He tried suicide at least three times, did four stints at mental hospitals, broke into a colleague's house and wanted a doctor prosecuted just for drawing his blood.
He was once found wearing surgical scrubs at the missile controls of a nuclear submarine, and he was known in his neighborhood for his nighttime chasing of cats.
And even before the deaths that led to his arrest in December, at least four times in his career as a nurse, people claimed Charles Cullen might have killed patients in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
Mr. Cullen, who has told prosecutors he killed perhaps 40 people with intentional drug overdoses, defies the cliché about serial killers: that nobody suspected anything, nobody noticed anything strange. Wherever he went, people found his behavior erratic, suspicious, even criminal.
In hindsight, his life looks like a trail of signal flares, warning of instability and a capacity to harm himself or others. Yet Mr. Cullen was able to go from job to job for a decade after the first homicide accusation, confounding co-workers, government investigators and relatives of patients who died. If his story is true, he is among the most prolific serial killers in American history.
It was his guile, in part, that allowed him to elude capture all those years. Mr. Cullen is suspected of choosing jobs and drugs that made it possible to kill without drawing much attention.
But interviews with dozens of colleagues, medical examiners, prosecutors, investigators and patients' relatives, and reviews of court records and state files show this: Mr. Cullen was able to continue mostly because of systemic failures, and his career reveals gaping holes in hospital and government systems for weeding out people who harm patients.
Supervisors and government officials who were looking over his shoulder also failed. More than a decade ago, a medical examiner neglected to order a test on a dead patient that investigators now say might have stopped Mr. Cullen. Another coroner believed that a death was not accidental but did not alert prosecutors or the police. And several times when the police, prosecutors, medical examiners and licensing authorities investigated deaths that might have been linked to Mr. Cullen, they did not look deep enough to learn of previous allegations.
Employers did not report him to one another, to oversight agencies, or to law enforcement, often because they were not required to. Some even brushed off allegations by victims' families or his co-workers.
The review of Mr. Cullen's career also sheds light on dark corners of the nursing world: how those who want to harm are sometimes drawn to the hard-to-staff night shifts; how shortages of nurses can lead hospitals not to inquire aggressively into a job candidate's past.
Mr. Cullen, 44, who has been charged so far with just one murder, has stopped cooperating. His lawyer, who would not be interviewed, has made clear in court that Mr. Cullen's mental state will be part of his defense, as he seeks to avoid the death penalty.
Meanwhile, state lawmakers are trying to devise ways to improve hospitals' ability to know about troubled employees, and to act on that knowledge.
But as officials in New Jersey and Pennsylvania piece together Mr. Cullen's 16-year nursing career, they concede they will never know the complete truth, leaving families to wonder about the deaths of their loved ones. Evidence deteriorates, and investigators must rely on Mr. Cullen's faded memory if he decides to cooperate.
The cost of exhuming bodies, performing autopsies, interviewing witnesses and examining medical records is already straining the capacities of several small counties.
''Our hope is to provide closure for as many families as possible,'' said James B. Martin, the district attorney in Lehigh County, Pa., where investigators suspect Mr. Cullen killed 12 people. ''But in reality, it is highly unlikely that we'll get them all.''
The Navy Career  Odd Behavior on Sub Draws Sailors' Ridicule
On long patrols under the frigid Atlantic, Petty Officer First Class Michael L. Leinen expected stress, expected danger, trained for nasty surprises aboard the submarine Woodrow Wilson. But he said nothing prepared him for what he found one day in the early 1980's, when he supervised the team that operated the sub's arsenal of 16 Poseidon ballistic missiles.
At the control panel for those nuclear-armed missiles sat Petty Officer Third Class Charles Cullen, not in uniform, but in a green surgical gown, mask and gloves taken from a medical cabinet. Mr. Leinen said he had punished Mr. Cullen, who could not have fired the missiles on his own, but could never get him to explain the outfit.
It was just one troubling incident involving Mr. Cullen that former shipmates recalled. In dry land training, he had done well, becoming a missile technician and passing the rigorous psychological screening for submariners, but he was ill equipped for what lay ahead.
Spending more than two months at a stretch submerged in a steel tube, sailors judged new shipmates, ''newbies,'' by how they handled pressure and related to others. Experienced sailors hazed each newbie mercilessly, finding weaknesses and hammering at them.
''They had that honed on Wilson to a fine art,'' said John M. Darnielle, who served with Mr. Cullen.
Usually, a sailor showed he could take it, and the hazing ended with his first patrol, but not for Mr. Cullen. He remained the favored target, mocked for muttering under his breath while being hazed and for his ''fish belly white'' skin. Even the newest sailors freely insulted him. ''In an environment devoid of many entertainments, these guys would make their own by messing with Charlie,'' Mr. Darnielle said.
Marlin Emswiler, Mr. Cullen's bunkmate, described him as socially inept. ''Charlie hung out with Charlie,'' he said.
That solitude was noted throughout his life. Neighbors from his childhood on Kling Street in West Orange, N.J., recalled Mr. Cullen, the youngest of eight siblings, as a quiet, slight boy who was smart but awkward. His father, Edmond, a bus driver, died when Charles was an infant. The yearbooks from West Orange High School mention Charles just once, on the Italian club roster, but he is not in the club photo.
A car accident killed his mother, Florence, during his senior year, leaving Mr. Cullen orphaned. Shortly after her death, he enlisted in the Navy.
Mr. Emswiler recalled that in his days on the Wilson, Mr. Cullen talked of becoming a nurse. ''He said, 'I like helping people.'''
But things got only worse in the Navy. He was transferred to the Canopus, a supply ship, but a mere change of assignments was apparently not enough.
Mr. Cullen tried to kill himself, said Mr. Leinen and a current Navy official, one of several attempts. Officials said they were not sure, or could not say, precisely how he had tried to take his life, but the attempt led to his discharge in March 1984.
His experience in the Navy would mirror the arc of his later life: the inability to bond with others, the disciplinary problems and odd behavior, and, finally, the attempts at a fresh start by moving to a new place where no one knew of his past.
Returning to New Jersey, Mr. Cullen enrolled at Mountainside Hospital School of Nursing, in Montclair. In 1987, he graduated, married Adrienne Taub, and got his first nursing job, at St. Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
Mr. Cullen was quiet and stubbornly private while he was at St. Barnabas, recalled Jeanne T. Hackett, a chief technician who worked with him on the burn ward there.
''You'd ask, 'Are you married?' or anything like that, and you'd get one-word answers,'' she said. ''I remember the day I laid eyes on his car, and I said, 'Oh my God, now I know something about Charlie Cullen: I know what his car looks like.'''
His attempts at warmth with patients were forced, she said. ''It was like he was going through the motions, patting someone on the hand and telling them they'd be O.K.''
Mr. Cullen spent four years at St. Barnabas, first as a hospital employee, and then through a related nursing agency, Medical Center Health Care Services. The agency effectively fired him in January 1992.
''At the end, he wasn't being given any more work,'' said Robin Lally, a hospital spokeswoman. She and his former colleagues say they do not know why.
Mr. Cullen's longevity at St. Barnabas was an anomaly; his career spanned nine jobs over the next 11 years. But the way he left -- forced out under murky circumstances for reasons that apparently did not reach future employers -- set a lasting and ultimately deadly trend.
The Favored Shift  Seriously Ill Patients And Little Supervision
Reporting for duty at Warren Hospital in Phillipsburg, N.J., in February 1992, Mr. Cullen found his niche, the sort of job he would seek out repeatedly: the kind that made it easy to kill, and easy for killing to go unnoticed.
He worked in the cardiac and intensive care units, where death is often expected, surrounded by the most gravely ill patients, many of them unconscious. In such wards, a single nurse handles several patients and spends time alone with them, unsupervised, especially on the graveyard shifts Mr. Cullen preferred, when the need for human interaction is minimal and the only sound heard for hours is the rhythmic beeping of monitors. Several medical serial killers have found working nights, with the sickest of patients, to their liking.
In these units, patients might need a range of dangerous drugs on a moment's notice, so nurses have relatively free access to them. The stress and nighttime hours make these jobs hard to fill. Mr. Cullen, who volunteered for such work, would have seemed like a welcome relief.
Even as Mr. Cullen settled into his preferred professional routine, his life began to unravel. He moved his family, which included two young daughters, to Phillipsburg, a struggling little town on the Delaware River in northwestern New Jersey, where they bought a modest red-brick house on the outskirts. He seemed to have pieced together a secure existence, but quickly lost his grip on it.
Ms. Taub filed for divorce in January 1993, claiming that Mr. Cullen had refused to talk to her or sleep with her for years. She accused him of beating their Yorkshire terriers and zipping one dog into a bowling-ball bag. ''I was awakened many nights by the screams of those dogs,'' she said in divorce papers.
He lost custody of his daughters and moved, alone, into a basement apartment on Shafer Avenue in central Phillipsburg, where he lived for 10 years.
As his marriage collapsed, the erratic behavior spilled into his working life. He started harassing another Warren Hospital nurse, Michelle Tomlinson.
''Charles had been following her around at work and tried to give her an engagement ring,'' a detective, Barry Portz, wrote in a police report. He wrote that despite her pleas to stop, ''he calls by phone continuously.''
Before dawn on March 23, 1993, Mr. Cullen smashed a window in Ms. Tomlinson's kitchen door, let himself in and walked through her house in Northampton County, Pa., while she and her 6-year-old son slept. He was booked on felony charges and released. ''He admitted it, but he had this fantasy that they were boyfriend-girlfriend,'' said Mr. Portz, who is now retired from police work.
The supervisor for Mr. Cullen, Corinne Trembler, told detectives that the day after his arrest, he tried again to kill himself. The detectives did not note in their reports how Mr. Cullen made this attempt, at least his second. He took two months off work, and court papers show that he was treated at two psychiatric facilities, including Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital in Parsippany, N.J.
On Aug. 10, he pleaded guilty to misdemeanor trespassing and was sentenced to a year's probation. He appealed the conviction, filing a succession of mostly handwritten, barely legible papers.
Yet all the bizarre events of 1993 paled next to what followed: For the first time, Charles Cullen was accused of murder. This was the first opportunity to stop him, the first chance for the authorities or an employer to keep him from continuing to work as a nurse.
On Aug. 30, 1993, Helen C. Dean, 91, was recovering nicely from breast cancer surgery at Warren, ready to be discharged. A male nurse not assigned to her ward entered her room, told her son, Larry, to leave, and gave her an injection no doctor had ordered. ''He stuck me,'' she told her son when he returned. Relatives say Larry and Helen Dean complained to doctors and nurses, and even pointed out the nurse to his colleagues later, but no one took action.
The next day, Mrs. Dean was released, but ''she looked green,'' said her niece, Sharon Jones. That afternoon, Mrs. Dean suffered heart failure and died.
Larry Dean told the county prosecutor's office that his mother had been murdered, that he knew who had done it, and how. The prosecutor's office and medical examiner investigated, confirmed the unprescribed injection, and determined that the male nurse was almost certainly Charles Cullen.
But an autopsy was marred by a simple oversight that now looms large. Mrs. Dean's blood and tissue were tested for 100 possible toxic chemicals, but digoxin, a common heart medication that can be fatal in large doses, was not on that list.
Investigators from several counties now say it is clear that digoxin was Mr. Cullen's favorite weapon.
Dr. Isidore Mihalakis, the local medical examiner, said he had been out of town and that another doctor had done the autopsy. The failure to test for digoxin was a potentially crucial oversight, he conceded. Asked how it happened, he said, ''I have no idea.''
Ms. Jones said she and her cousin Larry Dean had urged investigators at the time to test for digoxin, a conversation Dr. Mihalakis said he did not recall.
The prosecutor's office gave lie detector tests to a handful of nurses, all women except Mr. Cullen. Kay Shea, a hospital spokeswoman, said he passed the test, but an official involved in the inquiry said it was inconclusive.
The prosecutor's office dropped the case. Frank Bucsi, now the acting Warren County prosecutor, has reopened it, and had Mrs. Dean's body exhumed last month for chemical analysis.
At his mother's funeral, Larry Dean laid his hand on her coffin and vowed to find justice, Ms. Jones said. Until he died of cancer in 2001, he collected documents and saved samples of his mother's tissue in his freezer.
Throughout 1993, despite Mr. Cullen's troubles, Warren Hospital allowed him to keep working. Asked why it did not fire him for harassing a colleague and breaking into her house, Ms. Shea said she was not sure the hospital knew about it.
''There's no question his supervisors knew all about it,'' said Bruce Fretz, a detective on the case and now the police chief in Palmer Township, Pa.
Nor did Warren fire Mr. Cullen after Mrs. Dean died. ''He wasn't charged with anything, and he passed the lie detector,'' Ms. Shea said. When asked if giving an unauthorized injection to someone who was not his patient was sufficient grounds for dismissal, she would not answer.
Ms. Jones said, ''The hospital just didn't want to take it seriously.''
Ms. Shea, like Ms. Lally at St. Barnabas, said she could not say what references, if any, the hospital had provided for Mr. Cullen when he went job-hunting. Later employers said they had never learned of his being forced from St. Barnabas, or of his problems at Warren.
His history now included at least two suicide attempts, a psychiatric commitment, an ouster from a job, a criminal conviction and an allegation of murder.
He left Warren voluntarily on Dec. 30, 1993, leaving his past in the past, a secret from the rest of the world.
The Nursing Home  Colleague Casts Blame After Insulin Overdose
Francis J. Henry was rushed away by ambulance, barely alive, on May 8, 1998, and soon the calls came back to Liberty Nursing and Rehabilitation Center demanding to know who had given him insulin.
The staff at Lehigh Valley Hospital, struggling to save his life, called the nursing home in Allentown, Pa., to ask. His blood sugar level had dropped dangerously low, a sure sign of insulin overdose, yet Mr. Henry, 83 and suffering from multiple ailments, was not supposed to be taking insulin.
Kimberly Pepe, the nurse caring for Mr. Henry on the overnight shift, insisted to the hospital that she had not given him insulin, and she repeated her denial several times to her own supervisors, according to court papers. But she knew who might have done it, she told them: Charles Cullen, the nurse assigned to Mr. Henry's roommate, who was in that room repeatedly during the night.
There was more reason to suspect him, she contended. In a lawsuit and in a complaint she later filed with a federal agency, she said that even before Mr. Henry's emergency, Liberty was investigating Mr. Cullen for stealing drugs.
''He had equal access to the patient who died,'' Ms. Pepe wrote. ''My record is totally clean and Charles's record, however, was under suspicion for several serious matters.''
Mr. Cullen's past was more checkered than she knew. After leaving Warren Hospital, he had been fired in August 1997 by another hospital, Morristown Memorial, for what officials there described only as ''poor performance.''
He was already behind on child support payments and had been propping up his life with credit card debts he could not repay. His firing from Morristown left him unemployed for six months.
In October 1997, he turned up as a patient in Warren Hospital's emergency room, and from there was admitted again to Greystone, the psychiatric hospital. People with knowledge of the incident said they suspected he had again tried to kill himself.
In Warren's emergency room, he had a confrontation with a doctor, and he later filed a criminal complaint against him simply for drawing his blood for routine tests.
In the years he lived alone on Shafer Avenue, where he had a pet ferret, neighbors caught only glimpses of him, sometimes tending a flower bed. He barely spoke to them, but could make strange impressions.
''In the middle of the night, he'd be out there chasing after the cats, yelling at them and talking to himself,'' said Brett Everett, who lives next door.
Pleasant Maynard-Klemka, another next-door neighbor, said, ''When he didn't think you were looking, he'd make weird faces, like he was real angry or thinking really serious.'' He had no friends, ''none at all.''
Liberty Nursing rescued Mr. Cullen from his unemployment, hiring him on Feb. 10, 1998. Once again seeking out the sickest patients, he went to the ''vent unit,'' for people who needed ventilators to breathe.
On May 13, just five days after Mr. Henry's mysterious insulin dose, Mr. Cullen filed for bankruptcy, claiming $66,888 in debts, including hospital bills. His possessions amounted to a 1985 Dodge truck, a bicycle, a few books and videotapes.
Ms. Pepe claimed that at first, her supervisors agreed that Mr. Cullen was probably responsible for Mr. Henry's decline, but that they inexplicably changed their minds. Mr. Henry died on May 19, and Liberty fired Ms. Pepe, but allowed Mr. Cullen to stay.
Julie Beckert, spokeswoman for HCR Manor Care, which owns Liberty, would not discuss Mr. Henry's case, but she denied that Mr. Cullen had been under investigation for stealing drugs. Liberty settled Ms. Pepe's lawsuit on terms that both sides have kept secret.
But before long, Liberty could no longer deny that Mr. Cullen was a menace, according to two other nurses there. In October 1998, they said, colleagues saw him entering the room of an elderly woman he was not assigned to, syringes in hand. They said that they did not know precisely what happened, including whether he gave any injections, but that somehow the patient ended up with a broken arm.
Liberty fired him. Ms. Beckert, the HCR spokeswoman, said only that Mr. Cullen was fired for violating medication protocols.
Liberty reported that incident to the State Department of Health as a medication error. But neither that case, nor Ms. Pepe's alarming accusations, prompted Liberty to report him to the state police or to the State Board of Nursing.
Ms. Beckert refused to say how extensively Liberty had inquired into Mr. Cullen's past before hiring him. Two hospitals that say they called Liberty for references on him, though, say it did not pass along its concerns.
Liberty's apparent reticence was no anomaly. Mr. Cullen's case has exposed a fundamental weakness in health care: the difficulty prospective employers face in trying to learn someone's past troubles.
Employers frequently refuse to pass on negative information, even about people they have fired, for fear of being sued for slander by the former employee. And state and federal systems for warning employers of bad doctors and nurses are widely regarded as weak. The reporting requirements are so narrowly drawn that it is not clear they would ever have applied to someone like Mr. Cullen. And there are few penalties for hospitals that flout reporting rules.
''There needs to be some kind of safe harbor that would allow past employers who've taken adverse actions to share that, and to describe the associated facts, without fear of legal action,'' said Dr. Arnold Milstein, a health care consultant and one of the founders of the Leapfrog Group, a national business alliance dedicated to improving health care.
Several of the hospitals where Mr. Cullen worked said their policy was not to say anything about a former employer, good or bad. When someone calls for a reference, they give only the person's job title and dates of employment. So Mr. Cullen's career, which now looks so horrific, could have seemed unremarkable to hospitals hiring him.
When Liberty fired him, he was once again able to move on without word of his misdeeds and personal demons following him. It was his fifth nursing job and the third time he was forced out the door, he had survived multiple suicide attempts and psychiatric commitments, and he had twice been linked to patient deaths.
He was, apparently, just warming up.
The Coroner  A Long Inquiry, But No Results
The man handling Ottomar Schramm's intravenous tube at Easton Hospital in Pennsylvania said he was giving Mr. Schramm something to keep his heart beating. Even five years ago, when she first gave that account to investigators, Mr. Schramm's daughter, Kristina Toth, found the words chilling.
That night, Mr. Schramm, 78, ''crashed,'' and early the next morning, Dec. 31, 1998, his heart did stop, forever. Ms. Toth said the same man had advised her against an autopsy. After seeing images of Mr. Cullen since his arrest, she is convinced he was that man.
''Do I think he was murdered?'' she asked recently. ''I think I do.''
From the beginning, it was obvious that something had gone desperately wrong in that hospital room. Shortly before he died, a blood test showed that Mr. Schramm, a retired Bethlehem Steel worker, had a potentially lethal amount of digoxin in his system. But for Mr. Schramm, who had entered the hospital just two days earlier after a seizure, digoxin was off-limits because he had a pacemaker.
Zachary Lysek, the Northampton County coroner, investigated the death for eight months. He said he had never considered it accidental. An autopsy listed digoxin as a factor contributing to Mr. Schramm's death.
Yet Mr. Lysek never asked the district attorney's office to open a criminal inquiry. Ms. Toth told him of the mysterious man in her father's room, yet in those eight months, Mr. Lysek never learned Mr. Cullen's name.
Mr. Cullen went to Easton in early November 1998; it had taken him less than a week to find work after being fired by Liberty.
More than three years later, someone working with Mr. Cullen at another hospital -- Mr. Lysek will not say who -- called to tell him that Charles Cullen was involved in Mr. Schramm's death, and the coroner contacted the state police. But no one checked his background to learn of allegations linking him to patient deaths at Liberty and Warren.
No one saw enough of the dots to begin connecting them.
Mr. Lysek said that when he had gotten the tip, he called an Easton administrator, but was told that no Charles Cullen had worked there. Investigators say the hospital contends that it misled the coroner accidentally, because Mr. Cullen was not a hospital employee, but rather worked there through a personnel agency, Health Med One of Harrisburg. The owner of Health Med One at the time, William P. Gula, declined to answer questions about Mr. Cullen.
Days before Mr. Schramm's death, Mr. Cullen began working part time at Lehigh Valley Hospital. In March 1999, he left Easton and worked at Lehigh Valley full time, mostly in the burn ward. His time there was uneventful, according to hospital officials and government investigators.
His personal turmoil, though, continued.
On Jan 2, 2000, an overpowering smell like kerosene filled Karin Ziemba's apartment directly above Mr. Cullen's. She eventually called the police. Officers found Mr. Cullen inside, with insulation stuffed into air vents, batteries removed from smoke alarms, and a charcoal grill smoldering away in his bathtub. It was apparently an attempt to kill himself by filling the apartment with carbon monoxide gas.
The police took him to a psychological crisis center and then to a hospital for observation, but by the next day, he was home again. Brian Downs, a spokesman for Lehigh Valley, said hospital officials had never known of the attempt. Mr. Cullen worked there until April 28, 2000, when Mr. Downs said he left voluntarily.
He had gone through seven jobs, had been forced out of three, had survived at least three or four suicide attempts, had endured four psychiatric hospitalizations, and had evaded three investigations into suspicious deaths. Finding work, though, remained easy.
The State Police  A New Investigation Also Proves Fruitless
When the Pennsylvania State Police arrived at St. Luke's Hospital in August 2002, they were met by angry and worried nurses. The nurses, after persuading the police to come, told investigators that a former colleague had been found mishandling medication, and that they suspected he might have played a role in the deaths of patients at the hospital, just outside Bethlehem.
Worse, they feared that the hospital was not interested in investigating, and had allowed the nurse to quit and take up at another hospital.
That nurse was Charles Cullen, who had arrived at St. Luke's two years before.
''All of a sudden, the nurses who worked with him were talking about a number of suspicious deaths that they thought he might have had something to do with,'' said Capt. Scott Snyder of the state police. ''Things escalated very quickly.''
Finally, it looked as if Mr. Cullen might now be seriously investigated. A major law enforcement agency was on the case.
But again, the inquiry fell short.
The nurses pieced together Mr. Cullen's history at St. Luke's, and told the police of his assorted peculiarities, and the alarming suspicions he had aroused.
Mr. Cullen had been hired in the coronary care unit at St. Luke's in June 2000, and while he quickly established a reputation as an oddity, his disciplinary record remained spotless for two years.
Then in June 2002, a nurse on the unit opened a disposal container for dirty syringes and found vials of unused drugs: procainamide, to treat arrhythmia, and sodium nitroprusside for high blood pressure. The nurse reported the incident to hospital officials. The next day, another collection of medication was discovered in a container.
Hospital officials quickly concluded that Mr. Cullen was to blame and took him off duty, but he refused to answer their questions and resigned within a week.
The circumstances of Mr. Cullen's departure led some nurses to ask questions: Why would someone steal medications that were not used recreationally and would have little street value? Why did it seem that more patients died during the shifts when Mr. Cullen was on duty?
The nurses reported their concerns to hospital administrators. Ultimately one of the nurses called the state police, reporting only the missing medication, but insisting that detectives come to the hospital to investigate.
Because the detectives lacked the expertise to interpret the medical records, they contracted a private medical expert. Dr. Mihalakis, the same forensic pathologist who was involved in the investigation of Helen Dean's death at Warren Hospital years earlier, was hired to review the case files of 69 St. Luke's patients who had died on Mr. Cullen's wards. Dr. Mihalakis spent months reviewing the files, but could establish no pattern.
''Nothing prosecutable,'' said Captain Snyder of the state police.
But it appears that the police never seriously scrutinized Mr. Cullen's nursing history. They never at that time learned that Mr. Cullen had been accused of murder at Warren Hospital and of a deadly mistake, at least, at Liberty.
The final chance that his full history might be learned, and action taken, died when the State Board of Nursing, acting on information from the state police, sent an investigator to St. Luke's. He showed up at the hospital, but never recommended having a formal hearing.
Mr. Cullen moved along, working for 16 days at Sacred Heart Hospital in Allentown before being fired for his failure to get along with nurses, and then moving back to New Jersey and its hospitals. A severe nursing shortage meant that only criminal charges or a penalty from the state nursing board could keep him on the sidelines for long.
As he sought work again in New Jersey, his nursing licenses intact, his professional life now had these milestones: being forced out of five jobs and being linked to deaths in four places.
He was hired barely a month later by Somerset Medical Center in Somerville, N.J., where prosecutors say he carried out his deadliest work.
The Last Job  Mounting Evidence Finally Leads to Arrest
By June 2003, it was clear that Mr. Cullen was up to something at Somerset Medical Center. The hospital's computers had all but caught him red-handed.
On the morning of June 16, a cancer patient in the critical care unit suffered a sudden, life-threatening heart malfunction. Her blood tests showed high levels of digoxin, a drug she had not been prescribed. She recovered from the incident but died three months later.
There were signs pointing to Mr. Cullen. One of the hospital's computer systems showed that during Mr. Cullen's shift the previous night, he had called up medical files for the woman, Jin Kyung Han, even though she was not his patient. A computerized drug-dispensing cabinet, the Pyxis system, also indicated that in the hours before Ms. Han's heart malfunctioned, Mr. Cullen had ordered a dose of digoxin for another patient, who was not prescribed the drug.
Even before Ms. Han's heart malfunction, there had been a series of suspicious medication errors at Somerset. From May 28 to June 4, two patients suffered life-threatening drops in blood sugar that could only have been caused by an insulin overdose.
But at the time, hospital officials did not make a connection between Mr. Cullen and Ms. Han's digoxin levels. Dr. William K. Cors, director of medicine, said abnormal digoxin readings and indications that nurses took the incorrect medications were everyday occurrences. ''The information we were receiving concurrently really didn't stick out like a sore thumb and say, 'Charles Cullen is a problem,''' Dr. Cors said.
Despite a state expert's suggestion that the poisonings might be intentional, the hospital wanted to begin by ruling out a more benign explanation: Ms. Han had been known to drink an herbal tea, which might have caused an increase in her digoxin level. So they sent a sample of the tea to be analyzed by the New Jersey Poison Information and Education System. Rather than suspending or reassigning Mr. Cullen, the hospital allowed him to continue working in the critical care unit.
In the weeks that followed, Mr. Cullen was occasionally seen in the room of the Rev. Florian J. Gall, 68, a Roman Catholic priest with pneumonia. Father Gall's sister, Lucille, said she specifically remembered that Mr. Cullen was on the unit during her visit the night of June 27.
''He was quiet,'' she said of Mr. Cullen. ''Didn't make a lot of eye contact. I never thought much about him.''
But hospital records show that Mr. Cullen had reviewed Father Gall's medical records on the night of June 27, even though the priest was not his patient. Later that night, Mr. Cullen ordered a dose of digoxin for another patient who had not been prescribed the drug.
About 9 a.m. the next day, Ms. Gall got a call from doctors. She arrived at the hospital minutes before Father Gall died of heart failure.
Lab tests showed that Father Gall's blood had toxic levels of digoxin, a medication he was not scheduled to receive. But his death certificate listed the cause of death as an abnormal heart rhythm and excess potassium -- two well-known results of digoxin poisoning -- without ever mentioning the drug. Lucille Gall said Somerset doctors also failed to tell her about his digoxin level, and she decided not to request an autopsy.
Faced with their fourth incident in a month, Somerset officials now intensified their investigation. On July 1, hospital officials brought in outside experts, according to a spokeswoman. But the hospital did not report the incidents to the State Health Department or to the police and allowed Mr. Cullen to remain on duty.
Nine days later, when Somerset's administrators discussed Ms. Han's case with Dr. Steven Marcus, executive director of the New Jersey poison control center, the conversation quickly grew heated. Hospital officials wanted to discuss whether the tea might have caused her high digoxin level. But Dr. Marcus was startled by the pattern of overdoses, and stunned that hospital officials seemed reluctant to consider the possibility that the poisonings might have been malicious.
Dr. Marcus, according to records, told hospital officials that he intended to report the case to the Department of Health and Senior Services. He also told the administrators that he had been taping their discussion.
Later that day, Somerset notified state officials that it had experienced ''four abnormal lab values'' involving patients, but did not report the computer evidence linking Mr. Cullen to the two digoxin overdoses.
Dr. Marcus sent an e-mail message to the state the same day, saying he was concerned. ''They told me they were not planning on reporting these incidents to anyone -- not the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services or the police, until they mount a thorough investigation,'' Dr. Marcus wrote of Somerset.
State health officials responded by dispatching a team of researchers to the hospital to test the lab equipment, but allowed Somerset to continue its investigation.
At Somerset, Mr. Cullen was allowed to remain in the critical care unit as the hospital's inquiry continued, even after another patient on the ward apparently suffered a nonfatal insulin overdose on Aug. 27. On Sept. 25, when the Department of Health learned that the hospital had not reported that incident, state officials grew ''concerned,'' according to Dr. Clifton R. Lacy, state health commissioner. State health officials penalized Somerset for failing to report the incident, but still allowed the hospital to continue its internal inquiry.
Eight days later, yet another patient suffered a precipitous drop in blood sugar. The patient died 45 minutes later, and although doctors said they do not believe the death was related to the previous cases, Somerset administrators notified both the county prosecutor and state health officials.
Once the investigation became a criminal matter, the case moved with a new sense of urgency, 16 years after Mr. Cullen started work as a nurse and years after he says he began killing people. The Somerset County prosecutor, Wayne J. Forrest, immediately started a review of hospital records and began interviewing witnesses. In mid-October, investigators told Lucille Gall for the first time about the digoxin. Ms. Gall, a registered nurse, was outraged.
''Well then,'' Ms. Gall said she replied. ''Somebody killed him.''
Somerset hospital officials combed through Mr. Cullen's personnel file and on Oct. 31 fired him for lying on his job application.
Prosecutors kept close watch over Mr. Cullen in the following weeks, as they rounded up the evidence needed to file criminal charges. Finally, on Dec. 12, the authorities surrounded Mr. Cullen as he and a date sat eating spring rolls and drinking beer at a restaurant in Somerville.
Mr. Cullen would soon tell the authorities an astounding story of his 16 years as both caregiver and killer: claiming to have fatally poisoned 12 to 15 patients at Somerset, at least half a dozen at St. Luke's and 10 to 20 at other stops.
When he was arrested, Mr. Cullen went quietly.
His nursing licenses were in order. He was, in theory, ready to be hired somewhere.
Death on the Night Shift
