Senator John Kerry won the support of former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York and Mr. Cuomo's son Andrew last night, and accepted the embrace of the Brooklyn Democratic organization. But his most ringing endorsement came from a 22-year-old high-school dropout named Michael Parker.
''I was one of those people you'd like to call a statistic,'' Mr. Parker said, his composure breaking several times, as he spoke to 500 people at Medgar Evers College in Crown Heights.
Mr. Parker said he was among thousands of young people in his East Harlem neighborhood who had given up on education and were falling through the cracks.
Then, he said, he joined YouthBuild -- a Harlem program that Mr. Kerry became aware of in 1992 and helped expand nationally -- and turned his life around.
''He's a cool brother,'' Mr. Parker said of the lanky, blue-suited senator sitting next to him.
With three days until the New York primary on Tuesday, Mr. Kerry arrived here for the town hall meeting at Medgar Evers and for a televised debate on Sunday. But even as he flew to the city from Oakland, Calif., he picked up the backing of Mr. Cuomo and his son Andrew M. Cuomo, the former housing secretary and candidate for governor of New York.
''His superiority, at least to us, is clear,'' the elder Mr. Cuomo said in an afternoon conference call.
Andrew Cuomo called Mr. Kerry the right man, adding: ''His future agenda is even more impressive when backed by his past performance.''
In Brooklyn, as he had in a brief news conference at a refueling stop in Indianapolis, Mr. Kerry attacked President Bush over reports yesterday that Mr. Bush had replaced two frequently dissenting members of a bioethics panel with what critics called ideologically friendly members. The panel advises the president on issues like cloning and stem cell research.
''Once again the president has allowed politics and ideology to get in the way of good science and the future of our country,'' Mr. Kerry said.
Campaigning in Georgia, meanwhile, Senator John Edwards made a rare mention of Mr. Kerry yesterday, citing a poll that showed Mr. Kerry trailing Mr. Bush in North Carolina, Mr. Edwards's home state.
''We can't win states like Georgia in the general election if we don't have a candidate who is strong,'' Mr. Edwards told a gathering of black officials in Augusta.
The polls, however, have not been kind to Mr. Edwards. He trails Mr. Kerry in the Super Tuesday states, mostly by large margins.
Mr. Edwards, who appeared in Atlanta alongside the retired basketball star Charles Barkley, sought to brush off such signs, telling reporters, ''I'm a great closer'' -- a line Mr. Kerry often used when he was far behind in the polls -- and saying he planned to carry on even if he did not win a state on Tuesday.
In Brooklyn, a host of Democrats including Borough President Marty Markowitz, Assemblyman Clarence Norman Jr., City Comptroller William C. Thompson Jr., and former State Comptroller H. Carl McCall appeared with Mr. Kerry, who fielded questions on topics like Internet bandwidth, Iraq and freedom of speech.
But his questioners generally were already sold on Mr. Kerry. One, Lisa Kenner, asked him what he would do about Haiti and Iraq once he was elected. Mr. Kerry, not wanting to get ahead of himself, put in another a plug for votes on Tuesday.
''You're going to get elected, don't worry,'' Ms. Kenner said.
Mr. Kerry, grinning, said, ''I don't want to leave this place.''
It was young Mr. Parker, however, who set the tone for the night by telling his story and giving Mr. Kerry a share of the credit for his improving lot in life.
He called YouthBuild, which teaches leadership and carpentry skills, a blessing from heaven. Now, he said, he is holding down a minimum-wage drugstore job while working his way toward a grant to go to college.
Mr. Parker said he was thrilled to be asked yesterday to come to a town meeting for Mr. Kerry's campaign. ''To be honest, I didn't know what a town hall meeting was,'' he said.
But he thanked Mr. Kerry for paying attention to him and his fellow YouthBuild participants. ''I don't think people understand how important it is for people to listen to us,'' he said.
When he was done, he stood and wrapped himself in Mr. Kerry's hug. Then the senator took the microphone.
''I think that was one of the most eloquent things I've ever heard,'' he said, wiping a tear from his eye.
Five hundred people started clapping.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
