MANY dreams, and even a few nightmares, are born when 75 million Americans sit in front of their televisions and watch the Academy Awards.
No matter what happens at this evening's ceremony, the Oscar night that Craig Mowry will never forget came in 1999. That night, Mr. Mowry, 40, watched and waited to see if ''The Truman Show,'' a critically acclaimed film by that year's Wunderkind newcomer, Andrew M. Niccol, would win the award for best original screenplay.
Mr. Niccol, whose credits also include the film ''Gattaca,'' did not win. Bad news for Mr. Niccol, but good news, sort of, for Mr. Mowry. In a lawsuit he filed last spring in United States District Court in Manhattan seeking $50 million, Mr. Mowry contends that Mr. Niccol was not the authentic author of that movie. ''The Truman Show,'' heralded by critics for its original and compelling story about the last days of a reality television show, stars Jim Carrey as a young man who, without knowing it, has been watched day and night since birth, by millions of viewers.
Mr. Mowry, an independent producer, contends that he originated the idea, as well as much of the language, setting and characters that made their way into ''The Truman Show,'' in a script he calls ''The Crew.'' It was written in the early 1980's and first copyrighted in 1986, five years before Mr. Niccol's first treatment, or synopsis, for ''The Truman Show'' was registered with the Writers Guild of America.
The film, which took in upward of $125 million in 1998, almost eerily forecast the current popularity of reality television programs.
''I enjoy watching the Academy Awards,'' Mr. Mowry said in a recent telephone interview from his house in Southampton, on Long Island. ''But I understand,'' he added, dryly, ''that they are not the ultimate statement in either the quality of the nominees' work, nor originality.''
Depositions are scheduled to begin this month in the case, which Mr. Mowry has filed against some of the best-known names in the movie business, including Viacom, Scott Rudin Productions and Paramount Pictures, as well as Mr. Niccol. Both Mr. Mowry and Mr. Rudin are expected to be deposed this week in New York. The defendants are all represented by Loeb &amp; Loeb in New York, which would not comment on the case. Mr. Niccol did not respond to a message left at the office of his agent at the Creative Artists Agency in Los Angeles.
Mr. Mowry's lawyer, Alan A. Heller, of Heller, Horowitz &amp; Feit in Manhattan, said that the essence of the case was copyright infringement. The lawsuit contends that ''The Truman Show'' was ''knowingly and deliberately stolen by defendants'' from Mr. Mowry's screenplay.
Mr. Heller, who took the case on contingency, meaning he is paid only if he wins, said that the evidence was persuasive. His ''due diligence'' before taking the case, he said, included everything from sending material to linguistics experts to reading Mr. Mowry's treatment for ''The Crew'' aloud to a friend and asking, ''What movie is this?'' To which the friend answered, ''The Truman Show.''
REGARDLESS of how compelling the evidence may be, cases of this sort are tough to prove. ''You have to show access, how they got the script,'' said Otto L. Haselhoff, a lawyer in Los Angeles. ''You have to determine how much money or revenue is derived specifically from the similarities in the material.'' Mr. Haselhoff said that in 2001 he helped a screenwriter, Bill Van Daalen, attain an ''amicably resolved'' settlement with Adam Resnick and Paramount Pictures in a copyright infringement case involving the script for the film ''Lucky Numbers.''
''Sure, plaintiffs can win, but usually what happens is they settle before they go to trial, and a condition is that the settlement remain confidential,'' Mr. Haselhoff said. ''That's why you never hear about them.'' He paused. ''They are great cases if you are representing the defendants,'' he said, because movie studios ''can pay a lot of money and have got a lot of defenses and theory under the law.''
The Mowry case appears to be developing an audience among film industry buffs, who see it as a whodunit dealing with the confusing matters of copyright infringement. Joy R. Butler, a lawyer in Washington, has been talking about Mr. Mowry's case in seminars she gives on legal matters of concern to creative artists. Examining the court documents, she said, she found that ''the entire concept of 'The Truman Show' is present in the plaintiff's copyrighted work.''
''A lot of creative people are frightened about telling their ideas to anyone for fear that their movie idea, or song, will be stolen,'' Ms. Butler said. ''Usually, people are more fearful than is warranted by reality.''
Though creative concepts and ideas are not protected by copyright laws, the unique expression of the idea is. ''I have no personal involvement in this case, but the reason I mention it in my seminar is it represents a very good illustration of the separation of idea, which is not protectable by copyright law, and the expression of the idea,'' Ms. Butler said. ''If his case was about just another screenplay, his 'The Crew,' about a man trapped in a fictitious world, that would represent only his basic idea, and would not be protectable. But Mr. Mowry cites numerous examples of verbatim copying.''
In the lawsuit, Mr. Mowry points to a number of scenes that he contends are near duplications of scenes from his screenplay. One is a scene in which a family member is killed in a boating accident; another is the history of the star's love interest.
Many young screenwriters will no doubt identify at least in feeling with Mr. Mowry. ''There are thousands, millions, of screenwriters who feel they have a case,'' said Steve Ryfle, who writes a screenwriters' advocacy column for Creative Screenwriting magazine. ''I get e-mails and letters from people all the time. Never mind that most of them don't even know how to go about finding an attorney -- they can hardly find their left shoe.'' Those who do find lawyers, he said, ''are rarely ever successful in getting a lawyer to take the case because they want the attorney to take it on contingency. They're writers. They have no money.''
Ms. Butler said she would be interested, if the case went to trial, to see ''how far up the ladder it will go on the part of the people who made 'The Truman Show.'''
Indeed, a crucial part of the case will be the plaintiff's efforts to show how Mr. Mowry's script might have reached Mr. Niccol.
At the advice of his lawyer, Mr. Mowry will not disclose his theories. But he did confirm that his script was circulated in the mid-1980's in movie-making circles.
The idea for ''The Crew'' first came to him when his family lived in northern Italy, he said. They often drove past an ancient castle, and he would imagine what life was like inside its walls. Later, at the age of 16, when his family was living in upstate New York, Mr. Mowry was given a Bolex camera, and it was stationed on a tripod in his bedroom.
''What if you didn't know it but you were being filmed 24/7?'' he began wondering. That is when his boyhood imaginings ''turned into a media concept,'' Mr. Mowry said.
He wrote ''The Crew'' over several years, beginning while he was a student at Northwestern University and finishing in the early 1980's.
He said he received encouragement from many friends back then. But when ''The Crew'' failed to receive a real deal, Mr. Mowry turned his attention to making a living and became a marketing executive.
He poured his extra time and money into assorted filmmaking projects. His movie ''Scene Stealers'' had its premiere in the Hamptons Film Festival last fall and will be included in the D.C. Independent Film Festival in Washington in March.
IN 1998, however, friends familiar with his ''Crew'' script began to congratulate him on ''The Truman Show,'' he recalled.
His gut reaction, he said, alerted him to his worst fears. Mr. Mowry waited several weeks before he saw ''The Truman Show.'' Alone. Sitting on the aisle of the movie theater. ''In case, you know, I felt sick,'' he said.
Early efforts to retain a lawyer were pursued and dropped. The expense and effort seemed daunting. It was not until about 18 months ago, while perusing the Internet, that Mr. Mowry happened upon a copy of an early ''Truman Show'' script by Mr. Niccol. After reading it, Mr. Mowry said he felt compelled to try again to find a lawyer to represent his case.
He is philosophical. Maybe he will be a late bloomer yet in Hollywood. He says he is not bitter. Yes, certainly, he will watch the Oscars tonight, if only to commune with the national interest.
And he still dreams. Lately, Mr. Mowry has begun thinking he might like to adapt his ''Crew'' script for the stage. Why not?
Well, said Mr. Heller, his lawyer, there could be a risk in that: ''Would Craig's 'The Crew' be subjected to copyright infringement on the part of the people from 'The Truman Show'?''
