Five friends and four Harlem Globetrotters were in various parts of Jayson Williams's country home in Alexandria Township, N.J., when a chauffeur, Costas Christofi, was killed two years ago by a blast from a shotgun held by Mr. Williams. Last week, three of the friends, who did not witness the shooting but rushed into the bedroom where it had occurred, testified for prosecutors trying to prove that Mr. Williams, a former New Jersey Nets basketball star, covered up his role in the shooting.
They agreed on one major point: Mr. Williams, 36, wiped the double-barreled 12-gauge shotgun used in the shooting with a towel, apparently to remove his fingerprints.
On many other points, the three offered varying recollections of what they had seen and heard after entering the bedroom and seeing the body of Mr. Christofi, 55, lying beside a polished round table. They disagreed on Mr. Williams's demeanor. They disagreed on his comments in the minutes after the shooting. They disagreed on whether he had orchestrated a cover-up.
Consequently, a jury at New Jersey Superior Court in Somerville will have to sort out strings of inconsistencies and contradictions when it comes time to deliberate on the four cover-up charges against Mr. Williams.
The most incriminating testimony came from Dean Bumbaco, a 37-year-old landscaper who said he has come to dislike Mr. Williams since the shooting. Mr. Bumbaco testified that he saw Mr. Christofi kneeling and then topple over, gasping for breath, after he was shot. Mr. Williams was also on his knees, he said. Mr. Bumbaco quoted him as saying: ''My God, my life is over. Did I kill him? Is he dead?''
But the two other witnesses recalled things differently. Craig Culuko, a 33-year-old teacher, also said he saw Mr. Williams on his knees near Mr. Christofi. But, he testified, the former Net said: ''Oh, my God. Oh, my God. We got to get help. We got to do something.''
The other witness to the aftermath of the shooting, John Gordnick, a 46-year-old personal trainer, had Mr. Williams saying: ''Oh, my God. Oh, my God.'' Moments later, Mr. Gordnick testified, Mr. Williams said: ''He shot himself. He shot himself.''
There was also conflicting testimony about who could have been behind a cover-up. Mr. Bumbaco said he remembered Mr. Williams telling everyone in the bedroom to say that Mr. Christofi had killed himself. Mr. Culuko offered a slightly different account, testifying that Mr. Williams told the men to say that they were all downstairs at the time of the shooting, heard a shot and went to the bedroom.
However, Mr. Gordnick and another witness last week, John McPartland, a 26-year-old former professional basketball player in Europe, both said Mr. Culuko's younger brother, Kent, created the cover-up story. Mr. McPartland testified Kent Culuko told everyone to say that they were all downstairs and that Mr. Christofi ''wandered off'' alone before the shotgun blast.
Mr. Gordnick said that he told Kent Culuko the police would never believe Mr. Christofi had shot himself and that he pushed Mr. Culuko against a wall to emphasize his point.
Mr. Gordnick said he told him, ''You've got a zero percent chance of pulling this off.''
The defense has conceded that Mr. Williams wiped the shotgun. But during his opening argument earlier this month, a defense lawyer, William R. Martin, said Mr. Williams panicked after the shooting but had no criminal intent to stage a cover-up.
During cross-examination last week, Mr. Martin used Mr. Gordnick to support his contention, asking if Mr. Williams had panicked. ''The whole time,'' he replied. ''He was just out of it.'' Mr. Gordnick also said Mr. Williams had never told him to lie to the police.
But minutes later, Mr. Gordnick seemingly contradicted himself during questioning by a prosecutor, Steven C. Lember. He told Mr. Lember that at some point Mr. Williams told the others that the chauffeur had shot himself and then heard him say to them, ''Just stick to the story, just stick to the story.''
Lifestyle of the Rich
Unless the jurors dozed, daydreamed or just ignored all the state police photographs the prosecution has presented of Mr. Williams's grand home, they saw that he and his pregnant wife, Tanya, have a lavish lifestyle.
Over and over during the trial, after courtroom lights were dimmed, the jurors were shown pictures of the couple's indoor basketball court; their tear-shaped indoor pool with potted palms; their home movie theater with mauve chairs and honey-colored benches; their large dining room table with two glistening chandeliers above it; and the part of the master bedroom where the shooting occurred.
Mr. Williams's fondness for guns has also been made evident. The jury has seen the shotgun involved in the shooting, as well as a high-powered 30-'06 rifle and four other 12-gauge shotguns that Mr. Williams kept in a gun cabinet in the bedroom.
On the night of the shooting, according to testimony, four of the weapons were loaded.
Most witnesses who say they were in any of the rooms are then shown pictures of them. A photograph of the bedroom death scene, with Mr. Christofi's body, has been shown again and again.
The defense has tried to blunt the persistent images of wealth by depicting Mr. Williams as something of an ordinary working man. In his opening, Mr. Martin said his client has always loved working around bricks and mortar and helped build his 65-room mansion with his father, Elijah. Together, they own a construction company.
During his days as a Net, Mr. Williams sometimes went to building sites and helped workers lay bricks, Mr. Martin said. He also told the jury that Mr. Williams rises early each morning to feed the 450 animals he keeps in a barn on his estate.
Unfriendly Testimony
During his testimony last week, Mr. Bumbaco had some unkind things to say about Kent Culuko, whom he said he has known for about 20 years. Toward the end of a defense cross-examination, Mr. Martin asked Mr. Bumbaco if he had said during a pretrial television interview that Mr. Culuko would ''rat out'' his grandmother.
Mr. Bumbaco, who had seemed self-assured during his testimony, became flustered by the question and tried to deny making the comment. Mr. Martin pressed on, and Mr. Bumbaco blurted, ''He very well might push his grandmother in front of a bus for $2.''
Mr. Lember, the prosecutor, seemed startled and asked Mr. Bumbaco why he had criticized Mr. Culuko.
Mr. Bumbaco replied that Mr. Martin had made him angry. Then he tried to smooth things over.
''If I needed Kent,'' Mr. Bumbaco said, ''he'd be there in a heartbeat.''
Reporter's Notebook
