VIRGINIA may be for lovers, but is it for baseball? Major League Baseball, that is?
Two areas of the commonwealth believe it is. For years, Northern Virginia has tried to lure Major League Baseball to its area. Now southeastern Virginia has leaped into the competition for the Montreal Expos.
The commissioner's office has said it plans to decide by the All-Star Game where to relocate the Expos. Besides the two Virginia areas, other contenders are Las Vegas; Washington; Portland, Ore.; San Antonio; and Monterrey, Mexico.
No city or area is considered the front-runner because all of them have questions or drawbacks. Washington or Northern Virginia may ordinarily be viewed as the prime candidate, but Peter Angelos, the Baltimore owner, has been outspoken in his opposition to a team intruding on what he says is Orioles territory.
''Would you put another team 30 miles away from the Red Sox or the Rangers?'' Angelos asked. ''I don't see anyone trying to put a team in northern New Jersey to compete with the Yankees and the Mets. I don't think anyone should. Hopefully, the opposition we've taken will be recognized as accurate and appropriate. I don't have a grudge against the City of Washington, but the economic facts are the economic facts, and they don't change.''
Angelos sees Washington and Northern Virginia as presenting the same economic threat to the Orioles. Southeastern Virginia -- Norfolk, Hampton Roads, Virginia Beach, Williamsburg, Newport News -- is not a threat.
''That's a substantial distance from the Baltimore-Washington area,'' Angelos said. ''A location there would probably be one that would meet with support from the various franchises, I assume. Would I oppose such a franchise? I don't think I could legitimately oppose that location.''
If Norfolk, home of the Mets' top minor league team, should get the Expos, it would be a major blow to the people in Northern Virginia who have tried for years to get a team.
''D.C. and Northern Virginia and Portland have been in this for years,'' said Will Somerindyke Jr., chief executive of the Norfolk Baseball Company, a group leading the effort to get a team. ''We're a little late, but I think we've caught up pretty well.''
Norfolk's belated quest has created a conundrum of sorts for the Virginia Baseball Stadium Authority.
''We're leading the effort to bring baseball to Northern Virginia and supporting bringing a team to Norfolk,'' said Gabe Paul Jr., the authority's executive director, who is the son of the late baseball executive and worked for the Milwaukee Brewers for 27 years.
''When we were created, the intent was to build a ballpark in Northern Virginia,'' Paul said. ''We've been working with a private sector group in Northern Virginia for eight years, and it wasn't until very recently that we talked to people in Norfolk. As a state authority, we're committed to bringing a team to Virginia.''
The stadium financing legislation that the authority achieved ostensibly for Northern Virginia now also applies to Norfolk.
''The funding authority that has been voted on expires Jan. 1, 2005,'' Paul said, ''so it gives us plenty of time to do a deal.'' Paul said the cost of a park for Northern Virginia had been estimated at $400 million. A new park in the Norfolk area is estimated at $300 million.
If Northern Virginia gets the Expos, they will play for two or three years at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium in Washington until a 42,000-seat park is built. In Norfolk, the transplanted Expos would play at a minor league park expanded to 22,000 to 27,000 seats from 14,500 while a new park is constructed.
''We've been told if we get a decision by the All-Star break, a temporary park can be ready for 2005,'' Somerindyke said.
Major league officials and owners of the other 29 teams have said they don't want to own the Expos beyond this season.
Baseball's Oldest Player
''I'm only 41,'' Julio Franco said at the start of the conversation.
Two minutes later he said, ''I told you I'm 40 years old.''
''You said 41; you're getting younger as we speak,'' Franco's visitor responded.
''Exactly!'' he exclaimed.
Franco, the Atlanta Braves' nonroster first baseman, is, by most recent accounts, 45, making him the oldest player in the major leagues. A rookie in 1982, he has played for seven teams in the majors and has also played two years each in Japan and Mexico and one season in Korea.
Why is he still playing anywhere?
''I serve the Lord,'' he said. ''He gives me a talent to play this game, and I play baseball for his honor and glory. I think I'm here for a purpose. He gives me the strength and the ability to keep playing. He has kept my desire and endurance and enthusiasm to continue playing and having fun.''
For most of his 17-year career, Franco has advertised his age as younger than he has actually been. Many Latin players have performed that aging miracle and have been discovered only in the last year or so.
''I think age is a stereotype,'' Franco said. ''If you feel great and you have the strength and the ability to keep playing, age is overrated. I think I'm in great physical shape. I won't say I'm in better shape than anyone else, but I think I'm right there with them.''
Last season, Franco batted .294 in 103 games for the Braves and also had a .452 slugging percentage and a .372 on-base percentage. He started 38 games at first base and played there in 37 other games. Then he had four hits in eight times at bat and the Braves' best batting average in their division series loss to the Chicago Cubs.
If the Braves extend his career this season, Franco is expected to back up or platoon at first with a rookie, Adam LaRoche, who was 2 years old when Franco first played in the majors.
Piniella Optimistic Again
There he goes again.
''We're the most improved team in this division,'' Lou Piniella, the Tampa Bay manager, said recently, predicting that the Devil Rays would not finish in last place, their home in their first six seasons. ''This is a good baseball team and we're going to win some games.''
Eighteen years ago, when he was a rookie manager of the Yankees, Piniella talked in spring training about the good pitching the Yankees had, rejecting suggestions that they didn't have much pitching at all.
After the season, after Dennis Rasmussen, with 18 victories, was the only pitcher in double-digit victories, Piniella was reminded of what he had said in the spring.
''What did you expect me to say?'' he responded. ''I had to say something.''
Talking about the sad-sack Devil Rays this spring, Piniella might have taken a more conservative route, predicting perhaps that they would win 70 games for the first time.
On Baseball
