SHEILA MILLER grips the black rubber handle of a circular saw, struggling to drive the blade through a tough piece of laminated wood flooring. Cheered on by her two daughters and three dozen women attending a Home Depot Do-It-Herself workshop here in late January, Ms. Miller finishes the job and shakily turns over the saw to Wendy Tijerina, the manager of the flooring department.
''I just moved into a new house, and there's a lot of things to be done,'' Ms. Miller, 42, said, noting that she had already completed some of the easier home-improvement tasks.
''But now I'm coming to the big tools,'' she added. ''They are my biggest fear, but I'm not paying somebody to do something I can do myself.''
Her determination to tackle the toughest tasks -- like sanding and sealing a countertop in her kitchen -- is no surprise to executives at Home Depot, which is based nearby, in Atlanta. More than two years ago, under its relatively new chief executive, Robert L. Nardelli, the company embarked on an 18-month study of all its shoppers, paying particular attention to women. Home Depot executives pored over consumer data, and, with the ideas they gathered, the company is spending more than $1 billion to renovate many of its 1,700 stores.
Home Depot's main rival, Lowe's, had already been marketing to women and had redesigned its stores to feature departments considered more appealing to them: lighting, accessories, paint and flooring. It even widened its aisles to help eliminate ''butt brush,'' the uncomfortable contact that can occur as consumers navigate the aisles, and something that women particularly disliked, the company found.
''We're always looking to improve the stores, and many of the changes have made a real difference in the way women see Lowe's,'' said Julie Yenichek, a spokeswoman for the company.
The moves have paid off for Lowe's. And now Home Depot, too, appears to be reaping rewards from its effort. While Lowe's had consistently outperformed Home Depot for several years in same-store sales, those for stores open at least a year, Home Depot outpaced its rival in its fourth quarter. On Tuesday, Home Depot announced that its same-store sales for that quarter, which ended on Feb. 1, were up 7.6 percent over the period a year earlier. That compared with a gain of 7.3 percent at Lowe's in its quarter ended Jan. 30. Home Depot also had a 39 percent gain in its fourth-quarter profit, versus 28 percent at Lowe's.
Although Mr. Nardelli did not attribute all of Home Depot's gains to its marketing toward women, he did say during a conference call with reporters that the company's remodeled stores had outpaced others.
Home Depot found that women wanted clean and tidy stores -- no pastels, please -- that offered all the nuts and bolts of a home-improvement store and lots of information about how to do renovations.
Company executives say they think they have found a combination that plays well to a growing group of women: those who not only make the decisions about home improvement but also end up doing much of the work themselves.
By deciding to teach women about tools, rather than carrying tools specifically designed for women, Home Depot hopes to avoid offending its male consumers, especially the professional contractors who account for 35 percent of its $58 billion in annual sales. ''We can't give up one gender just to please another one,'' said John Costello, the company's executive vice president for merchandising and marketing.
With the help of Shelley Nandkeolyar, a former Williams-Sonoma executive, Home Depot has also overhauled its catalog and its Web site to make them more appealing to women, offering decorating ideas alongside images of the tools needed for the projects. It has also increased its television sponsorship of renovation reality programs like ''Trading Spaces,'' which are popular with women.
The Marietta store, in a former Kmart, shows the sometimes big, sometimes small changes that the company is making. To make the store feel less intimidating, Home Depot has made the shelves shorter -- and beige instead of orange. (The bland color doesn't compete for attention when consumers are picking paint and flooring.) Aisle markers are like those in grocery stores, and maps help customers find products. And the polished concrete floors reflect light, making them less industrial-looking than those in older stores.
Other things have not changed. The tool corral -- including a dozen saws bristling with sharp teeth and 50 different hammers hanging on an industrial Pegboard -- has not been remodeled, but its shelves have been lowered slightly so the tools are easier to see. Lumber, drywall and insulation are still stacked in huge quantities near the checkout counters set aside for professional shoppers.
''If you make it too girlie, you're messing with the secret sauce of Home Depot,'' said Jason L. Feldman, the company's director of style, innovation and design. ''Women told us, 'I want to shop where men shop for tools.'''
For years, executives at Home Depot said surveys had shown that even without doing anything to its stores, it had as many female shoppers as Lowe's.
Still, Home Depot has had a male-dominated image. ''Women may have had the impression that they weren't welcome,'' said Mary Lou Quinlan, founder and chief executive of Just Ask a Woman, a research firm.
The company acknowledges the image problem. ''Historically, we have overmarketed to men and undermarketed to women,'' said Mr. Costello, who faced a similar problem when he was at Sears, Roebuck. There, he helped create the ''softer side of Sears'' campaign to moderate the retailer's manly image as a seller of Craftsman tools. At Home Depot, Mr. Costello has revamped the company's advertising under a new tag line: ''You can do it, we can help.''
THE encompassing nature of that message reflects the delicate balance the company is trying to strike. While Lowe's moved aggressively to market toward women, executives at Home Depot worried that any drastic change would upset men, its core customers, who might shun stores that felt too feminine.
Fortunately for Home Depot, it found that women held the same negative view of overly feminine stores -- an opinion it discovered as it developed the Do-It-Herself workshops.
The sessions began several years ago as informal ''ladies' nights'' at a few stores around the country. Last year, the company decided to formalize the program and to offer the workshops on the same night every few months across the country. At first, company executives thought the workshops would deal primarily with advice on home decorating -- painting techniques and color trends, for example. But they changed those ideas after polling potential participants.
''These women wanted to tackle the big things,'' said Anna Siefken, who oversees the national workshops. She said women had requested sessions on how to use power tools, install carpeting and perform basic plumbing tasks.
Now Home Depot sends e-mail messages to thousands of women before the sessions so the women can determine the topics. ''Many of them are repeat customers, so as they gain confidence doing one project, they want to move on to even bigger projects,'' Ms. Siefken said.
In its research, Home Depot also found that growing numbers of couples worked together on home-improvement projects. ''I think some companies are still locked into a definition of the nuclear family where women's and men's roles are strictly defined,'' Mr. Costello said. ''The reality is of an increasing partnership. Women are definitely equal partners in home renovations.''
The company calls these people the ''home perfectors.'' While they make up just 21 percent of Home Depot shoppers, they account for 46 percent of the spending, especially for projects like outdoor kitchens and home theaters.
The demographic trend was visible at a recent Do-It-Herself workshop in Marietta. A few men took their seats after snagging cookies from a table with a handwritten sign that said, ''For the ladies' seminar.'' Jerry Piska, 47, wore a name tag with ''Denise'' on it -- a little joke by his wife, Kathleen, he said.
''My wife is the one with all the mechanical genius, and I provide the muscle,'' Mr. Piska said. The couple did not have a specific home-renovation project in mind, but Kathleen Piska wanted to learn more about how to install laminated flooring and a new product called Legato Carpet Squares. The squares have been a hot seller ever since they showed up on ''Trading Spaces.''
''Women see Hildy do a project and they want to know how to do it themselves,'' said Ms. Siefken of Home Depot, referring to one of the show's decorators.
For many women at the workshops, learning about home renovation is about more than making their homes look good. It is also about doing something they once considered impossible.
''I started out with a little faux painting; I was so inexperienced,'' said Jencie Boland, 50. ''Then I decided to renovate an entire room. I put up studs and Sheetrock. It was my biggest project. I was so tired, but so overjoyed that I could do it.''
