'Oh, isn't it good to be back!'' Red says almost breathlessly as we zip out of our midwinter New York lamentations and swan smoothly into a different class, almost a different era: the lobby of Wheatleigh, the hotel in the Berkshires in which we were snowbound three years ago and forced to fall in love for about the eighth time. Any sensible person would head for Belize or at least San Diego, but we're not sensible and instead drove deeper into snow country, where the temperature is generally well below New York's and in this case below zero. There's just about nothing to do, which is the point; nothing at all if you're allergic to all the bundlement and sweatered camaraderie of skiing.
Decompression was the lure: I'd just finished nightly grapples with a one-man show for three months, which Red had to endure, too. (She designed the set and kept my post-show martini-and-waterzooi intake at Bruxelles on Greenwich Avenue to one of each.) We looked forward to staying indoors, safe and cuddly, and there are few indoors as serene as Wheatleigh's. I brought along the Four Demagogues -- O'Reilly, Franken, Savage and Moore -- in hopes of reinvigorating my spleen. Also, the new executive chef, J. Bryce Whittlesey, had concocted a six-course all-chocolate tasting menu that intrigued -- and invited skepticism.
Even after a tense drive up from the city fighting ice slicks, snow flurries and those without E-ZPasses who nevertheless get into E-ZPass lanes, the Wheatleigh interior almost immediately pacified. The hotel's charm doesn't hit you in the eyes with a brilliant chandelier or stroke of bold architecture. Its building and grounds are magnifico to be sure, originally designed in 1893 as a wedding present for the lucky daughter of the insanely wealthy banker Henry Cook by the architects Peabody &amp; Stearns, window man Tiffany and Central Parkist Frederick Law Olmsted. But its 21st-century incarnation radiates luxury through understatement. It may be a few hours before you realize your blood pressure has stabilized and you're behaving decently to others, perhaps for the first time in years.
Some consider Wheatleigh the best hotel in America. I can't say for sure, since I haven't stayed in them all. I can say that it has the best pain au chocolat, blackout curtains and shoehorn of any I've stayed in. And by virtue of its ingenious training program for young Conrad Hiltons, the sort of service where someone darts out to catch your falling handkerchief before it hits the floor.
And the food? On our first visit, the cuisine was ambitious but somewhat heavy-handed. Whittlesey took over the kitchen two years ago, and the quality and imagination shot up directly. ''I spent the first 10 years of my life in Latin America, where my father was in charge of international trade for the Caterpillar Company,'' the chef says. ''My parents threw parties all the time. I loved watching my mother cook.'' Tall, square-jawed and fashionably unshaven now, Whittlesey at 15 biked to work in Miami pastry shops and restaurants after school. He graduated from the Culinary Institute of America and later spent five years at various two-star restaurants in France. His tales of bullying by sadistic French Über-chefs could resurrect freedom fries. ''At first,'' he says, ''I was assigned to wash the pots, and they would toss their white-hot pans into my sink, scalding my hands, and then laugh about it. But I knew they were just having fun with the American.'' He left when the French government instituted the 35-hour work week, ''degrading the restaurant business and closing many smaller places.''
I frequently picture chefs desperately scrambling for recipe invention like writers pitching sitcom pilots. They must conceive and promote the new -- often the loony -- to seduce customers. How else would we have foam in our sauces or mango on swordfish? Was Whittlesey's chocolate menu a gimmick, or could chocolate enliven unsweetened dishes without contrivance? Aren't we all besieged with so much annoying wine vocab that the back stiffens and the eyes slit at the attempt to turn chocolate -- good ol' Three Musketeers, lovable Nestle's Bits -- into something ''gourmet''? Does anyone care about grand cru chocolate?
If food is fuel to you, turn the page and get on with your life. But if it's an adventure, or something more than an incidental pleasure, you'll dive into these dense and provocative creations. After two or three, Whittlesey's design, like Wheatleigh's, becomes apparent. The cocoa flavors intensify, from the barely noticeable striped-bass tartare with white chocolate through a delectable chestnut cappuccino to the volcanic head removal (yours) of the ''Velvet Manjari'' dessert.
''When the idea of a chocolate menu came up, I wondered if it could be done without imitating the Mexicans, who use it in a very pronounced way,'' Whittlesey says. ''The Aztecs considered it a sort of ancient Viagra. Supposedly, Montezuma drank 20 to 30 cups a day. But he had several wives to satisfy.''
Whittlesey finds Valrhona best because of its flavor -- and because it came up with Araguani chocolate, which contains 72 percent cocoa mass. (Most milk chocolate has less than half that.) ''With the striped-bass tartare, I use their white chocolate, which isn't really chocolate, for its high cocoa-butter content. It balances the lean fish texturally.''
The choices do indeed complement each dish: cocoa nibs -- the center of the roasted beans with the shells removed -- add a dark dimension to scallops and foie gras; because of its slight chestnuttiness, the Araguani emboldens a chestnut cappuccino; milk chocolate with orange zest gives lobster a citrusy, floral aroma gentler than lemon; Café Noir jus enhances venison because its accompanying seckle pear is poached in espresso, its liquid added to the sauce.
Are these dishes improved by the use of chocolate? Certainly scallops, foie gras, lobster and venison can be brilliant on their own, particularly if they're as superbly prepared as they are here. Better? Not necessarily. Different? Definitely. Worth doing? Absolutely!
You do have to come to terms with the prices, which approach the sound barrier, rivaling Tokyo's (rooms range from $545 to $1,550 depending on season, dinner from $200 to $400 for two). After the feast, I started in on the Four Demagogues, and at about Page 3 of each decided they were more appropriate, if somewhat heavy, as skeet targets once the snows melted, and Red and I sank back into the terry robes and a duvet to watch ''Roman Holiday.''
Wild-Striped-Bass Tartare With Chocolate 'Ivoire'  (Adapted from J. BrYce Whittlesey)
For the yuzu gelée:  1 1/4 teaspoons powdered gelatin  1 cup fish fumet, warmed  2 tablespoons yuzu juice or lime juice  Salt to taste
For the tartare:  6 ounces sashimi-grade, skinless wild-striped-bass fillet, finely diced  1 1/2 tablespoons very finely grated Valrhona Ivoire white chocolate  1 tablespoon ''dolce'' (sweet) extra-virgin olive oil, preferably Ligurian  Fleur de sel sea salt to taste
For the shiso tempura:  5 tablespoons cake flour  2 tablespoons cornstarch  Small pinch baking powder  Safflower oil for deep frying  4 shiso leaves, sliced in half.
1. To make the gelée: Combine gelatin and 1 1/2 tablespoons cold water and set aside. Meanwhile, combine warm fumet and yuzu or lime juice; taste and season as needed with salt. (Bottled yuzu may already contain salt.) Stir in gelatin until it is completely melted. Refrigerate at least 6 hours.
2. For the tartare: Toss bass, white chocolate and olive oil. Season with salt and toss again. Refrigerate.
3. Combine the flour, cornstarch and baking powder. Using a fork, stir in  1/3 cup cold water until all lumps are gone. Let sit for a few minutes, stir again and add more cold water until batter is about the thickness of pancake batter.
4. Heat oil in a small deep pot to 325 degrees. Dip shiso leaves into batter, shake off excess and fry until crisp but not browned. Drain and keep warm.
5. Place 2 tablespoons of gelée on each of 4 small plates. Top each with  1/4 of the tartare and lay 2 tempura leaves on top.
Yield: 4 appetizer servings.
NOTE: Yuzu juice can be ordered from Kalustyan's, (800) 352-3451.
Velvet Manjari Chocolate Ganache  (Adapted from J. BrYce Whittlesey)
1/2 cup praline paste
1/2 cup finely crushed crumbs from gaufrette cookies or waffle ice-cream cones  2 ounces melted white chocolate  11 ounces finely chopped Valrhona Manjari chocolate (64 percent cocoa liqueur)  1 1/3 cups heavy cream  1 1/3 cups milk  8 large egg yolks  5 tablespoons sugar  For the pomegranate garnish:  6 tablespoons pomegranate molasses
1/2 cup sugar  Pomegranate seeds.
1. Lay a Silpat baking liner on a baking sheet and place a 7-inch square or 8-inch round ring mold on top. (The outer rim of an 8-inch springform pan with bottom removed will work.) Stir together the praline paste and cookie or ice-cream-cone crumbs. Pour the mixture into the ring mold and spread evenly and thinly across the bottom. Pour in the melted white chocolate and spread it thinly on top. Refrigerate.
2. Place the chopped Manjari chocolate in a large bowl and set aside. In a medium saucepan bring the cream and milk just to a simmer. Combine the yolks and sugar and whisk well. Whisk constantly and very slowly add the hot cream mixture. Return it to the pot, place over medium heat and stir constantly until it thickens just enough to coat the back of a spoon. (Do not overcook or it will curdle.) Immediately pour mixture over the chopped chocolate and stir until the chocolate is completely melted and smooth. Refrigerate until it is no more than room temperature.
3. Pour cooled mixture into the ring mold and refrigerate until set.
4. To make the garnish: Combine the pomegranate molasses, sugar and 1 1/2 cups water. Simmer until reduced to a thick syrup, cool and place in a squeeze bottle.
5. To serve, dip a kitchen towel into hot water and wrap it around the outside of the mold to help release the ganache. Lift the ring off. Cut ganache into 2-inch squares or thin wedges. Top with a few pomegranate seeds and squeeze some pomegranate syrup around the plate for decoration.
Yield: 8 to 10 servings.
NOTE: Praline paste is available from New York Cake and Baking Center, (800) 942-2539. Pomegranate molasses can be ordered from Kalustyan's.
FOOD
