From the beginning, Martha Stewart has made a business of her life -- or at least a lusciously lighted, expertly edited, carefully controlled version of her life. Her books, her television shows and her magazines featured photos of her family, her friends and her homes.
But her real world, it turns out, is even more intertwined, with no distinction between the social, the business and the financial. Wealthy friends are business associates are fellow investors, all at once. In Ms. Stewart's world, even her pets are public figures.
At least that is the unairbrushed picture that has emerged in the Old Federal Courthouse on Foley Square in Lower Manhattan, where Ms. Stewart is fighting charges that she lied to government investigators about a stock sale.
It is a world that most Americans can only imagine, what with the private planes and the Jaguar and the phone calls from friends in high places. (''Dick Gephardt wants to speak to you,'' reads an entry in her message log for Jan. 31, 2002.)
''Powerful people like to work and play with other powerful people,'' said Paul Bernard, an executive consultant who works with corporate and Wall Street clients. Indeed, they may not even make much distinction between business and pleasure, he said. ''It's all about networking.''
But seldom are the intimate details of such a world on public display as they have been at the Stewart trial. Her brokerage statements have been entered into evidence (at one point she owned more stock of Wal-Mart than of Kmart, her business partner).
Her telephone numbers have been disclosed. So have her personal e-mail addresses (Martha1 and Pawpaw, a reference to her dogs). Her phone manners have been criticized as rude, her expense account habits described as greedy. The tabloid newspapers have been having a field day with every detail.
And Ms. Stewart, understandably, has not been enjoying any of it. She enters and leaves the courthouse as quickly as possible, seldom smiling. She eats in an upstairs room in the building rather than face the phalanx of photographers outside.
And inside the courtroom, she sits stone-faced and still, seldom reacting to anything the witnesses say. Her first grin in months appeared Friday, when Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum dismissed the securities fraud charge that the judge had previously described as novel.
''The invasion of privacy has been as unprecedented as the charges,'' said George D. Sard, a spokesman for Ms. Stewart.
To be sure, she has never appeared very comfortable with publicity she could not control. In 1995, People magazine, hardly the home of the hostile profile, noted how uncomfortable she was with a reporter, saying that she had ''the look of a prom chaperone who has spotted a gate-crasher.''
And she has endured a lot of unpleasant public exposure, including two unflattering biographies and a made-for-TV movie last year in which Cybill Shepherd portrayed her as a sledgehammer-wielding shrew. Not to mention the jokes on late-night talk shows and Web sites.
That flaying has been more personally damaging than anything that emerged in the trial, said Judy Leon, a senior vice president at Bowne DecisionQuest, a litigation consulting firm. ''When things this catastrophic happen, life never goes back to the way it was,'' she said.
Ms. Stewart stepped down last June as chairman and chief executive of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, the company she built from scratch. If convicted, she could be permanently barred from serving as an officer or director of that or any public company.
But Ms. Leon and other experts agreed that if Ms. Stewart was acquitted, she would probably be able to restore her career and public image. ''She'll definitely bounce back,'' said Paul A. Argenti, a professor at the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth.
During the trial, Ms. Stewart has been supported by her family; her daughter, Alexis, has been in court every day (so has Alexis's husband, John Cuti, but he's one of Ms. Stewart's lawyers).
Colleagues have also turned up, including Gary Nardilla, the cinematographer for Ms. Stewart's TV show; Suzanne Sobel, an executive at Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia; and from the entertainment world, Rosie O'Donnell and Bill Cosby.
A few longtime girlfriends have been in the courtroom, including Mariana Pasternak, a frequent traveling companion. But she was in the witness box, and not of her own volition. One of the prosecutors told the judge that Ms. Pasternak was a reluctant witness, appearing because she had been subpoenaed. Indeed, he said he believed she was feigning memory problems to help her friend's defense.
The government contends that Ms. Stewart sold shares in ImClone Systems after learning through her stockbroker, Peter E. Bacanovic, that the company's founder, her friend Samuel D. Waksal, was trying to unload his stake.
Neither Ms. Stewart nor her co-defendant, Mr. Bacanovic, has been criminally charged with insider trading. Rather, the government has accused them of lying to investigators about why she sold; closing arguments are scheduled to begin tomorrow.
It was Ms. Pasternak who painted the clearest picture of how friendship and money and business are entwined for Ms. Stewart, describing their trip to Mexico and Panama at the end of 2001.
The two women, sharing a suite at a fancy beach hotel, gossiped about friends, bemoaned their lack of male companionship and lounged in chaises on a private terrace, according to Ms. Pasternak's testimony.
But personal investments came into play. It was here, Ms. Pasternak said, that Ms. Stewart told her that Sam Waksal tried to sell his ImClone stake, and that Ms. Stewart had sold her own shares.
Ms. Pasternak's ex-husband, Bart, also an ImClone investor, sold 10,000 of the company's shares the day after Ms. Stewart did -- but two days before this terrace conversation is said to have taken place.
This was also a business trip, at least in Ms. Stewart's view. Heidi DeLuca, who works for Ms. Stewart as a business manager, testified that she submitted the trip expenses for reimbursement from Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia. (The bill at the Mexican hotel alone -- which included spa treatments, room service and a private kayak tour -- was almost $17,000.)
The company confirmed that the trip had not been accepted as a business expense.
Of course, the line between Ms. Stewart the person and Ms. Stewart the brand is blurred. ''Martha Stewart generates ideas for her business 365 days a year,'' Mr. Sard, her spokesman, said.
Ms. Stewart did not draw a distinction between Dr. Waksal and his company, either, according to Douglas Faneuil, the star witness for the prosecution. Mr. Faneuil provided the only firsthand evidence that Ms. Stewart sold shares in ImClone Systems because she found out from him that Dr. Waksal was trying to sell.
Mr. Faneuil recalled that Ms. Stewart called after receiving a message from his boss, which said ''Peter Bacanovic thinks ImClone is going to start trading downward.''
But when Ms. Stewart called Mr. Faneuil, she did not ask him about ImClone. Instead, Mr. Faneuil testified, ''Immediately she said, 'Hi, this is Martha, what's going on with Sam?' ''
Dr. Waksal appears to have played an important role in Ms. Stewart's life. He was her pal. He once dated her daughter.
She appeared to be proud of his corporate success; her personal assistant, Ann E. Armstrong, testified that Ms. Stewart had pointed out to her Dr. Waksal's photo in BusinessWeek magazine.
And before she sobbed on the witness stand over the Christmas plum pudding Ms. Stewart sent her, Ms. Armstrong testified about the relationship between her boss and Dr. Waksal:
''She would go to Sam's Seder every year. He was honored a couple of times. There was one event at the Plaza that I know that she went to, and I think he was honored twice in late 2001. They went to a wedding together on the West Coast. I think they saw each other in East Hampton.''
Dr. Waksal was famous for his parties, held at his loft in SoHo, which attracted the rich, the famous and the socially prominent. He used Lizzie Grubman's public relations firm to send invitations to his holiday party in 2001 (''festive attire'' was requested).
One of those invited was Mr. Bacanovic, the stockbroker. He had once worked at ImClone as director for corporate relations; Dr. Waksal was one of the references he gave to Merrill Lynch when he applied there.
Mr. Bacanovic became the broker for the Waksal and Stewart families. And he played a large role at Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia. When the company went public, he handled the ''friends and family'' shares, which involved opening several hundred accounts. He helped administer the 401(k) retirement savings plan, and he handled the stock option plan.
While the prosecution and defense have debated just how much money he made through his connection with Ms. Stewart, it was clearly a lot; he received $51,300 as a finder's fee for bringing the friends and family program to Merrill Lynch.
And like so many other friends of Martha, Mr. Bacanovic appeared in a photo in her magazine, clad in a blue bathrobe and sitting at a long table at which Ms. Stewart (in a pink robe) presided.
Many pictures from Ms. Stewart's past seem oddly resonant now, especially those in her 1989 book, ''Martha Stewart's Christmas.'' There is a picture of a plum pudding like the one that made Ms. Armstrong sob on the stand. There is a photo of little Monica Pasternak, Mariana's daughter, helping Martha make potpourri.
And there, the very last photo in the book, is one that is now slightly notorious. It is of a couple, smooching on a sofa in Ms. Stewart's parlor, ''in what they thought was a private moment,'' the caption says.
The woman is Alexis Stewart. The man is Sam Waksal.
