Not once has the Connecticut Democratic primary produced a president. From Senator Edward M. Kennedy to Gary Hart to Jerry Brown, the sometimes surprising Democrats who have won the state in the spring have lost the nation by November -- if not earlier.
Yet relevance seemed attainable just last year, in the brief but optimistic days when Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut appeared to be a strong candidate, and a primary victory in his home state might have made a fine platform for declaring a broader victory on Super Tuesday.
But now, even though the senator is still on the ballot in the Connecticut primary, his candidacy is over, and so, it would seem, is whatever opportunity the state had to become a player in primary season. When Democratic voters in the state go to the polls Tuesday, many observers expect Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the new local favorite by default, to walk away with the bulk of the 49 delegates at stake.
''He's going to win the primary in Connecticut,'' predicted Ken Dautrich, director of the UConn Poll and a political scientist at the University of Connecticut. ''We stopped polling that a few weeks ago. He's almost like a senator from Connecticut. He's very popular here.''
Mr. Dautrich said the state's proximity to the Boston media market and Mr. Kerry's next-door neighbor status had given him exposure over the years that would easily secure the state. His polling also showed Mr. Kerry as by far the strongest candidate in Connecticut in a general election against President Bush.
Mr. Kerry's apparent dominance may help explain why, as a state Democratic consultant, Roy W. Occhiogrosso, summarized it, he and other candidates ''are not advertising here and not campaigning here.''
Asked how much television advertising Mr. Kerry had done in Connecticut, his state coordinator, Nick Paindiris, said: ''None. Zero.''
Mr. Kerry's wife, Teresa Heinz Kerry, plans to visit Stamford and Greenwich on Sunday, and Cate Edwards, daughter of Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, is to visit South Norwalk the same day, but the leading candidates themselves have no plans to come before Tuesday, their campaigns said Friday.
A spokeswoman for the Rev. Al Sharpton said Mr. Sharpton had been to Connecticut more than once in recent weeks. And Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, spoke Thursday night in New Haven, his first public appearance since dropping out of the race last week.
Dr. Dean, whose brother Jim is a state resident and has been a prominent supporter, did not discourage his supporters from voting for him in Connecticut. Dr. Dean's communications director in the state, Susan Wallace, said that Dr. Dean had built a strong network and that she expected him to do well, even without calling himself a candidate.
''Connecticut goes against the national grain,'' Ms. Wallace said.
Candidates who receive 15 percent or more of the vote in any of the state's five Congressional districts are eligible to win a percentage of Connecticut delegates.
A former state representative, Joe Courtney, who described himself as ''a recovering Lieberman supporter,'' has helped oversee a recent regrouping of the Edwards campaign in Connecticut after Mr. Lieberman's departure from the race. While Mr. Courtney conceded that Mr. Kerry was now the favorite, and while Southerners from Jimmy Carter to Bill Clinton have lost the state in the past, he noted Al Gore's primary victory in 2000 and said New Englanders were not fundamentally opposed to supporting a Southerner.
''We're all kind of trying to evaluate who can beat Bush,'' said Mr. Courtney, adding that ''I really think that moderate Southern Democrats with a populist streak who have a talent for connecting with middle-class voters'' were ''the formula for success.''
Some Democrats suggested that the recent ethical scandal surrounding Connecticut's Republican governor, John G. Rowland, could help increase Democratic turnout. But most expected that Mr. Rowland's troubles, if they played a role at all, were more likely to be an issue in a general election, when they say Republicans could suffer a backlash in the state.
Neither Mr. Lieberman nor his fellow Democratic senator from Connecticut, Christopher J. Dodd, have endorsed a candidate. A spokeswoman for Mr. Lieberman, Casey Aden-Wansbury, said Mr. Lieberman ''has advised his supporters to vote for their second choice who is still running.''
Even if Mr. Kerry proves vulnerable in the state, if the surging Mr. Edwards or the dormant but still popular Dr. Dean shows strongly, history suggests that success in the Connecticut primary is far from a ticket to the White House. Since the state first held a presidential primary, in 1980, the only candidate to have won in Connecticut and nationwide was a Republican, the elder George Bush, in 1988.
Told of the state primary's status as something of an anti-bellwether for Democrats, Mr. Dautrich, the political scientist, said, ''That's not a good omen for Kerry.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: CONNECTICUT
