After 20 Years, Sniper Still Awaits Justice
Two decades after one person was killed and six were wounded in a series of random shootings in and around Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan, nobody has been charged as the so-called Penn Station sniper, and for most people the case is hazy history, at best.
For some, though, the memory is anything but misty.
One victim, Brant Kingman, above -- who at the time was a young artist from Minneapolis hoping to make a name for himself in New York -- vividly recalled last week the experience of nearly being killed and how it transformed his personal values and his art.
The shootings occurred between April 1983 and February 1984. The first four victims lived or worked in buildings near Pennsylvania Station, which is at Seventh Avenue and 32nd Street.
The other three, all railroad workers, were shot inside the station.
The last victim, Richard Russo, died.
A special force to hunt the sniper was not formed until after Mr. Russo was shot. Top police officials said that they, like the public, had not been told until then that detectives had already linked three of the earlier shootings to the same .25-caliber pistol. Heads rolled among detective supervisors.
Last week, a Police Department spokesman, Sgt. Joseph Gallagher, said the ballistics data from the case are ''in the computer system and are checked against weapons of similar caliber'' used in recent crimes, in the hope of solving the old case.
Mr. Kingman, now 50, told of the bullet ripping into his chest through an open window of his loft apartment and studio on West 30th Street. Nine months earlier, he said, three strangers had robbed and beaten him in the loft.
He said he had interpreted the two incidents as ''telling me I had to leave that spot,'' and soon after being shot, he returned to Minneapolis. But in the long run, he said, the sniper's bullet changed his life for the better.
''Before that, I never enjoyed people; it never occurred to me that people were important,'' he said from Minneapolis, where he now sculptures as well as paints.
''After being shot, I began enjoying people.''
His art also changed. Until he was shot, he said, ''death was one of the most prominent symbols that reoccurred'' in his work. After the shooting, he said, rather than intensifying, that obsession ended.
Gas May Yield to Grass At Elmhurst Tanks Site
''Traffic on the Long Island Expressway is backed up to the Elmhurst tanks.''
For years, this familiar refrain on radio traffic reports was as welcome to Manhattan-bound drivers on the highway's Queens stretch as a nail in every tire. It threatened four miles of crawl and stall all the way to the Queens-Midtown Tunnel.
The two gas storage tanks, each rising more than 200 feet next to the L.I.E., were used until 1993. In 1996 their owner, Brooklyn Union Gas, dismantled them.
Local civic leaders and politicians wanted the 6.5-acre site turned into a park, but last year Brooklyn Union's successor, the KeySpan Corporation, said it was prepared to sell virtually the entire property to commercial developers for about $12 million.
Now, though, a park is in prospect. In December, KeySpan reached a deal with the city to sell it the site for a dollar. A spokesman for the utility, Ed Yutkowitz, said it had cleaned up the land to state environmental standards. The deal is subject to approval by the State Public Service Commission, which regulates utilities.
Following Up
