EVEN Power Rangers have to grow up eventually. ''Power Rangers DinoThunder'' is the 12th installment in the ''Power Rangers'' franchise, which began in 1993. Fans who were little ninjas when the series began are now old enough to drive. The producers of the show knew this and saw an opportunity.
Like previous series, ''DinoThunder'' features teenagers who acquire the power to transform themselves into high-kicking vigilantes in sleek costumes. But the show has a new gimmick: Jason David Frank, who starred in the very first series as Tommy Oliver, returns as Dr. Oliver, a science teacher at Reefside High S playing the rangers. Tommy Oliver is an older character but completely grown up. He's now in a leadership role as a teacher. He's part of the team.''
Each new episode of ''Power Rangers DinoThunder'' is shown on ABC Family on Saturday at 8:30 a.m., then repeated over the weekend at various times on Toon Disney, ABC Family and ABC. Yesterday's telecast, however, was pre-empted by a 500th-anniversary episode that will be shown again today at 8:30 a.m. on ABC Family and at 7:30 p.m. on Toon Disney. The special features clips from 10 ''Power Ranger'' series, dating back to the original ''Mighty Morphin Power Rangers'' and including scenes from ''Power Rangers Zeo'' (1996) and ''Power Rangers Turbo'' (1997) as well as more recent shows.
Until now the producers of the series have been able to avoid the narrative complications faced by long-running science fiction series and soap operas. Because of its very young audience, it wasn't necessary for each ''Power Rangers'' series to be compatible with old story lines. Past installments have had rangers come and go without much regard for continuity; there were even series based in outer space.
But as the ''Power Rangers'' audience has grown older and more sophisticated, the series has adapted to meetits tastes.
''We want to keep our audience a little longer,'' Ms. Austen said. ''We don't just want 5- and 6-year-olds. We also want 9- and 10-year olds.''
''DinoThunder'' features three teenage Power Rangers who are likely to appeal to the youngest viewers as well as teenagers. There is a star soccer player with a chip on his shoulder, a prank-playing computer whiz and an Avril Lavigne-like rocker. They acquire their special powers while on a field trip with Dr. Oliver, and along the way meet their new foes: giant mechanical dinosaurs that are up to no good. (Dr. Oliver explains in an early episode that he is partially responsible for the creatures, having done research on ''combining dinosaur DNA with technology'' a few years before.)
Ms. Austen said that the teenage ''Power Rangers'' audience -- those who grew up with the show -- was also growing. ''We have a very loyal young teen and adult following,'' he said. ''The kids who grew up 10 years ago are now in their late teens and 20's, and are still loyal fans.''
But the core audience, he added, is still young children, and the revolving door of new Power Rangers is there to help kids identify with the show and spark their imagination.
''A kid watching the show could say, 'Hey, that character is like me,' '' she said. ''It makes a kid feel like he can be a superhero too.''
Ben Sisario
FOR YOUNG VIEWERS
