THE SWALLOWS
OF KABUL
By Yasmina Khadra.
Translated by John Cullen.
195 pp. New York:
Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $18.95.
Yasmina Khadra is the pseudonym of Mohammed Moulessehoul, an Algerian writer who adopted part of his wife's name while an officer in his country's army so that his novels could slip past the military censors. His first novel published in English, ''In The Name of God'' (2000), focuses on vengeance -- it's about outsider boys, scorned and broken, who grow up to be Islamic fundamentalists and brutal killers. His second, ''Wolf Dreams'' (2003), is about disillusionment, the deadly noose that can turn a failed artist into an assassin. Those two books are set in Algeria. Khadra's new novel, fluidly translated from the French by John Cullen, moves to Afghanistan during the rule of the Taliban, and in it vengeance and disillusionment are elements of a despair that comes from the inability to recognize love as it stands before one's eyes in a country robbed of sensuality by the religious authority.
For Khadra's characters, the effort to ward off the numbness that follows violence, to maintain empathy with human suffering, is a never-ending struggle with one's conscience. Although at first shocking, the countless public executions -- slit throats and stonings -- make death a commonplace. Yet ''The Swallows of Kabul'' is a surprisingly tender book. The surprise is not that it renders slaughter palpable, or that it sets off religiosity from radicalism, but that amid the terror a classic story about love sneaks through: love lost, love imagined, love morphed into madness.
As the novel opens, Afghanistan, destroyed by drought and the war against the Soviets, is a country where ''cemeteries and wastelands compete with one another for territory,'' and where two couples suffocate under Muslim fundamentalism in once bustling Kabul. The Shaukats are poor and uneducated. Atiq Shaukat, a lowly jail warden, parts crowds with a ''many-thonged whip.''
Something is bothering him: maybe it's his sense that God asks too much of him -- making him sterile and subjecting his wife, Musarrat, to terminal illness. Maybe it's the crudeness of his life's ambition: ''to be able to pass a torture victim without lingering over him.'' Maybe it's that he has never been in love. Musarrat is the woman who nursed him to health after he was wounded by the Soviets. He is grateful and tired of feeling so.
The Ramats, in contrast, are moneyed intellectuals. Mohsen Ramat aspired to be a diplomat; Zunaira was a lawyer who worked for women's rights. Once vibrant lovers, they find themselves lost to each other -- Mohsen roams the streets while Zunaira festers indoors, refusing to put on a burka to go outside, as the Taliban require. One day, Mohsen, caught up in mob hysteria, finds himself casting stones at a prostitute's head, ''the light of his conscience'' gone out. Horrified, he confesses his act to his wife, who eventually agrees, with great reluctance (''Don't ask me to become something less than a shadow, an anonymous thing rustling around in a hostile place''), to ease his anguish by donning a burka and going out with him for a lover's promenade -- a fateful decision. (The ''swallows'' of the title refers to women clad in burkas: ''flocks of infirm swallows . . . that make a mournful sound when they come into the proximity of men.'')
In charged, present-tense interior monologues, Khadra hurls these four lives at one another. He writes as a kind of village sage, a war veteran whose tales compel passers-by to stop and listen. His sentences are direct and urgent. (''Every now and then,'' we read about Mohsen, ''a mad desire to grab an iron bar and destroy everything in sight surges through him; curiously, however, as soon as he takes his head in his hands, his rage turns into an irresistible urge to burst into tears.'') Images recur: hands, in particular, have wills of their own, catapulting stones, caressing cheekbones, shooing flies, commencing an execution.
Khadra belongs in the ranks of those writers -- J. M. Coetzee, for example -- who make violence into art, but it's the great Senegalese filmmaker and novelist Ousmane Sembene who is his nearest kin. Like Sembene, he populates a city with fanatics and the destitute, between whom are the ordinary men and women struggling to live their lives beneath the shroud of despotism; just as Sembene characteristically builds his work to a bright, surreal tableau charged with deep emotion, so Khadra indelibly seals the fate of Atiq.
Khadra, who was shipped off to military school when he was 9 and who served in the Algerian Army for 28 years -- an artist who found himself fighting Islamic radicals -- must have wondered often, ''How did I get here?'' Now, he writes from the south of France; he has held onto his conscience and made beautiful art of the terror he knew firsthand.
Lenora Todaro, a senior editor at The Voice Literary Supplement for five years, is now a freelance writer.
