The Yankees have not made a contract offer to the former Yankees pitcher Orlando Hernández, who auditioned for scouts on Friday in Coral Gables, Fla., General Manager Brian Cashman said Saturday.
Billy Connors, the club's vice president of player personnel, reported that Hernández, known as El Duque, who is recovering from arthroscopic arm surgery in May, threw in the mid-80's at the tryout. While that was better than the 78 miles an hour he mustered in a tryout about a month earlier, it apparently was not enough to excite the Yankees.
''He still has a little ways to go,'' Manager Joe Torre said. ''Of course, with Duque you have a lot of questions answered before you start.''
In five seasons with the Yankees, Hernández played on three World Series champions and narrowly missed a fourth. He had a 53-38 regular-season record and was especially effective in the playoffs, going 10-2.
Cashman said it did not help Hernández's cause that the Yankees' rotation appeared set, with Mike Mussina, Kevin Brown, Jon Lieber, Javier Vazquez and José Contreras.
Hernández recently rejected the Yankees' $1 million nonguaranteed minor league offer because he would like to be a starter.
Keeping Torre Happy
George Steinbrenner reiterated today that the club would like to extend Joe Torre's contract, and that he had asked his son-in-law, Steve Swindal, to handle it.
''We'd like to keep him,'' Steinbrenner said. ''I want Joe to be happy and satisfied. Right now I intend to leave Joe to his own pace. When he's ready, he'll make up his mind, and that's good enough for me.''
Torre said he was ''pleasantly surprised'' to note the return of mutual respect between him and Steinbrenner, but he said he had been too busy with the opening of spring training to give an extension much thought.
He smiled when he said Swindal asked him if he could envision himself not managing at this time next year. ''I said, 'No,' '' he said.
Williams Remains Hospitalized
Because of a lingering fever, center fielder Bernie Williams, who had his appendix removed on Thursday, remained in St. Joseph's Hospital in Tampa for a second day beyond his expected release.
Zambrano Will Open
Tampa Bay Manager Lou Piniella said that the right-hander Victor Zambrano would be his opening day starter. The Devil Rays open the regular season against the Yankees in Japan on March 30. Zambrano went 12-10 with a 4.21 earned run average in 2003, leading the Devil Rays in victories in his first full season as a starter.
The Devil Rays and the Yankees will play twice before finishing spring training. (AP)
BASEBALL: NOTEBOOK
