After Kevan Jackson was laid off from his management post at the New-York Historical Society last May, he discovered a very useful addition to his job hunt equipage: his wife, Karla the Losen.
At first Mr. Jackson tackled his latest job search as he had approached others, by contacting recruiters and expecting interviews to be lined up. But before long, he realized he needed to do more networking, and Ms. the Losen, a marketing executive, has ''been very proactive,'' he said. ''She's broadcast to everyone we know that I'm looking.''
The only people as vested in a job quest as unemployed people themselves are job seekers' partners and spouses. With job creation increasing but still falling short of forecasts, and the average duration of unemployment for professionals at nearly 24 weeks, spouses and partners are campaigning for their loved ones with abandon.
''The dynamics of the professional world have changed recently,'' said Jill Niemczyk, an executive recruiter at Sextant Search Partners in New York. ''Today we have more men in their 30's married to professional women, so they can have more input.''
Spouses have always offered moral support to their partners, but now they are reaching deep into their own personal and professional networks to give leads, circulate résumés and even set up meetings.
Human resources consultants say that these days nearly anything is acceptable when a husband or wife helps a spouse look for a job, from asking a large employer if a spouse can use the company's resource library to pressing a résumé into the hands of the human resources director. Federal employment law says nothing against an employer relying on a word of mouth recommendation to fill a job opening, so the door is open for an employee's significant other to get an inside track.
''Unless a company has a policy against hiring close relatives, it's O.K. to ask,'' said Leslie B. Prager, a career counselor at the Prager-Bernstein Group, a career consulting and outplacement firm in New York.
That is exactly what Elissa Roberts did when she was leaving her job in the finance department of a large retail corporation in Manhattan for a new job last year. Her husband had left his job in the public schools to try to land a university position and had turned to temporary work to generate some income.
A week before Ms. Roberts left her job, her employer had not hired a successor and was going to have to bring in a temporary worker. ''I said, 'Why don't you bring in my husband?''' Ms. Roberts recalled.
While her husband initially wondered if her lobbying for him would be ''a little weird,'' she said, he quickly agreed that anything was worth a shot. ''It's the same as my recommending a friend, which I've done numerous times,'' Ms. Roberts said. ''You vouch for them.''
Her husband was hired on a temporary basis, trained by his wife, and subsequently hired as a regular employee, in a job that it turns out he enjoys more than his wife did.
Many spouses and partners of job seekers are delving into their own alumni and professional databases for contacts and quietly sharing company-supplied passwords to electronic resources, according to numerous job seekers and career counselors.
Ms. the Losen has reached out to friends, co-workers, relatives of co-workers and professional organizations on behalf of Mr. Jackson. She went straight to the chairman of her company, who has a background in the media field that Mr. Jackson worked in previously and wants to re-enter, and requested an informational interview for her husband.
''I said, 'Kevan's in search of a job, you have similar interests, and he'd love to talk to you,''' Ms. the Losen said.
Like many spouses, she also stays tuned for any informal information she receives that might help her husband's search. ''If someone says something about a media organization, my ears perk up and I'm not afraid to say, 'Can my husband call you?''' Ms. the Losen said.
Indeed, sometimes the employed spouses are more aggressive than their job-searching counterparts to the point of aggravating their partners. Mr. Jackson says his wife's involvement has not pressured him. But Internet message boards are full of complaints from job seekers that their spouses are constantly asking about the status of the job search and their day-to-day efforts.
''The one who's looking should guide the spouse's level of involvement,'' Ms. Carter said. ''The problem we've seen is that the employed spouse tries to direct the job search for their partner.''
Bradford Agry, a partner at CareerTeam Partners, a career consulting firm in New York, urges a direct and brief approach for spouses helping unemployed partners. ''Call or e-mail on their behalf, and let them take it from there,'' he said. Unfortunately, a spouse who provides a contact, he said, can be tempted to follow up to the point of nagging. He has also noticed spouses who make introductions, then hover while their unemployed partners try to talk business with the new contacts. ''It's best handled by making an introduction and then getting out,'' Mr. Agry said.
The introduction should be a well-honed pitch, useful even when the job-hunting spouse is not present, according to Andrea R. Nierenberg, author of the book ''Nonstop Networking'' (Capital Books, 2002).
''You have a 20-second introduction of yourself that you use when you meet people, now you need a 20-second introduction of them as well,'' she said.
Sometimes a spouse's network becomes useful in a less-direct way. Mukul Kochhar, a graduate student at the Columbia Business School, hoped to find a summer job in equity research, the same field his wife is in. Her firm has a policy of not hiring close relatives of employees, but his wife gave him pointers in mock interviews and introduced him to others in the field who could provide helpful advice.
''I'm friendly with her friends, so could tap into that network,'' he said. ''Because we met in a more casual environment, they could give a more honest opinion than what they might have told me in a corporate setting.'' He wound up switching gears and finding a summer job at a hedge fund.
Career counselors say that even when a spouse is not actively helping with a job search, job seekers who are married or in a long-term relationship tend to have an edge. ''Having a spouse is helpful on a number of levels,'' Mr. Agry said. ''I worked with a client who was an architect. He was not in a relationship and did not have as big a network. That was more difficult.''
