THERE'S mixed media, and then there's opera, a medium so mixed up in the first place that it's always possible to fold in something extra.
Take the production of Claudio Monteverdi's ''Ritorno d'Ulisse in Patria'' (''Ulysses' Homecoming''), which opens Tuesday at the John Jay College Theater, presented by Great Performers at Lincoln Center. To the standard musical and theatrical components, it ingeniously adds both puppetry and film.
When puppets ''sing,'' they tend to do it karaoke style, to canned music or to the accompaniment of live singers placed out of sight. The venerable, well-traveled Salzburg Marionettes, which conclude a brief residency at the Metropolitan Museum of Art today, are prime examples of the canned-music option. And last night, in a remarkable alignment of the stars, the Brooklyn Philharmonic presented the Compañía el Tridente of Granada, Spain, in the intricate ''Master Peter's Puppet Show'' by Manuel de Falla, who calls for a puppet show within a puppet show, with live singers.
But Lincoln Center's ''Ulysses'' presents a still more elaborate case. Live singers, turned out in concert dress, help manipulate the puppets (roughly two-thirds life-size) in full view of the audience, taking their places on teams reminiscent of that more venerable Japanese invention, bunraku. The seven instrumentalists are onstage, too.
The production combines the forces of the Handspring Puppet Company of Johannesburg and the Ricercar Consort, a Belgian Baroque ensemble. But the mastermind behind it, as designer and director, is William Kentridge, 48, a native of Johannesburg, who says he wishes there were a proper English word for the kind of artist he is.
''Not draftsman,'' he said last fall on a visit to New York, where a daughter attends Columbia. ''That's someone who does technical drawings of buildings and bridges. Mainly I draw, and sometimes I film the drawings or make a theater production. But the process is still like drawing. It's working from the center outward. If somebody asks me, 'How would you do X?,' I haven't got a clue. The answer comes from the physical activity of hand on paper. You keep at it, and some new thought emerges.''
Mr. Kentridge is no musician. Still, music -- from a Renaissance madrigal and Dvorak to pop songs from the Congo and commissioned scores by the South African composer Philip Miller -- has always played an eloquent part in his animated films. Opera, he says, has been a passion for many years. But he never had the courage to direct an opera until the cosmopolitan Théâtre de la Monnaie, in Brussels, in collaboration with the city's gritty, downscale Kunsten Festival des Arts, tapped him for ''Ulysses'' in 1998. (Picture the Metropolitan Opera hooking up with La Mama.)
Adapted from Homer's ''Odyssey,'' Monteverdi's opera opens with an allegorical prologue showing Vulnerable Humanity, identified by many directors with Ulysses himself, at the tender mercies of Time, Fortune and Love. Mr. Kentridge, setting the work in the 20th century and cutting roughly half the score, jumps straight to a monologue for the war-weary hero as he awakens in a hospital bed from the grip of a sleep like death. But though the prologue is gone, its point is not lost: the puppets themselves embody the notion of mortals as playthings of the gods.
Within the stage picture, that archetype -- so ancient that it must be embedded in our DNA -- converges effortlessly with one that may well be personal to Mr. Kentridge. ''To the gods, Ulysses is a medical specimen,'' he said. ''In our culture, we feel that our bodies control our destinies. Modern medicine is our attempt to appease the forces we are subject to. Our gods are located in the body.''
To judge from photographs and film clips of ''Ulysses,'' feeling its evocative power will require no graduate seminar. But viewers tempted to explore Mr. Kentridge's mind-set in greater depth will be able to do so at the Marian Goodman Gallery on West 57th Street, which opens its latest show of his work, ''Tide Table,'' on Thursday.
Of particular interest to opera fans will be his video ''Learning the Flute,'' set to the overture of Mozart's ''Magic Flute,'' the second opera Mr. Kentridge is to produce, next season at the Monnaie. Designed (for unexplained reasons) to be projected on a blackboard, the video tells no story yet runs the gamut of the opera's motifs and symbols. Masonic ritual, the gods of Egypt, unfallen man at one with nature and birds, the four elements, the planets and the cosmic rounds of sun and moon: it's all here, keyed to the music in a sequence of images as organic as it is surprising, fresh and playful.
Low-tech and not slick in the least, the film bears Mr. Kentridge's unmistakable fingerprint. But its lightness stands in sharp contrast to the mood of ''Ulysses'' and the work that preceded it.
In spirit and technique, the animations that have put Mr. Kentridge on the map from South Africa to Istanbul, Paris, Havana and São Paulo are closer -- much closer -- to political cartooning than to fine art, explosive with energies of a social conscience profoundly in revolt. On that evidence, Mr. Kentridge belongs in the inflammatory company of such artist-provocateurs as the Goya of the etchings, the satirists of the Weimar Republic and the contemporary black American Kara Walker, whose scandalous paper cutouts air the dirty laundry of the antebellum South with wicked glee.
Mr. Kentridge's free associations open a window on obsessions that are plain to see yet hard to name. For many years, his work -- much of it released on limited-edition DVD's that have been snapped up by museums -- revolved mainly around two characters.
On one hand there was the corporate leviathan Soho Eckstein, waist deep in telephones and adding machines, tearing minerals from the earth and strangling whole nations in his tentacular embrace. On the other, Felix Teitlebaum, a balding, potbellied artist prone to fantasies of torrid sex with Eckstein's statuesque and unfulfilled Victorian missus.
Teitlebaum usually appears unflatteringly nude. Eckstein invariably wears the broad-striped business suit of a captain of industry, even under anesthesia. Yet an unsettling resemblance between Mr. Kentridge's leading men, in face and body type, is impossible to overlook: both are self-portraits. Mr. Kentridge has seen the enemy, and it is him.
Though the legacy of apartheid often hangs in the air like a toxic cloud, racism as such is seldom if ever an overt theme. The dance of Mr. Kentridge's alter egos raises questions that are more personal than political. How does a man atone for wrongs done to his brother? How does he atone for wrongs done to the earth?
At first glance, a Marxist might find the implicit indignation congenial. But then one must account for an aura of a different kind. The video ''The History of the Main Complaint,'' for instance, which shows Eckstein before a medical team posed like that of Rembrandt's ''Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp,'' conveys a gloomy, exhausted compassion also evident in ''Ulysses.''  ''The History,'' Mr. Kentridge says, was the ''first seed'' of ''Ulysses,'' and the soundtrack he chose for it was a Monteverdi madrigal.
So the genesis of ''Ulysses'' out of Mr. Kentridge's earlier work is not hard to trace. Theatrical skills cannot be taken for granted in a visual artist, but Mr. Kentridge has always had time for the stage. He has worked as actor, director and designer in material ranging from the shattering ''Bacchae'' of Euripides to Alfred Jarry's scatological schoolboy classic ''Ubu Roi,'' Samuel Beckett's ''Catastrophe'' and Tom Stoppard's ''Travesties.'' He has written plays as well.
As for puppetry, his association with Handspring goes back to the early 90's. In fact, three of Mr. Kentridge's previous collaborations with the company -- ''Ubu and the Truth Commission,'' ''Woyzeck on the Highveld'' and ''Zeno at 4 a.m.'' -- preceded ''Ulysses'' to New York. And all three suggested, as ''Ulysses'' does, that puppets may serve a distinctive visual artist better than human players do, for a simple reason. Dress them up as you will, real people look not like projections of the imagination but like real people. They are apt to clash with your ''picture.''
The Handspring puppets for ''Ulysses,'' carved by Adrian Kohler and Basil Jones from Mr. Kentridge's detailed sketches, preserve the handmade, homespun character of the video projections that make up the other principal visual element of the production. But even relieved of the need to look and act their parts, the singers have an important dramatic job.
''We singers don't do the difficult manipulations,'' the Italian baritone Furio Zanasi, who has recorded the title role on the French label K617 and sings it here, said from Brussels before the premiere. ''The professional puppeteers take care of that. We just work on one of the puppet's hands, for example. It's fun to do. But it's also a little strange to be singing and to feel that the audience isn't really looking at you.''
That effect, of course, serves Mr. Kentridge's exact purpose. ''There's a circular focus,'' he said. ''The singer focuses on the puppet, which draws the audience's eye to the puppet, too. For the singers in this production, that's what acting is: focusing on the puppet. The main thing the puppeteers have to learn is to breathe with the singers. My hope is that it all makes the music clearer.''
Il Ritorno d'Ulisse  John Jay College Theater, 899 10th Avenue, at 59th Street.  Opens Tuesday at 8 p.m.
William Kentridge: Tide Table  Marian Goodman Gallery, 24 West 57th Street.  Thursday-April 10.
MUSIC Matthew Gurewitsch is a writer based in New York.
