DOT IN THE UNIVERSE
By Lucy Ellmann.
Illustrated. 199 pp. New York:
Bloomsbury. Paper, $13.95.
PROBABLY everyone has received, at some time or another, one of those crazy, fulminating letters that have lots of capitalizations and passionately scratched-out phrases and unwarranted exclamation points. Such letters, sent by a tormented friend or a lonely cousin or a complete stranger, suggest ignorance at first, then insanity. But sometimes, if read to the end, they have an internal clockwork of idiosyncratic logic. ''Dot in the Universe'' is a literary version of that kind of letter, a deliciously subversive message sent to us by the novelist Lucy Ellmann.
Ellmann (whose previous books include ''Varying Degrees of Hopelessness'' and ''Man or Mango?'') gives us a pell-mell kind of narrative, chatty and emphatic, replete with spiels and digressions. Here, for instance, she sums up the main theme of ''Dot in the Universe'':
''Does it even matter if you DIE? A few people will notice and then they'll die too! . . . Nothing is left of you but a sour voice in your daughter's head every time she loses her keys, or an empty seat on the bus -- and there are MORE BRIOCHES for everybody!''
The effect is part wide-eyed naïveté and part pure rage.
The meaninglessness of life is pondered -- and illustrated+- by Dot, a ''pretty wifey'' who lives with her philandering husband, John, in the English seaside town of Jaywick. Dot is a dispiritingly shallow person, with ''the perfect face for her era: tight-lipped, pointy-nosed, pink-skinned, blond-haired. MOST WOMEN IN ENGLAND CURRENTLY LOOK LIKE THIS. It is the face that has WON THE DAY.''
The opening section of the novel tells of a well-regulated existence: Dot cooking, Dot shopping, Dot socializing, Dot collecting tea cozies. Here Ellmann seems to be writing a pastiche of the British chick-lit phenomenon. Dot is neither more nor less two-dimensional than many heroines of the genre; the difference is that the author knows she's a vacant lot of a character. It's as if Ellmann, in writing a book about the ultimate pointlessness of existence, chose as its focus the most pointless existence she could find. Dot is an object of contempt -- a mere dot, as Ellmann keeps reminding us.
The conventions of the chick-lit genre are revealed to be the conventions of middle-class life itself, as when Dot and John go on vacation: ''They took a boat to Capri, saw the Blue Grotto, swam a mile offshore, fell entwined upon a beach and lay there until waves measured their bulk. Then John ate a bad clam. So Dot went alone the next day to a shoe market and got lonely and depressed and chatted up, but managed to buy some nice shoes also.'' Ellmann snubs bourgeois life and celebrates it all at once. Dot and John are allowed a bit of poetry -- those measuring waves -- before the bad clam is visited upon them, and it's hard to imagine a more concise description of an Italian tourist trap.
All this is clever, but Ellmann is better than just clever. She is a genuinely (if sneakily) humane novelist. And she surprises us by making us care about Dot. It takes some heavy lifting, though: we don't really begin even to tolerate Dot until Ellmann has turned her into a ghost, then a blastocyst, a possum and, finally, a very sad little girl.
Dot's journey from Jaywick begins with a killing spree. After accidentally running into a child with her car, she develops a taste for blood. She discovers that no one misses old ladies and begins bumping them off. After her marriage falls apart, she commits suicide and ends up in the underworld. (I'm not giving much away; all this happens before the narrative really gathers steam.) Dot has been pretty bad in her life, but she finds, to her surprise, that villains aren't the only ones who fill up hell:
''Dante was WRONG. It's not just a place for MISCREANTS. There are people in the underworld who simply lacked PATIENCE, or listened to too much Radio Four. People who fell for the bunkum of RELIGION, people who killed spiders, spiders who killed PEOPLE, goops who mocked Mozart. Mozart himself!'' (Dante might be invoked, but Ellmann's underworld also brings to mind an old Rowan Atkinson routine in which the Devil welcomes newcomers to hell by calling the roll: ''Atheists! The French!'')
At this point, Ellmann's writing takes on a helter-skelter quality that recalls Roald Dahl in his most madcap ''Charlie and the Chocolate Factory'' mode. Touring the underworld, Dot witnesses the food she's eaten, the excrement she's produced, the unrecycled plastic she's discarded. She meets Coleridge. She is invited to help decorate hell. She is reincarnated as a possum, but that particular life is cut short by vivisection.
Finally, Dot is reborn to an American family. At first, we get more snideness: ''America does suburbia so well! No one else knows how to drive that much truth and beauty out of life.'' But the section on Dot's American childhood dilates into a reverie, with a father who loves to paint and garden, a genius brother and a sublimely domestic mother who stoically tries to hide the fact that she's dying. Ellmann provides her descriptions with more specifics: we gaze at ''blue sky moving dizzyingly'' through Dot's eyes; we admire her mother's creamy shoulders. There's tenderness in these details. Ellmann gives Dot and her grief the respect of a more traditional narrative. Characters are developed, scenes are described.
But even here Ellmann continues to interject rants and remarks. Earlier in the book, she comes out passionately against science, deplores the treatment of pets and takes a position in favor of wooden utensils. (''WOOD. It's an evolutionary PROCESS. Get with it.'') Later, she weaves in mouthy generalizations about a typical American childhood: ''The early years at school in America are devoted to confidence, continence, naptime, playtime, story circles, show and tell, reading, writing, drawing, singing and the celebration of one goddamn public holiday after another. The preparations are EXTREME.'' But then ironic observation turns to uncanny wisdom: ''We intensively train children in the Arts and ritual because deep down we know that these are the only things that really MATTER. This is what we must share first with the young, in case they DIE.''
Ellmann, though a novelist, has been compared by one British critic to Montaigne. And, ultimately, the pleasures of this book are the pleasures of an essay: the strong point of view, the surprising tug of moralism. Dot waxes and wanes as a character, but Ellmann emerges as a voice of clarity and reason. ''Dot in the Universe'' dares to ask: What if you really listened to that crazy friend who writes you all those oddly punctuated letters? And what if she turned out to be RIGHT?
Claire Dederer is a writer in Seattle.
