STEVE MICHALIK pushed up the sleeve of his warm-up jacket and flexed his arm, popping a Popeye-sized bicep. Pulling up his pants leg, Mr. Michalik exposed an equally oversized calf muscle.
Three decades after he held the titles of Mr. America, Mr. U.S.A. and Mr. Universe, Mr. Michalik, 57, of Roslyn, still keeps a Herculean focus on bodybuilding. Though older, he still bears a resemblance to the 225 pounds of rippled steel on the pin-up posters of his younger physique.
''I am in shape,'' said Mr. Michalik, a broad-shouldered muscleman whose bodybuilding triple crown rivaled that of Arnold Schwarzenegger, now the California governor. ''I have to be an example to my members.''
Concentrate on those power squats but disregard the plaque outside Mr. Michalik's office at the Powerhouse Gym in Farmingdale. His mantra is his intensity-insanity workout. He doesn't want to be known as a just another rep-counting personal trainer.
''I don't like that -- personal trainer -- even though that's the sign and the title,'' bristled Mr. Michalik, preferring to be known as ''a Lancelot,'' a fitness warrior who once slipped down the funnel of steroid abuse, guzzled the hormone-rich fluid from monkeys' brains to grow bigger muscles and learned the hard way that ''building a body, building fitness, being strong, being healthy and staying alive is probably 20 percent exercise and 80 percent mind and spirit.''
Contending that he's more teacher than trainer, Mr. Michalik oversees a team of personal trainers and a bevy of local executives and housewives who pump iron at his command. Mr. Michalik's goal, he said, is to teach clients who want to get in shape how to train themselves with fast-paced intense exercises on a circuit of heavy-duty workout machines.
''The human body does not want to change,'' Mr. Michalik said. ''The human body's idea is to survive, period. That's what it wants to do, survive. Doing exercise, to be physically fit, is nonsurvival to the body.''
The body will not grow large muscles naturally. Coping with the pain of working out past the endurance point is a mental as well as physical exercise, he said.
''To get your body to mutate like that or to grow like that or get stronger like that requires an ability to not listen to the inner voices that tell you not to do that,'' Mr. Michalik said. ''He who conquers the wall of fire or the wall of voices conquers the body.''
Mr. Michalik was 22 when he won the Mr. America title on his first try in 1971, making him the most muscular man in the country. Growing up in Brooklyn, he became interested in bodybuilding at age 8. After his abusive father threw him into the closet, he stopped crying, looked down and started reading a stack of his older brother's comic books.
''Captain America, because he was strong and wise and he had integrity and honesty, he was successful in life and conquered the villains and bad guys,'' Mr. Michalik recalled. ''I said to myself, there is the answer to all of life. I couldn't become Captain America, so I decided to become Mr. America.''
A scrawny youth, he peppered doctors with questions about the human body. By 12, Mr. Michalik was volunteering to scrub the bathrooms at a gym in Queens in order to observe how to grow big muscles. A physicist taught him to apply physics to exercise physiology. Simply put, the more force placed on a muscle, the faster and greater the change. After high school, he volunteered for a tour in Vietnam. While in the Eighth Air Force, he ignored sniper fire and did bench presses in a clearing using a cinder-block barbell.
But in 1976, shortly after capturing the Mr. Universe crown, Mr. Michalik's car was run over by a truck, crushing and paralyzing him from the waist down. Doctors told him he'd never walk again.
''I said, 'Oh yes, I will walk again,''' he recalled. '''I'll find a way to do it.''' Scouring anatomy texts, he studied ligaments, tendons, nerves and bones. While his younger brother helped move his legs, Mr. Michalik developed his own therapeutic program at the gym, eventually leg-pressing 700 and 800 pounds. Three years later, he secured the last of 15 slots on a fledgling Grand Prix circuit. Mr. Schwarzenegger happened to be emceeing the show for ABC. Startled at his cohort's comeback, Mr. Schwarzenegger nicknamed Mr. Michalik ''the phantom bodybuilder.''
Capitalizing on his renewed fame, Mr. Michalik created a ''phantom'' act that played on Broadway and in Las Vegas. But the Grand Prix circuit, with 12 shows annually, was grueling. Mr. Michalik began fueling his body with steroids.
''The choices were, take them and compete or get out of the sport,'' Mr. Michalik recalled. ''You couldn't get off the stuff because the next guy wasn't getting off the stuff. It was a horrible mental addiction.''
But constant drug cocktails intended to grow muscle took a toll on his liver; steroid-induced cysts nearly killed him. After a spell in California to study spirituality and clean up his act, Mr. Michalik returned to the Island 15 years ago as an anti-steroid campaigner, made a video and taught strength training to the elderly and lectured teenagers about the dangers of steroid abuse.
For the past three years at the Powerhouse Gym, he has been pushing his atomic force workouts, encouraging time-strapped businessmen to do 15 reps in the time they used to do 3.
''If you can take that one-hour workout and do it in 10 minutes, you can compress matter, energy, space and time,'' Mr. Michalik said. ''But you are creating 10 times the force in the muscle by doing so, thus creating a better ability to change, and it works.''
J.J. Burns, 38, an investment manager from Northport, ran 80 to 90 miles a week and did triathlons but had very little muscle on his 6-foot-2 frame when he started doing intense three-times-a-week 40-minute workouts with Mr. Michalik.
''It's about how to work your body out in the least amount of time in the most efficient way to shock your muscles,'' Mr. Burns said, now proud to take off his shirt at the beach and expose his brawny 240-pound frame. ''It's not just physically changing to yourself; it's physically changing your whole psychology of life.''
Mr. Michalik said he exercises his clients to the point where they scream that they can't do another squat.
''All I do is take over their mind and I convince them they can do it and they can do it,'' he said. ''I train people physically, spiritually and emotionally.''
LONG ISLAND JOURNAL E-mail: lijournal@nytimes.com
