When Norm Nixon retired from the N.B.A., he had only one thing on his mind: owning a business. So Nixon bought a restaurant and a nightclub. Then he decided he wanted to be an example. So Nixon became a sports agent.
''I thought there was a need for former players to represent players,'' he said, ''and also a need for more African-American agents out there.''
After serving as an officer for the N.B.A. players association for eight years, he knew contracts as well as he knew basketball. He founded Nixon and Associates, a sports and entertainment company, and over the years he has represented Jalen Rose, Maurice Taylor, Gary Grant and a host of N.F.L. players, including Peter Warrick. He has also worked with the musical artists TLC and L. L. Cool J.
Nixon, 48, said he wished more of today's players would follow in his footsteps.
''If they want to talk, I'll share,'' said Nixon, who was in Denver on Friday with his client Al Wilson of the Broncos. ''But most guys are not trying to do this.''
Nixon won two N.B.A. titles with the Los Angeles Lakers and put up sensational statistics in doing so. But he was always overshadowed by the brilliance of his backcourt mate, Magic Johnson. After six seasons, Nixon was traded to the Clippers for Byron Scott. Nixon finished his career with the Clippers, producing nice numbers but always in the shadow of Johnson and the Lakers.
''I won championships, man, championships,'' Nixon said. ''The media had certain guys they were always going to promote, and I was not a media baby. I didn't work hard at promoting myself. I handled basketball in a more businesslike manner.''
Nixon and his wife, the dancer and actress Debbie Allen, live in Los Angeles, where they run a dance company and produce musicals. Nixon's oldest son, DeVaughn, studies film and television at Loyola Marymount,. His daughter, Vivian, attends Fordham and dances with Alvin Ailey, and his youngest son, Norman Jr., is an all-city basketball player at Crossroads High School.
''I play with him and work him out,'' Nixon said. ''And, of course, I can still beat him.''
PRO BASKETBALL
