I am an affirmative-action baby. My SAT scores, grade-point average and nonexistent record of extracurricular activities would not have gained me admission to Harvard back in 1972 were it not for what William Fitzsimmons, Harvard's current director of admissions, has delicately described as the ''ever so slight tip'' traditionally granted to children of alumni.
I don't recall experiencing any stigma, and I certainly didn't feel that I deserved my diploma any less than all those physics geniuses admitted strictly on the basis of their intellect. In fact, I never thought of myself as the beneficiary of any special treatment until the recent debate over ''legacy admissions.'' And now Texas A&amp;M has abolished the practice. After announcing in December that the school would not restore its affirmative-action program, Robert Gates, president of the university, said last month that he would also end preferences for legacies because they create ''an obvious inconsistency in an admissions strategy based on individual merit.'' I have to admit he has a point there.
Legacies are one of those quiet institutional prerogatives that can't help looking bad once exposed to public scrutiny. The Economist magazine, no enemy of privilege, has noted the oddity of ''the most politically correct places on the planet . . . pandering to the (overwhelmingly white) children of the overclass.'' A campaign against legacies has obvious political appeal -- especially if your opponent is a legatee like George W. Bush; John Edwards has lampooned the practice as ''a birthright out of 18th-century British aristocracy, not 21st-century American democracy.'' Senator Edward Kennedy, who himself may have needed more than an ever so slight tip to get into Harvard, has introduced legislation requiring colleges to disclose the race and economic background of their legacy admissions.
Legacies hark back to an era when the elite university belonged to a network of institutions (the prep school, the military, the Episcopal Church) devoted to the intergenerational transfer of the manly virtues -- stoicism, sacrifice, loyalty, a tight spiral on the forward pass. They seem out of place in our fiercely competitive culture, which promises to reward ''merit.'' But universities defend legacies on the grounds that having second- or third-generation kids on campus helps build a sense of continuity and tradition; that the slight tip to their children keeps alumni donors happy; and that, in any case, it's nobody's business but their own.
Unlike Texas A&amp;M, most universities want both affirmative action and legacy admissions. Senator Edwards, by contrast, supports affirmative action but argues that legacy admissions violate a public good so fundamental -- equal opportunity -- that universities should voluntarily get rid of the practice no matter what institutional benefit it confers. Affirmative action is good social engineering, while legacy admission is bad social engineering. Of course, legacies were never intended to be any form of social engineering; but universities have become such powerful forces that even their private choices now have to be able to withstand public scrutiny.
The question, then, is what are we to make of these two forms of preference in light of each other? A thumb on the scale in favor of the historically excluded is obviously morally preferable to a thumb on the scale in favor of the fortunate. On the other hand, the magnitude of the advantage is very different in the two cases. At the University of Michigan, according to evidence submitted in the recent Supreme Court case Gratz v. Bollinger, minority applicants to the undergraduate school were receiving a 20-point boost on a 150-point scale, while legacies got no more than a 4-point bonus. People like Senator Edwards are thus defending a big intrusion on meritocratic principles and opposing a small one.
You could make the case in favor of affirmative action, and against legacy preferences, if you felt that college admissions offices should concern themselves as much with expanding opportunity as with rewarding academic merit. This is a serious argument, but it would be more persuasive if admissions offices based their preferences on actual disadvantage, not skin color. As for the opposite case, maybe there's some rationale that would justify giving a break to me but not to a black or Hispanic kid, but I wouldn't want to recite it in a crowded bar.
So which is it to be -- no to legacies and affirmative action, or yes to both? My own preference would be no to both. A place at an elite university has become so precious a commodity that even a slight tip for the already fortunate feels as un-American as, say, the Republican campaign to repeal the estate tax. And while increasing minority enrollment in the best schools is highly desirable, I would rather see it accomplished through outreach, recruitment and admissions policies sensitive to disadvantage rather than race.
But I also know what will happen. Both practices will flourish, because the marketplace will demand it. When development offices tabulate the millions of dollars in lost alumni gifts that a no-legacy policy is likely to cost, even the boldest meritocrats at the helms of universities will have second thoughts. Meanwhile, the political marketplace will insist that places be guaranteed to minority students. When affirmative action was eliminated in California and Texas, state legislatures devised new, hypothetically race-blind systems that have largely restored the prior numbers of minority students (except at the most selective schools in California). And now that the Supreme Court has reaffirmed its support for affirmative action, the University of Texas, which had abandoned the policy under court order, has begun to explore ways of restoring it.
Affirmative action has long been a handy punching bag for the right, and legacies may now become a handy punching bag for the left. And they'll both always be there. No matter how hard you hit them, they're bound to pop back up.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-29-04 James Traub is a contributing writer for the magazine.
