THE magnificent white pillared building that houses Corbin &amp; Reynolds is a landmark in downtown Long Beach. The décor of the new restaurant inside transports diners to another era. There are dark wood pillars, brick walls, ceiling fans, shiny wood floors, an old-fashioned tile floor in the bar, turn-of-the-century chandeliers, an impressive mirror-backed bar and a pressed-tin ceiling. Black and white photographs of old Long Beach dot the walls along with pictures of sailing ships.
The whole enterprise is a salute to history. The Corbin in the restaurant's name refers to the man who was responsible for bringing the railroad to Long Beach. Reynolds was the city's first mayor.
The new spot also salutes good food. The executive chef is Brian Schlitt, who last cooked at the Argyle Grill in Babylon, a sister restaurant. I first tasted and was impressed by Mr. Schlitt's food at the Seafood Barge in Southold. He was also in the kitchen at Nick &amp; Toni's in East Hampton.
Corbin &amp; Reynolds is a fine stage for his talents. The big, beautiful restaurant has less of a bar scene and therefore less noise than the Argyle. Still, Corbin's policy of no reservations past 6 p.m. results in crowds on weekends.
The service staff is caring and enthusiastic. When a guest spilled a glass of wine, at least a half dozen people scurried around us, making things right. Yet on a recent Saturday, the staff's solicitousness was too much of a good thing. Five men in suits plus a hostess stopped by our table two or three times each to ask if everything was O.K., interrupting the meal more than a dozen times.
They need not have worried. Nearly every dish scored. Most impressive was a shrimp martini, four jumbos threaded on skewers held in the ice of a cocktail glass. There was a papaya-mango salsa atop that ice, and a ramekin of spicy cocktail sauce and crunchy won-ton crisps on the plate. Other seafood sensations were the rare slices of sesame-seared tuna mated with marinated cucumber and a tomato-onion marmalade, a special bruschetta garnished with three smoky grilled shrimp, and the pair of crab cakes served alongside a refreshing jicama-orange slaw with a tomato-caper tartar sauce secured in endive leaves.
We also liked the creamy New England clam chowder; the poached pear salad featuring baby arugula, Gorgonzola cheese and a port wine drizzle; and a green salad highlighting exceptionally creamy goat cheese, brandied pecans and sun-dried cranberries. The Mediterranean chopped salad had all the right tastes but was minced so finely it was nearly a purée.
The only other letdown was the slow-roasted pork T-bone chop, which had not been roasted slowly enough. It was tough. The rack of lamb, though, was everything one hopes this dish will be: thick double chops running with juices. That was also the verdict on a special turf and surf. It included a succulent 12-ounce sirloin and two jumbo shrimp stuffed with crab and drizzled with scampi butter. The shrimp were light and appealing, not the breaded variety weighed down by a heavy filling so often encountered.
Two stellar entrees displayed the chef's deft hand with fish. Grilled herb-marinated swordfish was perfect, as was its vegetable-studded Israeli couscous. A special of red snapper atop a Peruvian blue potato hash with portobello mushrooms and a crown of spinach was its equal.
The pasta I'd go back for is the fresh pappardelle in a sauce of fall-away-tender beef short ribs with oven-dried tomatoes, caramelized onions, roasted garlic and spinach. Another hit was toasted (though not crisp) spaghettini encircled with rock shrimp and tossed with arugula, radicchio, garlic, shallots, olive oil and lemon juice.
All the desserts were garnished with mounds of real whipped cream and a baby orchid. Crowd-pleasers included a warm bread pudding studded with macadamia nuts and paired with ice cream, a rich, soft-centered chocolate cupcake decorated with a chocolate candy sail and a Godiva white chocolate cheesecake with a fresh berry compote.
Corbin &amp; Reynolds  20 West Park Avenue, Long Beach (516)431-4600
Very Good
ATMOSPHERE -- A step back into history.  SERVICE -- Attentive, sometimes overly so.  SOUND LEVEL -- Usually comfortable. Noisy on weekend nights when the bar is filled with diners waiting for tables.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Shrimp cocktail, crab cakes, seared tuna, bruschetta with shrimp, clam chowder, pear salad, goat cheese salad, pappardelle with short ribs, toasted spaghettini, surf and turf, rack of lamb, swordfish, red snapper, all desserts.  WINE LIST -- Fourteen wines by the glass ($6 to $10), a dozen half bottles ($14 to $35) and 66 bottles ($21 to $98). Almost half of them are $30 or less.  PRICE RANGE -- Sunday brunch, $18. Lunch, entrees $8 to $24. At dinner, appetizers $4 to $13; entrees $10 (burger) to $29.  CREDIT CARDS -- All the majors.  HOURS -- 11:30 a.m. to midnight Monday through Thursday, till 1 a.m. Friday and Saturday and 11 a.m. to 10 p.m. Sunday.  RESERVATIONS -- Accepted only for 4 to 6 p.m.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- Fully accessible.  REVIEWED BY THE TIMES -- Feb. 29, 2004.  RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING OUT
