HERE in Bruce Springsteen territory, down Route 9 South, past the adult store, bowling alley and tattoo parlor, gas stations, strip malls, fast-food restaurants and big box discounters, but across the divided highway from Crazy Joe's furniture and right next to the Capri Motel, sits the Cornerstone Calvary Chapel.
The long, low building with red brick facing, once a two-screen movie theater, is home base these days to not only the church but also a new evangelical Christian radio station called the Bridge FM.
An announcer on the car radio, introducing one of the station's syndicated Bible study programs, seems somehow out of sync with the gritty surroundings as he says, ''Thank you for joining 'Leading the Way' with Dr. Michael Youssef, helping you understand the times we're living in from God's point of view.''
Operating 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, the Bridge is one of 15 religious format stations scattered around New Jersey, from Bergen County to Cherry Hill to North Cape May.
It is also the latest example of a religious format phenomenon in radio that has grown to 1,843 stations nationwide, according to a 2003 report by Arbitron, the ratings service. Just nine years ago, there were 1,462 such stations, according to the Religious Broadcasters Association, a trade association in Manassas, Va.
In New Jersey, the Bridge takes its place among FM religious-format stations like The Star WAWZ (99.1) in Zarephath and WFME (94.7) in Newark as well as AM stations like WWDJ (970) and WMCA (570), both in Hasbrouck Heights.
The new station actually ties together four FM frequencies, some of which once belonged to Jukebox Radio, which was based in Bergen County and broadcast middle-of-the-road pop music and local news but ceased operation in December 2002.
The Bridge, with a combined transmitting power of 11,000 watts, consists of WWDR (89.7) in Howell (formerly WPDQ), WJUX (99.7) in Monticello, N.Y., and two other frequencies without call letters: 103.1 in Fort Lee and 94.3 in Pomona, N.Y.
The station is a result of a partnership between two nondenominational evangelical churches, the 350-member Cornerstone Calvary Chapel here in Monmouth County and the 5,000-member Calvary Chapel Old Bridge in Middlesex County some 20 miles away. Since last summer it has been broadcasting throughout the metropolitan area, offering instruction in the Bible by local and nationally known religious commentators as well as contemporary religious songs.
Lloyd Pulley, senior pastor of Calvary Chapel Old Bridge, who was instrumental in creating the radio station, says that more churches in the national Calvary Chapels movement are joining the trend, buoyed by the success in California of a station started by Calvary Chapel Costa Mesa that is now the No.1 religious station in Los Angeles.
''The main reason we did this -- and we really believe it's going to be a popular station -- is because it's going to meet a deeper need in people and that is knowing how the Bible relates to their spiritual needs,'' Mr. Pulley said.
The operation here is a one room-studio in the church building with a bank of computers and a mixing board that takes recorded programming from CD's, religious Web sites and satellites and broadcasts it simultaneously on all four frequencies.
The Old Bridge church bought the Howell station in January 2003 for $875,000 and began broadcasting in June. The other three frequencies, bought last year for $3.3 million, went on the air around Thanksgiving.
Mr. Pulley says the station's blend of teaching and music differs from the programming of other religious stations. The Star WAWZ, for example, plays only pop Christian music, and WMCA emphasizes teaching. The Bridge also has a more casual style than some of the other Bible instruction formats, said Mr. Pulley, a stocky man with thick reddish hair who is the image of casual in brown sport shirt, olive chinos and tan loafers, looking more like a college senior than a 45-year-old minister and father of two adult children.
''I'm a child of my generation, and all the pastors we have on the station are of the same era,'' he said. ''We came out of the hippie movement. We have more of a 'Be yourself; don't have that sort of heavy tone that people hear when they go to church approach.' We're just normal guys who have a love for the Bible. And that quality comes out on the radio. We're very down to earth.''
Among the personalities who broadcast on the station are Chuck Smith, senior pastor of Calvary Chapel Costa Mesa in California, and Jay Sekulow, a national call-in radio show host and chief counsel for the American Center for Law and Justice, a conservative activist group on religious matters. Mr. Sekulow could be heard recently urging a listener from Massachusetts to write to her legislators to support a Constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage.
Mr. Pulley also has a radio program on the Bridge, ''Bridging the Gap,'' which has also been broadcast for the 10 years over other stations, including WMCA. His time slots on the Bridge are 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. Monday through Friday. His Sunday sermon is also broadcast, at 10:15 a.m. In other activity, Mr. Pulley has recently been renting theaters where his congregation can see special screenings of the Mel Gibson film ''The Passion of The Christ,'' which opened this week and has been embraced as a teaching tool by evangelical Christians. Mr. Pulley plans to discuss the film more fully as Good Friday approaches.
Still, the Bridge is his main focus.
Dennis Radeke, the station's general manager, said, ''We're one of the stops on the dial, but I think when you consider where we are in the New York City area in light of the 9/11 tragedy, there's a lot of people that have questions and are looking for answers.''
JERSEYANA
