Salim Hoss, prime minister during some of the most violent years of Lebanon's 1975-90 civil war, is a vegetarian who does not believe in killing animals, much less human beings. In his final, postwar, stint in office, from 1998 to 2000, he refused to sign execution warrants for prisoners on death row. His decision began five years during which Lebanon did not enforce its death penalty law.
''It's a matter of principle,'' Mr. Hoss said in the small office here where he receives visitors in his retirement. ''I believe that God rewards life. God alone may take it back.''
This informal moratorium came to an end in January, when Lebanon held its first executions since 1998, two by firing squad and one by hanging. But the executions happened with an unusual amount of public soul-searching here, in a way that reflected this nation's persistent sectarian divisions, as well as differing responses to violence after so many years of war.
The differences were underscored by the three men executed. Under pressure to punish a Shiite Muslim accused of killing eight people, all but one of whom were Christians, the government of President Emile Lahoud also chose to execute one convict from each of the nation's two other main creeds, a Christian and a Sunni Muslim.
In a region where the death penalty is the norm, the return to executions was met by something novel in the Middle East: a full-fledged and homegrown campaign, led by human rights advocates and members of the clergy, to eliminate capital punishment in Lebanon.
Against Lebanon's history of war -- and strong protest from the European Union -- even the government seemed sheepish. Executing the three convicts, it also commuted the death sentences of six others, two of whom, it turned out, had already died in prison.
''We are not using it too much,'' said the information minister, Michel F. Samaha, who added that no new executions were currently planned. ''We are using it in the cases where the crimes were really premeditated.''
Since gaining independence more than 60 years ago, Lebanon has used the death penalty relatively sparingly. Through 1998, 51 prisoners had been executed here, compared with at least 100,000 who died in fighting during the civil war. Fourteen of those convicts were executed after the reinstatement of the death penalty in 1994, in what politicians said was an effort to deter crime after the war.
The last executions in 1998 signaled a turning point of sorts: two men were hanged in a public square near where they had killed the owners of a home they were robbing. The Movement of People's Rights, a group opposed to the death penalty that had been formed months earlier, held its first protest with about 30 people chanting and waving banners that said ''We mourn for the victims of the first crime and the victims of the execution.'' It was a rare sight in a region where the death penalty is usually unquestioned and often viewed as the modern extension of tribal law demanding revenge.
''It was the first time anything like this happened,'' said Ugarit Yunan, a founder of the People's Rights group, which is based in Beirut.
With executions suspended after Mr. Hoss returned to office, the campaign against capital punishment found support in Parliament and helped rescind a provision of the death penalty law that called for automatic execution for murders.
The group argues as similar organizations do in other countries that a death sentence is cruel and unusual punishment, that innocent people are sometimes executed and that the death penalty does not serve as a deterrent.
Turkey, one of the most progressive Muslim countries, banned capital punishment last year as part of its effort to join the European Union, the group said.
But the group also raises the particular case of Lebanon and the war. ''We do not need more violence to manage our country, especially from our leaders,'' Ms. Yunan said.
The government argues that the real state of Lebanese society, not entirely healed from the war and still divided along religious lines, makes the death penalty an unavoidable necessity.
''Lebanon is not actually Switzerland, France or England,'' Mr. Samaha said. ''We lived for 15 or 16 or 17 years of violence in Lebanon. In some minds, and some manners, a certain violence became the culture. After the war, we had many crimes, many important crimes. One of the things we did to stop this was the death penalty.''
In July 2000, a young Shiite named Ahmed Mansour killed eight colleagues at the Private School Teachers' Mutual Fund in Beirut. He appeared to be a disgruntled employee, but because most of the dead were Christian, the crime took on sectarian overtones. Several observers said the government had felt quiet, though firm, pressure from the Christian authorities to execute Mr. Mansour.
Ms. Yunan and other death penalty opponents said the government then injected sectarian politics into the issue in choosing the two others who would be executed: Remi Zaatar, a Christian convicted of killing two Lebanese civil defense soldiers in a robbery in 2000; and Badih Hamade, a Sunni convicted of killing three Lebanese Army intelligence officers in 2002.
But Mr. Samaha said the choice was not political. Each of the men, he said, had killed more than one person and deserved the death penalty.
Uncertainty over the death penalty in Lebanon can be seen in the Rev. Elie Nasr, a Maronite priest and the general chaplain of prisons. For months, he said, he had tried to comfort Mr. Zaatar and Mr. Mansour. Mr. Hamade refused to see him.
On Jan. 18, he attended the executions at Lebanon's main prison in Roumieh. The men were given sedatives, he said, and escorted to the prison courtyard, as death penalty protesters rallied behind police lines several blocks away. Mr. Zaatar and Mr. Hamade were tied to posts to be shot by a firing squad. Mr. Mansour was led to a gallows a few yards away.
At a signal, the three men were executed simultaneously. The two men who were shot each received a ''mercy'' round to the head. Mr. Mansour dangled for 45 minutes, Father Nasr said. ''It was very disturbing,'' he said.
Despite what he saw, Father Nasr, like many Lebanese and their leaders, is torn about the death penalty. He said he feared some crimes were so heinous, especially those carried out for religious reasons, that the threat of death might be the only deterrent. But, after the three latest executions, he said Lebanon needed a debate on the issue.
''I did a radio show,'' he said, ''and, on the whole, most people were against it, but they wanted an alternative. Put them in jail without parole. Put them in jail far away where no one can seen them.''
