THE business of running a school system can be exceptionally contentious in these times of exploding student enrollments, rising taxes, growing educational demands and aging buildings. Long meetings, bitter exchanges and distasteful compromises are often the order of the day.
But in Yorktown, matters seem to be exceptionally contentious: Board of Education meetings often last until the wee hours. Emergency sessions yield few results. And last month, the board president resigned as the district tries to complete details of a bond proposal intended to pay for pressing repairs and expansion.
The recent difficulties appear to include a rift between the Yorktown Central School District's Board of Education and its administrative staff, including Superintendent of Schools Gordon A. Bruno. The differences have handicapped the school system's ability to conduct business in a timely and financially responsible manner, school officials and residents say.
The battle has become unusually public, said Melissa McGrath, president of the PTSA Council, an umbrella group of the PTSA organizations at each of the district's six schools. ''Tempers and personalities are frazzled. The tension at meetings is unbearable, with a lot of eyeball-rolling and tongue-clucking,'' she said. For Yorktown, the turmoil is a return to familiar turf. In June 2002, Dr. Robert Van Zanten left before his contract had been completed and after spats with the Board of Education led to intractable acrimony. Two interim superintendents ran the system, which has a $62 million budget, until Dr. Bruno took the helm in July 2003. The position pays $190,000 a year.
Mistrust between Dr. Bruno and the board began almost immediately. Just after he took office, a sinkhole developed at the farmhouse that has long served as the headquarters for some of the school administration's top officials, and rodents invaded the building, forcing a move to new quarters. After costs ballooned for proposed renovations at the new location for top education officials, the Triangle Center in downtown Yorktown, some trustees said they suspected that the superintendent had known about cost overruns for the work and concealed the project's true cost.
''The situation with the central office space forever marred his first days in office and we can't seem to get past it,'' said a board member, Rose Ann Santoro. ''He assured us that $50,000 would cover the renovation, but the bill kept getting higher and higher and we only renovated half of what we needed.'' Dr. Bruno said that the overruns were only projected, since the board spent only the $50,000 allotted and the administration was still split between two sites.
Last month, at the height of the conflict, Dr. Bruno sent a letter to the editor at a local newspaper, which was published, in which he blamed the board for ''micromanagement and scapegoating'' and ''creating almost weekly, 'To do' lists for me and my staff, often second-guessing information that is provided.'' He implored the board to give ''the administration the space it needs to do its job'' and to cease ''adversely affecting our ability to administer the district efficiently and effectively.''
In an interview last week, discussing his baptism by fire, Dr. Bruno said that ''it was clearly a snafu and it produced a credibility issue.''
Mr. Bruno had been a superintendent in Wellesley, Mass., and in Ithaca. His last position before coming to Yorktown was professor of education at the University of Hartford.
Mr. Van Zanten, who began as a teacher, was superintendent at the River Dell Regional Schools in New Jersey before coming to Yorktown.
As the two sides battle, some business has gone undone. A bond referendum, to be voted on by the public in March, will propose spending $2.4 million in new money to repair roofs at three elementary schools. Another board member, Jay Miller, Dr. Bruno's most outspoken critic, said that delays in finding architects and estimates for the roof bond issue had jeopardized it. ''The roof at Mohansic School is a danger to safety,'' Ms. McGrath said. ''Tiles are falling into bathrooms and nasty brown water is leaking out of the ceilings.''
Nerves also frayed over the approaching deadline to hammer out the details of a second bond referendum, which the board had wanted to put up in May, but has now almost certainly postponed until fall, mainly because the board seemed certain not to the March 2 deadline for final decisions on its shape. Board members want to find a permanent home for the administration, expand the alternative high school and fix the locker rooms at the high school, among more than 160 other items that require addressing, Mr. Miller said. The board will consider modular construction alternatives and the bond will probably be put up in the fall, he said.
Parents are also pressing the board to expand kindergarten to a full day, but the board is putting that decision off until it grapples with construction issues.
Without the board's knowledge, the woman who was then board president, Joyce McCoy, said, Mr. Bruno invited parents and teachers to discuss the issue at a recent board meeting devoted to infrastructure concerns, prompting Ms. McCoy's resignation.
The board had scheduled a work session, at which the public was barred from speaking, and Ms. McCoy said she found herself in an untenable position. ''We were trying to get work done, since our meetings seem to last all night,'' she said. ''I felt like I was backed against a wall.''
In addition to the kindergarten issue, Ms. McCoy, who was a science teacher at Yorktown High School for 35 years, said: ''I was frustrated in not receiving information the board felt we needed to make decisions.'' she said. The square footage estimates for the alternative high school ranged from 10,000 to 14,000 square feet; the administration space from 8,000 to 12,000 square feet. ''It's hard to make responsible decisions based on that, especially when the cost swing is so large,'' she said.
Matthew Monaghan, an architect with the Thomas Group, an architectural firm based in Albany, said he helped prepare the proposals presented to the board. He said that his firm had devised 26 options in a short time and that plans to use existing buildings provided many options. Most other districts considering large capital projects are considering floating bonds in November and December, he said.
Ms. Santoro said the battles over infrastructure needs resulted in a lack of emphasis on curriculum. ''Sometimes I feel that Dr. Bruno spends more time criticizing our concerns than he does trying to find ways to work with us,'' she said, adding that ''we all have our own egos that play into this process and the board spends a fair amount of time injecting new issues for the central office to contend with.''An easing of tensions may already be under way. At its Feb. 23 meeting, the board elected Patricia Harris as its new president, and ''there really was a tone of conciliation on all sides,'' Mr. Miller said. ''You could see that people were struggling to work together and get things done.''
Dr. Bruno agreed. ''If the tone and spirit of mutual cooperation that I saw at the meeting between the administration and the board continues, it will make my letter to the editor old news.''
EDUCATION
