IN 1987, the horrormeister Wes Craven, known for ''The Swamp Thing,'' was sinking. On Mr. Craven's first day directing a voodoo film in Haiti, his writer fell ill. Mr. Craven stepped in, but power brownouts fried his computer. He called for help.
Answering were the owners of the Writers' Computer Store in Los Angeles, which specialized in rescuing Hollywood storytellers from desperation. They sent an emergency power backup unit and other equipment to Mr. Craven and, for two days, talked him through his ordeal.
''It wasn't Freddie Krueger chasing you around with a knife,'' Mr. Craven recalled, referring to his ''Nightmare on Elm Street'' movies. But as he struggled to finish the Haiti film, titled ''The Serpent and the Rainbow,'' he said, ''No one else would have bothered to give you that kind of service.''
Over the years, in fact, many filmmakers competing for Oscars at the Academy Awards tonight have turned to the shop. It is now called the Writers Store, which, as its name implies, is a general store for Hollywood storytellers, selling everything from scriptwriting software and instructional DVD's to brass script fasteners and baseball caps emblazoned with ''Writer.'' Customers among tonight's Oscar contenders have included Sofia Coppola, nominated for best director and best original screenplay for ''Lost in Translation''; Peter Weir, director, ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World''; Gary Ross, adapted screenplay, ''Seabiscuit''; and Brian Helgeland, adapted screenplay, ''Mystic River.''
''It's really one of a kind,'' said Marc Madnick, the chief executive of Final Draft Inc., which makes scriptwriting software used in Hollywood.
The company can trace its origins to the show-business failure of its co-founder, Dan Douma, two decades ago.
In the 1960's, influenced by the poetry of Allen Ginsberg and William Blake, Mr. Douma abandoned repairing cars at gas stations in New Jersey to write songs. By the 1970's, he was making a small splash in Los Angeles, but the closest he came to fame was as a warm-up act for Fleetwood Mac.
His first and only solo album bombed commercially, leaving him in debt. So Mr. Douma and his wife, Gabriel Meiringer, a former Hollywood client liaison at Ernst &amp; Whinney, the predecessor of Ernst &amp; Young, took a computer class at the University of California, Los Angeles, and began selling early personal computers from the basement of a feminist bookstore.
He and Ms. Meiringer took in word-processing assignments to pay the bills. One day in 1982, a client brought in a script and, referring to its idiosyncratic formatting requirements, said, ''This is one thing you'll never be able to do.''
''That was the light bulb, '' Mr. Douma said. ''It dawned on us'' that Hollywood word processing was coming.
Building on word processing shortcuts he had already concocted, Mr. Douma -- who says he spent much of his youth reading the dictionary -- created by what many accounts was the first screenplay software.
Next, Mr. Douma and Ms. Meiringer bought a $25 ad in Variety and built personal computer systems aimed at screenwriters. One day, delivering a system to the office of Daniel Petrie Jr., the screenwriter, the couple moved aside boxes labeled with a title that was unknown at the time: ''Beverly Hills Cop.'' As Ms. Meiringer was struggling to pull Mr. Petrie's system out of an Audi parked on the street, Marlon Brando walked up and offered assistance.
Ms. Meiringer, who now focuses on the company's business affairs, recalled that she and Mr. Douma high-fived: ''And we said, 'This is going to be successful whatever it is.'''
It was virgin territory. ''They were really the first ones to focus on writers as a market,'' said Joe Mefford, who owns ScreenStyle.com, a Web-based competitor.
In 1986, the couple moved the business into a former bookstore in West Los Angeles, near two freeways that led to areas where many screenwriters lived and worked.
''I was there constantly'' in the early 1990's, said David Reynolds, who worked on ''Finding Nemo,'' which is nominated for four Oscars tonight, including best original screenplay.
In 1987, Mr. Douma's son from his first marriage, Jesse, dropped out of college to join the store full time. Within several years, though, low-cost computer retailers appeared and began selling script software. Eventually, a satellite store in Sausalito, Calif., failed, as customers preferred to buy over the Web.
To adapt, the owners abandoned hardware sales, curtailed technical support, shortened the name of the business (and dropped the apostrophe, because customers did) and moved closer to U.C.L.A., which offers screenwriting classes.
Today, the company, with a staff of 10 and revenue of about $4 million a year, is profitable, Jesse Douma said. He is its president, running the company in close consultation with his father and stepmother.
The store's Web site attracts about half of the company's sales. But the actual store still draws customers, including Steve Martin, Tori Spelling, Renée Zellweger, Reese Witherspoon, Dylan McDermott, Brian De Palma, Benicio Del Toro, Madeleine Stowe, Gene Hackman, Andy Garcia, Elvis Costello, Sinbad and Talia Shire.
THE competition is not sitting still. Mr. Mefford, the founder of ScreenStyle.com, who also sells his products out of the DV Dojo film school in the East Village of Manhattan, for example, said he planned to open a shop, similar to the Writers Store, in the Drama Book Shop near Times Square today. Many of the Writers Store's customers live in New York.
Jesse Douma says New Yorkers would sooner buy on the Web than hop a subway.
Then there is customer loyalty. ''They just make you feel like you're a man with potential,'' said Jay Wolpert, who worked on ''Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl.'' ''It's an inspiring place to be,'' he said.
Private Sector
