1. Symptoms  The patient sat quietly in the tiny emergency-room cubicle, his muscular arms and chest barely covered by the thin cotton hospital gown. He looked far too robust to be in the hospital, but it was his fourth visit in two months. ''I'm losing my strength,'' he explained quietly to yet another doctor -- Dr. Christine Twining, a physician in training in her late 20's. ''I'm so weak, I'm worried there's something really wrong.''
It all started a couple of months ago, when he noticed that his hands and fingers felt numb. Then he started having chest pains -- a strange tightness that made it hard for him to breathe. That sent him to his local emergency room for the first couple of visits. His mother had recently died of a heart attack. Doctors would take his blood, get EKG's and X-rays, then pronounce him just fine. As autumn turned to winter, he began to have a hard time keeping up at work -- literally. He was a garbage collector and noticed that the short sprints from house to truck, which had been part of his daily routine, now left him panting. And the cans he emptied felt heavier. His muscles hurt constantly; he had frequent cramps. By the end of the route, his arms and legs shook with fatigue. ''The guys would ask me what's wrong, 'cause I'm strong, a weight lifter, and I was too ashamed to tell them I was getting weak,'' he said. ''I'd just tell them I'd worked out at the gym real hard the day before.'' The truth was, he hadn't been able to work out for weeks. There were other symptoms too: he was losing weight -- 20 pounds in two months. And he was tired. After work, he'd nap, get up for supper, then go back to bed. He also had terrible constipation.
One night, just before Christmas, he was shopping with his wife and kept bumping into the shoppers crowding the mall. ''I couldn't make myself go straight,'' he said. His wife persuaded him to go to the emergency room. Again, he was examined and tested. When that doctor returned, he offered the anxious couple reassurance but no answers.
2. Investigation  A week later, he almost fell off the back of his truck. ''My fingers were too weak,'' he said. ''I couldn't hold on tight. Just one bump and I would have been on the ground.'' That was what brought him here, to the emergency room once more. As he told his story -- his voice soft and level -- he studied his hands, describing their disobedience. He needed both hands to hold up his coffee cup. His handwriting, he reported, was like a child's -- barely legible. His fingers could no longer tell the difference between coarse cotton and smooth silk.
He was 27 years old and otherwise healthy. He had asthma as a kid, but it hadn't bothered him for years. He didn't smoke or drink and lived with his wife and their 6-year-old daughter. His mother died at 55 of heart disease, and he had two cousins with sickle cell anemia. The rest of his family was healthy.
Physically, he was massive. Six feet tall, he weighed 240 pounds, and his chest, arms and legs were well defined. On examination there was no evidence of muscle atrophy, and while he easily passed the standard doctor's-office tests of strength, the resident thought that was because those tests were not designed for someone with greater-than-average strength, like this young man.
The patient had decreased sensation in both his hands and feet -- a so-called stocking-and-glove distribution. When the doctor tapped his joints with her small rubber hammer, there was no spontaneous jerk. No reflexes. When she asked the patient to close his eyes and tell her whether she had moved his great toe up or down, he couldn't say.
There was one other finding: on his last visit to the E.R., the patient had a low red-blood-cell count. Anemia was unusual in an otherwise healthy young man. The physician considered her patient. He had two very different symptoms -- anemia and this odd weakness. Were they linked? She couldn't know based on the data she had. She focused first on his loss of strength and feeling: having both made it clear his nerves -- not his muscles -- were the problem. There were dozens of possible causes for this type of neuropathy: diabetes, alcohol abuse, syphilis, H.I.V., thyroid disease, cancer. But none really fit this patient.
Given his occupation, the resident doctor focused on an unusual cause of this type of nerve damage: toxins. Could he have been exposed to some dangerous substance discarded thoughtlessly or illegally in the regular garbage? Arsenic could cause this kind of nerve damage; lead and mercury could as well. Moreover, these toxins could account for the anemia as well as the neuropathy, if they were in fact linked.
And what about the anemia? Had his low blood count predated this new illness? Sickle cell anemia ran in his family, and although he had no symptoms of this painful disorder, could he have a milder form? He complained of abdominal pain: could he be losing blood in his stomach or intestines? It was possible, though his stools had not shown evidence of blood when tested.
The report from the lab described a few abnormal white cells in his blood: the cells contained irregularly shaped nuclei. This suggested he was anemic because of a nutritional deficiency. A diet poor in folate or vitamin B12 could cause anemia as well as this type of abnormal white cell. Moreover, vitamin B12 deficiency could cause neurological symptoms too. It seemed unlikely that this well-nourished young man could have such a deficiency. On the other hand, missing such a diagnosis could result in permanent disability -- even death. And treating it is easy and safe: replacing the missing vitamins usually reverses all the symptoms. Thus, ordering these tests on almost anyone with such an anemia is routine.
3. Resolution  The doctor sent off blood to look for the origin of the anemia and for recent exposure to toxic levels of mercury and arsenic. Other causes of this neuropathy, she thought, were much less likely, and she could test for them later, if necessary.
The results of the anemia work-up came back first. He had no evidence of sickle cell disease or any other congenital blood disorders. He had normal levels of iron and folate. But his level of vitamin B12 was dangerously low: a 10th of the amount normally found. The lack of this essential vitamin was causing his weakness, his numbness, his constipation and his anemia.
Some of those who develop a B12 deficiency get it because they have a hard time absorbing it from their food. This is most common in the elderly, though some drugs can interfere with B12 uptake. Heartburn medicines like Nexium and Prilosec can reduce B12 absorption by blocking the formation of acid in the stomach -- acid that is essential in taking up this important nutrient. Of course, you would have to take these medicines for years to produce this deficit (and even then it's rare); this patient took no medication at all.
The most common cause of B12 deficiency is a disease with one of those great 19th-century names: pernicious anemia. In this disease, the body's own immune system mistakenly destroys the protein responsible for absorption of the vitamin. Just what causes the body to make this catastrophic mistake is still unknown. The doctor sent off a blood test to look for these misdirected antibodies. It came back positive.
The patient was started on vitamin B12 injections. He felt the difference immediately. The physician reassured him that all his symptoms would resolve once his body had enough of the essential nutrient, though he would have to take vitamin B12 for the rest of his life.
After a week at home, the young man started back at work. ''Every day I can feel myself growing stronger,'' he said. ''I can finally run again. I can pick up my daughter again. I can tell I'm going to get it all back.''
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-29-04: DIAGNOSIS Lisa Sanders is an internist on the faculty at the Yale University School of Medicine. She is the author of ''The Perfect Fit Diet.'' If you have a solved case to share with Dr. Sanders, you can e-mail her at LSanders@pol.net. Dr. Sanders is unable to respond to all e-mail messages.
