DANCING WITH CUBA
A Memoir of the Revolution.
By Alma Guillermoprieto.
Translated by Esther Allen.
290 pp. New York:
Pantheon. $25.
IN 1969, Merce Cunningham offered to recommend his 20-year-old dance student Alma Guillermoprieto for a teaching job at the state-run National Schools of the Arts in Havana. For thousands of young people, caught up in the radical politics of the era, that would have seemed the opportunity of a lifetime, but Guillermoprieto was disappointed: she understood that Cunningham was gently telling her to set aside the dreams of stardom that had propelled her from Mexico to New York. Unlike many of her friends, she wasn't interested in politics, and had no desire to go to Cuba. Moreover, at the interview, the division's director, Elfriede Mahler, struck her as prickly and doctrinaire. Still, at loose ends and intrigued by touring dancers' tales of moonlight over Havana, she took the job. ''Dancing With Cuba'' is her vivid account of her stay -- six frustrating, fascinating months that opened her eyes to the world beyond dance, and, one suspects, helped turn her into the marvelous journalist familiar to readers of The New Yorker, The New York Review of Books and many other publications. In a way, although not the way anyone could have foreseen, Cuba was indeed the opportunity of a lifetime.
Arriving in Cuba so feverish she is immediately sent to the hospital, where she receives the kindest and most thorough medical care of her life, Guillermoprieto is quickly plunged into difficulties. The arts school, an architectural wonder commissioned in a moment of revolutionary high spirits, is so poor it cannot provide such basics as nourishing food, decent practice clothes and mirrors for the dance studios. (Making a virtue of necessity, Elfriede derides mirrors as symbols of vanity and decadence.) Her students -- serious Antonia, cinnamon-skinned José, gorgeous Orlando -- are eager and utterly charming, but poorly trained both physically and artistically. They're mystified by the abstract, aleatory aesthetic Guillermoprieto has been hired to impart (Martha Graham, whose dances she narrates to them like fairy tales, suits them better).
Modern dance is the last thing on the minds of most Cubans, though. The whole island is convulsed by the superhuman efforts required for the zafra -- the Ten Million Ton sugar cane harvest, which Castro hopes will free Cuba from dependence on the Soviets. Toward this end, the entire population has been mobilized, with virtually every able-bodied citizen expected to cut cane or fill in at work for those who do.
''My deepest conviction,'' Guillermoprieto confesses, ''so deep I would never have been able to articulate it, was perfectly elitist: I had no doubt that we artists were the highest form of human life.'' But if the goal is wringing 10 million tons of sugar out of marginal land and antiquated equipment, what good is a young woman who spends hours every day wrestling with a friend's gift of a dance written on cards so that its phrases can be performed in any order?
The zafra, documentaries about American atrocities in Vietnam and the omnipresent cult of the martyred Che Guevara soon throw young Alma into a crisis of guilt. Yet questions keep cropping up: should a philistine ex-baker run the arts school just because he was with Fidel in the Sierra Maestra? Why is there no fruit in the shops when Cuba is so fertile, and no fish when it is surrounded by ocean? Guillermoprieto doesn't really like the uptight, blinkered party officials she meets. Her preferred guides to Cuban culture are artists, dancers and witty homosexuals like her friends Galo, Pablo, Carlos and Boris, free spirits immersed in theater, literature and cutting-edge socialist theory who improvise delightful meals out of the discouraging items available in the shops.
Interestingly, despite the Revolution's open homophobia -- Boris had done time in a re-education camp for gays -- these men are Fidelistas: ''Do you know what it is to wake up in the morning and know that what you're eating for breakfast hasn't been stolen from anyone else's mouth?'' Galo demands. ''That if your son or your nephew graduates from medical school, you don't have to feel guilty, because the son of the guy who cleans your building can be a doctor too if he wants to? . . . It's all because of Fidel and Fidel alone.'' The ''Yankee blockade'' -- still in force 34 years later -- only makes them more devoted.
Eventually, these conflicts, piled on top of loneliness, youthful angst and assorted man troubles, lead young Alma to the edge of a nervous breakdown. At one point she even contemplates suicide. Meanwhile the zafra fails, causing yet more hardship, and the crisis at the poorly run and neglected school comes to a head with a student strike, unheard of in Castro's Cuba. In its wake, we learn that the government had lost its momentary interest in modern dance the minute it saw it wasn't the manly heterosexual alternative to ballet after all. Homophobia, it turns out, explains why dancers had their own cafeteria, albeit one that the school never had the money to open. In the same way, Fidel's hostility to religion and his ''mistrust of all things 'African' '' explain why the school refuses to develop the cultural treasure right under its nose: the Afro-Cuban and Santería-related traditions in dance and music.
Like Guillermoprieto's reportage (''Looking for History,'' ''The Heart That Bleeds: Latin America Now''), ''Dancing With Cuba'' is a pleasure to read, full of humanity, sly humor, curiosity and knowledge. As in ''Samba,'' which chronicles the year she spent living in a Rio favela, or shantytown, as it prepared for Carnival, she uses dance as a lens through which to explore the aspirations and injustices and contradictions of a whole society. It's a fresh and lively perspective. I loved her thumbnail sketches of notable people -- Twyla Tharp as a young genius staging ''events'' in Central Park; the warm and ebullient folk-dance teacher Teresa Gonzáles; the doomed romantic Salvadoran Communist poet Roque Dalton, assassinated by fellow party dissidents in 1975 -- over a woman, Guillermoprieto believes.
As a memoirist she manages some difficult terrain. Somehow, she conveys the intense and immediate feelings of youth while at the same time objectifying her 20-year-old self as a character in a story she is telling. Mostly, she stays in the moment she is narrating, avoiding the unspoken, apologetic ''had I but known'' that can make a memoir feel sketchy and drained of life. Thus the Castro she describes is a despot, but also an engaging, enthusiastic personality whose secretive love life is the source of fascination to Alma and her friends and whose famously long speeches strike them -- and hundreds of thousands of Cubans -- as actually pretty interesting.
Guillermoprieto writes with a novelist's zest for particulars, from the taste and smell of Galo's mother's lemon meringues (and the process by which she bartered for the egg whites to make them) to the shape of her students' feet. Yet she says she has only a few pages of notes and letters from her Cuban stay. As so often with memoirs, especially the best-written ones, you do find yourself wondering how anyone could possibly remember so much. Guillermoprieto explains that she has improvised a bit -- her students are composites, dialogue is invented, her letters are reconstructed -- yet, she writes, the result is not fiction, but ''a faithful transcription'' of her memories, including the partial, hazy, revised ones, and the ones ''completely invented by the stubborn narrator we all have within us, who wants things to be the way they sound best to us now, and not the way they were.'' (Perhaps the intimacy of the subject is the reason she chose to write this memoir in Spanish; it has been gracefully translated by Esther Allen.)
Mostly, I was happy to take ''Dancing With Cuba'' in the spirit in which it is offered. The one place where the writing made me want to resist was her hostile portrait of Elfriede Mahler. Maybe Mahler was exactly as she describes -- rigid, defensive, joyless, untalented, the prototypical commissar (oh yes, she's ugly, too). And maybe the psychic energy that kept Guillermoprieto's hatred fresh for over three decades is the same quality that lets her remember that after standing in line for two hours at the celebrated Coppelia ice cream shop, she ordered the rum raisin. Still, she piles it on so thick (''horrible witch''?) that I started feeling sorry for Mahler, who is not shown in these pages to have done anything so very terrible beyond throw the odd tantrum, run meetings with a heavy hand and be, in general, a pill.
It's interesting to note that both Mahler and her American assistant, Lorna Burdsall, who in 1970 was the wife of Manuel Piñeiro, Castro's right-hand man, stayed in Cuba and started their own dance companies, which exist to this day. Galo, on the other hand, left in 1980, with the Mariel boat lift. It's a tribute to the complex sympathies that animate ''Dancing with Cuba'' that you come away feeling that it didn't have to turn out that way.
Katha Pollitt, a poet and essayist, writes the ''Subject to Debate'' column for The Nation.
