BLAKE A. PRATER, who has been charged in connection with running what the S.E.C. has called a Ponzi scheme in Gales Ferry, is facing new charges that he violated the terms of a preliminary injunction by selling financial products over the Internet similar to those banned by a federal judge in early September.
In a motion filed Jan. 9 at the United States District Court in New Haven, the Securities and Exchange Commission charged that Mr. Prater, 52, of Guilford, broke the terms of the preliminary injunction by creating a new Web site selling financial products similar to those under investigation, and by using assets frozen by the judge to purchase a building and to earn money on an online auction site.
During a deposition last Monday, lawyers for the S.E.C. questioned Mr. Prater about several transactions they claimed violated the injunction and represented ''a flagrant disregard for the authority of the court,'' the court documents said. The commission is requesting that a judge fine Mr. Prater and possibly imprison him. A contempt of court hearing is scheduled for March 31.
On Sept. 8, the judge, Mark Kravitz, froze about $3 million in assets that belonged to Mr. Prater and his company, Wellspring Capital Group. Wellspring sold a range of financial products to 22,000 clients worldwide, promising huge returns for small down payments. The company said it could pay the returns by buying businesses and making them profitable.
The S.E.C. claimed that the products were unregistered investments and violated federal securities laws. Mr. Prater contended that he sold ''contracts,'' not investments.
Asked about the S.E.C.'s contempt charges, Mr. Prater did say that he serves as a consultant for Realm Holdings, a European company that established the Champions for Empowerment Web site. On its home page, the site bills itself as a resource for financial, personal and political empowerment. But in a password-protected forum, the site promoted financial products strikingly similar to those offered by Wellspring. One such plan offered a 66 percent return on an investment in three months.
The S.E.C. also claims that in the week following the judge's September order, Mr. Prater transferred more than $103,000 in frozen funds out of Wellspring's accounts. The S.E.C. charges that Mr. Prater used some of the money as a down payment to purchase a building in Troy, Ohio.
Mr. Prater said that he served as a consultant for the company that made the purchase, but that he had no direct role in the transaction.
WORTH NOTING: UPDATE
