ON the last night of her life, Michelle Rivera Nyce closed up at the Chanel makeup counter at Macy's in the Quaker Bridge Mall, plunged into the windy and frigid January air toward her S.U.V., and headed for a date with a man who was not her husband.
Dressed in a black pantsuit and with her long black hair flowing, she pulled her forest green Toyota Land Cruiser into the parking lot of Applebee's Restaurant across from Macy's. Waiting for her there was a man she had come to know as Alexander Castaneda. She followed his car to a nearby Wawa convenience store, parked and settled into his passenger seat. From there they made their way south to Mount's Motel, a $20-an-hour rendezvous point on Route 1.
On this January night in central New Jersey, a fresh snow covered the ground and the temperature had plunged to near zero, but this did not seem to matter to either Michelle or Mr. Casteneda, her former landscaper, who according to a report filed with the police had threatened to extort $500,000 from her husband last July by claiming he had video and audiotapes of Ms. Nyce having sex with another man.
The couple spent the rest of the evening at the motel, until Ms. Nyce eventually made her way home in the bitter cold.
It was a half-hour past midnight when Ms. Nyce pulled into 1 Keithwood Court, her 21-room 5,600-square-foot home that had recently been put up for sale for $1.6 million. Her husband, Jonathan W. Nyce, the former chief executive of a pharmaceutical company, had put their three children -- ages 12, 10 and 5 -- to bed when he heard the car pull in the icy driveway.
He came down to meet her. The next morning, Michelle was nowhere to be found.
She was supposed to meet her best friend, Larissa Soos, at 10 a.m., and as a reminder to the frequently tardy Ms. Nyce, Ms. Soos called her house. Jonathan Nyce answered.
''Hi, John, how are you?'' she asked.
''Not so good,'' he replied.
Ms. Soos asked if he was sick.
''No,'' he said. ''Michelle has been in an accident.'' And with that, he said he had to go.
What Ms. Soos did not know was that about 8:15 that morning, a Public Service Electric and Gas truck crew had spotted a car with its engine running in the half-frozen Jacobs Creek, a shallow Delaware River tributary. In the middle of the creek, about 100 feet from the road, sat a Toyota Land Cruiser. Behind the wheel, blood on her forehead and pooled around the seat, was the coatless body of Michelle Nyce. She was a little more than a mile from her home.
Two days later, her husband was placed under arrest and charged with her murder. He now sits in the Mercer County Correction Center, with bail set at $2 million.
The death of Michelle Nyce has peeled away the peaceful facade that was the Nyce family. Michelle had been a 19-year-old Filipino bride whom Dr. Nyce discovered through a newspaper ad, but the couple told friends and colleagues that they had met on the beach in Hawaii. For the past year, she had been having an affair with a Guatemalan immigrant who, according to the police, just last summer had urged Michelle to leave her husband, a scientist and founder of a company that had once held the promise of a groundbreaking asthma drug.
The company's hopes had faded along with the performance of the drug. Now a stay-at-home dad, Jonathan -- a failed businessman with a failing marriage -- was increasingly suspicious of his wife, and checked on her constantly.
To many, Michelle and Jonathan had made an unlikely pair. She was 34 years old, five foot two, an avid exerciser, outgoing, with a radiant smile. He was intellectual, socially awkward, and 53. Still, they had been married for nearly 15 years and were raising three children. And they were living in a new home with chief executives as their neighbors.
Jonathan was one of four boys -- the son of a machine designer -- who grew up in a working-class neighborhood near Collegeville, Pa. Michelle had grown up in a large, poor family in the Philippines, and was the first to come to America.
As a teenager, Jonathan Nyce cut a tall, thin figure -- ''skinny as a beanpole'' is how one classmate described him -- in the hallways of Methacton High School. He was bright and quiet. He had a dry wit and a shock of blond hair, and excelled in science and math. He often helped friends who struggled academically. He played center on the basketball team, competed on the tennis team, was in student government and on the school newspaper.
Though he was handsome, he had few girlfriends, and stuck with a small group of friends. ''He wasn't what you'd call a ladies' man,'' said Samuel Hamme, a former teammate on the basketball team. ''He just really wasn't.''
In 1968 he headed to Temple University in Philadelphia. It took eight years for him to work his way through undergraduate school, but he earned his bachelor's degree in 1976. Two years later, he got a master's, and in 1983 he completed his thesis on colon cancer and earned a Ph.D. from the Fels Research Institute at Temple.
Arthur G. Schwartz, a professor of microbiology, remembered Jonathan as an ''original thinker'' who added important understanding to cancer research. He was not surprised by Dr. Nyce's later success. After postdoctoral stints in Los Angeles, he got a job at East Carolina University in Greenville in 1987, and was promoted to full professor in 1988.
Shortly after he arrived in North Carolina, a friend of Dr. Nyce saw a newspaper ad for a woman from the Philippines, according to Melodia Ragenil, 27, Michelle's sister. Though the family has described the early correspondence as a friendly letter-writing exercise -- and said that no money exchanged hands -- it is hard to escape the conclusion that Michelle was on the road to becoming a mail-order bride.
Michelle Rivera was the middle child of seven who was born in the Mibantang province of the Philippines. She was a bright young woman who had decided she wanted to come to the United States, her sister said.
After exchanging letters for about a year, Jonathan went to the Philippines, and in 1990 the two married. Dr. Nyce returned to the United States, and about six months later Michelle arrived at her new home in North Carolina. Still in her early 20's, Michelle soon gave birth to two sons: Alex and then Trevor.
A sporadic asthma sufferer his entire life, Dr. Nyce shifted his attention from cancer research to asthma. Soon he hit on a new discovery: a molecule that he thought might fundamentally alter the way asthma was treated. In 1995 -- as a spinoff of his research work at the university -- Dr. Nyce founded EpiGenesis Pharmaceuticals Inc.
''My father influenced me because of something he didn't do,'' Dr. Nyce told U.S. 1, a weekly business newspaper that serves the Princeton area, in 1999. ''He worked around the clock one night to design the machinery to knit the first pair of panty hose. But because he had a new family, he was unable to capitalize on that discovery, whereas his partner was able to run with it. He told me that if I were ever in a similar position, to be sure I could capitalize on it.''
In February 1997, Dr. Nyce looked like he would do just that when the respected British science journal Nature published a paper he co-wrote titled: ''DNA antisense therapy for asthma in an animal model.''
Behind the clinical title was this novel concept: Traditional treatments attack the symptoms of asthma, and steroids only temporarily calm the constricted bronchial tubes. But Dr. Nyce's research on so-called ''antisense molecules'' suggested that he could stop the gene that produces a protein that causes the underlying problems in asthma sufferers.
By 1998, Dr. Nyce -- reportedly at the urging of a new investor that had anted up $5 million, Muzinich and Company of New York -- moved the company to a 5,100-square-foot facility in Cranbury, just off the turnpike at Exit 8A. The business grew, and trials on the asthma drug EPI 2010 started promisingly enough.
Amanda Gillum, a former vice president for operations and product development, joined the company in the fall of 2000, a good time at EpiGenesis. Indeed, Ms. Gillum recalled a workplace filled with ''cohesiveness, enthusiasm, optimism.''
Those who worked with Dr. Nyce said that he was a driven man and clearly in charge, but one who rarely lost his temper or delegated responsibility.
Anthony Sandrasagra, a former vice president and the company's chief scientific officer, put it this way: ''It was his baby, and to this extent it was a driving force for him.''
Still, some colleagues said that Dr. Nyce struggled to make the transition from the deliberative world of academia to the cutthroat world of drug development. ''The skills that make them an excellent researcher are not the ones that make them an excellent businessman,'' said a former colleague who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
By late 2000, preparations were being made to test EPI-2010 in London.
At home, the Nyces now had a new daughter, Samantha, and a large new house in Hopewell. Yet the property, set on the rolling hills of a former horse farm, was surprisingly devoid of trees. So in late 2001 the Nyces contacted Ostrich Nursery in nearby Robbinsville. Alexander Castaneda, a member of the crew that was brought in, would speak to Michelle Nyce from time to time. In one of those conversations, they exchanged cellphone numbers.
Though the man, a Guatemalan immigrant in his 30's, was known as Alexander Castaneda to Ms. Nyce, he was known to his fellow workers as Sergio Martinez. The authorities now say his real name is Miguel DeJesus, though they say they are not absolutely sure of that.
In the meantime, at EpiGenesis, very promising studies of Dr. Nyce's asthma medication were taking place in London. And the Taisho Pharmaceutical, a Japanese company, announced a deal that would provide $100 million to EpiGenesis. A $15 million arrangement had already been struck with Chiesi Farmaceutici, an Italian company.
But after Sept. 11, 2001, the money started drying up in what was an industrywide slump. In early 2002, the company announced positive data on the early trials, but more money would not be coming on a drug like EPI-2010 so early in development.
''The money was looking for something that was further along,'' said one company insider.
After hiring more than 50 employees, rounds of layoffs began in the spring of 2002 that would leave only about a dozen workers by November.
''The company was running out of money,'' the insider continued. One publication said the company had ''burned through'' $40 million with little to show. ''You look at the cash of the company and you could see the money was running down. Taisho and Chiesi were running out of money. In the venture community, no one stepped forward to say, 'I'll do the investment.' Was there pressure building at EpiGenesis? Sure.''
The pressure mounted, and as Mr. Sandrasagra put it, ''My impression was the last six months were a very stressful time for him,'' referring to Dr. Nyce.
At this point, a new group of investors had begun negotiations to take over the company. ''Over time,'' said a former colleague, ''it did become clear as the new venture capital money came in that Jonathan would not be retained as C.E.O.''
In March 2003, Dr. Nyce left EpiGenesis, the company he had founded. His attorney, Robin Lord, said he then began receiving a monthly stipend that covered the mortgage payments.
By May, Taisho -- in a news release announcing the severing of ties with EpiGenesis -- also addressed the disappointing test results. At that point, EpiGenesis shelved the drug.
If the loss of a livelihood meant hardship, the Nyces didn't show it. Even though they were paying $26,000 a year in taxes on their home and a mortgage between $6,000 and $7,000 a month, the couple went on a weeklong trip to the outer banks of North Carolina that summer.
Later that summer, Dr. Nyce bought a burgundy Hummer, a car with a sticker price of about $50,000. Ms. Soos and Ms. Lord said Dr. Nyce self-published a children's book and was trying to start a new company. In addition, he was spending more time with the children, taking them to the museums or on archaeological digs in Toms River.
But the stress on the marriage was said to be palpable. Melodia Ragenil said her sister was seriously considering leaving her husband. When Michelle's father, Teodoro, came to live with the family in June, he saw a marriage disintegrating. Jonathan was drinking heavily and fights were becoming more numerous, he told his family back home. At one point, he told them, a wall was punched in the house. Friends like Ms. Soos said Dr. Nyce's calls checking up on his wife were becoming more frequent.
On June 26, Ms. Nyce later told the police in Hopewell, she and Mr. DeJesus went to Seaside, where they shopped, had lunch, and spent two hours at a motel before returning home. Two days later the live-in girlfriend of Mr. DeJesus, Patricia Abad, told the police that she had found a thong in his coat pocket and kicked him out of her East Windsor apartment.
Matters took a more serious turn on July 10, when, according to the Hopewell police, Dr. Nyce said that he received two calls from a man who said he wanted $500,000 in exchange for video and audio tapes that showed his wife having sexual relations with another man.
The man played the audiotapes for Dr. Nyce, according to the police, and said the tapes would be ''sold'' if the money was not paid. The calls were made from a gas station in nearby Lawrenceville, but Dr. Nyce said he was given no further information on how to get in touch with the person. Mr. DeJesus denied to the police and later to prosecutors that he had called. And a lawyer for Mr. DeJesus, Gary Jodha, said his client was reluctant to discuss the case.
But somehow Dr. Nyce got Mr. DeJesus's number, and on July 23 he said that he called the man ''to tell him to stay away from my wife and family,'' he wrote in a signed affidavit dated July 25. Mr. DeJesus denied any knowledge of an affair and Dr. Nyce -- who had been told otherwise by his wife -- and hung up.
And she admitted to a lot more. On July 24, Ms. Nyce told Detective Daniel B. McKeown of the Hopewell Police Department that the affair lasted from October 2002 until July 10, the day Dr. Nyce claims he received the demands for money, when around 2 p.m. she called Mr. DeJesus, telling him the affair was over.
She said that Mr. DeJesus had been taking an unusual interest in the Nyces' finances. ''How much does your house cost?'' he would ask. He tried to borrow money -- first $3,000, which she refused to give him, then $1,000, which she told the police she had given to him.
And Ms. Nyce told the police she was feeling pressure from Mr. DeJesus to leave her husband. Asked by Detective McKeown if she wanted a divorce, Ms. Nyce paused, stared at the ceiling and said, ''No, he wants to stay together for the kids.'' These days, the Nyce children are with their father's family in Pennsylvania, although Ms. Nyce's parents are seeking custody.
On Aug. 21, Mr. DeJesus and Dr. Nyce met in a courtroom in Hopewell, at which time the judge, Bonnie Goldman, placed a two-year restraining order on Mr. DeJesus, forbidding him from having any contact with members of the Nyce family.
During the proceedings, Dr. Nyce asked the judge to forbid Mr. DeJesus from entering the Quaker Bridge Mall, where Michelle had begun working at the Chanel counter. He icily addressed the court: ''Just stay away from my wife, that's all I ask. He sees my wife, he turns the other way.''
But that did not happen. In the early hours of Jan. 16, Michelle Rivera Nyce left her lover for the last time.
As she pulled into her driveway, prosecutors say, Dr. Nyce came down and yanked her from the car and threw her face first to the ground, where she hit her head with a thud that Dr. Nyce said ''made me sick.''
Prosecutors allege that Dr. Nyce continued to smash her head into the garage floor, causing ''blunt force trauma.'' For his part, Dr. Nyce said that his wife lunged at him with a knife, and a struggle ensued, though investigators say they have been unable to find a knife.
''I think it was a figment of his imagination,'' said the Mercer County prosecutor, Joseph L. Bocchini Jr.
Investigators say Dr. Nyce panicked after killing his wife, and stuffed her behind the wheel of the Land Cruiser, jumped into the passenger side and somehow drove the car leaning forward with an 18-inch ice pick to press the brake and accelerator.
He drove the car just over a mile, through the hilly enclaves of million-dollar homes, they say, turning onto Jacobs Creek Road, passing through a break in the guardrail and plunging down a six-foot drop to the creek's icy bank. He left the car idling in the middle of 10-inch-deep water, they say, and walked home.
Investigators found tracks leading from the car that match the soles of boots found cut up and in the basement of 1 Keithwood Court. They found bloody paper towels in a trash can in the garage, a blood-soaked sock, a bag in the basement with bloody towels, and a trail of blood leading up a rear stairway into the bathroom.
At a bail hearing last month in Trenton -- against the vehement protestations of his attorney -- Dr. Nyce made this statement: ''I have no history of physical violence, ever, against any person. I've never, ever had ill intent toward my wife at any point. This, what happened, was a pure accident. That's all I'll say.''
Still, his lawyer, Ms. Lord, disputes the entirety of the charges.
''He did not murder his wife,'' she says. ''He did not kill his wife, and the state will not be able to prove that.''
Instead, she says that Dr. Nyce was far too bright a man to kill his wife and try to cover it up in the slipshod manner prosecutors describe. ''If he really wanted to kill his wife,'' she said in a recent interview, ''he could have designed a drug to do it.''
New Jersey
