TONI VAN LOAN will admit to being good at a variety of things. In 11 years of driving a taxi in New York City, she was never once mugged. She knows her way around the underbelly of an old English sports car, the kind that can be mastered with a flashlight, a pair of Vise-Grip pliers and a screwdriver. She renovates her own homes and maintains seven cats, three ferrets and a bounteous bird feeding station, requiring 500 pounds of seed a year. And, she says, she is the Queen of the Steinway Upright, especially those of a certain age that need new innards.
Of all the things she's good at, one job particularly engages her indomitable enthusiasm: ''to take an old, busted, really good grand piano and raise it from the dead and make it work.''
There is at least one thing she will admit to being fair at. ''I'm not a terrific player,'' she said, acknowledging that she practices only five or six hours a week, mostly Brahms. But that still puts her ahead of many piano technicians, she said, who aren't as skilled.
''It's very helpful in terms of showing people the piano,'' she said. ''Often, they don't play, and they need to hear you play the piano for them.''
Ms. Van Loan, 56, runs the Victorian Piano, a restoration business, out of her home, a showroom and a shared workshop, all in Yonkers. She tumbled into her craft 32 years ago, after graduating with a master's degree from the Manhattan School of Music in 1972, into the throes of a recession and, shortly thereafter, a gas crisis. Instead of following her plan of teaching music, music theory and piano, she turned down the one decent job that presented itself, in Caribou, Me.
''I said in all honesty, I'd rather drive a cab in Manhattan,'' she recalled. ''Rural is not really my shtick.'' She continued driving her taxi at night while working free as an apprentice to master tuners and restorers during the day.
She bought her first Steinway, the Mercedes of pianos, in 1980. ''It was salmon pink with gold sparkles -- a bar piano,'' she said. ''Someone had painted the stinking thing.'' When consulting with the Steinway Company about that piano's age, she learned that its tuner, a Harlem man, had just been mugged and had refused to work. Yes, she would be interested in replacing him.
''I became the Gospel Church Queen in Harlem in the 1980's,'' she said, referring to the number of church pianos she tuned. In 1982 she gave up driving the cab.
Soon, she also became the Steinway Upright Queen, as the company referred to her people who had uprights in need of restoring. (More specifically, her Web site, www.victorianpiano.com, calls her the ''double flange action'' queen, referring to a balky part used in Steinway uprights from 1870 to 1935.)
Her home next door to the Hudson in northwest Yonkers resembles what the inside of a cuckoo clock might look like, with a variety of small rooms, staircases and landings, topped by what she calls the Action Shop, an attic that she finished off into a musical aerie. In it, she keeps the first piano she ever restored, her 1906 Hardman, as well as two workbenches, one bench for uprights, one for grands, where she repairs the actions -- the moving parts, keys, hammers and shafts -- of various vintage pianos.
Actions on old upright pianos were put together with hide glue, made of animal hide and horse hooves, which fails after 50 years or so, she explained. The hammers need to be replaced, and the keys need to be rebushed, a process in which she replaces the compressed felt to keep them tight in alignment. She and her shop assistant, Peter Twyne, also work in the basement, which has held up to 11 pianos. Her husband, Frank, manages the Web site.
Under a poster for ''The Maltese Falcon,'' in an alcove blocked off from the ferrets by plywood, is her Action Corral, a chop shop of sorts, where she keeps the keyboards and actions of pianos she has bought for parts, some of which are obsolete.
To repair a piano's cracked sounding board, the large sheet of spruce that resonates with the music, Ms. Van Loan uses shims made out of old Steinway sounding boards, wood that has been presoaked in song.
Restoring a Steinway upright can cost $4,000 for 10 days of work, while work on a grand piano that also needs its case refinished can cost $15,000 to $18,000. Ms. Van Loan also sells pianos she has bought and restored, including some with sad histories -- the 1898 oak Knabe grand piano given away for the price of hoisting it out of a Park Slope brownstone, the badly burned 1905 Steinway grand, with a new lid, veneer and actions, just the original ivory, as the lid had been closed at the time of the fire, and the Steinway player piano, circa World War I, that she dismantled on a tiny platform, all that remained of the third floor of the house being demolished around it.
She speaks wistfully of ''the dark, crashy, mellow tone of a bygone era,'' and says old pianos have a rich sound new ones cannot approach.
Ms. Van Loan restored two pianos for Judith Ballan of White Plains, who has recommended her widely to people who need pianos restored or who are looking for a particular kind of piano. ''She's almost like a matching service,'' Ms. Ballan said.
She appreciates that Ms. Van Loan never overloaded her with repairs.
''She'll say the bushings are a little crummy looking, but they've got two or three years left in them,'' Ms. Ballan said. ''She won't push you to do work she feels is unnecessary. She's very aware that she's spending other people's money.''
She also likes hearing all Ms. Van Loan knows about a particular instrument.
''It's just so clear she's doing it for the love of it,'' she said. ''One of the great benefits of working with her, you learn so much about pianos. She can't stop herself from telling you everything there is to know about the particular style of piano you're going to get.''
Ms. Van Loan still dreams about driving a cab about twice a month, she said, recalling her most famous fares: a quiet Mikhail Baryshnikov, a flirtatious former mayor, John V. Lindsay, and the actor Denzel Washington, who appeared smaller in person than on screen, she said.
''I used to know where every legal space in Manhattan was, and when it became legal,'' she said, adding that she should write a guide to such matters. ''I didn't get a single parking ticket in 21 years. I'm very good at parking.''
IN PERSON
