THE tax cut on corporate dividends faces a new threat -- although a still-distant one.
The Democrats have found their voice in the presidential race. Both Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts and Senator John Edwards of North Carolina have pledged to repeal President Bush's tax cuts for people earning more than $200,000. For some investors, at least, that could mean a significant reduction of the dividend tax cut.
But in general, investors need not worry. The reduced tax rate on dividends, down to 15 percent from a high of 38.6 percent, has not played much of a role in stock performance.
The dividend-paying stocks in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index are expected to have outperformed the rest of the index in February. But it would be only the second month that they have done so since the big dividend tax cut was approved last May.
Analysts say other factors, like the pace of economic growth and rising interest rates, are much more important drivers of stock performance. Some also argue that a threat to the dividend tax cut is not a reason to dump dividend-paying stocks. Investing on tax considerations alone, they say, is not a good idea in the long run.
Through Thursday, dividend-paying stocks, which make up 74 percent of the index, were up 2 percent, while the nonpayers, dominated by technology stocks, were down 0.1 percent, according to Howard Silverblatt, equity market analyst at S.&amp;P. The only other month of outperformance was September, when payers fell 1.3 percent, compared with a decline of 2.8 percent for nonpayers.
In January, the nonpayers were up 5.7 percent while the payers rose 1.1 percent. For all of 2003, the nonpayers surged 61.7 percent while the payers rose 33.5 percent.
In February, the dividend payers won in seven of the S.&amp;P.'s 10 broad sectors. But in January, the nonpayers fared better in nine of them.
On average, dividend payers won the February race in the consumer staples sector through Thursday. But that was because the stock of Winn-Dixie Stores, which became classified as a nonpayer by omitting its dividend, fell 5.5 percent.
In the energy sector, four of the nine top performers did not pay dividends. But the four -- Transocean, BJ Services, Nabors Industries and Noble -- were among the bottom 11 performers in this sector in 2003.
Nonpayers were the better performers in health care this month but fared much worse in the industrial sector. In information technology, dividend payers fell 1.2 percent through Thursday, versus a decline of 2.4 percent for nonpayers. There are 23 companies in the sector that pay dividends, including Microsoft and Qualcomm, and 60 that don't.
James W. Paulsen, chief investment officer at Wells Capital Management in Minneapolis, said that ''what is really going to drive stocks is whether they are economically sensitive or economically defensive.'' And whether an investor picks the economically sensitive sector or the economically defensive one depends on how soon he thinks the Federal Reserve will begin raising its short-term benchmark interest rate to slow growth and curb any jump in inflation.
If the Fed waits until year-end or early 2005, economically sensitive stocks are likely to do well. These stocks, which include retail, media and appliance companies, tend to thrive when the economy is growing briskly. But a defensive position, including companies that supply energy and make household necessities like toothpaste, would be a better bet if an investor expected the Fed to move much sooner.
BECAUSE it is not clear when the Fed will begin raising rates, both approaches did well in February. The consumer staples sector of the S.&amp;P. 500, including dividend payers and nonpayers, fared best, up 5.7 percent through Friday, while energy, up 4 percent, was No. 3. These are defensive plays. The materials sector, in the economically sensitive category, was No. 2, up 4.9 percent.
Mr. Paulsen still favors economically sensitive stocks but has begun to play a little defense, reducing holdings in consumer discretionary stocks and moving that money to consumer staples. ''We have started to step the other way but not very far,'' he said. ''By summer, we will have stepped farther.''
PORTFOLIOS, ETC.
