ST. JOSEPH'S 57, RHODE ISLAND 55
This was not supposed to be one of the toughest tests of the season for No. 2 St. Joseph's, but it was.
When the shooting touch disappears and the rival team is inspired to knock off a goliath, these things can happen.
St. Joseph's left the Ryan Center on Saturday with mixed feelings and a 57-55 victory over Rhode Island that kept alive the Hawks' quest to finish the regular season unbeaten.
No one on St. Joseph's was happy about its terrible shooting performance (a season-low 35.8 percent) or letting an inferior opponent hang around for 40 minutes, but in the end, the Hawks (26-0, 15-0 Atlantic 10) showed enough grit to pull out a game on an afternoon when they clearly did not have it.
''Everybody wants us to win by 20 or 30 points every time,'' St. Joseph's guard Jameer Nelson said.
''We understand we can't win every game by that margin. This time, we won by showing our toughness.''
All that stands between the Hawks and an undefeated regular season is a home game Tuesday against St. Bonaventure, a team St. Joseph's beat by 51 points earlier this season.
The last men's team to go unbeaten during the regular season was Nevada-Las Vegas in 1991. That Runnin' Rebels squad was also the last team to go into the N.C.A.A. tournament without a loss.
After the game, St. Joseph's Coach Phil Martelli made a prediction: ''We will put their stamp on history Tuesday night.''
The outcome was not decided until the final seconds. With his team trailing, 55-53, the Hawks' Delonte West hit a 3-pointer with 58 seconds remaining to put St. Joseph's in front to stay.
After West converted one of two free throws 38 seconds later, the Rams (17-12, 6-9) were left with one last chance.
Dawan Robinson missed with the clock winding down, and Steve Mello, after coming down with a ball after it was batted around underneath, could not hit a 3-point attempt at the buzzer to pull the game out for the Rams.
''Right now, I feel relief,'' the Hawks senior guard Tyrone Barley said. ''I know how many people were watching this game around the country hoping Mello would make that shot.''
The Hawks were shooting 49.2 percent from the floor for the season and had topped 50 percent in four of their previous six games. But they could not get into a shooting rhythm all game. Against Rhode Island's zone, St. Joseph's shot 32.3 percent in the first half and 40.9 percent in the second.
''People have been looking for a blueprint on how to play us,'' Martelli said.
''Rhode Island probably put it out there: see if we're going to go ahead and miss shots.''
The score was tied at 27-27 at halftime, marking just the third time this season that St. Joseph's did not lead after 20 minutes.
Every time it appeared the Hawks would make a run, they sputtered offensively or Rhode Island countered.
''This game just felt different,'' St. Joseph's Chet Stachitas said. ''We never got on the type of run we are used to.
''Every time we started thinking, 'Here we go,' they would claw their way back.''
West made a 3-pointer with 10 minutes 48 seconds left in the game to put the Hawks in front, 42-37, but Rhode Island responded with a 7-0 run to gain the lead. The Rams scored their last points of the game when Dustin Hellenga hit one of two free throws with 1:26 remaining to give his team a 55-53 lead, but the Rams could not connect after West made what may have been the biggest shot this season for St. Joseph's.
''We definitely have to give all the credit to the coaches in that one,'' West said.
''In the huddle, we didn't know what we were going to do. They coaches drew a play up and we ran it to a T. The shot was there.''
Nelson led St. Joseph's with 21 points, but he made just 6 of 20 shots. West finished with 19 points. The Hawks, who had their lowest point total of the season, made only 6 of their 26 3-point attempts.
In winning their previous 10 games by an average margin of 21.5 points, St. Joseph's had not faced a test like this in a while.
The Hawks know they can ill afford another shooting performance like this one in the N.C.A.A. tournament, but they hope this game will have lasting benefits.
''Every game we play is a steppingstone and a learning experience,'' Nelson said. ''If we get put in this situation again, we will know how to handle it better.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
