WHEN ''Chicago'' won the Academy Award for best picture last year -- just one year after ''Moulin Rouge'' was nominated, but 34 years since the last time a musical took that statuette -- the film industry and press began frenzied speculation about the triumphant return of that lost form. To believe the rumors of a year ago was to envision the screens crowded with Will Smith as Norman Maine in ''A Star Is Born,'' Vin Diesel as Sky Masterson in ''Guys and Dolls'' and Mick Jagger as Fagin in a brand-new ''Oliver!''
But after musicals like ''From Justin to Kelly'' and ''The Singing Detective'' dropped into theaters last year and then out again practically unnoticed, the speculation became a lot less frenzied. It might seem particularly muted tonight, when high-testosterone flicks about hobbits and sea warfare will compete for the best-picture Oscar.
There have been reasons to be optimistic: ''You Got Served,'' a movie about street-dance competition, topped the early February box office, and at Christmas Warner Brothers will release the long-anticipated adaptation of ''The Phantom of the Opera.'' But filmmakers are learning that it takes more time -- and more innovative thinking -- to resuscitate a genre than last year's let's-put-on-a-show enthusiasm suggested.
''I think a lot of companies acquired musical properties and discovered that they were more difficult to put together than they originally thought,'' said Meryl Poster, co-president of production for Miramax Films, which nurtured ''Chicago'' for nearly a decade. In part, she said, those difficulties stem from legal tussles over rights to projects whose creators may be long dead.
The performers didn't age well either. ''When movie musicals were in their heyday, there was a large group of talent you could pick from,'' said Neil Meron, who, with his partner Craig Zadan, was among the producers of ''Chicago.''  ''When they fell out of favor, that group of people disappeared.'' Mr. Zadan said young song-and-dance artists, lacking an outlet for their talents, had been relegated to ''a musical closet'' until ''Moulin Rouge'' and ''Chicago'' came along and renewed interest in the genre. ''Then suddenly the trick becomes how to do more,'' he said.
It's not just a matter of leaping legal and technical hurdles, but of overcoming modern audiences' discomfort with characters who suddenly and unaccountably break into song. ''Conceptually you don't want it to look like a music video or feel like an old-fashioned movie,'' said Ms. Poster, who added that Miramax had settled on a plan for its next musical adaptation, ''Damn Yankees,'' which will be produced with Mr. Meron and Mr. Zadan. Mr. Meron said: ''Every musical you do has to be rethought. You want to honor where it started, but you need to take a new look at it very closely.''
In other words, you've got to get a gimmick if you want to get applause from audiences raised on an irony-rich diet. ''Chicago'' was able to gross $306.6 million worldwide in part because the show, already a cynical look at celebrity, was retooled so that its songs were placed between quotation marks, as dreams or performances, rather than as spontaneous outbursts.
''Moulin Rouge'' played up the chest-rattling, consumptive emotion of its plot, but padded the sturm und drang with covers of Elton John and Madonna songs, smirking at its audience with a self-awareness that made its pathos palatable. The trick is in zeroing in on a new approach for each project, keeping in mind that too many misfires could turn studio executives off the genre as quickly as ''Chicago's'' Catherine Zeta-Jones turned them on.
The director of ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' Joel Schumacher, bristled slightly at the suggestion that his film, which went into production last year as ''Chicago'' was cresting, was the product of a passing fashion. ''Andrew had wanted to make this for 16 years,'' said Mr. Schumacher, referring to Andrew Lloyd Webber, ''Phantom's'' creator. '' 'Chicago' didn't light a fire under him.'' Nor does Mr. Schumacher see the two movies as having much in common. ''To compare Chicago in the 20's to Paris in 1870 is nearly impossible,'' he said, noting that '' 'Phantom' really has its own world'' of fans devoted to the stage production.
And so Mr. Schumacher went in a different direction. Where ''Chicago'' was cool and slinky, Mr. Schumacher described ''Phantom'' as ''voluptuous'' and ''over the top with romance and sensuality.'' While ''Chicago'' was marketed to appeal to even those who thought they hated musicals, Warner Brothers has no intention of hiding ''Phantom's'' origins: it is already being called ''the world's biggest musical!''
Perhaps its riskiest departure from the ''Chicago'' model is in the realm of casting. Rather than showcasing high-wattage stars, ''Phantom'' will feature the relative unknowns Gerard Butler, who has appeared in ''Lara Croft Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life,'' as the Paris Opera House phantom, and Emmy Rossum, who is the daughter in ''Mystic River,'' as his beloved soprano, Christine. (The better-known Miranda Richardson and Minnie Driver have supporting roles.)
There is no shortage of well-known actors and actresses willing to take on musical roles, however. Kathy Bates, Russell Crowe and Charlize Theron are among the many who are reportedly eager to sing on film. ''A lot of actors are people who started performing in these kinds of shows in their high schools,'' Ms. Poster noted.
The benefits of high-profile casting are not lost on Mel Brooks, who is producing a film adaptation of ''The Producers,'' his current Broadway musical adaptation of his 1968 movie, with Matthew Broderick and Nathan Lane. Those two have become major Broadway stars, but Mr. Brooks hopes he'll be able to add even more celebrity to his cast with Nicole Kidman as Ulla, the female lead. ''She is not signed, but I have expressed a great desire to have her,'' Mr. Brooks said, joking. ''And also to have her in the movie.'' He said Ms. Kidman would lend the picture ''that tiny bit of exotic marquee glitz and razzle-dazzle.''
In transferring ''The Producers'' back to the screen, Mr. Brooks said, his plan is to ''take the old movie script and the new musical script and undo all the pages of both scripts and put them in a big laundry bag and shake vigorously and then collect and renumber them.''
That method sounds about as precise as some of the scattershot attempts currently underway. There are several hip-hop musicals in the works, including the first-time director Jon Chu's remake of ''Bye-Bye Birdie'' for Columbia Pictures. The 14-year-old singer Lil' Romeo is set to star in ''Lil' Romeo and Lil' Juliet,'' a hip-hop retelling of Shakespeare's tragedy for MGM.
At Paramount, Mr. Meron and Mr. Zadan are reviving the 80's with a new adaptation of ''Footloose,'' the 1984 Kevin Bacon movie on which Mr. Zadan was a co-producer. ''The characters actually sing,'' Mr. Zadan said, ''but it will be a much more experimental film, more in the direction of 'Moulin Rouge.' '' And Miramax will go Bollywood in the fall when it releases ''Bride and Prejudice,'' a musical adaptation based on the Jane Austen novel and directed by Gurinder Chadha (''Bend It Like Beckham'').
Some producers are avoiding the pitfalls of recycled material by simply starting fresh, even while relying on familiar tunes. ''De-Lovely,'' MGM's biography of Cole Porter, starring Kevin Kline and directed by Irwin Winkler (''Life as a House''), is not based on ''Night and Day,'' the 1946 film about Porter directed by Michael Curtiz, but on a script by Jay Cocks. Mr. Winkler said, ''It's not like a historic movie musical, where people stop and sing to each other.'' Instead, the songs are part of performances taking place within the film. Sheryl Crow portrays an actress performing ''Begin the Beguine'' in Porter's show ''Jubilee''; Alanis Morissette, Diana Krall and Robbie Williams take on similar roles. While casting pop stars cannot guarantee box-office success, when the film is released on July 2 it will be noticed by at least a few ardent music fans.
And then there's the grittier ''Romance and Cigarettes,'' a musical written and directed by John Turturro. The United Artists movie, which begins filming in March, will star James Gandolfini and Susan Sarandon (whose last musical foray, ''The Rocky Horror Picture Show,'' had her trilling ''Toucha-toucha-toucha-touch me, I want to be dirty'') as a philandering couple. Mr. Turturro's plot summary says, ''When the characters can no longer express themselves in language, they break into song, lip-synching the tunes that are lodged in their subconscious.'' Those tunes will include Engelbert Humperdinck's ''Man Without Love'' and Tom Jones's ''Delilah.'' The cast, which includes Kate Winslet and Mandy Moore, will do some singing of its own, and the dancer Margie Gillis will choreograph the elaborate dance numbers.
However musicals are being pitched or packaged, Mr. Brooks is simply happy that they are back at all. He recalled a preview performance of ''The Producers'' three years ago in Chicago, during which he thought: ''It's so sad they don't make movie musicals anymore. We should film this.'' Now, he said, ''like 'Singin' in the Rain' or 'Swing Time' or 'Top Hat,' I would like 'The Producers' to join that club of great musicals you can rent with pizza and beer and have the best night of your life.''
FILM Rebecca Traister is a staff writer at the online magazine Salon.
