George W. Bush is not a culture warrior by inclination. And he clearly did not seek this fight over gay marriage. I'd guess that he, like most Americans, wishes it would go away. At very least, it is a distraction from the real culture war, which is being fought in the Middle East against terrorists and anti-democratic fanatics.
Amending the Constitution is a big deal, and as a conservative, President Bush wouldn't seek to do so if there were other political or legal options. But his hand was forced. The mayor of San Francisco, in contravention of all existing state and federal law, started handing out marriage licenses to same-sex couples as if they were political placards. More ominously, four Massachusetts judges, looking to bring about radical social change from the bench, decided that their commonwealth must begin performing same-sex marriages this spring. Undoubtedly, there are more judges across the country waiting for their chance to be creative, too. Whether you favor gay marriage or not, it should be a concern when judges and officials decide to circumvent the democratic process on a core issue.
Still, even many Republicans who hold traditional views of marriage are asking whether it is really worth the enormous effort required to enact an amendment. The answer must be yes. Marriage, defined as one man and one woman, has been a foundation of our culture for millenniums.
It is society's basic institution for raising children. It expresses the unique relationship between men and women, an ideal based on love and care that is harnessed to the future: the next generation. It is how we protect children from the pain and frequent poverty of fatherlessness and family breakdown. Like private property and the rule of law, marriage is one of a few institution that hold up democracy. The ultimate benefit of an amendment is that it would ensure a uniform national definition of this vital institution.
What marriage most certainly is not is a benefits grab. It does not exist for the sake of providing health benefits or minimizing estate taxes. To the extent that those are the issues at stake for gay men and women, they can and should be rectified in state and local law.
And that's exactly what's been happening. Consider the widespread changes in adoption laws, nondiscrimination policies and corporate benefit plans favoring same-sex couples. In terms of social attitudes, there is now greater acceptance of gay people than anyone could have imagined a few decades ago. This is a good thing. And it will likely continue. Evolution is preferable to judicial fiat.
John Kerry, who like most prominent Democrats says he opposes gay marriage, has nonetheless charged President Bush with creating a ''wedge'' issue, to rouse his religious right supporters and foment anger and fear among voters. Actually, gay marriage is not, statistically speaking, a wedge issue. It can be emotional, of course. But very clear majorities of Americans oppose single-sex marriage.
In fact, a poll in November by the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press found that Americans of every age group, income level and educational background strongly opposed it. So, in fact, did Democrats, by 52 percent to 37 percent. Among whites and African-Americans, 60 percent were against gay marriage. In truth, there are few issues on which there is a broader consensus across ethnic, racial, religious and class lines.
Indeed, over time, as voters have thought about what is at stake -- the nature of the society their children will inhabit, what will be taught in school if gay marriage is legalized, the likely stigmatization of religious institutions that do not wish to treat gay unions the same as heterosexual ones -- they have been less apt to see gay marriage as benign social justice, and opposition has increased. Perhaps that is why activists chose to force the issue now.
Passing amendments is notoriously difficult. But given that 38 state legislatures have already passed ''defense of marriage'' acts, it may well happen in this case. The virtue of the amendment process is that it requires the consent of the governed. It forces nationwide debate and examination. Why are so many liberals now trying to keep that debate from happening?
Op-Ed Contributor Lisa Schiffren is a Republican speechwriter.
