A SPLASH was made last week when I.B.M. said that Samuel J. Palmisano, its chief executive, and 300 top officials at the company would receive stock options this year that they could cash in only if I.B.M.'s shares rose by at least 10 percent. Next year, all executives at the company will receive such premium-priced options. The changes, Mr. Palmisano said, ''ensure that I.B.M.'s leaders are compensated only when the performance we deliver first rewards our shareholders.''
I.B.M. is to be congratulated for recognizing that plain-vanilla options, issued at the prevailing market price, are a transfer of wealth from shareholders to management with not enough risks attached.
And it gets special kudos for the shift, given that it is in the technology business. Many of its peers in Silicon Valley insist on battling the attempts of the Financial Accounting Standards Board to bring truth to the corporate income statements that pretend options are not an employee cost. The board's new rule, requiring the deduction of option costs as expenses, is scheduled to take effect in early 2005.
I.B.M.'s new options plan is unusual but not unique. Over the last five years, a handful of companies have issued premium options, according to Equilar, a compensation analysis firm. Most, however, are awarded to a small number of executives.
The companies that have granted premium options recently have tended to put a higher benchmark on them than I.B.M.'s 10 percent. Those that have assigned premiums of 25 percent to the options they have awarded include the Chubb Corporation, the insurance concern; Liz Claiborne, the apparel maker; and Private Bancorp Inc.
And Tesoro Petroleum outdid them. In 2002, it awarded premium options at exercise prices that required a jump of 55 percent to 133 percent in the underlying stock price before holders could profit. The company said its compensation committee had chosen the premium options to put a strong focus on pay for performance.
Not surprisingly, shareholders applaud such plans. Briggs &amp; Stratton, a maker of motors for lawn mowers, has granted premium options for a decade, according to James E. Brenn, its chief financial officer. The benchmark increase in the underlying stock that is required in its plan has varied from around 6 percent to 8 percent in recent years.
Mr. Brenn said investors appreciated that its plan aligned management pay with what shareholders might expect in gains from the company's stock.
''They think the option program is fair, so they do give us kudos,'' he said.
INTERESTINGLY, two companies recently discontinued their premium option plans. Mattel, for example, had one in place since 1997 but it was terminated in 2002. The company did not return a phone call asking why it had stopped the program.
The Acxiom Corporation, a data management company in Little Rock, Ark., stopped its premium plan last year. The company had granted such options since 1993, and put a premium of 200 percent on half of them in certain years.
According to its proxy, Acxiom quit the practice because it had hindered the recruitment and retention of employees. Now the company issues options at the prevailing market price on the date of the grant.
Because I.B.M. is such a technology bellwether, other companies may follow it in adopting similar options plans.
But there is an even more compelling reason for premium option plans to spring up elsewhere.
When premium options are issued, the amount that a company will have to expense under standards board's new rules will be lower than the cost associated with plain-vanilla options.
That makes the bitter pill that the board is proposing a little bit easier for companies to swallow.
MARKET WATCH
