The rumors had been spreading for weeks throughout chat rooms and message boards.
But when the official word came that Arc, the year-and-a-half-old nightclub on Hubert Street in TriBeCa, was closing for good in April, even some hardened clubbers had trouble accepting the news.
''The more I read about this, the sadder I get,'' wrote a patron who identified himself as Zdawg on the club's Web site, joining a chorus of distraught voices. ''I'm pretty much speechless.''
New York night spots come and go every year, but the imminent closing of Arc has touched a nerve. Although the club had no liquor license, patrons were drawn by the reputations of its local and international disc jockeys, and its bass-heavy high-tech sound system; they arrived around midnight and danced well into the next morning.
''Arc represents the cornerstone of a lot of our social lives,'' said a self-styled ''Arcoholic'' who posted his comments under the name Biggie. ''To dismiss the closing like it's nothing is really hard to do.''
The closing is due to the recent sale of the three-story building at 6 Hubert Street that housed both Arc and some noteworthy predecessors. Sandy Rower, who has owned the building with his family for more than three decades, said luxury housing was one possible use.
The space has had a long history in the annals of New York night life. An early incarnation, the mid-80's hot spot Area, attracted a mix of artists, celebrities and musicians that included everyone from Andy Warhol to Ed Koch; the decor featured installations exploring themes like ''Suburbia'' and ''Confinement.''
In the early 90's, the pop star Moby gained prominence as a regular D.J. on Fridays during the club's run as Shelter. At Vinyl, the occupant before Arc, the Sunday night ''Body and Soul'' party earned a worldwide reputation for offering a mix of soulful dance classics and ethnic-tinged club fare.
But in recent years, the club's surroundings have changed. Once surrounded by burnt-out warehouses, the neighborhood, tucked away behind the Holland Tunnel, is now dominated by luxury condominiums. In December, Community Board 1 voted overwhelmingly against recommending a liquor license for the club.
Closing night will be Sunday, April 25. Until then, many of the parties and disc jockeys who have held court there will return for one last dance. And Arc is already seeking a new home.
''I'm definitely disappointed that we're having to close prematurely,'' said Mike Bindra, the manager of the club. ''But it gives us the opportunity to focus on doing something even better.''
MICHAEL GWERTZMAN
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: TRIBECA
