RICHARD HAMILTON is the invisible man of Pop art, at least in this country where his achievement has never been properly recognized. Born in England in 1922, he spent most of the 1950's and 1960's making collages, paintings and prints using mass media imagery and advertising. Among them is arguably the first authentic Pop artwork ever made, the collage ''Just What Is It That Makes Today's Homes So Different, So Appealing?'' (1956).
Mr. Hamilton, 81, is the subject of an expansive exhibition at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven. The exhibition, touring from the Kunstmuseum in Winterthur, Switzerland, surveys his prints, multiples (art works designed for mass production) and digital photographs from the late 1930's to the present. It is a dense, thoughtful show, requiring the best part of an hour to view properly. And then there is the catalog, a veritable S.U.V. of publishing.
The exhibition contains more than 150 of the artist's prints made using a wide variety of printing techniques, including etching, screen-printing, collotype, lithography, photogravure and digital media. Mostly they belong to the Kunstmuseum, which in 1996 received a substantial gift of Mr. Hamilton's prints. This gift, and further acquisitions, has made the museum the largest repository of the artist's prints in the world.
Much like his paintings and collages, an investigation of advertising, mass-media imagery and consumer culture dominates Mr. Hamilton's prints. But not until the 1960's, when he met the screen printer Christopher Prater, did he begin producing prints of lasting worth. Other collaborations soon followed with celebrated European master printers, including Picasso's former printer, Aldo Crommelynck.
Printmaking, it is worth recalling, is a collaborative medium. Regardless of the process employed, an artist usually needs the assistance of a skilled printer, someone who knows intimately the technical aspects of printing and how to handle a press. The artist works closely with the printer to fashion and then print the kind of image they want, a frequently exacting, time-consuming process involving much trial and error.
Mr. Hamilton's first collaboration with Mr. Prater produced one of his most celebrated prints, ''Adonis in Y Fronts'' (1963). The image shows a muscle-bound male wearing underpants sown with a Y-fronted design, flexing a lyre-shaped chest expander with black plastic handles and nipple-like silver washers and rivets. The work references advertising and consumer culture, in particular popular media imagery of male beauty.
Mr. Hamilton first visited the United States in 1963 for a retrospective of the works of Marcel Duchamp at the Pasadena Museum of Art. During his time here, he was introduced to the work of the American Pop artists Andy Warhol, Claes Oldenburg, Jasper Johns, Roy Lichtenstein and James Rosenquist. He was surprised to discover that, like him, they were fascinated with advertising and mass media imagery.
Shortly after this visit, Mr. Hamilton produced ''A Little Bit of Roy Lichtenstein for '' (1964), a lively screen print consisting of a grid of large red dots smeared with black paint. The work, produced in homage to Mr. Lichtenstein, shows a magnified detail of a girl's face in a Lichtenstein print. It was an audacious move, the artist making a work from a bit of an artwork made from a bit of comic strip.
The next year he produced ''My Marilyn.'' These prints, among his best, consist of pink-and blue-tinged photographic proof sheets of the famous actress at the beach, published in a magazine shortly after her death in 1962. Ms. Monroe approved all photographs of herself before publication, frequently using lipstick to cross out images she did not like. Mr. Hamilton's prints preserve the violent immediacy of her marks.
In 1968, Mr. Hamilton made various kinds of prints using press reports of legal proceedings against his then art dealer, Robert Fraser, and members of the Rolling Stones rock group for possession of illegal drugs. (They were sentenced to six months and three months in jail, respectively, but on appeal the sentences of the rock stars were reduced to fines; Mr. Fraser served time in prison.) ''Swingeing London 67 Poster'' (1968). is perhaps the most innovative of these prints, the artist creating photo-offset lithographs of a collage of newspaper stories and imagery of the court case.
Through the late 1970's, 1980's and 1990's, Mr. Hamilton continued making prints, changing and combining his printing techniques to fit the subject matter. Rarely however did his output match the lively and colorful prints of the 1960's and early 1970's, which stand as his most resolved and impressive contribution to the field. That so many of these early prints are on display at Yale is a rare treat. And the exhibition is free.
''Richard Hamilton: Prints and Multiples, 1939-2002'' is at the Yale Center for British Art, 1080 Chapel Street, New Haven, through May 24. Information: (203)432-2853.
ART REVIEW
