In the usual backstage tumult as the Versace show wound down on Thursday night during Fashion Week here, the following things happened, more or less simultaneously: Rupert Everett was snagged repeatedly by his own miraculously unlined reflection in a dressing room mirror; a waiter dropped an entire tray of Champagne flutes; the stylist Bill Mullen rolled lint off the backside of a houndstooth-check suit worn by the Belgian model Elise Crombez; Julie Mannion, the show's producer, called for models to queue up for a final runway circuit shouting, ''Dewi, up! Rianne, up! Hannelore, up! Cristina, up!''
At the same time, the Texan model Erin Wasson disentangled the strap of a dress that had gotten caught on a piercing through her right nipple; two seamstresses scurried around diligently collecting straight pins; the model Julia Stegner explained that she had taken a header on the runway because ''those shoes are so high!''; and a hairdresser smoothed at the fairy-tale flax of Donatella Versace's hair with a boar-bristle brush.
The model Karen Elson disappointed someone at the receiving end of a cellphone, saying ''I really can't go, I'm going to be finished too late''; the makeup artist Pat McGrath walked coolly through the dressing area touching up the models' vinyl-eyed Siouxsie and the Banshees makeup; Liz Hurley giddily showed off the hunk of D-flawless rock she wore on her ring finger; and one of the many hangers-on who always seem to weasel past the security guards at fashion shows kept repeating: ''Did anyone see Pharrell? I heard Pharrell is going to come.''
He was referring to Pharrell Williams, the Grammy-winning producer and performer and founder of the Neptunes, who did, in fact, appear, some hours afterward, at a party that followed the show held in an upper floor of Ms. Versace's mansion attended by nearly all of the aforementioned people as well as several hundred of their closest new fashion friends. Mr. Williams arrived near midnight wearing trousers, a jacket and a hunting cap made from camouflage cloth and looking perfectly prepared to do style battle with some of the most relentlessly chic people in this universe and any other, known or unknown.
Shopping Report
''Restaurants, no; shopping, no,'' said Eugenio Arrizza, a driver for one of the many limousine services whose cars are solidly booked when the fashion flock descends on this chilly northern city. Mr. Arrizza was summarizing economic priorities that are by no means singular to him.
Anyone doubting that the Italians are feeling pinched need only stroll through this city's fabled Golden Triangle -- more of a trapezoid, actually -- a series of cobbled streets whose ancient palaces once housed Milan's high-end antiques stores, until clothing purveyors began moving in several decades ago and supplanting goods burnished by the patina of age with those bearing the more alluring gloss of new luxury.
Two years ago, on a given winter afternoon, stores along Via della Spiga, Via Sant'Andrea or Via Montenapoleone were typically thronged with shoppers who hauled their loot around in shopping bags that turned them into ambulating billboards for Oscar Wilde's epigram that ''It is only shallow people who do not judge by appearances.''
Today the bags are scarcer, and so is the comfortable assurance of fat times. In the flagship stores, the aisles have a spookily empty feel. The sales help stand idle, holding up the walls. To walk into many of the fancy shops along Via della Spiga lately is to feel one had won a popularity contest. Sniffy clerks who seemed to pride themselves on an indifference to mere commerce now greet anyone who walks in in a suspiciously chipper way.
''The Koreans, we don't see so much anymore,'' explained a salesman at the Jil Sander boutique, who added that he would quickly find himself unemployed if his name were to appear in print. ''The Japanese are not coming so much,'' this man added. ''And the Chinese come, but they don't buy.'' Americans still spend money on European luxury goods, although evidently less of it than they did when the dollar was robust.
''I think the situation will be better in the second part of the year,'' said Mario Boselli, chairman of the Camera Nazionale della Moda Italiana, the Italian fashion industry's chief trade group, referring to the retail slump. ''The quality and quantity of people who came for the shows this season,'' Mr. Boselli added, ''is a positive trend.'' More than 1,500 journalists were in town for Milan's Fashion Week and, as Mr. Boselli noted, this was several hundred more than in the seasons since the Sept. 11 attacks.
These people may still be shopping with nearly their usual vigor (last year, this reporter observed a Japanese editor purchasing 49 pairs of $110 pony-skin gloves in a single transaction at the glove shop Sermoneta). But the current euro-to-dollar exchange rate, which equates to a roughly 25 percent surcharge on the retail price of most products, seems to be having a cooling effect on the sales of Italian luxury goods, both here and in the United States. ''It's a concern for us,'' said Ann Stordahl, the general merchandising manager of Neiman Marcus. ''It has affected our buying in terms of units. You can't pass along increases to consumers of up to 30 percent.''
A study issued this week by the Camera Nazionale painted a gloomy picture of the Italian fashion industry's future, projecting slow growth rates for the third consecutive year. ''Italian companies set themselves apart with their pessimism,'' the report claimed.
''The bad value of the dollar to the euro is really affecting everyone,'' said Kal Ruttenstein, the fashion director of Bloomingdale's. As an example, Mr. Ruttenstein explained that a $2,500 jacket from Giorgio Armani's 2003 high-end black label line might now carry a price of $3,000 or more. ''The designers are very aware of the issue,'' Mr. Ruttenstein said. ''They are relatively aware of the sell-through,'' he added, using the industry term for clothes sold at full retail value. ''And they don't want American consumers to get sticker shock.''
Memories of Mick
The setting was Da Giacomo, the restaurant that, to judge by the datebooks of most fashion editors, is one of only three in Milan (the other two are Bice and Le Langhe). The room was packed, as usual, with what Paul Cavaco, the creative director of Allure, once called ''fashionellas.''
Table 6 was the Bottega Veneta party. Table 1 was Bloomingdale's. Table 4 was occupied by a group of models and the men who love them (or who, at any rate, pick up their tabs). Table 8 was given over to friends of Emanuele Della Valle, the scion of the shoe empire, Tod's. A more blasé group one would be hard-pressed to find under most circumstances. But on this night a buzz ran through the crowd the moment Mick Jagger walked through the door.
Some people changed their chairs to have a better view of the rock icon. Some hummed Stones songs under their breath. Not a few intrepid diners felt compelled to interrupt Mr. Jagger and his companion, the stylist L'Wren Scott, as they dined on grilled fish and white wine.
One would imagine that, after 40 years in the public eye, Mr. Jagger must take annoyances like this in stride. But even Mr. Jagger seemed nonplused when an ancient man using canes accompanied his wife to the rock star's table. ''I feel I really must thank you,'' the woman said to Mr. Jagger. ''You were such an important part of our youth.''
FASHION DIARY
