Positive Words, Negative Effect
SENATOR JOHN KERRY has been praised lately for discarding the grim wonkishness of Al Gore and borrowing Senator John Edwards's cheery empathy, but how thorough is his rhetorical makeover? We sought guidance from James W. Pennebaker, a psychologist whose lingustic research subjects have included Richard M. Nixon, Rudolph W. Giuliani, Al Gore and President Bush.
Dr. Pennebaker and two colleagues at the University of Texas, Richard Slatcher and Cindy Chung, scrutinized more than 50,000 words spoken by Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards in five dozen interviews with the press in the past seven weeks. Their computer analysis showed that Mr. Kerry matched Mr. Edwards's optimism by one measure: they both used ''positive emotion words'' like ''build,'' ''energetic'' and ''admire'' at the same rate. But Mr Kerry offset that by using negative words like ''fight,'' ''disgrace'' and ''dangerous'' three times as often as Mr. Edwards did.
Mr. Kerry, who is from Massachusetts, also spoke in more complicated sentences and more concrete, impersonal language, as reflected in more uses of prepositions and articles and fewer uses of ''I.'' You might think a predilection for saying ''I'' is the mark of a self-centered alpha male, but Dr. Pennebaker's previous research shows that the use of ''I'' actually tends to be a more vulnerable, personal and honest style of speaking. (Mr. Giuliani, who was fond of using the royal ''we'' during his early years as mayor of New York, switched to ''I'' after his marriage broke up and he learned he had cancer.)
The bottom line: as a speaker, Mr. Kerry is a lot more similar to Mr. Gore than to Mr. Edwards, while Mr. Edwards is a lot closer to Mr. Bush than to either Mr. Kerry or Mr. Gore.
''Gore was always criticized for being stiff and detached, and you see this in Kerry, too, with the added feature that he's significantly more negative than Gore was,'' Dr. Pennebaker said. ''Unlike Edwards and Bush, his language shows he isn't as personally connected to his topic or audience, and perhaps to himself. Now, I can't say if he's really like that as a human being. But that's how he comes off under the glare of television lights.''
Add Up the Dollars, Er, Votes
THAT old promise of a chicken in every pot looks like a bargain compared with the sums politicians are spending this year to win votes. Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri spent $18 million in his presidential campaign, which ended after he won fewer than 14,000 votes in Iowa. That works out to about $1,300 per vote, which would be enough to buy every voter a chicken, a pot and a full-featured stove.
To be fair, you could include the votes that Mr. Gephardt has been picking up in primaries since he left the race. Counting them, his per-vote cost stands at about $600. So he can point to at least one bigger spender in the past: Steve Forbes, whose quest for the Republican nomination in 2000 cost $86 million, or about $650 per vote. But Mr. Gephardt is still comfortably ahead of another plutocrat: Michael R. Bloomberg paid about $100 per vote while spending more than $73 million to win the race for New York mayor.
Among this year's Democrats, the next highest roller was Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who spent $17 million, or a little more than $200 for every vote he won in the primaries until he withdrew. Howard Dean, former governor of Vermont, spent the most, $42 million, but took back enough of America to average about $100 per vote until his withdrawal. Gen. Wesley K. Clark spent $22 million, or just less than $60 per vote.
Among the active candidates, Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio has spent $5 million, or about $80 per vote so far. Mr. Edwards's $22 million in spending works out to nearly $24 per vote, and Mr. Kerry's $31 million to $21 per vote. But the most cost-effective of all is the Rev. Al Sharpton. By spending a little more than $600,000, he's paying less than $7 per vote, which is just about the price of a chicken.
A Youth Campaign For the Youth Vote
THE assignment, given to competing teams of teenagers from around the country, was to devise strategies for presidential candidates to reach the youth vote. One team proposed handing out health and beauty aids labeled ''Kerry Cares.'' They proposed putting the slogan on hairbrushes, which seemed sensible enough, especially considering the candidate's presidential mane. But then they suggested condoms, too. They did not win.
Neither did the team whose advertisements showed the Bush tax cuts paying for DVD players and Member's Only jackets, though the campaign did impress one judge, Tina Wells, a managing partner in Blue Fusion, a New Jersey youth-marketing firm that sponsored the contest. She called it ''smart, hip and on target'' to have ''the president embrace the bling-bling lifestyle.''
The winning team came up with a television advertisement featuring two high school seniors who are unable to afford college until a savior suddenly appears. ''Hi,'' the savior says. ''My name is John Edwards.''
He continues, ''Education is an important issue for youth of all backgrounds, and that is why my campaign will fund $10,000 student scholarships in a series of national essay contests.''
The teenage copywriters omitted any mention of how the scholarship program would work or how many students would benefit -- just the sort of vagueness that marks a seasoned professional in Washington.
''It's a great topic for an ad for John Edwards,'' said David Axelrod, media consultant for Mr. Edwards of North Carolina. ''He was the first in his family to go to college and remembers how hard they struggled to afford it. So this is the kind of ad he could do with all his heart.''
Would Mr. Axelrod consider using the script? ''It's not exactly the way I would do the ad,'' he replied diplomatically.
Well, then, would he at least recommend that the Kerry campaign try handing out the ''Kerry Cares'' condoms?
''I don't like to discuss rival campaigns,'' he said. ''But it would certainly enliven things.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
