THE director Jim Sheridan did not put a lampshade on his head during the party to celebrate his movie's three Oscar nominations, but late on a Thursday night in New York he did prance around in a wig. Mr. Sheridan, who lives in Dublin, was passing through New York to promote ''In America,'' a retelling of his impoverished family's experience in the 1980's in the slums of Hell's Kitchen.
As is common at Oscar time, a luxurious event was being held to celebrate a movie about the hard-luck life. The party was thrown by Mr. Sheridan's voluble Irish friend John Fitzpatrick, the owner of the Fitzpatrick Hotel on Lexington and 57th Street, who was waiting for guests in his private penthouse on the 17th floor. On the mantle over the fireplace was a needlepoint pillow with an inscription: ''You never know how many friends you have until you have a penthouse in New York.''
The dinner party was set for 8:30, and at 9 Mr. Sheridan arrived with his daughters, Naomi and Kirsten. (The three are jointly nominated for best original screenplay.) He hit the living room like a whirlwind and began talking movies and racehorses, sometimes (''Seabiscuit'') at the same time. Waiters passed lobsters and shrimp and refilled wine glasses. The daughters talked about their day at the Kwiat jewelry store shopping for things to be lent to wear at the Oscars. ''They kept saying: 'Try it on, try it on!' '' Kirsten Sheridan said.
At 9:30, Mr. Fitzpatrick hustled the 14 guests into the dining room. The gregarious Mr. Sheridan sat with Naomi on one side and Kirsten on the other, and answered his cellphone. ''We're in the penthouse,'' he told the caller. ''You want to come up later on? I don't know how sober I'll be.''
There were a lot of choices on the printed menu. Appetizers, a Killiney Castle broth, a choice of beef Wellington or grilled swordfish, vegetables and dessert, plus a choice of Irish farmhouse cheeses. Mr. Sheridan nixed the beef Wellington and swordfish, and ordered a big steak instead. For a moment, he and his daughters hunkered down over their soup in an identical, furtive way and slurped contentedly. Naomi Sheridan lives with her boyfriend, Mark Little, in a more gentrified Hell's Kitchen than what her family remembers from the 80's. ''The fact they've already renamed it Clinton is bad enough,'' said Mr. Little, who arrived along with the soup.
The wine was being poured liberally, the noise level was up and the accents were strong: ''thank God'' was ''tank God,'' ''cuff links'' were ''coof links'' and ''film'' was ''fil-um.'' Naomi climbed into her boyfriend's lap while Mr. Fitzpatrick discussed Catholicism. ''We have all these rules, and we don't follow any,'' he said.
''I think everyone should be a priest and not have to be married,'' Mr. Sheridan said. ''You can have the odd housekeeper, though.''
The main courses arrived, and the guests went back to talking New York real estate. ''So where are people moving now?'' asked Ira Shreck, an entertainment lawyer.
Mickey Tohill, another guest, answered, ''The South Bronx.''
''But when you hear about it, it's too late,'' Mr. Shreck complained.
Mr. Fitzpatrick had his own real estate advice: ''Three weeks after 9/11, that was the time to buy.''
Mr. Sheridan left the room and re-entered in a $20 wig that Edward Saxon, a producer, had worn to the party as a winter hat. It's practical, Mr. Saxon said, because ''no one ever takes it thinking it's their wig.''
''I got it off John Travolta,'' Mr. Sheridan joked. ''Oops, now I won't have any Scientologists voting for me -- and that's about 4,000 members.''
Apple tarts and ice cream were served. The cheese tray came out at midnight and the guests seemed to sag. Mr. Sheridan announced with certainty, ''I'm going.''
But there was another half hour of hugging and kissing and backslapping and talking before he took the elevator. More time passed in the lobby, and final plans were made: he and his daughters would head off for one last celebratory drink.
GOOD COMPANY
