GOAT
A Memoir.
By Brad Land.
210 pp. New York: Random House. $22.95.
When we read a memoir, how does it differ from eavesdropping on someone's therapy sessions? In the best memoirs and autobiographical novels, even the most harrowing recollection is sifted through an artful filter, resulting in a fact-based story -- told, presumably, from a more reflective remove -- that is as elusive and complex as the circumstances that provoked it. Memoirs that traffic in unmediated confession, however, or are too quick to interpret, make us feel more like a reluctant social worker listening to a patient's undigested ramblings and reductive theories about causality.
''Goat,'' Brad Land's memoir about how, as a sensitive and possibly mentally unbalanced young man, he suffered violence at the hands of other men, relies on a simple cause-and-effect psychological structure: I am this way because. Land grew up in the small-town South, overshadowed by his younger, cuter, more popular brother, Brett. At 19, he weighs a scant 132 pounds and admits, ''I'm always nervous and scared and I don't know why.'' Worse, he's afflicted by a shaking problem and a weepy courtship style. He tells a girl he's kissed only once that he loves her. She can't reciprocate. ''I can't, she says, and then I'm sobbing, placing one hand against the cold windowpane in my parents' living room and through my handprint the oaks outside are still in the cold dark.'' Land has returned home after a failed freshman year at college because ''I was just lonely and cried all the time and lived in an old house with lots of dust.''
Perhaps Land should be applauded for refusing to fall into jostling step with male memoirists like Augusten Burroughs (''Running With Scissors''), a bawdy raconteur who turns personal humiliation into a great occasion to entertain, or James Frey, whose ''A Million Little Pieces'' is a staccato, tough-guy recounting of his physical (not psychological) feats of endurance as a recovering Olympian substance abuser. Land is more focused on his psychological weakness, and this is daring; it risks his appearing unsympathetic or even pathetic. Considering the book's maudlin temperament, and the way the interior landscape of an unstable mind overpowers external events, ''Goat'' actually has more in common with an autobiographical novel by a dead female poet -- namely, ''The Bell Jar.'' Like Sylvia Plath, Land exhibits a weakness for death metaphors (''the moon is the blade of an ax''), but he lacks her bitter irony and her wrath, both essential chasers for the more-than-occasional shot of self-pity. Unlike Plath's novel, which captured the struggle of the externally perfect, internally scrambled woman (no one could reduce ''The Bell Jar'' to I will most likely stick my head in an oven because), Land's memoir reads more like a case study of one undone individual seeking to justify his plight. When he's not establishing causality, Land's admissions of inadequacy inspire reader responses that range from the hopeful ''Buck up!'' to far testier rejoinders.
But a reader is discouraged from becoming too impatient. Land is the victim of a crime -- and his resulting trauma is the proffered key meant to help us understand, and possibly forgive, his future shortcomings. One evening after a party, Land gives a lift to two nameless men -- ''the smile'' and ''the breath,'' he calls them -- who direct him to a remote place, beat him, stash him in his own trunk, drive around for a few hours, then deposit him in the woods and steal his car. Despite Land's inability to formulate a cogent police statement (''I'm writing about teeth and growls and foxes and smiles and breaths''), one of the perps is caught and sentenced, and the other flees town. Land's formerly ethereal fear, now assigned to a concrete event, persists. ''I know I'm carrying this thing with me,'' he says; ''sooner or later'' it will come back to haunt him.
The proving ground for this inescapable prophecy will be Clemson University, where Land joins Brett, who is already a member of Kappa Sigma. Land decides to rush the same house, which leads to perverse and anthropologically fascinating degradations, as well as some of the most absorbing passages in the book. Suddenly, we are in the company of a more mature and engaging narrator, who insightfully zeroes in on some fairly desperate and telling forms of male behavior. Pledges are called ''goats''; they are forced to fake copulation with walls; they are blindfolded and made to massage a banana in a toilet (and then to eat it); they are required to drink a foul potion of brotherly spit and urine. Land, along with the other, presumably trauma-free, pledges, withstands this abuse voluntarily. Why? In Land's case, we know; he is carrying around his trauma, and it has damaged him against self-preservation and self-respect. Or, as a fellow pledge more candidly puts it: ''If you quit what's left? Studying? . . .You can't go to a party without seeing'' the fraternity brothers, ''and besides, who wants to go to the parties that they're not at?''
Unfortunately, Land does harbor deeper reasons for putting up with the abuse: his complicated relationship -- partly worshipful, partly resentful -- with his brother, a complication that extends back in the Land family. His inability to live up to the expectations of his male lineage, lethally combined with his widely perceived sissy status, gestures toward what could have been an affecting portrait of masculinity in a culture that's least sympathetic to teary, unstable deviations from the classic model. Because of the fixed interpretation of the roles established for these brothers, any speculation as to either man's more convoluted and resentful undercurrents threatens this neat setup. Which is a shame. The most forceful scene in the book is the one in which, for once, Land is not the victim but the perpetrator of violence. He returns to his dorm room to find his roommate's pledge
brother asleep on the floor. He responds: ''I hate him simply because he is alone inside his muffled head and I have to sit and listen to myself. I put my foot back on his hand and move it around, press it down into the floor to grind the bones but he doesn't move.'' Does this complicate our understanding of Land's character, that a man who has endured random pain and cruelty would seek to cause it? You bet. Does it make Land more interesting and even, oddly, more sympathetic? Infinitely, yes. Land's willingness to be openly weak and pathetic is an admirable one, but such daring is counterbalanced by his curiosity-squelching impulse to explicate and simplify. The reader has no work left to do, save patiently listen.
Heidi Julavits is an editor of The Believer. Her most recent novel is ''The Effect of Living Backwards.''
