THERE isn't gold at the end of the rainbow in New York. There's a $17 dollar cocktail.
On Monday night, I went up to the Rainbow Grill, on the 65th floor of Rockefeller Center -- what's left of the Promenade Bar, which originally accompanied the Rainbow Room, once the city's most famous supper club. I was looking for a French 75.
The French 75 is a classic cocktail, circa World War I, which is currently regaining recognition. It is named for the French 75-millimeter gun used by Allied troops, including, according to one story, Capt. Harry S. Truman. The drink's munitions are Cognac and Champagne. The simplest recipe calls for little more than a twist of lemon. Versions that take prisoners include liqueurs.
The Ciprianis, the Venetian restaurateurs, operate the Rainbow complex now, and they have taken a lot of heat for the way they maintain one of the greatest legends of New York night life. The Rainbow Grill, with its cafeteria sense of style, is a tourist-class accommodation of the former Promenade Bar -- an Italian ferry of a certain age, with an observation deck where the swank and the swell once held sway. Of course, Manhattan at night from the top of Midtown is still a black ocean of magic, wired with stars. And no one can pull the plug on that.
I was prepared for a cynical experience, until Sharif Nagaiya, the bartender, took my order.
''Can you make a French 75?'' I asked.
''Yes, sir,'' Mr. Nagaiya answered, and set to work with the kind of methodical second nature that you don't acquire unless you've tended bar a long, long time and know every drink -- and every type of customer -- in the book. He has worked with the Rainbow for 15 years.
Mr. Nagaiya, an engaging Ghanaian man, set the French 75 in front of me and left me to take a sip. Like the best bartenders, he let the drink speak for itself.
The French 75 is a handsome cinnamon suede color, and its taste, as mixed by Mr. Nagaiya, has a cinnamon tone, too.
When I admired it, Mr. Nagaiya took his place of pride beside the drink. ''I make the best,'' he said, adding, in an open challenge, ''I like competition.''
The cocktail is clearly of a previous era, with an emphasis on luxury items like Cognac and Champagne, and is unusual in a genteel way: no dishonorable tricks.
To share it with a view that was created in 1934 and that has become more dynamic with every year is to understand what a modern idea the cocktail was. Exhausted by present-day pressures, New York looks young again from the Rainbow's bar, in the same way that a well-made cocktail can make your life fall away behind you and leave you only with the future glittering in your eye.
That could be worth any price.
FRENCH 75  Adapted from the Rainbow Grill
2 ounces of Cognac  1 ounce maraschino liqueur  1 ounce of Cointreau  1 dash of fresh lemon juice  Orange twist  1 ounce Champagne.
1. Shake all ingredients, except the Champagne, in a tall shaker filled with ice.
2. Strain and pour into a cold martini glass. Top with Champagne to brim. Garnish with flamed orange twist.
SHAKEN AND STIRRED
