LAST week I ran into a friend who told me she had been planning to call me. She had recently eaten at a new restaurant and wanted to recommend it. But she had just gone back for another meal and now she didn't want to recommend it anymore.
She was talking about Kitchen, a restaurant that opened quietly in Woodbridge in December and has recently become very popular.
I first ate at Kitchen for lunch and we had some truly lovely food, including something called chicken in a pot, which is a chicken leg served with carrot and celery pieces, egg noodles, and a great big matzo ball in a bowl of chicken stock. We also ordered something called tagliatelle, which is really a bowl of egg noodles with short ribs in a red wine veal sauce with mushrooms.
It seems to me that both of the dishes were examples of fabulous Jewish food, including the tagliatelle, which tasted more Eastern European than Italian. The matzo ball was light and tasty, like you find in New York. The short ribs were tender and silky, with just enough fat to make them taste luscious, and the red wine sauce was hearty and tasty and wonderful.
Appetizers were good, too. Duck confit spring roll was crisp and savory, the dipping sauce a nice balance of sweet, soy and acid. A spinach and ricotta salad with bacon and mushrooms was sauced with one of those reduced balsamic dressings that I don't like -- they're both sweeter and more acidic than I want -- but was, nonetheless, perfectly well made.
Desserts were the only disappointment (though they looked great). The texture of a Sacher torte was dry underneath its sugar syrup soak and I couldn't taste the chocolate through the sour cherry; the strawberry glaze on the cheesecake was much too thick and sweet.
The staff was enthusiastic about their food and new success, and treated their customers like family. You had to love it.
We came back for an early dinner on a weekend night. The place was soon full; the staff was as lively and friendly as before. But we waited almost an hour for our appetizers and almost half that time for bread (quite good, with its crisp crust and embedded cloves of roasted garlic). I didn't get a sense that anyone in charge was concerned about our long wait; perhaps they didn't notice?
I don't think I would have stayed if it hadn't been for our ebullient waiter. The food, when it came, was mixed. Pieces of each dish were tasty but accompaniments mostly marred their success.
Both the rib-eye and the tenderloin steaks were delicious; the Portobello mushroom on the tenderloin was too sharp with vinegar. Snapper was moist, well cooked, but it was served with a conch-corn pancake that was goopy inside. The braised short ribs were as before but the potatoes were undercooked. Garlic citrus chicken was perfectly respectable but didn't taste like either garlic or citrus. I found the coffee and cocoa rack of lamb too sweet with spice. Scallion pancakes were tough and the gnocchi rubbery. The best dessert was a chocolate cake soaked in Grand Marnier but again, I missed a richer, more chocolaty taste.
Weekends can be tough on a new restaurant, particularly one enjoying the kind of overnight success this one is having. Other dinners at Kitchen have not been so long but my reaction to the food has been consistent. There are some dishes that are made exceptionally well -- and you're in luck if you happen in there when they've just baked croissants -- and others that perhaps just haven't had time to gel.
In any event, a lot of customers seem quite smitten with the place. The restaurant does food for take out, and it is B.Y.O.B.
Kitchen  12 Seldon Street, Woodbridge  (203)387-8649  Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Informal, industrial chic.
NOISE LEVEL -- Moderate.
SERVICE -- Friendly, enthusiastic; service can be very slow.
RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Chicken in a pot, tagliatelle, braised short ribs, tenderloin of beef, rib-eye steak, Kitchen burger, duck confit and vegetable spring roll, spinach and ricotta salad, chopped salad.
PRICE RANGE -- Lunch: appetizers $5 to $9; main courses: $8 to $14; Dinner: appetizers $5 to $9; main courses $13 to $25.
CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards accepted.
HOURS -- Lunch: Monday, and Wednesday through Saturday, 11:30 a.m. to 4 p.m., Sunday (brunch), 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., (lunch) 1 p.m. to 4 p.m. Dinner: Monday, Wednesday and Thursday 5 p.m. to 10 p.m., Friday and Saturday to 10:30 p.m., Sunday to 9:30 p.m.
RESERVATIONS -- Recommended.
WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- Good.
REVIEWED BY THE TIMES -- Feb. 29, 2004.
RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING
