FOLLOWING visits to three major league spring training camps last week and after monitoring the grapevine on the dreaded steroid issue, specific words come to mind: Defensive. Splintered. Scared.
Some semblance of reality has penetrated the sluggers' skulls that had been as thick as their biceps. Reluctantly, angrily, they are acknowledging the ramifications of their industry's longtime denial of the performance-enhancement rage. Realizing that their union is not made of impenetrable steel, players are speaking out, lashing out, on their own.
With Commissioner Bud Selig posting off-limits signs to personal trainers, the federal government massing outside the fortress, and with the news media launching shadowy tabloid strikes, it was an ugly first week in Florida and Arizona, from one extreme to the other. While Cubs Manager Dusty Baker was crying McCarthyism, Colorado pitcher Turk Wendell was doing the unthinkable: trying to out Barry Bonds.
At the Yankees' camp in Tampa, Gary Sheffield, one of the players linked to the Bay Area Laboratory Co-Operative debacle, told reporters, ''You get me a pee cup, I'll pee.'' When one took the bait and invited Sheffield to accompany him to a doctor, he backed off, big time, with the union telling him to zip it.
With no desire to involve myself in the testing business or trail anyone with a scale, I nonetheless find the sudden outbreak of righteous indignation on the part of the players to be laughable. Where was the concern for their legitimacy when those offensive records were falling at an unbelievable rate, when players began looking like caricatures of themselves?
''I know who I am,'' Bonds, who has set an unprecedented pace for slugging at an age that used to be old for baseball, said when he reported to the Giants' camp. ''I know what I stand for. They can test me every day of the week if they choose to.''
If Bonds is so insulted by the doubters, if he has been willing to test comprehensively to quiet them, he should have spoken out all these years when the union was reacting to calls for testing as if it were a salary cap. He should have shown the independent streak he was so quick to demonstrate recently when the subject was the marketing of merchandise.
If all of these guys were clean, why did they hide behind Donald Fehr when the cash registers began ringing after the 1994 strike. Where were Bonds and Sheffield and the others when it took management and labor about 20 minutes to agree on a weak testing plan that was designed to disappear, and would have if enough players -- 5 to 7 percent of the tests were positive -- weren't so arrogant or ignorant that they couldn't pass a test they knew was coming?
As Christine Brennan wrote Thursday in USA Today, the 5 to 7 percent ''might sound pretty low until you consider that in the U.S. Olympic movement last year, the percentage of those who failed tests was 0.4 percent, according to the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency.'' And those results were derived in part from unannounced testing, far more stringent than baseball's. The happy spin baseball put on its first round of testing was a bigger disgrace than anything out of Pete Rose's mouth.
For years, the American sports media was so adept at ridiculing Olympic cheats, the fancy runners and Bulgarian weight lifters, while worshipping at the altar of the sport stitched into its psyche. When the Associated Press columnist Steve Wilstein produced a comprehensive work on Mark McGwire's use of the steroid-acting supplement androstenedione, he was assailed not only by most of baseball but also by many in the sports media. Didn't this muckraker know that drugs don't help you hit a curveball?
Feeling duped for years, an angry sports media mob now smells blood, although there remains a segment that believes this story is largely about political correctness, an exercise in futility because many fans, perhaps even a majority, haven't seemed to care, as long as the ball has been soaring 450 feet.
There is, similarly, a horde of zealots in University Town, U.S.A., who don't raise an eyebrow when prize recruits pillage the community. Should we rationalize that criminality because the games are fun?
Tell this to the parents of the frail kid whose adolescent world is dependent on making the varsity and who is tempted by a few magic pills. Tell this to Don Hooton, whose 17-year-old son, Taylor, a high school pitcher, committed suicide by hanging last year in what was believed to be a chemical reaction upon discontinuing the use of anabolic steroids.
Don Hooton, a cousin of the former major leaguer Burt Hooton, has become an outspoken critic of a high school culture he believes quietly encourages pharmacology. On the telephone from Plano, Tex., he said that he had read Dusty Baker's steroid comments while traveling last week and reacted viscerally.
''I believe he said he had never seen steroids and wouldn't know it if someone was taking them,'' Hooton said. ''Well, Coach, whose job is it to know? And it's that same attitude, the same silence, high school coaches are mimicking.
''Nobody knows anything. Nobody is tested. What else do people have left but speculation? Baseball has created its own McCarthyism.''
It isn't pretty. It isn't why we preoccupy ourselves with sports, but performance-enhancing drugs have apparently become as endemic to the game as money, all related to the score.
''Evidently, it's not going to go away,'' Yankees Manager Joe Torre said wearily of the steroid debate. Nor should it, for all of baseball deserves its place under the cloud of suspicion. They all maintained the silence, played dumb with the bottom-line owners and toed the shortsighted union line during baseball's decade of denial, and shame.
Sports of The Times
