PARSIPPANY-BASED SJP Properties, a 20-year-old company known for its high-end office developments, is ''adding another wing to the factory,'' in the words of its chairman and chief executive, Steven J. Pozycki. Despite the metaphor, SJP is not moving into industrial development; in fact, it is moving into residential.
SJP Residential Properties, a new arm of the company that will focus on building upscale rental apartments and condominiums, has just been established, and an executive has been recruited from the Applied Development Companies to run it.
''We want to diversify, and residential is the most creative way to go,'' Mr. Pozycki said. ''Certainly, we have the factory to do it.'' SJP's ''factory,'' he said, is made up of groups of veteran employees skilled at different tasks, like preplanning projects, securing approvals, financing, engineering, design and construction.
''We can produce,'' Mr. Pozycki said. ''We are just adding a new product to our line.''
The firm hired a longtime Applied Development executive, Allen F. Goldman, to run the new business. In his 13 years with Applied, Mr. Goldman developed a number of high-profile multifamily projects along the Hudson waterfront, including the Shipyard in Hoboken, Port Liberté in Jersey City, the Essex and Sussex in Spring Lake, Portside Towers in Jersey City and the Palisades in Fort Lee.
Mr. Goldman said he had decided to leave Applied, where the brothers David and Michael Barry have succeeded their father, Joseph Barry, who was indicted last fall on 16 charges of bribery, conspiracy and fraud, in a quest for more independence.
''Now I get to walk in and start working with all of SJP's existing in-house resources,'' Mr. Goldman said. ''Everyone will benefit from our combined knowledge base.''
Mr. Goldman said that he had entertained other offers and also considered starting up his own development firm, but that ''SJP has demonstrated its excellence with many different projects, and I've been given an opportunity to exploit that strength.''
SJP Residential will focus on developing rental and for-sale apartment buildings in New York City, Westchester, Long Island, Connecticut and New Jersey, Mr. Goldman said. SJP Properties will continue building offices within that same territory, Mr. Pozycki said.
''Certainly, the office market has been difficult for the last while,'' Mr. Pozycki said. ''The situation was exacerbated by mass layoffs, but we still managed to do all right. As the economy comes back and expands, so will we.''
THE SJP portfolio comprises more than 12 million square feet of office space with property that has the potential to be developed into an additional 6 million square feet of space.
Since the completion of its Waterfront Corporate Center in Hoboken last year, SJP has taken on projects for Lucent Technologies and Tiffany &amp; Company, Mr. Pozycki noted, and is working on plans for another as yet undisclosed project. SJP has frequently been involved in partnerships with the Newark-based Prudential Insurance on major projects -- and currently channels more of the insurance company's investment funds into real estate than any other company in the country, according to Mr. Pozycki.
Mr. Goldman said that in his experience, ''many people talk about what new things they want to do in residential development, but it doesn't often get delivered.'' He added: ''Steve Pozycki and SJP have really developed an outstanding reputation for being sensitive to the community, and for being mindful of the details -- satisfying what the market wants. I work the same way, and I think it's the way to be successful.''
The two executives said that real estate companies had been evolving over the years to take on a wider focus and that SJP's move was in line with that trend. ''Up until recently,'' Mr. Goldman said, ''there were office guys, retail-strip mall guys and residential guys in this business. Now, residential is usually created with some degree of retail, and sometimes office -- and developers need to have a more integrated approach.''
Mr. Goldman said SJP Residential was already exploring a variety of different types of projects, from a high-rise apartment building in Manhattan to a gated community in suburban New Jersey.
''Looking at the geographic area, it's large enough to take advantage of many different kinds of opportunity -- urban, infill, suburban, rental, for sale, ground-up or rehab,'' Mr. Goldman said. ''The characteristic that is going to be running through any of these that we do is that we are looking for the ultimate -- something that is exactly the right thing at the right time for a particular community.''
Mr. Pozycki says SJP's method is to assemble a development team for each of its own projects when they are still in the planning stages. The teams include architects, engineers, land-use attorneys and traffic planners. When working with other companies' projects, SJP provides an array of consulting services, with its personnel serving as contractors, project engineers and data specialists, and providing advice on such things as elevators and glass curtain walls for the exterior of a building.
''With about 100 people, we have one of the bigger in-house staffs,'' Mr. Pozycki said. ''That allows us to respond quickly, and precisely, to a particular building or town. It's sort of a Formula One team approach.''
Mr. Goldman said he was bringing a record of ''turnaround'' success to the SJP team, having successfully developed projects that had been abandoned by others.
THE last project Mr. Goldman developed with Applied, the Palisades, a 41-story, 538-unit apartment building with an adjacent 20 high-end rental town homes, recently sold for $222.5 million.
''That site lay fallow for nearly 30 years,'' Mr. Goldman said. ''It changed hands a number of times. Many looked at it and were unsure how to develop it because of its difficult site topography. There is a 190-foot elevation rise -- it's along the Palisades cliffs, immediately south of the George Washington Bridge. I came on the scene in '98, and said to myself, 'We could build the pre-eminent luxury building in New Jersey right here.' ''
Upon completion of the Palisades at the end of last year, it was sold to Crescent Heights, a Miami-based company that converts apartment buildings to condominiums.
With the Shipyard in Hoboken, Mr. Goldman said the big risk was taking on a ''brownfield'' site. At the point Applied began work on that apartment-tower project -- 1992 -- Hoboken's waterfront was still characterized by worn-out industrial buildings and seedy bars, Mr. Goldman recalled.
''A really strong developer sees opportunity where others don't,'' he said. ''You have to recognize the underlying strengths that can make a particular site a winner -- and then, of course, you have to make good on those.''
In the Region | New Jersey
