AT the start of Stephen King's new 13-part horror series, ''Kingdom Hospital,'' a character named Peter Richman, an artist living in Maine, is taking a quiet walk on a peaceful road near his home when, from out of nowhere, he is struck by a speeding van.
The event is a parallel to the devastating accident in 1999 that almost took Mr. King's life and left his body and his psyche shattered. Mr. King has been writing about the accident in various forms ever since, apparently in search of some kind of catharsis. If he is ever to find it, it may be in ''Kingdom Hospital,'' which, according to the show's executive producer, Mark Carliner, recreates every moment of Mr. King's frightening experience in exquisitely fine detail.
''This is frame for frame exactly what happened to Steve,'' Mr. Carliner said. The van is the same kind of Dodge camper that struck him (Mr. Carliner noted that Mr. King had himself bought -- and still owns -- that van, complete with broken windshield where it struck his head.) The driver character is a man with numerous personal problems who fights with his dog in the van, taking his eyes off the road just before the accident, exactly as was the case with the driver, Bryan Smith, who struck Mr. King.
Eerie is what Mr. King does, of course, as prolifically as any writer who ever lived, and he does plenty of that in ''Kingdom Hospital.'' (The show begins on ABC Thursday at 9 p.m and thereafter shifts to Wednesday nights at 10.) Its theme might have been borrowed from the Eagles' ''Hotel California'' -- you can check out any time you want, but you can never leave. This is a hospital in which people die and then linger in a nether world between life and death. ''It's great for actors,'' Mr. King said in a telephone interview from his home in Maine. ''Their characters don't die off, we just make them ghosts.''
For all of its resemblance to Mr. King's accident, ''Kingdom Hospital'' is actually an adaptation. He and Mr. Carliner first discovered the material while they were in Colorado making another film for ABC, a 1997 adaptation of one of Mr. King's most famous novels, ''The Shining.'' (Mr. King never especially liked the Stanley Kubrick film version.) The author spent a bored afternoon in a video store rummaging through bins of obscure titles and found a five-hour Danish television movie called ''Kingdom,'' written and directed by Lars von Trier.
Mr. King took the tapes back to his hotel room and was immediately captivated by what he watched. Seven years later, he has fused that material and the visceral experience of his accident into a work that he described as ''the thing I like best out of all the things I've done.'' That takes in an awful lot of territory, with a writer of so many books and previous original works for television.
But Mr. King said it in all seriousness, citing this as the first time he has written what amounts to a complete original novel for television -- 15 hours' worth -- and the first time he has adapted someone else's work rather than his own.
At the time they first stumbled on the material, Mr. King and Mr. Carliner tried to buy the rights to the Danish original, only to learn that Columbia Pictures had acquired them and intended to make a theatrical movie. It took five years of fruitless trying before Columbia concluded the work could not be adapted in two-hour form. In the meantime, Mr. King had his accident and the experience drew him all the more toward a story about dark doings in a hospital.
Mr. Carliner described Mr. King as so obsessed with the story that he started writing an adaptation even before the rights became available again. In fact, he was so eager for those rights that he made a deal for them. ''Columbia called my agents and said we'll give him 'Kingdom Hospital' if he's willing to trade something for it,''Mr. King said. ''It was like swapping marbles.'' Mr. King sold Columbia the rights to a novella from the 1990 book ''Four Past Midnight'' called ''Secret Window, Secret Garden.'' By chance, the film, which stars Johnny Depp, is scheduled for release not long after ''Kingdom Hospital'' goes on the air.
Mr. Carliner says the final work is much more King than Von Trier, with new layers of terrifying vision applied, as well as a roster of completely Americanized characters. One aspect Mr. King has retained from the original is its subtext of dark humor, with characters that snipe tartly at one another -- ''like people out of Noël Coward,'' in Mr. Carliner's description -- when they are not fending off menacing spirits from beyond life. He added that the claim made on the video cover of the original is apt: ''It's 'E.R.' on acid.''
Beyond the fright and the funny, Mr. King tried in ''Kingdom Hospital'' to push beyond his customary action-intense scenes toward more character-based drama, especially in scenes that involve his alter ego, Peter Richman. ''By the grace of God, what happens to him did not ultimately happen to me,'' Mr. King said. He said he found writing the moment that the character's wife learns how badly her husband was injured ''really wrenching for me.'' Mr. King said his wife had told him just a bit of what she went through that first day. ''It was hard for my wife to watch the scene,'' he said.
The character of the artist is unable to communicate in speech, just as Mr. King was, Mr. Carliner said. But he does communicate in drawings. The power of Mr. King's name enabled the production to induce the artist Jamie Wyeth, whose works often contain macabre images, to supply all the original drawings used in the show.
Mr. King conceded that the show would play on viewers' natural fears of hospitals. ''We're hoping to make that a lot worse,'' he said. The hospital in this show adds to its unpleasant ambience by being located on the site of a factory that suffered a devastation loss of life in a fire.
ABC has already designated ''Stephen King's Kingdom Hospital'' as a breakthrough in form for network television: a limited-run series that plays over consecutive weeks and comes back a year later and does the same thing. (HBO has made that kind of show its signature in everything from ''The Sopranos'' to ''The Wire.'')
Mr. King is already committed to write the story line, should ABC decide to continue the series next year. The network is hoping that Mr. King delivers them another hit, something he has done consistently for ABC over the past decade, most recently with ''Storm of the Century'' in 1999 and ''Rose Red'' in 2002.
But as to ABC's efforts to trumpet the series as some kind of breakthrough for the television form, Mr. King said, ''I think they're pulling your chain a bit there.'' In truth, he said, the notion of doing a short-run network series came about because that was the only way Mr. King would do it. It was he who saw the show as a network version of ''The Sopranos.'' ABC wanted him and Mr. Carliner to fashion ''Kingdom Hospital'' just like another drama series. ''They came to us and said do 22 episodes; we said no,'' Mr. King said.
''I am not a series TV person,'' he said. ''In series TV, it's beginning, then middle, middle, middle. Like the kid says in 'Stand by Me,' about television, 'They keep on ''Wagon Training.'' ' I just don't watch series television. 'E.R.' I have never watched. 'Friends' I have never watched. I don't say that with pride because that's really my culture. 'Seinfeld'? I've never seen an episode. It's always the same people doing the same things.''
TELEVISION  Correction:  March 3, 2004, Wednesday  An article in Arts &amp; Leisure on Sunday about the ABC series ''Stephen King's Kingdom Hospital'' misstated the premiere date. It is at 9 p.m. today, not tomorrow.
