SACRED TIME
By Ursula Hegi.
244 pp. New York:
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
URSULA HEGI'S nine previous books range over wide literary territory: novels, short-story collections, a children's book, nonfiction. Sometimes lyrical, sometimes matter-of-fact, she is a writer of clarity, precision and thoughtfulness, three qualities that make her work attractive to an equally varied readership, from serious devotees of small-circulation literary quarterlies to a broad popular audience. Hegi's fiction has sometimes been playful in form (her metafictional first novel features an author interacting with her characters) and often serious in content: three of her best-known books -- ''Floating in My Mother's Palm,'' ''Stones From the River'' and ''The Vision of Emma Blau'' -- explore guilt and responsibility in the lives of postwar Germans. German-born herself, Hegi conducted a series of interviews that were collected in ''Tearing the Silence: On Being German in America,'' an extended dialogue about the way shame festers when personal history is suppressed.
The twin clouds of shame and silence also hover over the lives of the characters in her latest novel, ''Sacred Time,'' which opens in the Bronx in 1953. Anthony Amedeo, who narrates this first section, is an only child who must share a bedroom in his family's cramped walk-up apartment with his twin cousins after their father is sent to prison for stealing on the job. Anthony is 7 years old: a key point, since 7 is the age of reason in the Roman Catholic Church, an institution that simultaneously sustains the members of the boy's family and keeps them in line. At 7, he is responsible for his sins.
Anthony speaks to us in an off-key register that readers should make an effort to push beyond. The voice here is neither a boy's nor a man's, and its awkward slippage between adult and childhood perceptions is strained. One of any novelist's greatest challenges is to eliminate the reader's disbelief, and I'm afraid I put up quite a lot of resistance at the beginning of Hegi's book -- not just because of Anthony's voice but because of the name-brand historical details (the movies playing at the Paradise, the varieties of soap and cigarettes in the Amedeo household) that have been so dutifully and relentlessly inserted into his story. And yet, despite the novel's eagerness to insist on its own authenticity, it succeeded in pulling me along: the dialogue is stripped down and funny; the family's problems are increasingly absorbing.
Anthony's parents and his aunt are given names from the world of opera, and the novel's inhabitants often emote at fever pitch. Certainly the first chapter's climactic scene -- when Anthony encourages his cousin Bianca, clothed in her Superman cape, to fly out the window into the night, where she thinks she hears her father's accordion -- is nothing if not operatic. It is also a scene we will never see in its entirety, so what actually happens when Bianca plunges to her death remains not just Anthony's secret from his family but the novel's secret from the reader. His ensuing silence and the silence of all his family members, who suspect him of pushing Bianca and yet cannot bear to believe it's possible, is devastating.
The novel (three of whose six chapters have been published in different form as short stories) lays out a pattern of puzzle pieces and a chorale of voices as the women of the family -- Anthony's mother, Leonora; his aunt, Floria; and his surviving cousin, Belinda -- carry the action through 50 years of avoiding the subject of what Anthony did to his cousin. These time-jumping chapters (which take place in 1955, 1975, 1979, 2001 and 2002) are as unassumingly self-assured as the opening chapter is strained: the grief, guilt and anger these women bear is, paradoxically, expressed in language that often seems to float above the page, its lightness of tone belying the weight of the characters' pain.
The women's own secrets are revealed in singular moments that are often sexual, and are rendered in such generous terms that readers may feel like guilt-free voyeurs. Leonora carries not only her suspicions about her son but the burden of her husband's infidelity. As if that weren't enough, there's also the memory of her brutal father's suicide. Floria, Bianca's mother, clings to her surviving daughter, Belinda, even though she knows she must loosen her hold. For her part, Belinda knows she must flee: eventually she shakes her parents, then her first marriage and finally her own suspicions.
The novel flies from New York to Italy and back, leaving out large chunks of time and family history but zeroing in on key rites of passage. Each one of these episodes is concerned with the same themes -- violence, passion, religious belief, psychological suppression -- and emerges with the message that none can be understood without the others.
Belinda goes so far as to marry an ex-priest, a character wholly original despite our expectations. Hegi has always been exceptionally good at releasing her characters from our preconceived notions about their roles, and that skill is continued here: little girls wear Superman capes; a Catholic priest's parents turn out to be staunch Unitarians.
These twists are so successfully integrated into the novel, their implied points made so gracefully, that it's jarring to encounter, every now and then, less adroitly handled elements like Leonora's overt (and not terribly effective) political commentary, which seems imposed on rather than integrated into the dialogue. The defense of the family's troubling secret, on the other hand, rises naturally from the various perspectives of its members and suggests a good deal, by implication, about the political secrets of the times and places they inhabit.
''Sacred Time'' becomes more structurally intricate and more satisfying as it progresses, enough to make a reader wish this were a longer, more lingering novel. In the penultimate chapter, Floria lies dying, and we hear the end of her story in an unexpected way, through a stream-of-consciousness narrative that is as clear and accessible as any of the straightforward accounts we have read up to this point.
Hegi pulls off the same undermining of expectation in the last chapter, delivering the narrative back to Anthony's emphatically adult voice. As he and his mother confront what has befallen them, and as they seek to define what responsibility each bears, the novel offers its own version of hope in the face of despair, of truth in a new era of secrecy and evasion.
Valerie Sayers, a professor of English at the University of Notre Dame, is the author of five novels.
