JOHN DePAOLI remembers how fires were once fought in northern Westchester. He remembers hanging onto the outside of the truck with the other volunteers as it raced to fires on cold nights, or the fire siren blasting during the day, calling the local men who fought the fires to run out of local businesses, still wearing their butcher aprons or barber smocks.
Mr. DePaoli joined the Croton Falls Volunteer Fire Department in 1956. Today he heads the Board of Fire Commissioners in town, so he is uncommonly qualified to cast an eye over the history and practice of firefighting then and now in the county, and to tell how it has changed.
As an indication of the current practices, he said, the department recently ordered a truck with a camera mounted on the back, so the driver can see the entire vehicle when he is backing up.
''If you told me that back in '56, I'd have laughed,'' Mr. DePaoli said. ''Now as commissioner, I approved it.''
The department is also looking into buying an aerial ladder, which once would have seemed ridiculous, but is now needed to battle fires in the three-story homes that have sprung up in North Salem, which the Croton Falls department protects.
Then there is the question about the department's two firehouses. The Croton Falls firehouse was built in the 1930's, and the ceiling is so low that it can house only custom-built trucks, made on an extra-low chassis. In contrast, the department plans to expand the North Salem station, built in 1970. It can house the bigger trucks, Mr. DePaoli said, but when the Fire Department holds a meeting there now, the volunteers have to drive the trucks outside so chairs can be set up in the garage because when the trucks are inside, there's no room for people.
The challenges facing Croton Falls are mirrored in firefighting forces throughout Westchester, and indeed, throughout the country. Firehouses are aging at a time when fire equipment is growing. Fire trucks, for instance, have grown far wider and longer, now that federal safety standards prohibit firefighters from hanging onto the outside of a rig, requiring instead that they sit inside the cab.
Firefighters also carry far more equipment than they once did. To rescue people trapped in cars, for instance, crowbars and hand saws have been replaced with the hydraulic jaws of life device and electronic saws that take hydraulic pumps and generators, adding to the truck's load.
The old base of volunteers, which served well for decades, has also shifted decisively. The volunteers who once worked at mom-and-pop businesses and worked shifts at local factories are scarce. In their place, to a large extent, are commuters, who spend little time in their own communities during the day. Those who grew up and want to stay in their hometowns often can not afford to live there. And despite the good will engendered toward firefighters after Sept. 11, 2001, departments that want to expand face tough questions from taxpayers. Some criticize expansion plans as extravagant, and liken volunteer fire departments to tax-supported social clubs.
Last week, voters passed a $1.5 million bond referendum for the Croton Falls Fire Department to pay for its expansion. It joins nearly a dozen volunteer fire departments in the county that have asked residents to upgrade their structures over the last few years. The votes have met with mixed results. Some communities, like Armonk, are building new large fire stations. Others, like Yorktown, rejected three different bonds. North White Plains has twice voted down proposals to upgrade a 1928 firehouse.
Westchester's fire protection is provided by 58 departments, a patchwork of career (fully paid) forces, volunteer forces and forces that combine the two. Five cities in the county -- Yonkers, Mount Vernon, New Rochelle and White Plains -- have paid departments, said Anthony W. Sutton, commissioner of the Department of Emergency Services. Fourteen departments maintain a core of paid firefighters, supplemented by volunteers. These include Port Chester, Rye, Pelham, Larchmont, Mohegan Lake and Mamaroneck. Departments in upper Westchester tend to be fully volunteer.
HISTORICALLY, there has been tension between paid and volunteer firefighters. Volunteer firefighters defend their role, pointing to the money they save municipalities, and to the concept of protecting their communities as a tradition handed down from father to son. (There are female volunteer firefighters, but they remain a small minority; though the ranks of women volunteering for the Emergency Medical Service continue to grow.) Career firefighters question the quality of the volunteers' training and commitment, and also charge that volunteers are blocking the way for the creation of more union jobs.
But volunteers are now caught between expanding needs and diminishing resources. Firefighting has changed significantly over the years, and many departments are now feeling the strains in money, manpower, equipment and buildings, as well as the art of fighting blazes.
John F. Heimerdinger, chairman of the Board of Fire Commissioners in North Castle, where an all-volunteer force protects the district, remembers battling blazes in Armonk in the late 1950's.
''In those days, it was pretty much a 'surround and drown' if you had any water at all,'' he said. ''Nobody did any aggressive interior fighting, because no one had breathing equipment to go into a fire.''
Firefighters are now equipped with air masks and air tanks and protective heat shielding gear, which allows them to enter burning buildings. But Mr. Heimerdinger said firefighters now must cope with toxic materials used in contemporary buildings. Plastics, nylons and foam rubbers burn quickly, and new lightweight construction materials present different hazards, particularly on roofs. Moreover, there are more houses, and they are bigger than ever.
''In the old days, our houses here used to be three bedrooms and two-and-a-half baths, maybe 2,400 square feet,'' he said. ''Now you have these 8,000-square-foot houses, and they're huge fire loads.''
The North Castle fire district presented voters with a $7.9 million proposal for a new firehouse in December 2001, after the World Trade Center attacks. Mr. Heimerdinger believes that public sentiment toward firefighters then helped pass the project. The new Armonk firehouse, which is being built on Route 22, will sit on a little more than 3.5 acres and will be roughly 27,000 square feet. Mr. Heimerdinger said that the old firehouse, which is in the village of Armonk, was crowded and violated building codes. It also had no changing areas for women.
But the new firehouse has its foes. Not surprisingly, neighbors object to its location and the noise and traffic it will bring. There has also been criticism about its size and the amenities it provides to Armonk's 55 volunteers, only 25 of whom are active. The new firehouse will have an exercise room and a gym, as well as a social room and a kitchen.
Bill Carlino, who lives nearby, compared the new space both to a Wal-Mart and the Taj Mahal. ''I shudder to think what this is going to do to the tax base a few years down the road,'' he said. ''It seems like every time Armonk residents are turning around, there's some referendum. There are two in March, for a recreation center and a school bond. For years nobody's asked a lot of questions but now people are starting to ask what's going on. I certainly want a good fire department for my neighborhood, but then again, enough is enough.''
THE Ossining Fire Department faces the same debate. The all-volunteer department has nine companies in seven fire stations. Construction is under way on a 16,000-square-foot building on State Street, which will house the Senate Hook and Ladder Company and the Fire-Police Emergency Squad and will be the Fire Department's headquarters. Currently, the headquarters is in a trailer on a construction site, and the Senate Hook and Ladder Company shares the Main Street firehouse, built in 1888, with the Ossining Steamer Company.
''We just received a new truck that doesn't fit into the firehouse,'' said Don Farrell, Ossining's fire chief. ''And the older buildings just don't hold the weight. The Steamer's company room was under the Senate Hook and Ladder, and when their truck would back in, it would back in on top of Steamer's kitchen, and you would think there was a train coming through the building.''
The controversy in Ossining concerns the Fire Department's proposal to build another firehouse, on Hawkes Avenue. Chief Farrell argues that the new station is necessary to improve response times to the fastest growing sections of town. But residents in the area are fiercely contesting the proposal on several grounds. First, they object to putting a firehouse in a residential zone, and oppose any zoning changes to allow it. There are questions about possible soil contamination on the chosen site. Most of all, they argue that the station is unnecessary and that Ossining has adequate fire protection.
''They have not demonstrated a need and they have been unwilling to provide me or any of my neighbors with data on their response time over the last few years,'' said Mark Schultz, who lives near the proposed site. Chief Farrell acknowledged that the department's response times were ''excellent'' but said that they would be improved even more with the new station.
Residents who successfully fought the new firehouse in Yorktown argued that it was unnecessary, and rejected a plan to build a $1.4 million firehouse (a scaled-back proposal that followed the defeat of an earlier bond for $2 million). Residents charged that the district had not seriously considered less costly alternatives, like sharing resources with neighboring Millwood.
The Millwood fire district, in its turn, wants a new firehouse and is embroiled in a dispute over the use of eminent domain to take over the site of a lumber company.
Some people have found that opposing a fire department can be an unpleasant fight, akin to fighting motherhood and apple pie. Voting against the wishes of neighbors who get up in the night to run into burning buildings is not for the faint-hearted, and some times the counterattacks get personal.
''At the hearing people were claiming that it was my desire for babies to burn in their beds,'' Mr. Schultz said. ''When I was asking about specific sites or for data, the response was personal or illogical, and 'don't you think firefighters are wonderful people?'''
At the same time that they face increasing resistance from tax-burdened residents, many volunteer forces are experiencing difficulty in recruiting new members. Though some departments saw a small spike in volunteers after the terrorist attacks in 2001, the gains have not been significant, many fire chiefs said. They do not compensate for rising housing prices, which have forced blue-collar workers -- the traditional base of volunteers -- out of their hometowns. ''Our biggest problem is getting people,'' said John R. Soloman, fire commissioner in North White Plains. ''People just can't afford to live here anymore. We get the younger ones, when they're between 18 and 22 and living at home and going to school. But once you graduate from college and get out on your own, you know what the rents are in Westchester County. They are getting priced out of being able to live here.''
Many of the professionals who have moved in have neither the time for nor the interest in fighting fires. ''The old volunteer fire department was really neighbor helping neighbor and now there's very little of that left anymore,'' said Mr. Heimerdinger of Armonk. Indeed, Mr. DePaoli, of Croton Falls, said that he was often asked where the firefighters slept, by residents who didn't realize that their fire protection was given by neighbors who leap out of their own beds at night.
The county is exploring legislation that would give a tax break to volunteer firefighters and emergency medical workers who have served at least five years in communities where there is no paid fire department or ambulance corps. But the estimated assessment reduction would be worth only about $10 to $12 a year, said Michael B. Kaplowitz, chairman of the Board of Legislators' Budget Committee. Some municipalities also offer a tax break to volunteers.
''I don't pretend that this exemption will be the compelling force to keep our volunteers in our communities,'' Mr. Kaplowitz said, ''but it sends the right message that we respect their efforts.''
Mr. Sutton, the emergency services commissioner, said that it was difficult to predict how the county would address the manpower shortage, but that options included ''automatic dual dispatch'' for certain types of alarms and more mutual aid among departments. They may opt to have their neighbors dispatched at the same time, he said, to provide specific equipment -- when theirs is out of service -- to cover alarms at, for example, hospitals or nursing homes.
''It's not easy work, especially when you get up from a dinner table or you're called out on Christmas Eve to spend time away from your family to protect your neighbor's property,'' he said. ''It takes a certain amount of dedication.''
It's a Long Way From Bucket Brigades
LONG before there were organized fire departments, Westchester residents were fighting fires. As villages and towns developed here, the combination of wooden houses and barns built in close proximity and the extensive use of open hearths, kerosene lamps and candles created a constant threat of fire. In the event of an outbreak, neighbors would scramble to help one another. Villagers would form bucket brigades, in which a human chain was formed between the fire and the nearest water source -- usually a river, lake or well -- and buckets would be quickly passed down the line to try to contain the blaze.
In his senior thesis for Manhattanville College, ''Westchester's Bravest: the History of Fire Departments in Westchester County, New York,'' Christopher Marinaro traces the gradual establishment of organized fire protection in the area. (His paper was published in 2000 by the Westchester Historian.)
In 1812, the village of Sing Sing (now Ossining) formed the first fire department in the county. Mr. Marinaro cited one source that suggests that the pioneering volunteers in Sing Sing were more motivated to avoid military service then they were to protect their neighbors' property, because firefighters were exempted from fighting in the War of 1812.
In any case, they staked their place in Westchester's history when they bought a used hand pumper from New York City and housed it in a shed. Gradually, other hamlets followed suit. In 1852, a Yonkers businessman, Robert P. Getty, bought a pumper for the town at his own expense. Katonah established a fire department in 1874, after a fire broke out in a hotel and spread through the business district, causing enormous damage.
Firefighting has never been easy, but for the early volunteers, it was particularly challenging, Mr. Marinaro writes. Many fire departments were established before automobiles were invented, so firefighters had to pull their equipment to the site of the blaze, often over rough dirt roads. (Others were lucky enough to have horse teams.) Firefighters often arrived at the fire exhausted from their running, worn out before they had even begun to battle the blaze. They protected themselves from smoke inhalation by tying wet handkerchiefs around their noses and mouths.
Mr. Marinaro writes that the original method of sounding a fire alarm was simply someone running through the streets shouting, ''Fire!'' The first fire bells were tire irons hung near a firehouse. Whoever was nearby would strike it to make a loud, clanging noise. Eventually bells replaced the tire irons, which in turn were replaced by steam whistles.
The Bedford Hills Fire Department installed its steam whistle in 1923. Larger communities, like Yonkers and New Rochelle, began to install fire boxes around the cities. To prevent false alarms, keys were entrusted to responsible citizens, Mr. Marinaro writes. In 1945, Tarrytown had the first fire department in the county to use two-way radios. In the 1980's, pagers came into widespread use. Now, 911 calls are routed to a fire control station in Valhalla.
Westchester's fire departments have not been immune to political infighting. Mr. Marinaro writes that early on, there was feuding between fire companies and competition to see who would reach a fire first. Yonkers was the first city in the county to make the transition to a paid department, he writes. In 1896, Yonkers hired six men to staff a chemical wagon and one of the department's ladder trucks.
In more recent history, the first female firefighter was hired in Pound Ridge in 1978. In 1980, a civil rights lawsuit was filed by the Vulcan Society, an organization of black firefighters, and by the federal government, accusing Westchester's four major cities, Yonkers, White Plains, New Rochelle and Mount Vernon, of not having enough minority representation in the ranks of the fire department. New Rochelle, Mount Vernon and White Plains reached a settlement in 1981, in which they agreed to ''increase employment opportunities for blacks, Hispanics and women'' and to ''the goal of a firefighter force in each city, which reflects no less than the proportion of blacks and Hispanics between the ages of 18 and 44 in the civil labor force.'' The City of Yonkers settled six months later under similar terms.
Kate Stone Lombardi
Correction:  March 7, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about changes in firefighting referred incorrectly to the new firehouse that is being built in Armonk. It will have a room with exercise equipment, not an exercise room and a gym. The article also misstated the number of volunteers in the Armonk department. There are 59 active ones, not a total roster of 55, with 25 who are active.
