STEVEN SPIELBERG long ago made a name for himself courtesy of a marauding great white shark in the 1975 blockbuster movie ''Jaws,'' but he may be wading into truly menacing waters with ''Shark Tale,'' an animated film scheduled for release in October.
The movie, about a little fish with big dreams, features underwater crime figures -- sharks, killer whales and hammerheads -- with Italian last names and dialogue that uses Italian expressions. Some Italian-American organizations, spurred by a group based in New Jersey, are not happy with Mr. Spielberg and his associates, to say the least.
''The prevailing message is negative and they have to be held out to dry for it,'' Representative Bill Pascrell Jr., a Democrat from Paterson and a second-generation Italian, said in a telephone interview. ''I'm a very proud Italian-American. When you stereotype me, it's like making fun of my grandparents.''
In fact, not since the debut of the TV show ''The Sopranos'' have Italian-American organizations been so galvanized behind a single issue.
They maintain that ''Shark Tale,'' produced by Mr. Spielberg's studio, DreamWorks, will perpetuate Mafia stereotypes with an impressionable audience -- young children. They want the shark characters ''de-Italianized.'' A letter-writing campaign has been under way, and Representative Pascrell joined the effort with letters to Mr. Spielberg and Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America.
''We were very concerned about this type of stereotyping being passed on to another generation of children,'' Dona De Sanctis, deputy executive director of the Order Sons of Italy, said. In a news release, she said that the plot of the film ''sounds like Nemo meets Don Corleone.'''
The protest is coordinated by the New Jersey group, the Italian-American One Voice Coalition, a national network of groups that protest defamation and negative stereotyping of Italian-Americans in all media -- from the large and the small screen to radio, commercials, games, magazines and newspapers.
The coalition was founded in 1993. ''Italian-Americans are mad as hell and we're not going to take it any more,'' Manny Alfano, the chairman of the group, said back then at the coalition's first demonstration, at WWOR-TV in Secaucus.
Mr. Alfano is a mild-mannered semiretired chiropractor and teacher who works out of his home in Bloomfield. He says he keeps tabs on negative media portrayals and sends out daily e-mail messages providing names and addresses of companies, advertisers or radio or TV stations at issue to 20 Italian-American organizations -- including UNICO National (Mr. Alfano is also chairman of its Anti-Bias Committee), the Order Sons of Italy in America (with its Commission for Social Justice) and the National Italian American Foundation -- and 500 individuals.
Mr. Alfano, 67, cheerfully acknowledges that he is virtually ''computer illiterate'' and still accesses the Internet with a dial-up connection. ''My wife screams at me I'm on 24/7,'' he said with a laugh.
He says his entry into the anti-defamation arena started when he taught at an elementary school in Newark in the 1960's and was called upon to use a new curriculum in black history.
''I said, 'What a terrible thing that this part of history is not in our history book - what African-Americans did.' And along came the movie 'Roots.' And that made me think about what happened to Italian-Americans. We don't even know our own history.''
Forty years later, he sees his largest success as the unity achieved in the effort to encourage more balanced representation of Italian-Americans.
''One Voice doesn't have membership money,'' Mr. Alfano said. ''We don't have the ink, we don't have the mike, we don't have the screen. The biggest effect we've had is to get all the Italian-American organizations to work together.''
Indeed, John Marino, manager of research and cultural affairs at the National Italian American Foundation, says the three largest groups, including his own as well as the Sons of Italy and UNICO National, have had unparalleled unity recently.
''The Italian-American community is a very conflicted community,'' he said. ''They're not a monolithic community. Some people don't think stereotyping is a big issue. Some people think it's the whole world. Some think Italian-Americans are very assimilated -- we're beyond the whole idea of 'The Sopranos,' and 'The Godfather' doesn't bother us. 'That's just entertainment,' they'll say. Other people, it infuriates. Manny Alfano has really tapped into that.''
William J. Connell, a professor of history who holds the Joseph M. and Geraldine C. La Motta Chair in Italian Studies at Seton Hall University, said of Mr. Alfano: ''A history needs to be written of anti-defamation, and Manny would make for an excellent chapter in the history of Italian anti-defamation. He's discovered the Internet for this issue. He's done with his little Web site and his e-mail addresses what Howard Dean did later. It's the case of the little guy seeing an opening.''
The release of ''Shark Tale,'' which will feature the voices of Will Smith and Robert De Niro, has spurred the three big Italian-American organizations to form Carres (the Coalition Against Racial, Religious and Ethnic Stereotyping), encompassing 25 ethnic groups, including the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee and the Polish American Congress.
Carres represents three-quarters of a million people, Ms. De Sanctis estimates, and has petitioned Mr. Spielberg to ''remove all Italian connotations from this movie'' and to make the characters in the film ''generic bad guys that do not reinforce the stereotype of Italian-Americans as violent gangsters.''
Mr. Pascrell, the congressman, said he had spoken recently with Andy Spahn, the director of corporate communications at DreamWorks.
''I felt that at least they're open to change,'' Mr. Pascrell said. ''They saw the storm on the horizon and they went back and looked at it.''
For his part, Mr. Spahn said in a telephone interview that some Italian-American reactions to the film were ''somewhat of a rush to judgment.'' The movie is still a work in progress, he said, and many changes have been made in the last year. One Italian character, Don Brizzi, for example, has been eliminated.
Mr. Spahn maintains that ''Shark Tale'' has many ''positive, redeeming messages'' delivered by way of diverse characters -- Italian-American, Jewish Americans, Irish-Americans and even Rastafarians -- playing both villains and heroes.
''If anything, it parodies or pokes fun of prior depictions and stereotypes, much the way that 'Shrek' poked fun at fairy tales,'' said.
To which Mr. Marino asked rhetorically, ''So, they're equal opportunity offenders?''
Similarly, Ms. De Sanctis was not placated: ''We have been told: 'Come on, where is your sense of humor? It's only a movie. You have to give the viewing public more credit. They can separate fantasy from fact.' But our research shows that they cannot.''
She cited a Zogby International poll in which 78 percent of American teenagers questioned ''associate Italians with blue-collar jobs or the mob.'' This, despite the 2000 census finding that 67 percent of Italian-Americans work in white-collar jobs. She also cited a 1991 national survey sponsored by the Sons of Italy's Commission for Social Justice and conducted by the Response Analysis Corporation that found that 74 percent of all Americans believe that most Italian-Americans are in some way associated with organized crime.
Are Italian-Americans fighting a losing battle with the entertainment industry?
''If you can find five positive depictions of Italian-Americans in American films, it's a miracle,'' Ben Lawton, chairman of film studies at Purdue University, said in a phone interview. ''Virtually every other ethnic group has succeeded in making the media establishment sensitive to their unhappiness. Italian-Americans continue to not be able to do so.''
In a letter to Mr. Spielberg protesting ''Shark Tale,'' Mr. Lawton wrote: ''The construction of the image of Italian-Americans as mob characters, beats, boors, bimbos and buffoons is predicated on their depiction in movies and television. This depiction began in the 1930's with 'Little Caesar' and 'Scarface' and continues to this day.''
Among Italian-Americans, another recent uproar is over the PBS series ''The Medicis: Godfathers of the Renaissance,'' which the Sons of Italy called ''tasteless.'' Mr. Alfano said, ''We were all offended by the way they packaged the program,'' citing a PBS Web site with features on ''how to be a Medieval mobster,'' rap sheets on the Medici mobsters and a list of their ''hits'' and ''capos.''
Stephanie Aaronson, a PBS spokeswoman, said that ''the Medici series provided an accessible, accurate look at the Medici and the Renaissance'' and was produced ''in collaboration with top academics'' in the field.
Yet as Professor Connell wrote in an opinion article for The Trenton Times, ''Since the Mafia did not exist in the 15th and 16th centuries, it is hard to escape the conclusion that the label appears here only because the Medici were Italian.''
He said attempts to tap into the profitable folklore surrounding Italian-American mobsters had even invaded educational programming on PBS, referring to the PBS Kids series ''Arthur,'' which featured a sketch that involved a mob called ''The Altos.''
Over the years the One Voice coalition has taken to task many media outlets and corporations -- among them AT&amp;T Broadband, Red Lobster and the radio station WNEW -- and has pressured sponsors to pull ads because of comments or ads that the coalition deemed offensive. In December, the Sons of Italy and other groups successfully petitioned Coca-Cola to retire the short film ''Mafia Movie Madness,'' which had won the 2003 Coca-Cola Refreshing Filmmaker Award for young filmmakers. The short had been shown before the main feature in movie theaters around the nation. Three movie chains also agreed to stop showing it.
''I'm not a member of One Voice,'' Professor Connell said. ''I'm not Italian American, but I love Italian history. I care about it being done right, about it being accurate.''
Other academics and academic institutions seem to be on the same wavelength.
A book to be published in May, ''Hollywood Italians: Dagos, Palookas, Romeos, Wise Guys and Sopranos,'' by Peter Bondanella, a professor of comparative literature and Italian at Indiana University, concerns the portrayal of Italians and Italian-Americans in American cinema.
On April 22, Montclair State University plans a panel discussion, ''Deconstructing the Sopranos: Representations of Crime, Class and Culture.''
The university's new Joseph and Elda Coccia Institute for the Italian Experience in America will sponsor a speech by Fred Gardaphe, a professor from the State University of New York at Stony Brook, on Italian-Americans in the media.
And Seton Hall has scheduled a conference for Dec. 4 on ''Real Stories: Defamation and Discrimination in the History of Italian America,'' sponsored by the Charles and Joan Alberto Italian Studies Institute.
