Watching Allen Iverson play is the equivalent of watching a pinball bounce around. Iverson, as fearless as they come, drives to the basket continually, colliding with larger opponents and tumbling to the floor.
The benefit is that Iverson, who averages 9.7 free-throw attempts a game, gets to the foul line more than anyone else in the N.B.A. except Shaquille O'Neal (10.97 a game). The detriment is that his 6-foot, 165-pound frame takes a severe beating.
Many around the league have wondered how long Iverson could withstand the pounding that comes with his courageous style. Now in his eighth season, he may finally be showing signs of wear and tear.
Iverson has missed 17 of 59 games because of injury this season, his most up to this point in a season. Two years ago, he missed a career-high 22 games over the entire season. Iverson, who will turn 29 in June, has been sidelined this season by a bruised right knee, a sprained finger and an injured right shoulder. He missed last night's game, his third straight, with a shoulder injury.
The same durability concerns dogged Michael Jordan early in his career, and the 6-6, 215-pound Jordan adjusted, relying more on his outside shot as he got older. Not everyone believes Iverson is capable of changing his game because he is not a great outside shooter. Much of his success is based on beating his defender to the basket to score, get fouled or draw two or three defenders.
''I think it's part of his game, to be aggressive,'' said Randy Ayers, who was fired as Philadelphia's coach earlier this month. ''If he stops being aggressive, it won't be the same Allen that we're used to seeing. I don't see him playing any other way. I think he bails people out when he shoots jump shots. He's got to continue to attack the basket when it's there.''
Iverson, whose game has shown no signs of decline, has often defied those who believe he is a one-dimensional scorer by displaying true point-guard skills in All-Star Games and on the United States national team. Billy King, the 76ers' president and general manager, said Iverson could return to playing point guard, which might cut down on his bumps and bruises. His assist average (6.6) is the highest since his rookie season, when he averaged 7.5 a game while playing point guard exclusively.
''This year, he's played more point guard than in the seven years I've been here,'' King said. ''He's talked about that -- that he may at some point have to play point guard. Early in the year, when he was playing at his best, he was playing a lot of point guard. I think he's transitioned toward that direction.''
Before the trading deadline Feb. 19, there was talk that Philadelphia would trade Iverson. But King disputed that notion.
''I hate to blame the media, but that was driven by everybody else and not by us,'' King said. ''Trading Allen was not brought up or talked about before the deadline. And I'm not going into the summer saying, 'I've got to get rid of Allen Iverson.' ''
There are a few reasons Iverson may remain in Philadelphia. First, despite his superstar status, his terrible practice habits make him hard to coach and his style of play makes him hard to build around. Rather than fit into a system, some executives say Iverson must have a system fit around him. So getting equal value for him is almost out of the question.
Second, for all the drama that comes with Iverson, he packs an arena as only a handful of players can. In trading Iverson, the 76ers would have to get not only a superstar in return, but also a dynamic superstar, one who could match Iverson's combination of street credibility and flair.
Word around the league is that rather than trade Iverson, the 76ers will try to bring in Maurice Cheeks, the former Sixers star and assistant coach, to relate to him. Cheeks is Portland's coach and the question is, will the Trail Blazers let him out of his contract? While Portland denied Philadelphia permission to speak to Cheeks last summer, a new management group is running the team now.
Van Horn Trade Could Haunt Knicks
Fans at Madison Square Garden, where an absent Keith Van Horn has become a cult hero, are not the only ones thinking that the trigger-happy Knicks president, Isiah Thomas, may have made one trade too many. Several executives said that trading Van Horn and Michael Doleac in the deal for Tim Thomas and Nazr Mohammed could haunt the Knicks.
No official would speak for attribution, but the common sentiment is that to maximize Stephon Marbury's abilities, a team must put good outside shooters around him. The Knicks have no one fitting that description other than the injured Allan Houston. So the pick-and-pop that Marbury ran so well with Van Horn and Doleac has become useless. Also, with no outside shooters to spread the floor, defenses are packing the paint and forcing the Knicks to hoist jumpers. And, Van Horn is a far better rebounder than Thomas.
Two league officials said Isiah Thomas was seduced by Tim Thomas's athleticism. Thomas looked brilliant in scoring 33 against Sacramento, but few around the league believe he will play any more consistently than he did in Milwaukee, where he exasperated team officials with his failure to reach his potential. The book on him is that he does not have the willpower to bring his best game every night.
Finally, Isiah Thomas should have questioned why Milwaukee was so eager to part with Tim Thomas when the team was playing so well. Clubs that are greatly exceeding expectations usually do not like to disrupt chemistry.
While it is too early to judge the trade, the move may have transformed the Knicks from a second-round playoff team with a puncher's chance of upsetting Detroit, Indiana or the Nets into one that is just happy to reach the postseason.
Wade Earns Share of Rookie Spotlight
For months it has been a foregone conclusion that either LeBron James or Carmelo Anthony will win the rookie of the year award or that they will share it. But Miami's Dwyane Wade may ruin the storybook ending. Though not as ballyhooed as James and Anthony, the two 19-year-olds, Wade, 22, is playing just as well.
Last week, Wade, a 6-4 guard, became the first rookie this season to be named player of the week. In leading the surging Heat to a 3-0 record, Wade averaged 27 points, 4.3 rebounds and 3.0 assists to win the Eastern Conference player of the week award.
As James has done in Cleveland, Wade has pushed Miami into the Eastern Conference's playoff race. While a month ago it looked as if Anthony would be the only member of the class's big three rookies to reach the playoffs, Anthony could now watch from the outside as James and Wade compete in the postseason.
In his 23 games since Dec. 9, Wade has averaged 19.3 points and led Miami to a 14-9 record. How important has he been to the Heat's success? In the 16 games he missed since that date, the Heat went 6-10.
Over all, Wade is averaging 17 points, 4.3 assists and 4.4 rebounds. His numbers are not as strong as those of James (20.4, 5.7, 5.7) and Anthony (20.2, 6.3, 2.7), but Wade has a far better shooting percentage. His 47.4 percent clip dwarfs those of James (40.8) and Anthony (42.8).
How about three rookies of the year?
Trail Blazers Turn Around
What began as a nightmarish season in Portland is turning into something potentially special. Oddly enough, the turnaround started with the Blazers' acquisition of Darius Miles. Miles, a fourth-year forward who entered the league out of high school, was a bust in Cleveland. Belief in his ability had dwindled all over the league.
But he has been rejuvenated in Portland, helping the Blazers win 12 of 18 games since his acquisition. Starting in 16 of those contests, Miles has averaged 11.7 points and 4.1 rebounds with 53 percent shooting. In Cleveland, he was averaging 8.9 points while shooting 43 percent.
Then the Blazers bolstered their defense by obtaining Shareef Abdur-Rahim and Theo Ratliff in the trade for Rasheed Wallace. Ratliff, the league's top shot blocker, has rejected more than four shots a game for the Blazers, and Abdur-Rahim recently replaced Miles in the starting lineup.
Portland's five-game winning streak ended Friday, and the Blazers are two and a half games behind Denver for the West's eighth and final playoff spot.
INSIDE THE N.B.A.
