WE were part of the exodus: the young working families battered by the triple whammy of high home prices, property taxes and child care costs in leafy Westchester. We moved to Putnam in the 1990's, the decade when this tiny reservoir-sodden county became the fastest growing in the state. (It is now surpassed by Dutchess and counties even farther afield with even more horrendous commuting times.)
For years, I regretted the move. Too far from work. Too far from New York City fun. Too few sidewalks. Our schools don't send six graduates a year to Yale, as Chappaqua did last year. They aren't ranked among the best in the nation by Newsweek, as Edgemont and many other Westchester districts were last spring.
My husband and I debated the move endlessly. We could move to a smaller, older house (much, much smaller, much worse condition) in Westchester and then struggle to make the payments by eliminating the music lessons, dance lessons and skiing lessons. We could leave the region, and our families, altogether. Houses in Ohio are cheap. I could return to work full time, rather than keeping my preference: part-time writer, full-time mother.
In the end, we decided we had made the right choice, even if it seemed that it was more happenstance than choice. And over time we were seduced by Putnam's charms (beyond its affordability). The open space. The wildlife. The decent neighbors. The relief from hypercompetitive child-rearing. During the years, Putnam changed as well. We now have movie theaters, skating rinks, shopping, rigorous offerings in schools and million-dollar houses.
But I'm finally glad to say that any lingering Westchester envy we felt was dispelled this month by two events that occurred almost simultaneously.
First, in a late-night last-minute attempt to fill a budget gap, Westchester County raised its property tax levy by nearly 19 percent, which will raise some communities' taxes by even more than that. When I reported the story for this newspaper, I got to write it as just a sympathetic observer. I understand the ''yikes we're barely making it now'' kind of panic that residents of Cortlandt, New Rochelle or one of the other ''affordable'' communities expressed when told to expect a whopping increase.
Instead of lamenting the Pelham colonials and Hastings-on-Hudson ranches we rejected six or seven years ago because their taxes then were $9,000 a year (what would they be now?), we pay our tidy $5,500-a-year taxes and are grateful that Putnam is not Westchester.
The other event that made us finally surrender to the joys of country life is that we learned to tap our maple trees. On Valentine's Day, we went to a demonstration at Ward Pound Ridge Reservation and learned how to make maple syrup, from a man in plaid and britches who called himself ''the Sugarmeister.'' What he lacked in sartorial judgment, he made up for in rugged outdoor enthusiasm. We were so taken by his ''Little House on the Prairie'' know-how that we bought some taps and some heavy-duty plastic collection bags.
Now that the weather is warming and the sap is flowing clear and barely sweet, our backyard has become a science project for the whole family. We finally see what possibilities nature holds.
We're building bluebird houses, to try to persuade a couple of the bluebirds that flock to the cedars in our yard in the winter to stay a while.
My husband plans to raise bees.
I can't wait for spring, when the troublesome cottonwood trees that ring our yard go into bloom. The seeds of the cottonwood, for the uninitiated, are carried in a kind of white, fuzzy cotton matting. In May, our yard looks like a snow globe, with the cottonwood seeds whirling about in the wind. They cover our grass in a layer so thick, you could shovel it. I've always thought of it as an annoyance. But now I hear you can make paper from it, and in my new pioneer spirit, I think I'll try.
Someday, when my family is grown and the college bills are paid, we may be able to afford to live anywhere we choose. I'm sure there will be great pleasure in that.
For now, there is great pleasure in discovering the unexpected and making a life out of it. A life we can afford.
COUNTY LINES
