THE new wave of corporate fraud trials was supposed to be about systemic problems with the way American companies are run. The trials were supposed to be about the collapse of accounting standards and the way huge stock option grants can corrupt executives.
Instead prosecutors have spent a lot of courtroom time talking about perks and obstruction of justice -- about floral arrangements and hotel bills run up by the indicted executives, as well as whether they lied to prosecutors or federal investigators.
In the trial of L. Dennis Kozlowski, the former chairman of Tyco International who is accused of looting his company, prosecutors have repeatedly presented evidence of perks received by the defendant, even when the benefits seem only tangentially related to the charges at hand.
The trial of John J. Rigas, the founder of Adelphia Communications, and his sons Timothy and Michael, which began last week, appears set to follow a similar tack. Prosecutors are preparing to present evidence about safari vacations and a $13 million golf course allegedly paid for out of corporate funds.
Meanwhile, federal prosecutors investigating Computer Associates, the Long Island software giant, have focused on alleged lies that executives told to prosecutors, not the accounting chicanery that Computer Associates allegedly used to inflate its profits.
Prosecutors have good tactical reasons for making these trials more about executive greed or obstruction of justice than about accounting or securities fraud, securities lawyers say. White-collar crime cases are often difficult to prove, as prosecutors learned again Friday when the judge in the Martha Stewart case dismissed a securities fraud charge against Ms. Stewart that was at the core of the indictment against her.
So prosecutors look for every possible way to simplify the cases for jurors -- and to make defendants look bad.
Evidence of defendants' lavish lifestyles is often used to provide a motive for fraud. Jurors sometimes wonder why an executive making tens of millions of dollars would cheat to make even more. Evidence of habitual gluttony helps provide the answer.
''You're trying to make the case that this individual is greedy, should not be viewed as credible, is only out for himself,'' said Joel Seligman, dean of the Washington University School of Law. ''It does have a kind of relevance.''
But prosecutors have other reasons for introducing evidence of extravagant spending. Because the details of the fraud charges can be so difficult to understand, jurors' decisions may ultimately turn on their personal impressions of the indicted executives.
''It's a lot more interesting to show the tape of Jimmy Buffett playing in the background and people walking around nude and drunk than to show the dry accounting evidence,'' said James Cox, a professor of corporate and securities law at Duke University, in reference to a videotape played by prosecutors in the Tyco trial about a birthday party for Mr. Kozlowski's wife, Karen. Tyco paid $1 million, about half the cost, for the party.
''The trial is partly about what the rules are, but a lot about what the defendant is,'' Mr. Cox said.
A classic example of that principle came in 1989, when Leona Helmsley, the Manhattan hotelier, was convicted of tax fraud and sentenced to four years in federal prison after a trial in which she was portrayed as cruel and unfeeling.
The trial's signature line came when a housekeeper told the jury that Ms. Helmsley had said, ''Only the little people pay taxes.'' In an editorial about the case, The New York Times wrote that the housekeeper's testimony ''probably explains why Mrs. Helmsley made so many enemies and why the I.R.S. finds her a suitable example.''
The reliance of prosecutors on obstruction of justice charges also arises in part from fears that juries may not understand accounting frauds, said Robert A. Mintz, a former federal prosecutor and the head of white-collar criminal defense practice at McCarter&amp;English. Obstruction cases, which are relatively easy to prove, offer a sort of insurance policy, he said.
''These complex financial cases are extremely difficult,'' Mr. Mintz said. ''The government has to be wary of bringing charges in a very high-profile prosecution and then suffering a staggering defeat.''
There is one major exception.
In the case of Enron -- the largest fraud investigation to come out of the stock market bust of 2001 and 2002 -- prosecutors seem to be focusing squarely on accounting chicanery rather than on tangential issues. The 57-page indictment earlier this month of Richard A. Causey, Enron's former chief accounting officer, and Jeffrey K. Skilling, its former chief executive, makes no mention of $6,000 shower curtains or $17,000 visits to Mexico -- both of which featured prominently in the Kozlowski and Stewart cases.
Instead, it outlines several complex accounting schemes that prosecutors say the executives used to inflate Enron's stock price while selling their shares in the company.
By zeroing in on actual accounting issues, prosecutors in the Enron trial may have made their job more difficult, lawyers say, but they have increased the importance of their case.
Already, Enron is in a class by itself as an example of corporate malfeasance. The company and its executives have come to symbolize the excesses of the 1990's stock market boom. While seven former Enron officials have pleaded guilty to various crimes so far, no jury has had to decide whether widespread accounting gimmicky crossed the line into fraud.
In that sense, the Enron case echoes that of Drexel Burnham Lambert and Michael Milken, whose rise and fall came to symbolize the perceived excesses of Wall Street in the 1980's. Mr. Milken served two years in prison after pleading guilty to six minor violations of securities laws.
But he never faced a jury, and a debate still festers over whether he actually did anything wrong or was merely a scapegoat for public anger.
If Enron prosecutors agree to a plea bargain on relatively minor charges with Mr. Skilling and Mr. Causey, history's verdict on the Enron scandal will be similarly cloudy. But with both sides seemingly intent on going to trial, a jury may finally have a chance to render a verdict on the government's ability to hold executives criminally responsible for financial malfeasance.
''In a strange way, the public is ill-served when all of the defendants plead guilty and the theories of the government are never put to the test,'' Mr. Mintz said. ''At some point, it can't be all about process. It has to be about substance. In order to justify the enormous resources that have been committed to these cases, there has to be a day of reckoning for the government. They have to put it all on the line and gain a shot at gaining a criminal conviction.''
Overcompensating
