40 WATTS
FROM NOWHERE
A Journey Into Pirate Radio.
By Sue Carpenter.
225 pp. New York:
Scribner. $23.
SUE CARPENTER was a mystery to herself. In 1995, at 28, she had spent five dull years as a legal secretary in San Francisco. For unknown reasons, her life's frustrations were projected onto the pitiful state of commercial radio. Overwhelmed by this sudden hatred, she stumbled into the seemingly all-male community of eccentric, leftist pirate-radio broadcasters and was soon pseudonymously running an illegal radio station of her own, the all-music KPBJ.
The editorship of UHF, a tiny culture magazine, soon took Carpenter to Los Angeles and away, fortunately, from her heroin-addicted boyfriend. At great cost (incurring both financial and sleep debts) and with curious urgency, she founded a new station, KBLT, in the growing hipster community of Silver Lake. From broadcasting alone in her semi-soundproofed closet to an audience of potentially zero people, Carpenter saw her baby station eventually grow to an around-the-clock freak show.
''I'm attracted to pirate radio for the same reason I ride motorcycles: it terrifies me,'' Carpenter writes in ''40 Watts From Nowhere.'' This seems like an odd, inverted motivation. She is an unlikely political spokeswoman for freedom on the dial -- she confesses early on that ''I have absolutely no idea what's going on in the world. I don't have a TV, don't listen to NPR and never read the newspaper.''
UHF died, and Carpenter made a nervy go as a freelance writer. Simultaneously, KBLT took off. The band Mazzy Star played a benefit for legal fees. KBLT broadcast bootleg world premieres of songs by Beck and Madonna. The Red Hot Chili Peppers played on air. The Jesus and Mary Chain came by one drunken night and spun records and playfully abducted her stemware. She lived through these adventures in a very real terror of the Federal Communications Commission.
KBLT became a torture to her neighbors, a strain to her sanity and a distraction from her journalism career. ''The music in my house is so omnipresent that it has become background. . . . I rarely listen anymore to the new music that comes into the station,'' she confesses. She worked as a motorcycle instructor for extra cash; meanwhile, the news media tried to crash her unlicensed party.
Carpenter is best on her experience as a media subject, unable to control the journalists who wanted to exploit KBLT. She is equally ferocious when she expresses her disgust with consolidated radio empires and the ludicrosities of the F.C.C. itself. Also fascinating is her take on Miami's big-time underground-radio world. The building anxiety of her illegal-broadcast lifestyle is terribly unnerving. As the story progresses, the F.C.C. strangles more and more pirate stations, and the government's men in white vans draw ever nearer to sweet little KBLT.
There are frustrations to the book, notably Carpenter's opacity as to motivation. Carpenter is a radio addict, one finally assumes, powerless against the dream of an anarchic utopia on the air. She writes in a straightforward enough magazine style, but veers between entertaining overdisclosure and a seeming fear of divulgation. Obviously the book will be of great interest to music lovers, self-publishers and renegades in all media, and film rights purchasers -- you wonder why Carpenter didn't forgo the book and sell that screenplay.
On a tip that the F.C.C. is coming, KBLT shuts down, then returns. In the last days of the beleaguered station, Carpenter does something absolutely extraordinary -- and, at last, revelatory. She has scouted tall buildings in Los Angeles and, finding a rooftop already crowded with antennas, installed her own among them. When the station suddenly hisses to static one day, she jumps on her motorbike, racing to her secret antenna. From the street she can see figures atop the building. Surprising herself for perhaps the final time, she races up to the roof and the long-feared Agent Smiths of the F.C.C. and boldly claims the equipment as her own.
Choire Sicha writes for The New York Observer.
