FRANCESCO ROSI'S electrifying ''Salvatore Giuliano'' (1961), just released on DVD, is usually described as a political docudrama, but the movie, like its fugitive title character, is too elusive for labels. Giuliano, a Sicilian bandit who operated from the mountains around his hometown, Montelepre, in the years after the Second World War, is such a mysterious figure, in fact, that Mr. Rosi's camera can't manage to get a good look at him. We see Giuliano first as a corpse -- face down in a sunny courtyard, two guns lying next to him -- and when, soon after, the film flashes to the beginning of his criminal career, we expect to see him more clearly, perhaps as the hero of a gangster movie. But he isn't a hero, and this isn't a gangster movie, and all we ever get are brief sightings of the man: in a long shot, or from the back, or in deep shadow. He seems always to be one step, or more, ahead of every effort to apprehend him -- even, as it turns out, in death.
This is not what we've come to think of as conventional docudrama technique. Then again, in 1961 there was no such thing; Mr. Rosi was helping to invent it. Although ''Salvatore Giuliano'' takes the form of an investigation and teases us with the possibility of dire revelations, it appears not to have occurred to Mr. Rosi that the audience might expect an actual solution to the mysteries he unearths, or even that it would require some sort of detective figure to identify with. The most popular descendants of ''Salvatore Giuliano,'' like Costa-Gavras's ''Z'' (1969) and Oliver Stone's ''J. F. K.'' (1991), would know better than to deny their viewers the comforts of resolution and lonely heroism.
Francesco Rosi has a different idea. For him, a film's political (and emotional) power doesn't depend on its ability to provide definite, nailed-down answers; asking the right questions is all that matters. In ''Salvatore Giuliano'' every small mystery breeds another, and then another, until, in the end, the mostly absent title character seems to be no more -- and no less -- than the sum of the questions we have about him: his ambiguity is his truth. Early on, things look newsreel-clear, with a narrator helpfully walking us through recent Sicilian history and the few indisputable facts of the bandit's life: After the liberation, in 1945, Giuliano, then 22 and already the leader of an outlaw gang, was persuaded to use his violent expertise in the service of the Sicilian separatist movement, in return for the promise of a pardon. Once this lucid exposition is over, however, the story just gets blurrier and blurrier, as the film jumps backward and forward in time, forcing us with each abrupt temporal shift to adjust to a new set of characters and, in effect, a whole new political reality. And where, in this constantly changing landscape, is Giuliano? It's anybody's guess.
The bandit's most spectacular crime, the massacre of Communist Party members at a May Day celebration in 1947, is so inscrutable that it suggests he's doing the bidding of other, larger forces, but no one can say exactly which ones. He may have ties to the government and the Mafia, both of which are cozy with the local police and the military, who, as it happens, are at various times in business with his chief lieutenant -- who finally believes that Giuliano is betraying him.
It's this poisonous climate of violence, secrecy and mistrust that is Mr. Rosi's true subject, and it is, despite its sometimes frustrating ambiguity, a far more interesting approach to the story than either the traditional rise-and-fall narrative of gangster movies (for proof, see Michael Cimino's ridiculous 1987 version of the Giuliano saga, ''The Sicilian'') or the ''we're going to get to the bottom of this thing'' spirit of later ''Z''-style conspiracy thrillers. In ''Salvatore Giuliano,'' rising and falling are equally meaningless, and there's no bottom to the reality Mr. Rosi depicts. The movie is, at heart, an epic about political instability and the emotional vertigo it creates.
''Salvatore Giuliano'' was Francesco Rosi's third feature as a director. He was close to 40 and had acquired such command of his medium that he could dare to tell this story without a hero, to pose this mystery without a solution and get away with it. The picture is full of dazzling set pieces -- notably the May Day massacre, which is, in its very different style, worthy of comparison with the Odessa steps scene in ''Potemkin'' -- and its shots are so eloquently plain that they seem simply to have composed themselves, out of sheer necessity. And ''Salvatore Giuliano'' manages to sustain an almost impossible balance of immediacy and reflection: it's such an exciting piece of filmmaking that you might not realize until the end that its dominant tone is contemplative, even melancholy.
Francesco Rosi continued to make movies about hot-button social and political issues for several years -- the best of them, ''The Mattei Affair'' (1972), deals with the relationship of the Italian government and the oil industry -- without ever losing that improbable poise, or his respect for the mysteries of human behavior. But when in the late 70's he began to slow down his films' rhythms and give more prominence to the contemplative side of his temperament, some of his admirers in the European press, who tended, wishfully, to see his movies as left-wing agitprop, were puzzled. They were disappointed that works like ''Christ Stopped at Eboli'' (1979), ''Three Brothers'' (1981) and ''Bizet's Carmen'' (1984) uncovered no high-level conspiracies other than, perhaps, the highest-level plot of all: the cosmic conspiracy to turn men's hopes to dust.
Mr. Rosi was never a crude rabble-rouser, and the truth, I think, is that these later films, including his most recent, ''The Truce'' (1997), are really a distillation of the volatile elements that made his earlier work so bracing. Instead of focusing on the huge, ultimately unknowable forces that control society, he concentrates on the intimate effects those forces have on everyday life. In ''Christ Stopped at Eboli,'' which may be his masterpiece, Mr. Rosi observes a remote rural village in Lucania, during Mussolini's regime, through the eyes of an anti-Fascist doctor, Carlo Levi (the extraordinary Gian Maria Volonte), who has been sent there as a political exile. Most of the action consists of nothing more than Levi's encounters with townspeople as he wanders through the unpaved streets, absorbing the customs, the beliefs and the stern realities that govern these people's lives, and learning, too, to appreciate the severe beauty of their ungiving landscape. It's a strangely exhilarating portrait of a death-haunted society, and if you wanted to take this end-of-the-world town as a metaphor for Mussolini's Italy, Mr. Rosi probably wouldn't object; if we're lucky, the movie says, we can survive the worst.
There's not a lot of ideology in that sentiment, but there's more than a little truth. And in a way it's not so different from the profoundly ambiguous truths Mr. Rosi discovered in ''Salvatore Giuliano'' -- which was also set in a culture ruled by death and which managed, if not quite to spit in its face, at least to deny it the satisfaction of absolute, unquestioning deference. Mr. Rosi in his prime would, I think, have been just the filmmaker to bring Camus's novel ''The Plague'' to the screen.
The 17 films he has completed in his nearly 50-year career add up, though, to a pretty potent declaration of existential principles. If there were any justice, Mr. Rosi -- now 81 and, on the evidence of the interview on the ''Salvatore Giuliano'' DVD, still vigorous -- would be one of the most celebrated filmmakers alive (and more than five of his pictures would be on home video). Of course, if there were anything like justice in this world, Francesco Rosi might not have felt compelled to make these mournful, vibrant, elusive films at all. Their beauty is his protest.
FILM Terrence Rafferty is the author of ''The Thing Happens: Ten Years of Writing About the Movies.''
