At age 6, his father says, he refused to eat McDonald's food because of environmental concerns about plastic-foam containers.
At age 17, he declined all Christmas presents, to protest commercialization of the holiday.
On Friday, at age 26, Jason West became the first elected official in New York State to solemnize gay marriage, performing ceremonies for 25 couples.
In undertaking a ceremony that attracted hundreds of supporters and a few protesters, a house painter with a rusted-out pickup truck and unpaid university bills has galvanized the university students in this tree-lined village and, in all likelihood, has sparked a traffic jam of gay couples coming to get married next Saturday.
He has also infuriated establishment politicians and received a few nasty phone messages that he will be passing on to the police.
''I will not be stopped by the threatening phone messages or threats of jail,'' Mr. West said. ''My main concern right now is how to continue the process while making sure not to disrupt the village too much.''
Straight, single, ambitious and at ease in front of television cameras, Mr. West said two even more youthful starts of his political career ended in failure. At age 23, in 2000, and again two years later, his bids to join the State Assembly on the Green Party ticket fell flat when he won little more than 3 percent of the vote each time.
''I lost by a landslide both times,'' Mr. West said. ''But we did successfully bring the issues of universal health care and unionizing workers into the debate.''
In running last year for mayor of New Paltz, a village about 80 miles north of New York City that is home to a State University of New York campus, Mr. West used a clown on stilts and people dressed in a chicken suit to goad voters into going to the polls. He promised to fight for affordable housing, tenants' rights, environmental protection and open government.
While motivating students -- one third of his voters listed campus dormitory addresses -- Mr. West also benefited from a vote divided between the 16-year incumbent mayor and a long-serving village trustee who campaigned to replace him. Victorious by a margin of 64 votes out of the 869 cast, Mr. West now leads a village board of which three of five members are in the Green Party.
''It is true the voting for mayor was divided, but we won a majority of the seats because those guys had been in power so long they had lost touch with the true electorate,'' Mr. West said. ''The people in this town are not landlords. They are young, broke and living month to month.''
More than 75 percent of the 6,034 village residents are under age 35, and more than 70 percent rent their homes, according to the 2000 census. ''There is no urban misery here, but many people are like me,'' Mr. West said. ''We sometimes have trouble meeting our bills.''
Mr. West conducted the marriage ceremonies on Friday wearing the only tie he owns, and a $120 suit he purchased from J.C. Penney. ''One gay friend criticized my dress sense,'' Mr. West said.
His vehicle, a 1987 Toyota pickup with large rust holes, was given to him by his father after his own car, a 1987 Ford Taurus, had an electrical failure three weeks ago. ''I am waiting for the warmer weather to see if I can revive the car,'' Mr. West said. ''This level of existence is not something that the former village leaders can relate to.''
Although he has completed all course work at the local SUNY campus for a double major in history and fine arts, with a 3.7 grade point average, Mr. West said, he has not received a degree because he still owes the university $300 in fees.
His critics decry him as young, inexperienced and more interested in publicity than in maintaining the aging village infrastructure. Critics say he should worry more about how the century-old New Paltz village sewage system is falling apart.
''A village mayor should take care of things like the village sewage system, not issues like gay marriage,'' said Robert F. Feldman, a long-serving village trustee who lost out to Mr. West in his bid to become mayor. ''It was incredibly unfair to drag this village to international attention just to bolster himself.''
Mr. Feldman further criticized plans by Mr. West to remove laws prohibiting couches or unlicensed cars from front yards in the village.
For his part, Mr. West said the laws against couches and unlicensed cars on lawns demonstrated how far removed the village's former leaders had become from its electorate.
''The former village leaders don't face the same problems of most people who live here,'' Mr. West said. ''Some people have old cars that break down sometimes, like me for example.''
As to charges of capitalizing on the current wave of attention given to gay marriage, Mr. West said he had spoken publicly on the issue as long ago as his 2000 campaign for the State Assembly.
''This really is not about me, it is about 25 couples making a declaration of love, devotion and commitment,'' Mr. West said. ''It is totally crazy that such a small ceremony gets so much attention.''
