Everywhere I go this winter, the game on the ice has been -- alongside the N.H.L.'s labor negotiations -- hockey's hot topic.
The game has become too defensive. You don't see players skating down the wing and picking the far corner on goalies anymore, the way Guy Lafleur did for me in the 70's in Montreal. Video, advance scouting and a more sophisticated understanding of the game have given coaching the upper hand on skill. Plus, the players are bigger and they all skate so well, making it easier to clog the shooting and passing lanes.
That's why the neutral-zone trap and defensive zone coverages work. And when teams get the puck, many coaches fear they'll lose it if they get too fancy, so players are instructed to chip it from zone to zone and battle along the boards. That thwarts creativity and excitement.
Hockey is a flow game that needs new rules to benefit the offense. When the N.H.L. general managers met a few weeks ago, they proposed some rules changes. Many are interesting -- like limiting goalies' puck-handling -- but I have some thoughts about rules they didn't propose.
To create more flow, I'd favor a change in the two-line offside pass rule. Currently, when a player passes the puck across his own blue line and the center red line, play is whistled down and there's a face-off inside the zone. This rule makes neutral-zone traps effective: the defending team has to clog up only half the neutral zone, the 27 feet between the blue line and the red line. The general managers proposed moving the nets closer to the end boards and expanding the neutral zone from 54 to 60 feet. But what if certain passes were permitted to cross the red line?
This might be more dramatic than some people want, but if we added a line running across the top of the face-off circles inside the zone (which is 25 feet inside the blue line) and allowed passes from north of that area to cross the red line and go anywhere in the neutral zone (that's another 60 feet to the far blue line), that would spread out the defense. Instead of defending 27 or 30 feet, they'd have to defend from the top of the circle to the far blue line. That's 85 feet. This would make it more difficult for the defensive team and could open the game up to some big passes, odd-man rushes and exciting hockey.
Some think this will backfire. They worry that the defensive team will set up on its own blue line and won't pursue the puck in the offensive zone, keeping the bulk of the play in center ice. No one wants that. But I think the opposite will happen. If a team lines up at the blue line, the attacking team can form something like a wedge to carry it through and gain the zone, and the defensive team will have to risk fouling players to keep them out.
Or the attacking team can dump the puck in; since the players are already going forward with some speed, because of new rules restricting goalies handling the puck, the races to recover the puck would be close and interesting. I'd really like to see this tried at the N.H.L. level, at least in preseason.
I don't know if you can legislate against certain defenses. Roger Neilson, a very innovative coach, was the first to have all his players just retreat behind the puck in the defensive zone. That has really caught on. You've got a goalie and five other guys who are trying to be a goalie; guys 30 feet closer to their own net, which is 30 feet farther from the other net. Teams doing that have no offense.
When I coached Montreal, Lafleur and Steve Shutt would be up near the blue line covering the point, trying to block shots so they could get free behind the defense. But these teams are basically saying to the opposition: ''Take your chances. You've got to shoot it through all 12 legs.'' The only way you could stop that is to prohibit certain defensive formations. But that would be too drastic a change.
I do think, however, that defensive teams benefit from the high number of stoppages in play. When I began coaching in the N.H.L., for St. Louis in the late 60's, we had two great goalies, Glenn Hall and Jacques Plante, but most of the players had been minor leaguers before expansion. The goalies would freeze the puck at every opportunity or we'd force a whistle somehow, and then I could get the players I wanted on the ice against our opponent.
I see these defensive teams do that today and, the way games are officiated, it's a good tactic. It's a reason the Devils won the Stanley Cup last spring. Martin Brodeur freezes and handles the puck very well and Coach Pat Burns is good at matching players. They'd get defensive zone face-offs, Burns would send out his top defensive center, John Madden, and the other coach often pulled his best players off. Yes, he foiled the matchup, but Burns was happy that dangerous opponents were on the bench.
Goalies stop play more than any other situation, but a stricter enforcement of the N.H.L.'s Rule 79, which provides a penalty for goalies who freeze the puck outside the crease, would aid offense. So would tougher rules against defenders shooting the puck out of the rink to stop play.
Those rules would provide more continuous action. Continuous action also means players would tire more easily, and that would lead to more scoring chances.
I don't think the fatigue factor is as costly as it was even 10 years ago. True, players are much better conditioned. And when I started coaching, players took two-minute shifts, maybe longer, while today the shifts are 45 seconds. But with better conditioning, the frequent stoppages and three long TV timeouts each period, players don't tire easily. Ten years ago, there were more TV stoppages, but they were less than 40 seconds each. I'd like to see the length of TV stoppages revisited.
Continuous action is what makes the four-on-four overtime so successful. I don't favor making the N.H.L. a four-on-four game, but if we eliminated all rules that allow for substitution on coincidental penalties, even on fighting majors, that would open up more ice during regulation time.
The general managers' proposal that goaltenders not handle the puck below the goal line drew the most fire. I understand the intent: good puck-handling goalies have been stymieing offense by stopping shoot-ins and firing the puck right out of the zone again.
People wonder why the league should penalize goalies from using that skill. I worry about a side effect: if goalies can't handle the puck when it's dumped into the offensive zone, the defensemen will have to and they'll be extremely vulnerable to onrushing forwards. I hope that when this rule is finally established, goalies will be allowed to handle the puck below the goal line, but will be prohibited from moving it above the goal line.
I'm glad the general managers and the owners are looking for ways to open up the game. Nothing should prevent a free and open discussion on how to improve it. Because if we don't act soon, the game we love will only continue to deteriorate.
Back Talk
