IF I were a singer  and my friends and family can tell you than I am not -- I would sing a song of dumplings at Shanghai Park. Soft and yielding, tender on the outside, succulent on the inside with a rich hot broth that spills yet another layer of flavor into your mouth, these little treats are worth the drive, all by themselves, and I could eat only them for many a meal before I wished for something else.
But then I would miss other delights, culinary and not, at Shanghai Park, which occupies a nondescript storefront along a gritty stretch of Route 27 where the population turns dense and towns begin to meld into the borders of other towns and houses begin to stack on top of other houses along this feeder chute to Manhattan.
There is, for example, the pleasure of the pause at the restaurant's entryway, where red paper lanterns move with the wind above, and behind the steamed glass of the storefront a woman in a quilted coat shapes dim sum in a fierce and hurried way, as if she were just catching a train and had been called back. Inside, there is the walk to your table, with ample opportunity to spy on other diners' choices -- and to be swayed by them -- even if they are not dumplings.
James Qin and his wife, Fei Shen, opened the restaurant about four and a half years ago, after she had nurtured the dream of her own business for at least the 15 years that she had worked in other restaurants. The couple chose Shanghai as the restaurant's specialty because it was the food of their own childhoods. They hired Jianfen Xu, a longtime family friend and chef, who had attended a Chinese cooking school and specialized in Shanghai-style foods, Mr. Qin says. Their restaurant, he says, was among the first of the style in central New Jersey when it opened, and it seemed to fill a niche for the growing Asian population.
If your party is large enough and you are lucky enough (because this place does a brisk business), you will be seated at a round table, the center of which holds an oversize lazy susan. The servers will gradually fill it, bringing each dish as it is prepared -- there is no course-by-course service here.
The menu is vast, with six pages of mostly typical American-style Chinese selections leading the book. Since my goal was to eat foods that reflected the name of the restaurant, I ordered from only the last four pages. Still, options were plentiful, many with generally well prepared exotic ingredients that aren't often seen, including yellow fish, sea cucumber, pickled cabbage and carp belly.
None of these is offered as amuse-bouche in a cute porcelain soup spoon. In fact, utilitarian presentation is consistent: Soup spoons are typical American-style budget stainless; soups come in low-priced china serving bowls that flare at the rim, making conveyance of the brimming broth a risky business. But the server made it every time, and then it was up to us not to slop it as we served ourselves.
Best bets for soup include pickled cabbage with shredded pork, with its still crunchy bits of piquant house-made pickle juxtaposed against a powerfully healing house-made chicken broth; Chinese greens with bean curd, where even the sound of those two ingredients offer a glimmer of spring; and yellow fish with sea cucumber soup, which pairs a favored Shanghai fish with bits of reconstituted sea slug, yellow chives egg and straw mushrooms in more of that hearty broth. Skip the ham and winter melon -- it was uninspired.
Jellyfish was a standout in the cold dish section, the defrosted raw meat cut into fettuccine-size ribbons and tossed with a Chinese-style vinaigrette. And for palate relief, there was a credible cucumber salad with diced garlic that could have come from any number of ethnic kitchens.
Dim sum, though not limited to those singably sublime soup dumplings of crab or pork, does a good job of its translation to touch your heart with its nine offerings. Table favorites included the bean paste biscuit, which is more of a filled crepe, with its egg-flour skin wrapped around the sweet red filling and pan-fried to a delicate gold, as well as the shredded turnip short cake flavored with scallions and ham. The eight treasures rice pudding, with nuggets of apple, pineapple, pear, papaya, raisins, dates, peaches and honeydew, was a runner-up, and the elementary-school set found great delight in dipping thick house-made bread sticks into warmed soy milk.
As for dinner, the plate of pork ribs with spicy pepper salt wasn't the most appealing thing on the roundabout, with the naked bittersweet brown of the meat against pale white and green shreds of iceberg lettuce. But the minced bits of long hot pepper, with its cilantro-like flavor, turned the dish into something special.
Vegetables include a trio of personal favorites -- Chinese spinach, watercress or pea shoots, though the $12 price for pea shoots seems stratospheric at this time, when they are practically in season.
Mr. Xu is a master at fish and seafood. Stir-fried eel with chives was tender, its sweet flesh enhanced with scallions and garlic. Squid, stir-fried and treated to the same spicy pepper-salt combination that was so successful with the pork ribs, was equally delicious. Steamed flounder, with its essence of scallions, ginger and soy sauce, flaked at the touch of chopsticks. Shanghai-style blue crab turned out to be an intriguing topping of minced pork and large soybeans in an overly salty brown sauce. But my favorite dish, next to the dumplings, was the braised crab and bean curd casserole, an addictive mélange sparked with a house-made pepper oil. And Mr. Qin says that this dish isn't quite right because the blue crab is a substitute for the fresh-water version that can't be imported.
And to think I considered eating only dumplings.
Shanghai Park  239 Raritan Avenue (Route 27), Highland Park; (732)247-8813
GOOD
ATMOSPHERE -- Big and busy, with harsh lighting and hurried décor.  SERVICE -- Smooth and efficient.  SMOKING -- Not allowed.  WINE LIST -- Bring your own.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Pickled cabbage and shredded pork soup, jellyfish salad, cucumber with diced garlic, pork or crab steamed buns (soup dumplings), bean paste biscuit, eight treasure rice pudding, ribs with spicy pepper salt, any sautéed green, stir-fried freshwater eel with chives, braised crab and bean curd casserole.  PRICE RANGE -- Soups, cold dishes and dim sum, $5.50 to $13; main dishes, $8.25 to $20; noodles and rice cake, $5.50 to $8.  HOURS -- Lunch, Monday through Friday, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.; dinner, Monday through Friday, 3:30 p.m. to 9:30 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday, 3:30 to 10 p.m.; dim sum, Saturday and Sunday, 10:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.  CREDIT CARDS -- Visa and MasterCard.  RESERVATIONS -- Requested for the weekends.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- The restaurant and restrooms are on one level.  IF YOU GO -- Highland Park is just north of New Brunswick on Route 27. Take U.S. 1 to Route 18 North. Turn right onto Route 27 (Raritan Avenue). The restaurant is on the left.
REVIEWED -- Feb. 29, 2004.
RATINGS -- Poor, Fair, Satisfactory, Good, Very Good, Excellent, Extraordinary. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
RESTAURANTS
