IN the opening scene of the new play ''Roulette,'' a put-upon suburban father gambles with his life in a casual game of Russian roulette at the breakfast table. That moment has been in Paul Weitz's head for the last 15 years.
When Mr. Weitz, the author of ''Roulette,'' first had the idea, he was a 20-something, struggling playwright, working at an even-more-struggling drama bookshop on 42nd Street -- the old 42nd Street -- and, in his words, ''bumming off'' his parents, the fashion designer and author John Weitz, who died in 2002, and the former actress Susan Kohner.
Now, the play, a dark comedy about the aftermath of the moment when, in Chekhovian fashion, the father's gun finally goes off, is actually onstage at the John Houseman Theater on Theater Row, and Mr. Weitz, 38, has become a successful filmmaker. With his brother, Chris, Mr. Weitz directed the hit films ''American Pie'' and ''About a Boy,'' for which they wrote the Oscar-nominated screenplay. The Weitz brothers also produced the two ''American Pie'' sequels, which means that they are rarely referred to without the phrase ''gross-out comedy'' somewhere in sight.
Is it surprising that the man who helped redefine baked-good bliss is tackling the dysfunctional family Off Broadway? Perhaps not. Mr. Weitz is accommodating and well read (the Chekhov reference was his). Over breakfast recently at a hotel in SoHo, where, in his casually chic beige sweater and chocolate-brown pants, Mr. Weitz was slowly blending into the minimalist furniture, he called the famous ''American Pie'' scene in question subversive.
''It was positing that sexuality is something that's wholesome and is as much a part of American life as anything else,'' he said with a reasonably straight face.
Still, Mr. Weitz, a new father who had traveled from his home in Los Angeles for the opening of the play and to scout locations for a future movie, is achingly aware of the legacy of the wildly successful ''Pie'' movies. ''I think for the rest of my career, anything I do will be an aberration,'' he said, laughing. ''I'll have this long body of pretentious, sensitive work, and people will still be saying, 'So, is someone going to defile a pie in the next movie?' ''
Probably not. His next film, ''Synergy,'' stars Dennis Quaid as a 50-year-old who is demoted and assigned a 25-year-old boss (Topher Grace) after a corporate takeover. The young boss falls in love with his employee's daughter (Scarlett Johannson) and finds a father figure in Mr. Quaid. Paul Weitz wrote the film and will direct, with Chris Weitz as the creative producer.
''It's about the degree to which people can control their destiny and retain their dignity against the stuff they have no control over,'' Mr. Weitz said. Were it not for the gray creeping into his hair and his unfailing, old world politeness, he would not appear his age. He has the adolescent habit of referring to his projects as his obsessions, and many of them have similar themes: family, sex, the role of masculinity and the loss of control when all of those things come together.
''No one has it under control in 'Roulette,' '' Ben Brantley wrote in his favorable review in The New York Times. The play, Mr. Weitz's third with the Ensemble Studio Theater, is, Mr. Brantley wrote, ''a comedy of loneliness, in which each dysfunctional family member is dysfunctional in his or her own isolating way.''
By phone from his office in Los Angeles, Chris Weitz, 34, said: ''All of our characters that kind of bounce around in our head tend to be losers in some way. Our mental world is peopled by misfits and failures of various degrees.''
The misfits at the center of ''Roulette'' are a manically active college-age son and a manically repressed and detached father. Jock, the son, played at fever pitch by Shawn Hatosy, is the heart of the play; he wears his emotions so close to the surface that he is liable to burst at the slightest pressure. ''His character is the one who actually has hope, and he's really trying to make things happen,'' Paul Weitz said. ''And he's also the stupidest.''
In a way, Jock exists on the same hapless-but-lovable loser continuum as Jim, the everyboy hero of ''American Pie''; and his father is only degrees removed from Will, the selfish bachelor in ''About a Boy,'' whose life is programmed into half-hour chunks, the better to avoid entanglements.
''On the surface, men are encouraged to hide their feelings more, so it's always interesting to deal with the tension of extracting emotion from people who are trying to be closed off,'' Mr. Weitz said. ''I'm a little obsessed with the role of American masculinity in American culture.''
It took him 15 years to resolve what would happen in the aftermath of the gunshot in ''Roulette.'' Will his next play, ''Chamber Piece,'' in which a man visits a dominatrix on a whim only to discover that they are high school acquaintances, have an equally long route to the stage? Perhaps. ''I have to be honest with myself,'' Mr. Weitz said, ''about whether it's good -- or not.''
In the meantime, he will continue making films with his brother. ''Filmmaking,'' he said, ''can give me the delusion that I'm in control of something.''
'Roulette'  Houseman Theater, 450 West 42nd Street.  Through March 14.
THEATER Melena Z. Ryzik is a contributor to The New York Times's Boldface Names column.
