In his three previous campaigns for public office, the Rev. Al Sharpton generally exceeded political expectations by attracting more votes than virtually anyone had predicted. The accomplishment added mightily to his stature as a political force to be reckoned with in New York.
But as he comes into his home state, campaigning before the Democratic primary on Tuesday, he brings with him only a smattering of delegates and the widely held perception that he did poorly in his first showing on a national stage.
At the same time, his campaign in New York for the Democratic presidential nomination appears to be somewhat lackluster, with little in the way of money, organization and, to hear many politicians tell it, intensity from either the candidate or the public.
Instead, Mr. Sharpton seems to be relying on quotable moments in- the Democratic presidential debates, and on political strokes, like his announcement last week that he would fly to Haiti to mediate in the troubles there.
''He has done a great job in the debates,'' said Bill Lynch, a political consultant who was a deputy mayor under David N. Dinkins.
''But I don't see that he has raised the kind of money that I think he could,'' Mr. Lynch said. ''And he hasn't built the kind of campaign infrastructure that he should have to do well. More than that, I was hoping that Al would nurture a whole new group of elected officials and campaign workers. But I don't see that happening.''
Mr. Sharpton has few volunteers working in the streets of New York and his campaign is deeply in debt. In addition, both he and the campaign have been rocked by less-than-favorable attention by the media, including the black press, specifically for his work with a well-known Republican strategist, Roger Stone.
He is far from being approved for federal matching funds and, more recently, the Federal Election Commission has asked him to explain many of his campaign expenses.
At the same time, with a chance to regroup on his home turf and gain some momentum as one of the four candidates still standing, he has done little on-the-street campaigning, and has not put out a message tailored to generating a New York vote.
''Much of the vote he will get is symbolic and it will come from people who have long been committed to him,'' said Representative Gregory W. Meeks, a Queens Democrat who has endorsed Mr. Sharpton for mayor in the past and is working for Senator John Kerry in the presidential primary.
''There are votes he will get no matter what. But they will be much smaller than when he ran for mayor and senator,'' Congressman Meeks said.
Mr. Sharpton's view of his campaign differs sharply. He said that he has received more endorsements from New York politicians than in any of his previous races.
And he added that because of his two Senate races and his run for mayor in a high-profile campaign, he is well known to New York voters and needs less campaign muscle than what the Kerry campaign has sought.
''I think, in terms of infrastructure, this is the best campaign I have been involved in,'' he said, in an interview last week. ''I have more elected officials behind me in this race than I ever have. And we have people in the streets and a lot of enthusiasm behind this campaign.''
The elected officials who are supporting him include Assemblyman Jose Rivera, who is the Bronx Democratic Party chairman, and Representatives José E. Serrano of the Bronx and Edolphus Towns of Brooklyn.
Mr. Sharpton said he has a chance to win significant votes in the Bronx, central Brooklyn and in southeast Queens, areas with large black and Hispanic communities.
Statewide, Sharpton campaign aides say they have singled out 10 Congressional districts where they believe they can either win or achieve impressive results. If Mr. Sharpton gets 15 percent of the vote in those districts, which are generally those with large black and Hispanic populations, Mr. Sharpton can walk away from New York with some of the 236 delegates that are at stake.
In those districts, he has slates of elected officials and union leaders -- Congressman Serrano, Assemblyman Ruben Diaz Jr. and State Senator Kevin Parker, for example -- running as delegates.
''Neither Kerry or Edwards have been to central Brooklyn, which has the largest black population in the state,'' Mr. Sharpton said. ''My opponents are nowhere to be found in the black and Latino community. We are comfortable that we are doing well and that we will pick up delegates on Tuesday.''
Mr. Sharpton said that any assertion that his campaign is doing poorly is an exaggeration.
''I don't know what these analysts are talking about. We won seven delegates in Michigan, and I got twice the vote that Dean got in South Carolina,'' Mr. Sharpton said. ''They criticize the fact that I didn't get matching funds. But I never got matching funds when I ran for mayor, and I still got 34 percent of the vote.''
But Mr. Sharpton's description of his campaign goals is far different from what he had initially forecast, when he started campaigning for votes nationwide.
His initial strategy, he had said, was to pick up delegates all along the way; at one point he predicted that by Super Tuesday -- this Tuesday's primary election -- he would have as many delegates as the front-runners.
He likened himself to the Rev. Jesse Jackson, hoping to tally up statewide achievements equal to or beyond what Mr. Jackson accomplished in his first national run for office, in 1984.
But Mr. Sharpton was sorely disappointed in the state he thought he had the best chance of winning, South Carolina, and picked up just 13 delegates over all. After winning 6.9 percent of the vote in the Michigan primary, most of it in Detroit, Mr. Sharpton began to redefine success as his ability to attract votes in urban black or minority districts -- a limited niche role in the presidential campaign, and far less ambitious.
But that appears to be his strategy for the New York primary, as well.
Last week, he campaigned in Harlem, in central Brooklyn and in southeast Queens. Yesterday, he drew about 250 people to a Bedford-Stuyvesant church, where he said, ''Somebody's got to stand for the regular people.'' And tomorrow, he plans to tour the predominantly black east side of Buffalo.
Aides to Mr. Kerry and to Senator John Edwards point out that Mr. Sharpton has spent little money in New York. (A Sharpton campaign official said that less than $25,000 had been spent on the state primary.)
But more than anything, politicians and political scientists suggest that what Mr. Sharpton's campaign has lacked is something less tangible: passion.
In the mayoral race of 1997, Mr. Sharpton had an energetic campaign organization that created a significant buzz in the streets and homes of New York City. Mr. Sharpton failed to win the Democratic primary that year but received 32 percent of the vote.
In the 1992 Senate race, a statewide contest, he secured 14 percent of the vote, and in the 1994 Senate race he got 25 percent. Most politicians, even those not supporting him in this campaign, say that Mr. Sharpton is hurt this time by forces beyond his control.
''I think that Rev. Sharpton remains an icon in the black community in New York,'' said State Senator David A. Paterson, a Democrat from Manhattan who has often supported Mr. Sharpton but who has endorsed Mr. Kerry's campaign. Mr. Sharpton, he said, ''still rightfully owns a place as the inspirational leader of a movement, and his campaign has raised some vital issues. But I think the reason it's not perhaps a dominant candidacy in the community right now is the fact that people really want to beat George Bush.''
A poor showing in New York, some contend, would be likely to significantly erode Mr. Sharpton's standing as a political power in New York. Then again, said others, Mr. Sharpton may benefit, as he has so many times in the past, from lowered expectations.
His fellow politicians and political strategists set the bar for Mr. Sharpton's success at winning some delegates, and about a quarter of the vote in New York City. This would be far less than what Jesse Jackson achieved in 1988 (he came in second in New York State and won New York City) and significantly more modest than what many would expect from a homegrown candidate, perhaps even one as controversial as Mr. Sharpton.
''At the end of the day, he always does all right,'' Congressman Towns, a supporter, said. ''I think the people will respond to him. He is saying the things that need to be said in this election. And I think that, once it's all said and done, he will do just fine.''
