Singing Models
Part of the countdown to ''Fashion, the Musical,'' which will open at the White Plains Performing Arts Center on March 20, is ''Dressed to Thrill,'' a Broadway-style fashion show to be held tomorrow at 7 p.m. at the center.
The event, which will benefit the center, will feature spring designer fashions from Mary Jane Denzer, the couture boutique in White Plains, jewelry from Fortunoff and an original rock score by Jordan Rudess, a recording artist, composer and producer. The models will not only walk the runway but will also break into song.
''Fashion, the Musical '' is based on a 19th-century play by Anna Cora Mowatt. Tony Stimac, executive producer of the center, adapted it for this production. Don Pippin wrote the music and Steve Brown the lyrics. There will be 14 performances before the show closes on April 4.
''Dressed'' will be preceded by a Champagne reception at 6 p.m. and a dessert reception after the event catered by Trotters restaurant.
Ticket prices, which include the fashion show, both receptions and one ticket to ''Fashion,'' are $250 per person. A ticket to the fashion show alone is $100. Information about the fashion show: (888)977-2250. Information about the musical: (914)422-1376.
Of Masters and Music
Long before ''Master and Commander'' won a gaggle of Academy Award nominations, long before the film itself was made, Richard Kapp, the music director of Philharmonia Virtuosi, was plumbing Patrick O'Brian's seafaring novels -- ''Master and Commander'' included -- for musical material. Philharmonia has recorded three CD's of music from the books, all produced by Ess.a.y Recordings, the company Mr. Kapp founded. They include ''Musical Evenings With the Captain'' in 1966; ''Musical Evenings With the Captain, Vol. II'' in 1997, and ''Musical Evenings in the Captain's Cabin,'' released this year. They can be ordered for $15 each at www.essaycd.com.
Six members of the orchestra, including Mr. Kapp as harpsichordist and narrator, will present a chamber concert of music and readings from the O'Brian novels on Thursday at 7:30 p.m. at the White Plains Performing Arts Center. The program includes works by 18th- and early 19th-century composers like Locatelli, Mozart, Breval and Boccherini.
Barbara Kapp, the executive director of Philharmonia, said the concert would be used to test the acoustics in the new hall and the willingness of the business crowd to linger after hours.
''We're trying a weeknight to see if we can attract some of the people who work in White Plains,'' she said. The orchestra moved last year to Danbury, Conn., from Dobbs Ferry, but regularly presents concerts at two Westchester sites, Purchase College and Lasdon Park and Arboretum in Somers.
Tickets to the concert are $30; children ages 8 through 18 are admitted free. Information: (914)693-5595.
For Would-Be Musicians
At the Maestro Club, children from age 8 through 13 can learn about music while trying out various instruments and playing musical games.
The club, led by the Westchester Philharmonic's music director and conductor, Paul Lustig Dunkel, meets before every Sunday concert given by the philharmonic at the Performing Arts Center of Purchase College. The club has about 24 members, but more can attend, Michael Jefferson, a spokesman for the orchestra, said. Children pay $5 to attend.
Next Sunday at 1:45 p.m. the pianist John O'Conor will be a guest at the club; children will be invited to join him at the piano, Mr. Jefferson said. The night before, on Saturday at 8 p.m., Mr. O'Conor will be the featured soloist with the orchestra in a program called ''Irish Valentine.'' He will play ''Piano Concerto No. 6,'' by John Field, whom Mr. Dunkel described as an ''underrated Irish composer and pianist credited with creating the nocturne.'' Works by Percy Grainger, Joaquin Rodrigo and Hector Berlioz are also on the program, which will be repeated Sunday at 3 p.m. Susan Narucki, a Grammy-nominated soprano, is also a featured soloist. Information: (914)682-3707.
ROBERTA HERSHENSON
