Six days after busing four hours round trip to defeat Evansville, three days after outlasting Hawaii in a nationally televised game that ended after 1 a.m., and 15 minutes after a victory over Missouri Valley Conference rival Creighton, Brad Korn and his Southern Illinois teammates were still on edge. Sure, they were 23-2, undefeated in conference play, and ranked No. 16 in the Associated Press news media poll, the team's highest ranking ever.
But as impressed as Coach Matt Painter was with his team's performance in the 68-60 victory over Creighton on Tuesday, he did not let his players leave the locker room without reminding them of the unfortunate truth. ''You aren't in the tournament, yet,'' Painter said.
The N.C.A.A. men's tournament is more than three weeks away, but Painter understands the calculus for those who inhabit the sport's so-called midmajor level: any loss is devastating, and a late-season one is disastrous. Unless a team belongs to one of the six power conferences, it means, along with money-saving bus rides and midnight tipoffs, a season can be ruined when conference tournament play begins next week.
Until a tournament berth is earned, the standing ovation from the maroon-clad Salukis faithful who fill S.I.U. Arena here to its capacity is gratifying, but not enough. ''It's stressful and it seems unfair,'' said Korn, a 6-foot-9 senior forward. ''But really we have had to treat every game this season like it's a tournament game because of how our conference is overlooked and disrespected.''
The sure way for the Salukis to make the N.C.A.A. field of 65 is to win the Missouri Valley Conference tournament next week in St. Louis and the automatic bid that accompanies it. Otherwise, they are at the mercy of the 10-member selection committee, which hands out 34 at-large bids.
Mercy, or some say justice, comes in only at long odds. Since 1985, 70.5 percent of the at-large teams have come from the power conferences: Atlantic Coast, Big Ten, Big 12, Big East, Southeastern and Pacific-10. Two years ago, for example, Butler finished 25-5 but was left out of the field after losing in the first round of the Horizon League tournament.
It has been a banner regular season for the midmajors as No. 2 St. Joseph's and No. 4 Gonzaga are certain to make the N.C.A.A. whether or not they win their conference tournaments. Even Southern Illinois, despite Painter's warnings, is likely to earn an at-large bid if it fails to capture the Missouri Valley tournament. [The Salukis improved their record to 24-2 with a 72-71 victory over Bradley on Saturday.]
But many other teams among the 25 other conferences, like No. 24 Utah State of the Big West, Kent State or Western Michigan of the Mid-American, and East Tennessee State of the Southern, may be banished to the National Invitation Tournament if they do not win their tournaments.
''If your total reward as a player and coach is to get in the N.C.A.A. tournament, you're going to have a tough time unless you win your tournament,'' said Utah State Coach Stew Morrill, whose Aggies have done so three of the last four years. ''But that's the reality. I understand that the power conferences are better than our league, but couldn't occasionally we have two teams in instead of the six or seven the Big 12 or A.C.C. get?''
The reason midmajors will not soon flood the tournament is that the N.C.A.A. selection committee leans on a mathematical formula called the Ratings Percentage Index, or R.P.I., which measures strength of schedule and how a team performs against it. The formula favors the power conferences, which have more depth, heftier athletic budgets and the marquee names that can attract nonconference matchups that show up on national television.
While the N.C.A.A. selection committee says the index is just one of 13 elements it uses to judge a team's worthiness -- including overall and conference records and its performance in the last 10 games of the season -- the R.P.I. ranking has historically reflected the makeup of the tournament field.
Since 1991, for example, 99.7 percent of the teams ranked 1 through 30 in the final R.P.I. have earned automatic or at-large bids, said Jim Sukup editor and publisher of The RPI Report, which duplicates the calculations made by the N.C.A.A. Likewise, over that same period, only five teams ranked below 60 have received an at-large bid.
The Missouri Valley Conference's commissioner, Doug Elgin, says two factors conspire against the midmajors: one human and one computer-driven.
''When you get good, you can't get the big conferences to schedule you, and if they do, our teams are always traveling to their place,'' said Elgin, who has served on the N.C.A.A. selection committee. ''Now what do really elite teams do regardless of the conference? They win on the road. But the R.P.I. doesn't reward a team for that.''
In fact, Sukup said, statistics show that the home team wins 66 percent of the time, and in nonconference matchups that likelihood increases to 75 percent. When the N.C.A.A. selection committee began using the R.P.I. in 1981, road victories were factored into the formula. It was dropped, however, within two seasons because the component still seemed to favor the elite teams.
''There's greater parity in college basketball today,'' Elgin said, ''and a team should be rewarded for having to go on the road and they should be rewarded when they win on the road.''
No midmajor has battled the R.P.I. more cannily than Gonzaga, which has made five straight N.C.A.A. tournament appearances and reached a regional final in 1999. Gonzaga schedules the best teams and will travel to play them. It has an 11-2 nonconference record, the losses coming against the current No. 1 team, Stanford, at a tournament in Oakland, Calif., and against St. Joseph's at Madison Square Garden.
But in reality, Gonzaga has little choice. Although the R.P.I. ranks its nonconference schedule as the 23rd toughest in the nation, its overall strength of schedule falls to 87th because it plays in the lightly regarded West Coast Conference.
Painter understands the pressure Southern Illinois is under even though he took an N.C.A.A. tournament bid for granted when he was a forward at Purdue from 1989 to 1993.
''We knew if we finished above .500 in the conference and won 17, 18 or 19 games, we were going to get in,'' he said. ''My guys know that the Missouri Valley Conference is not the Big Ten, and they have to win almost every time they walk on the court to make a case for the N.C.A.A. tournament.''
Painter also does not want to hear about Southern Illinois's No. 15 ranking in the R.P.I. and how percentages say the Salukis are a lock for the N.C.A.A. tournament. The last two years, they have lost in the championship game of the conference tournament and have had to rely on the selection committee to grant them at-large bids. The Salukis got them.
''But we don't want to sit on pins and needles when the field is drawn; we've done that, and it's excruciating,'' Painter said. ''We know if a low seed runs through the Big Ten, A.C.C. or any power conference tournament and gets the automatic bid, we got knocked down another step on the ladder. The only way we keep our fate in our own hands is win the Missouri Valley tournament. It's that simple.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
