TOM McCARTHY was driving past the old railroad station in Newfoundland, Passaic County, for the umpteenth time, visiting his brother and sister-in-law who owned a house on nearby Green Lake. He had been fascinated by the station for months. Who owned it? What was going on there? What had gone on there? This time, his mother was driving with him, and she was far less fascinated.
''She was saying: 'What are you doing? What are you doing? Let's go on','' Mr. McCarthy said. ''But it was finally the time I had to stop and do something. She's a lot of fun, my mom. So she finally got into it. She came out and looked in the windows with me.''
Mr. McCarthy left a note at the abandoned building, hoping someone would respond. The owner eventually did, and the station became the centerpiece for Mr. McCarthy's film ''The Station Agent,'' which won three awards at the Sundance Film Festival last year, including the audience award for best drama.
Written and directed by Mr. McCarthy, the movie this year was a nominee at the Screen Actors Guild awards, in a category with mainstream films like ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King,'' ''Seabiscuit'' and ''Mystic River,'' contenders for best picture at the Academy Awards, to be presented tonight. ''The Station Agent'' was also nominated for awards from the Writers Guild of America and the British Academy of Film and Television Arts.
Made for $500,000, a paltry amount by Hollywood standards, ''The Station Agent'' has stayed in theaters through the fall and winter. It is the story of Finbar McBride, a dwarf and railroad buff, played by Peter Dinklage, whose only friend dies and leaves him a remote and somewhat rundown railroad station house in rural New Jersey.
Over the course of the film, he has quirky relationships with a married woman (Patricia Clarkson) who is leaving her husband after her child's tragic death; a Cuban-American lunch-cart operator (Bobby Cannavale); a local librarian (Michelle Williams), and a young African-American girl (Raven Goodwin).
Among the many positive reviews was the one in The New York Times by Elvis Mitchell. He called it ''the kind of appetizing movie you want to share with others.'' He said that Mr. McCarthy ''has such an appreciation for quiet that it occupies the same space as a character in this film, a delicate, thoughtful and often hilarious take on loneliness.''
Mr. McCarthy, 34 and a native of New Providence, has had a decent midlevel acting career. A graduate of Yale University's School of Drama, he was in the cast of the television series ''Boston Public'' for a year, and appeared in the films ''Meet the Parents'' and ''The Citizen.'' He has performed on stage in New York City and in regional theater. ''The Station Agent'' is his first feature film behind the camera.
''I had never so much as shot a short before this,'' he said.
He started writing ''The Station Agent'' about three years ago and eventually developed the main characters with Mr. Dinklage, Mr. Cannavale and Ms. Clarkson in mind. He had worked with them at various times and found them compelling as actors and congenial as friends, he said.
But, he said, Hollywood was loath to take on a project with a dwarf as the main character. ''I knew a lot of people in the film business, and I went to every one of them, and everyone they suggested,'' he said. No one was interested.
Finally, his agents put him in touch with Mary Jane Skalski, who specialized in independent films and was a fan of Mr. Dinklage and Ms. Clarkson. A team of first-time producers, Robert May and Kathryn Tucker, put up most of the money, and Mr. McCarthy was off. ''We had to be quick, and we had to get it right,'' he said. ''That's the way of independent film.''
For example, he pointed out, ''Meet the Parents'' had a four-month shoot, while ''The Station Agent'' had 20 days, all in New Jersey around Newfoundland, which is near the border of Morris and Passaic Counties.
Mr. McCarthy could not afford to rent a train on his budget. So he stationed a production assistant a few hundred yards up the tracks when they were shooting around the station house, where Mr. Dinklage's character lived in the film. When a train was coming, the production assistant would blow a whistle. Shooting at the station house would stop, and the crew would quickly set up needed shots of the train passing in the background.
The almost-Maine-like setting of the Newfoundland area has confounded moviegoers who do not expect New Jersey to look so pristine, Mr. McCarthy said.
''They've seen other versions of New Jersey that they don't think this could be one,'' he said. ''There is the Sopranos' New Jersey and Atlantic City, and Kevin Smith's version from movies like 'Clerks,' so I guess this is my version of the New Jersey I know.''
Mr. McCarthy recalled his days growing up in New Providence. ''Yeah, we always tried to sneak into McSorley's in New York and all that other teenage stuff,'' he said. ''We were bridge-and-tunnel people and strangely proud of it.''
At that time, he had never thought about acting, and went to Boston College to study business. He changed his major to philosophy, but by the time he was a senior he had started with a comedy improvisational group.
''I had never been around people like that, and it became really fun,'' he said. ''I dug that world, maybe because it was so far away from what I had grown up with.''
He traveled and did comedy and local acting roles before studying at Yale. With an apartment in the West Village, he lives a bicoastal existence, like many actors, but knows where his loyalties are.
''I'm an East Coast guy, because that is where the theater is and my family is,'' he said. ''But I have developed two sets of friends and two different lifestyles, and am happy to drop in on both.''
His fascination with the station house led to a fascination with the lore of railroading. He spent weeks at the New York Public Library researching the subject.
''I wanted to know everything,'' he said. ''Folk songs. Stories. The history. Obviously, only 10 percent of that is in the film. But it gave me a basis for thinking, for developing characters.''
''The Station Agent'' has already spawned the inevitable, a pilgrimage.
''Yes, I guess the trek to the depot has started,'' said Mr. McCarthy with a chuckle. ''Where is it? How do I get there? I've been hearing that. I guess I have to say that's flattering, that my New Jersey is finally getting noticed.''
