Don't look now, but here comes the Catholic Jesus. In February 1804, Thomas Jefferson sat in the White House, cutting verses out of two Bibles and pasting them together into an abridged New Testament that cast Jesus as a rational ethicist. Two hundred years later to the month, Mel Gibson was furiously cutting and pasting a cinematic testament to his own ultra-Catholic version of Christ. Jesus may be ''the same yesterday, and today, and forever'' (Hebrews 13:8), but at least in the United States everyone can write his own gospel.
Since the evangelical century of the 1800's, America's Protestant majority has gravitated toward a Mister Rogers Jesus, a neighborly fellow they could know and love and imitate. The country's megachurches got that way in part because they stopped preaching fire and brimstone and the blood of the Lamb. Their parishioners are sinners in the hands of an amiable God. Their Jesus is a loving friend.
Gibson's Christ is by all accounts a very different character. If the mind is the seat of Jefferson's Jesus and the heart the seat of the evangelical Friend, Gibson's Christ is in his body. He came here neither to deliver moral maxims nor to exude empathy, but to spew blood. This is not a therapeutic, ''I'm O.K., you're O.K.'' Christianity. In fact, ''The Passion of the Christ'' seems hell-bent on crashing head-on into a parking lot full of American Protestant assumptions. Its leading man is the Christ of devotional Catholics who for centuries have approached their redeemer bodily, through the Eucharist, gratefully imbibing his battered body. And in scene after gory scene, Gibson is thrusting that Christ in our faces, shoving the ''Man of Sorrows'' of medieval passion plays into the national conversation about Jesus (and in Latin, Hebrew and Aramaic no less).
That national conversation began in earnest after the Revolutionary War, when evangelical Protestants pledged their allegiance to God the Son rather than God the Father. After liberating themselves from the tyranny of George III, these patriots were in no mood to bow down before another distant King, especially since, according to the reigning Puritan theology, he had capriciously predestined each of us to either heaven or hell. So they reinvented Christianity as a Jesus-loving rather than a God-fearing faith, transfiguring Jesus from an abstract theological sign into a living, breathing human being.
Over the American centuries, Protestants have resurrected Jesus as a socialist and a capitalist, a pacifist and a warrior, a civil rights activist and a Ku Klux Klansman. During the Victorian period, Jesus became a sentimental savior beloved by women and adored by children. During the Progressive era of Teddy Roosevelt's Rough Riders, he flexed his muscles and carried a big stick.
Non-Christians eventually joined the discussion. Between the Civil War and the 1930's, virtually every major Reform rabbi in the United States wrote a book or pamphlet reclaiming Jesus as a Jew. Echoing Jefferson, these rabbis drew a sharp distinction between the true religion of Jesus and the false religion about him. Then they praised the man from Nazareth as a faithful son of the synagogue who scrupulously observed the law and died with the Shema (''Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord'') on his lips.
Buddhists and Hindus have also made Jesus in their own image. In ''The Good Heart: A Buddhist Perspective on the Teachings of Jesus,'' the Dalai Lama recognized him as ''either a fully enlightened being or a bodhisattva of a very high spiritual realization.'' Swami Yogananda, author of ''Autobiography of a Yogi'' and founder of the Self-Realization Fellowship, flattered the Galilean (and himself) when he called Jesus a ''spiritual giant'' and a secret practitioner of yoga.
But Catholic contributions to this messy midrash on Jesus have been sporadic and muted. Few Catholics participated in the quests for the historical Jesus that have bedeviled American Protestants. Few wrote lives of Christ or Christological novels. When the National Catholic Reporter held a turn-of-the-millennium art contest for the best depiction of ''Jesus 2000,'' the winner was not Catholic.
Catholics inhabit a cosmos overflowing with sacred power, charged with the spiritual possibilities of saints and sacraments, angels and demons, popes and priests. By contrast, Protestants have since the 16th century sought to strip away those accretions of popery, banishing the saints and slashing the sacraments from seven to two (marriage and the Eucharist). Whereas Catholics based their faith on Scripture and tradition, Protestants relied on the Bible alone. But as textual criticism and Darwinism chipped away at the Bible's authority, sola scriptura gave way among many Protestants to solus Jesus: Jesus alone. To be a Christian was no longer to celebrate the Mass or to read the Bible but to have a personal relationship with Jesus.
American Catholics have never quite gotten what this fuss is all about. They access God through the saints, Scriptures and sacraments of the church; their spiritual drama is not a one-man show. Still, they have not entirely neglected the Jesus wars. During the Roaring Twenties, an era as besotted with Jesus (and celebrity) as our own, ''Life of Christ,'' by the Italian Catholic convert Giovanni Papini, spent three years near the top of the U.S. best-seller list, entertaining readers with purple prose and perfervid faith.
Gibson and Papini have much in common. Both are outlanders who found their largest audiences in the United States. Both are traditionalist Catholics who came to intense faith late in life (Papini as a convert from skepticism, Gibson as a prodigal son). Each presents his Jesus with the glee, and at times the bigotry, of a man of fresh faith. Unlike Gibson's ''Passion of the Christ,'' which confines itself to the last 12 hours of Jesus' life, Papini's volume covers the whole story. But the book tends inexorably toward the trial and the cross, where Jews mutate into serpents (''Pharisaical vipers'') and uncontrollable violence rains down. Papini's Jesus is indisputably divine, but he is also trapped in the tomb of the body. This is Gibson's Jesus too: a suffering servant who takes the lash with us, exhales his last breath for us and comes to us in the ''real presence'' of the Eucharist.
There is one crucial difference, however, between Papini and Gibson. Papini hated Protestants, while Gibson courts them the way he wooed Helen Hunt in ''What Women Want.'' ''America is the land . . . of the insupportable Washington, the boresome Emerson, the degenerate Walt Whitman, the sickening Longfellow, the angelic Wilson, the philanthropic Morgan, the undesirable Edison and other men of like quality,'' Papini once fumed. And for those sins, God in his wisdom visited on the nation the curse of Protestantism. Who knows what Gibson is thinking, but he has said nothing to rile America's evangelicals, who have embraced him as a brother even as Catholic bishops have raised concerns.
One puzzle of the reception of the film thus far is why born-again Christians have given such a big thumbs up to what is so unapologetically a Catholic movie. Why are they putting their grass-roots organizations at the beck and call of the producer formerly known as Mad Max, buying tickets by the thousands for an R-rated film? Why are they lauding an image of Jesus that owes as much to medieval passion plays and Hollywood action movies as it does to the Gospels, that runs so hard against the Protestant grain?
The culture wars no doubt have something to do with the evangelicals' decision to close ranks with Gibson, who must be commended for so adroitly spinning the debate over his depiction of Jews into a battle between secular humanists and true believers. The evangelicals' ''amen'' to the movie may demonstrate that conservative Protestants have bought more into Hollywood's culture of violence than they would like to admit. Or that, while anti-Semitism is still alive in the United States, anti-Catholicism is finished.
When it comes to the back story of the American Jesus, however, the decision by conservative Protestants to break bread with Gibson may be telling us that the friendly Jesus is on the way out. Calling on the authority of the Apostle Paul, who once boasted that he gloried only in the cross, a group known as the Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals has taken American Protestants (evangelicals included) to the woodshed for preaching a ''self-esteem gospel'' rather than the tough truths of the creeds. And Gerald McDermott, a professor of religion at Roanoke College, complains that American Protestants are reducing Jesus ''to no more than the Dalai Lama without the aura, an admirable sort of guy.''
Mel Gibson wants to undo all that, and his film just may. Cecil B. DeMille, who directed the 1927 Jesus movie ''The King of Kings,'' once bragged that only the Bible had introduced Jesus to more people than had his film. Soon Mel Gibson may be telling us the same.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-29-04: ESSAY Stephen Prothero is the chairman of the department of religion at Boston University and the author of ''American Jesus: How the Son of God Became a National Icon.''
Correction:  March 14, 2004, Sunday  An essay on Feb. 29 about Protestants' reaction to the movie ''The Passion of the Christ'' and the history of their interpretation of Jesus misidentified the sacrament other than the Eucharist recognized by them. It is baptism, not marriage.
