Over three months, from Nov. 2, 2003, to Jan. 31, 2004, daily articles printed in The New York Times looked into the fragile lives of some New Yorkers and explored how unforeseen misfortune put them in the grip of poverty. In case after case, people who received emergency assistance from The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund told how the aid gave them hope.
In the end, the campaign turned out to be among the most successful in the fund's 93-year history -- and the most challenging. Over the course of the three-month fund-raising effort, a total of 12,010 individual and institutional donors gave $8,279,371. That sum was the third-largest ever for the fund, but it was 6 percent less than the $8,806,761 raised last year. Donor support was down 16 percent, fund officials said.
''In this soft economy, the total dollars and total donors are down, but there's a big silver lining in this year's figures,'' said Jack Rosenthal, the president of The New York Times Company Foundation, which administers the fund. ''The average gift was $689 -- and that's a gratifying 10 percent higher than last year.''
Contributions ranged from a few dollars to a $1 million gift from the Starr Foundation, a private nonprofit group associated with the American International Group. About a thousand donations, totaling $250,869.50, were submitted through an online donation service, CharityWave.com. A group of first- and second-year analysts from several investment banks continued a decade-long tradition by collecting $134,868 from their colleagues. The fund also received $707,602.63 from bequests and trusts.
''This money is extraordinarily important,'' said Louise B. Greilsheimer, vice president of agency and external relations for UJA-Federation of New York, one of the seven charities supported by the Neediest Cases Fund.
The money helps UJA-Federation agencies offer cash assistance to meet emergency housing, clothing, food and transportation needs, she said.
''The articles,'' Ms. Greilsheimer continued, ''raise awareness of New York City's affluent and educated population about people who are falling behind. They give you real people behind the numbers.''
Sometimes, raising awareness results in acts of kindness that can change a person's life. This year's campaign was no exception.
When Roger Greene, director of marketing for the New York College of Podiatric Medicine, read an article published on Nov. 13 about Frederick Hart, 46, he was moved.
The article told of persistent foot problems that kept Mr. Hart from holding a job and getting off public assistance. After three operations to shave bone from his feet and place metal straightening pins and screws in his toes to stop pain, Mr. Hart found little relief. He hoped to take comfort from special shoes, for which he received $99 from Catholic Charities, Diocese of Brooklyn and Queens, another of the charities supported by the Neediest Cases Fund.
''He had been through so much - been through so much pain for years,'' said Mr. Greene, who shared the story with doctors at the college.
When Dr. Justin Wernick, the chairman of the Department of Orthopedic Sciences at the college, heard the story, he, too, was compelled to help beyond providing shoes.
Mr. Hart met with Dr. Wernick at the Foot Clinics of New York, a service run by the college.
For the first time, Mr. Hart felt that someone understood what he had been going through. ''This professor looked at me, he told me something I had never heard before -- I had multiple cysts,'' Mr. Hart said.
Last Tuesday, Dr. Wernick and a colleague, Dr. Mark Mandato, operated on Mr. Hart, beginning a six- to seven-month treatment plan.
After the surgery, Mr. Hart was ecstatic. ''This is a blessing to go through all of this,'' he said. ''I wasn't expecting this. I feel like there is hope now.'' The procedure and maintenance visits would have cost more than $5,000 -- an amount he could never pay.
Mr. Hart said he saw the surgery as the beginning of a new life. He added that he could not believe that his windfall resulted from an article about finding money for the proper shoes. ''Without the article, I would have never had this response,'' he said.
''I am fortunate. Out of all the people in the city, my article resulted in people helping me. I feel special.''
Trusts  Alexander C. &amp; Tillie Speyer Foundation  Arts 2nd &amp; 11th Madge Miller &amp; Hoyt Miller  August Siesel  Augustus Siesel Trust Fund  Cooper-Siegel Foundation  David Haas Memorial  Edward G. McAnaney  Elizabeth Ernst Fosbinder Revocable Trust  Herbert Allen Foundation  Jack Haase  James A. McDonald Foundation c/o Law offices of Walter J. Handelman  John Roach Trust Fund  JP Morgan Chase  JP Morgan Private Bank  JRS Dryfoos Charitable Lead Trust  Madge &amp; Hoyt Miller  Melkus Family Foundation  Sophia L. Miller Trust Fund  The Central National/Gottesman Foundation  The Ellen M. Violett &amp; Mary PR Thomas Foundation  The Pincus Family Fund  The Rodgers Family Foundation  The Saint Paul Foundation  The Salem and Annabel Jacoff Foundation  The Sloman Foundation  The Wyss Foundation  Thomas Sweeney TTEE/Thomas Hubbard TTEE  Wave Systems Corp.  Wilbur Trust  William Detmold  Wilmington Trust
Estates  Estate of Edward U. Gips  Estate of George Muchnic  Estate of Joan H. Wickert  Estate of Lawrence Zirinsky  Estate of Lester I Glen Judith G. Seip, Per. Rep  Estate of Lillian Studer  Estate of Louis W. Bowen  Estate of Madge &amp; Hoyt Miller  Estate of Phyliss Studner Grant  Estate of Ralph Jahr  Estate of Salvatore Saraceno  Solon E. Summerfield Foundation
The Neediest Cases
