MICHAEL and Leslie Ciriaco of Merrick sell greeting cards online. Andy Calimano of Babylon runs his own marketing firm. And Karin Eckert of Port Washington is a landscape and garden consultant.
The entrepreneurs are self-employed, but with a sobering qualifier -- they started their businesses as the economic slowdown of the last few years began to take root. During downturns, the ranks of the self-employed swell with workers armed with fresh pink slips and maybe some severance pay to help finance their new ventures.
Ms. Eckert, 63, was let go in 2000 from her six-figure administrative job at Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center in Brooklyn. Mr. Calimano, 38, lost his job at the LinkShare Corporation, an Internet marketing company in Manhattan, in 2001. The Ciriacos' circumstances were different: Mrs. Ciriaco, 35, left her job as a Rockette at Radio City Music Hall when she became pregnant with her first son in 1998, and her husband continued his job as the executive chef at the Ramada Plaza J.F.K., near Kennedy Airport.
Ms. Eckert, Mr. Calimano and the Ciriacos share the same success story. They have passed the two-year point -- most start-ups fail in their first two years -- and they have successfully ridden out the economic downturn and reached what most local economists agree is an economic recovery, albeit a muted one.
Pearl M. Kamer, the chief economist at the Long Island Association, said businesses begun during the slowdown would quite likely be a ''springboard for the next surge in employment growth,'' which she expects this year.
''What's happened in this business cycle is very similar to what happened on Long Island in the late 1980's and early 1990's, when we lost much of our defense industry base,'' Dr. Kamer said. ''At that time many engineers had ideas for new products or services of their own, based on defense technology in large measure. They applied those to civilian markets. By the late 1990's many of these businesses started to grow and hire people.''
In the next business cycle, telecom and information technology workers who lost their jobs will be the ones doing the hiring, Dr. Kamer said.
Mr. Calimano agreed. ''Usually when there are downturns, people get entrepreneurial, and hopefully they become the next generation of established businesses,'' he said. ''That's what we're hoping to do.''
Mr. Calimano said he and his business partner, Chris Consorte, have already hired five people for their marketing firm, Integrated Direct, which combines traditional print and Internet marketing services. Friends did not encourage their new venture. As Mr. Calimano put it: ''We did hear: 'Why are you investing your time? Why don't you go for a more traditional job? Why are you coupling your direct-marketing backgrounds with the Internet?' We just felt there were a lot of opportunities. We always had faith in the Internet.''
Mr. Calimano, Ms. Eckert and the Ciriacos appear to have survived the downturn by rigorously following some basic tenets of start-up survival: reinvesting profits in their businesses and working long hours.
The Ciriacos' progression from chef and Rockette to their own greeting card and announcement business, and Ms. Eckert's move from hospital administrator to landscape designer, are less obvious than Mr. Calimano's transition within the online marketing world. Even so, the Ciriacos and Ms. Eckert say their new businesses were not a huge leap.
When the Ciriacos first began considering their own business four years ago, they planned to capitalize on Mr. Ciriaco's experience as a chef by beginning a cooking Web site. At the time, the couple happened to be choosing birth announcements for the arrival of their son. The idea of a greeting card company appealed to them, and they quickly shifted gears.
The Ciriacos decided to call their business e-Announcements and Invitations.com, taking orders online and then sending greeting cards, birth announcements and wedding invitations to their customers. For Mr. Ciriaco, a typical day in the first years of the business began at 5 a.m. He would sit at a computer designing cards, printing them and taking orders until midafternoon, when he would go off to work as a chef.
His wife, meanwhile, juggled business and motherhood -- their son Michael is now 4, and their son Zachary is 2. After putting the children to bed, Mrs. Ciriaco would fill orders until her husband arrived home, sometimes after midnight.
Mr. Ciriaco said he was driven by a fear of failing during the weak economy. Money was scarce as the Ciriacos plowed earnings back into their business. ''When we went to the grocery store, we were removing items from our grocery cart as this thing was starting up,'' Mr. Ciriaco recalled. ''There were 50 times that we nearly quit. It was rough.''
Sometimes the couple improvised, asking the U.P.S. driver to watch the children in a pinch. ''She would buy us 15 or 20 minutes as we boxed up our last order,'' Mr. Ciriaco said.
Ms. Eckert, the former hospital administrator, could not have asked for better timing for her foray into garden design. Months before her hospital job ended, she began taking horticulture classes at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. Then, as she was looking for another health-care job, the State Labor Department invited her to join a self-employment program for people who had lost their jobs.
With the help of a job counselor, Ms. Eckert came up with a business plan to become a landscape consultant and designer. She began dipping into her and her husband's retirement savings for what would amount to $25,000 in start-up costs. Half a year after her hospital job ended, she had her own business, Garden Elements, up and running.
Confident in her concept, she only briefly considered the risks of beginning a business in a rocky economy. ''It's the kind of business that, even in a down economy, would have customers because people would still do landscaping and want a garden or want planters put up on their property,'' she said. It helped that her immediate market was Port Washington, brimming with upscale, environmentally aware clients. Ms. Eckert handles all phases of gardening, from design to maintenance. She puts in the smaller plants herself and arranges for suppliers to handle the larger trees and shrubs.
Ms. Eckert said she lost money in her first year, barely broke even in her second and turned a profit last year. The Ciriacos say their business was profitable early on: revenues totaled $100,000 in 2001, $200,000 in 2002 and $320,000 last year. Mr. Calimano, the Internet marketer, said his firm lost money in its first three years and turned a profit in 2002, although from the start, revenue doubled each year.
All of the businesses appear poised for stronger growth. ''If you can start a business in somewhat of a down economy and keep it going when the economy turns, you're in a really good position,'' said Lucille Wesnofske, the director of the New York State Small Business Development Center at Farmingdale State University. ''If you're keeping your business going, you've got some kind of a customer base and a reputation. That just gets better and better when the economy turns around.''
