IN recent weeks, state regulators fought two battles against federal officials in their continuing quest for autonomy in the oversight of financial institutions. They won one and lost one.
The victory came last week. The House Financial Services Committee struck language from an investor protection bill that would have diluted the powers of state securities regulators when they pursued fraud cases. The language had been put into the bill largely in response to aggressive moves by regulators in New York, Massachusetts and other states against brokerage firms and mutual funds.
But state regulators took a big hit on Feb. 12. New regulations issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the federal overseer of banks that is a part of the Treasury, placed all authority to regulate national banks at the federal level. As a result, state banking laws have been pre-empted or nullified.
Under the new rules, the states' banking regulators, including Diana L. Taylor, superintendent of banks in New York, say they can no longer enforce consumer protection laws against national banks and their units. Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general, agrees. He has filed a lawsuit challenging the measure.
When he announced the rules, John D. Hawke Jr., the comptroller of the currency, said: ''Federal pre-emption is not a new idea. Its roots lie in the supremacy clause of the Constitution, and the courts have repeatedly held that the states cannot restrict the federally authorized activities of national banks.''
But state regulators fear that consumers will be hurt. ''There are local issues in banking that are best addressed by the states,'' said Muriel Siebert, president of the brokerage firm in New York that bears her name, who was superintendent of banks in the state from 1977 to 1982. ''They know the economy; they know the banking system.''
Last week, members of the House Financial Services Committee criticized the comptroller's move, indicating that the issue was far from decided. If the comptroller's office does not retreat from its position, Congress may draft new regulation.
''The states in this little drama are Thomas à Becket, and the business community is asking to be rid of this meddlesome priest,'' said Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts, the senior Democrat on the committee. ''But this is one where I think they miscalculated. This one is not going away.''
