Before a new school opens in Queens, it must first march across a chart kept by Helen Marshall, the Queens borough president. From left to right, the chart displays the hurdles a school must clear -- from environmental review to design and construction -- before it lands in that magical column marked ''opened.''
Despite cuts to the city budget over the past two years, the new schools have kept marching, 10 this school year and 5 the year before. That is some comfort to the parents and students of Queens, the borough with the largest number of overcrowded schools in New York. About 46 percent of city students attend overcrowded schools, but in six of the seven Queens districts, the percentage exceeds that rate, the city Department of Education says.
But those budget woes have pushed back the scheduled opening dates of eight schools planned for Queens, despite the best efforts of Ms. Marshall, who convenes what she calls a monthly war room meeting with city officials to figure out how to add more classrooms as quickly as possible.
''This year, we're feeling our first real impact of the budget cuts,'' she said on Thursday, after a recent tour of Public School 78, on the Long Island City waterfront. The school, which occupies part of the first two floors of the upscale, 42-floor Citylights apartment building, was originally meant for kindergarten to second grade; it now serves pre-kindergarteners to fifth graders. Although the school is only seven years old, it is already filled to capacity.
The school was built without frills: no gym, no auditorium, no playground. ''There's a lot of limitation because the school's too small,'' said Debra Saunders, a Citylights resident who calls herself a big customer of P.S. 78 with two of her children going there and a third starting year.
The situation is worse elsewhere in the borough. Each of Queens's 42 high school has staggered sessions, which allows administrators to accommodate more students than there are seats. John Adams High School in Ozone Park, where overcrowding is the worst of any borough high school, holds two separate school days in back-to-back shifts, despite the fact that three new high schools opened in Queens last fall.
''Half the student body arrives at school before daylight, and are dismissed at noon,'' Ms. Marshall said. ''The other half arrives midday, and leaves in darkness.''
Queens Councilman Leroy Comrie worries that the money available for building new schools might shrink even more. He noted that the Bloomberg administration is depending on the state to finance half of the $13.1 billion the city has budgeted for new school construction.
''It's the No.1 problem,'' he said of the coming slowdown in the opening of new schools. ''If you have classrooms crowded with 32 kids, effective learning disappears.''
After Ms. Marshall finished her tour, she was met by the rumble of heavy machinery that was clearing the ground two blocks away for a series of apartment towers that will bring more children to the area. Then, as she entered a 6,000-square-foot storefront in the Citylights building that has been vacant for seven years, she made a proposal: It would be perfect for an extension of P.S. 78, she suggested, which, after all, was just on the other side of the storefront's cinder-block wall.
JIM O'GRADY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: QUEENS UP CLOSE
