''DIVIDE and Conquer,'' the new dance by the choreographer Carolyn Dorfman, explores emotional landscapes close to Ms. Dorfman's life in Short Hills.
In costumes that could have been plucked from the nearby mall, a newly married couple, played by Emily Gayeski and Jon Zimmerman, float on and around a kitchen table flanked by two chairs. Time goes by, punctuated by the woman gliding to stage left and flipping a calendar-like prop, while a baby -- strapped to the woman in a sling, its recorded wails interrupting the music -- distorts the marital harmony.
The relationship is enhanced and diminished as the family grows. At the end, the couple's two grown children leave home, and the couple clings to each other across the wreckage of the well-worn chairs and table.
Ms. Dorfman, 48, who celebrates 25 years of marriage this year, and has two daughters, ages 14 and 11, says she wants her choreography to reflect real life.
''I don't like any mode of dance that suggests contemporary dance is for a very particular audience, or that makes dance more enigmatic,'' she said.
''People are afraid they won't get dance, that it's a thing to be gotten, and that they're going to feel stupid,'' she added. ''Dance can be a challenge, but some artists are better than others at letting people in.''
For 22 years, Ms. Dorfman has led the Carolyn Dorfman Dance Company, based in Union. Since the early days, Ms. Dorfman said, she has ''gotten a little better'' about managing opening-night nerves. But she acknowledged that they had crept upon her during February's premiere of ''Divide and Conquer'' and another piece, ''Pastoral Pause,'' at the F.M. Kirby Shakespeare Theater in Madison, which is to be performed again on Thursday night at the State Theater in New Brunswick.
On April 2, the company will perform at the Paul Robeson Community Theme School for the Arts in New Brunswick, the culmination of a brief residency. Other performances are noted on the company's Web site, www.carolyndorfmandanceco.org.
''Pastoral Pause,'' with music by John Whelan, sets five of Ms. Dorfman's troupe prancing contemplatively through imagined landscapes, and converging in a series of pileups, some on a diagonally situated set of spinning discs that loose the dancers in languid revolutions.
''It still feels like I'm running around up there stark naked,'' Ms. Dorfman said, reflecting on the personal nature of her work.
Ms. Dorfman, a Detroit native, received an M.F.A. in dance in 1979 from New York University. Since her undergraduate days at the University of Michigan, she has been a fascinated follower of the techniques of Doris Humphrey and Jose Limon.
She moved to Short Hills when her husband, an orthopedist, set up his practice here. She founded her company in 1982, because various teaching positions, including a stint from 1980 to 1985 at Centenary College in Hackettstown, could not satisfy the urge to create, she said, and ''because getting incorporated was the grown-up thing to do.''
Since then, she has created more than 50 works for the company, which consists of nine dancers. Her signature theme is the struggle to connect.
''The dancers have to understand that the whole is bigger than them, and they have to find their place within that, without looking messy or disparate,'' she said. ''I try to move from the personal to the universal.''
That vision is clear in her best-known work, ''Mayne Mentshn (My People),'' a tribute to her parents, Holocaust survivors, and especially her father, who died just before its 2002 premiere at John Jay College in New York City. The dance tells the story of an American immigrant from Eastern Europe.
''It blends my history and heritage with my sense of theatricality and dance, which is very satisfying,'' Ms. Dorfman said. ''It makes me feel most whole.''
Ms. Gayeski, 28, the ''Divide and Conquer'' mother, has been with the company for five years. Ms. Dorfman, she said, ''has very specific, very strong ideas about what she wants'' from her dancers. ''She wants to give you room to figure out how you want to do things, but she shapes it a lot.''
Pamela Wagner, 33, who portrayed the daughter in ''Divide and Conquer'' and has been part of the troupe since 1998, added, ''She wants what she wants, but she also honors what's unique about individual dancers.''
Ms. Dorfman said that ''just about every five years I hit a wall.'' These days she is considering whether to perform on her own, which she has not done for years. ''People have been bugging me to do a solo'' as a dancer, she said, ''and I may do that.''
If she does, she will have to wedge it in between teaching at the Limon Studio and DanceSpace in Manhattan; an artist-in-residence position with the New Jersey Arts Council through which she holds weeklong residencies on modern dance at schools and universities statewide; and her company's rehearsal and performance schedule.
''There are times I panic, that I think I'll have no other ideas,'' she said. ''But things percolate,'' she said. ''This is my passion.''
