TONY BLAIR
The Making of a World Leader.
By Philip Stephens.
265 pp. New York:
Viking. $25.95.
AFTER the Iowa caucuses last month, Will Marshall of the Progressive Policy Institute in Washington said that it had been ''a good night for the Blair Democrats.'' Historians speak of Palmerstonian diplomacy, some Englishmen still call themselves Gladstonian Liberals and Thatcherism remains a fighting word, but Tony Blair must surely be the first British prime minister to have given his name to an American political phrase.
Even before Sept. 11 and still more after, Blair struck a chord with many Americans. To the ''liberal hawks'' he became a hero -- the ''leader of the free world'' for Paul Berman -- and those Blair Democrats find the prime minister's justification of the Iraq war through progressive internationalist rhetoric more soothing than the naked power politics of their own president.
They are the obvious audience for ''Tony Blair: The Making of a World Leader,'' a biography based on years of observation and on long interviews with its subject. There are plenty of other books about Blair, but Philip Stephens's is the first by a London political journalist specifically intended to explain him to Americans.
As any such book must do, it illuminates the sheer unlikeliness of the man's career. Blair is the first leader of his party to have no roots at all in the labor movement or any interest in socialism as a doctrine. His father was a self-made lawyer, and an enthusiastic Conservative, who sent his son to an old-fashioned public school in Scotland. Blair's contemporaries there remember him, significantly enough, as a brilliant actor.
At Oxford he blossomed, and got religion, under the influence of an Australian clergyman and the writer John Macmurray. Blair's political thinking is informed and infused by his Christianity, Stephens says. He deals with this subject thoughtfully, although with a few slips that suggest he may not be an Anglican (Blair could not have been confirmed by his college chaplain at Oxford, only by a bishop, and that Australian parson was not a ''prelate'').
Some are more impressed by Blair's ethical uplift than others. ''He holds to a set of values,'' one admirer says, ''fairness, tolerance, decency'' (unlike those of us who believe in unfairness, intolerance and indecency), and yet his religious zeal makes the British uneasy, as Stephens recognizes.
He could have made more of this. Religious observance is low and declining in England among all Christian denominations (though not Muslims), and the fact that Blair is a regular churchgoing member of the Church of England is something he has in common with less than 2 percent of the English population. Even the fact that he is any sort of devout Christian is something he has in common with a minority of prime ministers over the past century. Almost impossible to characterize in British terms, he has been best described as a Christian Democrat, while his invocation of religion seems less jarring to Americans, who are used to that from their politicians.
After a solid but largely uneventful career as a barrister and then a backbench member of Parliament, Blair became Labor leader 10 years ago this summer. Since then, he has been continually at odds with his party, while striving to please a harshly partisan right-wing press. Stephens observes this from the vantage point of a columnist on The Financial Times, which is perhaps the most scrupulous of London papers, occasionally high-minded to a fault in its disinclination to impute any base motive whatever to the country's rulers. (Maybe I should add that I write a weekly sports column for the FT, though that might be fuller disclosure than anyone sane could wish for.)
''This is a biography, not a hagiography,'' Stephens says a little defensively, and it's true that most of the book is honest and judicious. The author is quite capable of scolding Blair, for his ruthlessness, for his theatricality and for his uncritical admiration of the worst of Bill Clinton's methods, noting also the nimble way Blair switched from Bill's buddy to George's pal.
In one chapter alone does Stephens himself lapse into something like uncritical approbation. He describes the 1998 agreement in Northern Ireland as a ''historic achievement,'' and implies that it was wholly admirable. To be sure, that is the conventional wisdom, but there is another view. When John Banville was asked about the ''peace process,'' the most distinguished Irish novelist and critic of his generation replied that ''those of us who have always thought of the I.R.A., and indeed Sinn Fein, as neofascist, are deeply worried by the kind of respectability they have won now in Dublin, London and Washington.''
Leaving aside such namby-pamby considerations, any idea that Blair secured a lasting settlement looks distinctly shaky at present. Devolved government in Northern Ireland is in abeyance, and in the elections late last year Sinn Fein overtook the moderate nationalists, while the Democratic Unionists, fiercely opposed to the agreement, became the largest party in Northern Ireland. That was not what Blair had in mind six years ago. Stephens cites the complacent phrase British officials used about the ''constructive ambiguity'' behind the agreement, but what that really meant was that the position was misrepresented to both sides -- all too characteristically on Blair's part, his critics would say.
While Stephens has made news with his claim that Chirac opposed the war deliberately to undermine Blair, another revelation in the book is even more interesting. ''Blair sometimes thought Clinton was too biased toward the Republicans'' -- that is, the I.R.A. and its political front, Sinn Fein.
Further evidence is also provided for something we had learned from other sources, like ''Blair's Wars,'' by John Kampfner. Blair expresses warm regard for President Bush, while there is a close rapport between Jack Straw, the foreign secretary, and Colin Powell. And there is also something like reciprocal loathing between Downing Street and Dick Cheney's office in Washington. Here is a story that deserves closer inspection.
This book comes at a fraught moment in Blair's career. At the end of January his usual Commons majority of more than 150 dropped to a nail-biting five votes, and although Lord Hutton, who was appointed by Blair, cleared the government of conscious deception while damning the BBC, his report was greeted with widespread derision. In a subsequent poll three times as many British people said that they trusted the BBC as trusted the government, and in another a majority said Blair should resign.
As to Iraq, even this friendly biographer cannot deny that the intelligence adduced by the prime minister was ''speculative.'' Blair's claim that the Iraqi threat was ''serious and current'' was ''barely sustained by the hard facts,'' Stephens admits.
If anything, he shows more than he may have intended just how bad a deal Blair has made simply in terms of British national interest. After Sept. 11, while quite rightly saying that some reactions to the massacre betrayed ''a hatred of America that shames those that feel it,'' Blair offered America unconditional British support. His immediate reward from Washington was a tariff likely to ruin what was left of the British steel industry.
In his quaintly chiliastic speech (''The kaleidoscope has been shaken. The pieces are in flux. Soon they will settle again'') to the Labor Party conference that October, Blair said that ''the starving, the wretched, the dispossessed, the ignorant, those living in want and squalor from the deserts of northern Africa to the slums of Gaza, to the mountain ranges of Afghanistan: they too are our cause.'' That is just the language Blair Democrats like to hear, and the Labor Party too. ''Gaza'' acknowledged that a just resolution to the Palestinian question is a cause dear to his party's heart, and Blair insisted that this would follow from the destruction of Saddam Hussein, even persuading Bush to utter a few words to that effect shortly before the invasion of Iraq.
And now? In the president's latest State of the Union address the subject was not mentioned even once. As the Israeli newspaper Haaretz sourly noted, ''Mars is more interesting to officials in Washington than street battles between Israelis and Palestinians.''
Today Tony Blair enjoys a greater luster in America than in his own country. And yet readers may end this well-informed and sympathetic book wondering how long it can be before the bloom fades, even among those fond Blair Democrats.
Geoffrey Wheatcroft's books include ''The Controversy of Zion'' and ''Le Tour: A History of the Tour de France.''
