Hoofing It to Midtown
Q. Do they still have an outdoor circus parade? And did the elephants ever walk through the Lincoln Tunnel?
A. Somehow, it just wouldn't be the circus without a parade, even if the circus prefers to call it an animal walk and it's held when most boys and girls are in bed. ''In every city, we have to walk our hoofed stock from train to the arena,'' said Barbara Pflughaupt, a spokeswoman for Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus.
This year's animal walk will start about 11:30 p.m. on March 16, a Tuesday, in Long Island City, Queens. The hoofed animals, including elephants, horses and perhaps camels and zebras -- but no big cats, thanks -- will walk the usual route from the train yards through the Queens-Midtown Tunnel to Madison Square Garden and up the five-story ramp at West 33rd Street and Eighth Avenue. Call it an early parade for St. Patrick's Day. Sometimes the walk includes clowns holding E-ZPasses.
The 134th edition of the Greatest Show on Earth will open at the Garden on March 18.
On May 17, 1971, a nationwide railroad strike left the circus train stranded at the rail yard in South Kearny, N.J., five miles from the Garden. Most of the circus went the rest of the way by truck, but a lumbering caravan of 19 elephants, a zebra, a llama and a pony took the Lincoln Tunnel under their own power, with four trainers riding on the backs of the elephants. The toll for the caravan was $9. There was no extra charge for trunks.
Nobel New Yorkers
Q. I understand that a monument was recently erected in the city to honor American Nobel Prize winners. Where is it, and how many winners are from the United States?
A. The monument, a four-sided monolith of red Swedish granite, is behind the American Museum of Natural History in Theodore Roosevelt Park. It is engraved with the names of 271 American winners, including President Theodore Roosevelt himself, the first American winner (the Peace Prize in 1906), and space has been left for the names of future winners.
Including last October's winners, 277 Americans have won Nobel Prizes, and 24 of them graduated from New York public schools, according to the city's Parks and Recreation Department.
The monument, built by the city and the Consulate General of Sweden, was dedicated last October.
Missing Muses
Q. I distinctly remember that the Metropolitan Museum of Art, in the restaurant that used to be at the south end of the main floor, had a fountain directly in the middle of that space. If I recall correctly, it represented the Seven Lively Arts and the sculptor was the Swedish artist Carl Milles. Since its disappearance many years ago, I have never seen it again in the museum. Was it placed in permanent storage or sold?
A. The work, ''Fountain of the Muses,'' was indeed by Carl Milles. It was removed from the museum in 1982, according to Ann Matson, a spokeswoman, and then went to Brookgreen Gardens, a public sculpture garden in Murrells Inlet, S.C., near Myrtle Beach, in January 1983. There the separate figures cavort, arms raised, as streams of water play.
The fountain and other representational sculptures at the gardens can be viewed at www.williambaylor.com/brookg.html.
As part of a remodeling project announced last week, a new Roman Court will be installed in the space occupied by the old restaurant. The museum built a new restaurant beneath the Medieval sculpture court.
MICHAEL POLLAK
F.Y.I. E-mail: fyi@nytimes.com
