So many times in match play, the bigger the moment, the better Tiger Woods seems to putt.
The latest example came Saturday afternoon, when Woods was locked in an even match with Stephen Leaney on the 16th hole of the Match Play Championship semifinals. At that moment, Leaney made a key mistake. He gave Woods an opportunity.
After Leaney settled for a par, Woods had a 12-foot putt for a birdie to go ahead, 1 up. Woods has made similar putts to win majors, to win tournaments and to break an opponent's spirit. And on this occasion, he did it again.
''I knew if I could somehow bury that putt, I could grab the momentum back,'' Woods said.
Woods made the putt, unleashed his signature fist pump, then closed out the match with a 10-foot birdie putt at No. 17 to defeat Leaney, 2 and 1. The victory moved Woods, the defending champion, into the 36-hole championship match Sunday against Davis Love III, who defeated Darren Clarke in 21 holes, making an 8-foot birdie putt to win Saturday's other tense semifinal.
Asked his reaction to playing Woods, Love said: ''It's like Duke coming out of the East. You know you're going to play them in the finals.''
While Love, ranked No. 5 in the world, will be a worthy opponent, Woods has a 19-3 record in this event, and he will try to become the first two-time winner in its six-year history. Considering his love for match play, coupled with his talent and stamina, Woods was not bashful about what he expected.
''I've always liked the idea of going head to head,'' Woods said. ''I feel that I have the game to win matches. I have great positive memories to rely on.''
But Leaney, a 34-year-old Australian who is ranked No. 33 in the world, gave Woods a serious battle. After Woods went 2 up through 11 holes, Woods missed the green at the par-3 12th hole, giving it to Leaney, and Leaney evened the match with a birdie at No. 13.
That was when Woods bore down. He almost fell behind at No. 14, but he made an 8-foot putt to save par. Then after Leaney and Woods parred No. 15, Woods took control at No. 16. He hit an 8-iron shot from 182 yards to set up the birdie at No. 16, followed by a beautiful 7-iron approach shot from 190 yards at No. 17 to set up the final birdie.
The Love-Clarke match was also superb, with Love rallying from two holes down after 16 holes. Clarke hit a terrible tee shot at No. 17 and took three shots to reach the green, allowing Love to cut his deficit to 1 down. Love won the par-5, 548-yard No. 18, reaching the green in two shots and two-putting for birdie, while Clarke missed a 10-foot attempt for birdie and settled for a par.
Love also won the best match of Saturday morning's fourth round, a 1-up victory over Phil Mickelson. It was a match in which Mickelson made seven birdies but still lost.
Mickelson paid for a risky decision and bogeyed the par-5, 558-yard 18th hole. After Love laid up on his second shot, Mickelson tried to reach the green with his second shot, hitting a 3-wood and needing 254 yards to reach the front of the green. He pulled the shot badly, and the ball ricocheted off the cart path and landed behind a tree, 50 yards right of the flag.
Mickelson tried to lob his next shot over the tree, but the ball caught a limb and dropped straight down, short of the greenside bunker. From there, Mickelson did not get up and down, and he lost an intense match by making a bogey from the fairway on a par 5.
That left Mickelson in a familiar position -- defending a decision that did not turn out the way he planned.
''A good 3-wood could have gotten the ball on the green, and a two-putt birdie should have been able to win,'' said Mickelson, who settled for his fifth top-five finish in five starts this year. ''I pull-hooked it and made 6. It was a disappointing day. I felt like I was playing better than that.''
Woods outlasted Padraig Harrington, 2 and 1, in a fourth-round match Saturday, while Clarke eliminated Jerry Kelly, 5 and 3. Woods could have ended his match with Harrington sooner, but he missed a 3-foot putt on No. 10 and bogeyed No. 15 from the middle of the fairway. Nevertheless, Woods remained upbeat because he accomplished his main objective -- moving on.
''We both didn't play up to our standards,'' Woods said of Harrington. ''It was a tough match. I made a couple of crucial putts to get some momentum. I just tried to hang on toward the end.''
It was the strongest final four that this event has ever had, with Woods ranked No. 1 in the world, Love No. 5, and Clarke No. 13. Woods is hoping to win for the first time this year, and his game has shown signs of peaking. After a shaky opening-round, 1-up victory over John Rollins on Wednesday, Woods dominated in victories over Trevor Immelman (5 and 4) and Fredrik Jacobson (5 and 4). He has not trailed since the 17th hole against Rollins.
''There's no substitute for good golf and momentum,'' Woods said. ''Those two things carry a long way.''
GOLF
