President Bush dramatically increased the pressure on Jean-Bertrand Aristide to resign as Haiti's president, authorizing a White House statement on Saturday evening that the crisis ''is largely of Mr. Aristide's making'' and adding that ''his own actions have called into question his fitness to continue to govern.''
Earlier in the day, senior administration officials said the United States did not want to seem to be pushing an elected leader out of office. But after a meeting of Mr. Bush's national security advisers on Saturday morning -- run by teleconference from Camp David by Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser -- the president concluded that Washington's strong hints to Mr. Aristide that he needed to resign must be stepped up to a strong shove.
During the meeting, officials said, Mr. Bush's advisers concluded that the rebel forces holding in position outside the city were unlikely to stay there for long. ''If they go in and Aristide is still sitting there, it's not going to be pretty,'' a senior official said Saturday evening. ''So the conclusion was that the only way to get to a political solution was to exert more pressure, an evolution of what we've been doing all week.''
But the official noted that the statement was ''short of an outright call for him to get out.''
Mr. Aristide, facing anarchy, food shortages and rising pressure from Washington as rebels closed in on Port-au-Prince, the capital, tried Saturday to rein in armed supporters terrorizing the city. ''We condemn that,'' he said of the looting. ''When it's not good, we have to say it's not good,'' he added in a national television address.
He called for Haitians to stop carjackings and thefts that added to the mounting disorder on Friday but to maintain barricades against any attack by the rebels, now in control of half the country.
The motley rebel band of advancing former soldiers and gang members have said they plan to continue their siege of Port-au-Prince for at least a few more days before a threatened attack to oust Mr. Aristide.
The White House statement, issued under the name of Scott McClellan, the press secretary, accused Mr. Aristide of coordinating the violence. ''In the last few days, gangs armed and directed by President Aristide have looted and attacked people and property in Port-au-Prince,'' the statement said. ''These attacks have targeted innocent civilians, humanitarian programs and international organizations trying to help the Haitian people. Mr. Aristide must instruct his supporters to end this violence. Rebel forces approaching Port-au-Prince must cease their acts of violence to allow for a political solution.''
Administration officials said that at this point, Mr. Bush remained reluctant to send in American forces, noting that they neither wanted to appear to be using the military to support Mr. Aristide's rule, nor could they be in the position of ousting an elected leader.
But the statement on Saturday night all but abandoned any support for the man who was elected the nation's leader in a process the United States helped bring about.
''This long-simmering crisis is largely of Mr. Aristide's making,'' it said. ''His failure to adhere to democratic principles has contributed to the deep polarization and violent unrest that we are witnessing in Haiti today. His own actions have called into question his fitness to continue to govern Haiti. We urge him to examine his position carefully, to accept responsibility, and to act in the best interests of the people of Haiti.''
Mr. Bush's aides fear, however, that a political solution is not at hand, and they became increasingly concerned as Mr. Aristide telephoned CNN and other news organizations to declare that he would remain for the rest of his term.
An administration official who is closely monitoring the Haiti crisis said, ''It's pretty clear that Aristide is directing these gangs with the intent of targeting his political enemies in Port-au-Prince and creating a general atmosphere of chaos.'' This official said Mr. Aristide was acting ''with the aim that he could still save himself if he could just drag the international community into Haiti.''
''What's going on in Port-au-Prince right now is indicative of how Aristide governs,'' the official said, ''and it's really hindering the international community's ability to address what's wrong in Haiti.''
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell spent much of Saturday working the telephones, talking with leaders of several Caribbean nations, notably Jamaica and the Bahamas, as well as with French and Canadian officials, seeking a way to end the stalemate, the official said.
Pentagon and other officials said there were no imminent plans to deploy additional American forces to help solve the crisis. ''We're still at the point where any kind of military security presence will have to be linked to a political solution, and viable political solutions right now are looking fewer and fewer,'' the senior administration official said. ''That is why Aristide must go.''
Marines could be called upon to evacuate Americans and other foreigners and provide other assistance if the crisis escalates, defense officials said.
The Web site for the 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit, based at Camp Lejeune, N.C., quoted Lt. Gen. Henry P. Osman, head of the Second Marine Expeditionary Force, as saying last week that marines could be sent to Haiti. ''Things are bubbling right now in a nation in our own hemisphere,'' General Osman was quoted as saying. ''You're the marines I'm going to be looking at to possibly answer that contingency.''
But with more than 25,000 marines now rotating into Iraq, and the Army badly stretched between deployments to Iraq, Afghanistan and the Balkans, Pentagon officials are reluctant to consider anything more than an evacuation mission, and want to avoid being pinned down in another open-ended operation.
