JAMES SMITH, a sculptor and gravestone maker in Belleville, Ontario, was surfing the Internet when he saw a request, posted by the village of Port Jefferson, seeking proposals for a sculpture for a new five-acre park on the waterfront. He submitted a proposal -- a small model of the skeleton of a 20-foot schooner, with ribs made of old railroad track that were supported by four, limestone-covered toy figurines, representing shipyard workers.
''It's making reference to the rich history of the shipbuilding tradition, particularly of the Bayles shipyard, which occupied the site where the sculpture will be situated,'' Mr. Smith said in a telephone interview.
The shipbuilding industry, Mr. Smith noted, had long since moved overseas, but some of the railroad tracks used in the shipyard were still imbedded in the rubble of the former brownfield industrial area where the park is being built.
''It was nice to pick up that reference to the gritty work world in which the shipyard workers were working,'' Mr. Smith said.
A panel of seven judges looked over Mr. Smith's maquette as well as those of seven local sculptors. In November, the panel unanimously agreed that Mr. Smith's model best conveyed the maritime heritage of the seaport village that they wanted in a landmark, and gave him the $65,000 commission.
But since then, local groups have criticized the aesthetics of the pick; the way the winner was determined, with no vote by the village board; and the irony that a Canadian was chosen to create a monument to an industry lost to foreign competition.
Jeanne Garant, mayor of Port Jefferson, said the sculpture would be a focal point of the park, which will also include a new community center, 350-foot pier, restored chandlery building, promenade and children's playground. ''It met the criteria, the history, the scale,'' Ms. Garant said of the sculpture. ''It was a beautiful piece.''
But because of the pressure by local groups, and dissatisfaction by board members that they were not asked to vote on the contract, a vote of the board will be held tomorrow. Ms. Garant said that if the commission is rejected, the village will have to apply for an extension on a 2002 state grant.
Wendy Gibson, a spokeswoman for the New York State Department of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation, which administers the money, said the grant had already been extended one year and could be extended for another.
Members of the Long Island Professional Sculptors and Associates, a group of more than 20 artists and arts supporters, and the Port Jefferson Civic Association are the chief critics of the commission. William Hydek, president of the civic group, said the mayor pressured the board to accept the choice and kept it from allowing time for the public to examine the entries.
''Even though I didn't get a vote on paper, I felt very comfortable that we were on safe ground,'' Ms. Galant said.
Mr. Hydek said, ''We don't think the village adhered to all its guidelines in choosing this, and we asked the board to start it all over again and do it properly.''
Molly Mason, a Port Jefferson-based sculptor whose model tied for second place, said she made her complaints about Mr. Smith's selection at a Feb. 2 public meeting. She said the mayor failed to ask the board to approve the appointment of the panel and the winning selections, which published guidelines required. Nor, she said, were the models made available for public viewing until after a selection had been made. And she said the judges were not qualified.
The mayor defended the selection of the judges, and said that she did not seek board approval because ''I didn't want people to reach our board of trustees and make comments like, 'This judge is no good.'''
''I didn't want anyone to interfere with the judges,'' she added. ''I sensed that might happen.''
Allan Varela, executive director of the Greater Port Jefferson-Northern Brookhaven Arts Council, helped Ms. Galant select the judges. The panel consisted of art professors at the State University of New York at Stony Brook and Suffolk Community College; a local gallery owner; an art writer; a landscape architect; and Robert Kenny, a visual artist and visual arts co-chairman for the local arts council.
''I think it was a well qualified panel that did its job thoughtfully and carefully and impartially,'' said Dr. Kenny, a former dean at Georgetown University. ''It is always the case that people who don't win are disappointed. I do believe the process was very fair.''
Ms. Mason's entry in the competition was what she called ''a sea muse,'' a stainless steel boat in the shape of a fish.
David Hausler, president of the sculptor's group and an artist in Fort Salonga who also competed in the contest, said that at the same February meeting, he raised concerns that the steel Mr. Smith proposed to use in his sculpture would bleed rust on the limestone figures, requiring maintenance.
But Mr. Smith, in the interview, said a marine epoxy coating would protect the steel.
Mr. Hausler also questioned Mr. Smith's qualifications to create a work of public art because, he said, Mr. Smith has a business making gravestones. But Mr. Hausler conceded that he, too, has a day job, as a kitchen contractor. Mr. Smith said he makes his main living as a sculptor, and is working on a commission for the city of Niagara Falls, Ontario.
Slim Cook, a sculptor from Shoreham, entered the competition with a model of a mermaid on a 20-foot tall bow of a ship. Mr. Cook said he was upset not that he lost, but that the winning entry was awarded to the only non-local artist who competed. He asked why a monument to an industry lost to foreign competition would be sent out of the country to be built.
''If it is going to be about a monument to the work of Long Island workers, it ought to be a Long Island craftsman building the thing,'' Mr. Cook said. ''That just makes symbolic sense.''
Mayor Garant said that she ''certainly would have preferred'' to see a local artist win, but that the rules did not limit where entries came from.
Mr. Cook also criticized the choice on aesthetic grounds. He said the panel missed an opportunity to create a landmark that could be seen both by visitors on land and boaters on the Long Island Sound. ''To achieve this goal requires a design of monumental proportions rather than a creation that is literally pedestrian in scale,'' Mr. Cook said.
While the rules permitted a sculpture up to 30 feet, the figures in Mr. Smith's sculpture are life-size.
Brian Harty, a member of the village board, said he was troubled by Mr. Smith's use of toy figurines plastered with ground limestone in the model and doubted if it therefore qualified as original. ''I'm concerned about the process being followed correctly, and I am also concerned about the integrity of the art,'' Mr. Harty said.
Mr. Smith said the plastic toys were used as ''an armature, an interior structure onto which we built our model,'' not the final product, which would be a unique work sculpted in stone. ''Is that plagiarizing?'' he asked. ''I think that is a real stretch to take offense or issue with that in any way, shape or form,'' Mr. Smith said. Dr. Kenny agreed. Mr. Smith said he hoped that the judges' decision would stand. But he conceded that every piece of public art has its supporters and detractors. ''That's what's wonderful about art,'' Mr. Smith said. ''We don't all share the same opinion about art. If everyone were in agreement it wouldn't probably be art.''
But meanwhile, Dr. Joseph J. Neuschatz, a retired anesthesiologist, whose wife was on the panel, had another idea. In an opinion piece on portjefferson.com, an online newspaper, he wrote, ''Instead of a maritime theme for the new Harborfront Park sculpture, I have an alternative idea that might satisfy everybody: A giant bunch of sour grapes.''
ART
