AS moviegoers settle into the seats of the Loews 42nd Street E-Walk or the Loews Bay Terrace in Bayside, Queens -- perhaps to watch one of tonight's Oscar winners -- they will hear the familiar refrain ''Thank you for coming to Loews.''
But few of them will probably know they owe their experience to a Lower East Side son of immigrant parents who a century ago got his big idea from the decidedly uncosmopolitan center of Covington, Ky.
''Marcus Loew has vanished a bit from our popular memory,'' said Ross Melnick, a Los Angeles film preservationist and historian who was hired by what is today Loews Cineplex Entertainment to research the history of the company, which turns 100 this year.
Loews, which has long been linked to New York and which even today boasts more screens there -- about 110 -- than any other chain, has gone through many incarnations. It has traveled from its vaudevillian roots, to its founding of the film company Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in 1924, to its takeover by Laurence A. and Preston Robert Tisch in 1954, to its current ownership by Onex Corporation, a Canadian company.
But its origins lie outside McGlory's Cafe, at Hester Street and the Bowery, where in 1876 Marcus Loew began his working life at age 6, selling newspapers. ''His father was a waiter,'' Mr. Melnick said. ''He didn't make a lot of money, and he gave a lot of it away.''
Young Marcus, however, displayed entrepreneurial acumen, and by his early teens he was no longer selling newspapers but printing them, as co-owner of a small paper called The East Side Advertiser. From there he went into the fur business. When a venture went sour at age 17, rather than forgo the debts, as was his right as a juvenile, he decided to pay them all off.
As Neal Gabler recounts in his book, ''An Empire of Their Own: How the Jews Invented Hollywood'' (Crown, 1988), Loew credited his poverty for his success. ''It's an advantage to be poor in one sense,'' he is quoted as saying. ''That's why so many successes came from the East Side. The ones with talent for better things have every incentive there to exercise them.''
By 1903 Loew had invested in the Automatic Vaudeville business, in Union Square, run by Adolph Zukor, later the founder of Paramount Pictures. In cacophonous, gutted-out storefronts, customers could view 10 seconds of film -- a man juggling, or something more licentious -- in penny arcade mutascopes. The arcades, Variety noted, had a ''faintly malodorous reputation,'' but the vitality impressed Loew.
''Fourteenth Street at that time is on the edge of a burgeoning immigrant population,'' Mr. Melnick said. ''The fur shops are around the corner. Loew finds himself constantly going over to Automatic Vaudeville.'' A year later, with the actor David Warfield, Loew had his own penny arcade emporium, People's Vaudeville, at 23rd Street and Seventh Avenue. Others followed.
If Loew was intrigued by these arcades, he was absolutely captivated by an operation he stumbled upon in Covington, across the river from Cincinnati. There he found a house that an enterprising painter had turned into a movie theater; the man was ticket seller, projectionist and, as Loew reportedly noted, ''he'd even deliver lectures on the pictures.''
''We were surprised to see people literally fight to get inside the place,'' Loew said. In response, Loew borrowed some chairs from an undertaker and installed them in an arcade he had opened in Cincinnati. He charged five cents for a three-minute show -- and saw an opening-day crowd of 4,993.
''The first day, the place is sold out,'' Mr. Melnick said. ''The proof of concept is right in front of him.'' Loew took the ''nickelodeon'' back to New York, retrofitting his penny arcades for the more profitable motion-picture business. As The New York Times described it in 1921, the houses were ''little places, dark and narrow,'' but the public loved them.
By 1921, Loew had 34 theaters in New York alone. That year he opened the National, at Broadway and 44th Street, which held more than 3,000 people.
WITH five such massive ''wonder theaters'' in New York and New Jersey, Loew helped usher in the golden age of moviegoing in the 1920's, with New Yorkers seeing about 50 films a year on average. In anticipating what would delight and impress mass audiences, Loew drew on his own experience. ''He would note that hardly anyone had their own bathroom, and if they did, it wasn't much to look at,'' Mr. Melnick said. ''And so even going to the bathrooms would be a treat.'' With manicured and tuxedoed ushers and pristine interiors (Loews did not have concessions until the 1940's), the theaters were spacious, uplifting temples of escapism.
Loew, who was almost universally revered, was always ready with a business maxim (''I sell tickets to theaters, not movies,'' was a typical one) and he had considerable business savvy. When he noticed a rise in the prices that theaters were charged to rent films, he decided he should not only show pictures but make them, too. He bought Metro Pictures in 1920; it eventually became the giant MGM.
In the 50's, as the movie business changed in response to the coming of television, Loews opened drive-ins and, later, multiplexes and slowly bade farewell to the giant cinema palaces. (The Loews Astor Plaza in Times Square, which opened in 1968 with 1,200 seats, was a last hurrah.) Many of Loew's theaters, like the ones he built on Avenue B on the site of the tenement in which he was raised, no longer exist.
But the Loew legacy endures in other ways. Perhaps most important, a typical New Yorker spends more money going to the movies than people elsewhere in the country, a fact Loew would have relished. And the name Loews persists in New Yorkers' memory, too; as Mr. Melnick points out, it ''has been on the tongues of New Yorkers for 100 years.''
However, they pronounce it differently than other Americans. ''Couth was 'lows,''' said Peter Osnos, the publisher of Public Affairs, who grew up in the Belnord apartment building on 86th Street and whose favorite Loews was the one at 83rd Street and Broadway. ''Uncouth, or New York, was 'LOW-ees.' It was just the way people in New York characterize things in funny ways.''
''I always though of Loews as the Yankees and RKO as the Dodgers,'' Mr. Osnos said in explaining his loyalty to the chain. ''The Loews was much closer to my home and so that was my team.''
For Jonathan Schwartz, the New York radio personality, the memory is Atwater 9-4607. ''That was the beautiful name and number of the Loews Orpheum at 86th, and to this day I retain the phone number,'' he said.
''These theaters each had a distinct personality,'' Mr. Schwartz added. Of the 72nd Street Orpheum, he said, ''you'll find a reference to that beautiful theater with stars on the ceiling, much like a planetarium, in 'The Catcher in the Rye,' where Holden remembers it.''
CITY LORE Tom Vanderbilt is the author of ''Survival City: Adventures Among the Ruins of Atomic America.''
Correction:  March 7, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about the movie theater operator Marcus Loew misidentified his Times Square theater and its exact location. It was the Loew's State, between 45th and 46th Streets, not at 44th. (The Loew's National was in the Bronx.) The article also misidentified a theater with stars on the ceiling recalled by the radio personality Jonathan Schwartz. It was the Loew's 72nd Street, not the 72nd Street Orpheum.
