HUNTINGTON'S town landfill, a 225-foot mountain of garbage off Town Line Road in East Northport, has been capped since 1996, when it was covered with a thick plastic liner and about two feet of dirt. Most experts think it's harmless to passersby.
''It's closed, they used clean materials to cap it, there is gas venting, so there should be no problem,'' said Larry Swanson, director of the Waste Reduction and Management Institute at Stony Brook University, who noted that landfills in Merrick and Holtsville have been turned into parks and that there is a golf driving range on landfill in North Hempstead. ''I might not want to live on one, but I might want to play a round of golf on one,'' Dr. Swanson said.
But state Department of Environmental Conservation investigators may take a dim view of the town's practice of allowing local lobstermen to store several thousand lobster traps and bait buckets around the bottom of the landfill. Several lobstermen have kept their equipment at the landfill since 2000, when town officials sought to help them after the lobster die-off of 1999. While the lobsters remain scarce in Long Island Sound, some of the lobstermen continue to try their luck, and they still use the traps that have been stacked inside the landfill property.
The possibility of contamination of the lobster traps, lines and floats by sitting on the landfill is remote, said Anne McElroy, an associate professor of marine sciences at Stony Brook University. ''Unless they were buried in the landfill I wouldn't think they would be exposed to much,'' she said, but added, ''There are probably better places to put them.''
The thought of lobsters caught with gear stored on tainted land is not appetizing to some who might consume them. ''It could be a potential problem and it is a concern to us,'' said Claudia Bruno, executive director of the Long Island chapter of the New York State Restaurant Association. One lobster dealer said he is more concerned about the health of the lobstermen who drive their pickups in and out of the landfill to tend to their traps.
''They've had it tough in the last few years,'' said Robert Valenti, president of Multi Aquaculture Systems, a lobster dealer in Amagansett. ''Back in the 90's the big problem they had was where to store thousands of lobster pots. Some of them would lease space on local farms.''
John German, a Brookhaven lobsterman, said his traps are still in the water, but with land storage costs of $400 a month, he would jump at the chance to keep his gear anywhere, even at a hazardous waste site. ''The landfill is fine with me,'' said Mr. German, president of the Long Island Sound Lobstermen Association. ''If somebody offers it for free, I'm taking it.''
Garbage was dumped at Huntington's 44-acre landfill from 1935 to 1989, and it was declared a Superfund site by the federal Environmental Protection Agency in 1980. It rises about 225 feet above a 50-foot pit which is unlined, allowing the escape of contaminated liquid called leachate, produced when rainwater percolated through the waste before it was capped.
Though there may be debate about the safety of the landfill's surface, no one has denied the toxicity of the leachate that filtered through it and now spreads underground some two miles toward Sunken Meadow Creek. Private water wells in the area have been closed, having been contaminated with lead, thallium and other dangerous substances, according to a 2002 report by the state Health Department. The same study showed a significant increase in certain types of cancers in the neighborhoods closest to the landfill between 1978 and 1987.
James Clark, a lawyer from the Mineola firm of Rains and Pogrebin who is representing the town, said it was fulfilling its responsibilities at the landfill. ''Everything with respect to closing and capping the landfill was done in full compliance with the D.E.C.,'' he said. ''The town continues its obligation with post-capping testing that it's required to perform.''
