Besides the umpire and the catcher, no one at Bank One Ballpark was in a better position to evaluate a pitcher last April 2 than Ron Brand. It was the third game of the season for the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Arizona Diamondbacks, a home game for Brand, a professional scout for the Yankees based in Mesa, Ariz. He took his seat behind the plate, radar gun in hand.
What Brand witnessed was a performance unlike any he had seen in 45 years of watching baseball. The Dodgers' Kevin Brown beat the Diamondbacks, 5-0, and while his line was modest -- six shutout innings, three hits, four strikeouts -- Brand remembers other numbers.
''The stuff he had that night was as good as I've ever seen at any time in my life,'' Brand said. ''He was in the mid-to-upper 90's, with a high of 98 miles an hour, pitching consistently at 94 to 96, with a sinker that dropped anywhere from four inches to a foot and a split that was 89 with the bottom falling out of it. It was unbelievable stuff. It was just no contest. They didn't have a chance.''
Brand said he scouted Brown three more times and never saw him wild and never saw him hit hard. When Brown lost, Brand noticed, it was always on broken-bat hits and clunkers over the infield, the way it is when teams hit Mariano Rivera. Luck, in other words.
Brown seemed healthy, Brand thought, moving freely as he rocked and whirled in his distinctive delivery. He finished 14-9 with a 2.39 earned run average, but Brand said he would have easily won 21 games with even modest offensive support.
The Yankees scout all players, and Brown was not in their sights. But at the general managers' meetings last November, Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman spoke with Dan Evans, then the Dodgers' general manager, about contracts they each wanted to dump. Cashman mentioned Jeff Weaver, a disappointing right-hander due $16 million for the next two years. Evans mentioned Brown, due $30 million for two years.
Cashman called Brand and, not surprisingly, Brand readily endorsed the deal. On Dec. 11, immediately after Andy Pettitte signed with the Houston Astros, Cashman made the trade, sending Weaver, two prospects and $2.6 million to the Dodgers for Brown. When the deal was announced two days later, the Yankees had a new ace to replace an old one.
''I looked at losing Pettitte and Clemens and all those guys,'' said Yankees right fielder Gary Sheffield, who played with Brown in Florida and Los Angeles. ''But when you talk about Kevin Brown, he's one of the best pitchers in the game. Being with a lineup like this, he should win 20 games.''
Sheffield has visited Brown's off-season home in Macon, Ga., and calls him a friend. But Brown's brooding manner has kept many teammates from getting close to him. Yankee starter Mike Mussina, who teamed with Brown on the 1995 Baltimore Orioles, was asked if he and Brown were friendly. ''We were teammates,'' he said tersely.
Brown's reputation preceded him to the Yankees. Some of his new teammates wondered what he would be like and have found him, so far, to be surprisingly relaxed. But it will not last long. When the games start, Brown will be raging inside.
''The sky's a different color in his world on the days he pitches, that's for sure,'' said Yankees reliever Paul Quantrill, who played with Brown on the Dodgers. ''That's his drive, his direction. Kevin puts on a game face and he doesn't talk much. He just gets in his little world and will not come out of it, even once he comes off the field. Good outing, bad outing, it makes no difference. He's just locked.''
Brown said he has always been this way. While growing up in McIntyre, Ga., his parents taught him do his best at everything. It is a simple lesson that Brown takes to an extreme. No matter what he does, Brown said, it is never enough.
''I don't think as long as I'm playing, I'll ever be satisfied,'' he said. ''I don't think I'll ever sit back and say, 'Hey, I'm where I want to be; I'm comfortable.' I think there will always be a drive to find a way to get a little bit better, because of that attitude and that mentality. You learn how to harness it through experience.''
Brown, who turns 39 on March 14, is with his sixth team in a career that began in 1986. He has 197 victories and helped the Marlins win the 1997 World Series, but his legacy is still evolving. He signed baseball's first $100 million contract -- a seven-year, $105 million deal with the Dodgers in December 1998 -- but when he left Los Angeles, both sides were unfulfilled.
''He seemed to be a hired gun for up-and-coming organizations,'' said San Diego General Manager Kevin Towers, who traded for Brown and watched him lead the Padres to the 1998 World Series. ''And now, at the end of his career, he's got an opportunity to play on a team where he doesn't have to be the guy. They're expected to win the World Series, not just get to the playoffs.''
Towers still remembers the sense of calm he had watching Brown pitch. He would see Brown in his familiar trance before a start, then watch his lower lip quiver as he stared down a hitter during the game. It put Towers at ease, he said, and the only days he enjoyed having guests in his box were the days Brown pitched.
''He's as good as the San Diego Padres have ever had,'' Towers said.
The Padres offered Brown five years and $55 million to stay, but the Dodgers overwhelmed him with cash and perks, including 12 annual flights on a private jet for Brown and his family. He took the deal but soon realized that convenient travel was still travel. Brown, whose children are 13, 9 and 2, said he spent far more on airfare than what the Dodgers allotted.
''When we signed the contract, we expected it to be difficult, but with our kids being so young, we didn't know how difficult it was going to get,'' Brown said. ''If I had to do it again now, knowing what I know, it might be a little bit harder for me to make that decision. As a matter of fact, at this point in time, with the kids as old as they are, there's no way I could go back and play on the West Coast.''
The Dodgers finished above .500 in four of Brown's five seasons, but they never made the playoffs and he never finished higher than sixth in balloting for the National League Cy Young award. Brown missed much of the 2001 and 2002 seasons with elbow and back injuries, and he blamed himself for the team's failure to win.
It was a maddening five years, and for Brown, it was time to go. ''You could see it,'' Quantrill said. ''Brownie was just frustrated beyond belief.''
Brown eagerly approved the deal to the Yankees -- the Dodgers still pay for his flights -- because he wanted to return to the East Coast and play for a pennant winner. The Yankees received positive reports on his makeup, including one from a Dodgers clubhouse worker who said Brown's only fault was a poor relationship with reporters.
Brown speaks of the news media with the resignation of a person who believes he has been burned. ''If somebody wants to write something, they're going to write it,'' he said. ''They're not going to let the truth stand in the way.''
That attitude could be disastrous in New York, but Mets pitcher Al Leiter, a teammate of Brown's in Florida, said Brown was past the point of caring about his image. He will not try to win people over.
''He's always been viewed as a guy nobody liked or was written up as the least-liked guy in baseball,'' Leiter said. ''He's fine with that. If somebody doesn't like him, he doesn't care. He's got the right mantra of what matters -- this pitch, this moment, execute each pitch effectively.''
Brown said he learned that from Nolan Ryan, his teammate on the Texas Rangers for five seasons. Brown admired Ryan's ability to simplify the game, to focus on each pitch and forget what just happened. He also relates to Ryan's demeanor.
''Nolan was an easygoing, nice guy off the field, laid back,'' Brown said. ''You put him on that mound, he was a competitor. He'd put a bow tie on you'' -- a pitch at the hitter's throat -- ''as quick as he would look at you if that's what he thought it took to win the game.''
Brown has made an immediate impression with the Yankees. John Flaherty caught Brown's first bullpen session and was surprised at how hard Brown was throwing, how he seemed ready for the season. Flaherty heard Brown's grunting, watched the ball explode from three arm angles, and wondered how he ever managed to hit a home run off him.
''You just go up there thinking, 'I hope I don't get hurt today,' '' Flaherty said. ''That's how nasty it is when he's on.''
Brown's sinker typically catches the corner of the strike zone as it crosses the plate and homes in on the feet of a right-handed hitter. He is challenging for a catcher, too, said Sal Fasano, who caught Brown's session on Monday.
Brown swings his left leg behind him during his windup and turns his back to the catcher, his eyes straying from the target. Mussina compared him to Jim Palmer and Juan Marichal as pitchers with unusual deliveries. Fasano said: ''When he does that Luis Tiant twist, he hides the ball so well and he's not looking at you. You get concerned.''
Whenever Brown pitches, it seems, there is an injury waiting to happen: to the hitter, to the catcher or to him. The Yankees' biggest concern about him is his health, but they believe that if he is not injured, he can dominate as they need him to.
For Brown, it will not matter how he pitches. Asked about his masterpiece in Arizona, he did not even remember if he had won or lost. Brown is a perfectionist and unapologetic for it. It is the only way he knows, the constant in a winding career still seeking its final, defining moment.
''Nothing's ever as good as you want it to be,'' Brown said. ''But I wouldn't change it. That's the way I always expect to be.''
BASEBALL
