IN the opening scene of ''Fiddler on the Roof,'' Tevye, the show's narrator, explains that each Jew in the shtetl Anatevka is like ''a fiddler on the roof, trying to scratch out a pleasant, simple tune without breaking his neck.'' Continually threatened by their Russian and Ukrainian neighbors, by poverty and, most of all, by the forces of modernity, the villagers hold fast to their tradition, as the show's famous theme trumpets, in order to keep their balance.
Though the circumstances of the characters in ''Fiddler'' might be precarious, over the nearly 40 years since it first opened, the show has become a tradition in itself. The initial production, starring Zero Mostel as Tevye, set a Broadway record (in its day) with a run of almost eight years, and spawned an Academy Award-winning movie as well as a series of regular revivals. Part of the key to the musical's popularity was its faithful depiction of Old World Jewish life. ''Fiddler''  ''has an honest feeling for another place, time and people,'' Howard Taubman wrote on Sept. 23, 1964, in the original New York Times review of the production. He lauded the show's book writer, Joseph Stein, for his fidelity to the Yiddish stories on which the musical is based, and remarked on how accurately ''Fiddler'' depicted the customs of shtetl Jewry, from the clothes to the dancing. Even Mostel ''looks as Tevye should,'' Taubman wrote, with his full beard ''a pious aureole for his shining countenance.''
''Fiddler'' still occupies a canonical place in Jewish culture: ''Sunrise, Sunset'' has long since become a bar mitzvah standard, and the show's jokes are repeated as examples of quintessential Yiddish humor. But these days, with Jerry Seinfeld a more likely image of the Jewish everyman than Tevye, the kitschy, unashamed appeal to sentiment in ''Fiddler'' is an anachronism. Recent responses to it have ranged from uneasy homage to explicit rejection. In one episode of ''Friends,'' the ''Fiddler'' theme plays in the background, complete with a baritone booming ''Tradition!,'' as the characters gather around a menorah for an unconventional interfaith Hanukkah celebration (Joey wears a Superman costume and Chandler is dressed as Santa Claus). More seriously, the show has been criticized for promoting a romanticized, nostalgic vision of the shtetl -- a vision that has all but replaced the reality.
With the arrival of a new production of ''Fiddler'' on Broadway, which opened last Thursday at the Minskoff Theater, some commentators have again assumed that the show's value lies in its authenticity. Early responses to the revival have gone so far as to count the Jewish names in the cast and crew, noting incredulously that even the role of Tevye is played by a non-Jewish actor, Alfred Molina. ''The sensation is as if you're sampling something that tastes great and looks Jewish but isn't entirely kosher,'' Thane Rosenbaum lamented in The Los Angeles Times. This is hardly surprising: the further removed we are from the Old World, the more we long to recapture it. But what is surprising is that the pseudo-klezmer tunes and schmaltz-laden accents in ''Fiddler'' were ever assumed to be the real thing.
''Fiddler on the Roof,'' with music by Jerry Bock and lyrics by Sheldon Harnick, is based on ''Tevye the Milkman,'' a cycle of short stories by Sholem Aleichem published in the Yiddish press from the early 1880's until 1905. Aleichem's stories were enthusiastically received, but he was hardly ''the warmhearted spokesman of the poor Jews in the Russian villages,'' as Taubman called him. In fact, Aleichem was a stockbroker from Kiev who based his work on characters he met during his travels. By Aleichem's time, the scholar David Roskies has argued, Yiddish writers were deliberately striving to revive the declining rabbinical tradition by means of an invented culture that combined old and new elements. Paradoxically, the invention was so successful that later generations accepted it as the real thing.
This paradox would probably have delighted Aleichem, whose writing takes its power from a complicated interplay of irony and inevitability. The stories ''Fiddler'' draws upon depict Tevye's struggle to reconcile his fidelity to his religious traditions with the tribulations of his daily life, particularly his daughters' increasing rebellion against convention. First Tzeitel, the oldest, rejects the rich butcher who has his eye on her, announcing that she and the poor tailor Motel have decided on their own to marry. Hodel, the next in line, not only chooses her own husband but then follows him to Siberia when he is imprisoned for revolutionary activities. Both times, Tevye proves surprisingly flexible, accepting his daughters' will with only a modicum of protest. But his tests get harder. Tevye's third daughter, Chava, defies him by marrying a non-Jew, and he feels that he has no choice but to disown her. This is the emotional climax of the musical. But the Tevye of the stories suffers a final domestic tragedy: young Shprintze, the fourth daughter, drowns herself after she is rejected by a rich suitor and his family.
Perhaps inevitably, Mr. Stein drastically oversimplified Tevye's story. The play's signature image, the Jew as a wobbly ''fiddler on the roof,'' is his invention, more indebted to the dreamy visions of Marc Chagall than to anything in Yiddish literature. Aleichem populates his stories with a multitude of characters who live in a variety of towns under vastly differing circumstances, but ''Fiddler'' limits itself to the landscape of ''underfed, overworked Anatevka'' -- ''the cutest shtetl we've never had,'' as Irving Howe wrote in a famous blast at ''Fiddler'' published in Commentary in 1964. And its residents have become caricatures. In ''Tevye the Milkman,'' the local matchmaker, a minor figure who makes only a brief appearance, is a gruff, no-nonsense man. In ''Fiddler,'' he becomes Yente, the ungenerous, complaining busybody who -- as her name suggests -- embodies the stereotype of the meddling Jewish woman. The tailor Motel has become a wimp who cowers before Tevye, barely daring to ask for Tzeitel's hand. Golde, Tevye's wife, is a sharp-tongued shrew; the doddering, senile rabbi may be the most offensive figure of all.
But the Tevye of ''Fiddler'' is the grossest distortion. In Aleichem's stories, Tevye is not learned, but he is literate enough to pepper his conversation with biblical references in the original Hebrew. At one point he even fools a more ignorant man with a made-up quote from the Talmud. The Tevye of ''Fiddler'' is the Yogi Berra of Anatevka, a twinkly eyed, malapropism-spouting buffoon who carries on a running conversation with God that sounds like a monologue by a borscht belt comic. The wise-sounding statements he occasionally manages are the accidental truisms of the fool.
If ''Fiddler'' is so cartoonish, why did Jewish audiences embrace the show -- not only as a work of entertainment, but as a part of their culture? Howe, in his Commentary essay, suggested that they found any public recognition of their religion gratifying. ''American Jews suffer these days from a feeling of guilt because they have lost touch with the past from which they derive, and often they compound this guilt by indulging themselves in an unearned nostalgia,'' he wrote. ''The less, for example, they know about East European Jewish life or even the immigrant experience in America, the more inclined they seem to celebrate it.''
The idea that Jews don't even care whether a musical purporting to be about their culture is based on the real thing, or are too ignorant to tell the difference anyway, is almost as condescending as ''Fiddler'' itself. And it is obviously untrue. The last 20 years have seen a revival of klezmer music, renewed interest in Yiddish studies and journeys to Eastern Europe by American Jews young and old in search of their roots -- all of which indicate a desire to return to primary sources. If ''Fiddler'' represents the Disneyfication of authentic Jewish culture, these trends reflect a kind of anti-''Fiddler''-ism, a wish to set the record straight.
Howe was right, though, that a false nostalgia is part of the show's sentimental appeal. ''Fiddler'' takes place in 1905, shortly before the Russian Revolution, when relations between the shtetl Jews and their neighbors were on the cusp of disaster. In the prologue, Tevye says of his gentile neighbors, ''We don't bother them, and, so far, they don't bother us.'' By the show's end, one of Tevye's daughters has been jeered at by local anti-Semites, the village suffers a pogrom and finally the Jews of Anatevka are evicted. In the stories, Tevye becomes a wanderer, unsure where he will end up; but the Tevye of ''Fiddler'' looks forward to bringing his family to America, where his brother, conveniently, has already settled. For American Jews in the 1960's, to see Tevye on Broadway was a reminder of how far not only he, but also they, had come.
There is a gap, however, in the path that ''Fiddler'' traces. Tevye may make it to the New World, but other members of his family are left behind, including Tzeitel and Motel, who settle in Warsaw, of all places. The pogrom, appalling on its own, has a far different meaning post-1945 than it did for Aleichem's contemporaneous readers. It is now impossible to look back at the villagers of Anatevka without the knowledge that their world was about to be destroyed, and by a force more powerful than modern love or the disintegration of tradition.
Not long after originating the role of Tevye, Mostel went on to play Max Bialystock, in Mel Brooks's movie ''The Producers,'' the failed impresario who (mistakenly) assumes that a musical about the Nazis will be a guaranteed bomb. The Brigadoon-like vision of the prelapsarian shtetl in ''Fiddler'' draws on a similar cultural ambivalence about how to assimilate an unimaginable crime into a work of entertainment. The creators of ''Fiddler'' chose to return the audience to a happier time -- a time of poverty and hard labor, but before the terrible loss of innocence that World War II brought. Such escapism may not be authentic, but it is pure Broadway.
THEATER Ruth Franklin is a senior editor at The New Republic.
