THE AirTrain is running between Jamaica, Queens, and Kennedy International Airport, taking passengers from a railroad-subway connection to the passenger terminals in about 12 minutes. Various routes have been suggested for a rail link between Lower Manhattan and Jamaica that would enable travelers to go from meetings downtown to their flights without facing the often traffic-choked highways leading to the airport.
Since the area is already a major hub for the Long Island Rail Road and has extensive subway and bus service as well, planners say the community, near the geographic center of Queens, would seem to be a likely spot to practice an urban version of what they call transit-related smart growth.
''With necessary and significant private, public or mixed investment in site acquisition and maintaining new and modernized infrastructure, downtown Jamaica could be successfully revived,'' according to a study issued last year by City University's Institute for Urban Systems.
Because of its connection to the airport, the economic engine of Jamaica's resurgence was expected to be airlines and air travel related businesses, although real estate specialists caution that development should not be limited to transportation-related projects. But because of the economic problems of the airline industry, that part of the plan is likely to be delayed.
Still, some real estate executives say the Air-Train may give a short-term boost to retail businesses. ''With the coming of the J.F.K. AirTrain, we should see more retail activity and things like hotels and tablecloth restaurants,'' said Adelle Klein, a senior managing director at Sholom &amp; Zuckerbrot, a commercial and industrial brokerage active in the area. ''And the 14-screen theater that opened not long ago has added more evening business.''
Richard Maltz, chairman of Greiner-Maltz, a brokerage active in Queens, Brooklyn and Long Island, added: ''Jamaica is booming from a retail standpoint. There are stores all along Jamaica Avenue and 40 to 45 feet in on the side streets.''
In the meantime, a major rezoning plan is moving forward that would establish a special zone covering all or part of roughly 40 blocks around the AirTrain terminal that would encourage the development of hotels, office buildings and residences. While the allowable size of buildings in the special zone would be increased, the size of structures in adjoining neighborhoods would be restricted to preserve local character.
The special zone would be irregularly shaped area both north and south of the Air Train and the Long Island Rail Road. It would start a few blocks east of the Van Wyck Expressway and extend as far east as 169th Street. The zoning proposal, covering a 415-block area in and around Jamaica, much of it residential, which would be largely protected from further development, is part of a citywide rezoning process.
Plans have been made by a local group, the Greater Jamaica Development Corporation, working with LCOR, a national developer, to build a 13-story building with approximately 400,000 square feet of office and retail space. The plan -- which awaits a signed tenant before moving forward -- is seen as the first step in what the planners envision as a 5-million-square-foot mixeduse airport village on the 10 blocks closest to the AirTrain terminal.
This would be analogous to the ''transit villages'' that have been springing up near commuter rail stations in New Jersey and in Westchester and Fairfield Counties.
The emergence of these transit villages reflects the ''smart growth'' ideas that have largely focused on the suburbs as a means of slowing endless sprawl by directing growth back into older municipalities with existing utilities, communications and mass transit. In New Jersey the advent of Midtown Direct train service has been credited with reviving fading downtown areas in northern part of the state by attracting people who want quick, carless access to New York and retailers catering to them.
Envisioning Jamaica  A Regional Center Tied to Mass Transit
Eventually, the thinking in Jamaica goes, the airline industry will sort itself out, an anchor tenant will be found for Tower 1 of the JFK Corporate Square development -- the official name for the village -- and other projects will move forward.
Already, the first market rate housing in 40 years is under construction in the downtown Jamaica area. And parking decks have been built and remodeled to provide badly needed off-street parking.
''The Regional Plan Association designated Jamaica as a regional center tied to Manhattan by mass transit,'' said F. Carlisle Towery, a former R.P.A. official who has been president of the Greater Jamaica Development Corporation, a local economic development group, since 1972.
The R.P.A. is a private planning group whose recommendations have often come to pass, if at a glacial pace. In New Jersey, its suggestion to connect two neighboring rail lines--now known as the Montclair Connection -- was first advanced in the 1930's, but did not actually go into operation until 2002.
Transit-related developments are becoming increasingly feasible because people are forsaking a punishing daily automotive commute in favor of rail transportation, said Robert Yaro, president of Regional Plan. ''Total rail transport in the region,'' he said, ''is up one-third in the past decade, which is why you are seeing signs of life in places like Jamaica and New Brunswick,'' the city in central New Jersey.
He said the increased ridership was at least partly a result of $35 billion that has been invested in rail transport in the region since 1970. He said most of the investment had been in the rails and rolling stock, but included the renovation of Grand Central Terminal. ''In 1990 it was a slum,'' he said.
Transit-related developments have three major virtues, Mr. Yaro said. They recycle abandoned or underutilized land. They lure people out of cars and onto the rails for their daily commutes. And they give local residents, often people with limited transportation options, a shot at jobs that are created.
Jamaica was once an independent municipality and is one of the oldest in the region, having been established in 1650. The name is said to derive not from the island in the Caribbean but rather from the Carnarsie Indian word for beaver, ''jamecos.''
Even in ancient times the area was a transportation hub, with Indians from western areas traveling along a trail that is roughly the route of Jamaica Avenue today to trade with eastern tribes. By colonial times, the path had been widened to accommodate horse-drawn carts, and by 1834 the Brooklyn and Jamaica Railroad company completed a line to the trading post in downtown Jamaica.
Elevated passenger trains began operation in 1918 and, according to the CUNY study, ''triggered enormous commercial and residential growth.'' It said, ''By 1925 the section of Jamaica Avenue between 160th and 168th Street had the highest assessed valuation in the county.''
But after World War II, single family homes were developed in vast numbers on Long Island, attracting families out of apartments, and shoppers found it easier to drive their cars to the growing suburban malls than contest the tight preautomobile streets of Jamaica to do their shopping.
As a result, major department stores in Jamaica gradually moved away or went out of business and poorer families and newer immigrants replaced the departed suburbanites. ''Within one generation, Jamaica's downtown went from a thriving, bustling hub of banking, government, retail and commerce serving three counties to a neglected and distressed shopping district serving a much smaller trading area,'' Mr. Towery wrote in a transportation newsletter.
Nevertheless, a lot of people pass through the area. Approximately 100,000 commuters use the Long Island Rail Road terminal in Jamaica each workday, according to the local development group, with 16,000 more using the Sutphin Boulevard subway station and another 37,000 using the Jamaica Center subway terminal at Parsons Boulevard. In addition, about 40 bus lines serve Jamaica, carrying customers from eastern and southern Queens and Nassau County.
Those numbers will rise significantly as passengers and airport workers -- the Port Authority expects the total number to be 12.4 million a year -- arrive in Jamaica to get to their flights and jobs. Any direct connection to Lower Manhattan, which some people are calling the ''super shuttle,'' would add still more.
The trick, development officials say, is to prevent Jamaica from becoming simply a transit hub, where commuters rush through on their way to jobs in Manhattan or to the airport. Some planners and real estate executives say a hotel near the AirTrain terminal should be a priority. ''Without a hotel, there is nowhere for people to meet,'' said Ms. Klein of Sholom &amp; Zuckerbrot.
There have been proposals for a 10-story, 250-room hotel over the AirTrain terminal, but with the heightened security concerns after Sept. 11, the project is not likely to go forward soon.
Mr. Towery said air travelers are not the only beneficiaries of improved transportation. He said improvements in subway service in decades past were responsible for the decision to build a Social Security Regional Center in downtown Jamaica and for City University officials to build York College nearby. Both wanted to be in a location easily reached by mass transit.
And those subway trains run both ways, he added. ''Businesses in Manhattan can access the labor living here,'' he said.
It cost the Port Authority about $1.9 billion to build the AirTrain and the terminal building, and the money was well spent, according to Robert Paaswell, a principal author of the CUNY study, along with Harry Schwartz and Linda Stone Davidoff. ''Transit, in 99.9 percent of the cases, is a good investment, with an economic payoff,'' Professor Paaswell said.
Unfortunately, he added, improved transit ''is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for growth.'' He said it might take further public investment to convince developers that underused former industrial sites close to the Long Island Rail Road are bargain-priced and ready for development.
He said York College, which is a four-year college, will probably be an important factor in training residents for more skilled, higher-paying jobs at the airport and at places like the Food and Drug Administration building, which houses offices and laboratories and is on the York campus. ''The area needs a wider range of jobs, including white collar jobs,'' Professor Paaswell said. ''You want to have career ladder jobs, and York College is a part of that.''
Developing an office complex in Jamaica will be a stretch, since the area has not attracted office users in the past, said Mr. Maltz, the broker. He noted that many of the larger developments in the area have been government related, like the Queens County civil and family courts and the F.D.A. and Social Security buildings.
Seeking airline and airport-related tenants is seen as a good idea, but, he added, ''Unfortunately, the airline industry is not flourishing now and they have placed expansion plans on hold.''
Development officials had hoped to sign up Jet Blue, a rapidly growing low-fare carrier, but Mr. Maltz said this seems unlikely. ''Jet Blue subleased some Con Ed space on Jamaica Avenue that is much less expensive than a new building,'' he said.
Dealing With Autos  Nonprofit Group Offers Parking
Because many people still prefer to travel by car, the Jamaica development group, though a not-for-profit operation, has gotten into the parking business, acquiring some formerly city-owned garages and lots and building a 410-space garage convenient to the 180 units of market-rate housing under construction.
Under Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, ''the city wanted to get out of the municipal parking business, so we took over two city garages and renovated them and took two city lots and improved them,'' Mr. Towery said. He said the group pays taxes to the city out of income from the garages and tries to keep rates low to attract shoppers.
The problem, he said, is that Jamaica developed around the elevated train and has streets that are crowded beyond capacity. His group has estimated that there is currently a deficit of 500 parking spaces in the downtown area and that proposed developments would require the construction of garages to accommodate 2,000 more cars at an estimated cost of $32 million.
But part of smart growth is reducing automobile use and traffic on streets. If Jamaica is to develop in a smart fashion, the report says, ''a significant portion of residents will have to be weaned away from 50 years of automobile dependency.''
With the possible exception of the parking garages, Mr. Towery said most of what his development group has done or is proposing could be labeled as smart growth. He said the airport village would recycle urban land that already has a transportation infrastructure in place.
New York State's passage of a brownfields remediation law last year will help with the land recycling by providing guidelines for cleanups of sites that currently have dirty uses, such a junkyards.
Because of the contamination, Mr. Towery said, well located land parcels within a few blocks of the Air Train terminal can be acquired cheaply for redevelopment. ''We salivate at grunge,'' he said. ''Other people see blight, but we see sites.''
