TROUBLE IN MIND
Poems.
By Lucie Brock-Broido.
75 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
''IN the next millennium, I will be middle aged. I do not do well / In the marrow of things.'' So wrote Lucie Brock-Broido in ''Domestic Mysticism,'' the first poem of her book ''A Hunger'' (1988), and indeed, it has come to pass: the poet of ''Trouble in Mind'' stands harrowed, wintered by pain and a scrutiny of pain so relentless it threatens to become a whiteout.
Like all poets who cleave closely -- however wildly or clandestinely -- to the lineaments of life, Brock-Broido has now come to betray in her work a brutal mastery by death and its attendants, time and aging. The inner landscape here is northern, bleak; the dominant mode negation; the light ''early Netherlandish.'' ''Trouble in Mind'' circles obsessively around its griefs -- for dead parents, friends, loves, for a former more protean self. The poems etch a series of unsought, inflexible transformations.
We begin in a realm of newly bald statement: ''First, my father died. Then my mother / Did,'' we hear in ''After Raphael.'' The soul once so labile, flexible and inventive now stands purged of its ebullience and bravado: ''I was little; I am middle. Will I not / Grow old, not final.'' She will, and she knows it: ''For me, it is too late in the story / To die young, or guileless,'' she acknowledges in ''The Insignificants.'' A bittersweet and, it must be said, rare grace note of humor appears in ''Spain'': ''I can say 'little' / Now as many times as I goddamn / Want, here in the hour of my forty years &amp; four.''
This poet has always seemed to approach her life as an allegorical one: alchemized (as Keats put it) into poetry, the everyday often soared into skewed myth. She has worn many masks: prophetess, savant, blues artist, recording angel, trickster, time-traveler, metaphysician. Here she appears primarily as mourner, as witness, and as a forcibly remade self, as in ''Death as a German Expert'': ''The North Star hanging / Like an umlaut over all of us, causes (even brittle) me to bend.'' Brock-Broido's work has long been preoccupied with enunciation, the singing of the mutable self (hers and others') into being. In ''A Hunger,'' her seer-persona modulated into bravura dramatic monologues, featuring the dead boy king Edward VI, crazed pyromaniac twins and Baby Jessica in the well. In ''The Master Letters'' (1995), she channeled Emily Dickinson's whiplashed ecstasies in careering epistles and fractured sonnets.
Her incantations are now directed, soberly, toward the dead and the diminished self: ''Heart, be clean. Fists, be open, numb,'' she prays in ''Gamine.'' The poet of enchantment has acceded to disenchantment, forsaking her former raptures, opening herself to ''The New Realism / . . . a bovine one with widened eyes,'' in ''Self-Portrait in the Miraculous World, with Nimbed Ox.'' The remade heart is a humble thing, ''Common, clumsy, sunlit, oxish, kind.''
When Brock-Broido presented herself in earlier work as a flagrantly magical thinker, dealing in charms, fetishes, spells, prophecies and keepsakes, she took up one of the poet's tasks: to keep alive the image-making, language-discovering world of childhood, when every new thing could inspire an apocalypse of imagination. These poems mark the end of childlike fantasies of omnipotence: ''I am magical / No more,'' the poet concedes, keeping watch over her mother's corpse in ''Soul Keeping Company.'' Experience has rendered ''the great / Glassed castle in which I've lived, simply / Now a house,'' she writes in an elegy for the editor Harry Ford.
If elegies abound here, so do epitaphs on the self: ''I was a hunger artist once, as well. / My bones had shone,'' she recalls in the penultimate poem, ''Pamphlet on Ravening.'' The book tracks a severe lyric rededication; in ''The One Theme of Which Everything Else Is a Variation,'' she writes, ''If I am lucky in this life, here, I will go on / Being whole, and speak again old god, I will be plain.'' Brock-Broido's avowed plainness would be another poet's gaud. Yet to say that she verges on the mannered is almost beside the point: she is a mannerist artist who has achieved her middle style as well as her middle age.
Apprenticed to Wallace Stevens, from whose notebooks she takes the titles of several poems, she writes a sensual, sonically rich poetry, typified by the opening of ''Spain'': ''The god-leash leaves / Its lashes on the broad bunched backs / Of sacrificial animals.'' This acoustic gorgeousness, along with her highly figurative cast of mind, creates a striking tension: her new theme is austerity, yet her means remain profligate. The poems emerge from a place where ''all of my objects have lost their correlative states,'' as she observes in ''Still Life With Aspirin,'' yet they remorselessly seek out objective correlatives (as T. S. Eliot put it) for the prevailing emotional climate. We see the mind struggling to tether itself ''to an actual,'' as she writes in ''The Insignificants.''
Perhaps this is why the poet ravels and unravels simile upon simile: ''So many brooding swans like floating inkstains on a lake of slender wakefulness,'' ends ''Basic Poem in a Basic Tongue.'' Or, regarding psychic pain in ''Still Life With Aspirin'': ''so particular it hurt / Like a veterinarian's deep kiss, like a Jerusalem somewhere / Between fancy &amp; imagination'' -- to which the reader might respond (especially to that veterinarian), huh? The risk these poems take is to perform a high-wire act between the highly wrought and the overwrought.
In the lyric, more intimately than other genres, the artist takes on the terrible, thrilling problem -- ''Whom / Shall I address?'' (as ''Dire Wolf'' puts it) -- a wrenching question when anchoring souls die or lovers leave. Here, bereft and ruined (to invoke a key word of the volume), Brock-Broido has begun to write what Stevens called ''the poem of the mind in the act of finding what will suffice.'' And if the poet has committed herself to confronting ''things as they really are'' (echoing Stevens yet again), these poems still attest that ''the plain sense of things'' (Stevens again) ''had to be imagined.'' No reality, that is, without imagination.
The soul-making enacted here ends with a provisional cadence -- nothing so promising or predictable as spring but instead a ''Self-Deliverance by Lion,'' as the final poem is called, a difficult mastery of the despairing heart. Given her previous metamorphic flights, one must appreciate the ascetism involved in her aquiescence to what ''A Truce to Tragedy'' calls ''The furrows of a singlesighted / Life.''
Maureen N. McLane, a junior fellow at Harvard's Society of Fellows, is a visiting scholar in comparative media studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
