APROPOSED federal rule that would allow communities to silence irksome train horns and make railroad crossings safer at the same time is attracting scant attention on Long Island, where trains sound their horns day and night at nearly 300 grade crossings.
The Federal Railroad Administration is proposing allowing localities to create horn-free ''quiet zones'' in cooperation with railroads and transportation officials.
But they would have to add some safety features, including median dividers on the street leading to the rail crossing and four gates to prevent drivers from slipping through the gap that now exists when only two gates are used.
The proposal has yet to cause so much as a ripple on Long Island. ''I have not seen comments submitted yet from Long Island,'' Warren Flatau, a spokesman for the railroad administration, said last week. The comment period was to end Feb. 17 but has been extended to April 19.
Officials of the Long Island Rail Road -- along with those at its parent agency, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, and the State Transportation Department -- said they were reviewing the proposal and had not yet taken a position on it. ''We will comment later on,'' said James J. Dermody, the L.I.R.R.'s president. ''We are still looking at it.''
The federal proposal, which would pre-empt state laws governing train horns, comes in response to years of pleas for relief from unwanted noise. Communities in northern New Jersey and in other parts of the country, notably the Chicago area, have already begun planning for quiet zones, Mr. Flatau said, and the agency has received 3,000 comments on the proposal so far.
The zones, which would have to be at least half a mile long, would be permitted if a risk assessment showed that crossings with new safety features were as safe or safer if warning horns from approaching trains were prohibited. The new rule is to take effect in December.
L.I.R.R. crossings account for 7 of the 10 crossings that the railroad administration ranks as the most dangerous in the state. The list includes the two-track crossing at Stewart Avenue in Bethpage, where, Mr. Dermody said, the railroad is testing new safety equipment including a siren, warning lights in all four quadrants and longer gates.
The other six L.I.R.R. crossings ranked as dangerous are those on Carleton Avenue in Central Islip; Roslyn Road in Mineola; Atlantic Avenue in Oceanside; Jackson Avenue in Syosset; School Street in Westbury; and Straight Path in Wyandanch.
Along with the medians and four-quadrant gates, other features at ''quiet zone'' crossings could include horns at the crossings themselves that would produce less noise than train horns and cameras that would photograph drivers trying to beat the gate. Localities could also close the gates at some crossings during nighttime hours, provided that there was a nearby alternate route.
The federal rail agency estimates the costs of setting up a quiet zone at up to $15,000 for median dividers and $100,000 for four-quadrant gates. The expenses would be borne by the local government setting up the zone, although it could channel state and federal money to the project.
The federal proposal would cut down on noise whether a quiet zone was set up or not because it would also limit train horn volume to a maximum of 110 decibels. It would also require that horns be sounded 15 to 20 seconds before a train reached a crossing instead of a quarter mile from the crossing.
The rule would maintain the current horn-blowing sequence of two longs, one short and one long, but it would give engineers discretion to vary the pattern -- presumably sounding fewer blasts in areas where crossings were close together.
Mr. Flatau said that efforts were under way in one New York county, Rockland, to set up a countywide quiet zone.
Mr. Dermody, the L.I.R.R. president, said no government officials had called the railroad. ''We have not heard from any local governments,'' he said. He added that quiet zones would be a good idea for Long Island ''if they are properly enacted.''
''There has to be coordination between the villages, towns, counties, the railroad and the state,'' he said. ''But the jury is still out on what's the proper enactment.''
Mr. Dermody said that safety features like four-quadrant gates had drawbacks. ''You could run the possibility of trapping someone within the gates,'' he said.
He also questioned whether sounding a horn 15 to 20 seconds before reaching a crossing instead of at a quarter-mile distance would reduce train noise.
Mr. Dermody said that L.I.R.R. train horns were already set at 96 decibels, the minimum allowed by the new rule. But he said a requirement in the rule that the loudness be measured at 15 feet above the rails, instead of four feet above the rail bed, could change readings. ''We would have to retest our horns to make sure we are in compliance,'' he said.
Local officials on Long Island who had not heard of the proposed rule expressed interest in learning more. ''Anything we can do to quiet the horn would be good,'' said Mayor David Kapell of Greenport, a railroad terminus.
Other towns will look to residents for guidance. ''Although we haven't taken a position on quiet zones, we would want to hear from constituents who may have concerns in that area,'' said Michael Deery, a spokesman for the Town of Hempstead.
Jon Kaiman, the North Hempstead town supervisor, said he would solicit opinions from residents living near crossings. ''Certainly, if we can reduce the disruption of train horns, we would like to do that,'' he said.
Ruth Divis, a Bayport resident disturbed by train noise, said that silencing the horns might be a mixed blessing. ''It would be a wonderful thing,'' she said, ''but I really worry about safety.''
But Neal Lewis, the executive director of the Long Island Neighborhood Network in Massapequa, saw a step forward. ''There's a feeling that there's an element of anachronism in relying on train horns,'' he said. ''We don't want to finesse the safety issue, but it does seem that modern technology should present some better alternatives.''
Correction:  March 7, 2004, Sunday  A picture last Sunday with an article about a federal proposal to let communities limit train noise was published in error. It showed the Long Island Rail Road grade crossing at Lincoln Avenue in Roslyn Heights -- not the one at Roslyn Road in Mineola, which is ranked among the 10 most dangerous crossings in the state.
