IF we have any hope of ever seeing the Long Island Expressway free of traffic cones, cranes and construction debris it is time to privatize the State Department of Transportation.
The latest report that the always-under-construction high occupancy vehicle lanes on the L.I.E. will not be completed until at least 2005 is merely another indication that a dysfunctional, bureaucratic, myopic and politically vulnerable state agency is incapable of fulfilling its mission. The evidence can be seen from the miles of brake lights that recede far into the distance at any given time of day.
While the most dramatic instance of the Transportation Department's inability to manage may be the H.O.V. project, there are a broad range of examples that become obvious to the motorist with plenty of time to contemplate the region's highways. Directional signs designed to break away in the event of accident or high winds have been slumped over for months on the Northern State Parkway. Destination signs on the L.I.E. are obscured by a blizzard of other signs put up by department crews making us downright wistful for the old Burma Shave sign parade. Signs that enforced a truck-free left lane are long gone and instructions to maintain speed up grade have been dispensed with and no one at the Transportation Department can say why.
But sign woes are the least of the problems facing the department. For example, redesigned L.I.E. access ramps in Jericho have been completed for more than a year and yet they still remain closed. In Old Westbury, despite department bridge reconstruction that took out an entire overpass, a traffic light still stops traffic on the service road to allow phantom cars an opportunity to make a left turn.
It is a department that can take well-thought-out engineering designs and shred them under the pressure of political influence. For example, the service roads that are a critical component to making the L.I.E. work under changing conditions disappear in the Syosset-Woodbury area because the late State Senator Ralph Marino didn't want his constituents inconvenienced. As a result, tons of auto emissions are poured into these communities from cars jammed into this service road bottleneck when accidents occur along their stretch of the L.I.E.
Given its growing record of management incompetence it is time that the Legislature and the Pataki administration seriously contemplated privatizing the highway construction projects currently run by the Department of Transportation. As Donald Trump so dramatically proved when he assumed management of the reconstruction of the Wollman Rink in Central Park, private construction companies are compelled by the bottom line to bring projects in on time, on budget and without excuses.
Privatizing this sector of state government would not be as radical as it first appears. The Pataki administration has already privatized components of Stewart Airport in the Hudson Valley. President Bush is looking at privatizing Amtrak and studies are under way to determine whether the nation's air-traffic control can be improved through a similar strategy. There is also a call from urban planners to privatize the New York City transit system in an effort to make it truly competitive and more responsive to the riding public. Were we to introduce that concept within the New York Transportation Department, the agency would still set the priorities, seek budget approval from the Legislature and obtain the environmental approvals that all construction projects require. But the design, work schedule, execution of the work and the ultimate responsibility of getting it done before their construction foremen are ready for assisted living would be that of private industry.
This sort of profound change in how we build our roads isn't being mandated simply because angry drivers are frustrated by yet another year of delay on the L.I.E. Rather, it is in recognition that this kind of inability to manage transportation construction projects puts our entire region at risk. If we cannot move people and products from one part of the region to another, the fiercely competitive world of business and commerce will take its employees and investment and go elsewhere. No longer the punch line to a long running joke, the Long Island Expressway must be made to work and the responsibility for doing so must now be put in the hands of those who have demonstrated time and again how best to do it -- private industry.
SOAPBOX Ed Blumenfeld is a partner in BDG, a real estate developer in Syosset.
