A single image dominates the stage in ''King Lear'' at Yale Repertory Theater: a strikingly large, sculptured head bust that inspires thoughts of mighty Mesoamerican kingdoms and their godlike rulers.
But over all, no singular vision guides this production of ''Lear,'' directed by Harold Scott with Avery Brooks in the title role. Its energies are dispersed, and distracting, even disappointing. Still, this ''Lear'' has something to offer, particularly at its quirkiest.
No performance is as quirky as that of Mr. Brooks as the ancient, maddened monarch. Here mumbling, there bellowing, Mr. Brooks plays Lear as an old goat whose physical dial seems locked on ''fidget''; his upper body stiffly contorts as his lower half shuffles to some internal, arrhythmic melody only he can hear.
The performance suggests a personality at odds with the power of the stage-dominating head. Of course, Lear is not a god; the once-powerful king is unmercifully human, vulnerable, at a loss in body and mind.
Lear lurches into madness after demanding declarations of love from his three daughters. The villainous ones, Goneril (the feisty Marie Thomas) and Regan (Petronia Paley, a subtle and studious calculator), do his bidding as they lust for their pieces of the kingdom. But his most beloved daughter, young Cordelia (the beautiful Roslyn Ruff), refuses his call to hype her love. She is disinherited by the angry king.
Lear then falls into chaos. So does his kingdom, imagined by Mr. Scott as an African-American Olmec culture, precursor to the Mayan. The idea gives the production a visual panache in the set and the colorful costumes that the African-American cast displays as if parts of an exotic fashion show.
Such ideas work well in the show's opening pageant, as Lear enters from the audience while three young girls perform dances with a face-painted Fool. From that point on, however, the concept's execution provokes no unusual thoughts about either the Olmecs or ''King Lear.''
Most of this ''Lear,'' for better or worse, is pretty standard stuff. That is plenty satisfying if the actors work as an ensemble, which this play demands as much as any of Shakespeare's other great tragedies. But this cast is uneven, and their work together seldom has a life beyond the separate parts.
Johnny Lee Davenport gives Kent a rooted depth, despite the limitations of the restrained role; in him, the audience can see how craft can make flash unnecessary. Che Ayende is an entertaining Oswald, Justin Emeka an athletic Edgar. They and many of their colleagues turn in solid but typically nondescript performances.
The actors too often seem to mark their places with care, an energy-sapping approach in a space as large and distant from the audience as Yale's University Theater.
Some performances have more flavor, though that is not always a good thing. As Edmund, John Douglas Thompson dares to offer his ''Stand up for bastards!'' speech with such a light touch it ends with a squeak. His mildly comic approach is brave and non-traditional, but not very entertaining or convincing.
More successful is Ray Ford as the Fool, the only character who seems to belong in the same play as Mr. Brooks. Mr. Scott and the costume designer, Jessica Ford, have conceived the Fool's look as something like that of a witch doctor, and Mr. Ford mixes a comic naturalism with a supernatural wisdom that pumps momentum and energy into Lear's journey.
Mr. Brooks, whose work here is sometimes confoundingly inaccessible, seems enlivened by his scenes with the Fool. But his performance turns most appealing at play's end, when the fidgeting stops and, with exquisite grief and recognition, he confronts the blinded Gloucester, the hanged Cordelia and his imminent mortality. In these hushed and inspired moments, the talented actor reveals a ''Lear'' that proves moving for all places and times.
''King Lear'' is at Yale Repertory Theater, 222 York Street, New Haven, through March 13. Information: (203)432-1234 or www.yalerep.org.
THEATER REVIEW
