To the Sports Editor:
I'm sorry to say that my good friend Dave Anderson, whom I've known and admired for 50 years, made a glaring error in perception comparing Babe Ruth's arrival in New York in 1920 to that of Alex Rodriguez in 2004. Dave's column (''When Sold, Babe Wasn't the Babe Yet,'' Feb. 23) diminishes Ruth's arrival and ends, ''At the time, the Babe was not yet the Babe.''
The Babe was the Babe long before he came to New York. The fame he acquired with his tremendous pitching for the Boston Red Sox in 1915, 1916 and 1917 was hyped by the nine home runs he hit as a pitcher in those three deadball seasons. Ty Cobb had only 14 homers as a full-time player over the same three years, Shoeless Joe Jackson only 13, Tris Speaker 4. Imagine a pitcher hitting nine!
By 1918, the year Ruth began his transition from full-time pitcher to full-time hitter, he was being called the Home Run King. He attracted huge crowds as the Red Sox made their barnstorming way home to Boston from spring training. A 1918 newspaper headline called him the Mightiest Slugger of Them All. A Boston sportswriter named Burt Whitman said, ''The more I see of Babe, the more he seems like a figure out of mythology.''
He was certainly the Babe by 1918, and in 1919 he topped all he had done before by hitting an utterly sensational 29 home runs, destroying all existing home run records. Before he played one game for the Yankees, Ruth was famous as the greatest home run hitter baseball had ever seen. I think that Dave, in reading The Times files about Ruth's sale to New York in 1920, was subsequently looking for the hype of TV cameras, photos of reporters' microphones thrust in the Babe's face, sports radio jabbering away. Such things didn't exist in those days.
Why is Ruth being downgraded? The Yanks had never won a pennant before Babe and had finished as high as second only three times. Yet they won three pennants in his first four seasons with them, six in his first nine. Their biggest season's attendance before Ruth was 619,000. With him in 1920, they doubled that to 1,289,000, the first time a big league team had drawn more than a million. It was nearly 30 percent better than the old major league record for attendance.
In fact, New York was the perfect stage for Ruth, but it wasn't New York that made Babe the Babe. He was the Babe long before he arrived.
ROBERT W. CREAMER  Tuckahoe, N.Y.
The writer is the author of ''Babe: The Legend Comes to Life'' (Simon &amp; Schuster, 1974).
