AS stump speeches go, pundits have long observed that the John Edwards version is not so much delivered as performed. No mike, please. A wireless is preferred so he can flick his arms, pump his fists, reach out. And his mantra of ''two Americas'' has become so familiar that the Rev. Al Sharpton took it up -- even before Mr. Edwards had a chance to -- during last week's Democratic debate. (''I do not think that it is fair to say that there are two Americas,'' Mr. Sharpton said. ''There are many Americas.'')
While Mr. Edwards introduces fresh elements from time to time, the current incarnation of his stump speech has not changed much since he rolled it out with fanfare just after the New Year in Nashua, N.H. A former trial lawyer unabashed about using his courtroom tools on the campaign trail, he has called his stump speech his ''closing argument,'' the summation of a case he began making to voters more than a year ago.
He has jettisoned some of his favored lines: ''Who cares what the drug companies say?'' he would ask in a near shout, for example, referring to the industry's influence on health care legislation. His face would wrinkle in disgust, his hands rising, palms open, as if shrugging.
Now, the approach is less intense, and the focus is on what he sees as a divide between the haves and have-nots, a divide worsened by the White House, Congressional Republicans and ''Washington insiders.'' (Mr. Edwards, a first-term senator from North Carolina who had never held public office or even voted regularly before he was elected, does not count himself in this group.)
''These people are stealing your democracy,'' he is fond of saying.
In the past month or so he has pruned nearly 10 minutes from his standard campaign speech, to bring it down to 15 to 20 minutes. He added a pledge to fight poverty: ''You and I have a moral responsibility to lift those families out of poverty.'' In searching for votes among disgruntled blue-collar workers, he has honed in on trade: ''We used to talk about 'buy American.' How about 'hire American'?'' he says, a line almost always received with loud applause.
(The word ''Iraq'' rarely crosses his lips.)
Though a certain working-class rage underpins his message, Mr. Edwards manages to keep things sunny, imploring voters to ''join this campaign, this cause, this movement to change America.''
He invokes the memory of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, pulling the country out of the Depression, and of John F. Kennedy taking on civil rights. It is time, he tells audiences, for the same sense of ''optimism and hope.''
''Cynics didn't build this country,'' he says. ''Optimists built this country.''
