TONY JEFFERSON, a drummer who is busy on the metropolitan New York jazz scene, had an hour left one afternoon before he had to drive to Poughkeepsie for a gig, so he decided to practice his alto saxophone here at his home. But he is not ready to start stepping out with his sax.
''My mission is to keep improving on the drums,'' he said. ''I'm writing some music, too, now, besides digging into the saxophone, and I'm also learning how to play the clarinet. It's all meant to broaden my knowledge of music.''
Since he moved back to Westchester six years ago, his drumming talent and wide-ranging bandstand experience have landed Mr. Jefferson, a New Rochelle native, a number of high-profile jobs, including stints with the trumpeter Clark Terry and the saxophonist Frank Wess, two veterans of the Swing era. Mr. Jefferson can also be found at One Station Plaza, a Peekskill performance space, backing up visiting jazz musicians or leading his own jazz groups.
While most of the calls the 43-year-old drummer gets are for work in small combos or piano trios, he can also be heard keeping time in the Westchester Jazz Orchestra, a 14-piece band formed last year that is going through its first season of performances.
Mr. Jefferson, who had several other passing stays in big bands, said he looks at his playing with the Westchester Jazz Orchestra as ''an excellent opportunity to help me grow musically.''
''Playing in a big band is different from being in a small group because you have to pay attention to more musicians and also be sensitive to all the different colorations of sound,'' he said. Then, paraphrasing the drummer and big band leader Mel Lewis, Mr. Jefferson said, ''Once you're past the ensemble sections in a big band arrangement, you're back to playing in a small band.''
Emily Tabin, a jazz enthusiast who founded the Westchester Jazz Orchestra with two band members, Peter Hand, a guitarist from Pelham, and Joey Berkley, a saxophonist from Mount Kisco, said the group was made up of professional jazz musicians who either live or teach in Westchester.
''There are many stellar jazz musicians around here,'' said Ms. Tabin, who lives in Chappaqua. ''We were looking for individuals who could play well together and who were into performing new music. Tony's a dynamic and exciting drummer with a tremendous passion for music that comes through in his playing. He's also a good communicator on and off the bandstand, and the band we have is better for it.''
Another group also known as the Westchester Jazz Orchestra, founded in 1995 and only intermittently active, according to its leader, Howard Lawrence of Briarcliff Manor, is disputing the new jazz orchestra's use of the name.
Since its premiere performance last October, the Westchester Jazz Orchestra that Ms. Tabin put together has performed three concerts, including one in January at the Irvington Town Hall Theater with the tenor saxophonist Houston Person of Croton Halls as a special guest.
Music has long been a part of Mr. Jefferson's life. He started on the snare drum in his fourth-grade music class and was given his own drum kit when he was 13. Initially he fashioned himself as a rhythm and blues drummer, but later in his teenage years became interested in jazz.
''Living in New Rochelle, I took advantage of being so close to the city by going to clubs and concerts as soon as it was possible,'' Mr. Jefferson said.
While in high school he was already hanging out with the jazz musicians backstage at the Village Vanguard in Greenwich Village, and one memory that he particularly relishes is meeting the tenor saxophonist Dexter Gordon.
After high school, Mr. Jefferson went to Purchase College, but left to pursue music full time, getting experience in several musical settings and ''playing all kinds of stuff, funk, reggae, jazz fusion, just to make a living,'' he said.
A scholarship to attend the Berklee College of Music in Boston furthered his education and got him involved with a large network of fellow jazz aspirants until the lure of steady work on the bandstand again interrupted his studies.
In 1988, Mr. Jefferson moved to Fort Lauderdale, Fla. He hooked up a year later with Kenny Drew Jr., a jazz pianist, in a continuing association that resulted in Mr. Jefferson's being featured on several of Mr. Drew's recordings. He also met his longtime partner, Beth De Wit, a decorative artist, in Florida. The couple lived in Portland, Ore., for four years and moved to Peekskill in 1998 so that Mr. Jefferson could better advance his jazz career.
Today Mr. Jefferson keeps a tight schedule, fitting in his reed lessons with performances and recording dates while also working on arrangements for his combo's performances. He also gives private drum lessons in his home.
On Tuesday nights, he helps lead a weekly jam session at the Hudson House, a restaurant in Nyack, and at one of the gatherings not too long ago he gave up his drum kit to a young man who wanted to sit in.
''This guy sounds good,'' said Mr. Jefferson, watching the new drummer from one of the side tables. ''Maybe I should bring my sax next week.''
