ALAN GREENSPAN, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, focused public attention last week on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the giants of the home mortgage market.
In testimony before the Senate Banking Committee, he praised the two companies for making major contributions to the financial system. But he also said that they have become so big that they pose a risk to that system.
Jonathan E. Gray, a senior analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, took some time last week to talk about the future for Fannie and Freddie. Following are excerpts from the conversation:
Q. Congress, which created both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, is considering changes in the way they are regulated. Do you think a bill will be passed this year?
A. This is a big, complicated and contentious issue. The odds are that no legislation will be passed this year.
And even if a bill is passed, there is a low probability that a bill which is hostile to Fannie and Freddie will be passed. Unless the Congress is confident they are doing something that is not harmful to the housing market, I don't think they will do anything.
Since this is an election year, we will know whether or not there is going to be a bill within two months.
Q. Mr. Greenspan would like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to increase the capital on their balance sheets, removing one of their advantages over banks and savings and loan associations. What would be the practical effect of that step?
A. Mr. Greenspan is proposing that the housing finance system depend on banks and thrifts, as opposed to government-sponsored enterprises like Fannie and Freddie.
But banks and thrifts cannot hold long-term fixed-rate mortgages, because their deposits and debt are predominantly short term. That means that the fixed-rate mortgage would disappear, and the adjustable-rate mortgage would take over.
That in turn means that trillions of dollars in mortgages would shift to adjustable-rate products, which would increase the possibility of a collapse in home prices.
Suppose, for example, that interest rates rose by five or six percentage points over a two- to three-year period. That would create an enormous debt burden on homeowners.
Banks would also need long-term callable debt. There is a source for that in the Federal Home Loan Bank System. But if they issue enough debt to assume the role that Freddie and Fannie now play, you are basically creating another government-sponsored enterprise.
Q. Mr. Greenspan said that because of their size, a problem at Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac could threaten the financial system. Could you make the same claim about other institutions?
A. If sheer size poses systemic risk, then Citigroup, J.P. Morgan Chase or even Wal-Mart poses a systemic risk.
Q. Is the housing market slowing down?
A. Over the last 25 years, mortgage debt has grown at a 10.3 percent pace, compared with 7.2 percent growth in nominal gross domestic product. That is the tailwind that mortgage finance companies like Fannie and Freddie have.
Currently, there are about $14 trillion worth of homes and apartments in the United States, and only about $7.7 trillion of mortgage debt. The World War II generation saw debt as shameful, but the current generation uses the house as a source of liquidity.
Q. Could the housing market withstand a sharp rise in interest rates?
A. The housing market will be sensitive to a change in rates. If long-term rates moved from 5.5 percent to 8 percent, for example, that would put a damper on the volume of homes changing hands. But once rates stabilized, the housing market would come back. To hit the housing market hard enough to precipitate a recession, mortgage rates would have to go to 9 percent quickly.
Q. Have the accounting and management problems at Freddie Mac been resolved?
A. Arthur Andersen was Freddie's accounting firm, and Andersen blew up as a result of Enron. Anyone who was associated with them got burned. As far as improprieties on the part of senior management, I have no way of knowing what went on. But at this point you would have to prefer Fannie to Freddie if only because Freddie's senior management is unknown at this point.
Q. Do you like both of these stocks?
A. First off, let me say that I personally own both stocks, and so does my firm.
The mortgage finance sector is valued as if it were some sort of caste system. The stocks sell at anywhere from seven to nine times earnings. That is extraordinary.
Fannie Mae is so cheap that it sells about 8.5 times next year's earnings. If the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 were valued comparably, it would sell at 540, rather than 1,140.
At two-thirds of the market multiple, Fannie Mae's stock would sell at $115 a share. In my view, the perception of the risk in the stock is exaggerated.
MARKET INSIGHT
