BY now, everybody has heard of Senator John Kerry's ''band of brothers,'' the Vietnam veterans standing with him as he runs for president. Less well known is a second band of brothers here in New York: Mr. Kerry's fellow members of the Yale Class of '66.
One brother is Robert Van Leeuwen, who lived in the same residential college, Jonathan Edwards, as Mr. Kerry, before becoming a senior United Nations official in Southeast Asia and the Balkans. He now lives a professorial life on East 46th Street, just a few blocks from the fluttering blue flags of the Yale Club on Vanderbilt Avenue.
Another brother is Leo Kayser III, who played all-night poker with George W. Bush (Class of '68), but was a friend of Mr. Kerry through membership in the Yale Political Union, where Mr. Kerry was a young liberal and Mr. Kayser was a young conservative. He practices law on Madison Avenue.
These Elis are members of a steering committee of about 20 comrades who have formed ''Yale 66 Classmates for Kerry.'' The group germinated with four New York Yalies, Mr. Van Leeuwen, Cary Koplin, Greg Weiss and Biff Folberth, and since the fall has grown nationwide. Its e-mail list includes investment bankers, lawyers at white-shoe firms, the head of a private school and a real estate developer.
Are they a band of brothers? ''Yeah, I guess,'' Mr. Kayser said, in a wry drawl that recalls his Alabama roots. ''I wouldn't be supporting John if I didn't know him. I certainly wouldn't be supporting him because of his politics.'' But he was quick to add, ''Make it clear my support is only for the nomination.''
Mr. Kayser, a partner in the New York firm of Kayser and Redfern, is a registered Republican, and an occasional advisor to Governor George E. Pataki. He is socially libertarian (no to a constitutional ban of gay marriage) and fiscally conservative (yes to low taxes). As a registered Republican, he can't vote for Mr. Kerry in New York's Democratic primary on Tuesday, but he has donated $2,000, the maximum allowed, to Mr. Kerry's campaign. He cheered Mr. Kerry's upset victory in the Iowa caucuses from a bar on East 23rd Street.
Of course, many New York Yalies support George W. Bush; even Mr. Kayser hedged his bets by donating $2,000 to the Bush campaign. ''I consider both of these fellas being my friends,'' he said.
John Harvey, producer of a forthcoming movie called ''Swing'' (not about swing votes, in case you wondered), is another brother of Eli. In November, he held a ''house party'' in his East End Avenue apartment; Mr. Kerry's voice was piped in by conference call.
''If you were to dig a little deeper, you would discover that I was registered as a Republican, so class loyalty has some significance,'' Mr. Harvey said. But, he added, he's a Rockefeller Republican, so the kinship with Mr. Kerry is ideological as well as personal. He and Mr. Kerry were Navy men at the same time, so there's another connection.
The class of '66 meets once a month at the Yale Club of New York for lunch, so they're pretty close-knit. The other day, Mr. Van Leeuwen accompanied a guest to the club in search of the secret of their bond. Like Mr. Kerry, he served in Vietnam, and has a Purple Heart, which he wears pinned to his lapel. Like Mr. Kerry, he idolized J.F.K., and remembers hearing the bells of Harkness Tower toll the assassination their sophomore year.
The blue class books are kept in a glass-fronted cabinet, which is kept locked, as if the moldering youth of Yale were as precious as the ancient tomes of Alexandria.
''Look how far back they go,'' Mr. Van Leeuwen whispered, pointing to a volume with the date 1870 inscribed on its spine. A librarian armed with the key pulled out the volumes from 1966 and 1968.
The '66 book was well thumbed, its spine ripped. The class of 1,000 men had only a handful of black students; the table of contents listed the hot issues of the day: Class Prizes, Sports, Fraternities. Mr. Kerry's class oration, printed in front, was precocious but platitudinous -- hardly as stirring as the soul-searching version he actually delivered months before shipping off to war.
The Yale Mr. Bush remembers as ''fairly placid'' is not in evidence in the '68 yearbook. It is filled with photographs of black faces, not students but poor residents of New Haven, in a section titled ''Student Empathy: Response to the City.'' There is also a chapter called ''The War,'' and a passionate account of F.B.I. agents interrogating student draft resisters.
That is the 60's as Mr. Van Leeuwen remembers it, and why he hopes to some day see Mr. Kerry's portrait hanging alongside those of Taft, Ford, two Bushes and Clinton in the main lounge at the Yale Club. Mr. Kerry, he said, belongs to not just Yale '66, but what he still remembers as ''my generation.''
COPING E-mail: amh@nytimes.com
