THE new Pontiac GTO has many claims to fame. It went from concept car to showroom model in only 18 months, demonstrating General Motors' new prowess in product development.
It is fast, racing from a stop to 60 m.p.h. in just 5.3 seconds. It is nimble, taking curves at speeds that the original GTO of the 1960's couldn't have begun to handle.
And, surprisingly, it is a gas guzzler, the only mass-produced car with an American nameplate on the government's list.
To be sure, only GTO's with a four-speed automatic transmission are subject to the federal gas-guzzler tax. And with an economy rating of 16 miles per gallon in town and 21 on the highway, even that car does much better than many pickups and sport utility vehicles.
But because the GTO is a passenger car, the rating is low enough to require buyers to pay a $1,000 guzzler tax. Trucks, including S.U.V.'s, are exempt.
Still, the 350-horsepower GTO, which is built in Australia with the body of the Holden Monaro coupe and a Corvette engine (from Canada), contravenes a longtime General Motors policy of not selling gas guzzlers to the general public.
G.M. could have avoided the penalty by selling GTO's only with a six-speed manual transmission; that version, with a mileage rating of 17/29 m.p.g., is not subject to the tax. Indeed, this is the approach the company took with another high-performance car, the new Cadillac CTS-V sedan, which comes only with a six-speed manual. Automatics generally get lower mileage than manuals.
Enthusiasts may wonder why a Cadillac comes without an automatic while the GTO, from G.M.'s traditional performance division, has one as standard equipment. The GTO's manual is an option.
The automatic GTO's guzzler status is not widely known, partly because G.M. did not disclose that information at the car's introduction to the press. Although the GTO has been on sale for two months, Pontiac's media Web site still said Friday that the car's mileage was ''to be determined.''
At $33,000, the GTO is the lowest-priced 2004 model penalized for fuel consumption.
Only a few Detroit names show up on the list. The Dodge Viper is one, but Chrysler sold only 2,103 Vipers in 2003; G.M. plans to import about 18,000 GTO's annually.
Cadillac's special-purpose funeral coach and hearse also make the list, but they are not bought by the general population, and generally make only short trips to their occupants' final destinations.
G.M. has gone to considerable effort to avoid the guzzler stigma, developing technologies like variable displacement engines and a manual transmission that forced drivers of Corvettes, Camaros and Firebirds to skip gears in the interest of economy -- irritating many in the process. In its 2002 annual report, G.M. pointed to its investments in hydrogen fuel cells and went on to say, ''However, we're not putting off actions that we can take now to lower fuel consumption.''
G.M., in fact, does make several large cars with mileage ratings that are among the best in their classes.
G.M. officials, both in engineering and public relations, say the company had been operating under a clear directive, if not quite an iron-clad policy, to avoid making automobiles that would be subject to the guzzler tax. G.M. has not sold such a car since the low-production Cadillac Allanté roadster of 1993.
The results of this self-imposed policy are impressive: the Chevrolet Corvette, whose base engine is the same LS1 V-8 that is found under the GTO's hood (but a car that is 500 pounds lighter), returns 18/25 m.p.g. when equipped with an automatic. And like the GTO, the Corvette is no slouch in the performance department; its top speed is 176 m.p.h., Chevrolet says. No Corvette has ever been classified as a gas guzzler.
Of course, the goal of good gas mileage is not entirely a matter of customer appeal or soothing the corporate conscience: the government can impose large fines if an automaker's corporate average fuel economy does not meet federal standards.
G.M. does not have to worry that the GTO is weighing down its average for domestic vehicles, since the Australian-built GTO is classified as an import. G.M.'s import average gets a lift from gas sippers like the Chevrolet Aveo, a Korean-built subcompact, and efficient four-cylinder Saabs.
G.M. decided to make the GTO even if it was a guzzler because of what it saw as an urgent need to revive Pontiac's image. Thus, the car was not delayed while technology was developed that would have improved its mileage, like a more efficient six-speed automatic transmission. Pontiac also resisted makeshift solutions, like producing a front-drive GTO with a V-6 engine.
''We weren't going to compromise,'' said Jim Hopson, a Pontiac spokesman. ''We wanted to put a car out there worthy of the name GTO.''
Bringing the guzzler penalty to a lower price class may not stir protests. John DeCicco, a senior fellow at the Environmental Defense advocacy group, said: ''People are going to look at the window sticker and get annoyed, but not at Pontiac. They'll be mad at the federal government and its rules.''
About half of GTO buyers have chosen the automatic transmission. Considering the poor mileage of so many trucks, the addition of 9,000 guzzlers to American roads will not have much effect on oil imports.
