THE BODY
By Hanif Kureishi.
149 pp. New York:
Scribner. $20.
THE theme of eternal youth is at least as old as Greek myth. Both Eos (goddess of the dawn) and Selene (she of the moon) requested and received eternal life for their mortal lovers, with decidedly mixed results. And in our time Michael Jackson has notably failed to make the quest look any more sensible or dignified. Indeed, the story always comes packaged as a cautionary tale. Even Oscar Wilde in ''The Picture of Dorian Gray'' treated the preservation of youthful beauty as if it were a sin -- something the unrepentant aesthete can hardly have believed. But then perhaps we tell ourselves these stories about the price of eternal youth mostly to console ourselves for the fact that no such stuff is on sale.
Or it wasn't, anyway. Not until biotechnology breathed some new life -- or installed a fresh set of lungs -- in the old fantasy. In Hanif Kureishi's novel ''The Body,'' a man in late middle age trades in his decrepit physique for a 20-something organism with the proportions of a classical statue, the muscles of ''an Italian footballer'' and the face of a matinee idol. As a conceit this is not exactly original; think of the musical ''Damn Yankees.'' Still, Kureishi is right to feel that his theme has been rejuvenated, Botoxed by history. More and more the doctors are making a literal proposition where before the actors and models had offered only a tease: wouldn't you like to always look and feel young? The National Institutes of Health has given grants to ethicists earnestly considering the matter, and certain scientists maintain that there are those among us who will live indefinitely. What they don't always mention is that these are probably the rich people.
Kureishi would seem a natural to write a novel about renewable youth. Born at the tail end of the baby boom, he is self-consciously a writer of sex, drugs and rock 'n' roll, and therefore of a generation that worshiped youth as none since the Romantics. In ''The Buddha of Suburbia'' (1990), Kureishi's excellent first novel, our teenage narrator has been listening to Pink Floyd and smoking pot in the company of a handsome young friend: ''I wanted to live always this intensely: mysticism, alcohol, sexual promise, clever people and drugs.'' As for his beautiful friend: ''I coveted his talents, face, style. I wanted to wake up with them all transferred to me.'' Which is essentially what the narrator of ''The Body'' gets: to be young and irresponsible again, but better-looking this time. Like all tales of eternal youth, this one asks us to consider the problem of answered prayers. But Kureishi with his good idea is sadly like his narrator with the hot new body: he doesn't know what to do with it.
Adam, Kureishi's narrator, is older than the author, but likewise a Londoner and a successful writer. He is approached about becoming one of the Newbodies (as they're called) by a fan whose dream of an acting career has led him to become a Newbody himself. Adam quickly arranges ''a six-month sabbatical'' from his marriage and a substantial transfer of funds to a shady medical outfit offering a range of young bodies to rent. Thus equipped, he changes his name to Leo, travels to the Continent like the college student he now resembles, has a lot of sex, ingests many drugs and then, tiring of these activities, takes up menial work in a Greek colony catering to New Agey women. Finally he is pursued by a diabolical zillionaire who wants to steal his new ''facility,'' as the body is not very catchily called.
In some sense it is hardest of all to believe that Adam is a writer. He complains that in his old body he had lost interest in the world. But his prose shows no sign of quickened perceptions: ''I found a cheap cafe and ate a meal. I ate another meal.'' This is a man with a renewed appetite? Too often it's as though Adam had unwillingly been assigned an essay on ''the body'': ''Doctors spend their lives touching bodies, which is why young people go to medical school.'' Is it really? And he is no more persuasive on his own experience: ''I came to the city because the bodies are closer; there is heat and magnetism.'' Kureishi's short novel ''Intimacy'' (1998) was an almost oppressively convincing portrait of a middle-aged writer about to abandon his girlfriend and children. Here, however, he writes as if he knew of life mostly by hearsay. In the past a fine writer on music, now he refers patly to the genre of ''speed garage'' -- as if that's what someone told him all the kids listen to these days.
''The Body'' is a hectic picaresque, and while Kureishi lists a number of experiences, he goes to the trouble of describing very few. The dialogue similarly fails to partake of Adam's newfound vigor. Much of it is either crudely expository or just plain tin-eared: ''I've been walking on air ever since our lovemaking,'' or ''We're trying to restart our troubled lives here.'' Kureishi frequently resorts to a comedic degree of exaggeration without achieving a comic effect.
The literary poverty of ''The Body'' makes its premise -- a new vehicle for an old mind -- seem like going only halfway. Adam, that is, may be an intellectual, but he doesn't have original thoughts. And so Kureishi, having failed to turn his story to psychological or philosophical account, ultimately transforms the book into a thriller, complete with chase scenes. As so often in Hollywood, this is a sign of creative exhaustion, whatever young bodies can be recruited to go through the motions.
Kureishi, like many middle-aged people, has retained the hedonistic impulses of the 60's while dropping the political aspirations. Perhaps this conceals from him the way in which tales of eternal youth have been altered by their newfound plausibility. If once these tales were about how you shouldn't want what you can't get anyway, now they pose the question of whether anyone should have what so few can afford. Handsome young Tithonus in Greek mythology lived forever, but wizened and dwindled until he became a grasshopper. The new immortals will no doubt age better than that, but the sphere of their moral concern will probably shrink as their contemporaries from the lower tax brackets die off. When you are young, Kureishi writes, in hearsay mode, ''you want a machine gun and the revolution.'' Actually, universal health care and an iPod would do for now. But as we young people age, while some of our elders don't, we may change our minds. And if I see Dick Cheney running around in Ashton Kutcher's body. . . .
Benjamin Kunkel writes about books for The Believer and Dissent.
