In movies, 2003 will be heralded as the year that the parts dominated the whole. With the exception of ''The Return of the King,'' the final chapter of the brilliant ''Lord of the Rings'' epic, which, like history itself, swallowed up any individual effort, no matter how powerful, into its vast sweep, last year's movies were made thrilling by actors turning films into, essentially, character studies. Again and again, plot lines either fell away or proved murky or, worse, predictable, while happily, individual actors transcended even the most formulaic material. The murder investigation at the center of ''Mystic River'' is only a distraction from Sean Penn's anguished and complex performance. Charlize Theron turned ''Monster'' into a solo concert of rage and madness. In ''Lost in Translation,'' Bill Murray's performance, which combined humor and sadness, resonated like a shared memory; it was both completely original and yet instantly familiar. And Diane Keaton transformed a nonstop crying jag in ''Something's Gotta Give'' into a symphony of self-pity, revenge and a kind of manic strength.
And so it went, all year long: performances that made the movie. When the editors and contributors here who concentrate on film decided to showcase the best performances of 2003, we weren't trying to forecast the Oscars. What we wanted to do was feature the actors who had amused, dazzled, enlightened, enraged and transfixed us. It was not a scientific process -- there were no in-office polls taken, and none of us are critics, at least not officially. Quite simply, these were performances -- Chiaki Kuriyama as Go-Go in ''Kill Bill,'' Rémy Girard in ''The Barbarian Invasions,'' Gwyneth Paltrow in ''Sylvia'' -- that moved us. If it stuck with us for days (or weeks or months), it was right for the list. We were taken with the unforgettable.
Because of various complications -- other obligations, general unwillingness, a visa problem -- we had to give up on some of our picks. We were unanimous on Johnny Depp, who made ''Pirates of the Caribbean'' perhaps the most sheerly enjoyable popcorn movie of the year. Sadly, he was unavailable. And we would have liked to feature Oksana Akinshina, the teenage star of ''Lilya 4-Ever''; and Frances McDormand, who was riveting in ''Laurel Canyon''; and Markku Peltola, the mysterious star of the Finnish film ''The Man Without a Past''; but for reasons big and small, we could not include them. Happily, all our other choices were game.
We conceived this list as our version of the Oscars -- whether it was the lead role or one five-minute scene that glued us to the screen. Jamie Lee Curtis took her part in ''Freaky Friday'' less than a week before production began, yet she elevated that movie from a slick remake aimed at adolescents into a comedic meditation on middle-age angst. Sir Ben Kingsley and Shohreh Aghdashloo are so compelling in ''House of Sand and Fog'' that the movie seems to drain of color whenever they leave the frame. Similarly, in ''21 Grams,'' Benicio Del Toro and Melissa Leo, as an embattled married couple, seem to be in a documentary rather than a work of fiction. Their performances, like those of Anne-Marie Duff, Dorothy Duffy and Nora-Jane Noone in ''The Magdalene Sisters,'' do not seem like acting at all. Instead they are affecting slices of life.
Many of our choices revolved around newcomers: Chiwetel Ejiofor is haunting in ''Dirty Pretty Things''; Max Pirkis, who is 15 and has never acted before, is in many ways the heart of ''Master and Commander''; and Judah Friedlander, a stand-up comedian, is riveting as Toby, the self-proclaimed ultimate ''nerd'' in ''American Splendor.'' Surprisingly, we found it to be a strong year for women: Hope Davis (in ''American Splendor''), Ludivine Sagnier (in ''Swimming Pool'') and the omnipresent Scarlett Johansson (in ''Girl With a Pearl Earring,'' especially) were all immediate choices.
To photograph this portfolio, we chose Inez van Lamsweerde and Vinoodh Matadin. Like Richard Avedon or Irving Penn, who were first known for their fashion photography, van Lamsweerde and Matadin use the trappings of style -- the clothes, the makeup, the poses -- as a point of departure, a vocabulary that they can adapt to other languages. Today's celebrity portraiture demands almost instant decision making on the part of the photographers. A photo session usually occurs within the space of less than an hour, and the task before van Lamsweerde and Matadin was to evoke both the character of our chosen actors and their roles. Sometimes they would have a strong idea in mind for the sitter -- the flowers in Bill Murray's beard, for instance. Ralph Fiennes's disquieting, insular performance in ''Spider'' suggested a particularly vulnerable pose. Tim Robbins, who is heartbreaking in ''Mystic River,'' arrived at the studio with a snapshot that was taken in Washington Square Park when he was 7. ''It's my favorite picture of myself,'' he said, hinting that the childhood photo had inspired his performance in the movie. Van Lamsweerde and Matadin incorporated Robbins's snapshot into their image.
In many cases, the photographers created new personas that are as riveting as the on-screen characters: Gwyneth Paltrow was reconceived as a broken doll; Hope Davis, through the eyes of van Lamsweerde and Matadin, is a 70's cowgirl; and Judah Friedlander has been recast as a kind of Roman emperor, with a touch of Elvis Presley. Like a D.J. sampling music, anyone who is making photographs today is drawing on a huge archive of imagery, from high art to pop culture, and that mix is particularly evident in van Lamsweerde and Matadin's work. They take the archetypes of fashion photography and then direct the photo in almost the opposite direction. Hence, you have Charlize Theron, coifed and stunning, but with a scarf obscuring her movie-star glamour. In van Lamsweerde and Matadin's photo, she is a new kind of monster.
Our only goal in this portfolio was to reward excellence. In all the hubbub of celebrity coverage and the politics of awards, the excitement of watching great work is lost. Sitting in a dark theater and seeing these performances is like falling in love -- overwhelming, emotional and, finally, a moment that will always be remembered, long after the movie fades.
Lynn Hirschberg and Kathy Ryan
