KEVIN FORD had just finished sorting envelopes at South Jamesport's tiny post office on a recent snowy morning when a handful of residents trudged in to pick up their mail. Exchanging greetings while fiddling with the antique combination locks on their post office boxes, they joked with Mr. Ford, postmaster of what might be the smallest post office on Long Island, that it was rush hour.
Later that day at the Shelter Island post office, women in long coats and hats stopped to chat in one corner, blue-collar tradesmen in another. In Sagaponack that afternoon, residents grabbed their mail at the post office and then a bite to eat at a general store under the same roof.
These 3 post offices are among the 18 on Long Island that don't deliver to residents' doors or to curbside mailboxes. To get their mail, residents have to go down to the post office and pick it up themselves. Some think these post offices -- concentrated on the East End but including two Nassau County holdouts -- an anachronism and inconvenience. But many postal patrons cherish them as places for social encounter, to see the neighbors and catch up on the latest goings-on.
''I like the sense of community a small post office gives,'' said Kay Zegel, director of the Mattituck Free Library, who was ordering stamps from Mr. Ford in South Jamesport. ''It fills that void.''
Ms. Zegel echoed the sentiments of many others who said that going to the post office gives them a chance to connect with their neighbors, offers relief from winter isolation and preserves a slice of an all-but-gone small-town way of life.
''It's part of our old country routine,'' said Gregg Saunders, 44, leafing through his mail at the Sagaponack post office. ''You get to meet a lot of neighbors you never knew you had.''
A few steps away the actor Roy Scheider was picking up groceries at the Sagg General Store before getting his mail. ''It's all right with me because I live close to the post office,'' Mr. Scheider said of the daily mail call. ''There's a certain atmosphere in this post office.''
Inside the Shelter Island post office, Roswitha Wisseman was chatting with her friend Edith Lechmanski. ''We like coming to the post office because we can catch up on news,'' Ms. Wisseman said. If the flag at the police station across the street is flying at half-staff, she said, she heads for the post office to find out who died.
Ms. Lechmanski, a retired secretary for the school district, recalled one Saturday night finding a claim slip to an important package she needed for a Sunday presentation. Not being able to wait until Monday, she called a postal worker -- she gave no name for fear that the woman, whose children she knows from school, would be punished for breaking regulations -- who came in the next morning and opened the office just for her.
But Maury Laspia just wanted to get his mail and get out. ''It's a pain in the butt,'' said Mr. Laspia, 48, explaining that residents often want to discuss business in the Shelter Island post office lobby. ''They use it as their office.''
Postal delivery comes in two forms. Most Long Islanders get city delivery, which means mail delivered to the door. The service, established in 1863, can be started in any post office that serves 2,500 people or has 750 delivery points and has paved and named streets marked by signs, as well as drop slots or boxes and passable sidewalks. Rural free delivery, in which mail goes to roadside mailboxes, was begun in 1896, is intended for areas with lower population density and only applies to areas outside a quarter-mile radius from the post office. For example, Orient residents receive rural delivery unless they live close to the post office, in which case they must pick up their mail because the village has no city delivery.
For full-time residents without city or rural delivery, the alternative is a post office box. General delivery, in which mail is picked up at the post office window, is a temporary service for transients and tourists.
Some communities have agreed to no-home-delivery service in exchange for postal authorities' acquiescence in keeping their local post offices open despite the dictates of economics, convenience and even fire. In other towns the subject of mail delivery has scarcely been talked of.
''I haven't heard that brought up in years,'' said Cathy Southard, postmistress of Great River, when asked if residents ever request mail delivery. She said the South Shore community, which with a few hundred families would not qualify for its own carrier routes, has a sense of community lacking in East Islip where she lives, and she likes that customers bring her photos when their grandchildren are born.
Thomas Hug, a real estate broker, uses the quaintness of a no-delivery post office to sell homes in Point Lookout, an enclave of summer bungalows at the end of Long Beach Island that traded up to paved streets and tony homes in the 1940's. There is a practical reason for informing prospective residents, he said. One man who bought a home but was never told about the mail put up a mailbox, much to the amusement of the neighbors.
Glenwood Landing, a one-square-mile community on the North Shore in the Town of Oyster Bay, doesn't have the population or the land area for delivery, said Warren Magnuson, the postmaster. But his customers don't mind, he said, and appreciate not having to stop mail delivery when they're going away on vacation, or having it pile up by the front door. ''At least your mail is secured,'' he said. ''It's not sitting out there.''
If residents in New Suffolk fail to pick up their mail, Nancy Taylor sometimes phones them from the post office to make sure everything's all right.
''This is a real small town,'' said Ms. Taylor, 41, a window clerk who greeted her customers by name as they grumbled about the cold weather. ''It's like a family kind of atmosphere.''
New Suffolk's post office is a former bait shop that sits just yards from Great Peconic Bay. The two-person operation sports some homey touches like an ornate desk bell, a portrait of the postmaster done by a resident and a small vase with a rose brought from the recent funeral of a local resident.
When a 1993 fire gutted the old post office and prompted the postal service to propose delivery from nearby Cutchogue, New Suffolk residents lobbied for a new local post office.
''It happened on a Thursday, we had a meeting at the school on Saturday and people obviously wanted the post office back,'' said Joan Robbins, 77, a retired county social worker who was president of the New Suffolk Civic Association at the time.
Residents lobbied their elected officials, found a new location and secured a lease and the Postal Service relented, said Tom Samuels, 47, another former civic association president.
Ms. Robbins said the post office was the essence of the hamlet, which has no shops or businesses. ''It's all we have in New Suffolk now that's public,'' she said.
Identity issues are not merely symbolic. Tom Gaynor, the Postal Service spokesman for the New York metro area, said that if a small post office is closed in favor of delivery service from a nearby larger office, the area formerly served by the smaller office inherits the mailing address -- the place name and ZIP code -- of the post office from which mail is delivered. For example, residents of Aquebogue who receive mail on rural routes from Riverhead have Riverhead mailing addresses and use a different ZIP code than do Aquebogue residents who pick their mail up at the local post office.
In Aquebogue the post office was almost lost in 1963, when the Post Office didn't want to pay for a new building to accommodate the growing population, recalled Raymond McKay Sr., 93.
Mr. McKay, then a farmer, sat down with postal officials and agreed to let his family's roadside vegetable stand become a temporary post office.
''You have pride, you have a post office in your vicinity,'' said Mr. McKay, who now lives with his son in Riverside but pays to keep his Aquebogue post office box ''just to retain that name. Aquebogue must be in my blood.''
In Quogue, an incorporated village where a hollowed tree served as the first post office ages ago, a questionnaire was sent to residents in the mid-1970's proposing delivery, said Mayor George M. Motz, 62.
''The response was resoundingly 'No,''' Mr. Motz said. Even though nearby Westhampton opted for delivery and newcomers to Quogue sometimes ask about the mail, Mr. Motz said residents were happy with the choice.
''From our point of view we would be giving something up,'' said the mayor. Attempts by some residents in box-only areas to petition for carrier service have been few, infrequent and unsuccessful.
A few months after Estelle Simes took over as postmistress of the Shelter Island post office in 1991, a small group began a push for home delivery at her station and at Shelter Island Heights, the island's only other post office. Their petitions fizzled when the vast majority of residents refused to sign them, said Ms. Simes, who is recently retired.
Some Jamesport residents pushed for delivery a few years ago but were also outnumbered, said Ray Saltini of the Greater Jamesport Civic Association. ''It's a hardship for some seniors,'' Mr. Saltini said. At the same time, ''It's where neighbors get to meet each other especially, in the winter when nobody's out and about.''
Others also mentioned the problems frail or elderly postal patrons may have getting their mail. ''One of my customers is getting old, can't drive anymore and lives by himself,'' said Kim Norkelun, the postmaster in New Suffolk. ''He really has no way to get his mail and I have no way to get it to him. That's definitely the drawback.''
Back at the South Jamesport post office, Joe Maragni, 79, said he thought the convenience of home delivery might win out. ''You can't fight progress,'' he said between greetings to neighbors coming in to check their mail.
Long Island
