AT THE TOMB OF
THE INFLATABLE PIG
Travels Through Paraguay.
By John Gimlette.
Illustrated. 362 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
JOHN GIMLETTE'S first book is colorful and meandering, by turns hilarious and horrifying, often delightful, occasionally infuriating and very, very odd. In all these respects, it is an entirely faithful reflection of its subject, since, measured in terms of eccentric history per square foot, Paraguay is probably the strangest country on the planet. It is also among the most brutal. And the funniest.
Landlocked in the middle of South America, Paraguay has provided a refuge for humanity's most improbable flotsam and jetsam. It is a place where dreamers, dictators, fugitives and fantasists have gone to find peace or El Dorado or immunity from prosecution. Among these are conquistadors, Jesuits, Nazis, Mennonites, Australian socialists, Japanese utopians, German vegetarians, White Russians and Anglo-Paraguayans pickled in gin and tonic who can no longer speak English but cling to a frayed nationalism represented by Princess Diana tea towels.
There are no misfits in Paraguay because in this peculiar salmagundi of a place, everyone fits, more or less. In its hothouse atmosphere, new exotics evolve in grotesque shapes, while insulation has ensured that ancient forms of behavior, including cannibalism, survived here long after their extinction elsewhere. ''Paraguay is not merely isolated, it is almost impenetrable,'' Gimlette writes. Those who did penetrate it often found themselves marooned, and the author (a London lawyer and travel writer who originally intended to write a novel about the country) assiduously tracks down these forgotten people: the remnants of the anti-Semitic colony founded by Friedrich Nietzsche's repellent sister and brother-in-law; the fair-skinned, sun-flayed Anabaptists clinging on in a land of poisonous thorns and broiling grit; the Frenchmen running a hotel in the desert in a state of bewildered shock. (''All they could remember of their former lives was gratin dauphinois.'')
''At the Tomb of the Inflatable Pig'' is billed as a travel book, but Gimlette does not so much travel as wander, ranging across the history, the people and the landscape. There is only a single, not very detailed map, and no index, which may be intentional, since the writing has a delightfully aimless feel, as if the author himself doesn't know -- or care -- quite where he will wind up next. As anyone who has visited Paraguay quickly discovers, this is how the transport system works: flag down something that's moving, climb aboard and hope.
Gimlette's tone is amused, but it is less the detached amusement of the cynic than a raw sort of black humor, threaded with sadness. He knows he's on delicate ground here, in danger of turning a serious and often grim story into a collection of caricatures and first-world one-liners. But his defense of his own ''frivolity'' is persuasive: ''It's the only way I know to tell a story that, deep down, makes me feel anger.''
Ever since the 16th century, when Europeans decided that Paraguay was Arcadia and set about systematically brutalizing it, the country's history has comprised episodes of lurid horror interspersed with periods of mere chaos and grinding hardship. The modern era of totalitarianism got under way in 1814 with the rule of President Dr. Gaspar Rodríguez Francia, an ascetic, paranoid megalomaniac who liked to be known as El Supremo. Francia turned the country into a police state: he closed the borders, shot all the dogs, founded the secret service and insisted that people salute him by doffing their hats, including otherwise naked Indians who were forced to carry little hatless brims specifically for that purpose. When his sister married without his consent, he executed her, her husband and the priest who married them. He died in 1840 in a thunderstorm during a fit of apoplexy and was promptly dismembered and fed to the alligators in the Paraguay River.
Francia was followed by the spectacularly nasty López dynasty, which culminated in the rule of Francisco Solano López, a bloated, debauched, self-styled Napoleon who, egged on by Eliza Lynch, his irrepressibly corrupt Irish doxy, declared war simultaneously on Brazil, Uruguay and Argentina. By the time the fighting was over, 90 percent of the male population was dead. The Paraguayans displayed a suicidal bravery to the end, and a macabre sense of humor. (''If a Paraguayan in the midst of his comrades was blown to pieces by a shell,'' one observer wrote, ''they would yell with delight, thinking it a capital joke, in which they would have been joined by the victim himself had he been capable.'') López was finally bayoneted in a bog and then, on the 66th anniversary of his death, raised to the status of national hero by another strongman, Alfredo Stroessner, child molester, torturer and architect of the dictatorship that made Paraguay a home away from home for the likes of Josef Mengele.
One of the finer monuments to Paraguayan absurdity and generosity is the town of Villa Hayes, gateway to the vast Chaco wilderness. It is named after the American president Rutherford B. Hayes, who arbitrated in Paraguay's favor after President López's disastrous war. Hayes is mostly (and rightly) forgotten in the United States, but not in Paraguay, where memory evolves in the oddest shapes.
Underpinning Gimlette's account of his travels in the country are a wistful appreciation of the essential kindness of the Paraguayans and admiration for the robust indigenous Guaraní culture. Violently mistreated, neglected, robbed blind by their leaders and invaders, the Paraguayan people remain as welcoming as their country's climate and landscape are forbidding.
Gimlette is a big-picture, broad-brush amateur historian, untroubled by details. But to fault him for this is to miss the point, because his book is not intended as some ponderous footnoted tome or even a conventional travelogue, but rather an emotional evocation, partial in every sense of the word, of a place the author has come to love. Graham Greene arrived in Paraguay hoping to find ''some mingling of the exotic, the dangerous and the Victorian.'' He was not disappointed. Gimlette has captured that mingling as powerfully as Greene did, and while only a few readers may feel moved to visit Paraguay after reading his book, none, I suspect, will soon forget it.
Ben Macintyre is the author of ''Forgotten Fatherland: The Search for Elisabeth Nietzsche.'' His latest book, ''The Man Who Would Be King: The First American in Afghanistan,'' will be published in April.
