To the Editor:
Re ''In Atlantic City, a Time to See and Raise Them'' (Feb. 8):
Sometimes all it takes to turn antagonists into allies is the threat of a mutual competitor. Despite what you report, such is the case in Atlantic City. As gambling becomes a likely reality in every surrounding state, government officials and casino managers alike recognize that the success of everyone is going to require collaboration. Governor McGreevey has committed his support to Atlantic City's gambling community, and the community seems to have accepted it. Casino operators are less focused on increasing their share of the pie and more focused on making the local pie bigger and better. And more than $2 billion has already been invested in new development over the last two years, with hundreds of millions of additional dollars committed over the next two.
All indications are that Atlantic City is evolving into a full-service resort destination. Still, there are skeptics, most notably the news media.
Certainly the coverage is factual. But it's interesting to note which ''facts'' get ink and which do not. As happened with your article, the press is still running photos of a garage collapse that happened three months ago but never shows images of the rest of the $225 million retail, dining and entertainment complex that is near completion at the Tropicana.
You also omit other significant evidence of the transformation of Atlantic City. Projects like the $76 million Atlantic City Outlets-The Walk, an entertainment and shopping complex, and the $80 million luxury mall project by the creators of Vegas's Forum Shops are adding new depth to the destination.
Perhaps the most important evidence that transformation is taking place is the fact that the number of overnight stays in Atlantic City is increasing and the demographic is changing. Figures from the South Jersey Transportation Authority show that nearly 10 percent more cars went through the tolls on the Atlantic City Expressway last summer while the number of buses decreased. Atlantic City is the nation's fourth-most-popular destination. Guess we must be doing something right in Atlantic City.
Jeffrey S. Vasser
The writer is executive director of the Atlantic City Convention and Visitors Authority.
