At 7:30 a.m., Ty Wigginton helps David Wright read the day's schedule. At 9:30, he makes sure he is out for early stretching. At 10, they warm up together. And at 10:15, Wigginton grabs Wright and directs him toward the correct field.
Whether or not Derek Jeter is as helpful to the Yankees' third baseman of the future, Wigginton is doing for Wright exactly what the veteran infielders Jay Bell and Joe McEwing once did for him.
''Every team I've ever been on, I found somebody who'd help me out,'' Wigginton said. ''Any way I can help him will also help this organization. When I see him looking a little lost, I'll say, 'Come over here.' ''
Wright said: ''He shows me when to go out there and how to do everything right. More than anything, he makes sure I'm not embarrassing myself.''
What makes their relationship so unusual is that Wright is the player who could someday take Wigginton's job. Wright is only 21, but he was voted the most valuable player on the team at Class A St. Lucie last season, hitting .270 with 15 home runs and 19 stolen bases, and is considered the club's top prospect among position players.
''David is going to be in the big leagues within two years,'' said Howard Johnson, the former Mets third baseman who is now a spring training instructor. ''He's progressing that quickly. I've been in Ty's shoes where a highly talented guy is coming up. I really think there's going to be room here for both of them.''
The Mets believe they have developed a response to Alex Rodriguez, but fans will have to wait awhile to see him. The team will entrust Wigginton with third base this season and probably next. After that, the position seems practically reserved for Wright.
Rodriguez has changed the standard for third basemen, especially in New York. The 26-year-old Wigginton said he was looking forward to coming home after Sunday games this season and watching the Yankees, who will be regulars on Sunday night telecasts. Wigginton is not interested in the team across town so much as he is intrigued by its new third baseman.
With one trade, Wigginton suddenly plays the most glamorous position in New York. He simply does not play it for the most glamorous team. While Wigginton lacks Rodriguez's slick demeanor and style points -- he fashions himself more of a hunter and fisherman -- Wright is already smooth beyond his years.
''Being in New York and living in that spotlight is going to be exciting -- for me and for David,'' Wigginton said. ''Whenever you watch A-Rod, you always learn from him. He's in another league.''
Wigginton's modesty is striking for someone who beat out Bell for the starting spot last season and was one of the only positive pieces on a 95-loss team. Wigginton still remembers how Bell would lecture him during spring training to give his best effort, then root for him to get a hit in every plate appearance during games.
Growing up with three younger brothers, Wright is more accustomed to being a target. His siblings would try to gang up on him in every familial competition imaginable, but he would usually beat them anyway, in events ranging from basketball and baseball to chess and checkers.
Like most minor leaguers, Wright's inclination at the beginning of spring training was to summon the same competitive spirit and try to impress anyone he could. In response, Wigginton imparted experience and wisdom, his greatest advantages in the battle with Wright.
''I told him how some guys, instead of trying to win a job in spring training, get caught up in the idea of big-league camp,'' Wigginton said. ''They see Mike Piazza hitting home runs and then they try to hit home runs. David and I are going after the same job, but there is no sense in holding him back. I just want him to play his game.''
So far, that has not been a problem. After being drafted in the first round in 2001, Wright has progressed steadily through the Mets' system, taking another jump each year, and he is expected to take his well-rounded skills to Class AA Binghamton this season.
Though minor league reports will not be as readily available as nightly Yankees updates, Wigginton will try to follow Wright as closely as he does Rodriguez.
INSIDE PITCH
For the past two days, MIKE PIAZZA's personal yoga instructor and nutritionist, ANDY BOURELL, has been in the clubhouse and on the practice fields, wearing an all-access credential. Bourell's visit coincided with BUD SELIG's mandate that clubs follow a two-year-old edict barring personal trainers and other nonemployees from clubhouses, weight rooms, playing fields and trainer's offices. The Mets said that Bourell's credential would be removed Saturday and that he would no longer be allowed in the clubhouse or on the fields. . . . When MIKE CAMERON arrived for workouts Saturday, he said to KAZUO MATSUI, ''What's up, dog?'' Matsui, who speaks about five words of English, replied, ''Chilling.''
BASEBALL
