There should not have been any shame in losing to Rider here Thursday night, even if this was a game Manhattan was supposed to win. The Jaspers are 21-5 over all and still the class of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference at 15-2, and Rider needed a lucky break at the end to pull this game out. These things happen. They just cannot happen anymore.
Manhattan's margin for error was sliced thinner with the 57-56 loss to Rider, which probably cost the Jaspers any chance at an at-large bid to the N.C.A.A. tournament.
All that is left now is a regular-season game at home Sunday against Marist and the conference tournament, where one more loss will most likely mean the dissolution of a season-long dream.
''It was a tough scenario tonight, but it's something we have to deal with,'' Coach Bobby Gonzalez said Thursday. ''That's what's hard about being a midmajor.''
Life at the midmajor level has its challenges. The teams play in small, sometimes dumpy, gyms, struggle for attention and recruit the leftovers after the top conferences have had their pick. The payback can be a trip to the N.C.A.A. tournament if everything breaks their way.
Manhattan lives with this challenge each time it plays. After a victory on Feb. 21 at Wisconsin-Milwaukee in an ESPN ''Bracket Buster Saturday'' game, the Jaspers edged closer to a possible at-large bid. The only MAAC program to receive one was the 1994-95 Manhattan team, which was 25-4 after an overtime loss to St. Peter's in the conference championship game, but few believe this squad is as strong or as worthy.
After Luis Flores gave Manhattan a 56-55 lead on a layup with 15.2 seconds left, Rider's Edwin Muniz missed badly on a pressured baseline jumper, but the ball landed squarely in the hands of Steve Castleberry, who was alone underneath the basket. The winning layup left his hand an instant before the buzzer sounded.
''This was a tough loss for us,'' Gonzalez said. ''But there's a reason no one has ever gone 18-0 or 17-1 in this conference. It's because it's extremely difficult to play that many conference games over a short period of time and continue to win all of them. We'll take this and use it as a positive, to motivate us and springboard us.''
There will have to be a sense of urgency when Manhattan begins play in its conference tournament on March 7 in Albany. As the No. 1-seeded team, the Jaspers will have a bye until the semifinal round.
''If we don't make the N.C.A.A. tournament, it will be a letdown,'' the senior Dave Holmes said. ''We've worked hard all season, and that's what we've been looking forward to, making the tournament and trying to win a game in it.''
Holmes and his fellow starters Flores and Jason Benton were there when Manhattan lost in the first round of the MAAC tournament in 2002, and when the Jaspers left nothing to chance and won the conference championship game last season. That gives Manhattan experience to go with a talent level no other team will be able to match in the conference tournament.
''We've never been one to shy away from pressure,'' Gonzalez said Thursday. ''We're not going to shy away from what happened tonight. We didn't make shots; they did a good job and we got caught at the wire. I'm just glad it wasn't the MAAC tournament.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
