THE British bank HSBC has decided to scrap its analysts' buy and sell recommendations, acknowledging what many professional investors have been telling the brokerage industry for years -- that they prefer to use their own judgment to pick stocks, and to turn to outside research only as a supplemental tool.
Charles Hill, director of research at Thomson First Call, as well as officials at HSBC and several other banks said that they knew of no other major investment house that had eliminated analysts' recommendations.
But Mr. Hill questioned the wisdom of the policy change, which is part of a wider revamping of global research that HSBC disclosed last week. He said that brokerage research could help investors form opinions about companies and that analysts' recommendations about stocks put the research into context.
Those recommendations have long been subjects of suspicion, even derision, among many investors. That is mainly because, until recently at least, so few sell calls were made that it seemed as if analysts never met a stock they didn't like.
It is widely assumed that the ''S'' word was shunned to avoid angering clients of the brokers' investment banks, the entities that conduct stock and bond offerings and consult on merger activities.
The dubious worth of some research was revealed a few years ago when the technology bubble was imploding and some analysts publicly praised companies that they were describing privately in unflattering terms.
Several large brokerage firms reached a settlement with American state and federal regulators and prosecutors in 2002 that resulted in fines totaling $1.4 billion and a pledge to separate research and investment banking operations.
HSBC, which is based in London and operates globally, was not part of the United States settlement and was not implicated in wrongdoing.
The HSBC research department is being carved into segments focusing on economics and investment strategy, sector analysis, and short-term trading opportunities, said Pierre Goad, a company spokesman in London for investment banking and market activities. Analysts in all three groups will cover bonds and other assets as well as stocks. Mr. Goad described this as ''a much more global and multiasset approach,'' which he said customers wanted.
''We received informal feedback from clients that traditional equity research was not something they were interested in anymore, partly because everyone was producing the same kind of research,'' he said.
''The traditional brokerage model was not a sustainable business model, not just for us but for the industry,'' he added. ''We felt it was broken and could not be fixed.''
So far, HSBC's rivals appear to see no need for repairs. Officials at Citigroup, J.P. Morgan, UBS, Merrill Lynch and Morgan Stanley declined to comment on the HSBC changes or about whether they had considered eliminating analyst recommendations themselves. Representatives of Goldman Sachs and Lehman Brothers did not return phone calls.
Mutual fund managers generally applauded the change, saying that they ignored brokerage recommendations when investing, so there was no point in the firms' making them.
''We won't miss their recommendations because we have always had independent minds to make our own decisions,'' said Alan J. Brown, group chief investment officer of State Street Global Advisors, who is based in London. ''The general, broader research has some value to us.''
Mr. Brown said that customers of HSBC research were almost all institutional investors and that firms that cater to small investors might not be able to eliminate buy and sell calls.
''It depends on the community they serve,'' he said. He gave one example: ''Merrill Lynch has got to support its network of brokers, so I don't see how they can get away from saying buy, sell or hold. After reading a research report, independent investors would say, 'You told me all that -- now what do I do?'''
''It's an entirely logical and reasonable move by HSBC,'' he said. ''Other firms may look at this and say it's not a bad idea.''
Hugh Young, head of global equities in Singapore for Aberdeen Asset Management, said that any reduction of company coverage would be unwelcome. ''We look at companies, so insofar as we look at broker research at all, which is little, this is a poor decision,'' he said.
Mr. Goad, the HSBC spokesman, said companies would still be analyzed, but in broader contexts, not on their own. Research ''will focus more on sectors and industries, identifying themes and trends in those industries,'' he said.
''The mandate is going to be to produce insightful research on sectors, and, by extension, companies, that investors can use to make their own decisions,'' he added.
HE explained that specific investment calls would still be made in special situations, like arbitrage between similar companies -- for example, a recommendation to buy one drug company and to sell another because of valuation discrepancies after a failed merger. Other cases may involve different assets related to the same company, as when a company's stock rises sharply while its convertible bonds remain cheap.
Mr. Young suggested another potential reason that HSBC considered stock recommendations less vital than other banks do: it has never displayed the same thirst for participation in equity markets.
''What evidence is there that HSBC's heart is in this business at all?'' he said. ''They're Presbyterian Scottish bankers to the core.''
