Long Island Association Names 7 New Directors
The Long Island Association has named seven new directors to its 54-member board and has reappointed one director, the group said Wednesday.
The new directors are Dr. Calvin O. Butts III, the president of the State University College at Old Westbury; Ernest G. Canadeo, the president of the EGC Group; Dr. Praveen Chaudhari, the director of the Brookhaven National Laboratory; James J. Dermody, the president of the Long Island Rail Road; Todd Hewlin, a senior vice president of Symbol Technologies; Charles Mancini, the chief executive of the Park Ridge Organization; and Thomas Maguire, a senior vice president of Verizon.
Philip A. Teel, a senior vice president of the Northrop Grumman Corporation, was reappointed.
$9 Million Investment
Atkins Nutritionals, a manufacturer of vitamins and diet supplements in Ronkonkoma, received an infusion of $9 million during the fourth quarter of 2003.
This was the largest venture-capital investment made on Long Island during the quarter, according to the MoneyTree survey, produced by PricewaterhouseCoopers and Venture Economics in cooperation with the National Venture Capital Association.
White Amber, a software developer in Lake Success, reported the second-largest investment, a $4 million stake. The investors were not named.
$7.3 Million Audiovox Profit
The Audiovox Corporation (Nasdaq: VOXX) of Hauppauge has reported a profit of $7.3 million for the fiscal fourth quarter, which ended Nov. 30, reversing a loss of $15.1 million for the same quarter the prior year.
The profit came on strong sales at the company's Audiovox Electronics Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary, that markets consumer electronics and security and entertainment systems for cars.
Sbarro Names Financial Officer
Anthony Puglisi has been appointed the chief financial officer of Sbarro, the restaurant company based in Melville. Mr. Puglisi had previously been chief financial officer at Langer, a biomedical company in Deer Park. The Sbarro position had been vacant for a year; the company did not name his predecessor.
Compiled by Warren Strugatch
E-mail: libiz@nytimes.com
