CHIANG kAI-SHEK
China's Generalissimo and
the Nation He Lost.
By Jonathan Fenby.
Illustrated. 562 pp. New York:
Carroll &amp; Graf. $30.
What kind of man was Chiang Kai-shek? Answering the question correctly was central to some of the main strategic and military decisions of World War II, since in the dark days after Pearl Harbor the forces under Chiang's command -- even if motley and disorganized -- were holding down hundreds of thousands of Japanese troops on the Chinese mainland. If Chiang caved in, those Japanese troops could be shipped out to reinforce their comrades in the Pacific and Southeast Asia.
In the spring of 1943, President Roosevelt cared enough about the answer to summon back from China the two senior officers who knew Chiang the best, Joseph Stilwell and Claire Lee Chennault. Their assignment was to brief the president on the situation in China, and to meet with the combined chiefs and Winston Churchill in planning future strategy in the Far East. Chennault wrote in his memoirs that when asked by Roosevelt for his opinion of Chiang, he replied: ''I think the generalissimo is one of the two or three greatest military and political leaders in the world today. He has never broken a commitment or promise made to me.'' Stilwell was less forthcoming at his meeting with the president. But in a letter to his wife, written after his return to China, he was pungent: ''Back to find Chiang same as ever -- a grasping, bigoted, ungrateful little rattlesnake.'' In a diary entry written 10 days later, Stilwell called Chiang a ''Jovian Dictator, who starves his troops and who is the world's greatest ignoramus.''
The divergence in views between the two American generals is startling, but similar extremes can be constantly found among those who came into contact with Chiang between the early 1920's, when he began his political rise, and 1949, when he finally abandoned China for Taiwan after Mao had declared the formation of the People's Republic. These violent disagreements about Chiang's character and abilities help to explain why to date there has been no ''standard'' biography, despite the amount of fine scholarship published in the last 20 years or so about the period as a whole. Jonathan Fenby, a journalist and the author of books on France and Hong Kong, has made a valiant attempt to digest many of these recent monographs and articles, and ''Chiang Kai-shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost'' gives a comprehensive and accessible summary of Chiang's life.
Chiang Kai-shek was born in 1887 in a small town near the southeast coast, raised mainly in traditional modes of conduct by his widowed mother before traveling to Japan to study in a military academy -- as many young Chinese were doing at that time. An early supporter of the revolution that overthrew China's last dynasty in 1912, Chiang had moved along two separate tracks by the 1920's, one taking him into the world of speculative finance (which included some criminal connections) and the other into the world of China's militarists and the single-party government being established by the revolutionary leader Sun Yat-sen. After Sun's death in 1925, Chiang emerged as one of the nationalist party's leading generals.
In 1927 he turned on the Communist allies who were helping him in the drive to reunify the country, shattering their organizations in a series of violent purges. By 1928, the reunification of China was complete -- at least on paper -- and Chiang concentrated on developing a viable centralized government under nationalist single-party control, and in working toward the final extermination of the Communists. (The grandiloquent title of ''generalissimo'' was conferred on him by the Chinese government in 1932.) Before he could accomplish that goal, he was forced to shift his policy from single-minded anti-Communism to outright resistance to Japanese aggression. In the summer of 1937 this new approach led China into full-scale war with Japan, a series of shattering defeats and the retreat of Chiang's forces far up the Yangtze River to the province of Sichuan. It was here, after Pearl Harbor, that Chiang became a formal ally of the Americans.
It is indeed a complex story, and several authors have tried to tell it before. But what separates Fenby's book from most of the others is that he attempts to present this story as a coherent series of insights into Chiang's character and motivations. Why have academic historians not been tempted to try the same thing? The main reason, surely, is not ignorance of original Chinese and Western sources, but the fact that those sources are themselves so profoundly fragmented, ambiguous and often doctored by the principal actors or their self-appointed surrogates. Thus, despite the intrinsic fascination of the times in which Chiang lived, reliable materials on the man are extremely rare.
Chiang himself left no undoctored paper trail: there are few casual (let alone intimate) letters; his ''diaries'' tend to be stilted and formulaic, while his political writings are limited in intellectual range and often ghostwritten. With the exception of his second wife, Jennie, who years after Chiang had rejected her for the far more glamorous and wealthy Mei-ling Soong, wrote a brief memoir giving some details of their personal life together, Chiang's close relatives -- including Mei-ling and his son (by his first marriage) Chiang Ching-kuo -- remained closelipped. That has left much of Chiang's story in the hands of Chinese composers of the kind of unofficial histories that the Chinese call yeshi (literally ''wild'' or undocumented histories), a venerable genre going back more than two millenniums.
Fenby has developed a strategy on three fronts to overcome these limitations. First, he has combed through a wide swath of the available secondary materials on China's history in the first half of the 20th century, and the diplomatic documents of the time, so as to extract the nuggets that seem to illuminate some facet of Chiang's character. This is a time-consuming task in itself, but one that yields a great deal of relevant material. (It was a piece of bad luck for Fenby that ''Spymaster,'' Frederic Wakeman's powerful and richly documented study of Chiang's secret police chief, Dai Li, came out just as Fenby's own book was going to press.) Second, Fenby has scoured the English-language newspapers and press agency reports of the time, along with those of some of the Chinese press agencies. Third, and perhaps most important in terms of the flavor of the book, he has pored through scores of the vignettes written by Western travelers and journalists who visited China during these eventful years. And what an incredible group they were. Just taking names virtually at random, their ranks included Arthur Ransome and Vincent Sheean, W. H. Auden and Christopher Isherwood, Emily Hahn, Milly Bennett and Josef von Sternberg, Rewi Alley, Gardner Cowles and Peter Fleming, Aldous Huxley, John Powell and Robert Capa.
These vignettes are often vivid and entertaining, even insightful, but they tend to share the disturbing trait one finds in the Chinese yeshi writings: they are unverifiable. How much one trusts them as sources for history is a personal judgment call. A reader also has to bring his own sense of the feasible to the material presented: is it remotely likely, for example, as Fenby tells us at some length, that the generalissimo's politically powerful wife, Mei-ling, at the peak of her influence, would leave a large public reception she was giving with her husband to have a private tryst with the Republican politician Wendell Willkie, who was visiting China at the time? And that later that evening Chiang, escorted by tommy-gun-toting guards, went on a rampage as he tried to find the errant couple? I would have thought not.
Ultimately, despite the range of his explorations and the detail of his story line, Fenby cannot break away from the kind of contradictory portrayal that emerged 60 years ago in the Stilwell/ Chennault discussions. Chiang did have courage and determination, and an apparently unshakable belief in his own historic role as China's leader. He did wish to be his country's moral pole star. He was temperate in his physical needs, unostentatious and not personally corruptible. On the other hand, he was wooden in speech and manner, aloof, unimaginative. Despite his courage he was a poor commander in chief, constantly meddling in his senior officers' plans, ignorant of logistics, heedless of casualties and battlefield agonies. He surrounded himself with corrupt cronies, and allowed terrible cruelties to be perpetrated by his omnipresent secret agents. Fenby adds nuances to our received picture, but ultimately does not alter it. The generalissimo remains an enigma. It may well turn out that Chiang covered his tracks so well -- or had so little to cover -- that we are doomed never really to know him.
Jonathan Spence's most recent books are ''The Search for Modern China,'' ''Mao'' and ''Treason by the Book.'' He teaches modern Chinese history at Yale.
