THE AGE OF SHAKESPEARE
By Frank Kermode.
Illustrated. 214 pp. New York:
The Modern Library. $21.95.
Democracy invented drama as we know it. The earliest plays, staged in Athens in the fifth century B.C., were part of great civic ceremonies that included displays of tribute money and parades of war orphans raised at public expense. In several ways the outdoor theater recalled the public assemblies where the work of democracy took place -- a link some citizens must have lamented, in the same way we complain about the staged and artificial quality of politics today.
In Shakespeare's time, Elizabeth I's grand progressions and masque-filled festivals, marking holidays like her Accession Day, visibly exploited the connection between politics and theater. And in the literature of the period, the metaphor is stretched further, to apply to life itself. Macbeth's comparison of life to ''a poor player / That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,'' and Elizabeth's famous comment, ''We princes are set . . . upon stages in the sight and view of the world,'' reflect contemporary preoccupations with the improvised nature of personal character, and with the elaborate interplay between public and private versions of the self. The actor is able to arouse strong emotions in his audience through artful means, as Hamlet wonderingly observes after hearing a speech rehearsed, while expressions of the deepest emotion may entirely fail to move another: '' 'Tis very true, my grief lies all within,'' Richard II tells Bolingbroke, ''And these external manners of laments / Are merely shadows to the unseen grief / That swells with silence in the tortur'd soul.''
Live drama crystallizes these preoccupations, stylizing our everyday experience, not in the sense that it mimics real life but in its enactment of the condition of human life as theater, whether our acting is conscious or not.+This raises a question about the way we read the scripts in our literary canon. Do we read Shakespeare as poetry on the page? Or do we explore the experience of the plays as performances -- uncovering their contemporary allusions, their resemblance to religious ritual or political debate, their presumably different effects on bakers, court patrons and servants? Critics taking the latter approach point to the messy conditions of original performance: financing, gestures, props, special effects and, most of all, the proximity of a living, squirming, eating, drinking, urinating audience. In this view, the script is only one factor in a roaring scene, as flexible and responsive to live staging as it is central and essential to the theatrical experience.
In ''The Age of Shakespeare,'' Frank Kermode writes by turns in both modes. But for all the eloquence and learning he brings to history, which is the book's official topic, his ultimate interest lies with Shakespeare's language. Words have always been Kermode's main concern, and his facility with them has established him at the forefront of English literary criticism in the course of the past half-century. A scholar who writes as elegantly about Princess Diana as Yeats or the Bible, Kermode is a longtime defender of literary studies defined as the formal analysis of language and its particular resources of expression and meaning. In the face of the insulated tone of much academic writing these days, he writes books and essays accessible to a broad public, including this short book, part of a series designed for the nonspecialist reader.
Kermode clears the way with an overview of Tudor politics and the growth of English Protestantism, a rich background for his discussion of what is known about Shakespeare's early life, including the recent debate over his possible Catholicism. The heart of the book is its account of the swift evolution of English drama from its late-medieval forms to its professional heights not long after Elizabeth's death in 1603, and the many threads, political, financial and social, that connected the theater to the worlds of court and city. Kermode's portrayal of the crush of the London playhouse and its place in a bustling world of commerce and competition is vibrant and full of learning. Shakespeare's rivalry with poets like Christopher Marlowe and Ben Jonson develops in the context of other contests, in which adult actors vie with boys' troupes and court factions plot for power. Where the plays were originally performed -- at court, in the Globe, in the Blackfriars -- turns out to be central. Shakespeare takes his place at the cutting edge of his craft, an astonishingly productive poet as well as a shrewd businessman: there was no bearbaiting at the high-end Globe, but there were fine actors, whose profession, Kermode shows, now began to garner unaccustomed respect.
Worked into his history of the theater, Kermode's brief surveys of each play recall his ''Shakespeare's Language'' (2000), which traced the poet's transition from a wordy, declamatory style to the gnarled complexity and expressive experimentation of his later work. Here, as there, Kermode's close readings focus with polish and precision on Shakespeare's words, characterization and imagery. In these sections, even in the discussion of Shakespeare's most political themes -- power, identity, recognition and the theatrical quality of social life -- the world recedes, becoming a backdrop to the literary text; vividly introduced in the context of the stage, the plays end up firmly anchored to the page.
As a critic, Kermode is known for his acute yet gentle, almost diffident tone. He began his celebrated ''Sense of an Ending'' (1967) by cautioning that critics are not expected, as poets are, to help us make sense of our lives: ''They are bound only to attempt the lesser feat of making sense of the ways we try to make sense of our lives.'' More recently he has spoken out against work by prominent scholars of the English Renaissance who read Shakespeare (and other authors) precisely to make sense of early modern life -- or rather, and more radically, who find in Shakespeare ideas and expressions that go against the grain of our traditional notion of his work and his age. This approach, Kermode fears, diminishes literature and reduces literary studies to a weak form of doing history.
Consequently, though he allows (for example) that Shakespeare's early history plays dealt somewhat with politics, especially the worry over Elizabeth's successor, he politely rebukes those scholars whose political readings, he thinks, go too far -- who try to trace the theme of colonial expansion in ''The Tempest,'' for instance, or women's oppression in ''The Taming of the Shrew,'' or class discontent in ''Coriolanus.'' So where do we draw the line between the poetry on the page and the public stage? Kermode leaves this an open question.
Joy Connolly teaches classics and political theory at Stanford University.
