For the first time, New York's annual statewide wine contest is going to take place in Long Island wine country. The contest, which will be open to the public, will be held on the North Fork on Aug. 2 and 3, a high point in the wine-tourism season, said James Trezise, president of the New York Wine and Grape Foundation, the sponsor. Mr. Trezise said that while no contract had been signed, a banquet center was strongly interested.
The foundation, a trade association that is privately and publicly financed, is based in Penn Yan in the Finger Lakes region in west-central New York.
Now in its 19th year, the contest, the New York Wine and Food Classic, is open to all wineries. Two days of judging culminate in awarding the Governor's Cup to the producer of the state's single best wine, and to designations of the best red, white, sparkling, dessert and Bordeaux-style (blended) wines. The contest has been held mainly in the Finger Lakes and in New York City. But to focus nationwide attention to the spectrum of the state's wines, it was held last summer in Napa, Calif. Under changes introduced in Napa, the public was invited to observe how the contest operated. ''Most people don't have any idea what goes on, and we want to show what we do,'' Mr. Trezise said. This means, he said, that spectators would be able to see hundreds of coded glasses wheeled from a closed room where the wines are opened, inspected to make sure they are not spoiled (by, say, inferior corks) and poured.
Swirling and sniffing, the judges taste the wines blind, then record impressions and scores. Listening to their discussions, guests learn the criteria that separate winners from also-rans. The foundation is discussing holding a public tasting afterward.
The outcome of the contest can yield far-reaching benefits for producers whose wines finish first in various categories. The outcome routinely results in total depletions of the winning wines at the wineries and at stores within days.
Responding to criticism, heard in recent years, that some judges possessed so-called Finger Lakes or Long Island palates that could bias judgments, Mr. Trezise chose 13 of last year's 20 judges from out of state. About the same proportion can be expected this year.
HOWARD G. GOLDBERG
LONG ISLAND VINES
