DON'T call Bebe Winkler before 11 a.m. Not that you'll wake her. She's been dancing all night, and she'll be curled up with Lady Irene, her copper-colored poodle, on the chenille couch in her living room, the ringer turned to ''off'' on her phone.
Ms. Winkler, a decorator known for her traditional and luxurious interiors, has lately taken up the tango, and the dance has rewritten every aspect of her life, including where she spends the night.
That roomy corner bedroom in her East 55th Street apartment, for example, is now a super closet, a white laminate fantasy more likely found in a suburban McMansion (and the reason Ms. Winkler and Lady Irene are sleeping on the couch).
Inside the closet -- ''my wardrobe,'' as Ms. Winkler describes it -- in neat rows from wall to wall and floor to ceiling, are a staggered chorus line of gauzy, spangled leotards, slinky jersey skirts slashed to the thigh, and slyly arched and sequined tango heels, each piece as animate and sensual as the dance they were made for.
Five years ago, Ms. Winkler, a fastidious woman with sleek, copper-colored hair, copper-colored butterfly-wing eyebrows and the neat, economical movements of a 60's-era runway model -- which, indeed, Ms. Winkler used to be -- embodied a particular Manhattan archetype: the single, successful workaholic, an early Carrie Bradshaw prototype, but with a better work ethic.
Her hair coiled into a tight chignon and her 5-foot-5 1/2 frame corralled in a severe uniform of perfectly tailored suits, Ms. Winkler drove herself hard through 14-hour days; she'd be home by 10 and asleep by 10:30, too tired to watch the evening news or eat more than a can of tuna fish standing at her kitchen counter. ''My clients said, 'Don't you have a life?' '' Ms Winkler said. '' 'I'm fine!' I'd say, but I was wiped out, exhausted.''
One Saturday night she rented a video of ''Shall We Dance?,'' not the Astaire/Rogers confection but the winsome 1996 film by the Japanese director Masayuki Suo, about a middle-aged businessman who dreams of upending his drab, routinized life, and discovers ballroom dancing.
''I thought, 'Well, that looks nice, maybe I'd like to do a box step,' '' Ms. Winkler said. That Monday, Ms. Winkler wandered into a Fred Astaire Dance Studio and sampled its half-hour free lesson. One lesson became 15, and soon she was dancing four or five nights a week: moving quickly from a box step into a fox trot, a rhumba and a cha cha. She'd leave the office by 5 o'clock, mystifying her colleagues, who were used to leaving hours before the boss (and having their home fax machines shudder into activity with late-night thoughts from Ms. Winkler).
THREE years ago, Ms. Winkler discovered the milongas, the nightly tango parties that erupt all over Manhattan in restaurants like Lafayette Grill, after the dinner crowd has gone home.
''I loved my new life,'' she said. ''I loved that I had 'a life.' '' Her old wardrobe -- those suits -- no longer fit. ''I didn't want to buy anything that I couldn't dance in,'' she said, explaining a habit that grew daily. The chignon was put aside along with the suits, and soon she wasn't only buying dance clothes but designing them herself, and picking up shoes in Argentina, the home of the tango, on visits.
When the three closets in her bedroom began to explode with clothes, Ms. Winkler made the sort of spatial decision (and the call to California Closets) that would make sense only to a New Yorker.
The result is a new hybrid, the live-in closet. Ms. Winkler has reluctantly kept her suits, sad, drab stepsisters among all the color and glitter, and added luxurious touches, like a television set, as well as an island of a bureau on top of which is strewn her collection of costume jewelry, and a treadmill, which she uses mostly as a place to hang things.
Like Ms. Winkler, this one-bedroom apartment is a Manhattan archetype, a collection of boxy rooms in a postwar building that Ms. Winkler has had for more than three decades -- rent-stabilized, its rent has risen from $600 to $1,197. And it is only by accident that it wears its current luxurious outfit.
Ms. Winkler, an indifferent nester for whom the apartment has always been more of a carry-all than a home -- ''I was always the shoemaker without shoes,'' she said -- has mostly lived with blank walls, a television set on a stand and, sometimes, a bed. She slept on a couch when she first moved here with her mother in the late 1960's.
''All that mattered was that mother had a pretty bedroom,'' Ms. Winkler said. ''The rest was just drab.''
When her mother died in 1971, Ms. Winkler moved to the bedroom, but didn't alter a thing.
Her first career was as a fittings model, for the designer Stan Herman. A look-alike for Peggy Moffitt, the 1960's Rudi Gernreich model, Ms. Winkler was Mr. Herman's favorite, he said.
''She was so fastidious and so sharp,'' Mr. Herman said the other day, ''and I loved fitting on her because her shape was so human.'' He designed his culture-shocking pants suits -- in the days when women were often not allowed in a restaurant wearing pants -- to fit Ms. Winkler's body. ''It was her proportions that made it all work,'' he said.
When Ms. Winkler made the move, as she put it, from Seventh Avenue to Third, from model to lady decorator, her style, Mr. Herman said, was as ''fastidious, furious, and feminine as Bebe herself.''
Still, her apartment remained basically empty. In the mid-80's, Ms. Winkler turned her postwar boxes into prewar galleries, using crown moldings to articulate three separate ceiling areas in the main room. She also applied moldings to the herd of doors in the front hall. But despite a reputation for much fringe and flair, not so much as a throw pillow was allowed in.
''When you'd think of Bebe,'' said Joan Kron, editor in chief of Avenue magazine in the 1980's, now a contributor to Allure magazine, ''you'd think of fringe and leopard print and sequins. You'd think of a perfectly set table.''
Ms. Winkler, however, has set the table only once in her own home. The longtime chairwoman of the United Cerebral Palsy House Tour, she offered her undecorated apartment as a stopgap one year in the mid-1990's. The tour was short one decorator, and Ms. Winkler, hard at work on the Bel Air mansion of the philanthropist Iris Cantor, called the show house tour director, Suzanne Sokolov, and said, ''Use mine, we'll figure something out.''
The week before the tour, she filled it as she would one of her own jobs, borrowing gilt-edged mirrors and framed botanicals, a faun-colored chenille couch wide enough to sleep on and three feet deep in sequined and brocade pillows, and a 30's-style goat-skin-covered table.
The day it was photographed, the crew got hungry and Ms. Winkler ordered Chinese. She upended the cartons into Tiffany platters, and set the table within an inch of itself, she said, with Tiffany plates and French crystal, for the first and last time.
''That goat skin is impervious to food,'' she said. ''Not that it's ever seen too much of it.'' That night, she stayed up late admiring her ''new'' apartment. ''I called my accountant the next day,'' she said, ''and I told him, 'Sharpen your pencil, I'm keeping it all!' ''
Ms. Winkler still makes a dinner of a can of tuna fish, standing at her kitchen counter. ''I don't want to sit and dine,'' she said. ''I'm too impatient. I just want to eat the tuna fish and go dancing.''
Habitats | East 55th Street
