IT is time to come clean. For most of my adult reproductive years, I avoided the mold that life has now rather ironically and unceremoniously cast me in: that of a hausfrau in suburban New Jersey.
For several years I did well as a newspaper reporter. Then I switched to editing law firm divas and eventually to teaching high school literature. These were certainly not paths for the faint of heart, but now I can only imagine a life in the Marines as the last stop on the career train of testing my mettle.
The thing I've come to appreciate the most is that when you're a housewife, there is always something or someone to take care of. Sorting the mail, emptying the dishwasher or ironing are the things you do on your way to handling the carpenters or figuring out why water is gushing from the second-floor overhang or what is causing the circuit to randomly trip the central air-conditioning system. Who knew, when I decided to leave teaching last summer in search of what was once a life with time and money, that months of unemployment would whip me into this unplanned marriage?
Let's face it: my mother, who has far more tendencies of the male hunter/1950's provider type, has never been happier since she got a wife. At 78, she cheerfully toddles off to work while I sit with a cup of coffee, engage my disgust at the headlines and think about whether the bananas are mushy enough to make bread. If only someone would pay me and cover my health benefits, I may have found my dream job.
Oh, I know what you're thinking. But let me set the record straight. My mother thrives on working outside the home. In a different generation, she would have been a mergers and acquisitions lawyer. I know this from watching her draw blood from appliance salesmen over expensive gadgetry. There's one more thing. When my mother was 67, she retired from the import-export business. The critical subtext was that my father was also retired. So a year later, when the phone call came that the brother-in-law of the son of her former business partner needed some office help, it was worth the daily drive to urban Hoboken for my mother, who had seldom driven far beyond the borders of suburban Essex County. When my father died, going to work did much more for her than sitting with grief.
Since my dad's death, we decided to share the house and the bills. So, as the summer advanced, job applications remained unanswered and my guilt grew over the decision not to return to teaching, I did the only thing I could. I listened as any good wife does to my mom's stories about the characters in the office or how she had figured out a printer problem or that her friend at work might have cancer. And I headed directly to the back 40, where I spent months landscaping with the Belgian blocks I dug up on our property and using the last of the slate left over from a wall I had built earlier.
Sometimes I headed to the local paint store, where I've become one of the regulars. It's hard to know whether it's my adoration of Benny Moore or the smart-aleck commentary that keeps me coming back. Maybe it's the picture I'll always have of a bear-sized man standing behind the counter demonstrating a faux-finish technique in the air. ''Lightly dab the sponge and blot off excess,'' he began as if holding a sea sponge in either hand. ''Remember, random gentle random gentle,'' he whispered, his hands alternating on an invisible wall. ''You don't want patterns or gobs.'' Indeed. And there's nothing like hearing ''Where you been?'' when my pursuits of copper-topped caps for the deck posts or a chrome drainage assembly unit for the claw-foot tub have kept me away. Of course, I also spent hours with assorted electricians and carpenters, but please don't tell the paint store guys.
In all these months, my mother has not only been a good provider, she has been a good friend. As I continue to drive us into debt, she encourages me to find something that will give me satisfaction. Out of habit, I continue reading job postings for editors, writers, admin assistants, research associates. I notice there's a run on cardiologists. I think about what I'll make for dinner and smile to think that I have finally gotten my mother, who loves chips, Mozart and chocolate, to eat salmon and salad (thank goodness for organic gorgonzola). I'm knitting scarves like crazy and my family wonders if somewhere there's a cottage industry. I think about cooking school and wonder how I will reinvent myself. Mostly, I think about how easy it is to feel invisible or unimportant when you live in a culture that rewards making money and you aren't.
Yet, I know the names of the two men who alternate delivering our mail. The plumbing-supply guy gives me a discount because I could have gone to Home Depot and didn't. Our German carpenters have eaten well on homemade Sicilian pizza and bitter greens. The post office clerks smile and cross their fingers when I send out a short story. My octogenarian neighbor tells me about local history and how he misses his sister who died several years back. None of this adds up to a whole lot of anything except a life. A visible life.
SOAPBOX Mary Ann D'Urso is working on a novel and lives in Bloomfield.
