ONE Saturday evening in February, Peter Loftin sat down for dinner with a few friends in his mansion on Ocean Drive. Through the Addison Mizner-designed balcony windows, he could see frequent flashes of light -- strobes from all manner of cameras.
''When I first bought this place,'' Mr. Loftin said, ''I thought it was lightning.''
Now he knows better. He had, after all, bought the best-known house in Miami Beach. Casa Casuarina was Gianni Versace's home. The Italian designer had only owned it for five years, when, in 1997, he was murdered on his front steps.
Now, the tourists are a constant presence with their cameras and their little fingers ghoulishly clutching at the iron gates. But because Mr. Loftin, who made his fortune in telecommunications, is the friendliest mogul you'd ever care to meet, the tourists don't faze him. If they try to ask him questions as he steps through his gates, he usually says, ''I just work here,'' and shrugs and goes on his way. To him, they're just part of the scenery that makes life in Miami Beach so much more interesting and fun than his other life in North Carolina, where he has another home.
''Hey there,'' a vixen on the street yelled up to him on his balcony after a lavish dinner served on his Versace china. ''Do you know where there's a good place to go for a drink?''
Mr. Loftin gave the question some thought. ''You should try Mangoes down the street,'' he replied from on high. Then he gave a neighborly wave and went inside.
''This street has its own life,'' he said of the Art Deco-dent street of bars, restaurants, hotels and tourists. ''That's what Gianni Versace loved too.''
It was in 1995 that Mr. Loftin, now 45, first saw Mr. Versace interviewed in his historic Miami Beach dream mansion on the Discovery Channel. ''Gosh, I wonder if he'd sell me that house?'' is what he remembers thinking. Five years later, it was his for $19 million. He bought new furniture and set about removing some of Mr. Versace's trademark rococo excesses. He lovingly restored some of the original 1930's, neo-Spanish colonial design commissioned by Alden Freeman, the eccentric heir to a Standard Oil fortune. ''This house has a soul that is not just Gianni Versace's,'' Mr. Loftin said.
Mr. Loftin, divorced, with a young son living in North Carolina, did not have lots of friends in Miami. And that was too bad, because he wanted people to enjoy the house in much the same way Mr. Versace did. His legendary raucous parties (often given for Donatella, his sister) were filled with celebrities and all kinds of pretty, witty people.
''I like to be with people,'' Mr. Loftin said. ''I just like to be where things are going on.''
He started lending out his home for benefits, including a Democratic fund-raiser that drew Al and Tipper Gore. Then he hooked up with Barton G., the city's premier caterer, and started renting it out for high-end parties at a cost of $10,000, which tops the rental fee for Vizcaya, the historic estate across Biscayne Bay. There were enough parties that the stomped-on grass by the gaudily tiled Versace pool had to be replaced with Astroturf.
On many nights now, his exquisitely serene courtyards fill up with well-dressed strangers and sometimes a musician or two, while he lives his life quietly upstairs.
''I don't come down because I want people to feel they own the property for the night,'' said Mr. Loftin, who can sometimes be seen discreetly watching parties from a window like a shy English Lord who has rented out his country estate for a corporate dinner.
Mr. Loftin, who is retired from the company he founded, B.T.I., is wealthy enough to be the owner of an arena football team, the Carolina Cobras. He doesn't need more money. Still, he is intent on making something more of the place he calls home. Or is it that he's intent on using the place he calls home to make something more of himself?
Two years ago, after scrapping the idea of turning Casa Casuarina into a $2,000 a night bed and breakfast, he started thinking about a private club. He was a member of Mar-a-Lago, the former Palm Beach home of Marjorie Merriweather Post, now Donald Trump's high-priced membership club. And he was hearing about plans for Soho House, the Manhattan branch of the hip London social club. Why not select a few hundred people to play at his place?
''We're going to charge enough to bring the right kind of people here,'' said Mr. Loftin, a strapping man who seems more Bubba than Pooh-bah, and whose girlfriend, Kairee Hall, is a former Miami Dolphins cheerleader. ''We want to keep it upscale.''
In April, a mailing will go out to a list of 150 to offer memberships at a founder's rate that is still being determined, but will most likely be in the low five figures, tops. ''We'll have honorary memberships too,'' Mr. Loftin said about his goal to lure less wealthy types from the media, art and fashion worlds, ''because we want this to be fun.''
Exactly who those members will be is unclear. Not the ''boring'' crowd at Mar-a-Lago, where Mr. Loftin often finds himself talking to the staff. Not the crowd that belongs to the area's beach, golf and tennis clubs from Bal Harbor to Key Biscayne. Not the pushy party people attracted to the velvet ropes of the Skybar or Mynt, major nearby nightclubs. Well, maybe some of them, along with a sprinkling of rich Latin Americans and corporate honchos too, not to mention a fast European and New York crowd. A New York publicist, Nadine Johnson, has been hired to help bring him this element.
''We'll have all types of people here,'' Mr. Loftin said. ''I like diversity.''
While he's no Gianni Versace, Mr. Loftin, who serves on the National Board of Governors for the American Red Cross, has a little pull, too. He counts among his friends the prominent Miami attorney Roy Black and the director Oliver Stone. Donald Trump is a supporter, even if he knows that Casa Casuarina, famous as it might be, is no Mar-a-Lago.
''A club is a very tough thing,'' Mr. Trump said. ''And Miami isn't as rich as Palm Beach. But Peter's a shrewd businessman with a great personality. If anyone can make a club successful, he can. I just hope the facility is well located enough.''
Ah, location. Can an exclusive club exist, even in a famous, historic mansion, on one of the most touristy sidewalks in the world? Many locals aren't sure. And they're not so sure of Mr. Loftin's ability to rope in a velvet rope crowd either. ''He's a North Carolina guy trying to embrace the South Beach lifestyle,'' said Tom Austin, an editor of Ocean Drive magazine. ''Gianni Versace would be spinning in his grave.''
''Miami's a small town,'' added Juan Carlos Arcila-Duque, the interior designer of Mynt who was the chairman of the junior committee of last December's Art Basel/Miami Beach exposition, ''and if you buy a mansion here everybody knows you. So I guess he just hasn't been in the spotlight enough. He's still just some guy from the Midwest.''
The thing about Mr. Loftin is that he knows he's no Mr. International, even if he did once spend a summer yachting around the French Riviera. He has an unchecked if somewhat unsophisticated admiration for the putatively hip crowd he hopes to attract. On first meeting the hotelier André Balazs, who owns the Raleigh and is dating Uma Thurman, Mr. Loftin said, ''What a great looking guy!'' If he knows little about the art world or the fashion world, he is willing to let you know he's excited to learn about them from the kind of people coming through his gates. When the svelte socialite Brooke de Ocampo held a dinner party there during the Art Basel/Miami Beach weekend, he put a big arm around her and introduced her to some local friends. ''Isn't she fantastic?'' he exclaimed. ''She flew all the way from England to be here.''
When Mr. Loftin says, ''We're starting to develop friends around the world,'' it's hard to know if he means to cultivate friends or members of his club. Since he'll be living in the place much of the time, there might be little difference.
''It'll be a lot more friendly than the Delano,'' he said of the club. ''We'll have all kinds of people staying up all night, talking politics. The South Americans are so much fun. And the beach is better than St.-Tropez. There's all kinds of things to see out there, from gay to topless.''
If Mr. Loftin seems a little like the wide-eyed country boy at the circus, well, Mr. Versace was the same way, at least in his South Beach life. He used to invite people he'd meet on the beach or at nightclubs to his parties all the time.
''I love it here,'' Mr. Loftin said. ''In South Beach you can be anything you want to be.''
On Sunday morning, the Countess Marta Marzotto had just arrived for brunch with her party, a group of Italian jet-setters, titled and otherwise. While they sipped Champagne on ice and looked around his two courtyards, Mr. Loftin was upstairs in his sitting room, drinking Gatorade. He had changed out of his usual T-shirt and shorts and into a collared shirt and dress pants. He'd been invited to join this party, sponsored by an Italian travel company, but since he didn't know any of them, and spoke no Italian, he was biding his time before going down.
''I just want them to enjoy themselves down there, that's all,'' he said. Eventually, he stepped out of his quarters, which take up only a small portion of a house with 15 bedrooms, to give Countess Marzotto and her party a tour.
''I was here when Gianni lived here,'' she said to him through her translator after kissing him hello and introducing him to her entourage. ''It was full of his stuff, horrible. I like it much better now. It's more simple and chic. More pure.''
Mr. Loftin looked pleased. He was expecting a snob (the staff had been told she would only eat hard-boiled eggs for lunch and that she requested live flamingos for decoration) but she was bubbly and cordial. When he took her up to Mr. Versace's former bedroom, still a fantasia of excess from floor to ceiling, and told her it was where the designer slept, she interrupted him to say that he liked to sleep downstairs as well.
Mr. Loftin, nodded. He's always hearing stories of Mr. Versace from his guests.
''I'm not about to argue with her,'' he said as she swept through the rooms over ornate marble floors and past stained-glass windows. ''She knows more about it than me.''
Indeed, it seemed that even though it was his house, she was in charge.
''Without any doubt, you must be very rich,'' said the Countess, whose former husband's family owns the fashion conglomerate Gruppo Marzotto, and whose son used to date Naomi Campbell. ''Or at least you were before you spent all your money here.'' Mr. Loftin, pink-faced from the sun, turned even pinker.
''Tell her,'' he said to his translator, ''that all the wealth I have is inside me.'' The countess nodded. ''Yes, but we can see the outside of it too,'' she said.
Later, after lunch, the group, which included a prince and princess and a marchesa or two, was flamboyantly departing. A big crowd gathered on the sidewalk. One tourist was asking if the countess, wrapped in pea-green velvet, was Donatella Versace. Another thought others in the party might be movie stars. Suddenly the sidewalk was a piazza.
''Such beautiful people,'' Mr. Loftin said as he watched his guests drive off. ''This house just seems to attract them.''
Even if they have to pay to get in.
