AFTER surveying the Tuesday night crowd at La Scatolina, an Italian restaurant in Greenwich Village, a newcomer might think twice about settling in for a meal there. The variety show staged one recent evening seemed quaint enough, but the patrons had the fleshy, grim faces of mobsters. They wore gold pinkie rings and shiny blazers pulled tightly across pitch-black shirts. One of the men introduced himself as Frankie the Butcher.
The dinner conversation, however, was hardly foreboding. ''So we shot this movie in digital video,'' said one big, excitable guy, ''and the budget was next to nothing and it's doing well. You want a copy? Let me get you one. They're out in the car.''
La Scatolina, on the Avenue of the Americas, near Ninth Street, has in the last few months become a sort of clubhouse for a tightknit group of middle-aged New York actors who often play mobsters in film and on TV. Frankie the Butcher, né Bonsangue, for example, derives his nickname not from a grisly talent, but from his former career.
The host and founder of the event, held every Tuesday night, is a jovial fellow in his mid-50's named Vinny Vella Sr. He stands at the front of the room, microphone in hand, introducing singers, telling ribald stories to the men and sweet-talking the women. A native New Yorker whose father owned a fish market on Mott Street for more than 50 years, he lives on Elizabeth Street in NoLIta and exudes an easy charm. He is a neighborhood character who has made a living playing neighborhood characters.
The role of the Italian mobster is as old as the gangster picture itself, and there have long been New Yorkers who play the type. But in recent years the demand for these characters has boomed. The biggest force behind the growth is ''The Sopranos,'' the HBO series that begins its fifth season next Sunday. Mr. Vella and Frank Vincent, who has dropped by La Scatolina, have recurring parts on the show this season, as did Vincent Pastore, another visitor. A handful of other wiseguy actors who come to the restaurant gatherings have made cameo appearances on the show.
But ''The Sopranos'' is hardly the only wiseguy game in town. While the roles may not lead to great riches and concerns have been raised over typecasting and ethnic stereotyping, the parts are nonetheless popping up all over. Staples has a wiseguy commercial. Several of the actors have taped ''Wiseguys on Texas Hold 'Em,'' an instructional poker video. And perhaps most far-reaching, taping will begin next month for a wiseguy take on the classic spring break genre, with mobsters cavorting on the beaches of Cancún.
'''The Sopranos' has certainly made the type more popular in terms of commercials and other movies,'' said Grant Wilfley, whose Manhattan casting agency scouts actors for the series.
Mr. Vella's weekly suppers are a sign of this surge in demand. New York's wiseguy actors have had their gathering spots in the past, but now they are coalescing more, and in greater numbers, than ever before. The actors and wannabe actors, whose story lines are often as colorful as the characters they play, have even been given a name: not S.A.G., the Screen Actors Guild, but G.A.G. -- the Gangster Actors Guild.
''A lot of people,'' Mr. Vella said, ''love this wiseguy stuff for some reason.''
Tuesdays With Vinny
Since Mr. Vella began presiding over the gatherings at La Scatolina, Italian-American actors both great (Danny Aiello) and not so great (a Joe Pesci impersonator) have stopped by. But one door policy stands: no real wiseguys. ''It's bad enough I have all these actors who look like they're ready to kill somebody,'' Mr. Vella said.
Anyway, there isn't much room. As demand for wiseguy actors grows, more and more producers, agents and actors, both real and wannabe, show up at the restaurant each week. As Mr. Vella put it, ''They're networking like crazy down there.''
Al Messina, who lives in Queens and left the electrician trade to start a small production company, said, ''I can't even count how many projects have been launched through Tuesdays at La Scatolina. There's a sense of warmth here that I've never felt anywhere else.''
At one table this particular evening sat Danny Roth, who cast several wiseguy types in a low-budget independent film called ''Spy'' and who produced the poker video, and several actors, including Mr. Bonsangue, Peter Linari and Nick Raio. More people were crowded around a neighboring table, among them a curvy blonde and Geno Durante, a godfather of wiseguy actors, who was dressed entirely in shades of green, from a forest blazer to a sea-foam tie.
Many in the group tell similar, often serendipitous stories about how they came to their current career. Mr. Bonsangue, for example, who was raised in Astoria, Queens, wanted to be a disc jockey but worked for years at his family's butcher shop in the West Village (''We sell no prime before its time''). After enrolling in broadcasting school, he switched to acting. So far, he has appeared on four episodes of ''Law and Order'' or its spinoffs, and has landed some movie roles, most notably playing a henchman who kisses Robert De Niro in ''Analyze That,'' the sequel to the 1999 hit ''Analyze This.''
Mr. Raio is a former prison guard at a similar stage in his career. A few years ago, in what proved to be a stroke of luck, he met a then unknown Mr. Pastore in a Laundromat. After Mr. Pastore was cast as the memorable and eventually whacked Big Pussy on ''The Sopranos,'' he helped Mr. Raio score a small role on the show as a 50's-era tough guy in a flashback scene. On the set, Mr. Raio met Mr. Vella and -- bingo! -- here he was at La Scatolina.
At one point on this night, a neighborhood character who calls himself Cha Cha came by to pay his respects. ''I used to buy fish from Vinny's father,'' he said.
Short, round and mustachioed, Cha Cha owns a restaurant, called Cha Cha's of course, on Mulberry Street.
''He's an actor, too,'' said the blonde, who turned out to be his wife.
''That's right,'' Cha Cha said. ''I'm the only actor who played himself for nine different directors. I played Cha Cha for Martin Scorsese. I was a bodyguard in 'Goodfellas.' I was in 'China Girl'; I played a guy named Cha Cha. In 'It Had to Be You,' there's a scene where Michael Rispoli is in a restaurant. Who waits on him? Cha Cha.''
Much like Cha Cha himself, the evening was warm and boisterous. Mr. Vella introduced an opera singer who sang an old Neapolitan folk song. The room erupted with whoops and cheers.
''A lot of people put these networking things together and just talk business the whole time,'' Mr. Linari said. ''Which is no fun at all.''
'I Could Do That'
If you're a casting director looking to fill the role of, say, a sanitation worker, you have three options. You can find a sanitation worker and teach them to act. You can hire an actor who can convincingly fake it. Or, if you're in New York, you can call Mr. Linari.
That is because, like nearly every actor at La Scatolina, Mr. Linari, who appeared in Woody Allen's 2001 film, ''The Curse of the Jade Scorpion,'' logged years at another job before acting. ''The last year I worked, I emptied litter baskets in the Times Square area,'' he said. ''I spent my days looking at marquees and I thought, 'I could do that.'''
New York, unlike Hollywood, is full of guys like Mr. Linari, who resemble and may in fact have been blue-collar workers. The wiseguy actors, whose mannerisms and accents echo those of the real thing, are just another variation on this pattern.
It was this thought that, long ago, set Mr. Vella off on his acting career.
''I used to own R.V.'s -- this is about 18 years ago -- and I would rent them out for movie sets,'' he said. ''I remember watching once as this director explained to these guys how to act Italian. He says, 'You got to talk like this,' and he's doing these hand motions. I do this naturally. I thought, 'This guy belongs over here, and I belong over there.'''
Affable, open and extremely fond of velour track suits, Mr. Vella is indeed a fully formed character simply waiting for a script. ''The beauty of having a guy like Vinny in your film is that he's real,'' said Jim Jarmusch, who directed Mr. Vella in ''Ghost Dog'' (1999) as well as in his forthcoming movie, ''Coffee and Cigarettes.'' ''He didn't come out of an acting academy.''
Mr. Vella's first role came in a Japanese film called ''Thorn of the Ice'' that was shot in Central Park, for which he was paid $300. More bit parts followed until 1995, when he was cast in Martin Scorsese's mob epic ''Casino.''
''I grew up around wiseguys,'' said Mr. Vella, in explaining his cinéma vérité. ''If a pretty girl walked down the street, somebody would say: 'Don't look at her. That's Tony Eyes' niece.' You couldn't help but come in contact with these guys.'' In his early years, Mr. Vella said, he even dabbled in the street life himself, and spent 90 days at Rikers for running numbers.
If a neighborhood guy like Vinny Vella can make it, thousands of other neighborhood guys believe, then they they can make it, too. Mr. Wilfley, the casting agent, says he gets innumerable calls from guys who insist they're perfect for ''The Sopranos.''
But a mug shot does not an actor make, as a friend of Mr. Vella's learned all too well.
''This guy had been busting my chops for the longest time,'' Mr. Vella said. ''So I finally took him to a set of an independent movie. He had one line. He was so bad, the director had to replace him. A couple months later, he asks me if I can get him anything a little easier. A little easier? What do you want? To stand at the airport and wave goodbye?''
Calling All Wiseguys
But for wiseguy actors who can act, times are good. Mr. Vella, for instance, counts movie stars among his friends -- Mr. De Niro attended his wedding -- and he will appear in three episodes of ''The Sopranos'' this season. He also has a growing number of other gigs.
For one of them, Mr. Vella made his way on a recent evening to a warehouse on Greenwich Street where a large poker table and several cameras had been set up. He was there for a taping of the instructional poker video. Mr. Vincent was there in a shiny gray suit. So were Mr. Pastore, Cha Cha and several others who had dropped by to trade wiseguy shtick with old friends. Which was basically the idea. As Mr. Roth, the producer, put it, ''I knew I could throw these guys together at a table and not have any problem offering entertainment value.''
Throughout the evening cards were dealt, stories traded, chops busted. It was hard to know whether the bada-bing! routine -- the caricatured hand motions, the macho posturing -- was part of the act or part of the actors. Perhaps it was a little of both.
Other current wiseguy projects range from goofy caricatures to straightforward acting. In a current commercial for Staples, a group of wimpy sales clerks, forced to shell out pastries to their supply man, hire a wiseguy to put a stop to the extortion. And last Tuesday, Mr. Bonsangue appeared in a skit on ''Late Night With Conan O'Brien'' playing a mob-style screenwriter for ''Sex and the City,'' HBO's just-ended sister hit. There is also ''I Am Woody,'' a short film produced by Mr. Messina about a mob boss who believes that he is Woody Allen. The movie won honors at the New York Independent International Film and Video Festival last spring.
For his part, Mr. Vincent has launched frankvincent.com, a Web site on which visitors can buy ''Billy Bats'' shirts to commemorate his doomed character in ''Goodfellas.'' In a few weeks, Cha Cha will fly several guys to Cancún to shoot ''Wild Women and Wiseguys,'' the spring break film via Mulberry Street.
And Mr. Vella recently signed with LMNO Productions, a California company that produces programs for the Travel Channel and plans to base a travel show around Mr. Vella. ''Vinny is our man around town,'' said Lisa Bourgoujian, a vice president at the network.
''I don't want to be as famous as Robert De Niro,'' he said. ''I don't need no Rolls-Royce. All I want is to be working a little more, to have a little more money. I want a building with an elevator.''
Always the Pinkie Ring
Business may be good, but wiseguy actors have one great fear: being pigeonholed.
Mr. Bonsangue has played Frankie the Butcher on screen nearly as often as he did in his former life, including as a meat expert on ''Hot Off the Grill'' on the Food Network and as a store counterman on ''The Sopranos.'' Mr. Raio's most enjoyable moment as an actor was in Shakespeare's ''Midsummer Night's Dream,'' but his Bronx accent tends to keep him from stage work.
Mr. Vella has played comedic roles and more nuanced parts in the past, and wants more of them. ''I think I'm a humorous guy,'' he said.
Mr. Vella is even fighting a typecast within a typecast. ''I played the mobster who screws things up in 'Casino,''' he said. ''So now they got me doing that.''
Then there's the issue of money. For every Scorsese film, there are half a dozen low-budget, poorly scripted mobster movies that go largely unnoticed. Most wiseguy actors are hardly living the high life, and many must balance the occasional flickers of glamour with nagging, everyday responsibilities.
Mr. Bonsangue, who has a wife, a child and a mortgage, had plumbing, of all things, on his mind one recent Monday when he climbed the rickety stairs in a nondescript office building on West 23rd Street. He had gotten a callback that morning for a television commercial, and after the man at the desk handed him a script, Mr. Bonsangue sat down to study it in the sparsely furnished room. Three graying, middle-aged men were nervously reading the same sheet of paper, like teenagers cramming for a test.
Mr. Bonsangue's attention was not fully on the matter at hand. That morning the pipes in his house in Flushing had burst, and he had spent his prep time on his cellphone, talking plumbing with his wife. When his name was called, he took off his gold pinkie ring (''You gotta tone it down a little,'' he explained), picked up the black satchel containing his head shots and marched in to meet the casting director.
The part was not that of a wiseguy, or a butcher, nor the dreaded wiseguy-butcher combo, but rather a cranky distributor of electronic gizmos. In a room filled with actors who were clean-cut and well coiffed, Mr. Bonsangue's blue collar stood out.
On leaving, Mr. Bonsangue recognized Sam Coppola, a veteran actor who has also been on ''The Sopranos.''
''How are things?'' Mr. Coppola asked.
''O.K.,'' Mr. Bonsangue replied. ''Better if I get this part.''
Out on the street Mr. Bonsangue weighed his chances. ''They made me look away from the camera and read from the script,'' he said. ''I'm not used to that. But they made me read it twice. If they weren't interested they wouldn't have had me read it twice.''
Mr. Bonsangue smiled. ''I've got to get back to Queens and check on the pipes.''
