In the media scrum on the floor of the Assembly chamber after Governor McGreevey's budget address, a few scribblers surrounded Senator Leonard Lance, the Republican minority leader and so the highest-ranking Republican in the state.
The reporters wanted Mr. Lance to agree with them that Governor McGreevey, after all those months as being treated as something of a joke, was now, rather suddenly, in command of the state in a way he had never been. After all, didn't he finally have Democrats in control of both houses, a rising economy to take the heat off his $26.2 billion budget proposal, and a Republican opposition largely bereft of new ideas?
Mr. Lance was not going to be trapped by the liberal media conspiracy's spin. ''I would say he is in the same position as Jim Florio in 1991,'' he said.
In other words, Mr. Lance thinks the governor is cruisin' for a bruisin'.
There are some similarities between Mr. McGreevey and Mr. Florio, the previous Democratic governor.
For instance, in terms of the budget, both first termers were looking to close budget gaps and still pay for the things Democrats like social programs for the deserving middle class.
And like Mr. McGreevey, Mr. Florio had a Democratic majority in both houses large enough to inspire a certain reckless confidence about his ability to find a way ahead without having to worry too much about what the Republicans thought.
But there are also yawning differences. In 1991, New Jersey still had another year go before coming out of the worst recession since the Great Depression, and Mr. Florio -- operating on the novel idea that governments should not spend money they didn't have -- rammed through huge tax increases to keep the budget balanced.
That opened the way to an anti-tax backlash that ended Mr. Florio's career in politics and brought eight years of Republican rule that redefined how budgets are made in New Jersey.
Judging by the budget he introduced on Tuesday, Mr. McGreevey has learned the lesson well. His plan certainly gets a boost from a rising economy, but he also continues a tradition begun by former Gov. Christie Whitman of borrowing to plug the gaps -- $1.5 billion in direct borrowing against the proceeds of new taxes and surcharges, and millions more by putting off other payments.
As the governor made clear in his address, he is counting the rising economy's growth in income, sales and corporate taxes to pay for his borrowing and to see him on to a second term next year. In this he believes he is luckier than Mr. Florio, for whom the long boom of the 1990's came too late.
For his part, James Hughes, dean of the Bloustein School at Rutgers, is inclined to support Mr. McGreevey's gamble.
''My best estimate now is that there is room for some optimism on the economy,'' Mr. Hughes said.
He noted that the state has added jobs at a faster rate than the nation as whole, and that New Jersey should only accelerate as the overall economy improves.
Or, as Mr. Hughes put it, ''We faced strong national headwinds and they have finally turned around, and that should help us.''
The governor's treasury people say they have been in touch with the bond rating firms throughout the budget-making process, so the idea of borrowing $1.5 billion against the proceeds of the new 45-cent-a-pack cigarette tax and surcharges on driving infractions will not come as a surprise to Wall Street.
What no one can predict with certainty is the effect that paying $6 for a pack cigarettes will have on smokers in the state. Will they finally quit puffing, will they hop in their cars and run down to Delaware for cheaper smokes, or will they buy from the smugglers the cigarette industry says always follow in the wake of higher taxes? There is a chance that cigarette sales will drop off faster than the budget predicts, jeopardizing the bond repayments.
John E. McCormac, the state treasurer, said last week that he would be willing to pay higher interest on the bonds if they could be structured so the risk of an eventual default could be passed to the bond holders. If that doesn't work, a big piece of the budget could go up in, um, smoke.
Then Mr. McGreevey will know how Jim Florio felt.
ON POLITICS Iver Peterson reports from New Jersey for The New York Times.
