WHILE it is encouraging to read articles about government officials, citizens' groups, educators and others banding together to address the problems of today's schools, in general, and in predominantly African-American communities in particular, it is also discouraging.
I'm concerned that the policies and actions of professionals could push parents and guardians into adopting a laid-back approach to education in the belief that more experienced individuals and organizations are now in charge of the situation.
But they really are not. There must be a partnership among educators, parents and students. The basic prerequisites to a good education involve all interested parties working together for the good of the children. Adequate resources must also be made available, regardless of the socioeconomic situation of the family.
Home is where children should be sold on the importance of education. It's where young people get, or don't get, guidance from those having the greatest influence on their lives. It is where students have to build on their classroom experiences by doing homework, studying and shaping plans on how to use what they have learned.
As an educator and the father of three college graduates, I can point to many young men and women who say that the defining influences on their academic success or failure were parental involvement and teacher encouragement.
I also believe that there are a number of ways for parents to get involved, and many organizations through which they can leverage their interest in positive educational outcomes.
For example, there are the standbys of monitoring children's homework, helping with school projects, rewarding good grades, working to improve bad ones and showing children the close relationship between good grades and successful lives as adults. These methods are not the newest on the table but they work.
One of my fondest memories is being my son's adviser when he designed and developed a computer program to help teachers in our school district automate their attendance records. He was even asked to train teachers at the Bailey School in the use of his program.
Then there is involvement in organizations that help keep children on track. PTA's are the most obvious ones, but my children also benefited from my participation in activities through the Dad's Club, the Union Baptist Church, Town of Greenburgh Recreational programs and initiatives of the African-American Men of Westchester Education. There is nothing better than having allies in the child rearing process. All of these organizations have given me ideas as well as the comfort of knowing that the occasional difficulties of persuading my children that father or mother sometimes knows best have been shared by others.
Knowledge is another key point. If parents are kept from providing guidance on schoolwork at home because of job commitments, they should at least learn about their children's educational options. There are choices to be made, including charter schools, vouchers, private schools and public education, and they can't be reasonably made without an awareness of the pros and cons.
That's why I am taking an active role in the African-American Men of Westchester's Education Committee, which is committed to taking educational information and issues before the public.
As a parent, you may have asked yourself: What can I do? What should I do?
You know that your child is bright, but yet he or she does not seem to thrive in school. It's as if they were locked into an educational status quo. Their inquisitive minds are stymied because their school focuses on teaching for standardized test performance.
So what should you do? Too many parents, especially those in communities where schools clearly underperform compared with their counterparts in other parts of the country, haven't had the time to assess their choices. Many don't even know that they have choices. But it's important for parents to identify their choices and make informed decisions concerning their children's education.
SOAPBOX Fred Campbell, a math teacher, lives in Greenburgh.
