LAST month at the Golden Globe Awards in Los Angeles, Tom Cruise traveled the red carpet with a short-haired woman in a silver fluted blouse who betrayed a stunningly unpracticed exuberance. Speculation that she may have been an extra he met on the set of ''The Last Samurai'' was immediately squashed when he announced, ''I'm showing off my mom tonight.'' That same evening a number of other celebrities were accompanied by those with whom they share a close genetic link. Among them were Mr. Cruise's former wife Nicole Kidman, who took her mother and father to the ceremony, proclaiming with a laugh: ''I bring either my kids or my parents. It's pathetic.''
Pathetic no, but strategic perhaps. At a time when red carpet appearances are analyzed with the kind of attention typically reserved for the decoding of strands of viral matter and the status of a celebrity's relationship is of more interest to the press than that of his career, family members -- mothers especially -- have become increasingly visible as companions to those whom fate has dispatched to the universe of award presentations and movie premieres. Jude Law and Johnny Depp, both nominated for Oscars in the best-actor category, are expected to take their mothers to the 76th annual Academy Awards tonight, as is Charlize Theron, a nominee for best actress, who is also taking her boyfriend, Stuart Townsend, an actor. Diane Keaton, nominated for her role in ''Something's Gotta Give,'' will be joined by her sister Dorrie Hall, Ms. Keaton's publicist, Leslee Dart, said.
''A mother can work guilt in the extreme,'' said Joan Rivers, the red carpet's best-known semiotician. ''But seriously,'' she added, referring to her daughter and television cohost, ''Melissa and I were just talking about this the other day. The Oscars is not a night for boyfriends and mistresses who come and go. Bringing family members has become much more common. I remember when Jane Fonda brought her kids years ago, and it was sort of shocking.''
When considering what might motivate a famous person to take a beloved relative into grand public view, one should not, of course, exempt feelings of familial loyalty altogether. And for the woman who comforted you with Robitussin and taught you how to make soufflé, why not the reward of an evening with Billy Crystal?
''Wasn't it a wonderful thing that Adrien Brody brought his mother to the Oscars last year?'' Ms. Rivers said. ''Instead of some bimbo he could have picked up in a bar two nights before?'' Mr. Brody, an only child, is quite close to his mother, the photographer Sylvia Plachy, and his father, Elliot Brody, a former schoolteacher.
The presence of parents can be lovely, said Bonnie Fuller, the editorial director of American Media, publisher of periodicals including The Star. ''Let them be part of the naches!'' she said, deploying the Yiddish word for proud pleasure. ''Let them be part of this moment of enormous success. Charlize Theron has been going to all the events with her mother, because she feels her mother has been critical to her success.''
That acknowledged, advertising a parental relationship does seem to be the most effective way of deflecting attention from one's romantic life. Ms. Kidman, for example, who was almost always seen side by side with Mr. Cruise when they were married, seems to have gone out of her way since her divorce to avoid being seen in public with possible dates.
Instead, she walks the red carpet at awards shows, premieres and other celebrity ceremonies either alone or with her sister, her parents or her children. Most recently, Ms. Kidman took her parents to the Golden Globes at a moment when, said Janice Min, the editor of Us Weekly, speculation swirled around the actress's relationship with the musician Lenny Kravitz.
''There were rumors that he'd broken up with her,'' Ms. Min said. ''He'd been photographed out partying. One thing Nicole has been very good at is eliciting public sympathy. She showed up joking, 'Look, I'm sort of a loser -- I keep showing up places with my mom.
''Also, if both Tom and Nicole had wound up walking the red carpet with dates, there would have been endless comparison.''
Industry watchers say that there are certainly instances when a celebrity in a state of romantic turnaround might benefit by walking the red carpet alone or with a family member. Sometimes the star might choose to convey an image of woundedness, which the appearance of a mother or a father can reinforce, said one Hollywood publicist. ''Parents remind you that the person is human,'' the publicist said. ''We don't all have the Gucci dress and the Harry Winston diamond necklace, but we all more or less have parents.''
Earlier this month Justin Timberlake took his mother, not his girlfriend, Cameron Diaz, with whom he has not been shy about being photographed, to the Grammy Awards just days after he was accused of complicity in corrupting Super Bowl viewers by relieving Janet Jackson of a breastplate. ''It made him seem wholesome,'' Ms. Rivers said. ''It said, 'I'm still a very good boy.' ''
Some took a different view. ''That is the most recent incident of someone using mom as a shield,'' said Janice Min, the editor of Us Weekly.
''Good for him for going at all,'' Ms. River countered. A spokesman for Mr. Timberlake declined to comment.
Perhaps Jennifer Garner might have sought maternal assistance last year when she attended the Oscars as a presenter. She arrived alone, telling reporters who asked about her husband, Scott Foley, that she had wanted a ''girls' weekend.'' Shortly thereafter the couple announced their separation. Nevertheless, tabloids and magazines made weighted note of the matter. ''Jennifer Garner left behind her tough-girl Alias in a delicate Atelier Versace gown covered with microcrystals and a Neil Lane diamond bracelet; she also left behind her husband, Scott Foley, and partied with a pal,'' read a description in the post-Oscar issue of People last year.
The sight of a mother or a father can apparently melt away the nosiest intentions of the Hollywood press corps. At the time of the Emmy Awards last year, celebrity watchers had been gossiping about whether the ''Will &amp; Grace'' star Debra Messing was pregnant. Ms. Messing took her parents instead of her husband to the proceedings, and that seemed to squelch the interrogating. ''No one asked, 'Are you pregnant?' '' Ms. Min said. (Ms. Messing is expecting a baby this summer.)
An altogether different interpretation of the parental advantage is that celebrities understand that America is suffering from public-coupling fatigue. Reality television, which is to say much of television, is now focused nearly exclusively on the subject of pairing off. ''In the aftermath of Ben and J-Lo,'' Ms. Min said, ''there's been a pullback from bringing dates out.
''A lot of people in Hollywood looked at the Ben and J-Lo relationship, the barrage of images, as something that just went too far. And let's not forget that celebrities have enormous egos. They just don't want to be competing with their equally enormously famous significant other.''
