IN the elegant milieu of neo-Georgian and neo-Renaissance clubs, town houses and apartment buildings on Park Avenue, Hunter College's aggressively modernist building at 68th Street is the gate crasher at a debutante party.
But Hunter was on Park Avenue long before the rich; it was established at its 68th Street site in 1873 as the Normal College. The industrial style of the main building aroused a storm of criticism when it was built in 1940. Now the college is about to rebuild its 68th Street courtyard, itself overshadowed by a later building campaign.
Much of the area in the high 60's from Park to Lexington was owned by the city until just after the Civil War, when it began leasing or selling the land advantageously to nonprofit organizations. Mount Sinai Hospital, Hahneman Hospital, the Seventh Regiment Armory, the Baptist Home, the Deaf and Dumb Asylum, the New York Foundling Hospital and others built there on sites obtained from the city.
What is now Hunter College took the most imposing parcel, the plateau on the rise of Park (then Fourth) Avenue between 68th and 69th Streets. Founded in 1869 as a teacher training institution, it was generally known as the Normal College -- a ''normal school'' being one involving the education of future teachers. Thomas Hunter was the first president and ran the first classes in rented space at 691 Broadway (near West Fourth Street) in 1870, the same year New York gave the college the Park Avenue site.
In 1873, the college opened a new red-brick Gothic-style building on its Park Avenue site, with a smaller elementary school on the rear of the lot, facing Lexington Avenue. Architecturally, it was remarkably explicit, perhaps the most dramatic nonreligious example of the style in New York, with pointed arches, a central tower crowned by crockets and comparable elements.
Mr. Hunter retired in 1906, and in 1914 the college was named after him, just after the old elementary school on Lexington Avenue was razed for the present Tudor-style building on the site, designed by C. B. J. Snyder.
In the 1920's, Hunter College considered selling its Park Avenue site and relocating to the Bronx to a proposed neo-Georgian complex designed by John Russell Pope and Dwight James Baum, but the project never went ahead. In the mid-1930's, a liberal arts curriculum superseded Hunter's teacher-training orientation.
But a nighttime fire in February 1936 gutted the 1873 building, and the federal Public Works Administration financed a new structure on the site. Designed by Shreve, Lamb &amp; Harmon -- architects of the Empire State Building -- in consultation with Harrison &amp; Fouilhoux, the new college was to serve 5,600 students with 112 classrooms, an assembly hall for 2,500, four gyms, a swimming pool and 10 elevators. Its $6.5 million design could not have been farther from its Gothic-style predecessor: the simplest possible limestone facade punctuated by strip windows.
In 1938, The New York Times described the proposed architecture as ''conservative and modern,'' but cited the criticism by the Manhattan borough president, James J. Lyons, of its similarity to a warehouse.
The architect William F. Lamb said, ''I know the layman says this is a terrible building, but they said the same thing about the Empire State Building -- until it was finished.'' But Deputy Mayor Henry H. Curran responded, ''I still say it is a terrible building.'' The architects were still not certain at that time whether to use brick or limestone.
When the so-called warehouse design was completed in 1940, the magazine Architectural Forum noted the early controversy, with ''the more sentimental section of the public and profession decrying the omission of the customary collegiate trimmings.'' But it said that the requirements for light made a modern design necessary and that ''it is also difficult to see how this 19-story structure could possibly have been disguised as a cathedral or medieval fortress.'' The building is included in the Upper East Side Historic District.
AN utterly urban campus, Hunter had only a slight setback along the Park Avenue and 69th Street facades, and a small plaza on the 68th Street side. Photographs of the 68th Street space from the 1950's show groups of young women in bizarre outfits and makeup -- apparently freshmen -- performing weird stunts, like sweeping the steps with tiny paint and glue brushes.
After World War II, Hunter admitted its first male day students. (In 1939 The Times had described the school as the ''world's largest women's college.'') But the college did not officially become coeducational until two decades later.
Hunter's two-building Manhattan campus remained generally unchanged until the early 1980's, when Ulrich Franzen designed an addition at the intersection of Lexington Avenue and 68th Street, on the southeast and southwest corners. The tall office-type structures are connected by glass-walled skywalks, two over Lexington and one over 68th Street -- ''welcome additions to the cityscape,'' says the 2000 edition of the A.I.A. Guide to New York City, by Norval White and the late Elliot Willensky.
The 1940 Hunter building has changed in subtle ways. Projecting air-conditioners, often not so apparent on more elaborate facades, are particularly jarring in this case, especially on the 68th Street side. A set of clunky brown replacement windows -- nothing like the original trim, machined look of the factory windows -- dramatically reduces the sleek character the architects sought. By contrast, the 1913 building on Lexington Avenue still has its wooden windows -- although for not much longer if they are not painted soon.
The Franzen expansion allowed for an open space on the southwest corner of 68th Street and Lexington Avenue, with a great opening to the subway station below, benches, modern sculpture and a relatively sheltered space off the street. Pedestrians use it as a shortcut, and students hang out and read, smoke, and eat hot dogs. It is not intrinsically inviting but compared with the surrounding gridiron of narrow sidewalks it is practically an oasis.
This new plaza has become the de facto commons of the college, and the older plaza on the north side of 68th Street often just seems like a passageway. That is why Hunter's renovation of the older plaza, to start this summer, will prove particularly interesting. The architects Pasanella &amp; Klein Stolzman &amp; Berg have redesigned the area, with new ramps, planters and signage, to make it ''a welcome place for students and the larger community,'' said Meredith Halpern, a spokeswoman for Hunter.
Streetscapes | Hunter College on 68th Street and Park Avenue
