IT is a bit embarrassing, though gratifying, to announce that I have won my own contest. Now if I could only get JJ Slim to immortalize me in a poem.
Let me explain. Attentive readers will recall that two weeks ago I proclaimed an essay contest on the topic ''Why I'm glad the New Jersey Nets are, apparently, leaving.'' The basketball team has been bought by someone who wants to move it to Brooklyn, and I offered valuable Nets memorabilia to whoever best expressed the ''good riddance'' point of view.
It was odd, I admit, to conduct such a contest as the Nets were embarking on the N.B.A.'s longest winning streak, but logic has never been a strong point of this column. In any case, I lined up two judges to rate the entries: Caren Lissner, a writer, and Pat Lamb, a comedian. And it was in meeting up with Mr. Lamb, at an eclectic performance orgy at Mercer County Community College called the Late Night Series (www.latenightseries.com), that I encountered the revelatory poetry of JJ Slim.
The Late Night Series is a coffeehouse/poetry slam/hip-hop amalgam that sprang up about a year ago, in part to fill the void left by the closing of Urban Word, a Trenton cafe that had offered similar stuff. Nick Anselmo, who teaches theater at the college and runs the series, had on this particular Friday proclaimed an open mike, and Mr. Lamb came from Bloomfield to try out some material.
I met him there to give him the contest entries I had received -- the description ''small handful'' would be more than generous -- but stayed around for the festivities. The high point was JJ Slim, who took the stage and after much bluster and build-up recited a poem he called ''Tree.'' This was it, in its entirety:
''I am like a tree.''
Actually, it may have been ''I'm a tree'' -- I was temporarily blinded by the brilliance of it, like when someone takes a flash picture in your face, and may not have recorded it accurately. In any case, it changed my life.
As for the essay contest, I gave Mr. Lamb and Ms. Lissner the entries, anonymously, and asked them to pick their favorite three, reasoning that anything turning up on both of their lists would be a winner. The contest rules being fairly liberal, I slipped a few of my own entries in. And darned if one of mine wasn't the only one chosen by both judges. This was it:
''If the Nets go, that will be one more step toward freeing up the Meadowlands to become a mall. And we could sure use another one of those.''
Mr. Lamb also cast a vote for another of my entries, and for his own, in which he compared professional sports teams to carnies: when they stop drawing, they just leave town, even if you have erected them a nice, expensive tent.
Meanwhile, Ms. Lissner -- whose second novel, ''Starting From Square Two,'' arrives in stores this weekend -- was taken with yet another of my entries, in which I noted that the Nets' departure should drop the average height of New Jersey residents as a group. (Ms. Lissner confessed to being 5-foot-2 and a member of the notorious Short Power movement.) She also cast a vote for an entry from Camille Terracciano of Long Branch, one that actually has thought and serious sentiments behind it. Why is Ms. Terracciano glad the Nets are, apparently, leaving?
''When they're gone, newspapers won't have to use so much space writing about them. The world is filled with so many important problems. Our people dying in Iraq, and coming home disabled for life. How many of these men and women make the front pages, compared to unimportant sports figures?''
For that, Ms. Terracciano gets first prize, even though I rightfully won it: a New Jersey Nets Barbie, in its original box. I'm giving myself second prize, a Nets watch, because the band on my current watch just broke. And a consolation prize, an autographed Yinka Dare Nets card, goes to Ed Conti of Summit, not for his entry, which the judges deemed unexceptional, but for the letter of outrage he sent when informed he had not won:
''This is outrageous and I am, apparently, outraged. I entered your contest in good faith and what do I get? Apparently, nothing. Or worse, a consolation prize. What are you telling me -- that there was another contestant? All I can say is, Nets to you.''
Harsh words, yes, but they have no effect on me. I am, after all, like a tree.
JERSEY
