American troops moving into and out of Iraq are on such high alert that crews for tanks and other armored vehicles hauled atop transport trucks have been ordered to remain inside their turrets, always ready to return fire if attacked, senior commanders here say.
That is among a number of highly unusual security measures as a huge rotation involving nearly a quarter-million troops enters what commanders warn will be its most complicated and dangerous three-week period.
Even Army truck drivers have been ordered to pause here in Kuwait for advanced, live-fire weapons training usually reserved for the most elite commandos.
The high-risk swap of fresh forces for Iraq is the biggest American troop movement since World War II. It involves eight of the Army's 10 active-duty divisions and a large contingent of marines.
Commanders say convoys ferrying new troops and arms into Iraq and veterans toward home have been attacked an average of once a week since the rotation opened, with a trickle of vehicles first setting out a month ago. So far, not one soldier has died from hostile fire while on the move between Iraq and Kuwait.
But commanders say they do not intend to drop their guard, warning that a quick-learning adversary may yet mount a lethal ambush. Nor can they ignore torrential rains in the past 60 days that washed out sections of the heavily traveled routes.
''This is an operation where you have no sanctuary,'' said Maj. Gen. Stephen M. Speakes, the Army officer in command of the troop rotation.
''We are on the brink of our most challenging period,'' he said. ''Our most important test comes over the next three weeks. It's a long route. It's a hazardous route. It's a complex battlefield.''
The actual number of troops on the move peaked on Thursday, when 57,000 military personnel in transit home or to Iraq bunked down at a chain of desert camps here in Kuwait, hub for the troop rotation.
Over the next three weeks, commanders must manage a portion of the rotation that officers here call ''digesting the elephant.'' This part of the mission includes the overlap of tens of thousands of troops in Iraq, and the transition between veteran combat units and replacements. At the same time, hundreds of convoys will haul fresh vehicles into Iraq, the trucks will move to a different base to pick up equipment worn out by a year of combat and patrols, and then they will return to Kuwait.
When the rotation is over, just over 110,000 new American troops should have replaced about 130,000 who served 12 months in Iraq.
New training and tactics have been ordered to prevent a repeat of one of the darkest days of the war, when a convoy of the 507th Maintenance Company, which included Pfc. Jessica Lynch, got lost and then outgunned at Nasiriya.
Today, Army truck drivers must undergo intense, even hazardous, weapons training based on what is required for Rangers, the Army's elite light infantry, and Army Special Forces, commonly called Green Berets.
Army convoy drivers bound for Iraq are taught, among other things, how to fire accurately from behind the wheel even while maneuvering to evade attack.
Whenever Abrams tanks or Bradley infantry fighting vehicles are the cargo atop the powerful transport trucks, the armored vehicles' commander and gunner are required to remain inside the turret all the way, with heavy machine guns and mortars ready to fire, said Col. William H. Pratt, who is in charge of the command center that tracks and manages the rotation.
''The adversary should know we are ready to shoot back,'' he said.
The cannon would not be fired while the tank remained lashed atop the cargo bed, he noted. But under new rules, all Abrams and Bradley drivers and loaders must ride inside the cab of the transport truck hauling their vehicle. That way, the armored vehicle can be driven off and rapidly readied for action.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, during his visit this week to Iraq and Kuwait, said such plans meant that fresh troops were better prepared for the current stabilization mission than those who arrived in Iraq 12 months ago primed for combat.
''The new folks, we believe, are probably better trained for the task at hand today than the people who they're replacing,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''They're equipped, and their tactics and their techniques and their procedures are appropriate to the current situation on the ground as it's evolved.''
The road march north from transit bases in Kuwait -- about three days' time covering, for example, 460 miles to Baghdad or 693 to Mosul -- has had its close calls.
An improvised explosive device was spotted on the convoy route north of Baghdad just as a line of 200 fuel trucks, each a potential inferno, approached from south of the city.
Officers at the land forces command center in Kuwait, who were tracking the convoy's exact progress via satellite transmitters installed in every truck, halted the vehicles in time to allow troops to clear the bomb.
General Speakes, the rotation commander, said the mission could not be termed a success if logistics got in the way of the stabilization effort. ''If our process is invisible, that is the ultimate compliment,'' he said. Even during the current surge in the rotation, he added, ''We can't lose focus on the fight.''
