IN the summer of 1987, shortly after moving back to New York from Washington, I tried to buy a Nesselrode pie for my younger son's birthday. But that creamy, chiffon pie with accents of chocolate, candied fruit and rum that I remembered so well from my childhood in the Bronx seemed to have disappeared.
I searched the obvious pastry shops. I asked in the obvious restaurants. I asked friends for tips. But as far as I could determine -- this was not a scientific survey, mind you -- Nesselrode was apparently no more. Like baked Alaska and Charlotte Russe, it seemed to have gone to the equivalent of food heaven.
I was not alone in mourning the loss.
Arthur Schwartz, the food writer and restaurant critic, wrote of Nesselrode pie on his Web site: ''It's extinct now -- no restaurant serves it, no bakery makes it -- but this old New York dessert still lives vividly in the taste memories of many.''
On the Chowhound's message board: ''Ahhh, Nesselrode pie. I was a fiend for it as a child at Ratner's on the Lower East Side. If we were in town, I'd make sure to leave room for a slice (even in the face of those baskets of onion rolls). Eventually, they never seemed to have it in and then alas, Ratner's was no more. Let the weeping commence.''
Even Howard Seftel, the food critic for the Arizona Republic, wrote as one of his 10 requests to Santa: ''And if it's not too much trouble, find a pastry chef willing to bring back Nesselrode pie.''
Still, I couldn't believe that the pie was really impossible to find. So I started on a personal quest.
Let me backtrack. The story begins for me, as it did for others, in the 1940's and 1950's, when my father, who loved Nesselrode pie, used to bring one home for special occasions. ''I picked this up at Mrs. Spier's,'' he would inevitably say as he walked into our apartment at 3235 Grand Concourse or later, at our house in New Rochelle.
''Mrs. Spier's,'' I learned during my search, was a wholesale pie bakery run by Hortense Spier at 24 West 90th Street on the Upper West Side. Her pièce de résistance was a dessert named after the 19th-century Russian foreign minister Count Karl Robert Nesselrode, a man who loved good food and had a talented chef named Mouy. The chef developed a dessert that eventually became known as Nesselrode pudding, which Mrs. Spier turned into a pie. Her children ran the business after she died, but by 1968 they were also dead.
Although ''Mrs. Spier's'' provided the pie to many leading restaurants in the New York area, other bakeries had their own versions. You could find Nesselrode at Lindy's, Longchamps and steak houses and seafood restaurants throughout the region.
You probably want to know what this pie tasted like. My memory is of a lot of whipped cream, chocolate shavings on top, candied fruits in the custard of the pie, and a rum flavor throughout. The original Nesselrode had chestnut purée; later recipes omit this ingredient.
There is no shortage of cookbooks with recipes for Nesselrode. One experienced chef said it took him two days to prepare his Nesselrode, due to the need to prepare substitutes for such ingredients as candied orange peel. His conclusion: ''The Nesselrode, for all the comment it aroused, was not worth the extreme number of hours required to prepare it.''
Neither my wife, Marie-Jeanne, nor I was up to the task either of making the pie. This, however, did not deter other members of my family. Two Christmases ago, my daughter-in-law Maggie, decided to prepare the dessert for me as a surprise.
She and my son James made a valiant effort, stealthily mixing ingredients in the kitchen of our house in Riverdale, while the rest of the family slept. But when the pie was presented to me, with some fanfare, on Christmas Day, I had to disappoint everyone, shake my head and say, ''Thank you very much for the effort, but no, this isn't quite it.'' It was tough to reject a present so bluntly, but I did not in any way want to indicate that the quest was over. Happily, Maggie took the rejection in good spirits.
That scene, however, led to a string of events that brought the search to an end, in a way I would not have dreamed of, deep in Canarsie, Brooklyn. Also at that Christmas Day dinner was Maggie's mother, Nancy Tucker, who lives in the East Village. Shortly before last Thanksgiving, she accompanied a friend to a bakery in Brooklyn to pick up a few items, and while inside Teena's Cake Fair, at 1568 Ralph Avenue, she noticed an item labeled ''Nesselrode pie.''
Nancy told Maggie, who now lives with James in Seattle, and Maggie promptly called me. A few days after Christmas, I in turn called Teena's and spoke to a young woman, who, when I inquired about ordering a Nesselrode Pie for New Year's, replied firmly, ''We don't make Nesselrode pie.''
''Are you sure?'' I asked, adding that a friend had seen what appeared to be one in the store.
''We haven't made Nesselrode pie in 100 years,'' she answered curtly.
I hung up, and a moment later, the phone rang. It was the woman from Teena's, who had gotten my number from caller ID. ''You can pick up your Nesselrode pie on Tuesday afternoon,'' she told me.
SO, two days later, my wife and I set off by car for Canarsie. Jessica Wasserman, the owner's daughter-in-law, was behind the counter, and as we exchanged greetings. I felt something like Stanley about to meet Livingstone. She opened her refrigerated case and pulled out a box with my Nesselrode pie in it. I noticed two more pies in the display case.
Aaron Wasserman, a burly, friendly man who has run the place since 1977, told me that Teena's has been in his family since it was founded on this spot in 1959 by his grandfather. His father took over in 1965, and his son David is preparing to succeed him.
When the bakery was established, Canarsie was a largely Italian and Jewish neighborhood. Its ethnic mix has changed since then, and there isn't much demand for Nesselrode pie any more; Mr. Wasserman's customers prefer fruit pies. But he has been making a half dozen or so Nesselrode pies every year for Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's, when he has no trouble selling them, at $9 apiece,
We took our pie back to Riverdale and on New Year's Day we held a ''tasting'' for family and friends, some of whom claimed to have eaten Nesselrode in the old days. I was very curious, after all these years, to taste it myself. My conclusion was that Teena's pie was authentic, with the rum taste I remembered, along with the whipped cream, candied fruit and chocolate shavings. Mr. Wasserman said he does not use chestnuts, and I personally did not mind.
So after more than 16 years, my quest concluded successfully. Although there may be more Nesselrode pies around the city, at locations I never discovered, at least I managed to track down one place that still makes them. In the end, the whole experience was a bit anti-climactic, but at least it can be said that Nesselrode pie still lives.
URBAN TACTICS Bernard Gwertzman, a former foreign editor at The New York Times and a former editor of The Times's Web site, is a consulting editor for the Council on Foreign Relations.
