IN the past few weeks, Oscar-related plots and Academy Award-winning guests have been jammed into ABC sitcoms like so many product placements, as conspicuous as a can of Coke or Pepsi in the center of a movie screen. The network even managed to work an Academy Awards story into the feuding-family comedy ''It's All Relative'': near-catastrophe strikes when someone loses the television remote on Oscar night. It's a wonder the theme wasn't foisted on ''Celebrity Mole Yucatan,'' but ABC more than made up for that lapse on ''I'm With Her,'' the middling show about an actress and her schoolteacher boyfriend, now a show about an Oscar-nominated actress and her schoolteacher boyfriend. Joan Rivers dropped by the series playing herself, even though she belongs to the competing red-carpet show on ''E!,'' and in one episode the heroine's sister went campaigning for Oscar votes among geezers at the Motion Picture Retirement Home.
We're used to hearing about such campaigns to win an Academy Award; these sitcom ploys are evidence of the other Oscar campaign, the marketing battle to lure television viewers back to what used to be the only glittery starfest that mattered.
Last year's show drew its lowest ratings ever, and only part of that slump can be blamed a subdued national mood because of the war with Iraq. Viewers have been drifting away steadily, so this year the academy hired a year-round marketing director whose job is to sell the Oscar show to the public. It also brought in a new, high-profile producer, Joe Roth, known as a savvy film guy.
The founder of Revolution Studios, he is a movie producer (''Mona Lisa Smile''), former studio head at Disney, and a sometime director (''America's Sweethearts''). But when he was asked to produce the Oscars, Mr. Roth said: ''I wondered if they had the wrong guy. I've been producing movies for 30 years, but I've never produced a moment of television, not a sketch, not a sitcom.''
Thinking like a film producer, he decided to market the show as if it were a movie. Instead of simply promoting it on ABC, the ususal approch, for the first time the academy bought spots on radio and on cable, specifically ''channels that show movies for a living,'' as Mr. Roth said. There are large-scale tie-ins with Blockbuster and J. C. Penney; pick up a ''Watch and Win'' game card at your local J. C. Penney and you might win a seat on the red carpet at next year's awards. And while the Oscars have long been promoted in movie theaters, this year's minute-long trailer was less about the awards and more about the glamour of the show, with scenes of red-carpet entrances and OutKast's ''Hey Ya'' on the soundtrack.
If OutKast seems a weird choice to back up Hollywood glitz, the odd pairing suggests the challenge the show faces: keeping its traditional audience while trying to lure younger viewers.
Selling the Oscars like a product may lack dignity, but at least it's realistic. The revved-up marketing, like the academy's decision to schedule the ceremony a month earlier than in previous years, acknowledges how much the Oscars have been hurt by the flood of competing awards shows like the Golden Globes and the Screen Actors Guild Awards, which draw from the same star pool. Even finicky Sean Penn turned up at the Broadcast Critics Awards this year, shown on E!; after that, his appearance as a best actor nominee at the Oscars (for ''Mystic River'') won't seem so rare.
If you're making a marketing push, it helps to freshen the product itself. When he talks about the creative side, Mr. Roth sounds more like a moviemaker than ever. Putting together the show, he said, is ''a lot like directing a picture -- you get to determine the tone, the casting, the feel.''
He decided to go for a comic tone, and before he agreed to produce the show, called Billy Crystal to make sure he'd be the host (for his eighth time). Mr. Roth also added more comic actors as presenters, including Jack Black and Will Ferrell. Mr. Black's ''School of Rock'' and Mr. Ferrell's ''Elf'' weren't exactly Oscar bait, but their movies were blockbusters and the comics will lend a younger, less reverent tone to the show. So will actors like Colin Farrell, hardly part of old-time Hollywood.
Some irreverent additions will be less apparent. Mr. Crystal's music (though not the entire show's) will be directed by Marc Shaiman, who composed the music for the ''South Park'' movie, for the Broadway show ''Hairspray'' and for some of Mr. Crystal's previous Oscar opening medleys, crowd-pleasing musical parodies of the best-picture nominees. Of course, too often in the past, the show was all downhill after a hilarious opener, with viewers desperate for surprises three hours in.
''The times when I always wanted to get a sandwich was during the production numbers,'' Mr. Roth said. He promises that this year four of the five nominated songs will be presented by their creators in straightforward performances. Only the nominees from the French animated film ''The Triplets of Belleville'' will get some kind of production, which makes sense. That film's composers, Benoît Charest and Sylvain Chomet, don't have the cachet of Sting and Elvis Costello, each of whom will sing his nominated song from ''Cold Mountain.''
We can always hope for surprises. As Bill Murray, nominated for best actor for ''Lost in Translation,'' told David Letterman recently, ''I'm going to be there because, well, I bought a new dress.'' He just better make sure that dress stays in place -- not that we'd know if it didn't. After Janet Jackson's breast flashing on CBS during the Super Bowl, ABC has insisted on a five-second delay in broadcasting the Oscar show. Mr. Roth argued against it, he said, telling Michael Eisner, the Disney chairman, that doing the show without the delay ''would be a good countermeasure to what CBS did, caving in to the Janet Jackson thing.'' Personally, Mr. Roth added, ''I always worry about first amendment stuff.'' He said that this year the networks might be concerned about profanity and nudity, but ''Who's to say next year it won't be about something political?''
His was the losing argument, though. The supposedly live show will be live-five-seconds-ago, as someone from the ABC Broadcast Standards department stands by with a finger on the delay button. Just think: if the delay had always been in place, we would have been deprived of a classic Oscar moment, when a streaker dashed across the stage in 1974. Now the homage to that streaker in one of the Oscar episodes of ''I'm With Her'' seems like something from the good old days.
COVER STORY
