WHEN environmentalists say there is green in Governor McGreevey's budget plan for next year, they are not just talking about the color of money.
Although he did not praise environmental aspects of his proposal when he released it last week, the governor called for a number of fees and taxes intended to strengthen a variety of environmental programs, from hazardous waste cleanup to removal of tire piles -- part of a long-term move to shift the cost of environmental enforcement from taxpayers to polluters. The effort is loudly applauded by environmentalists but condemned by businesses that say it is an unfair burden.
''Business is already making the argument they are getting nickel-and-dimed to death,'' said David Pringle, campaign director for the New Jersey Environmental Federation. ''But all of these things are trying to discourage polluting acts, whether it is a tire dump, or toxic air emissions or contaminating lands.''
If he succeeds in winning approval of the budget in the Legislature, Mr. McGreevey will bolster his administration's record with environmentalists. Last year, that same constituency was disappointed when the governor had to withdraw a statewide development plan, called the Big Map, because of strong opposition from developers and local officials.
Still, Mr. McGreevey has generally received high marks from environmentalists like Mr. Pringle. The new state budget plan, Mr. Pringle said, continues Mr. McGreevey's policy of increasingly relying on business fees as well as penalties levied against companies that pollute the environment to pay for enforcement of environmental regulations. Environmental groups have said that this is good policy.
''Having polluters pay is not only an issue of fundamental fairness, it also discourages pollution,'' Mr. Pringle said.
But business groups dislike the plan and the philosophy. They say the governor has gone too far with fees and extra penalties and is trying to pay for environmental enforcement on the backs of already overburdened companies.
Businesses are particularly incensed over the governor's decision to extend a change in the corporate business tax that made it harder for companies to reduce taxes by offsetting profits with old losses. They say the governor promised to remove the change after two years. Extending it is expected to generate about $300 million in the next fiscal year, with a large part of those proceeds going to finance the Department of Environmental Protection.
''It is a broken promise,'' said Philip Kirschner, president of the New Jersey Business and Industry Association, which represents about 21,000 companies. ''This was sold to the business community two years ago as a temporary budget fix for two years. Now the extension is for at least one more year.''
Mr. Kirschner said the extension would hurt manufacturers in particular because they are just beginning to climb out of several years of losses.
''It is very poor economic policy to hit these manufacturers when they are down,'' he said.
In general, McGreevey administration officials have said that changes to the corporate business tax are intended to spread the tax burden between businesses and individual taxpayers. Micah Rasmussen, the governor's press secretary, said the governor disputed business groups' contentions that the change to the tax has hurt the business climate, and he cited data that shows New Jersey's economy has been growing faster than any other state's in the Northeast.
''We don't believe what we have done is hampering the economy,'' Mr. Rasmussen said. ''People making a decision on where they want to do business want to do business in a place that has clean air and clean water. The commitment to the environment helps us, it does not hurt us.''
To that end, the environmental commissioner, Bradley M. Campbell, said the state had been rebuilding his department's enforcement arm, which had been cut back under Mr. McGreevey's predecessor, Christie Whitman.
''In the area of enforcement, fines and penalties have increased by a third'' since Governor McGreevey took office, he said. ''With respect to collecting damages to restore damage to the environment, we have collected more in two years than the Whitman administration did in eight.''
Of course, enforcement has to be paid for, and one way Mr. McGreevey has done so is through increased fees. The new state budget plan, for example, proposes to clean up tire piles around the state with a tax on new tires; increased fees on companies producing air toxins, primarily from power plants; and fees charged to out-of-state companies that transport hazardous waste to New Jersey for disposal.
Mr. McGreevey has also proposed a 1 percent tax on ''McMansions,'' new houses selling for more than $1 million.
Though opponents of suburban sprawl welcome the McMansion tax, builders are not so happy with it. They say the governor has already done too much to slow the construction of new housing.
''The administration has demonstrated it can use the Department of Environmental Protection to suffocate housing opportunities,'' said Patrick J. O'Keefe, chief executive officer of the 2,000-member New Jersey Builders Association. ''It has yet to demonstrate it has anyone in the administration who is concerned about creating them.''
Mr. O'Keefe said the McMansion tax would probably would not have much practical effect on home sales: buyers who can afford homes at that price probably will not be dissuaded by a 1 percent tax. But he said it reflected policies that discourage building in a state where the average home price, at $324,000, is twice what the average family could afford.
''The governor has turned his back on people who need a place to live,'' he said.
Susan Bass Levin, commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, said the builders were being unfair. ''Governor McGreevey's administration has financed over 16,700 affordable housing units in the last two years,'' she said, ''almost twice as much as in the previous two years.''
Planning groups are split on the housing issue. Susan M. Burrows, spokeswoman for New Jersey Future, a nonprofit planning organization, said, ''This is a really strong budget on protection for the environment.'' But Ms. Burrows said her organization thought the governor could do more to encourage new housing in urban areas and discourage sprawl in the suburbs.
''This administration has done a lot of work on stopping growth in the wrong places,'' she said. ''But all the environmental protections in the world are not going to work if we don't make it easier to grow in the right places.''
Jeff Tittel, director of the New Jersey chapter of the Sierra Club, disagreed, arguing that the McGreevey administration had improved regulations that govern new development and encourages development in more urban areas. Although he said the McMansion tax would probably have little practical effect, it was one of the most important symbolic statements in the budget plan because large, expensive houses ''are a blight on the landscape that is chewing up open space,'' he said.
Mr. McGreevey's proposals, Mr. Tittel said, are moving in the right direction.
''I think the overall message is if you pollute New Jersey's environment, you are going to have to compensate the public,'' he said. ''That is a good thing. It is another incentive to clean up the environment.''
POLITICS
