Gail Devers is probably the greatest combination sprinter/hurdler to put on track shoes. She has won two Olympic gold medals and a world championship at 100 meters outdoors, one world championship at 60 meters indoors and three world championships in the 100-meter hurdles outdoors.
On Saturday, at age 37, she made history in the United States indoor championships. In a span of 49 minutes, she won the 60-meter hurdles and the 60-meter dash, a double achieved in this meet only once before, by Chi Cheng of Taiwan in 1970. In the 94 years that sprint and hurdles races have been held in these championships, no man has achieved that double.
Devers's accomplishment was even more impressive because earlier in the afternoon she had to run trials in both events. She won them easily. Then she won the hurdles final by two and a half feet, a comfortable margin, in 7.81 seconds.
The sprint final was something else. Devers had her usual good start but little separation from the others. In the final stride, Torri Edwards leaned into the finish line alongside Devers, who bobbed her head. If it was not a tie, the winning margin was at most an inch.
Who won? Neither knew at first.
''I wanted to be national champion,'' Edwards said, ''but whoever won, I was happy with my race. I fought to the finish.''
Devers and Edwards stood side by side at the finish line, waiting for the scoreboard to say something.
Finally, the scoreboard lighted up: Devers first in 7.12 seconds, Edwards second in 7.12 seconds. Later, the automatic timer produced the times to the thousandth of a second: 7.116 for Devers, 7.119 for Edwards.
''At this point, I have to find a reason, and my reason was to do something that I had never done,'' Devers said. ''Everyone talks about my age, and at this point, this does take a toll on my body. I run with my heart.''
The meet had one major disappointment. Maurice Greene, the former world-record holder at 100 meters, was racing in his first meet since August, when a knee gave him trouble in the world outdoor championships. In the last two years, he has been troubled by injuries to a quadriceps, a knee and a hamstring.
He arrived here saying, ''I'm healthy, no real nick-nack pains.'' He ran easily in Saturday's 60-meter heat, and although he did not win he advanced comfortably to the final.
But Greene did not run the final. His coach, John Smith, said it was a coach's decision.
''I just took him out,'' Smith said. ''I said after his heat, 'Are you O.K.?' He said the hamstring felt a little tight. This was his first race in a long time, and I don't want to put him on the track if he's not ready. He's not injured. But if he's not perfect, we're not doing dumb things in an Olympic year.''
INSIDE TRACK
The near-capacity crowd of 3,500 at the Reggie Lewis Center saw TIM SEAMAN win the men's 5,000-meter walk for the seventh straight year, in 19 minutes 30.59 seconds. Other men's winners were SHAWN CRAWFORD in the 60-meter dash (6.47 seconds), ALLEN JOHNSON in the 60 hurdles (7.44 seconds), MICHAEL STEMBER in the 800 (1:48.08), ROB MYERS in the 1,500 (3:40.80), TOBY STEVENSON in the pole vault (19 feet  1/4 inch) and ALLEN SIMMS in the triple jump (55-4 3/4). Among the women's winners were JEN TOOMEY in the 800 (2:00.02), SHAYNE CULPEPPER in the 3,000 (9:00.59) and TIOMBE HURD in the triple jump (45-5). The first two finishers in most events qualify for the United States team for the world championships starting next Friday in Budapest.
TRACK AND FIELD
