Testifying before the Senate Intelligence Committee on Tuesday, George Tenet was asked why the C.I.A. never picked up the trail of Marwan al-Shehhi, the pilot who crashed Flight 175 into the south tower on 9/11.
Thirty months earlier, German intelligence had passed on a hot tip to the C.I.A. -- the Al Qaeda terrorist's first name and phone number.
''The Germans gave us a name, Marwan -- that's it -- and a phone number,'' the director of central intelligence replied, adding: ''They didn't give us a first and a last name until after 9/11, with then additional data.''
For crying out loud. As one guy I know put it: ''I've tracked down women across the country with a lot less information than that.''
Mr. Tenet is not in any trouble for that sorry answer, of course, just as he hasn't had to pay any penalty for building up the phantom arsenal that Saddam only dreamed he had.
The catchphrase du jour is Donald Trump's snappy, ''You're fired.'' But no one has lost a job over the intelligence failures that led to 9/11 or the war that was trumped up and velcroed to 9/11. In fact, the only people the president and vice president are trying to put out of business are the members of the commission charged with figuring out how 9/11 happened and how to prevent another one.
The White House seems more worried about the public's finding out how much it knew and how little it did before 9/11 than it does about identifying and fixing security weaknesses.
After trying to kill the commission and then trying to put Dr. Strangelove-Kissinger in charge, President Bush and Dick Cheney have done their best to hamper the panel that's the best hope of the 9/11 widows, widowers and orphans to get justice.
''This is not no-fault government,'' said Lorie Van Auken, a 9/11 widow. ''You don't just let people go on doing what they're doing wrong.''
It is a triumph of chutzpah for Mr. Bush to thwart the investigation into 9/11 at the same time he seeks re-election by promoting his handling of 9/11 and scaring us with the specter of more terrorism. He's even using 9/11 memorials as the backdrop for his convention in New York.
Last week, the president played it sly, acting as though he was willing to extend the commission's deadline to finish the work that was taking longer because the administration was stonewalling. But the House speaker, J. Dennis Hastert, was clearly helping out the White House, answering the ''who will rid me of this meddlesome panel?'' call.
Senators John McCain and Joseph Lieberman, who helped create the commission, played hardball, threatening highway funds and federal jobs if the commission didn't get two extra months. Mr. Hastert caved.
Mr. McCain said he's expecting the same administration ''obfuscation and delay'' when he sits on Mr. Bush's hand-picked intelligence review board. ''That's why I made sure I got subpoena power,'' he said. ''No bureaucracy will willingly give you information that may be embarrassing to them.''
Especially not such a secretive, paranoid and high-handed administration. Bush officials act as though they own 9/11, even while refusing to own up to any 9/11 mistakes.
Because of 9/11, they think they can suspend the Constitution, blow off investigators, attack nations pre-emptively, and keep Americans afraid by waging a war against terrorism that can never be won.
As Bob Kerrey, a frustrated member of the 9/11 commission, told Chris Matthews, the U.S. should have declared war on Osama as soon as it became apparent that he had an army with a ''tremendous, sophisticated capability'' and an ideology that dictated killing Americans.
''To declare war on terrorism, it seems to me to have the target wrong,'' he said. ''It would be like after the 7th of December, 1941, declaring war on Japanese planes. We declared war on Japan. We didn't declare war on their tactic. . . . Terrorism is a tactic.''
A Bush 41 official agreed: ''You can't fight terrorism conventionally like a war. Any 16-year-old kid can strap on dynamite and take down any building. It must be fought clandestinely, dealing with the underlying causes and taking security measures in our own country.''
Here's a hot tip: If you think the White House should be more cooperative with the 9/11 commission, call George at (202) 456-1111.
I'm sure everyone outside the C.I.A. can take it from there.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com
