I once saw Chang-rae Lee being hugged in the grill room of an exclusive country club by someone he barely knew. Lee, who was a guest at the club, froze for a moment and then tentatively but politely hugged back. The embrace was not an expression of literary adulation. The hugger had no idea that Lee's first novel, ''Native Speaker,'' won the Hemingway Foundation/PEN Award in 1996, that his second novel, ''A Gesture Life,'' was named one of the best books of 1999 by several newspapers and magazines or that The New Yorker had named him one of the 20 best American writers under 40. The man, who played golf with Lee a week or so before, was simply thanking him, as Lee's golf partners often do, for helping him win a couple of nice side bets.
Lee now lives, with his wife and two young daughters, in Princeton, N.J. -- just a stone's throw, not accidentally, from a golf course. I got to know him in the late 90's, when he was living in Bergen County, just a couple of towns away from me, and our friendship has survived an unfortunate Fourth of July incident when, in an excess of fireworks enthusiasm, I nearly blew up his house. We play golf together (he wins), share the occasional meal and speak once in a while on the phone. We almost never talk about books or writing (possibly because, full disclosure, I am the editor of The Times Book Review), but I doubt that he has many literary conversations with anybody else.
Lee is probably the most unwriterly writer I know. He's cheerful and well adjusted, a homebody, a 10-handicap golfer and a serious foodie. He seldom goes to book parties, and he doesn't follow the literary gossip. In the darker, more invidious corners of literary New York, it is sometimes said of him, as it is of a few others thought to be unnaturally nice, that his apparent happiness and lack of problems must be a coverup for something really messed up.
Another thing that annoys some people is that success has embraced Lee with an eagerness and a quickness that is seldom bestowed on young novelists these days. Both ''Native Speaker'' and ''A Gesture Life'' received almost unanimously good reviews and sold well besides; the first earned him a job as head of the writing program at Hunter College, the second a professorship at Princeton. Lee's new book, ''Aloft,'' which comes out next week, was sold to the movies while it was still in manuscript and has already generated favorable buzz among booksellers and reviewers. But his success hasn't affected Lee much; he lives comfortably but not grandly and is a model of what Flaubert had in mind when he said that the writer should be regular and boring in his habits and wild only in his imagination. Actually, Lee out-Flauberts Flaubert: he has redefined the novelistic occupation into something that is both nicely profitable and seemingly angst-free.
Those who doubt his untroubled existence can point to the obvious: Lee is, to start with, a Korean-American, and Korean-Americans of his generation are known for concealing their feelings. Except occasionally on the golf course, I have never seen him show much emotion. And then there's the evidence of his books themselves, which tend to be about alienation and identity crises, about people so unsure of who they are (or so in denial about their true selves) that they're emotional cripples.
Henry Park, the narrator of ''Native Speaker,'' is a young Korean-American who works as a corporate spy and tends to see all of life as a puzzle to be uncoded; as the novel opens, his wife has just left him, because, as she says, in a long list of complaints, he's ''surreptitious,'' a ''B+ student of life'' and an ''emotional alien.'' Franklin Hata, the protagonist of ''A Gesture Life,'' is a Japanese man in his 70's, now retired in Westchester County, N.Y., and trying so hard to lead a blameless life (in atonement for his conduct during the war) that it becomes a hollow life as well -- a life merely of gestures and politeness; he is unable to connect with either the lonely widow down the street, with whom he has a tentative, fumbling romance, or his adopted, runaway daughter. The narrator of the new book is Jerry Battle (the family changed the name from Battaglia years ago), a retired Long Island widower now working part time as a travel agent. He's almost 60, a little younger than Hata but only slightly less uptight. He, too, can't commit to his girlfriend (though at least they have slept together) and has strained, oddly formal relationships with his two children. (His daughter, in a sly touch, is engaged to an Asian-American novelist named Paul Pyun, whose latest book is so arty and postmodern that his publisher won't touch it.) Jerry's favorite pastime is to get, literally, above it all -- flying in a small plane over the Long Island landscape and looking down with deep appreciation at how neat and orderly everything seems from such a height.
On the face of things, Lee, 38, couldn't be any less like these people. The novelist Brooks Hansen, one of Lee's oldest friends, said, ''Chang is about as comfortable in his own skin as anyone I've ever met,'' and his other friends all say much the same thing. So where does all the alienation stuff come from? I once put that question to Peter Greer, who taught Lee at Phillips Exeter Academy and has since become a close friend. He paused a moment, and then said: ''Well, I think that's where the art comes in. There's this undiscovered country in Chang that's a source of a lot of what comes out in the books.'' Hansen said he thinks the answer may have to do with Lee's family history. ''To a certain extent, I think Chang has internalized the experience of his parents,'' he told me. ''It's out of sympathy with them that he's able to project that sense of alienation.''
The experience of Lee's parents was in many respects the classic drama of immigration, although in a slightly privileged version -- the old story of working hard, trying to fit in and sacrificing everything for your children. Chang-rae Lee was born in Seoul, South Korea, in 1965. His father, Young Yong Lee, was a medical student; his mother, Inja Hong Lee, had been an all-Asian basketball star (though Chang and his sister, Eunei, didn't find this out until they were in grad school). In early 1968, Young Yong moved to Pittsburgh to begin a psychiatric residency. The rest of the family joined him six months later, and roughly six months after that the Lees moved to the Upper West Side of Manhattan, because Young Yong had a job at Bellevue. Many of the Lees' friends were making similar moves; they were part of the first great wave of Korean migration to this country.
Young Yong Lee's assimilation was ''slow but steady and inexorable,'' his son says -- though English proved an obstacle at first and the amount of required reading kept him from becoming a classically trained analyst, as he had hoped. (Dr. Lee, whom I've met, is now entirely fluent; he's a friendly, dignified man with bright eyes -- a Chang without the lightheartedness.) As was customary at the time, however, Inja Hong Lee stayed home, learned English slowly and made few non-Korean friends. Chang surprised me not long ago when we were sitting in his upstairs study in Princeton by remarking that the character of Ahjuhma in ''Native Speaker'' -- a Korean housekeeper hired by Henry Park's father after his wife dies, and whom Henry and the father barely acknowledge -- is partly based on his mother. ''Not because she had that role in our house,'' he explained. ''But because of the way she was so outside of things -- you know, the great divide between her private human personality and the expression of it in public. I was always impressed by how interesting and smart, and sometimes even aggressive, she could be, but it was always in Korean. She was never that person in English.''
The center of the Lees' social life was their church, a Korean Presbyterian congregation on Roosevelt Avenue in Flushing. They went not because they were particularly devout but because there, once a week, in the company of other Koreans, they could be themselves. Chang, who claims not to have had a problem fitting in or making friends at school, even though after the Lees moved to the suburbs he was usually the only Asian in his class, nevertheless remembers those Sundays fondly. He said he feels an even greater attachment to the church camp he went to every summer in Brewster, N.Y. ''Thank God they had that camp,'' he told me. ''It was your basic sort of really low-end, cheap camp. There weren't any minibikes or horses or boats or anything. But for two weeks, all of us drawn from Korean churches in the area got together, all these Korean kids, and I think we all sort of cherished it. I mean, if you had said to me at home, 'Are you a happy kid?' I would have said yes, but going to that camp was like discovering another gear you didn't know you had. And I think that's also the first time where I could kind of see myself. The funny thing about growing up in a town where you're one of a few Asian kids or minorities is you don't really see yourself. Everyone else sees you, and you get a kind of vibe, but you never actually see yourself.''
Lee is still close to a number of friends he made at camp. They and their families get together all the time, and when they do, they tend to re-enact, in an almost unconscious way, the patterns of their parents' lives. They split off in ways they would probably never do with non-Korean friends. The women talk to the women, that is, and the men go off together and smoke cigars and play cards. It's almost a caricature of the 50's dream: all of them, just like Lee, personable and seemingly without a care -- normal and well adjusted almost to a fault; a doctor, a lawyer, a senior editor at People magazine, all of them Ivy League-educated, with nice suburban homes, attractive, accomplished wives, beautiful, well-behaved children -- and whether they're aware of it or not, of course, this is in every respect exactly what their parents fantasized for them.
Except for the novelist part. That's not in the Korean-American dream, which tends more toward law and medicine. Lee said that when he told his parents he was quitting work to write (his first job after college was at the investment bank Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette), they were ''not happy, but gave their blessing.'' Brooks Hansen, Lee's roommate then, said that Lee's parents ''gave him a hard time, the way Korean parents do -- silently and forlornly.'' Mickey Kim, an old friend of Lee's, remembered that Young Yong Lee came to his law-school graduation and ''half-jokingly lamented that here I was getting on with my life while Chang was so much further behind.''
That Lee became a writer was a surprise to almost everyone. He was an excellent student, but no better, certainly, than his parents hoped as they moved the family along the well-trodden path of upward mobility, from the Upper West Side to New Rochelle and from New Rochelle to Pleasantville, always in quest of better schools.
As a boy, Lee read a lot, and Kim remembers that he wrote good letters, but he wasn't especially literary. Perhaps the first hint of breaking the traditional, expected mold came when -- somewhat unusually for even a very bright and ambitious boy in the Korean-American community back then, when family ties were so strong -- Lee decided he wanted to go to boarding school. The idea probably came from a Korean student at Northfield-Mt. Hermon who once spent Christmas vacation with the Lees and, as Lee recalled, made prep school seem ''pretty cool.'' But neither Lee nor his parents really understood what was involved, or how hard the separation would be. ''They had no idea,'' he said, ''and I had maybe a third of an idea.'' Lee's parents dropped him off at Exeter in the fall of 1980, and then, as Lee wrote in a memoir published in The New Yorker in 1995, they pulled over on the highway, and both began to weep.
At Exeter, Lee was a good but not outstanding student. He wrote some poetry, but he was far from the literary star of the class. That was Hansen. People from Exeter mostly remember Lee's exceptionally good nature. ''He was just a sweet guy -- a sweet boy,'' Peter Greer recalled, ''but I would never have anticipated that he would become such a good writer.''
At Yale, which Lee entered in 1983, the story was much the same. There were a lot of would-be writers at Yale then -- Naomi Wolf, the novelists Jane Mendelsohn, Jonathan Dee and Claire Messud -- but Lee was not visibly among them. ''I was always writing little stories,'' Lee said, ''but not doing anything with them, not showing them to anyone. On the inside, I think I felt literary, but I was afraid of it -- afraid of wanting it too much.'' He majored in English and minored in the high life. ''I think Yale was where Chang acquired his taste for the finer things -- where he learned the difference between port and Sauternes,'' Hansen said. Gary Feinerman, one of Lee's freshman roommates, remembers coming back from a Halloween party and finding Chang alone in their room, sitting in front of a fire (this was back when Yalies were still allowed to use the fireplaces) in a long, red nightshirt, smoking a cigar and sipping a brandy.
His knowledge of wine, in fact, is what got Lee his first job (he talked vineyards with the recruiter from D.L.J.), and he worked on Wall Street for a year while sharing an apartment on East 23rd Street with Hansen. That was in the late 80's, when practically everyone from Yale was going into investment banking. ''It was a very heady period,'' Mickey Kim said. ''It seemed very easy to make money.'' The 23rd Street apartment became the informal headquarters for what amounted to a postgraduate fraternity of young Korean-American professionals working in New York, all of whom still remember the epic parties there.
And then, after a year, Lee cashed it all in to become a writer -- perhaps for no other reason than that that was what Hansen was doing. Hansen, who said he was ''raised to be a novelist'' (his mother is an artist, his father a TV executive), had already published a novel -- ''Boone,'' which he wrote with his boyhood friend Nick Davis -- and was working on a second, ''The Chess Garden,'' which came out in 1995. ''Brooks was definitely an example to me,'' Lee said. ''He made writing seem not easy but, well, doable at least.'' Hansen and Lee spent two years or so as roommates, writing together. ''It was weird,'' Hansen recalled. ''We'd get up in the morning, make coffee and then toddle off to our rooms and type away for eight hours. But we never talked about what we were doing. I had no idea what Chang was writing.''
What Lee was writing was a novel with the extremely unpromising title ''Agnew Belittlehead.'' On a couple of occasions I have tried to get him to talk about this part of his bibliography, which he says is too painful to go into, and I think I have learned the following: that the book was about 500 pages long and heavily influenced by Thomas Pynchon; that it contained both Byronic verse and fantastical or science-fiction elements; and that, as he confessed once, it was ''completely intellectualized'' and had ''nothing to do with people, nothing to do with humanity.''
One reason for the oddness of ''Agnew'' may be that Lee wrote much of it during a time when his mother was dying of stomach cancer and he was making long visits to Syracuse, N.Y., where his parents were then living, to help care for her. The book may have been a kind of escape, much like cooking and golf, both of which he took up seriously during those long, sad months. His mother's death was clearly a kind of turning point -- an experience that deepened and matured him. His mother said to him then that she wished he had never gone to Exeter, because she could have had those extra years with him. ''My mother was 52 when she died,'' he told me. ''But it seemed to me that she died younger, because she lost 10 years of her life just trying to assimilate into things. Right before she got sick, I thought she was just hitting her stride.''
Though unpublishable, ''Agnew Belittlehead'' was promising enough to get Lee an agent and a scholarship to the creative writing program at the University of Oregon in Eugene (familiar to many of us because that's where ''Animal House'' was filmed). It was in Eugene where, week by week, he turned out ''Native Speaker,'' a debut novel that, as critics have suggested, doesn't read like one. It doesn't succeed in every respect, but it has that essential but undefinable quality: a voice. Lee is too modest to say so, but he must have known, from the very first pages, that he had found both himself and his calling. ''Native Speaker'' is that assured and exuberant.
Then, as if to make up for lost time, Lee seemingly simply skipped his second and third novels. As a number of people have pointed out, ''A Gesture Life'' reads like someone's fourth or fifth book. That's in part because it began as one thing and then changed over time. It was supposed to be a historical novel about the Korean ''comfort women'' in Japan during World War II, and it took Lee a year or so to discover that it was really about the septuagenarian Franklin Hata, now living in America and trying to hide from his memories of the war. ''A Gesture Life'' is the work of a completely mature writer, who was only 33 when he finished it and who has also, in his new book, proved himself unusually -- almost unnaturally -- perceptive about loneliness, loss and middle age.
Lee and I had the longest conversation we have ever had recently, sitting in his study after a walk around the snow-covered golf course. As the afternoon wore on, his daughters came home from school and his wife twice called upstairs to remind him that he was supposed to pick up a steak for supper. I was trying to get him to talk about why his characters tended to be so much older than he is and so cut off. ''You of all people,'' I said. ''You've got your family, your friends, you're close to your in-laws. . . . ''
''Well, like all writers, I feel like I have this other, inner life,'' he said. ''I've always felt like I should be somebody else -- I should be more brash or ambitious, or I don't know. I feel like I've got a lot of secrets. I don't, but I feel like I do.''
Charles McGrath is the editor of The New York Times Book Review.
