OSCAR, schmoscar.
Consider: the only time Martin Scorsese has accepted the little gold god was 30 years ago -- on behalf of Ellen Burstyn, the star of his ''Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore.'' And it is certainly hard to look at another 1974 nominee, Faye Dunaway, up for her role as the rawther complicated Evelyn Cross Mulwray in ''Chinatown,'' and not imagine at least a tie. The role was a comeback for the actress, who had all but disappointed since her Oscar-nominated debut seven years earlier in ''Bonnie and Clyde.''
Ms. Dunaway eventually got a statuette for her mantel in 1976, for ''Network,'' but it is her legend in ''Chinatown'' that lives on -- at least on the desk of Gregory Bays Brown. Dr. Brown, a plastic surgeon in Louisville, Ky., swears, much like a man who has seen God, that he has seen perfection, and it is the face of Mrs. Mulwray. For that reason, his favorite thing in the world is his photograph of Ms. Dunaway in ''Chinatown.''
Slipped into a simple nickel frame that the doctor bought at the Clignancourt flea market in Paris, the photograph -- found in a stack of movie stills the doctor was leafing through in an antiques store -- is no prize unto itself (unlike the purported photo of van Gogh that was recently unearthed; it had cost $1). But to Dr. Brown, known for formulating the high-end Ré Vive skin-care line for recovering surgical patients (and then discovering that it worked on aging skin as well), it is more elemental than any of the art he has collected, including Helen Frankenthaler and Ellsworth Kelly.
Specifically, Dr. Brown said, what makes Ms. Dunaway's face ideal is the classical proportion of the triangle formed by the canthus (corner of the eye), the malar prominence (cheekbone) and the lateral brow. Too often, he said, his patients obsess on more obvious signs of aging, the wrinkle here, the sag there, and overlook the value of the soaring brow, as exemplified by the then 32-year-old actress, her brows finely arched, plucked and penciled, late-1930's style.
''That triangle really makes a woman pretty if it has the right proportions,'' he said. ''And on Faye Dunaway, it's showcased perfectly.''
A face, Dr. Brown likes to say, is about geometry. (Hence his love for art that is, as he described it, ''simple, planar forms, distilled to the essentials, the minimal aesthetic elements.'') While Ms. Dunaway's face may embody a classical ideal, Mrs. Mulwray's character -- both weak and strong, transparent and opaque -- exerts an equal pull. She has more than classical bone structure; she has classical mystique as well.
And just as J. J. Gittes, the film's detective, explores the source of her mystery, Dr. Brown likes the reminder that perfection exists only when it is elusive -- you know, in the eye of the beholder. ''The building blocks are objective, but actual beauty is subjective,'' he said. ''She's this ethereal, unattainable thing, like beauty itself.''
Locked behind glass, Mrs. Mulwray makes the ultimate desk photograph of a loved one.
''Yes, unrequited love,'' Dr. Brown said, laughing. ''In some ways, it's the best.''
And clearly, ageless.
POSSESSED
