MY wife and I were driving through our neighborhood and suddenly this group of turkeys appeared,'' recalled Jeff O'Connell, a hunter who lives in Noyac. ''I rolled down the window and called to them, and one of them flew up and landed on the roof of the car, staring at us. It was the neighborhood turned into a wildlife park.''
Wild turkeys have joined deer as backyard visitors on the South Fork this winter, and residents are enjoying the change. Unlike deer, which have become pests throughout the East End, wild turkeys don't suddenly scamper into the paths of cars at night, nor do they devour flowers and garden vegetables. ''There's a flock of a dozen that show up at my house regularly, and I'll feed them some seeds,'' said Martin Mannix, who also lives in Noyac. ''At first they used to run away, but now when they see me they come running over and hang out for a while.''
The South Fork wild turkeys are imports from up-Island, where they were reintroduced a decade ago.
''Members of our organization have had frequent sightings of local flocks as large as 40 to 60 birds,'' reported Steve Ivanov of Bohemia, president of the Suffolk County chapter of the National Wild Turkey Federation. ''And due to the large amounts of farmland still occupying eastern Long Island, young new flock have easy access to benefiting food supplies.''
The turkey was indigenous to Long Island. Native Americans enjoyed them, and after white settlers arrived the birds were being killed by hunters faster than they could reproduce. By the mid-1900's wild turkeys were extinct on Long Island.
Wild flocks remained in the mountains of north-central Pennsylvania, and with laws enacted to protect them, wild turkey populations began to grow and their range expanded to adjoining states, including most of New York. But turkeys can fly only short distances and are famously wary of humans, so Long Island Sound and New York City blocked them from re-establishing naturally on Long Island. So in the winter of 1993-94, the State Department of Environmental Conservation transplanted turkeys from the Saratoga and Finger Lakes areas to the Island, releasing 49 in Southaven Park in Shirley and 25 in Hither Hills State Park in Montauk.
The Southaven Park colony migrated to the grounds of the Brookhaven National Laboratory, where it thrived. Since the late 90's the D.E.C. has relocated birds from Brookhaven to a couple of South Fork spots per year. For example, turkeys were reintroduced to the Long Pond Greenbelt in Bridgehampton and the Northwest Woods section of East Hampton two years ago.
''Sightings on the East End are increasing,'' said Maureen Wren of the D.E.C. ''The trap-and-transfer efforts have had an effect, and they have helped enhance the biodiversity of Long Island's forest communities.''
A separate population of wild turkeys lives on Gardiners Island, introduced in a private project about 35 years ago, said Larry Penny, director of natural resources for the Town of East Hampton.
The frequent sighting since December of wild turkeys in groups as large as a dozen in Bridgehampton and Noyac has been a clear indication that the bird is back out east. This may be a bit surprising considering January's harsh weather.
''While January was a tough month from a weather standpoint, turkeys are pretty hardy birds,'' Ms. Wren said. ''The hard crust that formed on top of the snow allowed the birds to be mobile to find food sources and potentially escape predators when necessary. Turkeys are omnivorous, opportunistic feeders and can find adequate food sources under most circumstances.''
Healthy adult wild turkeys don't have much to fear from natural predators on Long Island, but Hugh McGuinness of New York Rare Bird Alert said foxes could take young birds and injured adults. Domestic dogs can pose the biggest problem. ''People should not allow their dogs to run free if they live adjacent to large woodlots where the turkeys breed,'' he cautioned.
Ms. Wren cited hawks, owls, raccoon, opossums and skunks as the enemies of wild turkeys, but agreed that in most cases only the very young are vulnerable to attack. ''Annual survival rates increase dramatically for those wild turkeys that make it to about five months of age,'' she said.
As far as hunting is concerned, there are spring and fall turkey seasons in many areas of the state, but none on Long Island. Ms. Wren said the D.E.C. has no plans to allow hunting of the birds on the Island.
