WHAT, Andrew Vollo asked the 20 taxi drivers gathered in a classroom in Long Island City, Queens, is the prevailing view of a New York City cabby?
''View? It's bad,'' said one driver, a Chinese immigrant. ''They hate us. Period.''
A Pakistani driver added: ''We are second, after Leona Helmsley.''
Perhaps. But Mr. Vollo, a 50-year-old former cabdriver from Whitestone, Queens, promised his audience that the next four hours would help them ''change the public image of a taxi driver, one customer at a time.''
This is the New York Taxi Driver and F.H.V. Driver Institute at LaGuardia Community College; F.H.V. means ''for-hire vehicle.'' Since 1998, when the Taxi and Limousine Commission began requiring each of its roughly 40,000 licensed medallion drivers to take the cabby courtesy class after completing their first year behind the wheel -- call it charm school for hacks -- customer complaints have dropped.
The most common complaint against city cabbies is reckless driving, but some students said many passengers urge them to run yellow lights and make illegal turns.
''Do you need to drive recklessly to make money?'' Mr. Vollo asked. Many students nodded.
''This isn't a sprint, this job; it's a marathon. Realize that you're in it for the long haul, and learn to pace yourself. Don't treat customers like packages. Treat them like guests.''
Even when a customer is difficult?
''You have to see where the pain is coming from, and work around it,'' Mr. Vollo said.
Mr. Vollo, who drove a taxi for 16 years, teaches the class in New Yorker cabby shtick, all flailing hands and gritty pebbles of wisdom. He looks and talks like New York cabbies used to, and as they still do in movies and on television; picture Tony Danza's looks with Judd Hirsch's wit.
Mr. Vollo urges drivers to eat health food, not hot dogs, and to drink ginseng tea instead of coffee. Tai chi is great for staying calm in Midtown traffic, he said, and he suggested they take his Yoga for Cabbies class, also offered at the institute.
During a break, several Muslim drivers prayed on rugs in the corner of the room. Some drivers complained that most passengers made conversation by asking, ''What country are you from?''
''I had a student who used to say, 'I'm from my mother,''' Mr. Vollo said.
''That's the right answer,'' said a veteran driver with a thick Russian accent.
A good cabby, Mr. Vollo said, has the sensitivity of a fine butler. ''If you render good service,'' he said. ''It's going to come back to you.''
Some cabbies, he told the class, make better tips by keeping the daily newspapers in the cab and taking music requests on the radio. ''Older people don't want to hear rap,'' Mr. Vollo said. ''Save that for the Saturday night bar crowds. Those people don't want to hear Brahms.''
COREY KILGANNON
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: URBAN STUDIES/CHARMING
