THE franchise market on Long Island is hotter than a steamy cup of joe from Dunkin' Donuts.
''In the last two years there has been at least a 50 percent increase in the number of people buying franchises,'' said Harold Kestenbaum, a lawyer with Farrell Fritz in Uniondale, who has nearly 30 years of experience in franchise law. ''There's a franchising boom on Long Island.''
David Kaufmann, a lawyer whose New York City firm represents many large franchisors, estimated that 40 percent of all retail sales on Long Island are from franchises. Not only is Long Island home to icons like 7-Eleven, KFC and McDonalds, but there's growth in newer franchises like the submarine sandwich eatery Quiznos, Cold Stone Creamery, Panera Bread and Curves, a women's gym chain. Service-oriented franchise businesses like window cleaning, maid service, remodeling and handyman services are also catching on, said Maddie Beagelman, president of Frannet Long Island, a franchise consulting firm in Jericho.
Long Island mirrors the national growth in franchising, Mr. Kaufmann said. The country's 320,000 franchised businesses in 75 industries account for some $1 trillion in annual retail sales. About one in 12 retail businesses is franchised, according to the International Franchise Association, an industry group in Washington.
''Franchising is thriving in part because of the economic downturn,'' Ms. Beagelman said. ''When the economy is good, we're slow.'' She said her business was up 35 percent in 2003.
Mr. Kestenbaum said this apparent inversion of economic reality is because bankruptcies, mergers, downsizing and layoffs sour people on the corporate world. ''People who have been laid off ask themselves why they should go back and work for someone else,'' Mr. Kestenbaum said, adding that severance packages are often used as start-up capital. ''They want to control their own destiny.''
Also in the mix are early retirees deciding that they're not ready to slow down after all, baby boomers with an entrepreneurial dream and women hitting the glass ceiling.
Vita Zorbo wasn't necessarily bucking to be an entrepreneur. She had worked 20 years with an energy company as an investor relations manager and corporate secretary as the company went through bankruptcy and Chapter 11 restructuring, as it shut its New York City offices and forced her to commute to New Jersey from her Baldwin home. Then in 2002 she was let go.
The job hunt proved horrendous. ''I was always either over- or under-qualified for a job, or the salary was way under my price,'' she said. With time on her hands, she helped her niece explore a franchise opportunity last summer. In September her niece opened a Ladies Workout Express, an exercise franchise that now has more than 40 locations on the Island. Ms. Zorbo was intrigued. Her niece was doing so well, so fast, that Ms. Zorbo opened her own branch in West Hempstead in November.
''I'm not commuting, I have more time for my family,'' said Ms. Zorbo, 40. ''Good things do happen.''
Leslie Valentine lost her job of nearly 15 years at Morgan Stanley on her 40th birthday in 2002. After 9/11, the marketing manager and Woodmere resident had to commute temporarily to the firm's New Jersey office and then to temporary offices in Midtown. In 2002 she was scheduled to move to Westchester. It had all become tiresome.
''I heard rumors of layoffs and there was a part of me that was hoping for it,'' Ms. Valentine said.
After being home awhile, she realized she didn't miss the corporate world. ''I had a little money in my pocket from my package and the thought of being self-employed appealed to me,'' she said.
Ms. Valentine said she was attracted to the franchising concept because it offered support. ''I liked the fact that I wouldn't have to teach myself every aspect of the business,'' said Ms. Valentine, who plans to open a Rita's Frozen Ices franchise in Oceanside in March. ''Their expertise is worth paying for.''
Franchising can be a way to be in business for yourself without going it alone. The franchisor has a proven way of doing business that theoretically increases your probability of success. It is a big brother of sorts who provides a road map, a step-by-step manual of everything needed to run the franchise. While the costs involved vary with the type of business, basic franchise fees typically range from $30,000 to $60,000, Ms. Beagelman said.
From the business owner's perspective, franchising is a cheaper way to expand. The cost and risk are split with the franchisee.
But let the buyer beware: franchises, even involving established, successful companies, are not risk-free investments. There could be oversaturation in some categories, and in many respects the franchisee is at the mercy of the parent company.
''You agree to run the franchisor's business according to their policies and procedures,'' said Susan Kezios, president of the American Franchise Association. ''A change could mean you need new signage, or company colors, or other changes to facilities that could be costly.''
In 2002, John Pierro of Holbrook started a company, SmartWall, which makes residential storage systems for basements, garages and laundry rooms. Mr. Pierro has only three employees at his Yaphank office, but he says his business has done so well that he's working with a consultant to develop his business into a franchisor. ''I'm excited about the opportunity for my business to expand and to teach this business to others,'' he said. ''Everybody wins.''
Also in 2002, Roasty's Original Roast Beef opened in Merrick, and the owners, the brothers-in-law Bruce Golden and Steven Bogart, also are in the process of franchising. Mr. Golden, who lives in Hewlett, said that he and Mr. Bogart, of Roslyn, didn't envision franchising, but that from Day 1 people have sought them out.
''This move is driven by demand,'' he said. ''I have been asked by a lot of former business executives about franchising. They want their own business.'' Already they have a franchisee who has signed a lease for a Roasty's in Oceanside.
