THREE new hotels are expected to open on Long Island this year, two in areas long considered underserved: the North Fork and the Nassau-Suffolk border.
The third hotel will open in central Suffolk along the Long Island Expressway, where half the 12 new hotels built since 2002 serve corporate areas and the Long Island MacArthur Airport.
''There is some saturation in central Suffolk, where the most have been added,'' said Robert Lipper, president of Island-Metro Publications, which publishes the Long Island Lodging Guide quarterly and tracks the hotel industry on the Island.
''The need now is in the Riverhead area,'' Mr. Lipper said, ''where two new hotels have been proposed, and on the North Fork, where there is an emerging wine industry and the demand for more luxurious hotel rooms is increasing.''
With the growth has come an overall drop in occupancy rates to 69 percent, from 79 percent in 1999, Mr. Lipper said.
Also, competition caused average room rates to fall by $8 last year throughout Long Island. The average price for a hotel room in central Suffolk is now $124 a night; on the rest of Long Island from Nassau to Riverhead, the room price averages $145.
According to Paul Amoruso, a partner in Jericho-based Oxford &amp; Simpson, a real-estate services organization, there is also a need for hotel rooms along the Route 110 corridor in Melville, which is in western Suffolk at the Nassau border and which has two existing hotels and many national and international corporate headquarters.
''There has not been a new hotel in Melville since 1989,'' said Mr. Amoruso, who is also a partner in Melville Hospitality, which is building two hotels near Route 110 on the Nassau-Suffolk border. ''Once those two hotels are filled, that area is primarily exporting its demand for rooms to central Suffolk.''
Melville Hospitality expects to open its 147-room Homewood Suites by Hilton in November; later, construction will begin on an adjacent hotel, a 178-room Hilton Garden Inn, Mr. Amoruso said.
Farther east, in Greenport, on the North Fork, KACE Development is planning to open the village's first new hotel in 40 years, the 35-room Harborfront Inn.
There are 384 beds on the North Fork now, and 54 more are planned for this year, according to Audrey Wigley, director of the North Fork Promotion Council. Last year, there were 256,000 visitors, up 10 percent from 2002.
''There is such a need for more beds, especially with the wineries becoming more popular and offering their sites for wedding receptions, and it is phenomenal how many weddings are booked by people from out of town,'' Ms. Wigley said.
THE third hotel that is expected to open this year is in Holtsville at Exit 62 of the Long Island Expressway, not far from MacArthur Airport. The 124-room, extended-stay Residence Inn by Marriott is expected to open in May, according to Martin DePasquale, director of preconstruction services for the Setauket-based Tritec Building Company, which is building the $8.6 million hotel.
The 83,000-square-foot, four-story hotel on five acres is owned by RD Management in Manhattan and S&amp;S Hotels of Manchester, N.H. It is on a 23-acre site where there are two restaurants and a multiplex theater.
Mark Stebbins, an S&amp;S Hotels partner, said he was ''not nervous about the market oversaturating'' in that area.
''The newer hotels there are doing well as far as we can see,'' he said. ''As the market continues to expand, and the airport continues to expand, it will attract new industries. We are in a good location and feel relatively confident we are in a solid hotel market, and we have land to add onto if we want.''
Mr. Amoruso said Melville Hospitality had had approval for its two western Suffolk hotels on the 11.4-acre property in Melville since 1999 but did not break ground until last November.
''We were in the architectural design stage when 9/11 happened,'' he said. ''It slowed down our plans and we took a second look. Once we saw a resurgence in corporate travel, we kept going.''
Rooms at the 120,363-square-foot Homewood Suites will range from a 442-square-foot studio to a 1,000-square-foot two-bedroom, two-bath suite and from $180 to $260 a night, he said. Each suite will include a dining area, kitchen and high-speed Internet access.
Mr. Amoruso added that a 5,000-square-foot lodge with a 2,500-square-foot dining room for breakfast, an exercise room, an indoor pool and two meeting rooms would be attached by a corridor to the four-story extended-stay hotel.
The 93,000-square-foot full-service Hilton Garden Inn will include a restaurant and bar, an indoor pool, a health club and 5,000 square feet of meeting rooms. Rooms will range from 450 to 550 square feet.
About 60 miles northeast in Greenport, KACE Development, an affiliate of the KACE Group, a New York-based real estate development and investment company, plans to open its first hotel: the three-story Harborfront Inn on a half-acre in downtown Greenport.
The $6 million hotel, which will be open year-round, overlooks the Peconic Bay and Shelter Island. Of its 35 rooms, 27 will have balconies, and one will be an 800-square-foot suite with a private 1,000-square-foot deck with a gazebo. There will be three 550-square-foot suites, including one at the south end with a cathedral ceiling that on the exterior is a mirror image of the gazebo on the north end. Rates will range from $245 to $325 during the weekend peak season to $150 to $225 in the off-season from Dec. 31 to April 15. The large suite will rent for $750 a night in the peak season.
The hotel will include an 800-square-foot fitness room and four conference rooms totaling 2,000 square feet. The large suite will include a 100-square-foot bathroom with a Jacuzzi tub. All bathrooms will have limestone counters and mosaic porcelain tile walls. Rooms will have such amenities as flat-screen televisions, goose down comforters, CD players and stereos.
''We always wanted it to be a high-end hotel, but then it morphed into something more luxurious,'' said Michael Kontokosta, a KACE partner with his brother, Constantine. ''Once we got the building, saw the views and the direction Greenport is heading with tourism, we felt we were in a position to provide something more luxurious.''
The rooms will be furnished with custom-built cherrywood furniture and will have a clean, comfortable and modern feel, he said. The simple gray exterior has an intermittent scalloped-shingle pattern and multipaned windows with white trim.
ABOUT 20 miles west in Riverhead, Jaral Properties of Garden City plans to build a new hotel and renovate an existing one. Earlier this month, Jaral bought the 100-room Best Western East End for $6.9 million.
Mr. Amoruso, who had been a partner in the 30-year-old hotel, said: ''We sold it because we viewed that market as an area ripe for new hotels. Too much was happening in the Riverhead area and we had an old hotel.''
Riverhead is currently revitalizing its downtown, which includes the four-year-old Atlantis Marine World, where a $20 million, 120-room waterfront hotel has been proposed by the Bissett and Petrocelli families, owners of the aquarium. Another tourist draw is the nearby 150-store Tanger Factory Outlet Center and some family amusement parks.
Jaral is planning to completely renovate the Best Western, according to Louis Salvatico, a vice president of the company, which is owned by his brother Albert Salvatico. Jaral also owns the four-year-old, 130-room Wingate Inn in Garden City.
''The Best Western is a beautiful property on seven acres,'' Louis Salvatico said. The rooms were recently renovated and the lobby, hallways and bathrooms are being renovated.
In January, Jaral bought two acres on Route 58 in Riverhead, where it will build an 89-room, three-story Holiday Inn Express and Suites. Construction will begin this summer on the approximately $10 million project, which is just east of the Tanger outlets.
When that project is completed, Jaral will concentrate on the Best Western and ''give it a complete reskinning and mechanical update,'' Mr. Salvatico said.
Buying two hotels in Riverhead was appealing because ''it is an up-and-coming place and needs a very-high-quality hotel at an affordable price,'' he said.
In the Region | Long Island
