On the Streets
Last spring, the Actors Shakespeare Company of Hoboken lost its home at the Stevens Institute of Technology and could not present its usual September-to-May season. It has been performing staged readings at the Jersey City Museum instead.
The company, which was founded in the fall of 2000, has searched for a new performance space without success. Then its producing artistic director, Colette Rice, had an idea: to pitch a tent on the 13th Street Pier in Hoboken and present a summer festival.
''The Shipyard Shakespeare Festival,'' or ''Shipyard Shakes,'' as the company calls it, would be the company's first summer festival. It has been planned for weekends, mid-July through mid-August, with a run of ''A Midsummer Night's Dream.'' Performances will be free.
Provident Bank is providing money, but it is not enough, said Ms. Rice, who is seeking other sponsors and public money.
The staged readings continue at the museum through May. The company's search for a permanent home also continues. Information: www.ascnj.org.
'A Difficult Topic'
Kabu Okai-Davies, founder and executive director of Newark's African Globe Theaterworks, and Solomon F. Caudle, the company's director-in-residence, wrote ''When a Man Loves a Woman'' in 1999 to address the problems of HIV and AIDS in Newark. ''The idea was to tackle a difficult topic in an entertaining way,'' Mr. Caudle said.
The drama, which features original music by Kathy D. Harrison, tells the story of a married woman who finds out she is HIV-positive, apparently from a relationship before her marriage.
The piece had its premiere in 2000 at Newark Symphony Hall and will return there for another run from Friday through March 28. From June 17 to 20, it will be performed at Crossroads Theater in New Brunswick, and in October at Lincoln Theater in Washington. Information: (973)624-1584.
A Lost Voice
In the early 1990's, Irwin Chusid, a D.J. for 29 years at WFMU, based in Jersey City, discovered a record album of radio dramas made by a man named Judson Fountain.
Mr. Chusid's friend Don Brockway had bought the album in a secondhand store for a dollar. The record, made by Mr. Fountain with help from friends, featured two amateurish radio dramas modeled on those made in the 1920's, 30's and 40's. Sample dialogue: ''Now you see this? If you don't know what it is, I'll tell you. It's a gun.''
''He didn't display a lot of talent,'' said Mr. Chusid of Mr. Fountain. ''But he did display a lot of enthusiasm.''
Mr. Chusid began playing Mr. Fountain's record during his radio shows, eliciting strong reactions -- both positive and negative -- from listeners and other D.J.'s. He later found out about other albums Mr. Fountain had made, between 1969 and 1974. ''They were every bit as strong, wonderful and outsider as the first one,'' he said.
He also met Mr. Fountain, who was born in 1952 and lived in Jersey City and worked as a diner deliveryman, Mr. Chusid said. Mr. Fountain even performed some of his dramas on Mr. Chusid's show on the day before Halloween in 1995, he added.
A few years later, Mr. Chusid tried to find Mr. Fountain again; he could not. But a few years after that, Mr. Chusid's girlfriend, Barbara Economon, suggested that they produce a CD of Mr. Fountain's work.
The result is ''Completely in the Dark: Tales of Mystery and Suspense by Judson Fountain,'' a compilation of Mr. Fountain's radio dramas recorded from 1969 to 1974, to be released on March 24 by Innova Records, a nonprofit label in St. Paul, Minn.
Meanwhile, Mr. Chusid has continued to try to find Mr. Fountain, with no success.
''Judson's work is characterized by cliché scripting, egregious ethnic accents, and inept editing -- all seasoned with copious needle drops of creaking doors and howling wolves from the timeless Elektra sound effects library,'' Mr. Chusid writes in the liner notes. ''But this extreme amateurism and unwavering sincerity synergize to great advantage in Fountain's theatricals.''
Information on the CD is available at www.innovarecordings.com.
Michelle Falkenstein
