SHE was ever hopeful, but try as she might, marriage eluded Norma Fritz. Then Michael O'Brien walked into her life -- or, more accurately, above it.
She heard him before she met him, his footsteps treading softly across the ceiling of her Brooklyn walk-up, which is painted red and gold and illuminated with antique chandeliers. That meant he was visiting his ex-wife and their two children, Dana, now 13, and Jack, 11.
Eventually, he was a face and a name. They would see each other in the building's small entryway, as Mr. O'Brien, 45, a software developer with J. P. Morgan Chase and sometime rock guitarist, came and went with his children.
Ms. Fritz, also 45, said she had dated many men. When she turned 40, however, she decided that a husband could wait but a baby could not, and so conceived Jonah, 4, through an anonymous donor.
''I had opportunities to get married,'' said Ms. Fritz, who was a writer until last year for the American Civil Liberties Union in Manhattan. ''But I never felt like any of them was 'the one.' ''
Her friend Nancy Brandwein said: ''She has taken leaps and made bold decisions that others seldom would.''
As their paths continued to cross, Mr. O'Brien recalled being intrigued by her porcelain skin and glamorous demeanor, but having seen Ms. Fritz with an infant in tow and no man in sight, he was not sure what to make of her personal life. And the notion of dating someone who lived near his children and former wife was off-putting.
One day in 2002 the two ended up walking home together from the subway. ''I just found her very sexy, very intelligent and interesting to talk to,'' he said. He also learned that she was single.
''He, too, was very sexy,'' said Ms. Fritz, who was impressed to learn that ''the dad part was very true and very real.''
In the summer of 2002, Mr. O'Brien decided to ask her out, to a Gillian Welch concert, but how? ''Her phone wasn't listed, and I seldom got a moment with her alone,'' he said. He stopped her in front of her building, as their sons looked on.
She concluded -- incorrectly -- that he had asked her as a last resort, and rejected the invitation. She did, however, relinquish her phone number.
And so began a family affair, with Mr. O'Brien dropping off his children in their apartment before heading downstairs to Ms. Fritz's, where he could hear them tramping around overhead. Dana, Jack and Jonah became laundry-room buddies. Sometimes, when the couple needed a baby sitter, it would be Jack and Dana who would step in to watch Jonah, who soon began referring to Mr. O'Brien as ''Dad.''
''One night we got back from a date around 12:30,'' Mr. O'Brien said. ''We thought the boys would be long asleep.'' But there was Jack frantically feeding Jonah cereal in a futile attempt to get the toddler to go to bed.
Last March, the couple parted ways for two months as Mr. O'Brien struggled with the prospect of committing to another marriage and taking on another child. Then Mr. O'Brien, who was still visiting the building daily, decided to look in on Ms. Fritz in an attempt to clear the air.
When he knocked on her door, Jonah answered.
''Oh, you love her again?'' he demanded. Mr. O'Brien was silent.
Last Sunday the couple were married by Rabbi Gerald Weider at Congregation Beth Elohim in Park Slope, where the pews overflowed with children, including Jonah, who pulled off his tuxedo jacket and pouted. Guests then moved on to Grand Prospect Hall in Brooklyn, where they danced to a Cajun/rockabilly band, under rococo moldings and crystal chandeliers that evoked what Ms. Fritz called her ''bordello-esque'' home décor.
The couple are house-hunting, having decided against merging their households in Ms. Fritz's apartment. The upstairs-downstairs arrangement isn't the problem, however. ''Mike's ex-wife has been very, very gracious and his kids have also been amazing,'' Ms. Fritz said. ''Truth be told, Mike is too nice to say anything, but I don't think he likes my decorating scheme.''
WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS: VOWS
