THERE was good news for Martha Stewart on Friday.
A federal judge dropped the most serious criminal charge against her. That does not mean that she has dodged the possibility of prison time, but it could dampen public fascination with her trial -- if there is any limit to the ability of falling celebrities to enthrall.
''No kind of celebrity news seems more followed than negative news,'' said Mitchell Stephens, a journalism professor at New York University and the author of ''A History of News.'' Watching someone powerful and successful be torn down ''allows us to sit back in our couches and say, 'I'm glad I'm me,''' he added.
It is a particular kind of schadenfreude people experience as they watch the high and mighty in handcuffs. (For those who have not heard the song inspired by the career path of the former child actor Gary Coleman in the Broadway musical ''Avenue Q,'' schadenfreude can be defined as pleasure at other people's pain.)
The trial of Ms. Stewart has not involved murder (like the O.J. Simpson trial), nor the destruction of the jobs and pensions of many ordinary people (as in the Enron prosecutions). It rests, instead, on charges that Ms. Stewart lied about why she sold a few thousand shares of stock.
But Ms. Stewart is such an icon that millions have been willing even to learn about securities laws, if that's what was required to follow her tribulations, said Bonnie Fuller, editorial director of American Media, which publishes The National Enquirer.
''Women have admired her, as many women as have broken fingernails and knotted their eyebrows in frustration trying to do her projects,'' Ms. Fuller said.
Beyond polls, there are no good aggregate measures of public interest in media coverage of long-running stories.
While an individual publisher can keep track of newsstand sales of its issues that put Ms. Stewart on the cover, for example, the Audit Bureau of Circulation, which verifies the circulation figures of print publications, does not produce a broader index, a spokeswoman said. There is no Martha-o-meter, just as there was no Monica-o-meter.
But some suggest that interest in the Stewart case has topped out. Neil Cavuto, the managing editor of business news at the Fox News Channel, believes so, citing his personal barometer of public interest.
''I haven't heard a good 'decorating a prison cell' joke in about five weeks,'' Mr. Cavuto said.
Still, if coverage of Ms. Stewart seems at this point exceedingly thorough, warned Helen Benedict, a professor at the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University, just wait for the tsunami that a trial of Michael Jackson would trigger.
''I can't imagine a bigger circus,'' she said.
