For the Knicks, anything west of the Mississippi has been a wasteland this season.
With a last-minute loss to the Los Angeles Clippers on Friday night, the Knicks lost their 11th game on the road to a Western Conference team this season and their third straight on this trip; one game is left, against Denver on Sunday.
It is no coincidence that Allan Houston sat out injured for six of their losses in the West this season: the previous three and three in December.
After an intense workout on Friday, Houston scrimmaged Saturday for the first time in a month. Afterward, Houston declared that he was ready to play Sunday against the Nuggets.
He has missed 13 straight games while rehabilitating his knees.
''Finally,'' Stephon Marbury said Saturday with a beaming smile.
''I know that I'm ready to play a game,'' Houston said after scrimmaging without pain. ''I don't know how many minutes, how it's going to feel. I know I'm ready to move on with the team the rest of the season without having setbacks.''
Houston said he felt better than at any other time since his right knee operation on June 10.
Coach Lenny Wilkens says he feels better, too.
When Houston joins the stars of the Knicks' recent trades, Marbury and Tim Thomas, Wilkens's team will be fully assembled.
''I'm excited to see what we can do,'' Wilkens said, adding that Houston would play 25 minutes, at most, against the Nuggets, who have the rookie Carmelo Anthony and who left Saturday night's game in San Antonio having lost five in a row.
Marbury saw Houston shooting the ball well Saturday and was encouraged. ''He looked how he looked when he left, when he was playing well,'' Marbury said.
Houston said: ''Just from hearing everybody talk, they'll be more confident out there. I don't care what happens, how many points I score, I just want everybody to feel good and play together.''
The Knicks were 7-6 without Houston in this latest stretch, part of which coincided with the trade of Keith Van Horn for Tim Thomas.
The Western swings, including the games in Texas, all seemed to come during losing streaks. The last trip, in December, unfolded just as Antonio McDyess returned to the lineup after missing nearly two seasons.
''We weren't really full strength and we weren't in the right mode we would like to be in, so you can't really judge what's happening; that's why I'm not looking in the past,'' Houston said of the Knicks' road record against Western Conference teams (2-11). ''All I'm focusing on is finishing strong.''
Defense has been the biggest problem during the skid. The Knicks have allowed an average of 100 points a game.
Center Dikembe Mutombo has not started the last three games, but when he came in during the third quarter on Friday in Los Angeles, he made an immediate impact, blocking two shots, altering two others and grabbing four rebounds; he helped the Knicks turn a 6-point deficit into a 1-point lead.
The Knicks have lost to the two worst teams in the West, the Phoenix Suns and the Clippers, on this trip. The only teams from the West the Knicks have beaten on the road are Minnesota (Nov. 26) and Memphis (Dec. 26).
Even so, the Knicks remain in sixth place in the Eastern Conference. Seventh-place Toronto (25-33) has lost eight straight games and eighth-place Miami (25-34) lost to the Nets on Saturday afternoon.
''I'm just happy things have worked out the way they have,'' Houston said. ''We're still in a good spot and I'm as healthy as I have been in a long time. Hopefully, we can move forward and be ready to be at our best now and in the playoffs.''
PRO BASKETBALL
