HEARTENED by the change of ownership and especially the recent renaming of the restaurant to Chez Claude from the cumbersome Auberge Argenteuil, a return to Hartsdale was in order for another look at any other transformations Claude and Patricia Moreau, the new owners, may have made.
It's been three years since the couple took over this old dowager, too-long frozen in the cream-and-butter school of French haute cuisine. The setting remains lovely and unusual. High on a hillside and set among old trees, the restaurant seems miles away from busy Central Avenue, which is only a minute or two away.
In the kitchen, in the service and in general maintenance, however, improvements are still evolving.
Judging from the menu listings written in both English and unnecessary French, diners might expect the past flourishes of fancy French cuisine. The style claims to be ''haute bistro.'' While the food, in general, is decent and what one would expect at a French bistro (not necessarily at a modern one), prices remain haute.
Among the cold appetizers, quail and duck paté (a special) had lots of texture and zest. Cool, smooth foie gras ($22) was almost as good, but both dishes arrived with thick, inelegant slices of commercial bread tucked into a napkin. Reach instead for the fresh house rolls servers pass at frequent intervals. Nicely smoky grilled shrimp with assertive ratatouille, about half the price of the foie gras, made a better opening deal.
Of the hot appetizers, crab meat wrapped in a thin crepe has been done before, but nonetheless it was still a delicious mouthful. Although we hope the fashion for frisée, pretty looking on the plate but spiky and rough in the mouth, has had its day, the greens make a colorful backdrop for melting rounds of goat cheese embellished with slices of buttery sautéed mushrooms.
Fragrant with garlic and fresh herbs, rack of good lamb received a traditional treatment, as did Dover sole that came with lemony butter sauce and capers. But on two tries, the sole was a little overdone. Firm-fleshed skate wing, a special one evening, was a treat. This time pine nuts were added to the lemon-butter sauce. Duck breast was overly salted. Vegetable garnishes were virtually identical on every plate.
For sweet endings, a pyramid of chocolate and hazelnut dissolved splendidly on the tongue, and banana and white chocolate mousse would have been super even without the crepe base. Skip tarte Tatin; the apples were so mushy they were almost sauce. Perhaps the most interesting offering came at the end of the meal: an assortment (three) of cheeses ($9) and a flight of Taylor Fladgate ports ($30): 10-, 20-, 30- and 40-year-old tawnies.
Apart from the restaurant's fishing for an identity, other problems needed addressing. Pride of ownership seemed to be missing. The chef or owner never bothered to say hello to the few guests who were in the dining room -- not a requirement, but a nicety. Some chairs were very wobbly. Some food was only lukewarm but served on very hot plates. The passageway to the restroom was flanked by two darkened dining rooms, unkempt and littered; they should have been screened from patrons' view.
Averaging $70 a bottle, wines from a variety of vintages were mostly on the high side; the markups, however, were generally fair.
But send back a turned bottle and be prepared to take some abuse. One of our selections was acrid and vinegary. We sent it back politely, only to hear -- as could the entire dining room -- a voice bellowing from the kitchen, using an expletive, that the customer didn't know anything about wine. While the environment in restaurant kitchens can be stressful, one would like to think such outbursts would be kept out of earshot of paying customers.
Chez Claude  42 North Healy Avenue  (Off Central Avenue),  Hartsdale. (914)948-0597.
POOR
ATMOSPHERE -- Lovely view of tree tops beyond the window walls of a narrow main dining room porch. Attentive, helpful headwaiter; other staff willing but untrained.  RECOMMENDED DISHES Grilled shrimp, crab meat in a crepe, quail and duck paté, rack of lamb, mocha and hazelnut pyramid, banana and white chocolate mousse.  PRICES -- Dinner, main dishes, $20 to $33. Complete dinner price-fixed at $42 and $52. Special seven-course tasting menu, $68; with wine, $95 (not offered on Saturdays). Price-fixed menu on Sundays, $36.  CREDIT CARDS -- Major cards.  HOURS -- Dinner, Tuesdays through Fridays, 5:30 to 9 p.m., Saturdays, 5:30 to 10 p.m.; Sundays, 1 to 7 p.m.  RESERVATIONS -- Advisable.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Steps at entrance.  THE RATINGS -- Excellent. Very good. Good. Satisfactory. Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambience and service taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.  Review published: Feb. 29, 2004.
DINING OUT E-mail: westdine@nytimes.com
