Iraq's interim leaders missed the Saturday deadline for completing work on a temporary constitution intended to guide the country for at least a year.
Appearing during an evening break, members of the Iraqi Governing Council said that although tensions had eased considerably over the last 24 hours, the disagreements were too daunting to resolve by midnight Saturday.
''There are serious problems,'' said Mowaffak al-Rubaie, a member of the Governing Council. ''There are problems because we are building a new Iraq. The most important thing is to get the document right.''
Despite the disagreements, the Iraqi leaders continued to work well past midnight. Some said L. Paul Bremer III, the chief American administrator here, was pushing the council members to finish the constitution before daybreak on Sunday. He was prepared, they said, to keep them working until they did.
''Bremer is really pressing us,'' said Mahmood Othman, another Governing Council member. ''Everyone is hungry and sleepy. This is not the way write the law of a country.''
The burst of activity followed 24 hours of uncertainty after a walkout by eight Shiite council members on Friday. The walkout was prompted by a vote by the council to repeal legislation that would have given Islam a role in resolving family and marital disputes.
The dispute over Sharia, or Islamic law, appeared to open fissures among the Shiite leadership as well, and they spent much of Saturday meeting among themselves. That did not make for a very productive afternoon, according to some of those involved in the discussions.
''You can't negotiate with someone who is not in the room,'' said a person closely involved in the negotiations. ''And the Shiites were not in the room.''
Once the Shiite leaders returned, at around 6 p.m., the council members got down to work, going through the less contentious parts of the proposed Iraqi constitution. The more difficult issues, like the role of Islam in Iraqi society and the degree of autonomy allowed the Kurdish people, were being set aside for later.
In an agreement last year, Iraqi and American leaders set for themselves a Feb. 28 deadline for completing work on the interim constitution, which would serve as the framework for the government once the Iraqis take control of the country from the Americans on June 30. The temporary constitution would stay in place until a nationwide vote could be held to choose a national assembly, after which a permanent constitution could be written.
Missing the deadline by a few days would not mean that the June 30 transfer would be missed.
The draft circulating among the Iraqi leaders is remarkably progressive by the standards of Iraq's history and of the Arab world. It contains an extensive bill of rights that guarantees freedom of speech, assembly and religion.
But the outstanding issues cut to the heart of Iraq's identity. People involved in the negotiations say there is still no agreement on the role of Islam in the future government as a source for legislation.
Mr. Bremer has threatened to veto any constitution that would set up an Islamic republic, a threat that some of the more Islamist members of the council say they want to challenge.
Another disagreement is over the degree of self-rule to be granted to the Kurds. The draft circulating Saturday called for a sharp curtailment of Kurdish autonomy, including disbanding of the militia force, according to negotiators who have seen the document. Kurdish negotiators were said to be balking.
Discord also persists about a proposal to set up a government led by three presidents and a more powerful prime minister whom the three would appoint. Some groups, like the Kurds, are worried about the powers that would given to such a prime minister, who would most likely be drawn from the Shiite majority.
A final conflict, negotiators said, is over the role of women. Early drafts of the constitution called for a 40 percent quota for women in the national assembly, but many leaders prefer that as a target, not a quota.
It was this dispute that set off the walkout of the Shiites on Friday. At that meeting, a majority of the council members, led by two women, agreed to repeal a two-month-old bill giving clerics a role in deciding marriage and family disputes.
