Workers building the city's third water tunnel have been drilling, boring and blasting their way though the bedrock beneath the streets of New York for more than three decades. But with the 8.5-mile Manhattan leg of the 60-mile project's second stage, tunnel planners have run into an obstacle that could be even more formidable than granite: East Side neighborhood activism.
Construction won't reach the East Side for two more years -- the Manhattan leg is not expected to be finished until 2008 -- but residents have already collected nearly 1,000 signatures opposing plans by the city's Department of Environmental Protection to dig a 200-foot-wide hole for a water distribution shaft on 54th Street near Second Avenue. Dozens of people have attended heated community meetings, and many elected officials, including the City Council speaker, Gifford Miller, oppose the plan.
Greg Cranford, a leader of the shaft opposition, says such a project is inappropriate for a corner where there are three residential towers.
''This is a nice, residential, pedestrian-oriented neighborhood that they want to turn into a construction site,'' said Mr. Cranford, an architect who has lived in the Connaught Tower at 54th Street and Second Avenue for 10 years. ''We're not saying don't build it. We're just saying this isn't the right site.''
The neighborhood group and its consultants have proposed a spot near the Queensboro Bridge, on the north side of 59th Street between First and Second Avenues, as a less-populated alternative. But so far, tunnel planners are unmoved. Among the factors working against the alternate site is that the city doesn't own the property, said Charles Sturcken, an environmental department spokesman. If the city digs in the middle of 54th Street, he added, it doesn't have to pay for the land.
The third water tunnel, expected to cost $6 billion, has long been defended as a project needed to ensure New York's water supply. Mr. Sturcken noted that additional shafts are being dug throughout the city, adding that none of them have aroused the opposition currently brewing on the East Side.
Mr. Cranford was not apologetic.
''They're accustomed to just overwhelming people with facts,'' he said, ''and the public often doesn't have experts that are able to counter them. We do. They're dealing with an educated populace here.''
Arguing that the shaft would lead to increased noise and crime and obstruct fire trucks, he added that East Siders do not plan to give up. ''People are ready to lie down in the street,'' he said. ''This is like civil disobedience. I'm serious; we're not going to let it happen.''
JAKE MOONEY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: UPPER EAST SIDE
