My 12-year-old son gets migraines. He will call from the school nurse's office, head pounding, light stabbing at his eyes. I will drop what I am writing and bring him home, because sleep is his only real relief. I spend the rest of the day fidgeting and pacing, and the rest of the week distracted with worry.
Evan's sickness wraps itself around my work once a month or less. Which means I have no clue what Michelle Rago goes through every single day. Most working parents use all their energy balancing the demands of work and home. But parents of chronically ill children -- her 7-year-old son Trent has diabetes -- bear the burden of what she describes as ''trying to keep our children alive and healthy, while attempting to balance the demands of work and home.''
Jeff Hitchcock, president of Children With Diabetes, whose Web site gets nine million hits every month, said: ''Having a child with diabetes affects every single thing about your life. Nothing is the same after a diagnosis like this.''
Ms. Rago is a securities lawyer, and on the Monday that Trent's illness was first diagnosed more than three years ago, she was due at a deposition. By Tuesday she was back on the job, calling her husband, Tim, at the hospital during breaks. Her bosses were ''very nice and accommodating,'' she says, ''but there was no one else to take the case.''
Mr. Rago is a software engineer who works from home, and since his wife's job provided the health insurance, his own work all but evaporated as he cared for Trent. Type I diabetes is insidious, requiring close monitoring of blood sugar levels and the regular administration of insulin. If Trent's blood sugars run high, his sugary blood can ruin his capillaries, eventually leading to blindness or kidney failure. If they run low, the result can be coma or worse.
Using a pump the size of a beeper, Trent must receive one unit of insulin for every 25 grams of carbohydrates, so his parents have counted and charted every carbohydrate -- every cracker, peanut, handful of grapes -- he has swallowed in the last three and a half years. They have also tested his blood sugar levels about 10 times a day every day, setting their alarm clocks so they can prick his finger while he sleeps at least three times every night.
The Ragos are the first to explain that they are at the extreme end of vigilance. But they've decided they would rather be exhausted than regretful. (This month, a poll of parents on Mr. Hitchcock's Web site, www.childrenwithdiabetes.com, found that about 30 percent of parents say they have made that same decision.)
The price for that is paid at work. ''Before diabetes came,'' Ms. Rago says, she loved her job. ''I enjoyed the work our firm did. It was very exciting,'' she says. As for the children, she says, ''I learned to let go and realize it didn't matter whether their clothes matched or their nails were cut.''
''Then diabetes came,'' she says. She could not cut back on her work because ''litigation doesn't allow that,'' and her husband was becoming exhausted. In addition to being tested during the night, Trent goes to the school nurse six times a day for finger pricks. Having the school that involved in their lives made the Ragos realize that others were not quite so comfortable with uncut nails.
I first met Ms. Rago when she contacted me by e-mail, suggesting that I write about lives like hers. That was in December, and at the time she wrote, ''I can't leave or lose my job because losing insurance is a life or death situation'' -- a reality Mr. Hitchcock describes as ''the first rule of work for parents of children with diabetes.'' But when I visited her a month later, she said she had decided that ''I just can't keep doing this.''
Over the next few weeks she brought two of the firm's lawyers up to speed on her work as liaison counsel in the WorldCom securities litigation. Her plan was to take 18 months off -- the period for which she was eligible for Cobra health insurance benefits -- but just before she left on Feb. 10, she was told that her absence would be treated as a leave, and the firm, hoping she will come back, is letting her retain full insurance.
She says that a long rest may give her the energy to return. But for now, her contingency plans are limited: ''If I do lose my insurance, well, Starbucks has health benefits,'' she says. ''Or I can do 'paper and plastic' at the grocery store, and that's around the corner from the school.''
LIFE'S WORK
