IF you believe the saying, ''apples don't fall far from the tree,'' then I'd have to say I have some of my father in me.
On my birth certificate, my father's occupation was one word: cowboy. I was born in Arizona and grew up in Utah, where we lived on a ranch. My father was the embodiment of the Western culture: you take things head on, you don't back down and you try to do the right thing.
I remember being 7 years old and deciding to run away from home. It was the typical kid thing: I was upset that I didn't get my way. So I packed up and headed out the door, and I heard the deadbolt lock behind me. It was 9 at night. I learned early on from my father: you don't mess around. I sat outside for a while, then reconsidered. Eventually, he let me back in.
Another time, when I was about 9, I was out with my father rounding up cattle, and the horse I was riding broke and started running away. My dad was chasing me and the horse, but we headed right into a fence and I got thrown into some barbed wire. It was pretty rough; I had bad cuts on my back. At the same time we had to get the cattle. My dad went back and rounded up the cattle while I sat in the truck for another half-hour. Then he took me to the hospital.
My father was definitely my first role model. He had a hard-core work ethic. He was an electrician by trade, working 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. and then moonlighting on other jobs, in addition to running the ranch.
As I've gone through life, I've realized that the things of most value also seem to be the things that are hardest to get.
I served on a church mission when I was 19. I was in Japan, mainly in Osaka, for two years, trying to convert people to the Mormon Church. So I was able to learn Japanese.
It was a difficult thing to go into -- millions of Buddhists and I'm there to tell them about Christianity. That was an eye-opener, the rejection you had to take. On the other hand, we had more than 80 people who converted.
Early in my career I worked for Novell in Japan. We were supposed to be shipping a product: the Japanese version of Netware, a flagship product for Novell.
I had to take over operations that were very technical, but my background was more in marketing. The guy I replaced was an engineer, and I remember him going inside the company and saying, ''This McBride guy is never going to be successful.''
I took it as a personal challenge, and I worked 24/7 for two months, and the product had a successful introduction. It wasn't only me; it happened by rallying people together. That two-month period defined me: I could step up and be a general manager.
I am absolutely driven by people saying I can't do something.
EXECUTIVE LIFE: THE BOSS
