WHEN I got my start working in a pro shop at age 18, I never expected I'd be in this business more than 40 years later. I graduated from college and considered becoming an elementary school teacher, but I liked the environment in the skating rink and enjoyed working with the kids. in a less formal atmosphere.
You could say I'm part podiatrist, part psychologist. When people come in to be fitted for skates, I look at their legs from the hips down to see if they're knock-kneed or bowlegged, then I look at the foot to see if their ankles turn in or out. Based on what I see and my years of experience, I set the blade onto the boot so that they get the proper balance when they're skating. The fitting can take 45 minutes to an hour.
Every kid who comes in here would like to be an Olympic star or play in a Stanley Cup game. Sometimes they'll come in after a competition or test that didn't go well, and I'll try to get their spirits back up. I want to help them be the best and give their best performances when they are out there.
These days, the parents and coaches seem to have more compassion for kids when they haven't skated well. Fifteen or 20 years ago, you'd get the skating mom who was just like the stage mom, or the parents who were trying to live through their child. But I think that with everything being so unstable in the world right now, parents generally have a better perspective of what is and isn't important in life.
The parents are often so much more nervous than their kids. There was one mother I remember from years ago who never saw her daughter compete. She would get so upset that she would have to stay back at the hotel in a warm bath. And this was back in the days before videotaping, so I'm not sure she ever saw her daughter skate in competition.
This has never been just a job. I have always been involved with the people who come into the store. I want everyone to perform to the best of their ability and I'll do anything I can do to control that -- the sharpening of the blade, the setting of the blade -- whatever.
It doesn't matter who they are; they all get the same service. I've sharpened blades for Sarah Hughes, Dorothy Hamill and Janet Lynn. When we were over at Sky Rink in Manhattan years ago, we had Daryl Hannah and Tom Hanks buy skates from us for a scene in the movie ''Splash.'' I also remember John and Caroline Kennedy coming in with their mother when they were children.
We have a lot of repeat customers, people who drive hours from Syracuse or Washington for a fitting. We even have customers who have moved to places as far as Utah and Arizona who mail their blades to us for sharpening. Second and third generations are coming back to us now, so the kids we used to take care of are bringing their kids.
I compare it to getting a haircut. When you find someone who does it the way that you like it, you don't change. You go back to that same person again and again.
MY JOB
