Mary Ziegler has lived for 15 years within three blocks of Radiac Research Corporation, a radioactive and hazardous waste storage plant on Kent Avenue in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. She and others in the neighborhood say they have been concerned about Radiac for a long time. But after the World Trade Center attacks, that concern intensified, and this month, residents decided to take their fears public.
''Since 9/11, there has been the thought that it could be a terrorist target,'' Ms. Ziegler said, adding that for that reason, she and other opponents of the plant have been reluctant to publicize their fears. But now, feeling the weight of potential danger, they have decided that the possibility of an attack eclipses the risk of publicity.
Radiac has a permit from the state's Department of Labor to store radioactive medical waste, including uranium and plutonium. But last week, its opponents petitioned the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which can take a variety of steps if it sees a threat to national security, including closing the plant. A commission spokesman said the agency would make a decision on the petition by April 15.
Led by a local group, Neighbors Against Garbage, the plant's opponents believe that a truck bomb, for example, could cause a fire or explosion that could spew radioactive contaminants over parts of Brooklyn and Lower Manhattan. That would not be hard to do, they say, because Radiac's buildings either abut Kent Avenue or are separated from the street by a parking lot surrounded by a chain-link fence.
But John Tekin, a Radiac spokesman, said the plant's hazardous and radioactive waste storage areas are separated and that the levels of waste are too low to pose a serious risk, even if there were an accident. ''They're using punch words like uranium and plutonium, and they're using that as a fear factor,'' he said, adding that, regarding radioactive waste, ''there is not any more danger here than any hospital or university in New York City.'' Citing safety concerns, Mr. Tekin would not discuss details of Radiac's security measures, but said they had been approved by city, state and federal agencies.
City Councilman David Yassky, whose district includes the area, said the 35-year-old facility was no longer appropriate at its current site now that the city is a potential terrorist target. ''A fire in the chemical part could easily spread,'' he said, ''and we could easily face a dirty-bomb situation.''
TARA BAHRAMPOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: WILLIAMSBURG
