Erik Morales won the fight, but give Jesus Chavez a hand. If he had had two, he could very well have won a fight that brought 8,094 at the MGM Grand Arena to their feet during the final half-minute of action.
Morales gained a 12-round unanimous decision to add the World Boxing Council junior lightweight title to the W.B.C. junior featherweight and featherweight titles he won earlier in his 46-1 career with 34 knockouts. But this wasn't 12 rounds, it was more like 12 reels, the kind of drama that makes boxing movies so popular.
Morales joined Julio Cesar Chavez, who escorted him to the ring, as the only Mexicans to win titles at three weights. Chavez, a Mexican native who grew up in Chicago and now lives in Austin, Tex., said he hurt his right shoulder -- which needed surgery last year that he refused in favor of a chiropractor -- near the end of the second round. ''I pulled something,'' he said.
He seldom was able to throw a right hand after that. Yet, by pivoting on his feet, he was able to keep his left hand pumping into the challenger's body and face.
''When my shoulder heals, it will be a different song,'' said Chavez, who is 40-3 with 28 knockouts. ''The people saw what I did with one hand. With two hands, I would've knocked him out.''
Maybe, maybe not. Morales was not exactly Mr. Universe. He didn't know that Chavez was fighting with only one hand -- incredibly, he said his corner, headed by his father, did not tell him, but he said he was in a sense fighting with none.
''I hurt both my hands,'' Morales said.
Morales was also cut over both eyes. The right eye, cut in the second, ended up almost closed. It was a brilliantly paced fight until the attrition set in, but at the end, Chavez was throwing and landing right hands despite the pain.
Judge Burt Clements of Reno scored the fight 118-108 for Morales, Daniel Van de Wiele of Belgium had it 117-109 and John Keane of England had it 115-112, all for Morales.
Before the ambulances started circling, after Chavez had a very useful opening round, Morales struck early in the second with a right uppercut to the chin. Chavez, whose corner stopped him after nine rounds last year against Floyd Mayweather Jr., staggered backward several steps before falling. He got up, fought back, but suddenly another uppercut floored him again.
Yet again, he fought back bravely, but it became clear to observers that something was wrong with his right hand.
Marc Ratner, executive director of the Nevada State Athletic Commission, walked around the ring to see what was wrong. But there was never a thought of stopping the battle.
''Chavez was fighting well with one hand,'' Ratner said.
Meanwhile, there was always a chance he could get lucky. The referee, Vic Drakulich of Reno, had ruled that the cut over Morales's right eye was caused by a punch, not an accidental clash of heads. If the bout had had to be stopped because of the cut, Chavez would have gained a technical knockout.
Both fighters are promoted by Bob Arum, increasing the chances of a rematch. Another Arum star, Juan Manuel Marquez, is penciled in to defend the W.B.C. featherweight title against Manny Pacquiao of the Philippines on May 22.
That winner, or the winner of next week's Joel Casamayor-Diego Corrales 130-pound title fight at Foxwoods, would be another major fight for Morales.
The new champion said he would stay at 130 because there are so many good fights there. One of the best would be the rematch with Chavez.
PUNCH LINES
The undefeated junior welterweight MIGUEL COTTO, billed as the next FELIX TRINIDAD by his promoter, BOB ARUM, showed his customary patience and calm, then dropped VICTORIANO SOSA three times in the fourth round. The referee, KENNY BAYLESS, stopped the scheduled 12-round semifinal at 2:51 of the fourth round. Cotto, 23, is 19-0 with 16 knockouts and is now No. 1 in the World Boxing Association junior welterweight ranking. Sosa is now 37-4-2 with 29 knockouts and said that Cotto hit harder than Mayweather. ''I hit him some good shots early,'' said Sosa, who was hurt and dropped the first time by a left hook to the head. ''He has a good chin, too.'' . . . JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ JR., 18 and looking even younger, raised his professional record to 5-0 with a unanimous four-round unanimous decision over OISON FAGAN, 4-2, of Ireland.
BOXING
