CIS 455/555: Internet and Web Systems 
 
 
Spring 2014 
 
 
Assignment 0: Using VMware Player 
 
Due January 27, 2014, at 10:00pm EST 
1		Background 	
We will be offering a standardized development system for CIS455/555 that is based on a virtual machine 
image. This image contains a small Linux installation, the Eclipse IDE, and all the tools you will need for 
the homework assignments. Having such a standardized system has several advantages: 
 
1. You do not have to worry about incompatibilities between the software we will be using and 
other software that may be installed on your machine; 
2. If something goes wrong, you have a 'safe' configuration to go back to - just reinstall the virtual 
machine image; 
3. The virtual machine image will be the 'gold standard' for grading; thus, if your solution works in 
the VM image, you can be sure that it will also work on the graders' machines. 
 
The virtual machine image works with VMware Player, which has been installed on the Linux machines 
in M100A, M204 (Ketterer Lab), M207, and Towne-M70. If you prefer using your own computer, 
VMware Player is available for free at http://www.vmware.com/products/player/ (Windows and Linux 
versions; non-commercial use only). If you are a Mac user, try VirtualBox (http://www.virtualbox.org/) or 
VMware Fusion (http://www.vmware.com/products/fusion/). 
 
Of course, you are free to use a different development system (e.g., a different operating system, your 
favorite editor or IDE, ...). However, we will only grade solutions based on their performance in the 
virtual machine image, and we can only offer limited support if you decide to use your own setup. 
2		Installing 	the 	VM 	image 	
Your first task is to install the VM image for this assignment. The following step-by-step guide assumes 
that you are in the Moore M100A lab: 
 
1. Download the VM image from http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~cis455/handouts/vm.zip. If you don't 
have enough space in your SEAS account, use the cis455-vm link in your account (see below) 
2. Unpack the .zip file; this should produce a folder called cis455 
3. Start VMware Player (if you are using the Linux in the lab, press Alt+F2 to open the 'Run' dialog 
and enter vmplayer; you can also open a terminal window and run vmplayer from there) 
4. Click 'Open a Virtual Machine'. In the dialog box that appears, open the cis455 folder, select 
the CIS455 machine image, and click 'Open'. 
5. Click 'Play virtual machine'. If you are asked whether the VM was moved or copied, say 'moved'. 
6. The Linux in the VM image should boot now. Wait until the login dialog appears.  
7. Click on 'CIS455' to log in. The password is vm. You should now have a running VM. A few tips regarding the virtual machine (please read carefully!):  
 
? If you run out of storage space while unpacking vm.zip, try downloading vm.zip to a 
temporary directory (e.g., /tmp), and then unpack it to your home directory from there. (Do not 
unpack the VM image to /tmp, since files in this directory are deleted regularly!) 
? If you are using an old version of VMware Player, you may get an error message about an invalid 
configuration file. If you see this message, try upgrading to the newest version. 
? CETS has allocated some extra space for CIS455/555 students; you should have a symbolic link 
called cis455-vm in your home directory that points to this space. If the VM image doesn't fit 
into your normal SEAS account, please store it in this space. 
? Always shut down the VM properly before closing VMware Player (by clicking on the 'CIS455' 
the upper right corner and selecting 'Power Off'). If you do not do this, the VM image can become 
corrupted, just like your operating system can become corrupted if you switch off your computer 
before shutting it down properly. 
? If the screen size of your VM is tiny, try resizing it or putting it into full-screen mode. 
? Note that the mouse pointer has to be over the VM window; otherwise your inputs will not be 
accepted. If at any point your mouse or keyboard are 'captured' by the VM (i.e., you can no longer 
move the mouse outside of the VM window or switch to other applications), press the 'Ctrl' and 
'Alt' keys simultaneously. This should also help you to get out of 'fullscreen mode'. 
? The data you store inside the VM is persistent (i.e., will survive reboots), and we will be using a 
version control system; nevertheless, we strongly recommend that you make occasional backups, 
e.g., by copying your data to eniac.seas.upenn.edu using the scp command. 
? The password for the cis455 user is vm. You shouldn't normally need to become root, but if 
this ever becomes necessary, you can use sudo with the same password. 
? If you would like to use a text editor other than Eclipse, please use apt-get to install it. For 
instance, to install gedit, run sudo apt-get install gedit in a terminal window. 
? If the VM runs slowly on your machine, try increasing its memory size to 1.5GB (under Virtual 
Machine / Virtual Machine Settings..., or under "Edit virtual machine settings"). 
? If the virtual disk (the .vmdk file(s) in the cis455 folder) is getting too big, try deleting some 
files inside the VM and then 'compacting' it (under Virtual Machine Settings... / Hard Disk (SCSI) 
/ Utilities / Compact). This should free up some space on the host machine. 
3		The 	HelloWorld 	application 	[10 	points] 	
Your third task in this assignment is to write a simple Java program that writes your full name and your 
SEAS login name to System.out when it is invoked (for example, my own solution writes "*** 
Author: Andreas Haeberlen (ahae)"). The class that contains your main method should be 
called HelloWorld, and it should be a member of the package edu.upenn.cis455.hw0.  
 
This is not rocket science. We know. The goal is to familiarize yourself with the VM, and to try out the 
homework submission process, which is described below. In the following, we will assume that you have 
already received an email with your login information for the svn server, and that your VM can 
successfully connect to the network. If you are not sure about the network connection, double-click on the 
"Firefox" icon on the VM's desktop; this should open the CIS455/555 web page. 
 To get started, open Eclipse, select the "File..." menu, and click on "Import...". Find the "SVN" tab, select 
"Checkout Projects from SVN", and hit "Next >". In the dialog box that opens now, select "Create a new 
repository location" and hit "Next >"; then enter the URL  
 
              svn://ds01.seas.upenn.edu:10455/yourSEASlogin 
 
but replace yourSEASlogin with your actual SEAS login name. Then hit "Next >". 
You should now be prompted for a username and password (if not, check your network connection!). The 
dialog box will suggest cis455 as the username, but you should not accept it; rather, replace it with your 
SEAS login name, and enter the password from your welcome email (check the box to allow the 
password to be saved). You should now see the "Select Folder" dialog, which should show the URL you 
just typed, and below it a folder called "HW0". Select the "HW0" folder and click "Finish". The HW0 
project should now be checked out, and it should appear in Eclipse's Package Explorer.  
 
Find the HelloWorld.java file, and add the necessary code to write your full name and SEAS login. 
Please use the exact format above (Example: "*** Author: Andreas Haeberlen (ahae)"). 
Also, open the README file and complete all the fields. Finally, check all your changes back into the 
repository. To do this, right-click on the "HW0" project in the Package Explorer, select "Team..." and 
then "Commit". You should be prompted for a comment. Enter a short description of your changes  
(Example: "Implemented Hello World") and then hit "OK". Your changes should now be checked in. 
 
For later assignments, we strongly recommend that you regularly check in your changes, at least once a 
day and/or whenevery you've implemented a major new feature. That way, when something suddenly 
stops working, you can use svn's diff feature to find the changes you've made since the last checkin. Also, 
when you create additional files, e.g., for new Java classes, please don't forget to add them to the 
repository. 
4 	Requesting 	extensions 	
We strong recommend that you start working on each assignment as soon as it becomes available!! 
That way, if you encounter an unexpected problem that you cannot resolve by yourself, you will have 
enough time to post a question on Piazza, or to come to office hours. However, we do realize that things 
do not always go as planned. Therefore, you automatically receive three 'jokers' at the beginning of the 
semester, which you can redeem for a one-day extension. To redeem a joker, please go to 
 
     https://alliance.seas.upenn.edu/~cis455/cgi-bin/jokers.php 
 
You will see a list of assignments, the corresponding deadlines, and the number of remaining jokers. To 
spend a joker to extend one of the deadlines, click on "Extend". You can spend all jokers on one 
assignment, or each joker on a different assignment; however, you cannot extend a deadline that has 
already passed (it is ok to spend one joker before the original deadline, another one the next day, etc.).  
 
Once you have spent your three jokers, you cannot get further extensions for any reason, and each late 
day will lower your score by 20%. Therefore, we recommend that you try to save your jokers for emergencies and/or the inevitable time crunch at the end of the semester. The best way to save your 
jokers is to start early. 
4		Packaging 	and 	submitting 	your 	solution 	
Once you are ready to submit, you should first check in all your changes. After that, you should prepare a 
package with your source code as follows. First, double-click on the Terminal icon on the desktop to open 
a terminal window. In that window, run the following commands (text you should type is underlined): 
 
    cis455@vm:~$ cd workspace/HW0 
    cis455@vm:~/workspace/HW0$ ant pack 
    Buildfile: /home/cis455/workspace/HW0/build.xml 
 
    pack: 
        [zip] Building zip: /home/cis455/workspace/HW0/submit-hw0.zip 
 
    BUILD SUCCESSFUL 
    Total time: 0 seconds 
    cis455@vm:~/workspace/HW0$ 
 
This will create a file called submit-hw0.zip, which should automatically include all the source code 
you have written (to verify, you can run unzip -l submit-hw0.zip). You should now submit this 
file using turnin; however, please keep in mind that turnin is only available on eniac, and not in 
the virtual machine, so you need to copy the file to eniac.seas.upenn.edu first: 
 
 cis455@vm:~$ scp submit-hw0.zip <yourSEASlogin>@eniac.seas.upenn.edu: 
 
Note the colon at the end of that line, and be sure to enter your SEAS password when prompted (and not 
the VM password)! You can then ssh to log into eniac.seas.upenn.edu and run turnin there: 
 
    cis455@vm:~$ ssh <yourSEASlogin>@eniac.seas.upenn.edu 
    <you>@ampersand:~> turnin -c cis455 -p hw0 submit-hw0.zip 
    Your files have been submitted to cis455, hw0 for grading. 
    <you>@ampersand:~> turnin -c cis455 -p hw0 -v 
    -rw-r----- <you>/<you>     2359 2014-01-19 10:04 submit-hw0.zip 
    <you>@ampersand:~> exit 
    logout 
    Connection to eniac.seas.upenn.edu closed. 
    cis455@vm:~/workspace/HW0$ 
 
The second turnin command (without the zip file name) verifies that your solution has been submitted. 
If turnin reports "No such file or directory" at this point, the submission did not work; please check the 
above commands carefully. turnin keeps only the latest file you submit, so you can safely resubmit 
your solution at any time before the deadline. turnin  also records the timestamp of the latest 
submission, and we will use this timestamp to determine whether your solution was submitted on time.