In the Big Time
He wrote his first play with a friend when he was in the seventh grade at Mount Pleasant Middle School in Livingston; it was about three boys facing the end of the world.
Now 19, the playwright, Travis Baker, is an amateur no more. He is one of three young authors whose plays are being produced at the Cherry Lane Studio Theater in New York City through Feb. 21 as part of the Young Playwrights Festival founded by Stephen Sondheim in 1982.
Mr. Baker's one-act play was chosen from a field of 1,000 playwrights 18 years or younger who competed in a national competition sponsored by the festival. His winning play, ''Thick,'' is about two high school boys whose classmate has committed suicide.
''It's extremely theatrical,'' said Sheri Goldhirsch, artistic director of Young Playwrights Inc., which runs the festival. ''He is writing about young characters in a very mature way.''
Mr. Baker, who has written 60 plays since the seventh grade, discussed his views on writing for the theater in a telephone interview.
''In screenplays, the object is to be as real as possible and briefly stated as possible,'' said the Mr. Baker, who graduated from Livingston High School in June. ''Your intentions have to be pretty clear. But for the theater audience, there is a love of words and of rhythm and of complex ideas that you can really indulge.''
This is the first time he has had a play professionally produced, he said, adding that it has been a good experience.
''I've done the amateur stuff and I've played every role in the production process -- written, directed, acted, stage-managed,'' he said. ''But now this is the first time I really get to just sit back and watch my work come to life.''
Mr. Baker, whose family moved to California from Livingston last summer, said he attended several workshops given by Young Playwrights Inc. before his play was chosen. One of the things he learned, he said, was that a playwright should attend all the rehearsals of his play to make sure nobody changes his words.
''They taught that, in fact, when it is theater, the playwright is No.1,'' he said. ''No one is allowed to change the playwright's work without the playwright's permission.''
Mr. Baker will not attend the premiere of ''Thick,'' he said. He will be in school. He has just started his first semester at Middlebury College in Vermont.
The Cherry Lane is at 38 Commerce Street. Performances are Tuesdays through Saturdays at 7 p.m. Information: (212)279-4200.
First the Dress, Then the Book
When Deborah Davis, a story editor and analyst for films, wore a black gown to the Golden Globe Awards three years ago, she got the idea for ''Strapless: John Singer Sargent and the Fall of Madame X,'' her first book. ''I reminded myself of John Singer Sargent's painting of 'Madame X,''' said Ms. Davis, who lives in Montclair.
The book, published last year, is about the real ''Madame X,'' Virginie Amelie Gautreau. The Sargent portrait (1883-84) is in the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
On Tuesday at 7 p.m., Ms. Davis will discuss her book at the Montclair Art Museum. Reservations: (973)746-5555, extension 297.
Margo Nash
