Off the court, Zoran Planinic speaks in halting but decipherable English. On the court, with fans screaming while he tries to race the ball up the floor as quickly as Jason Kidd does, his English is not always so clear.
In perhaps the simplest but most noticeable change since he took over as coach, Lawrence Frank has eased Planinic's rookie transition by calling the plays himself rather than leaving it to Planinic, the 21-year-old Croatian point guard.
Frank shouts plays from the sideline when Planinic is on the floor, and Planinic has only to worry about playing.
But it was not only the play-calling responsibilities that confounded Planinic under Byron Scott. It was also his belief that Scott wanted little to do with waiting for Planinic's language and on-court skills to develop.
''I understand Byron because this is a team that needs to win every game,'' Planinic said. ''I came here and didn't know the language well. I know he just don't want to bother with me. He'd be like, 'Bring an American point guard.' This team don't have patience for me.''
The language barrier left Planinic struggling to fit in on the court.
''I had to do it,'' he said of the play-calling under Scott. ''It was tough. That was the worst part. I couldn't handle that.''
Planinic said that while trying to play at the Nets' fast pace, he often spoke unintelligible English. Kenyon Martin, he said, would ask, '' 'What did you say?' ''
''I didn't know what I said,'' Planinic said. ''It was funny, everybody was laughing.''
Scott, who has been generally unavailable for comment since his firing last month, could hardly be blamed for being reluctant to allow Planinic to find his way while his job was on the line. But the Nets have spent three seasons trying to find a solid backup to Kidd, and in Planinic, their first-round draft pick last year, they thought they had him. Frank said on Saturday that Planinic was the best player in the Boston summer league last year, but added, ''The bottom line is you have to earn your stripes. At the time, maybe he just wasn't quite ready.''
Planinic's progress stalled once training began. He started in place of Kidd, who was injured, on Nov. 22 and struggled through 22 minutes in a Nets loss. Scott criticized Planinic's energy and readiness, and he was soon on the injured list. ''Life's not fair sometimes,'' Planinic said.
Planinic played his best game of the season Friday, contributing 8 points and 7 assists in 18 minutes -- the most he has played since the start in November -- in a 120-99 victory over Orlando.
''A month ago I was on the injured list,'' he said. ''I was miserable. Now I'm really happy because I can contribute to the team.''
PRO BASKETBALL
