AFTER 30 years of hybridizing, judging and worshipping roses and the ground they grow in, there is not much that John Mattia does not know about the blossoms. He can explain why crossing a red rose with a white rose might result in a yellow rose, and he can recite why four out of five rose seeds might never grow into a bud.
So how is it that Mr. Mattia, one of the founders of the Connecticut Rose Society and self-proclaimed ''rose nut,'' had no clue how the red rose became the symbol of romantic love?
''I don't know; I guess I really never thought about it,'' said Mr. Mattia, 65, of Orange. ''Then, after I was asked the question, I couldn't find anything about it anywhere -- not in my own books, not at the library, and not even on the Internet.''
But only weeks before Valentine's Day, Mr. Mattia has found enough information to compile an enchanting narrative of the relationship between roses and romance that the president of the American Rose Society wants to use as the basis for a national rose-awareness campaign for Valentine's Day 2005.
''We spend a lot of time saying that the rose is a symbol of love, friendship, beauty and peace, but we didn't know why it is until now,'' said Marilyn Wellan, president of the 20,000 member organization in Shreveport, La. ''I asked John to promise me that next year we will create our own 'legend of the rose' for the world.''
Mr. Mattia said he accepted Mrs. Wellan's assignment to help impart the ancient tales of the rose and its entanglement with such love symbols as Venus, Cupid, Adonis and St. Valentine.
Until then, however, Mr. Mattia, a nationally renown rose competitor and semi-retired public-relations official for Southern Connecticut State University in New Haven, said he would spend much of his spare time on a far more current project: using the Internet to sell his digitally enhanced photographs of roses.
Mr. Mattia may be the nation's sole ''digital photo rose artist,'' Mrs. Wellan said. He sells the images on his Web site, www.rosemania.com and the American Rose Society is planning to sell them on its Web site (www.ars.org) soon. Mr. Mattia created a commemorative dish featuring a digitally swirled image of the Marilyn Monroe rose for the organization.
''Like a photograph, every rose tells a story,'' Mr. Mattia said recently as he spread dozens of examples of his artwork of his dining room table. ''In the Victorian era, a gift of roses allowed gentlemen to send a message to a lady. Every color meant a different thing. Red was for love. Yellow for friendship. White for innocence and purity.''
Mr. Mattia held up an enlarged image of a glorious pink bloom that appeared to be glowing around its edges, thanks to digital enhancement. Across the top of the print was a line from an Alfred Lord Tennyson love poem, titled ''Maud,'' which includes the stanza:
''The slender acacia would not shake
One long milk-bloom on the tree;
The white lake-blossom fell into the lake,
As the pimpernel dozed on the lea;
But the rose was awake all night for your sake,
Knowing your promise to me;
The lilies and roses were all awake,
They sigh'd for the dawn and thee.''
Mr. Mattia said he had read the poem in college and ''hated every minute of it.'' But when he saw his photograph of the pink rose, he remembered the line, ''But the rose was awake all night for your sake'' and thought it was a perfect fit.
The fit of his longtime passion with his new one, digital photography, was quite accidental, Mr. Mattia said.
''Three years ago, I got a digital camera and within 28 months I took 11,360 photos, 90 percent of which were roses,'' he said. ''I travel all over the United States to see roses and on one trip I can take about 1,500 photos alone.''
After he bought a digital printer for his camera, Mr. Mattia took a course and learned how to manipulate his rose photos into unusual works of art by adding swirls, streaks, altered lighting and other images.
''It really opened up a whole new vista of what I could do on my computer,'' he said. ''I didn't know where I was going with this.''
Some of his photos intersperse roses with seashore images, photos of star constellations and fireworks. He added some of the images to his Web site for sale. Mr. Mattia said he had limited sales success so far, but added that it was not a big concern.
Mr. Mattia said that some of his photos hold more of a special meaning to him than others. One is called ''Wedding Bouquet,'' which showcases a spectacular ball of red, pink, white and cream roses against the background of a bridal gown.
''When my daughter was getting married, she asked me to bring with me some roses from my backyard garden,'' Mr. Mattia said. ''I thought she wanted to make a table arrangement out of them.''
But when Mr. Mattia dropped off the special delivery at the florist, he said he found out the flowers were to be used for his daughter's bridal bouquet. The result of the surprise was an image of the bouquet being held by his daughter on her wedding day. The photograph has been manipulated digitally to look as though it was painted.
One steady customer has been George Hartley, a semi-retired accountant and rose aficionado who lives in Royal Oaks, Mich. Mr. Hartley said he bought the Tennyson poem image because a friend of his in Michigan was the breeder of the pink rose in the photo. He said he also owns another image called, ''European Touch,'' which features a white bloom called European Touch surrounded by famous landmarks in Europe.
''I knew Mr. Mattia to be an excellent rose exhibitor,'' he said, ''but I had never seen anything like these digital pictures. They intrigue me.''
''Intrigue'' is a word rose experts, also known as rosarians, use frequently when talking about their hobby. Mr. Mattia calls the blooms from his 250 backyard bushes his ''children.'' Mrs. Wellan calls the rose ''the most beautiful flower in the world.'' .
And Mr. Hartley said growing roses was ''a challenge for perfection.''
Mr. Mattia, who last year created a new rose called the Elizabeth Park Centennial in honor of the 100th anniversary of the nation's oldest public rose garden in Hartford, said that all of his rose pictures start out with a ''perfect bloom.'' According to him, the view from the top of a rose should form a perfect circle; from the side view, the petals should build in a pyramid; and the middle should have a small, round center. ''You're looking for balance and even spacing,'' said Mr. Mattia, a national rose circuit judge.
Creating a new hybrid is not an ''instant-gratification-type hobby,'' Mr. Mattia said.
Breeding a new rose can take two or three years. Mr. Mattia said he ''forces roses to have sex:'' in other words, in late June, he takes pollen from the ''father'' rose and places it on the ''mother'' rose, which is called ''cross pollination.'' If he is lucky, he said, he will get seed pods, otherwise known as rose hips or rose apples.
''I work with hundreds of these seeds at one time and most of them are duds,'' he said. ''I had 550 seeds last years, but I could use only about 100 of them.''
Mr. Mattia begins transplanting the tiny plants the following May into four-inch pots, which he later plants in his backyard. Out of that crop, he will be happy with about 15 bushes, he said.
Right now, Mr. Mattia's backyard is filled with bare bushes covered with snow, but he is busy preparing for the coming season and traveling around the country giving speeches to rose organizations. Giving his wife, Gerry, roses for Valentine's Day, may have long ago lost its novelty, but as he likes to say, ''I tell my wife 'I promised you a rose garden and you got one.'''
American Beauty: Keeping the Bloom on the Bouquet
THE beauty of cut roses for Valentine's Day is intended to last up to 14 days, said John Mattia, an expert rose breeder and judge in Orange, but the time span can vary.
Most of the roses sold in the United States are imported from South America or Africa, Mr. Mattia said, and the perils of air travel as well as the care the roses receive upon arrival at flower shops or homes determine how long they will last.
Here are some tips to help keep the roses fresh for as long as possible.
$(6$)Thoroughly wash the vase in which you intend to show off your roses with warm water containing a few drops of household bleach.
$(6$)Fill the vase with warm water and add the preservative that many florists provide in a little package with your roses. If a preservative is not provided, a homemade brew of a few drops of bleach and a teaspoon of sugar added to the water works equally as well. Another alternative: several capfuls of a non-diet soda (like Sprite) provide sugar and a mild acid to the water for the blooms.
$(6$)Strip the lower leaves off the bottom of the stem.
$(6$)With a sharp scissors or garden shears, cut off the bottom half-inch of the stem under cool tap water and immediately plunge the stem into the vase containing warm water. Do this for each stem.
$(6$)Each day check the water level, and add more water if necessary. If the water becomes cloudy, a sign of severe bacterial growth, cut off another half inch of stem under running cool water and immediately replace it in a clean vase with new warm water and a preservative.
$(6$)Keep the display away from streaming hot air from radiators or vents that will dry the bloom, and not in direct sunshine. At nighttime, store your bouquet is a cool room.
$(6$)If the necks of the rose blooms suddenly bend over, it may be a sign that water is not reaching the bloom because of bacterial clogging in the stem. Sometimes the condition can be reversed by again cutting off the end of each stem under running water and restaging the bouquet in a clean vase with warm water and a preservative.
CHRISTINE DiGRAZIA
