IF you want to sell a potential client on your company's brand, change your employees' work habits or overcome voters' doubts about your fitness to occupy the White House, then a certain self-effacing Harvard professor just might offer some guidance.
Howard Gardner, a psychologist and professor of cognition and education at the Harvard Graduate School of Education, is known for his theory that people have several kinds of intelligence. In his new book, he tackles the age-old riddle of how to change people's minds. As any marketer, manager or politician can tell you, not to mention anyone who has ever shared a roof with someone else, that can be a challenge.
But it is not impossible, if you pull the right ''levers'' to dislodge set ways of thinking, according to the book, titled ''Changing Minds: The Art and Science of Changing Our Own and Other People's Minds,'' due in April from the Harvard Business School Press. All seven of these levers have names beginning with ''re-.'' When you use the ''resonance'' lever, the points you make should feel right to the people you are addressing, he says. Then there are reason, research, ''representational redescriptions'' (presenting the same idea in various formats -- through speech, pictures and deeds, for example) and ''resources and rewards'' (positive reinforcement). Finally, you can invoke ''real-world events,'' like terrorist attacks, that can drastically affect how people think, and strive to counter people's ''resistances'' to changing views.
One arena where opinion can die hard is politics. So how could Howard Dean change the public perception that his outburst on the night of the Iowa caucuses showed that he had become unhinged? ''The original prototype is Nixon's 'Checkers' speech, the grandfather of all televised mind-changing enterprises,'' Professor Gardner said. ''But whether it's Nixon denying having taken money, or Clinton dealing with charges of having an affair or Dean dealing with the charge of being out of control, the issue is: How do we bring former supporters back to the flock and defang the resistance?
''The answer is: You try to develop a story about yourself that is different from the one that the press is carrying, a different narrative,'' he continued. ''Nixon converted it into a family story about 'our dog Checkers' and the good Republican cloth coat; Clinton said, none of us is without sin, but look at the great family you'll be getting in the White House.'' Beyond that, Professor Gardner said, ''you have to embody the story you're telling.''
The approach can work in business. ''Say the new C.E.O. comes in and says, 'We are not going to be hierarchical anymore,''' Professor Gardner said. ''But you're the longtime regional product manager who's thinking, 'We've heard it before.''' But if the chief ''spends a third of each week walking around the plant or office listening attentively to the staff, starts implementing their suggestions and closes the executive dining room, then that's what I call embodying the story.''
Warren Bennis, a professor at the University of Southern California's Marshall School of Business who specializes in leadership issues, says the book cuts to the core of what people in positions of influence do to get there, what he calls ''including and engaging people in a shared belief system.'' Professor Bennis points to Howard D. Schultz, the founder and chief executive of Starbucks.
''He had to convince 80,000 of his employees that they aren't just selling a commodity, they are selling an experience,'' he said. ''And he had to convince investors that people would pay a few dollars for hot drinks in a paper cup.''
Does Professor Gardner ever alter his own views? Yes, he says, but ''almost always gradually, very rarely precipitously.'' He and his wife, Ellen Winner, a psychology professor at Boston College, made a list of major changes in his thinking and came up with only a handful. ''At first I drew a blank,'' Professor Winner said.
Their son, Ben Gardner, a high school senior, had no such mental block about his father.
''I had been lobbying for a dog almost my entire life, but he claimed he was allergic,'' Ben said. ''In ninth grade, it came to a head. We had a sit-down talk and decided we would get a dog.''
His mother's take on the story is that Ben simply convinced his father that a dog would make him happier, but Professor Gardner restates the formula. ''I think the key was my being convinced of another narrative: This isn't about me and my comfort and my possible allergy; it's about what's important to Ben, and it was worth taking a risk,'' he said.
Sure, Dad. Professor Winner says Ben and his siblings, Jay, Kerith and Andrew, joke about their father's air of having the answer to everything. Jay, 32, and his wife, Jeanne Koenig, even invented a game called ''Ask Howard'' that pokes fun at his impatience. One player asks a question and the other reaches into a sock, pulls out one of the wooden disks inside that have the professor's photograph on one side and a ''Gardnerism'' on the other, and reads the answer. One says: ''You have no idea how busy I am, ask again later.''
IN his own childhood, Professor Gardner's major change of direction was to discontinue piano lessons and abandon a path that might have brought distinction to his parents, who had fled Nazi Germany and who had lost another son in a sledding accident. ''A lot of what determines whether you continue a pursuit is whether you have peers you can identify with,'' he said. ''I was kind of a prodigy for Scranton, Pa. I didn't know other kids who were working hard on piano and advancing quickly.''
Today, for all his academic fame, Professor Gardner shuns the limelight, squirms when he is recognized in airports and still wears his old high school and college jackets. He says he buys cars and clothing on impulse because neither is important to him. In August, to mark his 60th birthday, he bought a green Volkswagen New Beetle after thinking about it for just 10 minutes.
Private Sector
