IT may be the toughest job in American politics: Campaign manager for a candidate for president. And this is true more than ever this year, when the casualty rate has been about as high for campaign managers as for those running for president.
Howard Dean is on his third one (as of Friday afternoon), while John Kerry is on his second.
The attraction of the job is understandable. The campaign manager is the subject of adoring magazine profiles, newspaper articles and documentaries. And running a winning campaign is not required.
Dr. Dean's second campaign manager, Joe Trippi, moved effortlessly from the campaign war room to the television studio after Dr. Dean dumped him. He seems on his way to becoming a celebrity, like James Carville.
But is all this fame justified? After all, there is only so much even the best campaign manager to do. Clearly smart, if a bit eccentric, Mr. Trippi gladly accepted the accolades when Dr. Dean was on the way up. In Des Moines and Manchester, N.H., he could be found every night talking to reporters until the bar lights came up about what the Dean campaign was doing right.
But it was Dr. Dean who sensed the anger among Democrats over President Bush's election, and rode that rage to the top of the pack. Also, burning through nearly $40 million in contributions without winning a single state is not exactly what they teach you in campaign managers' school.
But was it Mr. Trippi's fault that Dr. Dean doubted the value of Saddam Hussein's capture, or gave such an exuberant speech celebrating his loss in Des Moines? No matter: he was out, replaced by the more corporate Roy Neel, a friend of Al Gore.
At the Kerry campaign headquarters, Jim Jordan was bounced last year when Mr. Kerry's campaign was in its own nose dive. He was, replaced by Mary Beth Cahill, the earthy, no-nonsense Democrat from Dorchester, Mass., who is close to Senator Edward M. Kennedy.
By every measure, Ms. Cahill imposed some order on the Kerry campaign. But even members of the new team say Mr. Kerry's recovery had as much to do with Dr. Dean's collapse and Mr. Kerry's evolution as a candidate than anything some smart person thought up back in campaign headquarters.
Life has been stable over at the headquarters of Senator John Edwards, where Nick Baldick was there at the beginning and survived Mr. Edwards' own long period in the basement. Mr. Baldick is no doubt enjoying the Edwards surge, though the look in his face is, characteristically, one of anxious expectation, as if disaster were around the corner. (Can you blame him? He worked for Al Gore in the final weeks of 2000.)
And finally, there is Eli Segal, who apparently wasn't satisfied after running Bill Clinton's campaign in 1992. He came back last year to run the campaign of Gen. Wesley K. Clark.
Second in a series of photographic essays on the presidential campaign.
