When NBC recently invited Donald J. Trump to move into its most exclusive neighborhood on Thursday night, the network's competitors immediately recognized the momentousness of the programming maneuver.
For the sake of finding the best location for Mr. Trump's new reality series, ''The Apprentice,'' NBC broke with a two-decade tradition of offering its four best comedies in a row on Thursday night, the night of ''Friends'' and ''Cheers'' and ''Seinfeld,'' the night that has generated the most advertising revenue by far for any network.
Now that ''The Apprentice'' has become the most successful new show of the season, NBC executives have announced that they plan to bring it -- as well as Mr. Trump -- back in the same 9 p.m. time slot in the fall.
NBC's decision to overturn its ''must see'' comedy strategy for a reality show is only the latest sign that the playbook that has governed prime-time programming since the days of radio is in the midst of its most substantial revision.
''If ever there was a watershed moment in this business, this is it,'' said Lloyd Braun, the chairman of ABC Entertainment. ''This is NBC walking away from its greatest strength, from the thing that has made its name for 20 years.''
Network television -- battered by years of audience defections to cable channels and fearing the devastation that personal video recording machines like TiVo could wreak on advertising, its only revenue source -- is beginning to embrace tactics considered heretical just a few years ago as it struggles to keep viewers tuned in and attentive.
Network executives now say they are moving toward abolishing the traditional television season, that 35-week period from mid-September to mid-May that confers bragging rights on the network with the highest ratings. In a plan designed to reduce or do away with repeats, new shows will increasingly be introduced year-round rather than in the typical mid-September and midseason slots.
Instead of the typical 22-episode seasons, the networks are also planning more short-term programs, including reality shows and even scripted dramas. And they will be offered in bursts of 8 or 10 or 13 episodes in consecutive weeks, like ''Stephen King's Kingdom Hospital'' next month on ABC. (The lone holdout so far is CBS, which is committed to a traditional structure of 22 or so episodes in a season, followed by a summer of mostly repeats.)
Many network executives are even considering the elimination of the television-season subsections known as sweep months, the three-times-a-season special ratings periods filled with stunt programming.
''If you play by the old rules, you will be left behind,'' said Jeff Zucker, the president of NBC Entertainment.
The threats facing the networks are not new. Cable has been eating into the networks' share of the audience for years, surpassing the combined viewership of CBS, NBC, ABC, Fox, The WB and UPN last year for the first time. Repeats of all but a few shows have lost their allure. And the networks have not had a breakout comedy in six years.
''Have you laughed at a sitcom once this year?'' said Jon Mandel, co-chief executive of MediaCom, which buys advertising for clients like Procter &amp; Gamble and Mars Inc. ''Something has happened to television comedy. It's like they sucked the creative juice out of anybody who was ever good at writing television comedy.''
But several recent developments appear to have shaken network executives out of their inertia, spurring them to turn previously infrequent experiments into permanent decisions.
Worried that advertisers were turned off by the sometimes low-rent reality shows that were filling more of the television schedule, the networks committed last spring to hew to the old formula of scripted comedies and dramas for the 2003-2004 season. The gamble mostly failed. The most talked-about comedy of the season, ''Coupling'' on NBC, was quickly yanked from its 9:30 p.m. spot on Thursdays after disappointing ratings. Critical darlings like Fox's ''Skin,'' from Jerry Bruckheimer, the producer of ''CSI,'' were quickly canceled. And a striking number of younger viewers, particularly men, mysteriously stopped watching network prime-time television.
Meanwhile, ''The O.C.'' benefited from beginning its run in the dog days of summer, free from the onslaught of shows making their debut in September. Short-run reality shows like ''The Simple Life'' on Fox and ''Average Joe'' on NBC continued to thrive, particularly among those disappearing young adults. This prompted network executives to set aside their disdain for the genre and proudly proclaim its virtues to advertisers.
NBC decided to place Mr. Trump and ''The Apprentice'' in its Thursday night lineup because its executives saw a fundamental shift among young viewers -- the ones most networks covet because many advertisers pay a premium to reach them.
''No comedy has hit big since 'Will and Grace' six years ago,'' Mr. Zucker said. ''That's not to say there won't ever be another great sitcom, but right now to a lot of these young viewers, comedies just feel artificial.''
The apparent durability of the reality trend dovetails with the networks' moves toward limited-run series throughout the year. ''Our job is to get the audience what they want, but in doses that are easily digestible,'' Mr. Braun of ABC said.
In addition to ''Kingdom Hospital,'' ABC is producing an epic about ancient Rome, ''Empire,'' to be shown over eight consecutive weeks. If successful, both shows could be brought back for subsequent runs.
NBC will bring back ''The Restaurant,'' its reality show set in an Italian restaurant in Manhattan, for six episodes in April. And on Feb. 16, Fox will introduce ''The Littlest Groom,'' a two-episode show in which a 4-foot-5 man will search for a wife among short and regular-sized women.
Fox is also leading the charge against the long-held notion of a September-to-May television season.
''The television season doesn't matter to me,'' said Gail Berman, the president of Fox Entertainment.
She said she would soon announce a roster of new scripted shows for the summer, likely to include a legal drama called ''The Jury,'' from the producer Tom Fontana.
As for the sweeps, network executives have for years urged ending the focus on November, February and May. They have complained that sweeps are an antiquated concept that has drained them of a substantial portion of their most appealing programs in other months. Until now, the sweeps have been considered essential -- not for networks, which get ratings information every day, but for local stations, which are measured en masse only during those three months.
Now, however, Ms. Berman, Mr. Zucker and other executives are pointing to coming changes in how Nielsen Media Research measures viewership, saying that by 2006 the sweeps will be rendered irrelevant for the 10 largest markets. Those markets represent about 30 percent of the total national viewers -- and almost 50 percent of local television advertising revenue. Because the networks own most of their stations in those cities, their incentive to use their highest-profile programming in sweeps months could be eliminated.
These predicted changes come with caveats. Jack Loftus, corporate spokesman for Nielsen, said, ''Remember: 70 percent of the stations will still need the sweeps.''
And CBS, the most-watched network, rejects the premise that sweeping change is necessary.
''All these people talking about dropping the notion of a season and going to 52-week schedules, I think can be translated into, 'We're not doing so well, so let's deflect the story,' '' said David F. Poltrack, the CBS executive vice president for research.
But Mr. Zucker of NBC said that network television's still-profitable model was doomed to obsolescence.
''Things are working for CBS now, but it's a very short-sighted strategy,'' he said. ''Maybe it will work O.K. for two years, but we've got to be ready for the next five years.''
