It hit me in the theater last week, catching me unaware. The first preview opens with the trill of ''(Don't Fear) The Reaper'' by Blue Oyster Cult, a song I have never been embarrassed to enjoy. With just a few chords of classic rock, my senses are primed, eyes dilated, hair slightly raised. I'm sufficiently teased, the crash coming only when the screen brightens.
There's Kurt Russell as Herb Brooks, coach of the gold-medal-winning 1980 United States Olympic hockey team. Undaunted by a mop of 70's hair, the pseudo-Brooks studies game films while the actress representing his wife hugs him for support.
A voiceover explains the basics. Brooks was the last player cut from the 1960 Olympic team that proceeded to win gold. Now, 20 years later, as the coach of 20 ''ordinary kids,'' as they are called in the film, he has a chance to realize his Olympic dreams.
It's all going by so fast. The introduction of the players, actors shouting out names I long ago committed to memory: Mike Eruzione, Mark Johnson, Buzz Schneider. The general story line: a gaggle of unremarkable amateurs are molded into a team so good it engineered the ultimate upset, a defeat of the Soviet Union.
I slump in my seat, my hand shielding my eyes as if I were enduring a horror-flick dismemberment.
The advertised movie is ''Miracle,'' which is short for Miracle on Ice. The film opened nationwide on Friday. It's made by Disney. I cannot possibly watch it. Not a chance. The 1980 Olympic victory means too much to me.
There is no reason for this to be so. I am not Mike Eruzione. I am not the ABC announcer Al Michaels, who rose to fame calling the games. I don't own a Mark Pavelich throwback jersey. Ostensibly I had no role in the Miracle on Ice. Yet I felt its power deeply, was as moved by the achievement as any of the principals. It couldn't have meant more to me if I had been on the team.
The woman on my right, she knows. She's seen the famous picture of the team sprawled on the ice in victory, a picture I keep near my desk. She's the one who wooed me with the Gift: a tape of the actual game.
She'd spent a month hunting for it, even calling ABC directly and posing as a newspaper reporter. She said she was profiling one of the players, who'd moved to Miami where we live.
''Really?'' the producer asked. ''Which player?''
A pause revealed the ruse.
''This is for a gift isn't it?'' the producer demanded. ''Christmas, right? We get calls like this every year.''
Eventually she tracked down a black-market bootleg in a New Jersey memorabilia shop. It's a grainy tape, dubbed a thousand times, distributed clandestinely. It's all old-school graphics and simplistic camera angles. There's the analyst Ken Dryden before the game saying it's one thing to be young and promising and another thing to be good. There's an ''Up Close and Personal'' with goalie Jim Craig, so old to me at the time, now so young and beautiful on-screen.
There's Mark Johnson scoring a tying goal with one second remaining in the first period. There's Eruzione scoring the go-ahead goal. Then there's 10 agonizing minutes as the Americans hold on for the victory. Ten minutes of the best drama I've ever tasted. By the time Michaels kicks off his countdown, asking if we believe in miracles, I usually feel like crying. I often do. It's just so moving.
I'm not knocking the film. They hired real hockey players as actors. They paid attention to details as small as the black blades of the players' skates and the blue ice of the Lake Placid rink. The subject is worthy. I mean, it is a particularly good story.
It's just that some stories can be too personal. A Hollywood distillation of one of my favorite memories? A story about a plucky bunch of underdogs uniting to overcome huge odds and win the big game? For that plot I'll wait for the movie about the Patriots' first Super Bowl victory. Kurt Russell could play Bill Belichick without changing hairstyles.
In the theater, Al Michaels counts down to his famous line, an authentic insert that elates me as it unnerves me. In a moment the screen will dim, then brighten again, and I'll lose myself in a promotion for a Jim Carrey vehicle about erased memories. While I wait, while Michaels cries in ecstasy, the woman on my right reaches over with her hand. Her fingers rest on my knee. She knows where my head is. She understands.
Back Talk Robert Andrew Powell is author of ''We Own This Game: A Season in the Adult World of Youth Football'' (Atlantic Monthly Press, 2003).
