ON any given Monday here, even a casual observer can see something rare in society in the form of behavior that cuts evenly across the lines of class and race. Running up and down the basketball court in the Highlands Middle School gymnasium here are 50-year-old white men, 25-year-old black men and 30-something Hispanic men and just about everyone else. And many of them, regardless of age, race or color, act as one, at least when it comes to whining and ranting at the referees.
This White Plains men's league is not alone. Like other adult leagues, it has attracted a diverse group of adults who, the moment a call doesn't go their way, say spiteful things to the referee. Across the county and in other sports like softball and football, the same thing happens, say referees, players and league organizers, a trend I have observed with my own eyes.
With so many grown men consistently carrying on like petulant toddlers on courts and ball fields, many referees have refused to work men's league games, resulting in a referee shortage. ''It's logical,'' said Barry Mano, the founder and president of the National Association of Sports Officials in Racine, Wis., and former Division 1 basketball referee. ''Referees might be dumb, but we're sure not stupid.''
John Malnati, the secretary and treasurer of the Westchester County Football Officials, an organization for high school and youth league officials, used to referee men's league football but stopped after a player broke a fellow referee's nose. ''And that was after a good call,'' Mr. Malnati said. ''These are amateur officials with professional problems.''
Robert Sutherland, who lives in Brewster, has been officiating basketball, football, baseball and softball for 25 years, but says the men's games aren't worth the $35 to $40 he used to make. He will no longer do them, he said, unless he knows all the players involved. ''It's just aggravating and nerve-racking,'' he said. ''The abuse level is much higher than when you officiate the kids. Men's league games are a headache from the time you throw the ball up until the finish.''
Unlike others, Mr. Sutherland has never been physically abused, he says, only threatened. Make no mistake about it: Mr. Sutherland is no ingénue. He recently retired from his primary job as a captain for the New York City Fire Department.
And we've only been talking here about men's league games in the regular season. ''It gets worse when you get to the playoffs,'' said George Grieger, a Yonkers residents who officiates men's football.
You can talk about the frustration of athletes whose bodies don't do what they once did or who did not achieve as much as they imagine they should have. You can talk about how grown men are mimicking some of the behavior they see on television, but grown men should still know better than to take their misfortunes out on a guy who has to wear a striped shirt while working a second job. Not every grown man has to take his behavioral clues from Miss Manners, but it's a little too much to think they'd take them from Rasheed Wallace, the National Basketball Association player who has turned screaming at referees into an art form.
Like every scold, of course, I have my own history. In a game about 10 years ago, I received the only technical foul of my career. When I did not get the foul call I thought my right, I kicked the ball. The ball ricocheted off the wall, nearly decapitating me. After my brother, also playing in the game, laughed at me and said the ball had expressed his own opinion of me, he asked me how it was possible that I had gotten less mature as I'd grown up. In high school, he said, our coach, Robert Croke, would have pulled me by my ear from the court for such behavior -- if I was lucky.
Maybe that's the answer: adult supervision for adults. But Skip Ahnemann, who has most recently played in a Mount Kisco softball league, has a different idea: child supervision. Although Mr. Ahnemann has seen plenty of umpire harassment, he says there is one time when even a man who is normally a whiner and a ranter will be well behaved: when his child attends the game.
Mr. Ahnemann said, ''Most guys don't want their kids to see their father going berserk.''
That's not to say, however, that the children don't see other fathers going berserk. Mr. Ahnemann added: ''You see the children awestruck at what's happening. And you can see on the kid's face. He's just taking it all in.''
COUNTY LINES
