ONE day last fall, Barbara Vrana of Commack was driving her two teenage daughters to a class at Lumiere Ballet, a school on Nancy Street in West Babylon that teaches ballet to girls aged 5 to 17, when brightly colored neon signs caught her eye outside a new store just around the corner from the school.
''Adult Videos, DVDs, Mags,'' read one of the signs; another, ''Live Girls.'' Above the door was the store's name, X Dreams.
''I was appalled by it,'' Mrs. Vrana recalled. ''I had to explain to my daughters what that place was. They had no idea what pornography was. It bothers me because when I bring them for class, especially during the day, there are so many cars parked along Nancy Street and men walking to the store. To be honest with you, I find it disgusting.''
A member of the Babylon Town Board, Lindsay P. Henry, said his neighbor's three daughters take classes at Lumiere Ballet and that he is pressing the town to close X Dreams.
''Do we want live nude dancing or do we want ballet dancing in the town?'' he asked. ''Is the town more interested in bringing in culture or the alternative?''
Other members of the town government, however, find themselves in the awkward position of trying to resolve the conflict not by forcing the sex shop to move, but by finding a new home for the ballet school.
Steven C. Bellone, the town supervisor, said the town government has tried to concentrate sex shops in industrial areas like Nancy Street.
''It is not a question of what we want, it is what the law will allow,'' Mr. Bellone said. ''The U.S. Supreme Court has said that you are not permitted to zone these places out of existence. Our goal is to restrict them to specific areas of the town, namely nonresidential, industrial areas.''
Michael Ozegovich, the owner of X Dreams, said he fully complied with town regulations before opening in October.
''They chased us out of residential and commercial areas; we have to have someplace to go,'' he said. ''I built to code and had four or five inspectors here before I opened. This is not a strip club or a hangout where you stay for hours. This is a place where you buy or rent videos and see live girls through a window and leave. The longest someone is here is 20 minutes.''
He said he met with the owner of the ballet school, Svetlana Caton-Noble, after he opened and that she expressed some concerns to him.
''I told her she was not going to have any problems,'' Mr. Ozegovich recalled. ''I told her that people come and leave, that we don't have the overcoat crop of people here. We have an upscale atmosphere.''
He added that his store is frequented by ''lawyers and doctors.''
The fact that his business is tucked into an industrial area, Mr. Ozegovich said, means that ''it is way out of the way and nobody is coming here unless they want to come here.''
''There are no posters of naked women in front and we only allow in those 18 and over,'' he added.
Ms. Caton-Noble agreed that she had had no trouble with customers of the porn shop and noted that although parents of some of her students had complained, none had withdrawn their girls from her school.
''I wanted to confront the owner,'' she said of Mr. Ozegovich, ''and he said this is an industrial area and that he had a permit. He reassured me there would be no problems and we talked and he was very civil to me.''
Wayne Horsley, another town board member, said he understands Mr. Henry's concerns and agrees that the town would much prefer to foster a ballet company.
''A ballet company is what we want in the suburbs,'' he said.
But Mr. Horsley said the town mandates that adult establishments be allowed to operate in industrial areas and it is just ''unfortunate that the area they moved into is near this ballet company.''
Mr. Henry said, however, that the town prohibits an adult establishment within 500 feet of a church or school. ''Yes, these folks have won the right to operate, but not to be built around schools,'' he said.
But both Mr. Horsley and Mr. Bellone said Lumiere Ballet does not qualify as a school. ''In their legal papers, they say they are a ballet company, not a school,'' Mr. Bellone said. He said the town would try to ''facilitate'' the ballet school and the sex shop. Mrs. Caton-Noble said that when she moved to 64 Nancy Street in 1996 ''it was a charming place with trees and houses.''
''It got more and more industrial as time went on,'' she said. ''We had been very happy for eight years.''
But she said the ballet company has grown and she had begun looking to relocate from her 1,200-square-foot site to a 3,000-square-foot location about a year ago. The arrival of X Dreams in October, she said, had intensified her search.
''We certainly are totally incompatible'' with a porn shop, she said. ''But we are not in a position to tell people where they should or should not be. Mr. Harvey's heart is in the right place, but he does not have the full grasp of the situation. We need support of the community and positive exposure -- and we need to be out of here.''
Mr. Horsley said he is working to help her find an affordable location for the ballet school.
''We all agree we have to find a nice location for her that will be in the mainstream of the community,'' he said. ''At the end of the day, we want a nice place for the girls to perform and learn the craft of ballet.''
