No disrespect to William Shakespeare, but people around here think there is something in a name, especially a ship's name.
In May, a high-speed ferry will begin making daily trips between Rochester and Toronto. The company behind the project, Canadian American Transportation Systems, started a contest asking the public to come up with a name for its $42.5 million vessel.
Suggestions from both winter-weary cities are coming in by the boxful. Since Jan. 19, when the contest began, officials have received nearly 25,000 entries. ''Torro, Torch, Torchester, Rocco, Roctor,'' said the company's president, Howard Thomas, as he cited some suggestions that blended the names of Rochester and Toronto.
''TONY,'' he added, ''as in T-O for Toronto and N.Y. for New York.''
The ferry can hold up to 750 people and 220 cars. It has a restaurant, a bar, two movie theaters and a children's play area. Early test runs clock its speed at more than 47 knots or about 54 miles an hour, meaning the trips across Lake Ontario will last about 2 hours 15 minutes. (A one-way fare for one person is $25, and fares, based on weight, for most cars and light sport utility vehicles are $40.)
None of those attributes were reflected in its first name, Hull 251, the shipbuilders' equivalent of a labor nurse's officialese, Baby Boy Smith. When the ferry company registered the boat, it chose the name Spirit of Ontario, after a steamer that once hauled coal across the lake. That is its official name.
But people spontaneously wrote in their own suggestions. The ferry company received so many that executives decided to make a game of it, with a panel of judges chosen by the company and prizes that include two lifelong passes for the winner and gift certificates for the runners-up. Smaller prizes, like digital cameras, will be given away in a drawing.
''Cheetah, Lynx, Bobcat, Fast Cat, Toro Cat,'' said Mr. Thomas, listing suggestions from people who tried to better their chances by playing off the company acronym, CATS.
The ferry company wants the winning name to be catchy and memorable and to offer a sense of place, like the el in Chicago. It is simple shorthand for the city's elevated trains, but has become symbolic of Chicago itself. ''I think the el is closely identified with Chicago,'' said Robyn Ziegler, a spokeswoman for the Chicago Transit Authority. ''When the film industry comes and they want to shoot Chicago's landmarks to place the city, they ask permission to film the el. I hear many people say they're going to take the el, and they just mean they're going to take the train.''
Some of the ferry entries show that the public is thinking this way, too. ''Ontario Queen, Ontario Princess, Lilac Queen, because Rochester has the Lilac Festival,'' Mr. Thomas said. ''Flower Power.''
The contest has clearly engaged both cities. Rochester, which has always embraced the ferry project as a means to attract tourism income, has submitted only 2,000 entries more than Toronto, which has been skeptical of the benefit of traveling to western New York. Some suggestions sound like peace offerings. ''There's a whole lot of pride and friendship names,'' Mr. Thomas said.
The ferry company has hired three part-time workers to process the entries. The deadline for submissions was last Friday, and judges will now look for, among other criteria, novelty and marketability.
Mr. Thomas also wants the winning name, which is to be decided later this month after a legal review, to be short, simple and, of course, not already in use. ''We're not going to name it the Clipper,'' he said. ''That's already in Bar Harbor.''
At the Rochester ferry terminal, where construction has continued this winter, laborers had their own suggestions. ''The North American,'' said Thomas O. Marchetti, naming the entry from his wife, Cindy.
James DiNardo, the project manager for the city, countered, ''I think that sounds too lengthy; they want quick, zippy names.''
John M. LaDelfa suggested ''the Merry Ferry'' as he worked outside under a sky that was as gray as the concrete. ''Yeah, the Merry Ferry.''
Craig Doud, building canopy frames, disagreed. ''It's got to be a lady,'' he said. ''The Lady of the Lake.''
A mile away at Charlotte High School, a group of six students brainstormed names for a project. ''Freedom,'' said John Underwood, an eighth grader who noted that slaves traveling the Underground Railroad stopped in Rochester before crossing into Canada.
A classmate, Dechele Hester, thought the ferry should be named after the school's basketball team. ''The Lakesiders,'' she said.
Mr. Thomas seemed to like the names that were connected with history. ''The Marilyn Bell,'' he said, referring to the 16-year-old Canadian who became the first person to swim across Lake Ontario in 1954.
Another of his personal favorites is the Boomerang. ''There and back, right?'' Mr. Thomas said. ''Also, the boat was built in Australia.''
Some suggestions make sense only to those who submitted them. ''The Beagle,'' he said. ''I don't know why it was suggested, but it's out there.''
Rochester Journal
