The two German-made machine guns on the newest boat patrolling here in San Francisco Bay are not yet operational. There is no ammunition, and some of the sheriff's deputies are still learning how to shoot them.
The important thing, though, is that they are obvious -- mounted high on the bow and stern, visibly deadly. Sheriff Charles C. Plummer of Alameda County, the man behind the boat, wants terrorists to know that he is dead set on using his guns, and all 800 rounds they fire per minute, if he has to.
''We will kill them with kindness,'' Sheriff Plummer said. ''And if that doesn't work, then blow them out of the water.''
The sheriff gave a satisfied harrumph after delivering the threat, a favorite expression of his in the days since the gunboat, the August Vollmer, was christened here on Jan. 28. The 31-foot vessel is named for a former police chief in neighboring Berkeley, who espoused the ''kill them with kindness'' motto.
As the sheriff's new marine unit finds its sea legs, it has a certain ''McHale's Navy'' feel. The machine-gun mounts are homemade and must still be modified so the barrels do not swing toward the cabin. The crew is so green -- some members have been on the water only for fishing and sailing -- that heads bump against the low door frames.
But there is nothing amateurish about the marine unit's mission and aspirations. Despite his showy one-liners, Sheriff Plummer is serious about thwarting terrorists in his section of the nation's security underbelly: Alameda County's 26 miles of coastline, which include some of the West Coast's busiest shipping lanes, and the Port of Oakland, the fourth-busiest container port in the country.
Largely through the sheer force of personality and 51 years in law enforcement, Sheriff Plummer, 73, has thrust his 1,000-member department into the war's front lines, with a one-boat flotilla that federal and state authorities praise as an example of what is going right in the domestic security effort.
''Yes, it is one boat, but if one more person had been out there to intercept information about the terrorist attack on 9/11, then we might have been able to stop it,'' said Lt. Cmdr. Kevin Raimer, the Coast Guard's operations officer for the San Francisco area. ''That might be the one boat that counts.''
About 300 ships, ferries and other commercial vessels move through San Francisco Bay every day, creating an enormous law enforcement task for the Coast Guard and several police and fire departments with marine patrols. The August Vollmer is seen as a welcome addition, particularly since the bay includes several of California's most frequently mentioned terrorist targets, like the port's container terminals and the Golden Gate Bridge.
''This is an example of local officials taking the initiative to increase protective measures in our own backyard,'' said Ashley Snee, a spokeswoman for Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, praising Sheriff Plummer for trying ''to think outside of the box.''
The sheriff skimped and saved to come up with $325,000 from his operating budget to buy the boat from SAFE Boats International, a private manufacturer in Port Orchard, Wash.
Scott B. Peterson, vice president of SAFE Boats, said that his company had contracts to supply hundreds of vessels to the Navy, Marines and Coast Guard, but that he knew of no other local agency buying a boat for a start-up marine unit.
Capt. Rocky Medeiros, who commands the marine unit, said, ''Our main mission here is to act as a deterrent against a possible terrorist attack.'' He said, ''Everyone has come to the realization that no one agency or entity can do it all.''
Even so, some questions were raised last year when the purchase was approved, and some reservations remained as the August Vollmer took its maiden voyage last week.
''We have an added responsibility to do it, but like everything else, at what cost?'' said Keith Carson, a county supervisor. ''The tradeoffs have been deeper cuts in other areas that are potentially life-threatening, too.''
The supervisors approved the purchase by a unanimous vote. Mr. Carson, who is chairman of the supervisors' budget committee, said it would have been difficult to turn the boat down, since fighting terrorism is such a national priority and the sheriff had found the money.
''I think local officials are caught in a quandary,'' Mr. Carson said. ''We may have the gunboat out there to protect the goods moving on the water, but the money taken from some other area, some preventative program, might force some mentally deranged person with a gun to shoot somebody.''
David J. Kears, the county's health director who is a member of the county's antiterrorism committee, said the panel had also asked tough questions when the sheriff proposed paying for the boat with money from the Department of Homeland Security. In the end, the committee found that the purchase did not qualify for the money, but it expressed its support for the sheriff's undertaking.
''We are as hard as nails at these meetings,'' Mr. Kears said. ''Some laugh at proposals, and throw others in the waste basket.'' In the case of the August Vollmer, he said, the sheriff's ''credibility and reputation made a huge difference.''
To help defray costs, Sheriff Plummer put one of his captains to work last year writing grant proposals, eventually coming up with $500,000 as part of a larger grant to Alameda County from the Justice Department's office of community-oriented policing services. That money will cover the marine unit's costs for its first year, including salaries and training for its five deputies.
The department also found ways to cut corners. The two Heckler &amp; Koch machine guns, worth about $16,000 each, were obtained free from the local office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The guns use standard NATO-issue cartridges, which will make it easier to keep ammunition stockpiled. The boat will dock in a donated slip. And the unit will soon add two personal watercraft to help in the gunboat's activities, both donated by the Honda Motor Company.
''The Coast Guard had been whittled down to next to nothing, with one or two boats in the entire bay that ever came close to our area,'' said Capt. Rich Lucia, who wrote the grant request. ''They increased that since 9/11, but the sheriff was concerned about local control and somebody keeping an eye on the port.''
But some uncertainties loom just around the corner. The federal grant covers costs for only the next 12 months. The county has no money lined up for next year, and a spokesman for the Department of Justice said the $59 million federal program that financed Alameda's grant had not been renewed by Congress.
Captain Medeiros and his crew did not seem worried. They had come too far, and waited too long, to allow the endeavor to fail. Sheriff Plummer said unequivocally that the August Vollmer would not end up in dry dock.
''If I have to go out with a tin cup and beg for money,'' he said, ''we will keep it going.''
