A YEAR ago very few people had heard of Derek Lam. He didn't sell a single piece of clothing to stores after his first collection last February. He was still obscure when he staged a runway show in September in a downtown furniture store, but his colorful print dresses were in tune with the upbeat mood for this spring, and retailers and magazine editors formed a mini-stampede to him.
In a make-believe world -- maybe a Hollywood fashion movie -- the 37-year-old Mr. Lam would now be a big success, living in the lap of luxury with white-coated serving men like Giorgio Armani's catering to his every whim.
Such is not the case. Even after $450,000 in sales last fall and flattering coverage in Vogue and other periodicals, he is still very much a struggling designer whose business runs in the red. This evening at 5, he will present his third collection, for fall 2004, at the National Arts Club on Gramercy Park, hoping to stand out among 100 other designers this week. He agreed to offer a rare glimpse into the precarious finances of a beginning designer with a newly minted label -- one who draws no salary, answers his own phone and worries about how much he spends in subway fare to the garment district.
''If we're lucky we'll break even,'' he said. ''Not with this show, but the one after that.''
It all started in October 2002 with $380,000 -- not exactly a shoestring, but hardly a blank check. Mr. Lam contributed half, and half came from a business partner, Jan-Hendrik Schlottmann, an executive at Givaudan, a fragrance company in New York. ''It was really all our savings.'' Mr. Lam said. ''He sold some real estate, and both our families kicked in.''
A graduate of the Parsons School of Design, Mr. Lam worked as an intern for Michael Kors, went to Hong Kong for several years to work as a designer for a clothing chain, then rejoined Mr. Kors's design team in New York. He then decided to break out on his own.
''I'm from San Francisco,'' he said. ''My father used to import clothing from Hong Kong, and my mom worked for my father. My grandparents on my father's side had a factory in San Francisco. They were very supportive, especially my mother. I said, 'I'm ready to start,' and she said, 'We're with you 100 percent.' My parents were always entrepreneurial -- they believe that if you own your own business, you are your own boss and can succeed on your own terms.''
Like many beginners, he worked from his home, using his one-bedroom Greenwich Village apartment as his studio. ''My apartment was strewn with samples and papers and drawings,'' he recalled. ''It was like a Rubik's Cube: when you moved one thing, you had to move everything else.''
He and Mr. Schlottmann sought out Greg Mills, who owns a showroom in the garment district that represents a dozen designers too small to employ sales and marketing teams. ''You could see he has it -- it was a gut instinct,'' Mr. Mills said. But the first presentation, in February 2003 -- 20 dresses, jackets, coats, tops and sweaters, which cost $60,000 to make -- was a disaster.
He showed it on hangers in Mr. Mills's showroom to avoid the expense of a runway spectacular. Mr. Mills invited buyers and editors, and Mr. Lam invited his own friends -- women in the cosmetics business, graphic designers, handbag designers, former colleagues and classmates, who happily bought his clothes, generally below wholesale.
But every store declined. The collection was ''dark, heavy,'' Mr. Mills said. ''It did have an attitude when you saw the silhouette. But -- I like to take a little credit for this -- I said: 'Derek, you've got to do colors. The magazines won't photograph black and burgundy.' ''
''It was the nadir,'' Mr. Lam said. ''The economy was still bad, and it was just before the Iraq war.'' Money from sales to acquaintances only partly offset the $60,000 for samples and other expenses. ''We spent $70,000 and had nothing to show for it,'' he said. ''I said to my partner, 'What are we doing?' But I didn't want to quit. I said: 'I'm going to do this next one. Can I do one more? Is there enough money?'
''Coming from Mr. Kors, I was used to spending. I just bought, spent, did what we did, assuming the sales would cover the costs. Now I had to assume the worst: nobody would buy it. But I said, Just go ahead and produce it. If nothing else, it could be my résumé for a future job.''
On Sept. 14, Mr. Lam held his first runway show with live models. As a newcomer, he had to show on a Sunday, a less popular day in Fashion Week. ''But I knew Diane Von Furstenberg was showing the same day at 6, and we knew everyone would go to her show. So we said, 'Let's do it before her, very close to hers, and we'll have a captive audience.' ''
Mr. Lam rented a vacant furniture store two blocks from Ms. Von Furstenberg's studio on West 12th Street. ''I had packed the audience with friends,'' he recalled, ''and when, at the end, I heard a roar, I thought it was just my friends. I didn't get a sense of the real reaction until after, when I was rolling the racks back to the studio and one editor shouted across the street, 'I loved the show!' The next day, the store buyers started calling. Some had already made appointments, but wanted to move them up.''
All told, Mr. Lam wrote $450,000 in wholesale orders for 15 stores, including Barneys, Neiman Marcus and Nordstrom. He sold them 80 of the show's biggest hit, a strapless cotton sundress with a carnation print that was widely photographed in the fashion press, a surefire catalyst for orders. At retail, the dress will sell for around $900. One is currently in a window at Kirna Zabête in SoHo.
Because retailers usually don't pay designers until 30 to 60 days after clothes are delivered, a newcomer has a problem coming up with enough cash to finance the manufacturing. ''Everything I order -- the fabric, the zippers, the buttons -- is cash up front,'' Mr. Lam said.
But some of the retailers helped by paying more speedily, Mr. Schlottmann said. Department stores offered cash advances, and smaller boutiques paid on delivery. Mr. Schlottmann was surprised at how supportive some stores were. ''I had heard they were really tough,'' he said, ''but I suppose they will be tougher when we are bigger.''
Suzanne Patneaude, Nordstrom's vice president for designer apparel, who bought Mr. Lam's designs, said that although she did not provide a cash advance, she ''walked the invoice through,'' so that payment would go to him 10 to 15 days after the clothes were shipped. That is very unusual, she added, but ''every single piece had a reason to be -- it was a well-edited collection.''
Even with nearly half a million dollars in orders and the easy terms from some retailers, Mr. Lam and Mr. Schlottmann said their business is not yet profitable. They parted from Mr. Mills, on friendly terms, and brought in a marketing director, paid on commission. The cost of mounting the last show -- models, invitations, renting space -- came to $20,000, plus $85,000 to make the samples. They had to pay $200,000 for fabric, manufacturing, shipping and import duty, Mr. Schlottmann said.
The business has moved from Mr. Lam's apartment to a tiny brick-lined studio in a warehouse in the meatpacking district, where the rent is $3,000 a month. The copy machine and furniture still have to be paid for.
For his runway show this evening, he has budgeted about $60,000. And this time the impression that he is a comer has attracted some heavyweight sponorship: Vogue is contributing $5,000 to help with expenses, and Swarovski gave the crystal beading for the clothes and some money. Shiseido cosmetics, Maurice Villency furniture and Saga Furs are also sponsors, contributing money or products in exchange for the cachet of being associated with Mr. Lam.
Will he finally be able to make money if the show is a hit? ''With this one?'' he said. ''No. Hopefully maybe by next fall we'll be in the black if we still keep the costs tight.''
''I'm on the C train to the garment center about four times a day,'' he said. ''And you should see the messenger bills -- I'm shocked. I'd carry the stuff myself to editors, to photographers, but I have to be five places at once. And we don't even have a decent phone system. I'll pick up the phone and say, 'Derek Lam,' and some editor will say, 'Oh, it's so cool you pick up your own phone.' But who else is going to do it?''
