WHEN Sarah Jones opens her mouth, what's going to come out is anyone's guess. A confession from a shy Indian woman? Kvetching from a Jewish grandmother? Or maybe the naturally rapid-fire delivery of this hyper-articulate New York performer. Then again, who knows for sure?
The 29-year-old monologist, who is as tall and bone-thin as a supermodel, has earned comparisons to Lily Tomlin and Whoopi Goldberg in downtown theater circles because of her precise, detailed and totally unpredictable character portrayals.
''I'm really interested in the slashes,'' Ms. Jones said over lunch at a NoHo restaurant, across the street from 45 Bleecker, where her new show, ''Bridge &amp; Tunnel,'' began performances last Friday. ''The slashes are what connect -- I'm African-American, I'm a woman, I'm this, I'm that. I'm fascinated by those spaces.''
In the show, directed by Tony Taccone, she speeds through 14 characters in 80 minutes, introducing audiences to a collection of immigrants who have come together for a poetry slam. Ms. Jones gives off the impression of a crowded room of lively loudmouths dying to get something off their chests. With a dry sense of humor and a deep sense of empathy, she creates her own self-contained world of eccentrics who riff on pop culture, often make bad jokes and serve up unsentimental personal confessions.
Many New Yorkers use the term ''bridge and tunnel'' as a slur, but in this show it refers to the connective tissue between people of wildly different backgrounds.
''We want to reclaim the term,'' said the production's assistant director, Steve Colman, a poet who appeared in Russell Simmons's ''Def Poetry Jam'' in 2002 on Broadway and who is Ms. Jones's fiancé.
Ms. Jones has been working on this project for about three years, conducting discussions with members of the Border Patrol, illegal aliens and random people on the subway, among others. While her monologues are not taken verbatim from interviews -- as in the work of Anna Deavere Smith -- they do come from her subjects' personal experience, Ms. Jones said.
''It's easy to find good stories in New York,'' she explained. ''Go downstairs and buy your newspaper, there's somebody to talk to. Enter a cab, there's a famous singer from another country. Go down to your doctor's office and you're just as likely to find someone from South Asia or West Africa as someone who was born here. And it always feels fresh because no one talks about it. These people are not on television.''
This is one of Ms. Jones's pet peeves -- how television either ignores immigrants or treats them as comic relief. ''On television, if you speak a little Yiddish, that's got to be funny,'' she said. ''Why? Same thing with accents. I start talking like this'' -- she spoke a few words using an Indian accent -- ''and it's funny. Why? If you have a French accent, O.K., that's sexy. If you have a Spanish accent, that's unacceptable.''
Ms. Jones, who was brought up in New York and Washington by an African-American father and a mother of European and Caribbean descent, began her career doing poetry slams at the Nuyorican Poets Cafe in the East Village. She started performing in 1997, the same year that her 18-year-old sister died of a drug overdose. ''Remember heroin chic?'' she asked. ''Well, I do, too.''
Ms. Jones's breakout show was ''Surface Transit,'' which opened in 1998 at the Nuyorican cafe and was also seen at the American Place Theater and P.S. 122. Critics hailed the young performer as a rising star, and offers from television and Hollywood soon followed. Spike Lee gave her a part in the movie ''Bamboozled,'' and MTV asked her to be a regular on a sketch series ''The Lyricist Lounge Show.'' She was poised to become a major new star, but things didn't quite turn out that way.
Most of her scenes in ''Bamboozled'' were cut. ''It was a lesson in humility,'' she said. As for ''The Lyricist Lounge Show,'' Ms. Jones left after one episode, unhappy over the direction of the program. ''I didn't realize that I didn't have the power to say to an executive that 'Puerto Rican woman pregnant with nine kids in the kitchen let's make rice and beans' jokes are not funny to me,'' she said. A spokeswoman for MTV said it would have no comment.
''She is one of the finest artists working in the form today,'' Mark Russell, artistic director of Performance Space 122 in the East Village, said of Ms. Jones, ''but she's yet to find the perfect vehicle to take her to the next level.''
The multi-character solo show was once a prime launching pad to pop culture stardom. In the 1980's, artists like John Leguizamo, Whoopi Goldberg and Eric Bogosian burst on the scene with landmark showcases that led the way to Hollywood. Since then, there have been many standout solo performers -- including Danny Hoch, Dael Orlandersmith and Heather Woodbury -- but few have crossed over to the mass audience, which is what Ms. Jones wants to do.
One person who wants to help her do that is Meryl Streep, a producer of ''Bridge &amp; Tunnel.'' In 2000, Ms. Streep saw Ms. Jones perform ''Women Can't Wait,'' monologues about oppressed women commissioned by the advocacy group Equality Now. ''She changes colors right before your eyes,'' Ms. Streep said in a telephone interview. ''I'm telling everyone I know who is big and important to see the show. Sarah deserves to be seen by as many people as possible.''
Despite her many criticisms of television, Ms. Jones admits she is dying to be on it. ''We're not going to stop this,'' she said, ''so I want to participate in it. It doesn't serve anyone to be an underground artist who stays underground. What does matter is the opportunity to reach millions who only get to see 'TRL' and Nick and Jessica Simpson.''
Ms. Jones may get that chance in a new and still-unnamed sketch comedy show for Bravo, which she has written with Mr. Colman. This time, she will have more creative control. ''It's 'The Sarah Jones Project,' '' she said, pointedly.
As for her future, Ms. Jones can easily imagine a life without one-person shows. ''I like acting with a team,'' she said. ''On the other hand, I might also become a cowgirl, a ballerina or whatever else when I grow up.''
'Bridge &amp; Tunnel'  45 Bleecker Street.  In previews; opens Feb. 19.
THEATER
