WHEN it comes to night life, Beverly Hills is typically about as thrilling as the third day of a white sale. The city starts to snore as soon as the Rodeo Drive shops close. But last Saturday evening, the scene across the street from Spago was bustling. At 10, a throbbing line of clubgoers had formed outside a new restaurant and lounge called Luce. Young, lithe women strained against a velvet rope. It was all so, well, Hollywood.
Inside, the place was even louder. Luce (rhymes with touché) was so packed that you couldn't help fretting that Lara Flynn Boyle, thinner than a slice of prosciutto, might be trampled. It was no small feat to get a drink at the bar. Hand-passed platters of baby lamb chops nearly caused fisticuffs. ''In the future, Luce will never be such a rowdy place,'' said David Bergstein, 41, an owner. ''We'll get young Hollywood to the extent that older Hollywood is either doing business with them or dating them.''
But on this night, young, old and middle-aged Hollywood seemed to coexist nicely. The line of twiggy 20-something women waiting to use the restroom parted for a 70-something woman. A Robert Evans look-alike revealed his tanning secrets -- ''baby oil, a heated pool and a pitcher of vodka gimlets'' -- to three young men in suits at the bar.
With so many bodies on hand, it was also difficult to appraise the décor by the restaurant designer Dodd Mitchell. Above the lounge area, a skylight that looked like a giant bicycle wheel with wooden spokes stood out. The oversize banquette beside the bar made for easy mingling. While the interior cost $2 million, the walls were bare. ''We haven't put up our art yet,'' Mr. Bergstein said.
On the back patio, the crowd was a decade or so younger. Smokers swayed as a D.J. spun hip-hop.
''This is fun for tonight, but Beverly Hills is not somewhere I can see myself hanging out. It's old,'' Audrey Delaney, an independent film executive, said.
''But it could be coming around,'' noted Dane Lee, 34, the editor of a new magazine about young Hollywood called Ingenue. ''It would be great if there were more hip bars and clubs around here.''
Not everyone agreed. ''It's too crowded and I can't hear anything,'' said an older man wearing a scowl and an ascot. When asked how he ended up at Luce, he gestured to his silver-haired wife and growled: ''Her. This is not my crowd at all.''
Luce  301 North Canon Drive, Beverly Hills; (310) 275-2900.
GETTING IN -- Reservations for dinner.  DRESS CODE -- For women, long hair, floral perfume and diamond stud earrings; for men, navy blazers and jeans.  D.J. PICKS -- ''The Way You Move'' by Outkast; ''Emotional Rescue'' by the Rolling Stones.  SIGHTINGS -- Ethan Hawke.  SIGNATURE DRINK -- The James Luce: vodka, rum and Midori, topped off with a splash of cranberry and pineapple juice and a squeeze of lemon, $9.
BOÎTE
