IF there was anything more bizarre than the sudden baring of Janet Jackson's breast during the Super Bowl halftime show, it was the hyperbolic reaction that followed. The whole fuss began to seem like a sequel to some Philip Roth novella -- ''The Breast That Ate the Super Bowl.''
A lawyer in Knoxville, Tenn., filed a class action suit claiming that victims who watched the show experienced ''outrage, anger, embarrassment and serious injury.'' CBS was flooded with protest calls. The Federal Communications Commission received 200,000 calls and e-mail messages and opened an investigation.
Michael K. Powell, chairman of the panel, complained that Ms. Jackson's stunt violated a ''sacred period of time,'' as if a football championship were the Sabbath. Senate and Congressional hearings into indecency on television were scheduled for this week in Washington.
Jittery NBC executives also demanded that ''E.R.'' producers omit a glimpse of the breasts of an 80-year-old hospital patient, evidently fearful that viewers would deem even that image lewd. For its Pro Bowl halftime tonight, the National Football League replaced JC Chasez -- an 'N Sync band mate of Justin Timberlake, who ripped Ms. Jackson's bodice -- with traditional Hawaiian hula dancers. CBS promised that the Grammy Awards would be shown tonight with a time delay and without Janet Jackson. (Mr. Timberlake, for some reason, was granted immunity.)
But the breast is not just an American fetish. It is the last wall between networks and cable -- the Maginot Line of broadcast decency.
Limits on the depiction of violence were crossed years ago, and anyone who has seen network reality shows like ABC's ''Are You Hot?'' or ''Temptation Island'' on the Fox network understands that network standards about sex are almost as skimpy as cable's. The F.C.C. has jurisdiction over networks, not cable, and its enforcement of indecency statutes is scattered. Last year, the commission received about 240,000 complaints about some 375 different radio and television programs, and issued a total of three fines.
The networks are careful not to violate the mammary taboo. Breasts are shown at varying angles of nudity depending on the hour of the day, but nipples are not normally shown on network television. (The first broadcast of ''Schindler's List'' was a notable exception. The director, Steven Spielberg, refused to edit his Holocaust film, and NBC went along, assuming viewers would not consider nudity the most disturbing element in the film. The network got complaints anyway.)
For millions of Americans who believe that the violence, sex and nudity on network shows keep growing bolder and sleazier, Janet Jackson's extreme exposure (her metal sunburst enhanced rather than concealed her nipple) was almost welcome. Like federal prosecutors sending Al Capone to jail for tax evasion, critics of all stripes used the Jackson infraction as a chance to vent about far worse, unpunished, offenses.
''The outcry is really about the glaring lack of accountability or responsibility at some of the most important media and entertainment institutions in the country,'' James P. Steyer, the founder of Common Sense Media, a parents' lobbying group, said. ''How could they think this was O.K.?''
Mr. Timberlake did more than just expose Ms. Jackson's breast. The move, a pantomime of sexual assault, is not widely accepted, however commonplace it may be on MTV and at hip-hop concerts. And it was particularly jarring during the testosterone-fueled Super Bowl, an event that to some minds is linked, however speciously, to male violence against women. (A women's advocacy group in 1993 got a lot of attention by stating that rates of spousal abuse were higher on Super Bowl Sunday than any other day, even though research did not support the claim.)
Plenty of viewers argue that Ms. Jackson's flash of flesh hardly qualifies as indecency, particularly when compared with some of the other sights and sounds shown during the Super Bowl. Ads for impotence medication like Cialis are not exactly fit for children. Like the ever competing ads for fast food chains and weight loss plans, the dizzying juxtaposition of sex-driven ads and virility enhancement drugs bears a confusing message for youth: Is the absence of sex a disease?
Viewers can debate how much damage the MTV halftime show really did, but Ms. Jackson's prank is likely to qualify as a nuisance as it was defined by a Supreme Court justice, George Sutherland, in 1926: ''A nuisance may be merely a right thing in the wrong place, like a pig in the parlor instead of the barnyard.''
That ''pig in the parlor'' trick was cited by the Supreme Court when it ruled in 1978 that the F.C.C. had the power to regulate George Carlin's ''dirty words'' routine. ''We simply hold that when the commission finds that a pig has entered the parlor,'' the court decided, the exercise ''of its regulatory power does not depend on proof that the pig is obscene.''
And many are hoping that the Super Bowl nuisance will lead to tougher scrutiny of television excess. As Michael J. Copps, an F.C.C. commissioner who has long argued for stricter regulation, put it, ''I think Ms. Jackson's escapade illuminates the need to tackle this issue and enforce the law.''
Week in Review
