Andrea Ends Relationship With Adviser on Asset Sale
The Andrea Electronics Corporation (Amex: AND) of Melville has severed its relationship with FTI Merger &amp; Acquisition Advisors of Annapolis, Md., Andrea said Monday. Andrea had engaged FTI last June to seek a buyer for its digital audio technology business. Two calls to FTI for comment were not returned.
Andrea, a developer of audio recording products, sought the sale after the American Stock Exchange said that it had fallen below the exchange's required $2 million minimum in shareholder equity and had not met profitability requirements in two of the three most recent fiscal years.
Paul E. Donofrio, the president and chief executive of Andrea, said that it would concentrate on raising capital for continuing operations and might seek buyers for some assets on its own.
Gentiva's Ex-Chief Appointed
The HealthSouth Corporation (OTC: HLSH.PK), a rehabilitation and surgical center based in Birmingham, Ala., has appointed Edward Blechschmidt, the former chief executive of Gentiva Health Services (Nasdaq: GTIV) of Melville, to its board, the company said Monday. Seven of HealthSouth's directors have resigned or agreed to resign after a criminal investigation, and Richard Scrushy, its former chief executive, has been arrested on fraud charges.
Mr. Blechschmidt left as the chief executive of Gentiva, a home health-care provider, in June 2002. He continues to serve on Gentiva's board.
CPI's Financial Officer Resigns
CPI Aerostructures (AMEX: CVU) of Edgewood said Tuesday that its chief financial officer, Anthony D'Agostino, had resigned.
Edward J. Fred, the company's president and chief executive, will serve as interim chief financial officer while CPI searches for a replacement. CPI produces airplane parts for the Air Force and other branches of the armed forces. The company said that Mr. D'Agostino was out of the office and would not be available for comment.
$2.3 Million Comtech Contract
The Comtech Telecommunications Corporation (Nasdaq: CMTL) of Melville said Tuesday that its Comtech Systems subsidiary in Orlando, Fla., had signed a $2.3 million contract to manufacture microwave communications equipment. It did not name the customer.
E-mail: libiz@nytimes.com
