Atop a list of priorities on a chalkboard in the Knicks' locker room Saturday afternoon was a reminder to be aware of Miami Heat guard Eddie Jones's 3-point shooting, especially in transition. Jones had made five 3-pointers in the teams' previous meeting, a Heat victory last month.
Mission accomplished. Jones missed all five of his 3-point attempts Saturday and the Knicks, coming off three consecutive days of practice, beat the Heat, 76-64, before a crowd of 16,500 at American Airlines Arena. It was the Heat's lowest point total against the Knicks. The previous low, 65, came on Jan. 20, 2003.
Putting the clamps on Jones might have been the difference between winning and losing. He shot 4 of 16 and finished with 9 points.
''The guy's been on a roll, but we gave him no easy looks,'' Knicks Coach Lenny Wilkens said after his 1,300th N.B.A. victory.
The Knicks (24-27) clinched the season series, 3-1, giving them the first tie breaker with the Heat for a playoff berth. And it was their fourth consecutive victory, all without their star shooting guard, Allan Houston. That left Wilkens to ponder briefly whether Houston, who has an ailing left knee, might return to the team as a sixth man. ''If he gets in the system and plays good defense, then it should be just a plus for us,'' Wilkens said.
The Knicks' defense was inspired. It made eight steals and blocked seven shots, a stark contrast from the last time the Knicks had three days off in a row, Nov. 11 to 13. After that break, they lost two in a row and four of five. This time, they spent most of the practices deciphering Wilkens's system.
''You have to have good team defense in this league,'' said Wilkens, who is 8-3 with the Knicks. ''One guy can't stop one person by himself. They have to learn to trust one another. We're trying to build that and make them see and understand that when they do those things, they become a pretty good defensive team.''
Wilkens went with a small lineup Saturday -- 7-foot-2 Dikembe Mutombo played only 12 minutes -- to combat the Heat's fluid offense, which relies heavily on disrupting the defense's timing. The switch also meant that Kurt Thomas, who is 6-9, guarded Lamar Odom, who is 6-10 and quick. Thomas did well in the matchup. Odom shot 6 of 19 and scored 18 points. Thomas scored 14 points and had a steal and 3 blocks.
''If I got beat, I was hoping someone would be there,'' Thomas said, adding that someone always was.
Thomas gave the team a scoring lift in the second half, just as the Heat (21-30 over all and 14-9 at home) hoped to rally. He made seven consecutive shots, despite injuring his right pinkie two games ago.
''They say it's not broken,'' Thomas said, ''but it feels like it.''
The third quarter belonged to Thomas. Muted early -- Odom blocked Thomas's first shot and Thomas was 0 for 4 in the first half -- he was 5 for 5 in the third.
He was 2 for 2 in the low-scoring fourth and blocked a shot.
Wilkens said of Stephon Marbury, who had 8 assists and a team-high 16 points: ''Stephon has really taken over, and he's running it like a point guard should. Tonight was a great example of it, because Kurt had the hot hand and he got the ball to him.''
The Knicks led after the first quarter, 19-17. Marbury had 11 of those points, including three 3-pointers, and his backcourt mate, Shandon Anderson, had 6, including a twisting reverse layup amid three defenders.
Forward Othella Harrington's free throw with 41.2 seconds left was the lone frontcourt scoring contribution in the quarter. Forward Keith Van Horn did not even attempt a shot.
By halftime, the Knicks had four steals, two by Penny Hardaway, and three blocks, and had held the Heat to 35.9 percent field-goal shooting in taking a 43-36 lead.
The Heat got within 6 points two times in the final quarter, but no closer. Wilkens does not particularly like the idea of teaching his players his system while they are on a winning streak, but he cannot argue with the early results.
The Knicks have three games in the next four days. They return to Madison Square Garden on Sunday night to play the Los Angeles Clippers, then are at Dallas on Tuesday and at New Orleans on Wednesday.
''Guys are stepping up,'' Marbury said. ''We've got a nice balance of chemistry going on. We're getting our offense down and our defense. And when Allan returns, we'll just have way more firepower.''
PRO BASKETBALL
