Federal investigators have served Gov. John G. Rowland's wife, Patricia, with a subpoena, asking her to turn over financial documents, including records of any gifts she and her husband may have received, according to lawyers who are aware of the subpoena.
The subpoena does not require Mrs. Rowland to appear before a grand jury, but she has nevertheless retained her own lawyer.
The subpoena for Mrs. Rowland, which was issued this week, comes as her husband's administration is under federal investigation for possible corruption in the awarding of state contracts. Mr. Rowland is also the subject of a Connecticut House impeachment inquiry.
The federal investigation picked up steam after Mr. Rowland, a Republican in his third term, admitted in December that he had lied about accepting gifts and free work at his Litchfield cottage from people doing business with the state.
Mrs. Rowland's lawyer, Robert M. Casale of Branford, could not be reached for comment Saturday. Through a spokesman, Mrs. Rowland declined to comment.
Ross H. Garber, Mr. Rowland's in-house counsel, would not confirm or deny that a subpoena had been issued for the governor's wife, and Mr. Rowland's spokesman did not return calls seeking comment.
But three lawyers who are aware of the subpoena confirmed that Mrs. Rowland had been subpoenaed. They said the subpoena sought financial documents and records of any gifts she and the governor might have received.
Whether the subpoena is a pressure tactic of federal investigators to gain leverage on the governor or the beginning of her own criminal ordeal could not be determined Saturday.
It is not uncommon for a family member of someone under investigation to be subpoenaed, said Hugh F. Keefe, a criminal defense lawyer in New Haven.
''This was a deliberate move to embarrass the Governor and deliver a message to him,'' Mr. Keefe said. ''It's outrageous.''
Last month, Mr. Rowland hired William F. Dow III, a criminal defense lawyer from New Haven, as his personal counsel. Mr. Keefe said it would be a conflict of interest for Mr. Dow to also represent Mrs. Rowland.
Mrs. Rowland has two teenage sons from a previous marriage. She published a children's book last fall set in the Rowlands' official residence in Hartford.
Some of the documents sent to federal investigators in compliance with recent subpoenas are related to the residence. An expensive restoration of the house, a Georgian Colonial, was undertaken when Mr. Rowland took office in 1995. It was paid for by a private foundation, the Governor's Residence Conservancy. Many of its donors are some of the same people who are implicated in the federal investigation of Mr. Rowland.
In September, when questions were raised about who paid for improvements to the Rowlands' cottage, which had already been completed, Mr. and Mrs. Rowland wrote $13,000 worth of checks.
The wives of two other men who helped outfit the Rowlands' cottage and who are involved in the federal investigation have not received subpoenas. William Gerace, an Avon lawyer who is representing one of them, Lawrence Alibozek, the governor's former deputy chief of staff, said neither Mr. Alibozek's wife nor the wife of Peter Ellef, the governor s former co-chief of staff, have been subpoenaed.
In an interview published Saturday in The New Haven Register, Mr. Casale characterized Mrs. Rowland's subpoena as mere paperwork.
Mr. Casale told The Register that Mrs. Rowland could not be considered the subject of the investigation because ''nothing she could have done would violate any federal laws.''
But Mr. Gerace said that in general, the fact that someone is issued a ''record subpoena versus a personal subpoena does not mean they are not under investigation.''
