The town, in the end, proved as insubstantial as smoke. More so, really: the houses, the Methodist church and the playground seemed to drift away into the colorless Midwestern sky, while the twin columns of roiling vapor remained, sometimes gray, sometimes yellow, sometimes tinged with venomous blue.
It was the blue that doomed Cheshire, Ohio. That was the signature tint of sulfur trioxide and sulfuric acid, emissions from the massive coal-burning power plant whose smokestacks and cooling towers loomed over the town. On days when the smoke was blue, locals complained of sore throats, burning eyes and strange blisters. Sometimes the smog was so thick that cars drove through the streets at noon with their headlights on.
As for the rest of the story, it's easy to imagine how Hollywood would script it. One or two plucky souls stand up at a town meeting and vow to fight. The plant's owner, a ruthless multibillion-dollar corporation, strikes back with everything its high-priced attorneys can devise, or worse. Someone has to die. And finally, good (or just possibly evil) prevails.
But that's not what happened. Instead, it was something quite undramatic, or at least uncinematic: in a series of town meetings in the spring of 2002, lawyers presented an offer from American Electric Power to buy all of Cheshire for $20 million. The 200-odd residents would have to move, their houses would be razed and their community would cease to exist -- and in exchange they would each receive about three times the assessed value of their property. Though a few dissenters stood up and said they would rather fight than leave, they couldn't sway their neighbors. Nothing rallied the townspeople to resist, to tap the stubborn courage of the American heartland, to show the company that their hometown couldn't be bought. They deliberated for a short while and told American Electric Power that, yes, they would accept the offer. They would waive their right to sue. They would take the money, and they would lose Cheshire.
Today, less than two years later, nearly all the town's residents have left. First the moving vans came, and residents loaded them up with their belongings as well as anything desirable they could pry loose from the vacated houses: doors, windows, even floorboards and plumbing. Then American Electric Power's bulldozers and track hoes followed, tearing down homes and buildings; 18-wheeler trucks hauled the debris away, and the empty lots were smoothed over and seeded, left as if nothing had ever been there at all. Most of the remaining structures await the same fate. Fewer than two dozen people, most of them elderly, have stayed on; the power company has bought nearly all their homes and is allowing them to live there until they move out or die.
The photographer Mitch Epstein, whose work has often documented the inner lives of ordinary places, spent two weeks in Cheshire. He found it unlike anywhere he had been before, a town whose sadness and squalor were interrupted by odd flashes of beauty. ''There were days when the sun would pass behind the emissions plume at midday and spread a warm golden light over this broken landscape,'' he says. ''It was like something out of a biblical painting.''
No one made much of a fuss over Cheshire during the first two centuries of its existence. Even the famously thorough writers of the Works Projects Administration failed to find anything there worth noting when they traveled through the region in the 1930's. But ever since its imminent demise was announced, outsiders have found something disturbing in the town's fate -- the antithesis of a classic American fable, a small-town drama without heroes or villains, a story without a satisfactory ending.
It's hard not to paint a sentimental picture of Cheshire as it was before the power plant was built in the 1970's: a hamlet where children played ball in the streets and parents left the back doors unlocked. It's hard not to mourn the loss of this Frank Capra-esque town as a stand-in for all the others that have died more ordinary deaths; we know that close-knit Midwestern villages aren't the true American heartland any more.
But perhaps even more, to mourn for Cheshire is to mourn the loss of a Capra-esque myth: the idea of a square-shouldered native obstinacy in the face of corporate bullying. We all say we want to live in Bedford Falls, but when the chips are down, we'd really rather take the cash and buy a McMansion in Pottersville.
And so we look at the former citizens of Cheshire not just with pity but also with annoyance or even scorn -- feelings made all the sharper because we suspect that if we were in their shoes, we'd have done the same thing. The villagers' abject surrender was simply a larger-scale version of a thousand little capitulations and humiliations in all of our lives today, from employers' mandatory drug tests to numbing odysseys through automated toll-free help departments.
In truth, though, the vanishing of a town, bulldozed by the forces of history, is a story as old as the country itself. More than 80 years ago, the greatest novel ever written about the American Midwest began with a reminder of just such impermanence: ''On a hill by the Mississippi where Chippewas camped two generations ago, a girl stood in relief against the cornflower blue of Northern sky. She saw no Indians now; she saw flour-mills and the blinking windows of skyscrapers in Minneapolis and St. Paul.''
When Sinclair Lewis published ''Main Street'' in 1920, there were living, thriving settlements that are now no more than a few churned bricks and rusty nails somewhere out on the prairie. Those towns gave way to forces larger than themselves, just as Cheshire has. Where Cheshire now -- barely -- stands by the banks of the Ohio River, the Shawnees once camped. Later, in the 1790's, the area was settled by a colony of French émigrés who were quickly defeated by the wilderness, leaving little trace behind except a fancy Latin name for the county, Gallia. Anglo farmers followed, and Germans, and then Slavic coal miners.
Now the smoke is all that seems permanent. It streams above the town and the river, above the moving vans and bulldozers, dissipating noiselessly in the upper air.
Mitch Epstein is a photographer based in New York. His most recent book is ''Family Business.'' Adam Goodheart is a fellow at the C.V. Starr Center for the Study of the American Experience at Washington College in Chestertown, Md.
