Robert Lang of Washington is second in the N.H.L. in scoring with 64 points, but, like other members of the Capitals, he is the subject of trade rumors. Lang, here for the All-Star Game on Sunday, may have lessened his chances of a trade to the Rangers with comments before Saturday's skills competition.
When asked to name the surprises of the 2003-4 season, Lang replied: ''I don't think there have been that many. The strong teams are still strong, and Rangers are still Rangers. It's kind of same-old. Teams that really do good homework and do a good job, they always surface up and they win.''
With 51 points, the Rangers are 10th in the Eastern Conference. With 41 points, the Capitals are 14th. Washington recently traded Jaromir Jagr to the Rangers. Jagr is tied for 11th in scoring with 53 points. Regarding Jagr's disappointing play in Washington, Lang said:
''They put him in a situation that sort of could not work out. You can't put a player like that on a team like Washington and want him to play a defensive system. He's been winning scoring races and titles and all that because he played loose hockey and had a good support cast. They didn't really give him the cast.''
As for trade rumors surrounding himself, goalie Olaf Kolzig and forward Peter Bondra, Lang said: ''It's not fun to be in rumors around the league and still playing for the same team month after month. You wish, just move on and do it or keep it quiet.''
Swedish Uneasiness
With talk growing about the World Cup, to be played in late summer, center Mats Sundin, the captain of Toronto, was asked about the Swedish team. Sundin, Colorado forward Peter Forsberg, Vancouver forward Markus Naslund and Detroit defenseman Nicklas Lidstrom are among the best players in the world and are the core of the Swedish national team.
There is concern in their country, however, that the next generation might not be as good.
''I know hockey in Sweden struggles nowadays with competition from soccer and from other sports,'' Sundin said. ''Hockey has become a little too expensive for parents. That's been an issue. There is concern at the junior level with the junior national teams.''
The cost, Sundin said, is for playing equipment and ice times at indoor rinks.
As for the tournament later this year, involving mostly N.H.L. stars, Sundin said that Sweden had many good players at the top level but not the depth of talent found in Canada and the United States.
''I like our national team,'' he said, adding that a nation like Canada could put together four or five competitive national teams.
Lupul and Sauve Shine
Anaheim's Joffrey Lupul scored three goals and Colorado's Philippe Sauve stopped 18 of 21 shots for the Western Conference in a 7-3 victory over the Eastern Conference in the Young Stars game Saturday night.
Lupul, who is ninth among N.H.L. rookies with eight goals, scored twice in the third period. But Sauve, the Avalanche's backup to David Aebischer, was selected as the most valuable player for his performance in a game where defense is nonexistent. The Young Stars play four on four with 10-minute periods and no clock stoppages.
Sauve, a rookie who is 7-4-2 this season, was pleased -- yet realistic -- about what he did. ''There are not many All-Star Games with that few goals scored,'' Sauve said. ''But I admit I was beaten a few times, and there were a lot of lucky saves.'' (AP)
Roenick Shows Off Skills
Jeremy Roenick had a perfect night, showing off his precision shooting and apologizing to a referee.
Roenick knocked out all four targets in only four shots to win the accuracy shooting event in the N.H.L. All-Star skills competition. That helped lift the Eastern Conference to a 13-6 victory over the West.
Before he displayed his shooting touch, Roenick issued an on-ice apology to Referee Blaine Angus, who was officiating the contest.
Roenick, a Flyers forward, threw a water bottle at Angus on Jan. 13 after a high-sticking penalty was not called against Buffalo. Roenick was struck in the face but Angus said he did not see it. Angus said he appreciated Roenick's sentiments. (AP)
HOCKEY: NOTEBOOK
