Last year, the New York State Education Department faced a storm of criticism from educators who said too few students had passed the Math A Regents examination. Now the department seems to have the opposite problem.
Some math teachers and administrators are complaining that the department's scoring chart for its most recent exam, offered last month, is overly forgiving, and that passing scores are being doled out to students who have not mastered the material. To pass the test, which is required for high school graduation, students had to earn 28 out of 84 points. To pass with a grade high enough to earn the more coveted Regents diploma, students had to score 37 points.
''To score one-third of the points allotted on the test, in my judgment, does not show proper mastery of the content or of the standards,'' said Alfred S. Posamentier, dean of the School of Education at the City College of New York. ''It appears that the passing grade was too low. If that is so, then we are causing more damage than good, because you're allowing kids to pass a course who are not prepared to go on into the next math course.''
Last summer, educators complained that the Math A exam was confusing and too difficult. In response, the state education commissioner, Richard P. Mills, with the Board of Regents, appointed a panel to examine the test. (Dean Posamentier served on the panel.) Heeding the panel's recommendations, education officials created a new test with more multiple-choice questions and fewer open-ended questions.
But when the state released its scoring chart a few days ago, some teachers were shocked to discover that students they thought should have failed the test had, in fact, passed. While schools are not obliged to giving passing course grades to students who pass Regents tests, teachers say it can be difficult convincing students who have passed a test that they need to repeat a class.
''It's almost setting up a scenario where the kids don't seem to feel that standards are standards,'' said Michael Steger, a math teacher at Oceanside High School on Long Island. ''I'm very concerned.''
David Wise, a math teacher at Richmond Hill High School on Staten Island, said he, too, felt the cutoff scores were too low. ''We're supposed to have standards,'' he said.
Of the 450 Richmond Hill students who took the test, he said, there were more than 100 who passed but who the school had originally thought would have failed, given the raw scores. Mr. Wise said that he had tutored students for the exam in his free time, but that ''I don't feel like all this extra work was respected.''
Some critics say that last year's Math A debacle, together with problems that led to rescoring the Regents physics exam, undermined confidence in the State Education Department and called into question its test method.
But defenders of the new Math A test say the criticism springs from the inherent difficulty of setting standards that everyone can agree upon.
''You're going to get disagreement from passionate people about where those standards should be set,'' said William Brosnan, superintendent of the Northport-East Northport district on Long Island, who served as chairman of the Math A panel. ''That's a normal dialogue that I think is going to emerge from all of this.''
Dr. Brosnan said he thought the test and scoring system were fair.
A deputy commissioner of the State Education Department, James A. Kadamus, said the January exam was reviewed by three groups of teachers. In December, a fourth group made recommendations that served as the groundwork for the scoring system. Moreover, he said, the department applied its scoring chart to a sampling of 20,000 exam scores from across the state before releasing the chart to schools.
Among the sampling, he said, about 85 percent of students passed with a 55, enough to earn local diplomas.
''I don't think people understand what we did here and the extraordinary efforts we made,'' Mr. Kadamus said. He said some math teachers might want too much out of the test, seeing it as a gateway to higher-level courses instead of serving simply as a graduation requirement.
One assistant principal for math at a city high school, who declined to be named for fear of retribution from superiors in the city Education Department, called the scoring system embarrassing.
''If the cut score is too high,'' he said, ''you feel terrible because kids who worked their tails off and who you worked hard with get nowhere. If the cut score is too low, then almost everybody passes, no matter what you did.''
Daniel Jaye, assistant principal for math at Stuyvesant High School and a member of the Math A panel, defended the scoring system, saying teachers should be pleased if more students passed. ''If you think about June and you think about now,'' he said, ''what's better, heaven or hell?''
Correction:  February 13, 2004, Friday  An article on Sunday about the Math A Regents exam given in January misstated the location of Richmond Hill High School, where a teacher complained that it was being graded too easily. The school is in Queens, not on Staten Island.
