''YOU must be from California,'' people say to the ecology-minded developer Anthony Sblendorio when they hear him talking about rainwater harvesting, wetland habitat construction and pavement made out of dirt. Quite the contrary. He is from New Jersey, the densely populated, highly built-up Garden State -- and it is here, he argues, that ''environmentally sensitive building is the perfect approach for the land we have left.''
Mr. Sblendorio, 33, grew up in Waldwick and bases Back to Nature, the landscape design company he founded 10 years ago, in the Oldwick section of Tewksbury. He said most developers he comes into contact with find Back to Nature's ecofriendly approach foreign.
Housing developments have been built in other states using the ''green'' style of development that he espouses, Mr. Sblendorio said, but he believes there is not a single project in New Jersey that has used such standards. So, he is moving to create one.
Up to now, Back to Nature has provided services only to other developers. ''But so much of the damage to the environment is done before we even get involved,'' Mr. Sblendorio said. ''The developers, the engineer, the builders all get involved first. The cookie-cutter subdivision continuously prevails. It has been very frustrating.''
But he believes he has found an ideal place for such a model development: Tewksbury. It is about 45 minutes from Manhattan and a potential location for well-heeled family seeking a rural setting. According to Lisa Stryker, a member of the township's planning board, ''Tewksbury is a very special place.''
''We cherish our rolling hills, our trees and our wonderful vistas,'' Ms. Stryker said. ''It is a lifestyle lost to many towns due to overdevelopment and disregard for what Mother Nature has blessed us with.''
Last year, after being brought in by another developer to come up with an ecofriendly design for a 28-acre property in Tewksbury -- and after getting a nervous reaction to the plans that Back to Nature produced -- Mr. Sblendorio bought the property himself, and he and his 25 employees set about doing what they had been longing to do: create the New Jersey model.
Fern Valley, a four-lot residential subdivision that will be the first of its kind, according to several environmental groups in the state, quickly won approval -- and even enthusiasm -- from local planners. ''Too many other developments are just plopped on land,'' Ms. Stryker commented, ''with no regard for the lifelong impact. This is something new and different.''
Mr. Sblendorio, who declined to say how much he had paid for the property, did say his firm paid more than $500,000 -- ''about five times the usual price'' -- to get the project through the approval process. A number of experts were brought in to assist in the effort.
Work on site improvements began last year, and Turpin Real Estate of Bernardsville is marketing home plans. The plans are somewhat flexible on points other than environmental. Either four homes will be sold individually, with accompanying rights to 8.5 acres of shared open space that includes a natural trout stream, or the entire project is available as a family compound, according to Minot Weld of Turpin.
Back to Nature has already designed plans for one home, which would be fashioned from an old barn with an attached silo. The barn would be gutted and the silo would house a spiral staircase.
Buyers may use Back to Nature's architects to design homes or hire their own architects to work within the firm's detailed vision, according to Mr. Sblendorio. ''What we really wanted to do here, most importantly, is use a holistic design process,'' he said, ''working start-to-finish to fashion an end result both beautiful and regenerative.''
THE idea is to actually improve the environment at the site by developing it, the developer said. Site work already completed has improved groundwater ''recharge'' -- that is, absorption of water back into the ground, he said.
Small ''pocket wetlands'' with oxygenating plant life are being created to do the job, Mr. Sblendorio said. Plastic liners form a basin, and the plants grow hydroponically -- without soil -- naturally treating pathogens and returning water to near drinkable quality, he said.
Wetland habitats attract waterfowl, he noted, providing an additional benefit for residents who enjoy nature's creatures.
''Nature is an inspiration for the systems we build,'' Mr. Sblendorio said. At the Willow School in Bedminster, for which Back to Nature provided ecodesign work, he said, ''we focused on using water as a resource, rather than a byproduct of the site.'' He added: ''When a raindrop hits the roof of Willow School, it flows into a cistern under the parking lot, where it is treated with ozone, then pumped into the building to flush toilets and urinals. Then, the effluent is piped to wetlands, rather than septic tanks or leach fields, where plant life naturally scrubs it clean of pollutants.''
He said solar panels, such as those his company designed for use at the Willow School in Bedminster, might also be used at Fern Valley. Back to Nature's work at the school won a gold LEED (Leadership Energy Environmental Design) award from the national Green Building Council, a private agency that established an ecological rating system several years ago.
Currently, Workstage, a joint venture of the Gale Company of Florham Park and Steelcase, an office furniture design company based in Michigan, is at work on similarly ecofriendly plans for three New Jersey projects that are part of the state's ambitious school-building program.
Following are other unusual features incorporated in design plans at Fern Valley:
*A covered bridge across the stream at the entry to the compound -- the first new one in memory to be built in Hunterdon County, according to planners.
*A water harvesting system for each home. Rainwater will be collected from roofs, stored in cisterns, then reused to water the garden and flush toilets.
*''Soil cement'' roads, fashioned with a toxin-free glue called Poly Pavement applied to the soil at the site, creating easily maintainable roads.
*A woodland management program, intended to increase the diversity of native plants and maximize natural beauty. The program is detailed down to the individual tree, with a dead one near one of the two ponds on the property being designated a ''standing habitat,'' or in everyday terms, a place for woodpeckers to peck.
*A program to educate children about Fern Valley's environment, that is, open-air classes on bird and fish identification, ecological issues and the like.
A percentage of proceeds from the sale of the properties, Mr. Sblendorio said, will be set aside for programs aimed at safeguarding environmental awareness at Fern Valley in perpetuity.
Back to Nature will most likely maintain a role at the compound even after the land is sold, he said -- running the environmental programs and providing ''turnkey'' services to residents who desire them.
''We can design a particular home's environment to suit the owner's particular lifestyle,'' Mr. Sblendorio said. ''For example, we are talking to one potential buyer who loves to cook and entertain. He loves Italian dishes, so we researched what would grow in his vegetable gardens. We are proposing to install a free-standing conservatory with an outdoor adobe kitchen, so he can bake breads for his guests.
''Our package includes all of that, plus day-to-day services such as making sure the driveway is plowed, there is firewood on the front porch, perennials and annuals in the planters.''
The price for that custom design and maintenance plan would be about $2 million, he said. He said that suburban-style manses, without the shared open space, environmental maintenance and regenerative planning aspects of Fern Valley often go for that price or more.
''We're not rushing into that plan or any other, though,'' Mr. Sblendorio said. ''The main thing is to determine what's best in the long term for the land.''
In the Region | New Jersey
