No Stomach Pills, But Many Legal Bills
It was an academic research project, but it left a decidedly bitter taste with many of the restaurant owners who were its subjects.
And it has meant a legal bellyache for Columbia University and the faculty member who cooked up the project.
In August 2001, Francis J. Flynn, an assistant professor at Columbia Business School, sent letters to many New York City restaurants saying he had suffered severe food poisoning while eating there. The restaurants included culinary stars like La Grenouille and Aureole and popular bistros like Chez Josephine, which is owned by Jean-Claude Baker, above.
After a graphic description of gastrointestinal reaction, including pain that Mr. Flynn said had sent him to his bathroom floor, the letters said he expected that ''you will respond accordingly.'' He did not indicate what such a response might be.
Several weeks later, Mr. Flynn sent a second round of letters to the restaurants. He said there had, in fact, been no food poisoning, and apologized for the ''stress and turmoil'' caused by the fabricated accusation, which he called ''a mistake in judgment.'' He revealed that he had been seeking data for a study on ''vendor response to consumer complaints.''
But his admission just sent the pot to a higher boil. The owners of two dozen restaurants sued Mr. Flynn and Columbia. Their claims, including libel and infliction of emotional distress, cited fears that the poisoning accusation would damage their reputations and business, though none said this had occurred.
Today, complaints by only three of the owners are alive, after court rulings on motions by Columbia and Mr. Flynn to dismiss the suits. Under the rulings, Mr. Baker and Frank Valenza, the owner of Restaurant 222 on the Upper West Side until it closed last year, can go to trial on their emotional distress claims; Nicholas Criscitelli of Da Nico in Little Italy can do so on his libel and misrepresentation claims.
The emotional distress claims of the others were dismissed as not specific enough. But a lawyer for those owners, Thomas R. Moore, said last week that the ruling allowed them to submit more specifics in an effort to revive their claims, and that many would.
Mr. Flynn's lawyer, Arthur M. Toback, said he and his client, who still teaches at Columbia, would not comment, and neither would a spokeswoman for the university.
Howard Beach Victim Is Himself Behind Bars
In 1986, Timothy Grimes, then 18, was a victim in a notorious racial attack in which he was one of three black men set upon by white teenagers in Howard Beach, Queens.
One man, Michael Griffith, 23, was struck and killed by a passing car as the mob chased him. Another, Cedric Sandiford, then 36, was badly beaten; he has since died of an unrelated illness. Mr. Grimes, above, fled without physical injury, but according to a psychiatrist in 1988, the attack, for which three assailants were convicted of manslaughter, worsened severe emotional problems he already had.
Mr. Grimes is now serving 40 years in prison in Virginia. The sentence was initially 16 years, for shooting and seriously wounding his brother in 1988. Chunks of up to 10 years at a time have since been added, for five convictions over the years for crimes he committed in prison, including assault and maiming.
The first four assaults were on other inmates, and the most recent, in 2002, was on a guard, said the Wise County Commonwealth's attorney, Chad Dotson, whose office prosecuted that case.
Following Up
