One thing has become clear in the All-Star selections: N.B.A. Commissioner David Stern is not the puppeteer that conspiracy theorists have made him out to be.
When the rookie sensations LeBron James and Carmelo Anthony were left off the All-Star rosters, people started to let go of the idea that Stern pulls strings for the brightest stars. But now that that has been settled, next Sunday's All-Star Game will still be without the league's two brightest young stars, each worthy of All-Star honors at 19 years of age.
Russ Granik, the deputy commissioner, said the league recognized the added sizzle James and Anthony would have brought to the game, which will be played at Staples Center in Los Angeles. But he added that the league was satisfied with the decisions of the fans, who chose the 10 starters, and the coaches, who selected the 14 reserves.
''We think this is just fine, if that's the way the coaches see it,'' Granik said. ''LeBron and Carmelo will still get plenty of attention over the weekend, and everyone expects them to be in many All-Star Games before they're through.''
James, averaging 21 points and nearly 6 assists and 6 rebounds a game, and Anthony, who has led Denver to a surprising contending role in the Western Conference, will have to settle for playing in Saturday's Rookie Challenge, which pits first-year players against second-year players.
There is still a possibility that James or Anthony will participate in the All-Star Game as a replacement for an injured player.
Last Tuesday, James said he would refuse such an invitation, saying: ''If I wasn't part of the ones they picked at first, I wouldn't even like to be a part of the team. I'm an only child; I never want to be picked second. I don't come second.''
He backed off that statement the next day and said he would probably play if asked.
James and Anthony are not the only players with legitimate gripes. Stephon Marbury has rejuvenated the Knicks and is probably the second-best point guard in the league behind Jason Kidd. And what about Zach Randolph, Mike Bibby, Latrell Sprewell, Antoine Walker and Richard Hamilton?
But who could be replaced? Michael Redd, who was picked, has been outstanding in leading left-for-dead Milwaukee into playoff position in the East.
''I love the people who write or say this guy should've made it, but never tell you instead of who,'' Granik said. ''I think you could make a very good case for LeBron or Carmelo, but when you look at the positions they play, it makes it harder. The guards in the East are very strong, and the forwards in the West are very strong. It's hard to say that LeBron should've been on instead of the guys that did make it.''
The league could consider increasing the number of All-Stars from each conference to 15 from 12. After all, there are 29 N.B.A. teams now, and next season there will be 30. In 1980, when Magic Johnson and Larry Bird were named among the 22 All-Stars as rookies, there were 22 teams.
But Granik said the All-Star roster would not expand along with the league. ''It's purely a playing-time issue,'' he said. ''It's hard enough to get all 12 players in the game. You almost wish you could honor a few more guys but tell them to stay home.''
About a dozen years ago, the N.B.A. considered naming four All-Star teams, one for each division. The teams would have faced off in an All-Star tournament.
''But there was a sense that we were trying to do too much,'' Granik said. ''We've already got a lot of other events around the game. We don't want to put too many layers on it. We like the game the way it is.''
Bird Likes Age Requirement
Larry Bird, the Indiana Pacers' president of basketball operations, has three players on his roster who entered the N.B.A. out of high school. Nonetheless, Bird favors a minimum age of 20 or 21.
''I wish they would put in an age requirement because it's hurting college and definitely, in the long run, it's going to hurt our game,'' he said.
Bird said it was hard to get a legitimate read on young players. The Pacers benefited from that problem in the case of Jermaine O'Neal, who sat on the bench for four seasons in Portland before blossoming into an All-Star in Indiana.
With that in mind, the Pacers are being careful not to give up on Jonathan Bender, a fifth-year swingman who they believe has star potential. The 6-foot-11 Bender has played sparingly, but Bird said next season would be Bender's chance to prove himself.
''Jonathan has all the ability in the world, but not all the fundamentals of how to play the game,'' Bird said. ''We need to go back to square one and learn how to play the game this summer, and he's willing to do that. He would've just been finishing college, so now it's time to take the next step. Next year, we'll see what kind of player he really is.''
Bird said he was conflicted about scouting high school players. ''I've been in high school gyms this year and I felt guilty about being there,'' he said. ''But if everybody else is there, you've got to be there.''
He does not envy officials in the National Football League, which may encounter similar issues after the the Maurice Clarett ruling opened the door for younger players.
''That will open the floodgates to high school kids,'' Bird said. ''No question about it. If they leave the door open, they'll come. That's not good for college football.''
McKie Doesn't Forget
Count Philadelphia's Aaron McKie among the players who aspire to coach after their playing days are over. But he wants to coach in high school.
''People have said things to me about coaching in the N.B.A.,'' McKie, a 10-year veteran, said. ''But what helped me in my life the most was having my mentor, my high school coach, working with me a lot. I think a lot of people get away from that. This is the glorified part of being an athlete -- the N.B.A. But my focus would be with the younger kids and having them understand life, having them understand education and basketball -- how to play it, have fun and learn to work as a team and as a unit.''
Coach Bill Ellerbee at Simon Gratz High School in Philadelphia became something of a father figure to McKie after his father died when he was 8 and his mother abandoned him when he was a teenager. McKie wants to become a father figure to those in need, not those in the N.B.A. ''That's what I want to do,'' he said. ''Because it helped me so much when I was growing up.''
76ers' Coach Is on the Spot
Midway through Allen Iverson's rant after Philadelphia's loss to Toronto last Tuesday, one could only wonder if Randy Ayers was going to be the next coach to be fired. Questioning the team's toughness and heart, Iverson said the same players who battled like warriors for the previous six seasons had suddenly gone soft.
The only significant difference between this season and the past six? Instead of Larry Brown, who led Philadelphia to the playoffs the past five years, the 76ers have Ayers on the sideline.
But when asked, Iverson stood up for Ayers, who gained a little breathing room when his 76ers (21-30) pasted the Lakers two days after Iverson's outburst.
''That don't have nothing to do with somebody playing tough,'' Iverson said of the coaching change. ''You're talking about a Hall of Fame coach, so that says a lot about Coach Brown, but we have a lot of trust in Randy's ability.''
Iverson added: ''He gives an assignment and if it's not getting done, what can he do? If he sits somebody down and then the next person comes in and does the same thing, what can he do? A coach can only do but so much.''
That may be true, but Ayers had better find a way to keep the 76ers scrapping.
INSIDE THE N.B.A.
