GEORGE FRAYNE, known professionally as Commander Cody, led his band mates, the Lost Planet Airmen, through the front doors of Smokin' Al's, the new barbecue emporium on Main Street in Bay Shore one evening last month. The musicians hoped to fill up on barbecued ribs before their concert at the new Boulton Center for the Performing Arts four doors away.
But as Al Horowitz, who owns Smokin' Al's, tells the story, his 80-seat restaurant was packed, and with no time to wait, the Commander beat a hasty retreat.
Fifteen years ago, the Boulton was a triple-X movie theater, and many storefronts on Main Street stood vacant in Bay Shore. Today, a $2.4 million renovation later, the movie theater has become the 265-seat Boulton Center, and crowds are returning to downtown, even in this winter's bluster.
''There's a chemistry, a buzz, in Bay Shore now because of the theater,'' Mr. Horowitz said. ''It's a renaissance.''
And not just in Bay Shore. A sampling of 55 Long Island arts organizations by the Long Island Association showed that they sold $11.6 million in tickets in 2002, the latest year for which complete information was available, compared with $8.3 million in 2001, an increase of nearly 29 percent.
Some of that increase reflects the effects of Sept. 11. People on Long Island didn't necessarily attend more concerts or plays than the year before, or visit more museums, but when they did go out, they went out locally, said Pearl Kamer, the association's chief economist, who conducted the survey.
Although the survey, which was released last month, did not include 2003, she said she believes the trend is continuing.
''We have an affluent population, a sophisticated population, and a highly educated population,'' Dr. Kamer said in an interview. ''And what that population is saying is, 'We want the arts close at hand.'''
Some of the increasing support for the arts represents a generational shift. Baby boomers are less inclined than their parents to equate ''culture'' with New York City, said Lee E. Koppelman, the executive director of the Long Island Regional Planning Board.
''You used to have to go to Carnegie Hall or Lincoln Center'' for first-rate musical performances, Dr. Koppelman said. ''But that isn't true any more. You have major concert halls here like the Tilles Center and the Staller Center.'' Smaller halls like the InterMedia Arts Center in Huntington and Theater Three in Port Jefferson have also acclimated Long Islanders to seek cultural entertainment close to home, he said.
Bay Shore residents trace the comeback there to 1997, when the Chamber of Commerce organized a fund-raising drive for a community bandstand at the foot of West Main. But the big push came when the Great South Bay Y.M.C.A. acquired the XXX movie theater as a restoration project. Frank Boulton, the investment banker best known as the principal owner of the Long Island Ducks, agreed to help pay the bills. Acts booked so far include John Sebastian, known for his pop nostalgia act; the Amani Winds, an African-American ensemble with a nontraditional repertory; the Los Angeles Guitar Quartet, which plays classic music; and Commander Cody.
Like other once-vibrant downtowns of Long Island communities like Riverhead, Hempstead and Patchogue, Bay Shore's central business district was decimated after a mall opened nearby, siphoning off shoppers by the thousands. Now, merchants in Bay Shore and throughout Long Island are embracing the arts as a way to lure people back to Main Street.
''One of the components of downtown revitalization is bringing in centers for the performing arts,'' said Susan Barbash, a Hauppauge developer and a trustee of the Great South Bay Y. People who attend films, concerts and shows ''often begin or end their evenings at restaurants,'' she said, and they often patronize local stores as well.
Performers, along with the many administrators, agents, stagehands and others who work behind the scenes, also dine at local restaurants, stay overnight at local hotels and buy services from local vendors, the Long Island Association's survey noted.
From 1998 to 2002, hotels and motels on Long Island added nearly 2,200 jobs to meet demand generated by the arts, according to the report's data.
In Bay Shore, 9 out of 10 Main Street stores are now occupied, and several new businesses are scheduled to open this spring, including a Chinese restaurant, a sweet shop, a card shop and a lingerie store.
The refrain is the same in Westhampton Beach. Nearly 10 years ago, seeking to provide a focal point for a stagnating downtown, a number of merchants, business owners and philanthropists joined with local cultural leaders to buy a dilapidated movie theater on Main Street. Now, reborn as the Westhampton Beach Performing Arts Center, the old movie theater is thriving, and, residents say, so is downtown.
In Riverhead, once the commercial hub and political center of Suffolk County and more recently a case study in confronting urban blight, volunteers saved the Vail-Leavitt Music Hall, an 1882 building listed on the National Register of Historic Places. It reopened last spring.
Riverhead turned to the arts in the early 90's in desperation. With the Tanger Factory Outlet Center under construction several miles away, the Business Improvement District commissioned a Maryland consulting firm to draft a survival strategy for local merchants. In April 1993, the consultants advised them to forget about competing head-to-head with national chains, and instead to remake downtown as a tourist destination.
''The objective was to encourage nontraditional retail uses that would not compete with Route 58,'' said Andrea Lohneiss, Riverhead's community development director. The opening of the Atlantis Marine World aquarium on Main Street was a turning point, she said. But the town and county have also nurtured the fine and performing arts, she said, tapping private and government grants, volunteer enthusiasm and support from local businesses.
In addition to helping reopen Vail-Leavitt, she said, the East End Arts Council runs a music school for 400 students. A popular outdoor blues festival attracts thousands every summer. The East Enders Coffee House, a commercial venture, attracts nightly crowds to poetry readings and concerts, she said. Behind it, a new art gallery, the Blue Door Gallery, is making a name for itself.
And the ripple effect has helped local businesses, Ms. Lohneiss said.
Most renovations, like those in Riverhead, Bay Shore and Westhampton Beach, are financed privately, ''Sometimes, where there's a historic building involved, there are federal grants,'' said Michelle Isabelle-Stark, the director of Suffolk County's Office of Cultural Affairs.
Ed Tuccio, who owns Tweed's restaurant just around the corner from the Vail-Leavitt, said that he does more business on nights when the theater is open. The music hall and other cultural attractions, he said, draw a different type of visitor to Riverhead than do the shopping malls and chain retailers on Route 58.
''These are curious people who value the arts and who crave history,'' said Mr. Tuccio, whose restaurant promotes its turn-of-the-century origins and its bison specialties. ''We can't compete with the fast-food places. We have to be different.''
L.I.@WORK
