''IT'S always good to know the answer to a question you are going to ask,'' Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum cautioned Michael Schachter in Manhattan federal court last week. Mr. Schachter is one of the lawyers prosecuting Martha Stewart and her former Merrill Lynch broker, Peter E. Bacanovic. The government claims that Ms. Stewart sold stock using inside information supplied by Mr. Bacanovic and that the two then lied to investigators to conceal the alleged insider training.
Last week, Mr. Schachter made a rookie's mistake. Forgetting a basic rule of advocacy, he asked a witness a question without knowing the answer, which turned out to hurt his case. But his response to the judge's caution honored another basic rule: When in a hole, stop digging. ''I choose this auspicious time to stop,'' he said, and did.
Mr. Schachter error won't much matter, but another event that began last week will. That's the cross-examination of Douglas Faneuil, the government's key witness, who was Mr. Bacanovic's assistant at Merrill Lynch. On direct examination, Mr. Faneuil calmly testified to conversations with each defendant that, if believed, pretty much proves the government's claims.
The challenge to defense lawyers is to persuade the jury that Mr. Faneuil should not be believed. They will do that mainly through cross-examination, which the evidence scholar John Henry Wigmore called ''the greatest legal engine ever invented for the discovery of truth.''
The rules of cross-examination have been part of Anglo-American law for centuries. All trial lawyers know them. It's how they are used that matters. Great advocates intuit what will bother the witness and gnaw at it in their questions. They get the witness to speak without thinking, to contradict himself on small points. They move around the room, alter the rhythm of the questioning, change their volume and tone. They may be sarcastic one minute, then angry, then friendly. They switch topics often. The goal is always the same: To convince jurors that this is not a person they would trust with their car keys, much less rely on for a verdict.
David Apfel, a lawyer for Mr. Bacanovic, questioned Mr. Faneuil on Thursday. Robert G. Morvillo, the lead lawyer for Ms. Stewart, gets his chance this week. So far, Mr. Faneuil is largely untouched. Yes, Mr. Apfel showed that the witness, who has pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor for initially lying, has a motive to lie to avoid jail time. And yes, the jury heard that Mr. Faneuil once told the same innocent story as the defense now claims. And Mr. Apfel made sure to bring out that the 28-year-old Mr. Faneuil has used illegal drugs. Shocking.
This is a far cry from David A. Boies's devastating cross-examination of Bill Gates and a slew of Microsoft executives in the government's antitrust case against the company. (Microsoft lost.) Nor does it come within a mile of John W. Keker's scathing cross-examination of Oliver L. North in his trial for crimes arising out of the Iran-Contra affair. (Mr. North's conviction was reversed on appeal.)
But it's too soon for Mr. Faneuil to relax. Mr. Morvillo is a leading white-collar criminal defense lawyer, the equal in any playbook of Mr. Boies and Mr. Keker. Mr. Morvillo has spent far more time asking questions in court than Mr. Faneuil has spent answering them. Few people can handle expert cross-examination with aplomb. Mr. Faneuil may be one of them. But he hasn't really been tested. Yet.
Stephen Gillers is a professor at the New York University School of Law.
