WHEN Darsha Leslie, 44, left Fort Wayne, Ind., last year to move back to Westchester County, she had to give up her $440-a-month two-bedroom apartment.
In White Plains, her hometown, she found that a one-bedroom apartment for herself and her two teenage children would cost $1,200, almost three times as much, an unaffordable prospect on her $28,000-a-year salary. So she moved her family into her mother's one-bedroom apartment on Harmon Street.
''She gets the bedroom,'' Ms. Leslie said. ''We are all in the living room. It's rough.''
Frank Rasulo, 27, a financial analyst, was laid off from his job at a small Wall Street software company last March. His rent was a good deal: just $875 to share a house in White Plains. He stuck it out until the end of January, when he moved back in with his parents, Ray and Maryann Rasulo, who have a three-bedroom co-op in White Plains, and who he says are his ''really good friends.''
There are signs throughout Westchester County that moving back home is becoming an increasingly common response to the combination of rapidly increasing local housing costs, a tight job market, and lagging wages. The trend cuts across class lines: perhaps two or more generations of low-income adults ''double up'' in a household to share costs, or perhaps middle- and upper-middle-class parents make their adult children welcome to help them save up enough money to rent or to buy a place of their own.
High housing costs are a major cause. Ms. Leslie is making the same amount of money she made when she left White Plains in 1997, but average advertised rents in Westchester County have risen 43 percent since then, according to a survey by Westchester Residential Opportunities, Inc., a non-profit housing agency. Home prices have also risen steeply, with the median sale price of a single family home hitting $564,000 in 2003, according to the Westchester-Putnam Multiple Listing Service, Inc. Even a coop apartment, with a median sale price of $125,250, would require a stiff down payment beyond the means of many workers in income brackets similar to Ms. Leslie's and higher.
Ms. Leslie is self-conscious about her situation, particularly since she works as a case manager for Cluster Housing Resource Center, a nonprofit housing advocacy organization in Yonkers.
''I'm a big advocate for welfare reform and being self-sufficient,'' she said. ''What does it look like for me to teach self-sufficiency? It's almost like perpetrating a fraud. But it's a reality.''
In middle- and upper-middle-class communities of Westchester and the region, parents who called themselves empty nesters when their youngest left for college are also finding their children returning home months or years after graduation. Though some families in this situation declined to speak with a reporter out of embarrassment, many interviewed said the phenomenon of adult children living with their parents is becoming an increasingly visible, acceptable, and even trendy way to cut costs.
Mark Crescenzo, a real estate agent, 32, plans to move with his partner, Jason Kahn, 28, and their foster daughter, Tahlia Crescenzo, 2, to his mother's home in Stony Point after they sell their coop apartment. When Mr. Kahn first proposed the arrangement, Mr. Crescenzo resisted it and thought his mother would, too. But then they both warmed up to the idea because it would help the couple save money for a house.
''It's almost impossible for young people today to start out and get something decent,'' he said. ''Real estate has gone up so fast.''
Jacob Cooper, 23, moved back to his parents' home in Hastings-on-Hudson a year after he graduated from Amherst College. He discovered that he had plenty of company among his old high school classmates. ''We laugh about it,'' he said. ''We think it's funny that our parents go away for the weekend and we have people over. It's like throwing a high school party when your parents go away. I don't think it damages our self-esteem.''
Dana Colonna, 23, a special education teacher who works in White Plains and lives with her parents in Congers, said: ''Most of my friends are still living at home. I also know a lot of teachers still at home. The ones who've moved out are older.''
Mr. Crescenzo said he and his partner are used to some limits on their privacy already because of their foster daughter, but he knows more changes are in store when they move in with his mother, Patricia Crescenzo. ''While I am comfortable with my mother, she's my mother,'' he said. ''She's not Jason's mother. He'll be on guard with her.''
Despite a wealth of anecdotal evidence suggesting that many Westchester County adults are living with their parents, establishing how many people are in this situation is not a straightforward process.
An analysis of the 2000 United States Census prepared by David M. Muchnick, principal in the Manhattan consulting firm Sustainable Enterprise, shows that the number of 20- to 34- year-olds in Westchester County who are neither heads of households nor spouses of heads of households -- in other words, a group likely either to live with their parents or roommates -- actually fell to 46 percent in 2000 from 52 percent in 1990. This decline was accompanied by a substantial exodus of this age group from the county: 42,123 left, a more than 20 percent decrease.
Nationally, 56.8 percent of men and 43.2 percent of women 22 to 31 years old lived at home in 2002, according to the Census Bureau's Current Population Survey. A slightly older demographic sampling -- 25- to 34-year-olds -- showed 13.6 percent of men and 8.3 percent of women living at home, figures that increased slightly from 2001.
But the Westchester numbers don't take into account the main local economic challenge of the last three years, which started after Mr. Muchnick's figures were compiled from the 2000 census data: a struggling economy in New York City and nationally, combined with housing costs that continue to skyrocket.
Rising housing costs are a key factor in whether and when people go out on their own, according to research done by Mary Elizabeth Hughes, an assistant professor of sociology at Duke University.
She said that in metropolitan areas with higher rents and home prices, the more expensive living arrangements, including living alone, were less common among 18- to 30-year-olds. ''Young people may be staying at home more,'' she said. ''They may be less likely to marry or live alone and more likely to live with their parents or in group roommate situations.''
In a report prepared for the New York State A.F.L.-C.I.O. called ''The Crisis of Affordable Housing for Hudson Valley's Working People,'' Mr. Muchnick found local evidence of delays in household formation. ''The counties where rents are highest -- Nassau, Suffolk, Putnam, Westchester -- also have the lowest rates of people forming their own households,'' he said. ''Young people living at home aren't counted in estimating local housing shortages, so this essentially adds to the shortage.''
The report also estimated that workers would have to be making at least $36,225 to be able to afford the median gross rent in Westchester. Starting salaries often fall far short of that.
Jonique Richardson, 22, makes $13 per hour doing data entry at New York Presbyterian Hospital and $9 per hour working at the front desk of a fitness center. Both jobs are part time. She lives in Mount Vernon with her parents, putting away about $600 per month after she pays her student loans, cellphone bill and other personal expenses.
''I'm trying really hard to save enough to move, but I have bills to pay,'' she said. ''There's no way I could leave now. I have to save enough to cover myself for a few months.''
Ashley Van Buren, 22, makes about $30,000 a year working as a production assistant in Yonkers on Jonathan Demme's remake of ''The Manchurian Candidate.'' She looked for a place of her own, but found that the only apartments she could afford were too small, in bad condition or too far from the train station. She decided she would be better off moving back in with her parents and her younger sister in Tappan. ''I thought I'd be better off living at home,'' she said.
For those fresh out of college, such arrangements are not especially unusual, nor is it unusual for elderly parents to live with their children. Yet anecdotal evidence suggests that the rate of such arrangements is higher in Westchester, New York City and other places where housing costs are comparatively high -- and in Westchester, where homes are bigger than they are in the city, it's easier to do. For example, Mr. Rasulo, the unemployed financial analyst lived with his parents for three years after college.
''It's something I feel happy doing,'' he said. ''The problem is not moving home. The only thing that's been difficult is being out of work for a full year and not being able to move forward with my goals.''
Another factor easing his move was that he had plenty of understanding from his peers. His longtime girlfriend still lives at home in White Plains. A close friend, Pablo Sanchez, 29, is also planning to move out of his Yonkers apartment and in with his parents in White Plains, even though he's earning $60,000 as a public health consultant. He said the move will help him save enough money to put a sizable down payment on a condominium or a house. ''I make enough money to live on my own and save,'' he said. ''But if I move back in with my parents, I'll save at a faster rate.''
Mr. Sanchez is not alone in preferring to camp out with the folks in order to hold out for a better living situation in the future. Ms. Colonna makes $45,500 per year, but she has decided to spend a second year living with her parents in Congers to save money. ''I decided I might want to buy a condo,'' she said. ''I don't want to move out just to say I have my own place, then struggle from paycheck to paycheck and not have anything.''
Ms. Hughes said her research into the impact of housing costs on new household formation revealed that young adults' expectations of the quality of where they live are rising along with costs. ''Kids don't just want to move out, they want to move into a nice place,'' she said. ''They want to live alone, not with roommates. Part of it is rising material aspirations.''
Most parents interviewed for this article said they were eager to see their children save up for a nice place to live and did not expect rent or financial compensation during their time at home. Louise Colonna, Ms. Colonna's mother, said her daughter is paying for her own car and credit card bills, ''but any of the expenses as far as food or rent, no, because I want her to stand up on her own two feet when she goes on her own.''
Mr. Sanchez says his parents are about to retire and buy a house in Miami. He will take over half the rent on their apartment when he moves in. ''I want to save money for myself and help them save money,'' he said. ''I'm living with my parents, but they're also living with me.''
The advantages of living at home can go beyond the monetary for both parents and children. ''It can be a fabulous experience,'' said Susan Newman, a social psychologist and the author of ''Nobody's Baby Now: Reinventing Your Adult Relationship with Your Mother and Father'' (Walker &amp; Co., 2003). ''Parents have the opportunity to know adult children as adults. Children get to see their parents as people. They can share experiences beyond the parent-child role of 'O.K., it's time to get your homework done.'''
Though Mr. Cooper said there are times when he feels like he's ''in middle school again,'' he describes life with his parents in Hastings as ''much better than I ever expected it to be.''
''My parents understand I'm here to do my work,'' he said. ''They're very generous.''
His mother, Martha Cooper, said: ''Emotionally, it's just been great. I know he thinks I ask too many questions and I think he doesn't communicate enough, but that's an old story. This arrangement is something we are doing happily and excitedly.''
For some families, having an adult child back at home feels more natural than not. Mr. Rasulo remained very close to his family when he lived on his own, visiting several times a week. His father, Frank Rasulo, is glad his son is coming back home.
''I missed him when he was gone,'' he said. ''It was hard for him to leave as it was for us to see him leave. We never really broke our bond.''
Some families, though, have a more difficult time updating parent-child roles. Ms. Richardson said that since she moved home, her parents have been pressuring her to go to Bible study and church the way she did when she was growing up.
''I want to leave,'' she said. ''I respect my parents, but I have my own way of doing things. When you go to school, you have freedom, you live life the way you want to live it. Living at home is hard to adjust to.''
Ms. Van Buren said she also has her difficult moments. She'll come home after a long day on the set, only to find that she's expected to help her younger sister write her college application essay. ''You fall back into the way you were before,'' she said. ''Then I have that fear of, oh my God, will I be able to live alone when it's time? Take care of myself?''
There are other frustrations, too. Adults living at home often find themselves going without freedoms that are typical for others their age, like having significant others spend the night or staying out late without having to let mom and dad know where you are. For Ms. Van Buren, living in the suburbs with mom and dad means being isolated from the urban social life she had thought she would have after college. ''Working such long hours, I don't always want to go down into the city on weekends,'' she said.
Rabbi Alfredo Borodowski, who heads the Jewish Community Center of Harrison, has counseled some young adults in his congregation who have found themselves back at home after college. ''It's seen as a step back,'' he said, ''and you get hooked into some of the dynamics that bring you back to the precollege state.''
But he added that time at home can also be spiritually rewarding for young adults. ''They are at the age when they come from college and begin building their identity in the world,'' he said. ''Spiritual questions about who they are begin to emerge. I don't fear for them. When they come to me with these kinds of questions, I know they are using the time in a useful way and they will come out of the experience stronger than before.''
Some Steps To Take If Paths Cross
WHEN an adult child moves back home, both parents and child may need to make changes in the way they relate to one another.
''Both want to be careful or wary of slipping back into old patterns,'' said Susan Newman, a social psychologist and author of ''Nobody's Baby Now: Reinventing Your Adult Relationship with Your Mother and Father.'' ''It's very easy to slide back into your adolescent self, and the parents into the care-taking role.''
Her advice for successful cohabitation falls into three baskets.
For parents, here is her advice:
1.Be aware and sympathetic to the feelings of your adult child, who may be facing professional or personal setbacks.
2.Support and encourage your children's efforts to take care of these setbacks.
3.Realize your child is not the same person as when he or she left home. Eating habits, politics and social habits may be different.
4.Be careful not to ''enable'' a lazy child. Set up a plan or set a time limit to urge your child toward independence.
5.Enjoy the opportunity to get to know your adult child in new ways.
For adult children, here is her advice:
1.Don't try to change your parents. ''Call up your sense of humor,'' she said. ''Remind yourself that when mom's being meddlesome or dad's being controlling that this is the way they've always been.''
2.Respect that your parents' lives have changed.
3.Contribute to the household; contributions may be either financial or through ''services in kind,'' like mowing the lawn or cooking dinner.
4.Have a goal or a plan for moving out.
5.Respect your parents' values. 6.Focus on what's positive about being home and your goals. 7.Enjoy the opportunity to get to know your parents in new ways.
And finally, Ms. Newman has some advice for both parents and children: Negotiate new policies about sharing chores, finances and household responsibilities, she says. Perhaps most important is the last one: Don't let tensions build. Talk through conflicts.
LISA A. PHILLIPS
