FOR Donald Pandina, the blow came a year ago. It was time to renegotiate the lease on Summa Gallery, an art and framing store he had owned with a partner in Brooklyn Heights for 35 years, the last 27 of them at 152 Montague Street. He thought he had reached an oral agreement with his landlord over the new lease.
''But then one day I got a phone call,'' Mr. Pandina said, ''saying that a large chain was interested and could we match a 12-year lease and a considerable increase in rent'' -- 40 percent more than the oral agreement.
The chain was MAC Cosmetics, a subsidiary of Estée Lauder, and after Mr. Pandina declined to match the offer, Summa Gallery departed in August and MAC opened there in December.
Such evolution is a natural part of the city's commercial fabric. But where Montague Street once seemed somewhat immune, a booming adjacent downtown area has spilled increasingly onto its graceful blocks. In the past decade, property values in Brooklyn Heights have shot up 65 to 70 percent, said Bill Ross of William S. Ross Real Estate, a local agency, adding that property taxes were higher than in other areas of Brooklyn.
These changes have made it hard for many independently owned businesses to stay open and have left some residents fearful that their elegant minnow of a main street may be swallowed up by a less dignified commercial whale.
For an estimated 50,000 workers at the MetroTech Center, Borough Hall, the Brooklyn courthouses and the law offices along Court Street, Montague Street is a convenient half-mile strip along which to grab a fast lunch, run to the bank, get a manicure or buy aspirin. To them, the news that a Subway sandwich shop opened last week, replacing a longtime Mexican restaurant, simply means another lunch option.
But such changes do not thrill residents of Brooklyn Heights, many of whom remember when the current Banana Republic was Nettie's, a family-owned department store that sold merchandise in bins.
''We don't need a Subway, we need children's shoes,'' said Judy Stanton, executive director of the Brooklyn Heights Association. The association recently drew up a list of the kinds of businesses it would like to see on the street (stores selling gifts, clothing and furniture) and the kinds it says are overrepresented there (banks, beauty salons, drug stores and cellphone stores).
While the guidelines are not enforceable, the hope is that they will encourage landlords to think twice when considering tenants.
Because impending vacancies are not always publicized, it is hard for the community to have a say in individual transactions, said Valerie Lynch, executive director of the Montague Street Business Improvement District. ''Property owners tend to negotiate their leases behind closed doors,'' she said. ''If they have an inkling that a business is about to close, we don't hear about it until there's a sign there saying a MAC is coming.''
Some businesses have successfully bridged the divide, appealing to both residents and commuters. The Garden of Eden, a high-end grocery store, opened two and a half years ago to acclaim from both groups. And residents hailed the recent arrival of Design Within Reach, a modern furniture store.
Still, many wish that their street could be more like Court Street in Cobble Hill, a homey strip of bookstores, thrift shops, sit-down restaurants and a small movie theater. Many of these would have trouble surviving on Montague Street, where rents are twice as high, around $100 a square foot per year for a ground-floor space.
Mr. Pandina, who moved the contents of his Montague Street store to the gallery's Upper West Side location, says that as a Brooklyn Heights resident he still sees former customers who lament the closing of his store and others like it. ''They say they hate going to Montague Street now,'' he said. ''They think it's becoming cheesy.''
TARA BAHRAMPOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: BROOKLYN HEIGHTS
