LESS than a year after imposing a new 7.5 percent tax on Atlantic City's casinos -- touching off a bruising political battle -- Governor McGreevey treated more than a dozen gambling analysts to dinner and an olive branch at Drumthwacket last month.
By all accounts, the governor said just what the analysts, representing several top investment houses, were waiting to hear.
He promised that there would be no new casino taxes in the near future, no unpleasant surprises, and, most important, no slot machines in the state's racetracks without the consent of the casino industry.
While there was some parsing of the governor's statement about video lottery terminals at racetracks -- what does ''industry'' mean, anyway? -- the analysts were relieved to hear Mr. McGreevey pledge his commitment to Atlantic City's stability and growth. Their opinion matters because they influence investment decisions and they are not afraid to speak their minds. No resident of Drumthwacket, the governor's mansion, wants to hear gambling analysts complaining to whoever will listen about dubious prospects for Atlantic City.
While the analysts themselves were not involved in the brawl last year between the governor and the casino operators backed by State Senator William Gormley of Atlantic County, the dinner was a sign that peace may be at hand along the Boardwalk.
''It's to the governor's credit, and the industry's credit, that they're able to put aside last year and move forward,'' said Micah Rasmussen, a spokesman for Mr. McGreevey.
Dennis Gomes, president of the Casino Association of New Jersey and president of resort operations for the Aztar Corporation, which operates the Tropicana hotel and casino, struck a similarly conciliatory note. ''We're pleased that Governor McGreevey met with the gaming analysts,'' Mr. Gomes said. ''The feedback we're getting from analysts has been positive, especially in light of the governor's assurances of stability.''
Further evidence of lambs and lions sharing space came when Mr. Gormley met last month with Donald Trump, who operates three casinos in Atlantic City, to talk about the state of the casino industry. Mr. Trump criticized his fellow casino operators last year when they unleashed a withering ad campaign aimed at the governor.
Mr. Trump had reason to hold Mr. McGreevey in high esteem. A key part of the governor's tax package last year was the new 7.5 percent tax on net profits. But because Mr. Trump's three casinos did not show a net profit, the billionaire developer and erstwhile television star did not feel the pain.
Throughout the summer, Atlantic City was split between two camps: Mr. McGreevey aligned with Mr. Trump, and Mr. Gormley side by aside with the rest of the casino operators. But all that appears to be changing now for the usual reason: self-interest.
Facing what promises to be a difficult re-election campaign next year, the governor can not help but wince when he sees his dismal approval ratings in casino-dependent South Jersey. According to one recent poll, 50 percent of those questioned who live in the southern part of New Jersey said they disapproved of the job Mr. McGreevey is doing, evidence that the wounds inflicted last year still have not healed, even if the battle is over.
Among their neighbors to the north, the disapproval rating was 43 percent.
As for the the casino operators, they also have some fences to mend -- and new ones to build. Senator Gormley, the industry's longtime champion, now finds himself in the minority in a State House that has a Democratic governor, Senate and Assembly.
''It's time to find new allies,'' said one Atlantic City insider. ''The casinos have to build a relationship with the governor.''
And for good reason. The casinos want to do everything in their power to thwart any plans for video lottery terminals in the state's ailing racetracks. That task will be easier to accomplish over dinners at Drumthwacket than by dueling news releases.
''We want to participate in the process,'' said Larry Mullin, executive vice president of the Borgata. ''That's why we want to work this out.''
For the last decade, governors have been content to let Senator Gormley run the show in Atlantic City. But now Mr. McGreevey has made it clear that he, too, wants center stage.
The industry seems inclined to make room.
