Near the end of his All-Star weekend news conference Saturday, N.H.L. Commissioner Gary Bettman interrupted his answer to yet another labor question with this warning: ''Don't confuse rhetoric with facts. If somebody says something -- even us -- make us prove it. I'm confident we can.''
At least Bettman knew to expect the questions, which took up most of his 45-minute session at the Xcel Energy Center. As the All-Star Game returned to one of the most vibrant hockey areas in the country, the threat of a lockout this fall remains the N.H.L.'s foremost problem in the minds of most players, coaches and league officials.
In the coming months, the N.H.L. must also deal with an expiring television contract and a game so choked by the neutral-zone trap and efficient goaltending that offense has slowed to a trickle. Bettman says he thinks solutions to all the problems -- labor, scoring and television -- ''can all move on parallel tracks.''
But labor remains the trickiest problem to fix. Although Bettman is optimistic that the league and the union will reach an agreement before next season, the sides cannot even agree on the terms of their disagreement -- mainly, whether the league has proposed a hard salary cap.
''We proposed a link between revenues and player salaries,'' Bettman said. ''It's been said we proposed a $31 million individual salary cap. It just isn't true. We did not propose a cap, and I defy anyone to show me a document that says we did.''
Bob Goodenow, president of the players association, said he had one: a one-page memo from the league to the union that, at the bottom, listed a proposed payroll of between $30 million and $31 million per team. ''For him to suggest they haven't done this is very disingenuous, but not surprising,'' Goodenow said.
Bettman said: ''The one-pager we gave them was this: These are revenues. These are player costs. These are reasonable profits. This is what's left. We never got past that.''
The union proposed revenue sharing and a 5 percent reduction in salaries, which the owners say is not enough to fix the game's economic problems. The lack of common ground left most All-Star players uneasy.
''I don't know how it's going to affect me,'' said Rick Nash, a 19-year-old wing for the Columbus Blue Jackets, whose 31 goals lead the league. ''I don't know what's going to happen. I wish I knew.''
Veterans like Philadelphia's Jeremy Roenick, who went through the 1994-95 lockout, say they are prepared to play in Europe or form their own league if the N.H.L. locks them out. Roenick, who played in Germany during the last lockout, said he had saved enough money to withstand a one- or two-year stoppage.
''We've got our roots dug in just as much as the owners do,'' he said. ''I don't think somebody like myself or Keith Tkachuk or Mike Modano -- we don't need to play another game in the league if we don't have to. A lockout is not good for the game. If the owners want to say it's going to take two or three years, I'm wondering how many years I'm going to play anyway.''
Roenick said the fear of a multiyear shutdown was real, and frightening. ''I think it's more scary for the sport and for the owners than it is for the players,'' he said. ''The players can go play in Europe. They can play in the different leagues. But the owners are going to lose their franchises, and they'll have to deal with the people that work for them; they'll have to deal with the buildings that will sit empty.
''The Buffalos, the Carolinas, are they going to stick around? Is Ottawa going to stick around? Calgary? Edmonton? Those teams are not going to be able to withstand one or two years. There's going to be a lot at stake, there's no question.''
Bettman said the situation was not nearly as dire as Roenick portrayed it. ''I don't know why there is rhetoric from the players that there will be a two-, two-and-a-half-year work stoppage,'' Bettman said. ''We want to make a deal.''
But as of today, there is not one in sight.
''Who knows what's going to happen?'' said Tkachuk, the St. Louis wing who said he would spend a lockout coaching his sons rather than playing.
''I'm optimistic something will happen, that it'll get done, and we'll be playing next year. Nobody can afford to be out.''
HOCKEY
