''I WAS tired of doing the same one- and two-week trips year after year,'' Jake Burton said from Livigno, Italy, last month. ''I wanted to remind myself and my children just how big the world is.''
Mr. Burton, the co-founder of Burton Snowboards, was explaining his decision to take an epic 10-month, round-the-world snowboarding trip with his wife, Donna, three sons (ages 14, 10, 7), a 15-year-old niece and two tutors.
The Burtons, who live in Stowe, Vt., aren't the only parents who are allowing their offspring to forgo school for a family trip. A 1999 poll conducted by the Travel Industry Association of America found that one out of five parents let their children miss school for family travel, though 72 percent of them only missed a day or two. In 2003, according to the National Leisure Travel Monitor, market research found that 57 percent of 1,350 leisure travelers in the United States would be willing to take their children out of school for vacation.
In Rye, N.Y., the increasing frequency with which students are missing school because of family travel, prompted Ann Edwards, principal of Rye Middle School, to send parents a letter last fall reminding them of the school district's recognized absences from school, which included a death in family and religious observance, but not, say, a month of surfing in Fiji.
During their trip, the Burtons are home-schooling their children in accordance with Vermont's requirements, with the help of the tutors, who are family friends. But it's the informal learning of a prolonged cultural vacation that many parents say they find most rewarding.
''We thought exposing our kids to different cultures, having them learning new languages and understanding other histories would be much more educational than sitting in a classroom,'' said Dr. Yumi Jarris, a family doctor in Shelburne, Vt., of the 14-month, round-the-world trip she took two and a half years ago with her husband and three children, who were 12, 8 and 3. ''We had no questions about taking them out of school.''
'A Real Burden' for Teachers
Teachers do, though.
''A few days, I can see,'' said Carrie Amaya, a sixth-grade teacher at Columbia Explorers Academy in Chicago. ''But a whole week?''
Mrs. Amaya works in a Mexican-American community, and many of her students return to Mexico for three weeks at the Christmas break even though the school vacation is only two weeks.
''Personally, I understand it, because they want to visit family,'' Mrs. Amaya said. ''But as a teacher, it's a pain. I have to go back and teach them everything they've missed.''
Teresa Plowright, editor of a family travel Web site, travelwithkids.about.com, agrees, saying, ''It places a real burden on teachers.''
Mrs. Plowright, who has three children and sometimes travels with them when school is in session, obtains assignments from the teachers before a trip. (Another site with articles about family travel issues, including taking children out of school, is www.familytravelforum.com; a yearly subscription costs $38.)
Some principals discourage teachers from providing work in advance, however, since it appears to condone the taking of kids out of school for vacation. Absenteeism, even for a week, disrupts the learning process, educators say. While some work can be completed during or after a trip, lectures and classroom discussions are impossible to replicate.
''Long absences from school sends a dismissive message to the child about the importance of school,'' said Marlene Maron, director of psychology at Fletcher Allen Health Care and the Vermont Children's Hospital, both in Burlington, Vt. She noted that parents initiated such time off when it met their own needs, not necessarily those of the child.
Additionally, she said, ''It can breed resentment in peers left in the classroom, particularly if there are group projects going on.''
Individual schools or teachers determine requirements for missed schoolwork. In 2001, before a five-month global adventure with his two children, Koyla and Zoe, who were 13 and 9, Dan Glick, a Colorado-based journalist, was told to have them ''do some reading, do some math and write in their journals,'' while on the trip, which overlapped with school summer vacation. The children were out of school for two and a half months and, Mr. Glick said, ''easily assimilated back into school.''
The Jarrises, whose children missed school for much longer, were required to gain approval of a curriculum from the Vermont Board of Education before leaving.
Responsibilities and Hassles
Missing even a few days of school is often difficult for a child.
''They miss quite a bit of information, even for one day, and when they return, their responsibilities have doubled,'' said Nancy Reaven, a health care consultant in La Cañada Flintridge, Calif., who has two daughters, 15 and 12. ''Frankly, the hassle associated with being behind is not worth it.''
As a result, if they want extra time for a vacation, she and her husband, Bill Applebaum, pick up the girls from school a couple of hours early on their departure day rather than sacrifice a complete school day.
Frequently, parents will cite a trip's cultural or historical value as justification for taking their children out of school, but according to the Travel Industry Association poll, 47 percent of parents surveyed said pleasure, sightseeing or entertainment was the principal reason for trips involving missed school.
Add cheap off-season travel to the list. Transportation and lodging are often most expensive, and most crowded, during school vacations. ''We take our kids to the Caribbean in November rather than over the Christmas break because it's less expensive and less crowded,'' said Michael Wagner, an investor from Shaker Heights, Ohio, with a son, 11, and a daughter, 9.
A few families in Rye start summer vacations before school ends, and pupils miss final exams. ''In the past, I've tried to make arrangements to give students the exam over the summer, but now we're saying unless a child is ill, we're not going to do it,'' said Dr. Edwards, the middle school principal.
High student absenteeism can also translate into less state financing for some schools. At La Cañada High School in California, for example, parents are asked to pay the portion of state financing ($26.02 a child a day) lost when students are illegitimately absent. Joanne Davidson, assistant principal for attendance, said all have complied so far.
Such tactics are myopic, some parents contend. ''Before the trip, my 14-year-old had no interest in foreign languages,'' Mr. Burton said. ''Now he's around European kids who speak two or three languages and he wants to be multilingual.''
The schools, however, see it differently. ''Sometimes children have opportunities to go to fabulous places and be educated outside the walls of school,'' Dr. Edwards said. ''But then they come back and they're playing catch-up for a long, long time.''
PRACTICAL TRAVELER WENDY KNIGHT is a freelance writer who lives in Vermont.
Correction:  February 22, 2004, Sunday  The Practical Traveler column on Feb. 8, about taking children out of school for vacations, misspelled the name of a student who went on a five-month global trip and incorrectly described a parent who took his children on a 10-month snowboarding tour. The student is Kolya Glick, not Koyla, and the parent, Jake Burton, is the sole founder of Burton Snowboards; he is not the co-founder.
