In his new police procedural, PLAYING WITH FIRE (Morrow, $23.95), Peter Robinson makes repeated reference to Chief Inspector Alan Banks's fear of fire. ''Fires did strange and unpredictable things to the human body,'' this observant Yorkshire copper notes, after sifting through the devastation of an arson fire that incinerated two squatters, one a young heroin addict and the other a failed landscape painter, camped on barges at the dead end of a canal. So you can pretty much follow the trail of ashes to see where this grim story is heading -- from one inferno to the next, until the flames are licking at Banks's toes.
There's no predicting, though, the labyrinthine route of the investigation, which leads Banks down the bleak byways of parental abuse, drug addiction and homelessness before it narrows its focus on a cleverly hatched scheme of art forgery. Although Banks has adapted well to the advanced methods of forensic science (he's a quick study on gas chromatography), his patient and insightful style of detection lends itself more to the art of the personal interview. ''He had a knack for the thrust and parry, or the subtle persuasiveness of a good interrogation,'' writes Robinson, whose own talents in this department account for both the quickness of mind that makes Banks such a keen protagonist and the diversity of tongue that gives the secondary characters -- from inarticulate teenagers to bloviating art experts -- their lively individuality.
In Jenny Siler's brooding crime novels (''Shot,'' ''Iced,'' ''Easy Money''), a young woman with a gun usually finds herself traveling alone on some unfamiliar American highway, running for her life. Although this solitary fugitive never seems to know where she's going, she always has a dual mission: to deliver some plot McGuffin like a geological map or a microcassette, and to discover something about her own identity. In FLASHBACK (John Macrae/ Holt, $25), Siler darkens the lost-identity theme and transfers the action to exotic locations in Morocco, lending a Hitchcock-like sense of disorientation to a story of international espionage that is thick with atmosphere, if thin on logic.
Siler's latest and most fully realized heroine is an American woman known only as Eve. An amnesiac, Eve has been living with French nuns who rescued her from a field in Burgundy where she lay bleeding from a gunshot wound to the head. But when gunmen invade the convent and massacre the nuns, Eve bolts for Morocco, directed by the only clue she has to her identity -- an old receipt for the Tangier-Algeciras ferry. Tangier, with its ''pervasive stink of colonialism gone to rot,'' is one of several Moroccan locales that Siler describes in the hollow voice of someone who knows a place intimately but must wander as a stranger -- the eternal outsider.
Even more than the sinister figures who pursue Eve from Tangier to Marrakesh, these feelings of alienation haunt her dreams and cast menacing shadows on the landscape. Curiously, the story loses its suspense as, one by one, Eve's pursuers identify themselves and expose the secrets of her past life. As it turns out, the moody beauty of Siler's style shines best at night, in the dark.
Two things you can always count on in the rawboned crime novels that William Kent Krueger sets in the deep north woods of upper Minnesota: fierce winter weather and bad feelings between local white and Indian residents. True to form, BLOOD HOLLOW (Atria, $24) opens in a howling blizzard that slams into the search-and-rescue team looking for a high school girl who took off on her snowmobile after getting drunk at a New Year's Eve party. Cork O'Connor, the former sheriff of the town of Aurora and the hands-on hero of this rugged series, finally gives up the search, but not before glimpsing a spectral wraith -- what one of his Ojibwa ancestors might have called a manidoog -- in the whiteout that blinds him crossing the ice of Fisheye Lake.
There's no doubt where Cork's sympathies lie when the girl turns up a murder victim and the town passes its biased judgment against Solemn Winter Moon, a truculent youth with a reputation as ''the bad boy off the rez.'' Despite plentiful evidence against Solemn, it's a trumped-up case and an ugly example of the racial prejudice that mars the serene beauty of an endangered region. Writing as a naturalist, Krueger draws on Indian legends to communicate the mystery of the north woods; as a humanist, he looks to the spirits of the ancients to heal all wounds.
Somewhere, buried under the breathy prose and chirpy dialogue in Laura Van Wormer's romantic suspense novel THE KILL FEE (Mira, $23.95), is a teeny-weeny mystery involving a disputed piece of real estate. But it is decidedly a subplot, a wispy little thing that in no way distracts from the essential business of the book -- the rapt contemplation of its heroine, Sally Harrington.
Although Van Wormer has written four previous novels about Sally, a stunningly beautiful journalist who has worked her way up to senior producer of a network news program headquartered in New York, the author obviously feels that there is oh, so much, much more to say about her. As narrator of her own story, Sally strives to be modest about ''my admittedly spectacular climb.'' But that doesn't stop her admirers from gushing about her looks, her brains and ''that charm of yours.'' A good half of the narrative concerns Sally's professional coups -- a million-dollar offer to be the host of the network's morning show and a more appealing counteroffer to anchor her own newscast. Lest the reader nod, much ink is also spilled on her romantic conquests, the latest (discounting old boyfriends) being a hunky cop who followed her from California and her boss's suave and sexy (and inconveniently married) brother.
Waiting for some criminal action to intrude on Sally's sunny life is as wearying as waiting for Godot. When it does surface -- in the form of dire warnings to stop pushing Great-Uncle Percy's claim to five acres of prime Connecticut real estate -- the threat to Sally's well-being is as hard to take seriously as her powder-puff efforts to play amateur sleuth. The only mystery here is how many boyfriends she can dangle at one time.
Crime
