Senator John Kerry romped to two more big victories in the Democratic presidential battle on Saturday night, overwhelming Howard Dean in two of his one-time strongholds, Washington and Michigan, and solidifying his position as the favorite to win his party's nomination.
Mr. Kerry's twin victories -- including the one in Michigan, the biggest state that has voted to date, with 128 delegates -- mean he has now won 9 of the first 11 nominating contests. By contrast, Dr. Dean, who placed second in Michigan and Washington, has won none.
The result left little doubt of Mr. Kerry's command of the Democratic field as the candidates head to a vote on Sunday in Maine, where Mr. Kerry is also considered strong, and in Tennessee and Virginia on Tuesday. Mr. Kerry had been campaigning intensely in those two Southern states in a hope of victories that would knock out the two Southerners in the race, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Gen. Wesley K. Clark of Arkansas.
Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, speaking at a rally before a Democratic dinner in Richmond, Va., on Saturday evening, hailed the results and moved to turn the discussion away from the Democratic presidential race to the contest with Mr. Bush this fall.
''In Michigan and Washington, a message is being sent -- and it's the same message that was sent from Iowa, New Hampshire, to Missouri, to North Dakota, to New Mexico to Arizona,'' he said, ''And it is the message that I am carrying to Virginia and to Tennessee, and the message is: George Bush's days are numbered.''
Dr. Dean's defeats on Saturday in two states that once were considered fertile ground for him came as his campaign lost the backing of a major union supporter, a turn of events that underlined the precipitous decline of his candidacy. Gerald McEntee, the leader of the union that had provided Dr. Dean one of his most important endorsements of the year -- the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees -- told Dr. Dean, the former Vermont governor, that it was withdrawing its support.
Dr. Dean issued a statement on Saturday night reiterating his intent to press forward with his campaign through Wisconsin, which votes on Feb. 17.
''The people of Washington State have sent a clear message that they want this race and this debate to continue, and that our campaign is the real alternative to John Kerry,'' Dr. Dean said. ''We look forward to tomorrow's Maine caucuses and winning Wisconsin on the 17th.''
Still, advisers to Dr. Dean seemed staggered by the strength of Mr. Kerry's showing on Saturday, and said they now saw only the remotest hope of any Democrat blocking Mr. Kerry from winning the nomination. Aides to General Clark and Mr. Edwards, looking for victories on Tuesday in Virginia and Tennessee, were hardly more hopeful.
In Michigan, with 100 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Kerry had 52 percent, while Dr. Dean had 17 percent, barely meeting the 15 percent threshold for qualifying for delegates. Mr. Edwards came in third with 14 percent. The Rev. Al Sharpton, who was looking to make a strong showing here, and General Clark each drew 7 percent of the vote. Representative Dennis J. Kucinich received about 3 percent.
In Washington, with 99 percent of the precincts counted, Mr. Kerry had 48 percent, compared with 30 percent for Dr. Dean. Mr. Kucinich was third with 8 percent, while Mr. Edwards drew 7 percent and General Clark 3 percent.
In Michigan, state party leaders extended the closing time of the poll to 6 p.m. from 4 p.m. in Detroit after a last-minute shift of six caucus sites led to confusion across the city. Some advisers to Mr. Sharpton and Dr. Dean said the last-minute change had the effect of disenfranchising some minority voters, but Democratic leaders, in announcing the result, said they had confidence in the tally.
Michigan was a particularly important prize, both because it had the largest number of delegates at stake and because it is expected to be a fulcrum of the presidential battle this November. The state, which is traditionally a battleground, has the second-highest unemployment rate in the country and has lost more than 300,000 jobs in the past three years.
The election here was unusual because it permitted Democrats to vote over the Internet, as well as by mail or in person. About one-third of the total votes were cast online. Most voters -- more than 100,000 -- showed up at the caucuses to vote in person.
Mark Brewer, executive director of the Michigan party, said that the Internet votes were cast ''with integrity and security, and there is no doubt about the accuracy of those results.'' But Representative John D. Dingell, among others, was concerned about the security of the ballots and said he would oppose further attempts at Internet voting until the system could provide a verifiable paper trail.
''I would be very, very careful,'' said Mr. Dingell, who represents a district outside Detroit.
In any event, the predictions that Internet voting would favor Dr. Dean were not borne out, and a poll suggested that people who voted by Internet were similar to people who voted by more traditional methods.
A poll by CBS of voters who had applied for absentee ballots, which could be cast either on line or by mail, showed that 37 percent of the people who voted on line voted for Mr. Kerry, while Dr. Dean got the support of 25 percent of online voters.
But the poll demonstrated that support for Dr. Dean had dwindled over time among these voters, based upon when they cast their votes, much the way it had deteriorated in the population at large. Dr. Dean had the support of 19 percent of the Democrats who voted this week, and 35 percent of those who cast their votes more than two weeks ago.
CBS News interviewed a statewide sample of 1,169 voters in Michigan who had requested an absentee ballot from the Michigan State Democratic Party. The margin of sampling error was plus or minus three percentage points.
As the contests came to an end, Mr. Kerry virtually had Michigan, and to a lesser extent, Washington State, to himself. Although just a few weeks ago polls showed Dr. Dean with a commanding lead here, he pulled up stakes on Thursday, skipping on to campaign events elsewhere, and turning his attention to Wisconsin, which is voting on Feb. 17.
With Mr. Kerry pulling into the lead in the polls, the candidates did not make any major investments in television advertisements in Michigan.
Mr. Kerry had not been here since a debate in late October. And Mr. Edwards and General Clark all but ignored Michigan as well, turning their attention to Virginia and Tennessee to head off a Kerry victory in a region they consider their own.
Mr. Kerry's victory here on Saturday underlined what many Democrats said has been the central dynamic of his candidacy: primary voters and elected officials are willing to put aside differences with Mr. Kerry in the belief that he is the strongest candidate the Democrats had to put up against Mr. Bush. Many elected officials who endorsed him here had opposed the North American Free Trade Agreement and higher fuel mileage standards, both of which Mr. Kerry has supported in Congress.
A CBS poll of voters who had requested absentee ballots -- not those who actually showed up at the caucus sites -- showed that most voters were also looking for a candidate who could beat Mr. Bush.
''His stand on issues is important, and I don't want to denigrate that, but the top Democrats in this state, myself included, want one thing,'' Mr. Dingell said in an interview on Saturday. ''We want a Democratic presidential candidate who can fight Mr. Bush on good and even terms and who can win, and we think that's John Kerry.''
Mr. Dingell said that he had endorsed Mr. Kerry only after receiving assurances during two hourlong discussions with him that he would protect jobs here.
Similarly, Governor Jennifer M. Granholm of Michigan said she had endorsed Mr. Kerry after he agreed to ''fix'' Nafta.
In the Detroit suburb of St. Clair Shores, some Democratic officials said that turnout appeared to be low, suggesting that might be the result of polls showing Mr. Kerry with a big lead in the state, and the absence of other candidates here.
Washington State had once been prime territory for Dr. Dean as well; it is where he drew some of his biggest crowds during the higher-flying periods of his campaign. And there were early reports there of the heavy voting that has characterized almost all of the contests to date.
In Seattle on Saturday morning, hundreds of people crowded into a senior center in one of the state's most diverse and liberal legislative districts.
There were so many voters that caucus organizers had to hastily set up two overflow rooms. Voters, many of them standing, gathered at round tables and began their debating and balloting.
At the table for precinct 1854, all of the candidates had supporters among the 19 voters signed up there.
''I'm from the South and I know that Edwards is more electable than Kerry,'' said Richard Lewis, 48, who is originally from Texas. ''Edwards is a great orator. If we want the swing voters, people are not going to go for Kerry. I'm casting a strategic vote for Edwards.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CAUCUSES  Correction:  February 11, 2004, Wednesday  Because of an editing error, a front-page article in some editions on Sunday about voting for a Democratic nominee for president referred incorrectly in some copies to one state in which Howard Dean placed second on Saturday. He placed second not only in Michigan but also in Washington (not Wisconsin, which votes next Tuesday).
