ANNE WOLFSON, a tall, curly-haired brunette who is told that she smiles a lot, was married in a blue dress from Loehmann's in her late 30's, and began trying to conceive. After a miscarriage, her doctor sent her to a specialist; the specialist could find nothing wrong with her. A year later, a second miscarriage followed, and nine months later, a third.
Along the way, she took ovulation pills, injected herself with hormones and embarked on two cycles of in vitro fertilization. She and her husband had spent $45,000, little of it covered by insurance, and the reproductive endocrinologist was starting to talk about using donor eggs.
About that time, her parents told her about a friend of theirs who claimed that his crippling arthritis had been cured by a Chinatown acupuncturist, Rong-Bao Lu. After all that infertility treatment, Ms. Wolfson was feeling pretty awful: depressed, bloated, headachy. When she made an appointment with Dr. Lu, she wasn't thinking about getting pregnant. ''All I wanted,'' she said, ''was to feel better.''
Ms. Wolfson, who is the general counsel for a small Lower Manhattan software company, did her homework. Through the State Health Department's Web site, she confirmed Dr. Lu's claim that he was an M.D. as well as an acupuncturist.
Her first glimpse of Dr. Lu's office, at 227 Canal Street, amid fishmongers, restaurants and junk stores, was off-putting. But that was part of the attraction. Ms. Wolfson had been paying for Upper East Side décor and office rentals, with little but disillusion to show for it.
After hearing her story, Dr. Lu insisted that she try to become pregnant again, with the help of acupuncture and traditional Chinese herbal medicine. ''Your womb is cold,'' Ms. Wolfson remembers him telling her.
''What do you mean?'' she asked.
''Cold, hot, wet, dry -- Chinese medicine is all about maintaining balance,'' she recalls him saying. When she looked skeptical, he gave her a wry look and said something like: ''It's a Chinese thing.''
Twice a week, Dr. Lu stuck very thin needles into her legs, abdomen, hands and right ear. He gave her little paper bags of herbs -- they looked like twigs and bark -- to boil into bitter, stinky tea, which he told her to drink once a day.
Two months later, she was pregnant. Her son, Ethan, is 2 and playing with trains.
Was it magic? Science? Pure coincidence? A con? The answer is one of those mysteries of New York life, hidden behind the nondescript door of an office on a crowded street in Chinatown. Perhaps, as Ms. Wolfson believes, the treatment reduced her stress and anxiety over her failures to conceive. What is certain is that in their pain and sorrow, a steady trickle of affluent and successful upper-middle-class women have come to Dr. Lu's office seeking help.
To Western ears, Dr. Lu's explanation of Chinese medical theory sounds more like folklore than science. ''You have to improve energy flow -- this is Qi -- and balance yin and yang of the body,'' Dr. Lu, a slight, unflappable man in a white coat, said in his office last week. ''Everything has yin and yang. Sun is yang and moon is yin; bright things are yang, dark is yin. Some organ belong to yang, some to yin.''
Dr. Lu, 59, studied medicine -- 90 percent Western, 10 percent Chinese -- in Shanghai. In 1965, the government sent him to work on a farm, where he practiced acupuncture on peasants who could not afford hospital treatment. He came to the United States in 1981 and moved to New York in 1995.
Last week, Giovanna d'Andrea, a 42-year-old architecture school dropout turned banker, looked like a stylish pincushion lying on one of Dr. Lu's examining tables. Her doctor, Melvin Thornton, medical director of the Center for Women's Reproductive Care at Columbia University, had suggested acupuncture as a complement to conventional infertility treatment. She found Dr. Lu through ''women talk'' at the sauna. Ms. d'Andrea became pregnant immediately and is in her first trimester.
The benefit of acupuncture, Dr. Thornton said, may amount to no more than individual attention or subconscious motivation. Or there could be something more to it, like improving blood flow. ''When you talk about medicine, you need good clinical trials -- randomized, blinded, with thousands of patients,'' Dr. Thornton said. ''That study has never been done.'' But he added: ''There are a lot of things in medicine we don't understand. I tell my patients as long as it's not going to harm you, and not going to cost you a lot of money, then you can try it.''
To Ms. Wolfson, Dr. Lu offered hope, and hope is often stronger than reason or science. ''Whatever the reason,'' she said, ''I've got this great kid, and that was the goal.''
COPING E-mail: amh@nytimes.com
