Angela Cannings spent 20 months in prison, convicted of smothering two of her babies, before an appeals court declared it was all a grave mistake -- the murder charges, her trial, her conviction and her life sentence.
The court ruled that her conviction relied almost entirely on a tidy presumption of guilt, rather than on solid evidence. Ms. Cannings and her husband, Terry, lost three seemingly healthy children to sudden infant death syndrome from 1989 to 1999, and have one surviving child, 8-year-old Jade.
The appeals court ruling, along with similar decisions in two other cases last year, constitutes a watershed in Britain for parents who have lost children through crib death and who have been accused and convicted of murdering them on the basis of conflicting opinions, delivered by expert witnesses.
''It was a nightmare,'' Ms. Cannings said from her home here, with her husband by her side, more than a month after the appeals court ordered her release from prison on Dec. 10. The court's written judgment was issued on Jan. 19.
''I just couldn't take it all in,'' she said. ''It was just a mishmash of emotions.''
Prompted by the appellate court's strongly worded written judgment, the British attorney general, Lord Goldsmith, announced a thorough review of 258 criminal cases similar to Ms. Cannings's, although he noted the ultimate number of cases likely to be revisited was far fewer. The government is also weighing whether to review civil family court cases, where the standard of proof is considerably lower than in a criminal court.
Medicine is ''still at the frontiers of knowledge'' when it comes to crib deaths, one of the three appellate judges said after the ruling. Without ''additional cogent evidence'' these cases should not be tried or continued, he warned.
The appeals court opinion went on to say: ''Unless we are sure of guilt, the dreadful possibility always remains that a mother, already brutally scarred by the unexplained death or deaths of her babies, may find herself in prison for life for killing them, when she should not be there at all. In our community, and in any civilized community, that is abhorrent.''
Ms. Cannings's case has called into question the testimony of Sir Roy Meadow, a prominent pediatrician who was the first to suggest in 1977 that some mothers induce illness in their children to draw attention to themselves.
Sir Roy, who has testified in countless child abuse cases and is now retired, also popularized a theory -- not his own -- that stated, ''one sudden infant death is a tragedy, two is suspicious and three is a murder, unless proven otherwise.'' The hypothesis, which is widely quoted, became known in Britain as ''Meadow's law.'' But those assumptions are now being re-examined.
Graham Zellick, chairman of the Criminal Cases Review Commission, which is the final arbiter of the appeals process, called the ruling in Ms. Cannings's case ''very significant indeed in relation to sudden infant deaths which have no obvious medical explanation and no other evidence.''
He added, ''It clearly should result in a significant change in prosecution policy, and one would earnestly hope in the attitude of many pediatricians.''
Ms. Cannings, 40, a former supermarket worker, gave birth to her first daughter, Gemma, in 1989. Gemma died at 13 weeks, and doctors could not explain why. Two years later, Jason was born. He lived seven weeks.
After each funeral, the couple collected all the cards, mementos and little toys and put them in a box, with the child's name affixed. But the couple was determined to try again. Jade was born in 1996, and this time the couple signed up for a special program to help monitor the baby. Jade, now a blond, green-eyed child of 8, suffered a strange breathing episode as a baby and was rushed to the hospital, but she survived.
Convinced that their bad luck was behind them, the Canningses decided to have another child. Matthew was born in 1999. The couple did not sign up with the monitoring program but followed the protocol, including using a special alarm that signals distress if a baby is not breathing properly. Matthew had gastrointestinal problems and had trouble sleeping on his back, which is now considered safer, so they let him sleep on his stomach.
When Matthew was 4 months old, Ms. Cannings heard the alarm. She ran to his room and found him lying still, his face a shade of purplish gray. She called her husband, who worked five minutes away, then waited in shock until he rushed home and called an ambulance.
From the start, Ms. Cannings said, the police and doctors, who had treated her so kindly after the previous deaths, viewed her with suspicion, after the death of her third baby. ''They were intent on getting a confession out of me,'' she said.
Ms. Cannings was told she could either go home, and her daughter Jade would be taken in by social services, or live elsewhere and see Jade only under supervision until her trial. Ms. Cannings moved out and grew deeply depressed. She was eventually charged with murder in connection with the deaths of the two boys and went to trial.
In court, prosecutors relied on what they described as a suspicious pattern of deaths and what they considered her strange behavior after Matthew died.
Her husband soon concluded that the police had no evidence against his wife, and he began to fight to have the murder charges dropped. Eventually, the pressure caused him to have a mental breakdown, which cost him his job and, without the income, his house.
''Don't think we survived it,'' he said after his wife's release. ''Were not surviving it now.''
At the trial, a number of experts offered their opinions about the deaths of Jason and Matthew. Much was made of Mrs. Cannings's decision to call her husband first and not an ambulance. Sir Roy, as a witness for the prosecution, told the jury, ''The diagnosis for me, the clinical diagnosis, would be this was characteristic of smothering.''
But he had never seen the babies or interviewed the parents and, as the appellate court pointed out, there was a dearth of evidence: no cause of death could be determined; there was no sign the babies had been injured; and there was no history of parental violence or abuse. In fact, relatives and friends described Mrs. Cannings as a loving mother.
Nonetheless, the jury found Ms. Cannings guilty.
Sir Roy, whose testimony in other trials has also been questioned, has been advised not to make any statements pending an investigation by the General Medical Council. His defenders, though, say he has been undeservedly singled out.
''He was just one of several witnesses,'' said Prof. Alan Craft, the president of the Royal College of Pediatrics and Child Health. ''Yet he has been seized upon by everybody.''
The issue in Ms. Cannings's case, and others like it, is that medical science cannot explain why these babies die, a fact society often has difficulty accepting.
''The bottom line is that we don't know in the end why babies die suddenly and unexpectedly,'' said Joyce Epstein, who heads the Foundation for the Study of Infant Death in Britain and is working with the government to set up more thorough investigations of crib deaths, including the use of pediatric pathologists.
