FOR LOVE OF INSECTS
By Thomas Eisner.
Illustrated. 448 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
The Belknap Press/
Harvard University Press. $29.95.
Have you ever been squirted by a vinegaroon? Spent a night alone outdoors in the Arizona desert? Staged a pitched battle between ants and termites? (The termites took heavy losses, but the ants retreated under fire from their biological weapon, a chemical spray containing complex diterpenes.)+If the answer's no, enlarge your horizons by reading Thomas Eisner's ''For Love of Insects.'' Eisner, the J. G. Schurman professor of chemical ecology (a discipline he helped found) at Cornell University, has interwoven the story of his career with the results of his investigations to create a fascinating and highly unusual book.
Eisner was a fellow student of Edward O. Wilson at Harvard, and the two men, now perhaps the world's leading entomologists, remain close friends. (Wilson's foreword to this book compares Eisner to Fabre, the legendary 19th-century French naturalist who pioneered the study of insect life.) With a grant of $200 and an automobile that, in Wilson's words, ''may have set a national record in breakdowns per week,'' they made a 12,000-mile field trip through ''the lower 48 states,'' an epic excursion that helped form their subsequent careers.+Those careers, however, diverged dramatically after college. Wilson took off from groundbreaking studies of ants to build his controversial, Darwin-inspired program of sociobiology, then became a leading champion of biodiversity. Eisner, an equally committed evolutionist and conservationist, chose more modestly to focus on one important but previously neglected issue in insect ecology.
Insects and arthropods (things like millipedes, which most of us group with insects under the generic title ''bug'') are mostly small and appear highly vulnerable to a wide range of predators: birds, fish, reptiles, small mammals, even some plants, let alone carnivorous species of their own kind. So how do so many millions survive? Before Eisner, only a few were known to have chemical defenses. Eisner suspected that their recipe for survival might be the rule rather than the exception.+His suspicions opened a research field that would keep him busy throughout his life. And to give you Eisner's idea of ''busy,'' here's his schedule for one trip: 10 lectures in 12 days at locations up to 200 miles apart, each road journey punctuated by several stops to explore sites and collect specimens, on which he experimented nightly in his motel bedroom.
To his work Eisner brought an array of talents seldom united in one individual: the patience, perseverance and interpretive skills required for thorough fieldwork, the meticulous care, ingenuity and resourcefulness needed for the most rigorous laboratory experiments and the technical virtuosity and artistic flair of a first-class photographer. Most pages are illustrated, mainly with his own photographs; many of these are bizarrely beautiful in their own right, apart from their value in illuminating the text.
And how full of surprises that text is! Creatures as diverse as stink bugs, roaches, fireflies, vinegaroons (a type of scorpion that emits a vinegarlike odor) and a variety of moths and beetles turn out to emit a bewildering variety of chemicals. Some of these, like cyanide and cantharidin (the active ingredient in Spanish Fly), have sinister connotations for humans too. Others will immobilize spiders for as long as six days or actually kill small lizards. At least one species, the bombardier beetle, discharges its accurately aimed venom with a loud bang, almost at boiling point. Occasionally, an arms race ensues, and the predator evolves a countervailing strategy. For instance, one species of toad swallows bombardiers whole -- Eisner, who misses nothing, has heard the beetle discharge, too late to do any good, inside the toad's belly.
In most cases, chemical gambits elicit nonchemical responses, but the procedure can be reversed. A leaf beetle, whose muscles and adhesive feet resist the pull of weights equivalent (in human terms, and in Eisner's graphic phrase) to ''7.5 automobiles (Subaru Legacy station wagons, 1998 model),'' meets its Waterloo in the shape of a wheel bug that simply injects it with a muscle relaxant. This, like most defensive chemicals, is manufactured within the insect itself, but in some cases the toxin is acquired by eating a toxin-producing plant -- or insect. The female of one firefly species that doesn't naturally produce toxic substances lures males of a species that does by faking the frequency of its mating signal and then, when a male shows up with romance in mind, quickly kills and eats him, acquiring both dinner and immunity from attack.
These and many more of nature's mysteries are unraveled in Eisner's inimitable style -- charmingly modest, brimming with enthusiasm and shot with flashes of endearing naïveté. His descriptions are vivid, sometimes almost too vivid; describing how one larva weaves itself a protective blanket from its own excrement, he notes that ''the first fecal strand'' is ''slowly squeezed from the anal turret.'' Not many a scientist of his eminence would choose, for his book-jacket portrait, one of himself riding backwards on a bicycle.
Unfortunately there's a downside to this ebullience: not knowing quite when to stop or when to spice with variety. Almost all his stories have the same plot: Eisner sees something in the field, hypothesizes a chemical explanation, immobilizes the insects, heads for his lab and tests his hypothesis experimentally (experiments range from the basic -- tossing insects into spiderwebs -- to the high-tech, involving thermistors, microcalorimeters, solenoids, oscilloscopes and rotating magnets, to name but a few). Finally, like some biological Sherlock, he unveils the solution. Wait, wait, one longs to cry out, do these animals do nothing but eject chemicals? Don't they ever feed, breed, communicate? Until the final chapter, such matters are seldom mentioned. Suddenly the text alights on moth pheromones. Aha, we think. Then mating rituals. Better yet! But . . . oh no! . . . Females who lack protective alkaloids are getting them from the males, and the males are signaling ''I've got more alkaloids than the next guy!'' It's not the sex -- it's the chemistry, stupid!
But+both the quality of Eisner's writing and the intrinsic interest of his material (not to mention his outstanding illustrations) mean one can't really fault Eisner for staying on topic. Anyone fascinated by the endless diversity of nature, who prefers quirky fact to highfalutin theory or who simply likes to share someone else's passion, will find this book a delight.
Derek Bickerton's most recent books are ''Language and Human Behavior'' and ''Lingua ex Machina'' (with William Calvin).
