The imagined scene gives frequent fliers and security officials the chills: a Boeing 737 is ready to take off from Dulles International Airport outside Washington. Two men crouch among the trees a few hundred yards beyond the edge of the runway. At their feet lies an open metallic carrying case, empty now but for its gray foam padding. One man shoulders a cylinder just under five feet long and weighing about 35 pounds. The specifications vary slightly depending on whether the portable missile is of Soviet, Chinese, Egyptian or Pakistani manufacture.
As the Boeing taxis for takeoff, one of the men inserts the missile's thermal battery while the other slots a targeting device into place and switches it on. The warhead will use infrared homing -- based on technology found in all sorts of military and civilian hardware, like antiaircraft batteries, night-vision gear, NASA telescopes and medical equipment -- to lock on to the hottest part of its target, the exhaust plume at the rear of the jet's engines. The compact 737 makes a good target, because the engine pods hang tightly next to the wing. Larger jumbo jets like the 747 or the Airbus A380 are less vulnerable because their engines are mounted well below the wing (farther from the passengers), and the planes are designed to withstand the catastrophic failure of any single engine. The men wait for the 737 to rumble overhead, because they can fire a tail shot only from directly behind its engines' exhaust.
The plane screeches over the clearing in the woods, accelerating to greater than 200 miles an hour. The missile's solid fuel booster rocket motor will propel the warhead at
630 yards per second; as long as the operators get a shot off in the next 20 to 30 seconds, the warhead should catch the rising plane. But timing is everything in this business: the weapon has a safety feature common to many missiles and torpedoes -- the explosives are activated only after a certain distance is traversed (500 yards, in this case), in order to prevent a missile from exploding near the shooter. Fire too early, and it will harmlessly bounce off the target. Fire too late, and the missile self-destructs within 14 to 17 seconds. The manual is clear on that.
It is now or never. On this particular weapon the targeting element might vibrate against the shooter's cheek -- on another model it might beep -- letting him know that the infrared guidance system has captured the Boeing's heat signature. All that remains now is to pull the trigger.
So this is what we have: a powerful weapon that enables a single person, or a small handful of people, to inflict harm on a massive scale. A weapon, in other words, tailor-made for terrorism. To be sure, it has design flaws -- it relies on old technology, is not always accurate and requires split-second timing. Those who would fire a missile at a commercial jet, for example, are likely to get only one shot at it, even if they have a spare warhead with them, because it takes a trained crew 6 to 10 seconds to reload, by which time the target might be beyond the weapon's 2-mile-to-3-mile range. (Another failing of the old rocket launchers is that they must be fired from behind a plane. But advances in homing technology have led to newer missiles that can be fired head on at approaching aircraft.)
Still, the training needed to wield a shoulder-launched rocket is not all that extensive. According to Milton Bearden, a retired C.I.A. officer who distributed Stinger missiles to the mujahedeen freedom fighters during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, it takes merely a few lessons to absorb the basics. (The only limitation is experience -- there aren't any places in the world where live target practice is possible.) Since the 1960's, when the Russian Strela SA-7 was introduced, 24 civilian craft have been shot down with shoulder-launched missiles. Most of those planes were in war zones -- in Iraq, Strelas have taken down at least one U.S. military helicopter -- where combatants had access to military arsenals and plenty of opportunities to train by shooting at real targets. But for years now the weapons have been readily available for a few thousand dollars in the better-stocked arms bazaars of the third world, and it is impossible to account for how many shoulder-fired surface-to-air missiles are in terrorists' hands; estimates range from the thousands to the hundreds of thousands. In November 2002, suspected Al Qaeda operatives lurking outside Mombasa's airport in Kenya tried to take down an Arkia Israeli Airlines Boeing 757 with Strelas. They fired too early, according to Tal Imberman, an Arkia pilot, and they missed twice before abandoning the launcher and fleeing.
The question is what can be done about this threat. Preventive measures are being taken, of course. Last August, for example, the F.B.I. arrested three men in connection with a plot to smuggle a single SA-18 launcher from St. Petersburg, Russia, to New Jersey. And in October, the U.S. government persuaded several Asian and Pacific Rim countries to cooperate in efforts to thwart the global trade of the missiles. But in a sense, these steps only make people more aware of and more anxious about the threat, and that's why another approach has emerged as an attractive political option: the outfitting of every American passenger jet with a complex system to elude shoulder-launched missiles. (It would not be possible to quarantine every airport out to a point beyond their range.) The Department of Homeland Security has set aside $120 million to study that possibility. A version of the technology has long been used in military planes, but it's expensive and cumbersome, as well as messily pyrotechnic. To be suitable for civilian purposes, it must be completely overhauled, not only rendered safe and reliable, but also made to seem normal, unspectacular, an everyday thing. To some critics, this is a hopeless crusade, a boondoggle like Ronald Reagan's Star Wars scheme supposedly was. But to advocates, it is the only sensible response to the problem. Technology, in their view, can defeat fear.
If you watched cnn during the war in Iraq, you may have noticed fighter planes shedding bright little flares as they took off from and landed at air bases, or as they swept low over enemy territory. This was the military's missile defense system in action. It consists of three components: sensors that detect the hot plume of an incoming missile; a computer that registers the threat and sends a signal to deploy countermeasures; and the countermeasures themselves, flares ejected from the rear of the aircraft. These flares burn at a temperature that mimics the heat signature of jet exhaust and so work as pyrotechnic decoys to lure heat-seeking missiles away from their intended targets.
A crucial word here is ''burns.'' That's not a problem over a battlefield or a desert. But you wouldn't want these burning objects raining down on cities, oil refineries or even unpopulated fields or forests. ''Think of all the brush fires,'' says a C.I.A. veteran.
False alarms from the on-board missile detectors present another difficulty in applying battlefield solutions to civilian problems. Military policy is based on a ''better safe than sorry'' credo, hence the false positive rate, or the frequency with which threats are incorrectly identified, is very high in virtually all military systems. In civilian settings, that could create chaos. ''You'd have the 4th of July over J.F.K.,'' says Bill Sweetman, an aerospace analyst. Lumbering passenger jets would be performing missile-avoidance corkscrew maneuvers; hundreds of flights would be grounded every time one of these alarms went off. ''A great promotion for Amtrak,'' says the C.I.A. veteran with a laugh. (The issue of false positives is not limited to aviation. ''If a sniffer in Kuwait or Iraq goes off,'' says Parney Albright, second in command at the Department of Homeland Security's Science and Technology Directorate, ''the G.I.'s put on their gas masks. If it turns out to be a false alarm, they just take them off, and no big deal.'' But a detector that goes off in the New York subway means ''a major public health event, not to mention a potential for panic.'') Most of the on-board missile warning systems currently deployed by the military would thus need to be far more sensitive. ''I don't think the sensors will lock on to your backyard barbecue or anything,'' Sweetman says. ''But something intense like a welder's torch, I just don't know.''
Maintenance is another serious obstacle to the commercial application of antimissile technology. ''The systems on military aircraft need to be maintained every 300 hours,'' Albright says. ''That will bankrupt the airlines.'' Possibly, that is -- the issue of who will pay for the installing and the servicing of the antimissile hardware is unresolved. One federal report puts the estimated cost of maintenance at between $5 billion and $10 billion a year, money the airlines simply don't have. ''The threshold needs to be several thousand hours to be even approachably acceptable,'' Albright says.
Matters become only more complicated when the question of who will perform the maintenance arises. ''You can't have some high-school grad in Peoria without significant training handling pyrotechnics,'' Albright says. ''The infrastructure in the civilian sector for this sort of thing simply doesn't exist. You are going to have to train people all over the country.'' No one can say how much that will add to the costs of the plan, or who will foot the bill for it.
None of these objections, of course, mean that deploying antimissile technology on civilian airplanes can't be done, at least in part. Several existing systems address some, if not all, of the Department of Homeland Security's concerns. The infrared jammer, for example. Defense contractors like BAE Systems, based in the U.K., and Northrop Grumman produce versions of a laser that deflects incoming missiles. Instead of destroying the warhead à la Star Wars -- the hardware needed to generate such a powerful beam of light could take up as much as half the space in a 747 -- the laser disorients the missile until it is diverted harmlessly away from the plane. (Air Force One is said to carry a variety of similar systems to protect the president, though the precise nature of its countermeasures is classified.) The Air Force also uses infrared laser technology on some transport planes assigned to covert Special Operations missions, where pilots can't give away their positions by leaving a trail of pyrotechnic bread crumbs in the night sky.
''It's not that difficult to repackage for civilian use,'' says Randy Belote, a Northrop Grumman spokesman. He claims that the system could be ready in as little as nine months. It would be housed in what Belote calls a ''conformal pod,'' which looks like an inverted canoe grafted on to the lower rear of the fuselage. Alterations to stiffen the plane's skin around the pod would be required, because of the extra vibrations caused by turbulence, but Belote says this is a relatively minor issue.
Such a directional laser, according to Jack Pledger, who works on infrared technology at Northrop, has the advantage of being able to operate through 360 degrees, so it does not matter if a missile like the new-generation Russian SA-18 is fired from the front or rear of the plane. (Flares are most effective if missiles are shot from behind the craft.) And to minimize false alarms, Northrop says, its civilian version of the antimissile laser would incorporate a three-tiered screening system. The first sensor would check to see if the source of the alarm shows the ultraviolet signature of a missile. Second, an infrared camera would track the heat source to determine if it is behaving like a missile, and not, say, a welder's torch. A third screen, performed after the laser has been fired, would ascertain whether the deflected threat was a missile before sending an alert to traffic control towers to ground all nearby aviation.
Belote says that another upside to his company's system is less costly maintenance. Infrared jammers should be considerably cheaper than traditional flare-based systems because there are no pyrotechnics to restock. The unit cost of the system is currently $1 million.
A cheaper, competing antimissile system being developed by Raytheon in partnership with Elta Systems, an Israeli defense contractor, uses radar rather than ultraviolet sensors, so home barbecue enthusiasts need not worry about being mistaken for rocket-wielding terrorists. Radar antennas deployed at the front and rear of a craft would provide 360-degree detection (although software programs would need to evaluate the data to ensure that a flock of seagulls or a Cessna doesn't trigger countermeasures). As soon as a missile threat is detected, hundreds of pyrophoric wafers, three inches in diameter, would be released. Coated with a chemical that oxidizes when exposed to the atmosphere, releasing a burst of heat, the wafers would work as flares, only they would disintegrate harmlessly before falling to earth, eliminating the danger of ground fires, according to Ron Colman, a Raytheon spokesman. At $600,000 per plane, this system is cheaper, but it is unproved and potentially high-maintenance, and the Department of Homeland Security recently rejected it in favor of three other finalists. In January, the department gave Northrop Grumman, BAE Systems and United Airlines six months to submit detailed blueprints for a civilian antimissile system. Northrop and BAE will use laser-driven technology, while the United-led team, anchored by Alliant Techsystems, a defense contractor, will rely on a form of tiny heat-generating decoys invisible to the naked eye.
Albright doesn't know who will make the final cut. Each proposal still has design and mass-production kinks that need to be ironed out, and cost will be a major factor, given the size of the American fleet, nearly 7,000. Engineering and price problems aside, defense contractors will also need to contend with the issue of liability. If an F-15 is shot down over a war zone, the pilot's family doesn't sue. The same can't be said of the civilian sector, where attorneys would most likely swoop down on contractors if their countermeasures failed to neutralize a missile. ''It's something we're very aware of,'' says Colman, who adds that some form of indemnity would have to be worked out under the provisions of the Homeland Security Act. There are other regulatory hurdles, too -- for example, under current legislation civilian planes fortified with hardware derived from classified military technology would require special export permits from the State Department every time they left U.S. airspace. ''There are still a number of issues out there,'' Belote says.
All these complications have led a number of people in Washington to question whether defending against shoulder-fired missiles is worth all the trouble. Are they really a serious enough threat to merit the $7 billion to $10 billion it would cost to outfit all U.S. passenger planes? That larger sum represents roughly twice the F.B.I.'s annual budget and almost a third of next year's budget for the Department of Homeland Security. Vincent Cannistraro, a former head of the C.I.A.'s counterterrorism operations, says no. ''The whole thing is not practical, and will give a false sense of security,'' he argues. ''There's a universe of missile threats out there, and this only protects against one type.''
Perhaps the Israelis had the best idea. Following a 1973 attempt to bring down an El Al jet in Rome carrying Prime Minister Golda Meir, it was widely assumed that Israel's flagship carrier, El Al, had installed the countermeasures on all its planes. But apparently that was a mere ruse. ''A little disinformation,'' says Offer Einav, a former El Al security director. ''It was cheaper than actually putting the defenses on. And for a long time, it worked.''
Not anymore, though. Last year the Israeli government approved a plan to develop an antimissile defense system for El Al's Boeings. But that doesn't necessarily mean that El Al, and possibly one day U.S. passenger planes, will be immune from portable missiles. Technology works for both sides: advances in defense systems merely buy time before better offensive weapons are developed. Already Russian scientists have fitted the newest version of the SA-18 Grouse with a sophisticated two-stage homing system that uses a noncooled detector and special filters to counter a variety of decoys and infrared jammers.
Matthew Brzezinski is a contributing writer for the magazine. His book on homeland security, ''Fortress America,'' will be published in September.
