The Internet is a sprawling system of wires, cables and computers that runs through boardrooms, basements and back alleys all over the globe. Policing such a system would be hard enough in any event. Tracking crimes is all the more difficult because the Internet allows malefactors to mask their identities, even as they spy, steal or commit spectacular acts of cybersabotage.
Sophisticated users have known of this problem all along and have taken elaborate precautions to protect themselves. Now casual users are being initiated through epidemics like the one caused by the MyDoom e-mail worm, which recently infected up to a million computers worldwide. This insidious program avoided sophisticated users whose security systems might have killed it off early and instead took aim at inexperienced users, partly through a series of names written into its code. The infected machines spewed out hundreds of millions of worm-laden e-mail messages, which generated millions of return messages, telling the infected parties what they already knew: that their computers had been invaded by the fastest-propagating e-mail worm ever seen.
MyDoom's ultimate target was an obscure software company named SCO. Champions of the open Net have portrayed SCO as the Antichrist since it sued to establish part-ownership of a popular and free computer operating system called Linux. Linux has become an icon of the so-called open-source movement, which is seeking to limit the influence of companies like SCO and the industry giant, Microsoft, which closely guard their software.
Microsoft and SCO have offered a $500,000 bounty for the worm writers. The federal government is rattling its sabers and promising an all-out effort to capture them. Even so, the smart money in the security community is betting that those who deliberately distributed the worm will remain hidden in the blind alleys of the Net. As one prominent security company president said recently, ''Commonly only the dumb ones get caught, the ones that go out and brag about what they do.''
Government officials and Internet cops know this reality well. But the ease with which hackers and Net vandals can move about at will is surprising Americans who thought that the Internet was a virtual copy of the real world, where shopping, banking -- and perhaps even presidential elections -- could be carried out in relative safety.
Average Americans tend to see the Internet as safer and more secure than it is partly because they operated under a simplified notion of what the Net is. Writers who imagine the cyberworld in fiction take a darker view by far. They see the Net as a quasi-lawless frontier where hackers try to break into databases, sometimes for money but often just for the sheer adolescent joy of showing that they can. The novelist William Gibson likens the Internet to the early American West by describing his fictional hackers as ''cowboys.''
The cyberworld in which we live at the moment resembles the snarly Gibsonian version more closely than it does the harmless version put forth in commercials touting e-commerce. In this real cyberspace, skilled hackers attack large institutions -- including the federal government -- and equally brilliant ex-hackers try to fend them off. The two sides fight each other to a fragile standstill, break off, and go back at it again the next day. The realization that hackers sometimes win caused the Pentagon last week to cancel a plan that would have allowed military personnel and other Americans in 50 foreign countries to vote via the Internet.
Criminals' attacks on networks and data systems are more or less constant, but only a few rise to the level of the nightly news. Even then, misdirection and deception built into the tactics and computer codes themselves make motives difficult to discern. The MyDoom writers, for example, wish us to see them as the paladins of the Internet proletariat, who bombarded SCO to strike a blow for freedom and openness on the Web. Stripped of its pretension, the MyDoom worm becomes naked graffiti -- a spectacular display of teenage ego writ large across the Net. Those of us who were singled out for infection by virtue of having our first names written into the worm are probably collateral victims of what is known among teenagers as a ''shout out'' -- a ritualized greeting in which people call out their friends' names in public.
The computer security wizards are dismissing the worm as a nonevent because it failed to disrupt corporate networks and did not cause massive economic damage. But this encounter with the nasty side of the Net was significant indeed for casual users who thought of cyberspace as a combination shopping mall and mailbox, where little of consequence could go wrong. These users are beginning to see that the virtual shopping mall is but a tiny, well-lighted space on what is otherwise a vast, shadowy frontier. The virtual mailbox that appeared to be domesticated and benign turns out to be a mailbox that bites.
Editorial Observer
