Q: You call your new book, ''The Man in My Basement,'' about a white man who exiles himself in the cellar of an African-American man's house on Long Island, a novel of ideas, but you usually write thrillers. Do you think that marginalizes you from the literary world?
It's exactly the opposite. The literary world is marginalized. Thrillers are not marginalized. If John Updike or Harold Bloom were to say that thrillers are not genuine literature, how important is that to me?
In 1992, President Clinton gave you a famous endorsement, calling you his favorite mystery author.
We still run into each other. He's a well-read guy. He loves Gabriel García Márquez, as do I. ''One Hundred Years of Solitude'' is written as well as Flaubert, and you can't write better than Flaubert.
Do you consider reading an essential activity?
Not at all. Reading isn't the only way to obtain complex knowledge. Probably the best way to gain complex knowledge is human interaction. If someone knows how to build a wall, he can teach me, because I don't know how to build a wall.
Do you think that building a wall takes more knowledge than writing a book?
I think that people don't know anything anymore. My father was a janitor. He could take a car apart and put it back together. He could build a house in a backyard. Today, if you ask people what they know, they say, I know how to hire someone.
Your mother is Jewish. Did you have a bar mitzvah?
At 13, I had this party where I gave a little talk. I don't know if it was a bar mitzvah.
You would know if you had one.
I guess I didn't. I am a black man in America.
That is a grand statement. What is it supposed to mean?
I have never met an African-American who was surprised by the attack on the World Trade Center. Blacks do not see America as the great liberator of the world. Blacks understand how the rest of the world sees us, because we have also been the victims of American imperialism.
Don't you think most everyone feels marginalized or mistreated in one way or another?
No. If you went to a party at the Bush house in Texas, most of the people would not feel marginalized. They would feel they are right at the center of the world. There are very few black people who think that, and if they do, they go to the Bush parties, too!
Are you married?
No. I am divorced. And I don't know why people insist that families are so satisfying.
It comes out of our farming history. When you own a farm, that's when you need a family.
But why do we need the nuclear family today? We do not farm. We're so alienated.
Still, we all want to be loved.
Is love important? I don't know. The thing that tears people apart is money. The reason they are unhappy is money. The boss is so important in people's lives. He's more important than your spouse because he's the one who provides your paycheck. Compared to that, love is just about procreation.
But isn't there anyone you love?
Sure. I have a lot of love in my life -- friends, girlfriends, my mother. But I have always been a loner. I wake up every morning and sit down at my desk before I am even dressed.
Are you going to tell me that your idea of happiness is a good morning's work?
The real question to ask is not are you happy or not happy. The question to ask is this, How important is happiness?
I knew an artist who broke up with his girlfriend because she said she wanted to be happy.
I can understand that. I am a political writer. I see a lot of injustice in the world. I see 5,000 or 10,000 people dying of AIDS in Africa every day -- how can you complain about things when you know that the life span in Botswana is 32 years old? Life can be really hard, and almost anyone's life in America is pretty easy.
Deborah Solomon
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-8-04: QUESTIONS FOR WALTER MOSLEY
