TEN years ago, upon breaking up with someone after an embarrassing public argument in Central Park, I went to see Lodovico Capponi. I needed his approval and reassurance. He was also one of the first people I visited a few days after Sept. 11. Whenever friends are in from out of town, I often take them to meet him, and if I find myself in his Upper East Side neighborhood, I can rarely resist dropping by.
Lodovico lives in the Frick Collection, the mansion-museum on Fifth Avenue. He is a portrait, painted in the 1550's by Agnolo Bronzino, the celebrated Florentine artist employed as a court painter to the Medicis; the 500th anniversary of Bronzino's birth is being celebrated this year. In this four-foot-high oil, Lodovico is shown with wavy, red-brown hair, a flawless complexion and a wandering left eye.
I have known Lodovico for 23 years, as long as I have lived in New York. And after all these years, I keep asking myself the same question: Why do I continue to visit this mute, overdressed, imperious young man? Many people to whom I introduce him find him austere, even humorless. Others consider another Bronzino young man who hangs on a wall at the Metropolitan Museum of Art handsomer and more engaging.
When I was close to Lodovico's age, about 22, some people said I resembled him; my right eye wanders lazily in the way his left does; his nose appears to be equally ample and Italian. I suppose it's natural that we are attracted to those who remind us of ourselves. Years ago, after I sent a postcard of the portrait to my father in Florida, he called to mention that he had taped Lodovico to his refrigerator as a reminder of me. ''He looks like you, only without your eyeglasses,'' my father said. ''And get a haircut -- you could be as clean-cut as this kid.''
Lodovico was a constant in my early years in New York. I knew always where to find him, in the West Gallery of the Frick. (Last month, Lodovico was temporarily moved to a more prominent spot, in the South Gallery, to coincide with the opening of the big show on Parmigianino.) Being a painting, he would never change or age. At a time when I still had few friends and a fragile self-confidence as a young man in a new city working in an office job for a book publisher, I admired Lodovico's regal bearing, his unblinking confidence and his solid ownership of a defined station in life.
Much has changed since we met. I am now twice as old as he is in the painting, I've had careers and I've been happily involved with a partner for years. Yet I need the unspoken advice that Lodovico still supplies. When I visit the Frick, his portrait is what I go to first, striding purposefully to the work, and leaving the museum after only several minutes, sometimes even before the coat checker has hung up my garment. I have never visited the Frick without spending some time with Lodovico.
He wears a high-collared, velvet-striped taffeta jacket over a white satin shirt, sleeves embellished with fisheye cutouts. A long swag of luxurious black velvet swoops from his right shoulder down to his billowing breeches, which seem fashioned from shimmering ribbons. In his right hand, he pinches a cameo with the mysterious inscription ''Sorte'' (fate, or fortune, in Italian), and in his left he clasps neatly folded brown gloves that I had long mistaken as a wallet until the audio-guide narrator enlightened me one day.
The space where he dwells is a retreat not only from Manhattan streets, but from all concerns in life, even though every passion, from lust and jealousy to murder and love, is on display. Even before reaching the galleries, some visitors are seduced by the trickling fountain in the interior courtyard where they wind up spending contemplative hours listening to the water instead of looking at the artworks. This is where I sat those many years ago after my romantic breakup; rather than confront Lodovico in tears, I collected myself beside the waters before presenting myself to him for consolation.
Despite his calm demeanor, Lodovico was living through trying times when his portrait was being painted. While on the job as a court page, he fell in love with a young girl, Maddalena Vettori, whom his employer, Duke Cosimo I de' Medici, had chosen as a bride for one of his cousins. Upon learning of their courtship, the duke forbade the couple to meet. The duke's wife, Eleonara of Toledo, empathized with the young couple and lobbied on their behalf. After three years, the Duke acquiesced, but stipulated that unless the couple married within 24 hours, they would be forever separated. They wed immediately and produced eight children.
One reason I go to see Lodovico is because he is an expert creation. I marvel at the folds in the fabric and the resulting shadows, the shimmer of material, the smoothness of skin and the absence of brush strokes, an almost photographically flawless application of color. I love the literal cloak of mystery created by the green material. I can imagine a marble palazzo just behind the folds, corridors bustling with court pages, ladies-in-waiting lifting skirts as they walk, busybody Eleonara passing messages between Lodovico and Maddalena.
LODOVICO and I have maintained an odd relationship. We don't speak, and when together, we stare each other down. Yet I can look at him indefinitely. And I miss him quickly if too many weeks go by without a visit. I break my gaze only when another visitor approaches.
He neither smiles nor frowns, seems judging or indifferent, appears happy or sad. Lodovico is just as he is. There is nothing else in the painting but him; no alluring snippets of late Renaissance cityscapes, beloved pets, fanciful furniture. He is simply a young, well-dressed, attractive man who has taken the time to stand for us over what must have been many weeks.
Lodovico is my Dorian Gray. Because he will never age or fade, neither will my memories of life in New York in my early 20's when Lodovico was one of the first figures I met and came to know.
If he could see me, he would have discerned over the years a portrait of me standing before him, alone, with various mates, as they entered and left my life, with friends (some of whom died in the 80's during our version of the black plague), and with strangers who share their thoughts about the painting. He would have seen me wearing ties as wide as napkins, later ones ruler-narrow, glasses in every style from granny to aviator.
I can't claim that an image in a painting became one of my first real friends in New York, but I can say that I visited the painting so often when I was new to the city that, as an object, it became friendly and familiar. The painting and the room where it hangs became, and remain, constants in my life.
Lodovico and I are equally removed from each other's time, and I worry, increasingly, about the growing gulf in our ages. Will his youth eventually intimidate me? Yet, I know that if he came to life somehow, we would eagerly teach each other the ways of our time. I wouldn't know how to negotiate the intrigues of Renaissance Florentine court life, and he wouldn't understand whole-wheat pasta. But I'm sure our friendship would be an easy one. We would be, as they say in Italian, simpatico.
CITYPEOPLE David Masello is New York editor of Art &amp; Antiques Magazine.
