For nearly two decades, the residents of the Carteret, an apartment building on 23rd Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, have been shaken, rattled and rolled by a series of nightclubs operating in the basement of their building. But the latest tenant, a mostly hip-hop establishment called Sessa, made many of them wish for the days when losing a night's sleep was the only fear.
Soon after the club opened in the fall of 2002, the police investigated a case involving a reported rape; several more investigations followed involving assaults, stabbings, drug activity and unruly clubgoers blocking the sidewalks. ''People were actually stumbling into the street, blood-covered, after being stabbed,'' said a resident who, like many critics of the club, spoke only on the condition of anonymity. ''This was a rough crew.''
Councilwoman Christine Quinn, whose district includes Chelsea, added: ''The place was so out of control, the owner had to substitute the glasses with plastic cups so no one could use them as a weapon.''
Those days appear to be over. Responding to letters and calls from outraged neighbors, Councilwoman Quinn, along with the 10th Precinct and Community Board 4, last fall began a campaign to close the club down.
''Regarding the club, there was a conscious disregard to illegal activities happening inside and outside,'' said Allen Schwartz, deputy managing attorney for the Police Department, who filed a complaint on Jan. 14 in New York State Supreme Court charging that the club was a continuing nuisance and seeking to close it.
After weeks of legal maneuvering, an agreement was reached Jan. 29 between the Police Department, the landlord and the club that Sessa would close. Its last night was Tuesday.
In response to the criticism of the club, its owner, Stratis Morfogen, said last week that Sessa was well run and has been a victim of the city's new nightlife laws. ''I had to make people go outside to smoke to obey the law,'' he said. ''Then when they go outside, they make noise, and it becomes a quality-of-life issue. It's a no-win situation.''
Neighbors are pleased with the latest decision -- ''I'm euphoric about it closing,'' said Michele Zalopany, who lives next door in the Chelsea Hotel -- but many have questioned why it took so long.
''Through a lot of hard work, we made a bad system effective,'' Councilwoman Quinn said. But, she added, the State Liquor Authority is too sluggish in responding to dangerous clubs.
In response, Mark Anderson, a deputy commissioner with the authority, said: ''There are a lot of procedures available to the licensee as the matter is adjudicated which can lengthen the process. We've been working on this matter with the 10th Precinct since January of 2003.''
For residents of the Carteret, Sessa's closing has brought another piece of good news: the building's owner, JSB Properties, has promised not to rent to another club for at least a year. ''We've been trying to get them out since the day they opened,'' said Luise Barrack, a lawyer representing JSB. ''The landlord would be foolish to go through a situation like this again.''
STEVE KURUTZ
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: CHELSEA
