AMY LEE, the 22-year-old lead singer of the Goth metal band Evanescence, whose debut album, ''Fallen,'' has been nominated for five Grammy Awards, including album of the year and best new artist, was shopping for CD's on Wednesday evening at Aron's Records in Hollywood, but hardly anyone among dozens of record geeks so much as looked up.
''The only place I'm recognized is at the mall, because that's where the teens are,'' said Ms. Lee, who was dressed for the night in jeans, a pierced eyebrow and a black T-shirt that read ''Don't Touch Me.''
Ms. Lee, whose album has sold 3.7 million copies since it was released last March, is a classically trained pianist from Little Rock, Ark., who sings Goth ballads about suicide, betrayal and the afterlife over thrashing guitar and medieval choir arrangements. She moved to Los Angeles three years ago after she was signed to Wind-up Records (known for bands with Christian appeal like Creed and Drowning Pool).
One of the first female stars in years to emerge out of the male-dominated hard-rock genre, she has created an image as the anti-Britney: she writes her own songs, prefers writing in her journal to table dancing and thinks it's tacky to bare her midriff. Onstage, she prefers get-ups she designs herself, like deconstructed priestess corsets and her infamous protest dress, which she made in response to a radio D.J.'s sexist remarks to her. Scrawled across the front of her dress were things men had said to her like ''worthless'' and ''I hate everything you've become.''
''There are a lot of sluts in the industry,'' said Ms. Lee, jumping into her black Mercedes coupe with Beth Wilson, her hair and makeup stylist and best friend. ''It's like, if you're really a strong woman, then why do you need to sell your body?''
Ms. Lee said she was on a flight back from Japan when she heard about Janet Jackson's breast-baring episode at the Super Bowl. She saw the film later on television.
''It didn't look like an accident to me,'' she said. ''It looked more like someone exploiting themselves for marketing purposes.''
Ms. Lee has been on a strenuous world tour that has lasted over a year. (In October, Ben Moody, a founder of Evanescence, left the band midtour.) Tonight Ms. Lee was meeting friends at Arnie Morton's, the steak house in Beverly Hills. ''I love sushi,'' she said. ''But after too much of it, it just starts to taste like a dead animal that hasn't been cooked.''
Ms. Lee's road manager and publicist were waiting with her new bodyguard, whom she hired after receiving a threat. The lighting designer and tour manager didn't show, and her boyfriend, Shaun Morgan, the lead singer of the band Seether, was in the studio and running late.
''I don't really have many friends,'' Ms. Lee explained. ''My one friend in Los Angeles, who's also my roommate, had to work tonight.''
Just then, the maitre d', an older man in a tuxedo, came over and asked Ms. Lee if she would pose with him for a photo for the celebrity wall above the banquette. He had not heard of Evanescence but had been tipped off by a Goth-looking hostess dressed in all black.
''I think Amy's going to be the youngest one up there,'' said Ms. Wilson, looking at the old black and white photos of stars like Bob Hope and George Burns.
''I'm not really into the whole celebrity thing,'' Ms. Lee said later when her sirloin arrived. ''I wasn't popular in high school. I'm not good at schmoozing. After the tour is over I want to move to Seattle and just be an artist.''
When the conversation turned to the Grammys (tonight on CBS), Ms. Lee seemed a bit dazed about her multiple nominations and said she had designed a black dress in Japan that wraps around her like a mummy, giving the effect of a corpse and an angel.
''Afterward I think I'm going to go home and watch it again on TV,'' she said. ''I don't really like to go to parties.'' Ms. Lee took a sip of red wine and reconsidered. ''Maybe I'll go and check out one.''
A Night Out With
