MARK McALLISTER, manager of the $ 2.1 billion Smith Barney Capital and Income fund, sees opportunities in the energy and natural-gas sector.
''We think energy prices are likely to stay high for a while, and we don't think the earnings estimates reflect those higher prices,'' Mr. McAllister said from his office in Midtown Manhattan.
Energy stocks now account for 11.7 percent of the fund's assets, compared with a weighting of 5.8 percent in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index. Two of the fund's top 10 holdings are American depository receipts of large integrated oil companies, BP of Britain and Total of France.
The Class A shares of the fund returned 1.7 percent a year, on average, for the three years through December, adjusted for the maximum front-end load, or sales charge, of 5 percent. That puts the share class in the top 20 percent of moderate-allocation funds, which lost 0.6 percent a year, on average, during that time, according to Morningstar Inc.
The Class A shares returned 29.2 percent, also adjusted for the load, in the 12 months through December, compared with 21.4 percent for the group.
Mr. McAllister, 41, who has worked with the fund since November 1999, became co-manager in May 2002 and the lead manager in May 2003. He works for Smith Barney Fund Management, the fund's adviser, which is a subsidiary of Citigroup.
The fund can invest in stocks, bonds, convertible securities, A.D.R.'s, real estate investment trusts and derivative securities anywhere in the world. The prospectus does not limit the allocations to each asset class.
Mr. McAllister re-evaluates the fund's asset-allocation decisions monthly, taking into account his forecasts for the economy and investment markets.
He personally selects about 25 percent of the total assets in the portfolio, including the REIT's and what he calls his ''best ideas'' portion of the fund's stocks and convertible securities. He supervises a team of managers who select the remainder of the portfolio. Most recently, common stocks and convertible securities accounted for 60 percent of total assets. An additional 26 percent was in bonds, mostly high-yield securities.
Mr. McAllister says he worries about the impact of potentially higher interest rates. ''High-yield is the only place in fixed income that we've been able to find yield without taking on a lot of interest-rate risk,'' he said. The trailing 12-month yield for the Class A shares is 4.15 percent, versus 1.67 percent for the S.&amp;P. 500.
To minimize credit risk, the high-yield stake is very diversified; individual securities typically account for no more than 2 percent of the portfolio.
Technology stocks account for just 9.2 percent of the fund's assets, compared with 17.7 percent in the S.&amp;P. 500. He has been selling technology stocks because of high valuations, he said.
The fund's 12 sector analysts meet at 8:30 each morning to discuss economic and financial markets news, allocations and investment ideas.
Mr. McAllister has been adding to the fund's position in Total of France. He started buying A.D.R.'s in February 2003, and has paid $74.19, on average, for the entire position. They now trade at $89.73. The company generates returns on invested capital that are close to those of Exxon Mobil, the industry leader, he said, and he expects production growth over the next several years to be about 5 percent annually. Yet the A.D.R.'s are trading at a 10 to 15 percent discount to the energy group based on the price-to-earnings ratio. ''We think the stock price incorporates an oil-price assumption that's significantly below both the current spot price and our price forecast for the next 12 to 24 months,'' he said.
The fund has owned shares of Pfizer, the drug giant based in Manhattan, since October 2000. It added to its position last year, and its overall average cost has been $30.58 a share; the stock now trades at $38.85. The company's drug pipeline is deep and broad, Mr. McAllister said. The company is expected to file 14 applications for new drugs with the Food and Drug Administration in the next two years, he said, and will introduce at least four drugs that should each generate more than $1 billion in annual sales. Shares trade for less than 17 times projected 2004 earnings, versus a multiple of 19 for the S.&amp;P. 500, he said, despite faster earnings growth and a higher dividend yield than the index.
AMONG high-yield bonds, the fund owns zero-coupon bonds issued by Charter Communications Holdings, the cable television company, and due in January 2010. The bonds yielded 23.7 percent when they were bought in January 2003 at $36.50, on average, for every $100 in face value. They now trade at $83.
Bond valuations were depressed after the downturns in the technology and telecommunications industries, Mr. McAllister said, so Charter's bonds were valued attractively relative to the company's underlying cable assets. Recently, management has been improving the balance sheet, he added.
Investing With Mark McAllister
