WHEN Teach for America volunteers speak of their experiences working in schools in some of the country's poorest neighborhoods, they use terms like ''life transforming'' and ''the greatest challenge of our lives.'' For Christie Hodgkins, 34, and Mark Walter Bisard, 32, it was an experience that they say forged a lifelong link between them.
They were fresh out of college in the early 1990's, when they took up with the national program, which places bright young graduates in often run-down schools filled with poor children.
In Houston in 1994, when their paths first crossed, Mr. Bisard was, he remembered, a new and cocky recruit attending a six-week Teach for America boot camp. Ms. Hodgkins, who had completed a two-year stint in New Orleans, where she taught first graders, extended her tour, agreeing to work in Houston as an adviser at the training session. In addition to her other duties, she got the new recruits, who were not sure what was awaiting them, to mingle and loosen up. While she was playing social director, she and Mr. Bisard, who was being readied for a school in Jackson, La., became good friends -- and sometimes, Ms. Hodgkins said, ''more than good friends.''
Ms. Hodgkins grew up in a middle-class family in Charlotte, N.C., and Mr. Bisard came from a very similar background in Mount Pleasant, Mich. Not long after the boot camp, she headed to Columbia University for a master's degree in social work. He meanwhile began two years in Louisiana, teaching high-school geography, civics, free enterprise and art.
''We taught 200 kids,'' Mr. Bisard said. ''I did something for them, and they did something for me.'' He added: ''Everyone is kind of shellshocked at what they see in their schools, and they have a different perspective. You can no longer relate to certain people you knew before.''
Thomas Fatouros, who knew the couple from Teach for America, echoed Mr. Bisard's thoughts. ''It's like you're coming out of it with the same DNA,'' he said.
Their time in the program led Ms. Hodgkins and Mr. Bisard to maintain a friendly exchange of letters, phone calls and e-mail messages, while they pursued graduate degrees and started careers. But as the 90's wore on, a period when both experienced relationships that were often not so satisfying, they lost contact.
Soon after 9/11, he called to see if she was O.K.
Then in 2002, it dawned on Mr. Bisard, who had returned to Michigan for a law degree at Wayne State University and had become a lawyer, that Ms. Hodgkins had been the right woman for him all along.
''For 10 years she was patient with me,'' he said, ''letting me figure out that I was an idiot for not being around her more.''
By the time of Mr. Bisard's epiphany, Ms. Hodgkins had moved to Brooklyn, having fallen in love with the borough and become the director of after-school services for the Church Avenue Merchants Block Association.
In the fall of that year, Mr. Bisard, never the shy type, decided it was time to get real.
''I wanted to be around people I really liked,'' recalled Mr. Bisard, who had become an associate at Jaffe Raitt Heuer &amp; Weiss, a Detroit law firm, and had also joined a mentoring program that helped schoolchildren in poor sections of the city.
He looked up Ms. Hodgkins's e-mail address in the Teach for America database and sent her out of the blue a to-the-point message containing three brief questions:
''Where are you?''
''How are you doing?''
''Are you married?''
Until that e-mail message, Ms. Hodgkins said, she thought marriage ''just wasn't in the cards.'' But those 10 little words changed everything.
Mr. Bisard soon flew to New York for her birthday. Their reunion at the airport left not one doubt about what their future would bring.
A year later, on the Fourth of July weekend, he proposed under the Brooklyn Bridge, ring in hand.
Not long after that, Ms. Hodgkins left behind her Brooklyn apartment, where her tiny television was relegated to the closet and her radio was permanently tuned to NPR, to share a home with Mr. Bisard in Pleasant Ridge, Mich., near Detroit, where the ever-present television was tuned to ESPN. In Detroit, she found work as the executive director of Youth on the Edge of Greatness, a program that works with at-risk middle school students and their parents.
For their wedding on Jan. 31, the couple returned to bride's beloved borough, choosing to marry among the plants and flowers in the Palm House of the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. Lisel Burns, the clergy leader of the Brooklyn Society for EthicalCulture, led the ceremony, which was attended by about 115 guests, including a contingent of nearly a dozen Teach for America alumni. As Ms. Hodgkins recited her vows, Mr. Bisard beamed, hardly able to stand still as he heard her say in her gravelly halfway Southern voice the words, ''my husband.''
As great a challenge as Teach for America might have been for the couple, a greater one might lie in the not-too-distant future. Before the ceremony, Mr. Bisard said, ''In the back of my mind, I'm playing with the idea of running for office.''
WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS: VOWS
