IN 1998, to coincide with that year's World Cup, Louis Vuitton made a soccer ball that looked like the company's high-end luggage, and, at $530, resembled it in price.
For Louis Vuitton, that ball was a limited edition, never meant to be kicked around on a muddy field. Would a real soccer player have even wanted one?
Hummel, a soccer equipment and fashion company based in Aarhus, Denmark, hopes so. This month, it introduced a top-of-the-line pair of cleats priced at $400, part of its plan to create a market for athletic gear that carries the allure, and the price tag, of luxury.
For Hummel, a private company with worldwide sales of about $140 million last year, it is either an act of genius or of desperation. In coming out with the new cleats, which are twice the price of the nearest competitor's, it is hoping that it can parlay the success of a clothing line worn by entertainers like Jennifer Lopez into a product that is strictly for the playing field.
The chief executive, Soren Schriver, likes to say that Hummel is the world's oldest soccer equipment company. It was founded in Denmark in 1923 by a shoemaker who saw that runners used spiked footwear and reasoned that soccer and handball players might benefit from it, too. (The company has no relation to the popular German figurine maker of the same name.)
By the 1970's, Hummel had advanced beyond shoes to become a coveted apparel brand throughout Europe, in part because the company was one of the first to design team jerseys that were distinguished by more than their color; it offered elements like military-style chevrons down the sleeve. Many of the top professional teams wore the brand, and the company made minor inroads in the relatively undeveloped United States market for soccer gear.
Management problems in the 1980's diminished the company and, by 1993, when Mr. Schriver took over, it was reduced to selling mostly cheap plastic cleats in Europe.
The son of a NATO general, and himself a former tank commander in the Danish army, Mr. Schriver instilled fiscal discipline. But his biggest challenge has been to differentiate the company from the leading soccer brands.
''Nike and Adidas are the only ones sitting at the poker table,'' said John G. Horan, publisher of Sporting Goods Intelligence, a trade publication. In soccer, as in other sports, he said, ''consumers wear what they watch on TV, and nearly all the teams that play on TV now belong to Nike and Adidas.''
Hummel could not afford that game, Mr. Schriver said, so ''we realized we would have to do something that these companies thought was impossible or not worth doing.''
He came up with a two-part plan. In the late 90's, he started a fashion division, reviving the polyester styles that made Hummel hot in the 70's. After some success in Europe and Asia, sales representatives hit boutiques and department stores in New York and Los Angeles in 2001, hawking track suits with chevrons and bumblebee logos. In a market that was soaking up everything retro, the clothing sold well. ''They were aggressive and they had a good product,'' said Tara Everston, a buyer at Stackhouse, a Manhattan boutique.
Hummel moved naturally into the celebrity world, popping up in music videos and the occasional paparazzi shot of an actress doing her grocery shopping. It hit the jackpot last year, when People magazine's annual roundup of the best-dressed celebrities featured a photograph of Ms. Lopez in a colorful track suit with Hummel's distinctive chevrons. The orders poured in.
If Mr. Schriver had wanted to build a fashion company, he might have been content. But he understood that success in fashion was fleeting, with trends burning out faster than ever. It seemed only yesterday that Von Dutch trucker hats were worn by half the aggressively stylish people in the world. Now they are scorned in the hipster circles that only recently flaunted them.
Other sports-gear companies have tried to master the art of turning popularity with style makers into sustainable sales. One is Puma, which sells limited-edition sneakers and apparel to boutique shoppers, then uses that cachet to sell plainer, lower-priced models through national chains. ''The cool, expensive stuff props up the Puma brand,'' said Lucian James, president of Agenda Inc., a brand consulting firm in San Francisco. ''And the cheap stuff makes the money.''
BECAUSE Hummel lacks Puma's history and name recognition in the United States, a mass audience here is a distant goal. Instead, Mr. Schriver is gambling that Hummel's desirability can be channeled into the high end of the soccer market. That is where $400 cleats come in.
Known as ''the Professional,'' Hummel's top-line cleat is sewn by hand and made of kangaroo leather. Hummel has also introduced cleats called Golden Goal, for $350; the Afficiando, for $300; and a range of lower-priced shoes and team apparel.
The notion of luxury soccer equipment, however, invites skepticism. Mr. Horan of Sporting Goods Intelligence said that in sports like skiing, there is a market for bindings that cost $2,000, which are ''all about expressing your wealth.''
''But that's an individual sport,'' he said. ''It would be odd in a team sport like soccer.''
Joseph Kirchner, a former top executive of the United States unit of Adidas and now a consultant, said that the idea of $400 cleats originally struck him as preposterous, but that at a recent trade show he was ''impressed by Hummel's products and their thinking.'' Still, he considered it ''a hit or miss concept.''
Mr. Schriver conceded that their target market is tiny. ''We're looking for the top 1 percent,'' he said, ''the one or two players who think differently, and want something on their feet that reflects that.''
In an impromptu focus group at a Manhattan bar, Ben Court, 31, a club player in New York, confirmed that ''there is always one weird guy on the team that wears a brand of cleats nobody has ever seen.''
His teammate Mathias Lilja, a former professional player in his native Sweden, interjected: ''But you don't think of him as somebody cool. You think of him as 'that one weird guy.'''
Mr. Schriver said he was prepared for this point of view. ''Yes, we will have to change minds, and we feel confident about that,'' he said.
Eager to make gains in the now well-developed American market for soccer gear, Mr. Schriver hired Brian Kukon, 44, a former apparel executive for Adidas.
Mr. Kukon, who played soccer at Coastal Carolina University, says he believes that the sport has reached a new level of cool in the United States, and that the young people who play it are more fashion-oriented than those in other sports. He is particularly enthusiastic about the company's $110 Squadra cleats, and matching apparel, all offered in a range of unlikely colors like pink, peach and lavender. (According to Big Toe Soccer, a major catalog retailer, the pink has been a hit with women.)
BUT Mr. Kukon agreed that many young soccer players want to wear what their idols wear, and said that Hummel was working to meet that challenge. In Europe, Mr. Schriver recently signed a deal with the British Premiere League club Aston Villa; Hummel will not only outfit the team on the field but will also create a line of fashion for players and fans to wear outside the stadium. Hummel can afford to pay for those rights because Aston Villa, while followed by some famous fans, is not a big winner.
''It will be extremely expensive, extraordinary clothes, like leather jackets,'' Mr. Schriver said. In his vision, Aston Villa fans like Ozzy Osbourne and Prince William will wear nothing else. ''They are an asset for the club,'' Mr. Schriver said, ''the same way that Jack Nicholson is an asset for that basketball team he follows in Los Angeles.''
In the United States, Hummel has struck a deal with Major League Soccer to make a line of retro jerseys for fans.
Some trend watchers are upbeat about Hummel's prospects. Mr. James of Agenda Inc. said that David Beckham ''has closed the gap between fashion marketing and sports'' and that many top European soccer clubs now redesign their jerseys every year because young fans covet the new ones.
Extending the fashion impulse to the playing field in the form of luxury cleats is ''a seemingly inevitable evolution,'' Mr. James said. ''Ten years ago, it would've been an extraordinary idea that would've failed.'' he added. ''Now the timing might be right.''
Too bad those Louis Vuitton soccer balls are all sold out.
Correction:  February 15, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about Hummel, the soccer equipment and clothing company based in Denmark, misstated the name of the soccer league that includes the Aston Villa club, which recently struck a deal with the company. It is the English Premier League, not the British Premiere League.
