THE Yonkers sculptor Barbara Segal is a champion of public art. Her carved stone ''Cloud Living Room'' invites exploration and repose by visitors to the Sculpture Meadow on the waterfront in Yonkers, a public art project that she headed.
Ms. Segal was the executive director of Art on Main Street in Yonkers until the demise of the program, which used art to breathe life into dilapidated downtown areas.
Now Ms. Segal is involved in her most dramatic public art project to date, a sculpture that will crown the renovation of Metro-North's station in Yonkers.
Her proposal was chosen from 65 submissions by other artists in a competition sponsored by the Arts for Transit program of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Since then, Ms. Segal has spent nearly two years immersed in the rhythms and aura of another monument near Yonkers - the Hudson River itself.
She has drawn it, studied paintings of it, made sculpture on its banks and contemplated its moods.
Her resulting work, ''Muhheakantuck,'' the Hudson's Indian name loosely translated ''river that flows two ways,'' which the river was originally called, is an undulating sculpture 72 feet long and 4 1/2 feet wide, which evokes the river in all its swirling turbulence and sparkling serenity.
The work, which the Arts for Transit program commissioned for $200,000, will be installed on both the eastern and western sides of a railroad viaduct alongside the Yonkers station, visible both to drivers and pedestrians. (The money was allocated for the sculpture itself, and will not cover the cost of installing or lighting it, Ms. Segal said,)
Ms. Segal has delved into science to evoke the river's past, while drawing upon the luminescence of Hudson River paintings to capture timeless qualities like light and motion.
''The work is an abstract representation of the river,'' she said. ''The sun and moon will constantly change the lighting on the sculpture, and the shadows will change with the sunrise and sunset.''
Before cliffs on the Yonkers side of the river yielded to development, Ms. Segal said, citing her research, river met rock at just the spot where the sculpture will be installed.
Ms. Segal, who studied sculpture in Italy and France, was one of five finalists invited to present fully developed proposals for the viaduct.
The deputy director of the Arts for Transit program and manager of the Yonkers project, Jodi Moise, said of Ms. Segal's submission: ''This one captured the spirit. The artists had to be very sympathetic about the space, which is long and narrow. Aesthetically, this fit the space very well.''
Ms. Segal said the selection panel also approved of her choice of materials, a low-maintenance aluminum that can be power-washed, and displays no fancy attachments, like special light bulbs that need changing.
The sculpture will be installed in the spring of 2005, when the station is expected to be completed.
Metal casting of the plaster work, which Ms. Segal sculptured in her studio until it outgrew the space, has been taking place in sections at Polich Art Works here, near Beacon.
Ms. Segal completed the plaster original at the foundry, which is noted for casting sculptures by Louise Bourgeois, Julian Schnabel, Frank Stella and others.
Foundry workers are using 425 pounds of aluminum heated to 1,325 degrees to cast each section, which will eventually be painted and finished to reflect every nuance of shifting light.
Since the founding of the Arts for Transit program 19 years ago, 135 art projects have been commissioned and installed, with 90 more in the works.
Among those completed are glass murals by Tova Snyder, a White Plains artist, at the Harrison train station; and glass murals by Marjorie Blackwell, formerly of Mount Vernon, at the Mount Vernon station.
Since the money allotted by the M.T.A. for sprucing up stations is less for some than for others, not all Metro-North stations under renovation will be graced by a new artwork.
''Some of the stations are very low budget,'' Ms. Moise said, ''so not everyone gets a project.''
