One recent Saturday afternoon, a perpetually impatient friend called to report that he was at that moment in the process of walking out of a well-reviewed, much-talked-about, sold-out musical.
He said that halfway through the first act he started wondering why it was taking an hour and a half to get through two narrative plot points and that he had to get to Barneys. And as he was fleeing the lobby of the theater, he was pleased to report to me, a prominent and well-regarded young actor was also abandoning the show.
Some people would have been disappointed after spending so much on a ticket only to be let down. But my friend sounded giddy. He must have been experiencing the jolt of superiority you get from dismissing something very expensive or important.
Call it the thrill of conspicuous rejection. The joy of ''Next!''
Conspicuous rejection is briefly sticking your nose into one screening after another at a film festival, as if important movies were for sniffing rather than viewing. It's giving an anti-Super-Bowl party for watching commercials only. It's not going to the Oscars when you are nominated, the way Sean Penn likes to do; or turning down Gracie Mansion as a place to live, like our current mayor; or yapping about leaving the Hamptons for Connecticut as if it were an important spiritual decision.
Conspicuous rejection is calling a worthy benefit party ''horrible,'' as an editor I know did last week, or crowing, ''We leave St. Bart's early because New Year's Eve there has become unbearable,'' as a socialite once told me. Then there's the guy I know with a $1,700 subscription to the Metropolitan Opera who likes to talk about rarely using it. ''I should research which act is better in advance,'' he told me, ''since I'm only able to make a two-hour commitment.''
Has abundance spoiled us this much? There are people who would kiss the sand on St. Bart's to be there for the holidays. They'd be thrilled to be invited to the black-tie opening of the Time Warner building last Wednesday, where each well-heeled guest I greeted seemed to be thrilled not to have anything nice to say about the lavish event.
Thorstein Veblen, who coined ''conspicuous consumption'' more than 100 years ago, wrote: ''To gain and to hold the esteem of men, it is not sufficient merely to possess wealth or power. The wealth or power must be put in evidence.'' Well, these days, with everything on such bald display (from breasts to bling), I guess we have to be a lot louder about being discriminating.
''What is the good of hating something if everyone doesn't know it?'' asked Mona Riklis Ackerman, an Upper East Side psychologist. ''It is not consumption that distinguishes people now, but negation.''
Food has always been big with the dismissive elite. Jerry Zipkin was famous for special-ordering omelets at Le Cirque. Roy Cohn had power lunches without the lunch, just canned tuna. Now, with everyone on every diet imaginable, it's become even giddier.
''I've seen people at the best restaurants who have eaten everywhere and can afford anything,'' said Gael Greene, the food writer and novelist, ''and they seem so absolutely triumphant about having their Zone diet meals delivered to the table.''
Still, even in a world where eliminating people has become a spectator sport (Donald Trump's big line on ''The Apprentice'' every week is ''You're fired!''), when it comes to being obsessive-dismissive, no one outdoes the fashion world.
Listen to the flock in town for Fashion Week. Hear them dismissing clothes they loved half a year ago as ''over.'' Hear them rejecting designers they declared the next big thing not long ago. Then they'll migrate to Paris where they'll let you know they're snubbing French cuisine to eat mediocre Chinese food at Dave. In this month's British glossy Tatler, Alexander McQueen, 34, takes conspicuous rejection even further. He says, after having a clothing line for just 12 years, that he's getting tired of it.
''I'm actually thinking of leaving fashion,'' he declared.
Diana Vreeland said that ''elegance is refusal.'' But enough already.
THE AGE OF DISSONANCE
