JOHN KATZMAN was 22 when he started a test preparation service out of his parents' kitchen on Central Park West in 1981. The company, which he named the Princeton Review after the New Jersey town where the Educational Testing Service is based, had a fairy-tale rise, expanding to 60 American cities and 15 countries and spawning several college prep divisions.
But in the two decades that the start-up was growing into an international, publicly traded company, another fairy tale was developing. Of the Princeton Review's 500 currrent employees, about 30 couples have formed and married. And apparently that's just the tip of the romance iceberg.
''The records we have of Princeton Review marriages are probably about one-tenth of what's out there,'' said Mr. Katzman, a boyish-looking 44-year-old who works these days in a spacious chief executive's office overlooking Broadway and 84th Street. ''I guarantee that there have been hundreds.
''It's 'Friends' on steroids,'' he added.
New York's cutthroat corporate world is a famously hard place to find a suitable mate. ''Sex and the City''-style romantic debacles are the norm; young entrants to the labor market, ensconced in their cubicles, find that meeting potential partners in the workplace can be tough, and is sometimes discouraged.
Princeton Review executives can't exactly discourage dating; after all, most of them, including Mr. Katzman, met their spouses on the job. The company's quarterly newsletter regularly announces engagements or weddings between employees and runs photographs of resulting children. Perhaps more amazingly, to date there are no known Princeton Review divorces.
So what's in the water there?
For old-timers, people now in their 30's and 40's, the answer is less magical than logical: a natural product of working intensive hours together with a common purpose.
''Most of us were in our 20's; we were together all the time,'' said Mark Chernis, the president and chief operating officer, 37, who met his wife, Michele, at the Princeton Review. In the mid-80's, as a student at Bronx Science and later at Vassar College, he worked there part time, and after graduation he took a full-time job there.
''I definitely dated here,'' he said with a laugh. ''It was a young, smart, attractive, aggressive group of people, and a lot of late nights.''
One helpful ingredient was the group's homogeneity. ''It wasn't like the old guy hitting on the young 'uns,'' Mr. Chernis said. ''It was like a dorm -- everybody's on a similar path. There's a certain personality type that likes to teach: vocal, outgoing, friendly. And everyone was at a certain point in their life: single, no kids, into dating, doing what people in their late 20's do.''
They also tend to be intelligent. Princeton Review teachers must score in the top percentile of the tests they are preparing students for. ''So,'' Mr. Katzman said, ''you tend to have smart, well-educated, charismatic, empathetic people who want to put on a show a little bit and like kids.''
But plenty of other professions attract smart young people. Could it be that the Princeton Review's corporate headquarters have something to do with the high incidence of dating? Might those trompe l'oeil clouds on a sky-blue ceiling get employees in the mood? Or the rooftop deck where employees relax under the stars after a long workday? Is it the international cooking contest, or the yoga classes, or the annual trips to places like Hawaii? Or were romances facilitated by Mr. Katzman's chocolate Lab, Tor, who used to go to the office every day and steal people's lunches? (Mr. Katzman's office door still has a doggie door cut into it.)
A LOT of that playfulness smacks of the youth-oriented offices that sprouted during the dot-com craze. ''You had some of this in dot-com land,'' Mr. Katzman agreed. ''But they were all guys. This is pretty much 50-50. And it's people that are all interested in teaching, so the people are a little more outward than they are in technology.''
Of course, dating goes on in other companies, and as the Princeton Review has matured into a more adult operation, it has begun to set boundaries. But as long as dating partners are not working directly above or below each other, the field is still pretty open.
''We don't want to be hypocrites,'' said Linda Nessim, who met her husband, Joel Rubin, there in 1989. ''We have an obnoxious amount of Princeton Review weddings. You go to a wedding and look around and see that 40 percent of the people are Princeton Review members.''
Mr. Chernis's in-house romancing culminated when he met his wife (they kept the relationship secret until people started noticing both arriving with deep tans after weekends in Aruba and St. Martin). But even he agreed that the rampant dating culture of old couldn't last forever.
''As the company grew and started bringing in more professionals, all of a sudden,'' he said, lowering his voice to a whisper, ''people were married, people had kids. It went from everyone being a viable date to people being at different stages in their life.''
Nevertheless, even as the age range has broadened, the dating continues. When Andy Lutz, 36, started working there in 1990, he was in a serious relationship. But when his relationship ended in 1997, he was fair game, and like many company romances, his began one night when officemates went to a nearby bar to unwind. ''By 10 I was shooting pool with Karen, and by 11 I had a date,'' he said. The couple married last year.
Still, young people coming into the company these days say the fires have cooled somewhat.
''You hear about the glory days,'' said Erica Magrey, a 26-year-old guidebook editor.
Erik Olson, a 25-year-old director of publications, added: ''Yeah, the heady days in 1990. Very quickly you heard stories that the upper management had all met their spouses at work.''
In her two and a half years at the company, Ms. Magrey said, she has not dated anyone there. ''And I will not,'' she added. ''You see people having lunch and think how it's so weird that they go home together.''
URBAN TACTICS
