Pinot noir, the red grape of Burgundy, is a minority grape on the East End. Many local pinots I have tasted over the years have been iffy or unsuccessful.
It seemed pertinent, before a week in which at least 16 growers from Burgundy would be offering their 2002 reds for tasting here in New York, to sample an old South Fork pinot.
A 1995 pinot from Sagpond Vineyards was at hand. You will not find that name on the bottle. Before Christian Wölffer gave his name to his vineyard in Sagaponack in 1996, it was Sagpond Vineyards.
The 1995 pinot would hold its own against good village-level counterparts from Burgundy and a few lesser Premier Crus: the second rank of the region's vineyards after Grand Crus.
The pinot was a small-production wine; mine came from Wölffer's cellar .
Using purchased grapes from a South Fork vineyard, Roman Roth, the wine maker, fashioned a fairly classy long-lived pinot.
Normally, I do not write about wines you cannot find or taste, but there is a large, timely issue present: longevity.
With the learning curve in East End vineyards and cellars rising apace, vintners are making demonstrably better-structured wines intended to last increasingly longer while showing new, ingratiating features as they age. This is true at Bedell, Paumanok, Pellegrini and, I'd guess, at Raphael (a relative newcomer, established in 1996).
As the prices of East End reds keep rising, consumers who pay $20 or more for a bottle will expect -- should expect -- to lay it down for a year or more for further maturation and drinking pleasure.
Besides, if Long Island reds are to enter the auction arena, thereby staking out a reputation worldwide, they must prove longevity, as the light-bodied Sagpond pinot does. It has matured handsomely. The bouquet had hints of violets and lilacs. The flavor was vivid and fresh. The tannins were soft. Licorice and tar flavors were detectable.
If this quality was possible from grapes not farmed under Wölffer's total quality control, imagine what's possible from the 1.5 acres of pinot now planted at the estate.
HOWARD G. GOLDBERG
LONG ISLAND VINES
