THE PROGRESS PARADOX
How Life Gets Better While People Feel Worse.
By Gregg Easterbrook.
376 pp. New York:
Random House. $24.95.
THE CHEATING CULTURE
Why More Americans Are Doing Wrong
to Get Ahead.
By David Callahan.
353 pp. New York:
Harcourt. $26.
LET the wonkfest begin! Because the money culture of the past decade was so chimerical, it is now time to consider what hit us, what the effects are and most important, why, when so many people got so rich, those of us who spend our lives reading books were so rarely among them. In the last few months Paul Krugman, a columnist at this newspaper, weighed in with his polemical collection ''The Great Unraveling: Losing Our Way In the New Century,'' and Elizabeth Warren and Amelia Warren Tyagi offered ''The Two-Income Trap: Why Middle-Class Mothers and Fathers Are Going Broke.'' Both books marshaled compelling statistics and anecdotes into reasons to feel impoverished, or feel better about already feeling that way. And both belong to a little-discussed subgenre of well-constructed, civic-minded books you take on airplanes only to wish in midflight that you'd brought a saucy novel instead.
Gregg Easterbrook, a senior editor at The New Republic, and David Callahan, a founder of a policy center called Demos, enter the fray with well-constructed, civic-minded books full of compelling statistics and anecdotes. Easterbrook writes that the rising prosperity of the last 50 years made almost everything so much better for almost everybody that it is sheer perversity -- abetted by Freud, tabloid television and Thomas Pynchon -- to feel bad about most anything. Callahan argues that the winner-take-all ethos of the recent boom has bred dishonesty from the classroom to the boardroom, making life worse for almost everybody.
By the rules of the subgenre, the opening chapters of these books come on like crisp newsmagazine features, full of dash and numbers, followed by voluminous examples that basically make the same points, and capped with center-left prescriptions that could have been arrived at without all the bother. Specifically, both call for a higher minimum wage, broader health coverage and tighter corporate oversight.
Easterbrook begins with a convincing case for good cheer. More Americans grow up with both parents, better health care, less physical toil, more leisure time, cleaner air and water, bigger homes, higher literacy rates and more cable channels than ever before. Average families now enjoy the privileges recently reserved for the rich: access to college, long life expectancies, fancy vacations, home ownership, central air conditioning and a fleet of cars in the garage. ''Why do so many walk around scowling, rather than smiling at their good fortune in being born into the present generation?'' he asks. Even the poor get too much to eat.
When he turns to the other half of his paradox, that people are not happy, it is as if to another book. Ignoring an obvious connection -- that this dissatisfaction is a cause of economic growth, not just a symptom -- he dives into the delightfully named fields of ''happiness math'' and ''forgiveness studies.'' According to the data, once people reach a threshold of about $10,000 a year per person, money has little to do with contentment. People are happy if they are optimistic, grateful and forgiving. He quotes an expert in gratitude research: ''if you only think about your disappointments and unsatisfied wants, you may be prone to unhappiness. If you're fully aware of your disappointments but at the same time thankful for the good that has happened and for your chance to live, you may show higher indices of well-being.'' In other words, if you look on the bright side, you'll see more light. So much for the hundreds of paragraphs about wealth and health that came before. Easterbrook's prescriptions -- a $10-an- hour minimum wage, more foreign aid, lower tariffs on imports -- ignore what he has just said about happiness. These reforms might improve life for millions, but the rising taxes and retail prices he accepts in return are unlikely to make average Americans feel optimistic or grateful.
Callahan, too, begins with a full quiver. From the adults around the Little League star Danny Almonte who lied about the boy's age, to the looters at Enron, WorldCom and Tyco, cheating scandals have filled the news. Though Callahan concedes in a postscript that no one really knows whether such cheating is on the rise -- no small concession, given his project -- he makes the case that high payoffs for winners and weak punishments for offenders have combined to encourage dishonesty among students, doctors, lawyers, taxpayers, auto mechanics, job applicants, stock analysts, file sharers and corporate executives. In a society obsessed with the bottom line, he writes, ''The message isn't just that the world is unfair and the rich can get away with murder; it's that people who cut corners get ahead.'' Recent scandals involving mutual fund chiselers and steroid use among baseball players seem timed for the sequel.
Callahan invokes a lost age of corporate altruism. He quotes Krugman that before the deregulation of the 1970's, ''America's great corporations behaved more like socialist republics than like cutthroat capitalist enterprises, and top executives behaved more like public-spirited bureaucrats than like captains of industry.'' Even if this portrait were accurate, who would want our economic engines to follow socialist republics, given the way things worked out? Callahan's proposed remedies -- an $8.50 minimum wage, affordable health care, increased financial aid for college, ethics curricula in professional schools, a tougher S.E.C. -- are bigger than the problems they're meant to fix, however seriously you take Little League cheating.
Though both of these books are relentlessly big picture, they resist the bigger picture -- which is how their isolated riffs fit into the greater symphony of the boom. The anecdotes and statistics shut out competing theses rather than tackle the mess that the boom so manifestly was. There's no use weighing which view is right, because both take on only a small bit of turf, and because they arrive at the same solutions. In either case, an in-flight movie wouldn't hurt.
John Leland is a reporter at The Times and the author of a forthcoming history of hip.
