With a wife and a 9-month-old baby here to watch him compete, Ross Powers hardly fit the stereotype of a snowboarder.
But there is no reason a soft-spoken old man of 25 cannot compete with the best in a sport known for its rising popularity and its appeal to the coveted youth market. Powers is among the best in the world -- odd fit or not.
Even on a night when he did not perform at his best, that point was driven home with each jump and twist as he careered down the halfpipe in a competition that was not meant for the weak of heart or body.
Powers did not get what he wanted in the finals of the United States Snowboard Grand Prix on Saturday night at the Mountain Creek Resort, the first time the event had been held in New Jersey.
He finished second behind Andy Finch in Saturday's competition and in the overall series, which consisted of three events.
That meant that Finch collected prizes of $10,000 and a new Chevy truck.
Powers had to settle for a few pats on the back from his rivals, many of them teenagers and two of them 15 years old.
''Getting second is good,'' Powers said. ''I was so close. I missed it by four-tenths of a point. I would have loved to win tonight, but I've had my wins and hopefully I'll have some more.''
That sort of spirit has served Powers well throughout a snowboarding career that began when he was 9. Reared by a single mother in an affluent area of Vermont, Powers never had the financial means of many of his competitors.
But he persevered and developed the skills that took him to the top of his profession. He won a bronze medal in the 1998 Olympics in the halfpipe event and has since won most of the major events on the circuit. His crowning achievement came in the 2002 Olympics, when he won a gold medal.
As his reputation soared within the sport, he decided to use his name to give something back to other competitors who came from middle-class backgrounds.
He started the Ross Powers Foundation, which provides financial assistance to Vermont athletes in need.
''He doesn't want this to be a sport just for people who are well off,'' said Powers's wife, Marissa. ''He had to work very hard to make it.''
With Finch and Powers each having won single events leading to Saturday night's conclusion of the three-event series, the champion would be crowned based on what happened on the Mountain Creek half pipe.
The halfpipe competition looks a lot like skateboarding on snow, and the uninitiated would have a hard time distinguishing one flip, trick or spin from another. But the judges and the estimated 2,000 fans who seemed to relish the cold and the loud music did not seem to have any problem telling a good run from a bad one.
Finch's score on his first run was 45.50. He had a poor run in his second try, but only the better of the two scores counted. When Powers was given a score of 44.70 on his first run and 45.10 on his second, he had to settle for second.
But he'll be back.
Twenty-five may be old in this crowd, but it isn't ancient, even in snowboarding.
''When you get older and your body starts hurting a little more, age gets to be a factor,'' Powers said. ''Right now, I'm feeling healthy and I'm staying strong. You just have to work a little harder when you get older.''
WINTER SPORTS
