If you can download Vindigo onto your cellphone or Palm Pilot, you need never run out of restaurants in this city, even when, like me, you haven't had the wit to make a reservation. Vindigo is considerably more helpful than Zagat's electronic counterpart. In addition to updating itself daily and guiding you step by step from the very spot on which you're standing right into the arms of a maître d' even hundreds of blocks away, it often includes reviews, and you don't have to put up with the faux-populist comments from those who could be either Joey Buttafuoco's neighbors or Gore Vidal's, and almost certainly not Vidal's. (The ''food'' is ''really good,'' and ''the'' service is ''really'' good, and the décor is, um, ''beyond'' breathtaking.) Democracy is for governments, TV programs and box offices -- not for food or culture. What will Zagat rate next? Best artwork? Hmmm, I see LeRoy Neiman with a 27 and big-eyed Keane edging him out with a 28.
Vindigo gives my city chauvinism substance every time I discover a new restaurant that offers at least one or two superb dishes, even when all the fare may not be nine-star. As a stroll through its suggestions implies, if you were able to cobble selective dishes from assorted restaurants, you'd no doubt have not only the best meal in town but also several best meals in town.
The following recipes constitute one such repast. They are not for the faint of heart. Although prudence and the recent trend toward skintight men's fashion try to browbeat us into deflating from recent holiday celebrations, those of us who have already forgotten the horrors of summer thongs and are accustomed to Lipitor and Pravachol can and should indulge as if there were no tomorrow, because there might not be. I frankly don't understand why statins aren't prescribed for everyone age 6 and up, so we can all have the tallow of our choice as often as we want.
At Ilo, the midtown American swankerie, there are many starring ingredients, but Chef Rick Laakkonen definitely has a favorite sun. ''When I was a kid, my parents would ask me what I wanted to eat for my birthday,'' he told me, and I anticipated that he'd dive into a chocolate mousse or possibly one of the chilled fruit soups for which Ilo is famous. ''I'd always say, 'Artichoke.''' And not fancied up either -- ''Just steamed.'' Sober child! ''I've always been careful not to repeat ingredients on the same menu,'' Laakkonen says, ''but I make an exception with artichokes because I love them.'' His artichoke soup can now be yours.
Once you've accomplished the nearly aerobic task of extracting the hearts -- ''It takes time to work with them; they're not rapid cuisine'' -- the soup is simple to make. It is urbane, pure velvet and sweeter-tasting than the artichoke.
Is there a more inventive restaurant for the down-to-earth than Lupa? In the six visits I've made, new forays into the butch Roman cuisine have popped up every time, each singular and probably unique in New York. When the chefs, Mario Batali and Mark Ladner, decide to feature pig, they mean the whole animal -- not just the loin and the shank, but the shin, the belly and the jowl. And so it is with the frequently maligned tuna -- not just the steak and the toro, but the very belly itself. So larded is it with fat and sinew that it needs thorough heating. ''You can't serve it rare,'' Ladner says. ''People don't understand that.'' It needs to reach medium well, otherwise the striations won't melt -- and melting them is what gives tuna belly its extraordinary juiciness and richness. Smothered with a combination of poached onions and leeks (a prep called in porrata) and warmed garbanzos, it will hold you through the coming snows very nicely.
It's unusual when a luscious dessert is lighter than the main course, but the pastry chef at Citarella, Bill Yosses, has created just the delectability to finish off a serious offering like artichoke soup and tuna belly.
''Vanilla never seems to get top billing, so I devised this,'' Yosses says of his cake, the house signature dessert. ''I loved it as a kid, even though the other kids always liked chocolate better, and I love it now.''
This combination of white chocolate, many vanilla beans and more vanilla beans for the 12-bean vanilla ice cream and the sauce he serves with it should satisfy the anti-choc in your sweet tooth. ''I prefer vanilla from Madagascar -- it's more fragrant because it has more seeds than Tahitian, which is also good,'' Yosses says. ''It's the seeds that give the most flavor. We serve the cake directly from the oven, so there's lots of aroma, and the meringue has expanded with heat, so it looks bigger. And it's a great vehicle for other things -- hazelenut paste in the center would be fantastic, or candied chestnuts. Raspberries, too.'' The cake -- the entire meal -- would apotheosize with a Sauternes or prosecco, which won't overpower the homage to Madagascar.
Of course, you don't have to prepare all these recipes to make dinner brilliant, but these three are particularly felicitous together. And with any or all, you can boot up your Vindigo and grafitti in a restaurant few will have heard of but to which anyone would gravitate: your own home. What will be served? The best meal in town.
Artichoke Soup  (Adapted from Ilo Restaurant)  7 tablespoons unsalted butter  Sliced hearts from 5 large artichokes (leaves and choke discarded, stems peeled)  1 medium leek, white-and-light-green part, sliced and rinsed  6 garlic cloves, chopped
1/2 cup sliced yellow onion  3 shallots, sliced  8 ounces Yukon Gold potatoes, peeled and sliced  12 cups chicken or vegetable stock
1/2 bay leaf  2 sprigs thyme  4 sprigs parsley
1/4 teaspoon cracked black peppercorns
1/2 cup cream  Salt to taste.
1. In a large pot, melt 3 tablespoons of the butter and cook the artichoke hearts, leek, garlic, onion and shallots until tender but not brown. Add the potatoes and stock. Tie up the bay leaf, thyme, parsley and peppercorns in cheesecloth and add to the pot. Simmer, uncovered, 1 hour.
2. Remove and discard the herbs. Purée the soup and pass it through a fine strainer. When ready to serve, heat the soup and whisk in the remaining butter and the cream. Season with salt and serve.
Yield: 8 servings.
Baked Tuna Belly  in Porrata  (Adapted from Lupa restaurant)  For the porrata:  2 medium leeks, white-and-light-green parts, sliced  1/2-inch thick
1/2 large white onion, cut into
1/2-inch dice  4 tablespoons unsalted butter  2 cups chickpeas, drained and rinsed  Salt and pepper to taste.  For the tuna and broth:  1 cup chopped white onion  1 cup chopped red onion  1 cup chopped carrot  1 cup chopped celery  1 cup chopped fennel
1/2 cup peeled garlic cloves  1 tablespoon freshly cracked black peppercorns  1 1/3 cups medium-bodied red wine  Salt to taste  68-ounce pieces tuna belly (see note)  2 1/2 cups fresh breadcrumbs from crusty white bread
3/4 cup young extra-virgin olive oil  Juice of 1 lemon  2 ounces sliced black truffles (optional).
1. For the porrata, rinse the leeks in several changes of cold water to remove all grit. In a small saucepan, combine the leeks, onion, butter and  1/2 cup water. Simmer, uncovered, until leeks are tender, about 25 minutes. Add the chickpeas and season with salt and pepper. Set aside.
2. For the tuna and broth, combine the onions, carrot, celery, fennel, garlic and pepper in a large pot. Add 5 1/2 cups water. Boil, uncovered, for 40 minutes. Meanwhile, simmer the wine until it is reduced to about  1/4 cup.
3. Strain the vegetable broth. Press the vegetables to force some pulp through the strainer into the broth. Add the reduced wine. There should be about 2 cups broth; if you have more, simmer it gently until reduced to 2 cups. Season lightly with salt.
4. Preheat oven to 300 degrees. Spoon two heaping tablespoons of porrata into each of 6 individual ovenproof casserole dishes. Season the tuna well with salt and pepper and place a piece in each dish. Top each piece with 2 tablespoons of porrata and pour  1/4 cup of broth over each. Bake 25 to 30 minutes, until the tuna is medium to medium-well done, basting at least once.
5. Meanwhile, mix together the bread crumbs, olive oil, lemon juice and truffles. When the tuna is done, top each portion with about  1/3 cup of the mixture and serve.
Yield: 6 servings.
Note: Tuna belly is available from most fish markets by special order.
Warm Vanilla Cakes  (Adapted from Citarella  Restaurant)  8 ounces chopped white chocolate  6 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus more for greasing the molds
1/2 cup flour, sifted  5 large eggs, separated  4 vanilla beans, preferably Madagascar
1/4 teaspoon cream of tartar
1/2 cup granulated sugar  Confectioners' sugar for dusting  Vanilla ice cream for serving.
1. In a double boiler over simmering water, melt the chocolate and butter, stirring frequently. When smooth, remove from the heat and whisk in flour and egg yolks. Split the vanilla beans and scrape the seeds into the batter. Set aside.
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer, combine the egg whites, cream of tartar and 1 tablespoon of the sugar. Beat at medium speed until peaks just begin to form. Slowly sprinkle in the remaining sugar. Continue to beat for 2 minutes. Stir a good-size dollop of the whites into the chocolate mixture, then very gently fold in the rest. Refrigerate overnight.
3. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Butter the insides of 10 ramekins or muffin cups, each with a capacity of about  1/2 cup. Cut out circles of parchment paper for the bottom of each mold, insert and then butter the paper. Fill each mold about  3/4 full and bake until golden brown, 15 to 20 minutes.
4. Remove from the oven and cool 1 minute. Run the tip of a knife around each cake to release it. Gently invert onto plates. Discard the parchment. Sprinkle each cake with confectioners' sugar. Top with a scoop of ice cream and serve.
Yield: 10 individual cakes.
FOOD
