Even on a Friday morning, when most businesses are shut and most people are preparing for weekly prayer services, men looking for jobs paced the sidewalk of Tayeran Square in the center of Baghdad, at an intersection packed with the buses that ferried them in from outlying slums.
Leaning on their sledgehammers and shovels, hoping against the odds that somebody visiting the hardware stores in nearby alleyways would offer a day's work for a few dollars, they talked about the twin problems that still weigh heavily on Iraq 10 months after the fall of Saddam Hussein: unemployment and insecurity.
''I haven't been working at all for the last two weeks,'' complained Hassan Kadhim, 27, who lives in Sadr City, the big Shiite ghetto on the city's outskirts. ''If I stay like this for another week my family will starve, and if someone comes with $50 and asks me to toss a grenade at the Americans, I'll do it with pleasure.''
Others, like Mustafa al-Basri, 33, a sewage worker who came from the southern city of Basra to look for work, spoke in more measured tones.
''The terrorists and the bombers will not stop if you provide jobs,'' he said. ''Those people are working hard to destabilize Iraq. But providing jobs could solve other security problems, like stealing, looting and carjacking.''
The economy here, like the guerrilla war that is holding it back, cannot be measured as much as sensed. But on one question, bankers and borrowers, soldiers and Iraqi politicians, day laborers and urbane professionals all agree: economic recovery and security are inextricably linked.
In a recent poll of Iraqis in six cities, 98 percent of those responding said creating more jobs would be ''very effective'' in improving security. But the investment that could produce the hundreds of thousands of new jobs that are needed is not likely to materialize in the current violence and chaos.
In a week of interviews with leaders and Iraqis at all levels of a jumbled economy, most expressed optimism for the longer-term prospects, tempered by security problems.
''Despite all the hindrances, as an economist I cannot help but believe that the economy will crash through the security concerns,'' said Adnan A. al-Janabi, the head of the consulting firm Mebex, which helped the World Bank develop its assessment for the conference of donors held last fall in Madrid.
Like many other places in Iraq, Baghdad is a place where gunfire crackles in thief-infested shopping districts at night and where a luxury hotel lies in ruins after a recent bombing.
Upscale markets are piled high with imported consumer goods, and back streets are filled with used junk for sale. Small building projects are just starting to appear amid the bomb-gutted wreckage of towering government ministries.
By some estimates, Iraq has imported a million cars since May 1. American economic advisers said Iraq's 17 private banks were receiving about $5 million a day from Iraqi exiles for everything from business projects to support for relatives, a flow that is buoying the economy.
The affluent areas of Baghdad seem to be getting more affluent. The shopping street in Mansur gleams like a display case for the consumer economy. A visitor would have no problem finding home-gym equipment like a rickety elliptical exercise machine for $195, or a 512-megabyte memory chip that plugs into a computer for extra, portable storage for less than $100.
At the Coalition Provisional Authority, which governs Iraq for now, a senior American adviser on economic policy said he was ''quite confident that there is a consumer-led expansion under way, bolstered by business spending on reconstruction and construction.''
The Economist Intelligence Unit, the forecasting branch of The Economist magazine, predicted that real growth in gross domestic product this year would be 25 percent, fueled by American spending on reconstruction, the recovery of the oil industry and increased trade.
But Iraq's current economic performance is far less encouraging. Mowafaq H. Mahmood, chief executive of the Bank of Baghdad, said that investors would not put their own money at risk, nor would bankers lend freely, until the risks of violence subsided. Mr. Mahmood said that his bank's lending was ''much less'' this year than last.
Those near the bottom of the heap are people like Saleh Fazzaah, who has a job as a porter in the market of Aziziya, a small town an hour's drive from Baghdad, but makes only about 1,000 dinars a day, less than 75 cents.
He said he had already sold half of the roughly 500-square-foot house where his family of seven lives. ''We live mainly on food rations,'' he said, smoking away the idle hours in a tea house. ''But that only lasts for 10 days.''
There are no basic economic statistics here, so nobody knows the real rate of unemployment. The occupation authority's economic adviser estimated that it was 22 percent to 30 percent. Most Iraqis say the rate is higher, though it has declined since the summer.
Both Mr. Mahmood and Mr. Janabi said that when it came to creating jobs, the occupying authority's policies were putting too little emphasis on basic, labor-intensive construction projects, like building new homes. This sort of investment would generate many more jobs, they said, than investments in capital-intensive projects like rebuilding the power grid or the oil industry.
Oil and electricity are high priorities -- oil for the billions of dollars it can earn for the government, electricity because of the public outcry for reliable power. Both are needed for long-term economic growth, but neither offers huge numbers of jobs right away.
Construction has traditionally provided employment for 30 percent of Iraq's work force and is the best way to generate jobs, Mr. Janabi said, adding that 30 percent of every dollar spent on construction is for labor.
Nasreen Siddek Berwari, the director of the Public Works Ministry, said recently that the ministry created more than 70,000 construction-related jobs last year, many of them temporary, while the occupying authority's economic adviser said internal estimates suggested that its projects had already generated ''hundreds of thousands'' of new jobs.
''In six months, this country will be a gigantic construction site,'' the adviser said. The adviser estimated that up to 50 percent of the $18.7 billion earmarked by Congress for rebuilding Iraq will be spent in Iraq, as opposed to going to foreign contractors, creating up to one million jobs over the next couple of years.
While some parts of the economy have revived, most of the prosperity is limited to government employees and merchants selling consumer goods to the relatively well-off.
At the local hospital in Aziziya, Telba Kamel knows she is better off than most. As a nurse, she now earns 100,000 Iraqi dinars, or about $75 a month, a big raise from her old salary of 3,700 dinars.
Ms. Kamel's face lit up as she made her rounds, talking about how she has splurged on children's clothes, a color television and a water heater. But with a family of 11 to support, she said, her newfound prosperity still feels fragile. She worries about the rising prices of necessities.
On a recent afternoon in Aziziya, Nashaat Abdullah and several friends were moving a refrigerator-size safe into his jewelry store. Business is 10 times what it was before the war, Mr. Abdullah said, because state employees, many of them women, have much more money now.
But for every Iraqi with new money, others live in a flea-market economy, said Naama Moussa and his friends, who drive around Baghdad every day, down streets and alleys, shouting offers to buy second-hand furniture. One large house they scouted was empty save for a few pairs of shoes the owners hoped to pawn, said Yusef Salah, a driver.
Mr. Moussa said his customers were ''the middle class, who can't afford new things.''
The mixed picture was reflected in the recent opinion poll, taken by a contractor for the occupying authority who interviewed 1,167 people. In the poll, 60 percent of respondents echoed Ms. Kamel, who said her income was ''just enough to get by now.''
Only 3 percent of those surveyed reported making enough money ''to live comfortably.'' Sixteen percent reported living on ''only the monthly food ration,'' a remnant of international sanctions, and another 21 percent said they often could not afford basic needs.
In a country still shaking off decades of Baathist socialism, the talk of capital formation and private investment that is bandied about by American economists and the ministers of the fledgling government sound as foreign as the slang of American soldiers.
When the pollsters asked what promise a political party could make to win votes, nearly half of those surveyed said the promise of jobs created in the public sector would entice them. Only a tenth as many said they would be swayed by promises of jobs in the private sector.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE ECONOMY
