LIKE many other brides, Lisa Rus took a three-day Royal Caribbean cruise to the Bahamas as part of her wedding plans in November. Ms. Rus, a teacher from Pikesville, Md., basked in the sun, went snorkeling and danced until 3 a.m.
It was not, however, her honeymoon. The trip, which she took three weeks before her wedding, was a bachelorette party for her and four members of her bridal party. Richard Gerber, the bridegroom, was left behind. The Rus party was, in fact, one of three such gatherings on that cruise -- a sign of the growing popularity of what some are calling destination bachelorette parties.
In place of the traditional alcohol-besotted evening at a club like Chippendales, travel agents, hotel representatives and couples about to marry report that a growing number of brides in their late 20's or in their 30's are being whisked away by their girlfriends on prewedding cruises, or on long spa weekends in distant resort cities.
Ms. Rus, 35, was looking for some prewedding stress relief, but not a hangover. ''I am too old to go to a string of bars and wear a veil and run around,'' she said. Jodi Sacki, one of her bridesmaids, added, ''It was the girls' last hurrah before entering the circle of marrieds and the circle of babies.''
The parties are typically organized and paid for by the bride's friends. In Ms. Rus's case, each woman paid her own way and together split the cost of the bride's fare. The trip, booked by phone, cost $624 each, including airfare and two shared inside cabins.
''It's definitely a trend,'' said Roz Resnick, a vice president of Austin Travel in Melville, N.Y. (www.austinvacations.com). ''Everything chan ges when one in the group gets married. They want this time for themselves as women, partially getting away from their responsibilities and things they have in their daily lives.''
Women are also increasingly making their way to Las Vegas, long the desination of choice for bachelor parties. ''Just a few years ago, there was one bachelorette party for every 10 bachelor parties,'' said Rob Powers, a spokesman for the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority (www.lasvegas24hours.com). ''Now the number is almost even.'' About 100 bachelorette parties a month come to Las Vegas, he noted, staying three to four days, mixing clubgoing with a spa visit.
The Borgata Hotel Casino and Spa in Atlantic City and the Mohegan Sun in Uncasville, Conn., also report increases in bookings for bachelorette parties.
Before Maja Russer's wedding in Copper Mountain, Colo., in September 2002, Mrs. Russer, 29, had a traditional bachelorette party -- which included manicures, pedicures and a lingerie shower -- and a weekend road trip to the Paris Las Vegas hotel with five girlfriends. They lounged by the pool sipping bloody marys by day and went gambling and dancing in the evenings.
Since January of last year, 132 spa bachelorette parties have been held at the Paris's Spa by Mandara (www.mandaraspa.com), said Rebecca Livingstone, the spa's sales and marketing coordinator.
Laurel Krome, 26, who is to be married to Drew Thimme, 28, in Chicago in August, said that bachelorette parties in bars had become ''very tacky.'' Instead, Ms. Krome and her sister and maid of honor, Katie Krome, are planning a ''girls' weekend'' of pontoon boating, waterskiing and other activities for 15 friends over Memorial Day at a rented cabin at Lake Geneva in Wisconsin.
''We will be bringing in manicurists and pedicurists so we can pamper ourselves while watching 'Sex and the City' reruns,'' said Katie Krome, who estimates it will run $200 a person for the weekend. ''We are modeling this event after our fond memories of a lazy weekend in college where we had no concerns, lots of girlfriends and a refrigerator full of margarita mix. It is a true testament to the last days of the single life.''
FIELD NOTES
