FOR decades, Tupperware never entered my vocabulary. My mother didn't own any. We were New Yorkers. We did not do Tupperware. And we certainly didn't do Tupperware parties.
But my mother-in-law did. And I coveted a certain cereal container she had. So, after I moved out to Water Mill, N.Y., a little hamlet of Southampton, and was invited to my first Tupperware party, I accepted and counted on that container.
What I didn't count on was the quality of the consultant.
A former advertising executive, she didn't look anything like my own fantasy of a Tupperware lady. By the time she was finished with her demo, I wanted to buy a lot of what I saw. She overheard my off-hand comment that I wanted to own everything, but that if I came home with a $400 bill instead of $15.83, it might not go over so well. She suggested I be host for a party and get a lot of this stuff free.
Free is good. I like free. But then she dropped the question: ''Have you ever thought of doing what I do?''
And I asked, ''Advertising?''
She said, ''I mean Tupperware.''
I said, ''Of course not.''
But then she told me what was possible through the company. When she got to the company car, I said, ''Sold!''
At the beginning, I still meant to hold my managerial retail job and to do this sort of part time. I started out with five parties booked, but after just the first one I made my monthly target. That really drove the possibilities home. Before the month's end, I gave notice at my ''real job,'' and all of a sudden I'm a stay-at-home mom, with a flexible job and a great income.
When I tell people I'm a Tupperware lady, or consultant, I have to brace myself. I went to private high school, so when I went to my 15-year reunion, the room was full of Ph.D.'s and people with all sorts of highflying careers. A guy I dated in high school asked me what I was up to. I told him that I was with Tupperware. First came the blank stare, then the uncomfortable cough, then the loss of eye contact.
I let him go through the motions until he got to the inevitable: ''You're a real live Tupperware Lady?''
''Yes,'' I said. ''And I know you have no idea how terrific that is. You can't imagine. It was midlife crisis and it was the best professional move in my life.''
It shut him up right away.
PLAYING games at the parties is a Tupperware tradition. While they don't exactly go over big in Manhattan, they are favorites in the suburbs where the women aren't afraid of hanging loose, having a glass of wine and some fun. At one party, I led the pocketbook game.
''Ladies, put your bags on your lap,'' I said. ''I'm going to call out some names of things that are common. The first person to show me a fire-red lipstick gets a raffle ticket.'' The women went mad, whipping out their lipsticks or whatever. These women had very well-equipped bags. I asked for pantyhose. Three pairs shot up in the air.
The crowd started taking over and shouting out suggestions for me. I was shocked at what people carry in their pocketbooks. I was sure glad when that party was over.
MY JOB
