JOHN BLENN'S first play, ''X's and O's,'' had its premiere at the Stage Theater in Merrick in 1995. Since then, he has written 24 other full-length plays, turning out these sit-com-style social commentaries nearly as fast as he can type. Every one has been performed on a Long Island stage. That makes Mr. Blenn unusual because on the Island, playwrights have few opportunities to present original works.
In fact, Mr. Blenn has made his own opportunities; like an author who self-publishes, he acts and directs with his own ragtag traveling thespian troupe, Middle Class American Productions, which presents his plays at local theaters. Among them is the Brokerage in Bellmore, a 130-seat club better known for its weekend lineup of standup comedy fare, which is putting on his ''Bloomer Pudding'' for a three-night run beginning tomorrow.
''The tone of Long Island tends to gravitate towards the musicals and the trieds and trues,'' said Mr. Blenn, 44, of North Bellmore. ''The theaters out here in general are afraid to try a lot of new things. You get Neil Simon over and over and over again.''
He continued, ''It's almost impossible to sell unknown drama to the Long Island market.''
His point is echoed by theater directors and playwrights across the Island. They recite the hurdles: audiences that shy from the unfamiliar; a shaky bottom line and the need to fill seats; and proximity to Manhattan's rich theatrical menu, which may be why most local theaters cluster closer to the middle of the Island, or farther east. Left on the Island's playbill are vintage musicals, murder mysteries and dusty comedies.
Seth Rozin, president of the National New Play Network, an alliance of nonprofit professional theaters that champions new plays, said the lack of innovative theater was not limited to the Island. While people flock to new movies, they shy away from new plays.
''It does seem to be the mindset that a new play doesn't have as good a chance of being as good as the Shakespeare play that I know and love,'' Mr. Rozin said, pointing out that no theaters on the Island belong to the network, but that two in New Jersey do.
One of those theaters, the New Jersey Repertory Company, in Long Branch, has five new productions slotted this year, as well as 20 to 30 readings of new plays and a biannual festival highlighting 10-minute plays, said Suzanne Barabas, the founder and artistic director. Ms. Barabas acknowledged the problems in presenting original work but said it was a matter of educating the community.
''As soon as people discover they are not going to know what they are going to see here, it's going to be something different, it's going to be something special, they get it,'' Ms. Barabas said. ''We won't have plays if we don't start doing new works.''
Island theater directors do not dispute Ms. Barabas's point, but say the economic difficulties of presenting new plays are formidable.
''Doing theater is a roll of the dice to begin with,'' said Steve Hamilton, executive director of Bay Street Theater in Sag Harbor. ''Anything that we can do to put the odds in our favor we do.''
At Bay Street, with 299 seats, at least one new play is among the five produced on the main stage each season. Other original pieces are presented in a reading series, rather than as full productions.
Tony Georgan has been artistic director of the Stage Theater in Merrick for 11 years. ''Original pieces are a gamble, and most theaters on the Island struggle to survive,'' he said.
To sell subscriptions to his 185-seat wraparound amphitheater, Mr. Georgan sticks to sure bets like the musical ''The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas,'' opening today for a run through March 14, and ''Unexpected Guests,'' an annual dollop of Agatha Christie.
The 53-year-old Arena Players Repertory Company in East Farmingdale is committed to presenting 2 new plays each February, out of the 20 it presents over the year. ''You don't make money on original plays,'' said Frederic DeFeis, the company's producer-director.
Still, when picking his roster of revivals, he gravitates toward the less familiar, like Edward Albee's ''The Goat or Who is Sylvia?'' and ''The Cocktail Party'' by T.S. Eliot, rather than going for standard commercial fare. This year, for the first time, the new plays he selected are by Long Islanders. ''These were the quality,'' Mr. DeFeis said. ''It wasn't that they were Long Island playwrights.''
One of the chosen was Jack Canfora, an English teacher at Plainview-JFK High School. His ''Place Setting,'' written in 2001, was his first full-length play. It is about the unraveling of relationships among three couples and is on Arena's 240-seat main stage through Feb. 29. ''Cowbirds,'' a dark comedy about an ornithologist, by D.T. Arcieri, a biology professor at Farmingdale State University, is at the 100-seat second stage through March 7.
Mr. Canfora, 34, of Huntington, is an actor turned playwright. His first play, a one-act, won the American Theater of Actors' National One-Act Play Contest in 2001, and was performed in Iowa. Two other one-act plays he wrote were performed in Manhattan. ''Cowbirds'' is his first production on the Island.
Like Mr. Blenn, Mr. Canfora has manufactured his own opportunities, staging readings of his plays in New York.
''Long Island is a bit of desert for original theater,'' Mr. Canfora said. ''There is not much of a demand for it. Most of the audience seems more inclined to jump on a train and go to Manhattan.''
Mr. Arcieri has tried before to get Mr. DeFeis to present his work, hand-delivering the scripts to him.
''Generally he doesn't take it,'' said Mr. Arcieri, 48, of Blue Point. ''He just rejects it. As a playwright you can get pretty used to rejection. ''
Mr. Arcieri's first play, a 10-minute, one-act piece, was produced in 1986, when a student who was also president of Farmingdale's theater troupe liked it and put it on stage. Seven of Mr. Arcieri's 12 plays have since been produced in Florida, Los Angeles and Australia. A one-act play ''Norman!'' was included in a theater festival at Theater Three in Port Jefferson.
The Broadhollow trio of theaters -- the Bayway Arts Center in East Islip, Studio Theater in Lindenhurst and Centre Stage at Molloy College in Rockville Centre -- juggles musicals, comedies and drama. Recent productions include ''Noises Off'' and '' Cabaret.''
''Normally if we do an original piece, it doesn't do as well as an established piece,'' said Richard Dolce, artistic director of all three theaters.
Mr. Dolce blamed proximity to the city for the failure of new works to do well. ''They have access to the greatest theatrical venues in the world,'' he said, referring to local audiences.
Bayway and Centre Stage each have close to 300 seats, but the Studio Theater has only 138 seats and so there, Mr. Dolce has experimented with less familiar fare, like ''Boy Gets Girl,'' a drama that played Off Broadway. Last summer, the theater presented a new musical, ''Saturday Night at Grossingers,'' and the piece did well.
''A theater is a business like any other business,'' Mr. Dolce said. ''If you want to keep your doors open, you have to provide your audience with what you think they want to see.''
Some theaters are trying to find an audience for original works. Shortly after Stacy Dermont began writing short plays and monologues in 2001, she founded Women's Voices, Women's Lives, now known as the River Theater Company, based at the Vail-Leavitt Music Hall in Riverhead. ''As the audience is an integral part of live theater, I needed a forum to share my work,'' Ms. Dermont said.
Last year, Ms. Dermont presented a program of four one-act plays by local playwrights in a small theater on the ground floor of the music hall. The 76-seat theater was half full. She also presented John Pielmeier's ''Agnes of God,'' which she said did well.
But when the floor of the theater was renovated in August, the Vail-Leavitt board decided not to replace the seats, turning the space into a reception area for the opera hall upstairs. That space, Ms. Dermont said, is not as suitable for original drama. But she has not given up. In May, she will offer ''Tell Me About It,'' a new piece by Lisa Reitman-Dobi of Water Mill, in the opera hall.
''Our audience has been steadily growing,'' Ms. Dermont said. ''Long Island is absolutely ready for new theater.''
A year ago, Marcalan Glassberg, a teacher, lawyer and struggling playwright, also decided to take matters into his own hands. He became executive director of the 60-seat Author's Playhouse, in Bay Shore, mostly to get his own work produced. His three-act play, ''Mother's Day,'' is in the midst of a three-week run.
''What we need as playwrights, the key is the critical review, the exposure,'' Mr. Glassberg said.
Author's Playhouse was started in 1981 by Lester Schoen, an optometrist who wrote and produced more than 100 of his own plays on the small stage before recently retiring upstate. This year, 5 of the 15 plays on the schedule are new pieces by local playwrights.
Unlike these other theaters, which are independent, Hofstra USA, a community theater based on the Uniondale campus, has the resources of the institution behind it. Although Bob Spiotto, artistic director, said he was open to new plays, his lineup is still mostly well-worn classics. Last year, though, he slipped two original works -- ''Fair Liberty's Call: A Musical Story of Revolutionary America'' by Pam Meadows of Port Washington and ''Heaven Sent: The After-Life of Mark Twain'' by Drew Keil of Lynbrook -- into the roster.
''Playwrights are out there pounding the pavement to get their work heard and presented in some shape, way or form,'' Mr. Spiotto said. ''They can't give up. If they give up, we will all lose.''
For sheer volume and velocity, Mr. Blenn's record is among the most prolific of original playwriting on the Island. With his wacky characters, spitfire dialogue and provocative messages, he has built a fan base; the six plays he presented at the Brokerage in the past two years sold out, said Gary Smith, owner of the club.
''Original fits in nicely with what we are doing,'' Mr. Smith said.
''Bloomer Pudding,'' Mr. Blenn's play opening at the Brokerage tomorrow, is a comedy about a Lloyd Harbor couple on the run from the Internal Revenue Service; it was originally staged in 1998 at the now-shuttered Purple Cow Playhouse in Hicksville.
Mr. Blenn, long a journalist for local entertainment guides before he began cranking out plays, said theaters compete against other diversions. ''You have to hit the audience over the head with the art and reintroduce them to it regularly,'' said Mr. Blenn, whose day job is as a consultant at Five Towns College's Dix Hills Performing Arts Center. ''The attention span out here is as long and as strong as the next exciting video game to come out.''
THEATER
