INCUBUS -- Being an MTV heartthrob doesn't sit right with Brandon Boyd of Incubus, a multi-million-selling band that gets serious on its new album, ''A Crow Left of the Murder'' (Epic). Instead of promising ''whatever tomorrow brings I'll be there'' as he did in the band's hit ''Drive,'' he cranks up the personal and political resentments packed into the band's amalgam of grunge, U2 and R.E.M. The video for ''Megalomaniac'' (at www.enjoyincubus.com) starts with 30 seconds of grating noise and presents an America hurtling toward fascism. Images of Hitler sprout wings and turn into bombers; they give way to a modern politician whose podium is a gas pump, and to a huckster waving ''Ye Holy Buy Bull.'' Clearly, Incubus is willing to make some enemies.
MASCOTT -- If Aimee Mann had fended off cynicism, she might sound like Kendall Meade, the songwriter and singer of Mascott. The serenely tuneful songs on ''Dreamer's Book'' (Red Panda) turn folk-rock into stately pop, wrapping vulnerability and longing in quietly radiant arrangements.
AFRICAN RAP -- Africa gives hip-hop's endless hybridization plenty to work with: irresistible dance grooves, multiple languages, tenacious traditional music, and social conditions tough enough to provoke plenty of material. ''The Rough Guide to African Rap'' (World Music Network) is an ear-opening collection, 14 well-chosen tracks from 11 countries that are as far-reaching as any self-styled underground American hip-hop. Try Unsung Heroes from Nigeria, X Plastaz and Hard Blasters from Tanzania, Prophets of Da City from South Africa and Tata Pound from Mali. Translations of lyrics would have made it even better.
STEREOLAB -- After listening to Stereolab for years, I'd be hard-pressed to quote or recognize a line of the band's political-philosophical lyrics. It's just that the music is so beautifully distracting: an effervescent counterpoint of blipping keyboards, overlapping voices, sonic Ping-Pong and giddy nonsense syllables. Argument's loss is music's gain, and ''Margerine Eclipse'' (Elektra) infuses the dialectics with a streak of disco. Even Stereolab's elegy to its member Mary Hansen, who was killed in a bicycle accident in 2002, bubbles along.
NELLIE McKAY -- She sings, raps, plays piano and writes songs, and she's 19 years old. Nellie McKay's debut album, ''Get Away From Me'' (Epic), is a tour de force from a sly, articulate musician who sounds comfortable in any era, whether she's touring seedy ''Manhattan Avenue'' in a counterfeit Tin Pan Alley ballad, refusing to apologize in the rap ''Sari'' or deftly taking apart romance in songs that could be showtunes or forgotten disco hits. She's blithely formidable, and just getting started.
ONEIDA -- ''I got a couple ideas and a couple ways of giving them to you,'' Oneida declares on its new album, ''Secret Wars'' (Jagjaguwar). Those ideas involve distorted keyboards, terse little riffs and a relentless repetition that stokes Minimalism into a psychedelic furor. For this album, Oneida cut its extended drones into four-minute songs that only distill their impact.
MICE PARADE -- Everything shimmers on Mice Parade's ''Obrigado Saudade'' (Bubble Core). Adam Pierce, who records as the anagrammatic Mice Parade, has been studying the transparent acoustic guitars and breezy drumming of bossa nova, and he applies them to his slowly evolving, mostly instrumental songs, folding in low-fi outbursts and whispery vocals as they amble toward the ethereal.
THE FRAMES -- The crowd sings along on ''Set List'' (Anti) because in Ireland, where this live album was recorded in 2002, the Frames can fill arenas. They have the Irish rockers' gift of writing unabashedly emotional songs that don't seem mawkish. The Frames sing about love and death and revelation. They pick folky ballads full of quiet longing; they seethe and mourn; they build crescendoes and taper down to fiddle tunes and build again, making hearts surge every time.
TELEFON TEL AVIV -- Telefon Tel Aviv, a studio duo abetted by guest vocalists and a chamber orchestra, likes to let electronic noises nibble away at the edges of its songs. Its second album, ''Map of What Is Effortless'' (Hefty), is full of hushed chords and late-night ruminations, with chirrups and sputters doubletiming their way into the mix. There's comic relief in ''My Week Beats Your Year,'' as Lindsay Anderson deadpans her way through an increasingly pixilated club crawl.
THE SUPER BOWL -- The same night Janet Jackson and Justin Timberlake added ''wardrobe malfunction'' to the American vocabulary, the music business tried propaganda. A Super Bowl commercial for Pepsi's offer of free downloads through iTunes showed targets of the first file-sharing lawsuits, including a girl who says she was ''prosecuted for downloading music free.'' Not exactly. She was sued not for downloading but for unauthorized distribution of copyrighted material; that is, she opened a folder of songs on her computer for Internet sharing, and a recording-industry spy computer found it. While the music business is striving to make downloading itself illegal, that hasn't happened yet. The girl is right when she continues, ''We're still going to download music free off of the Internet.'' But with three million people logged on to KaZaa at any given moment, Pepsi won't be paying for all of it.
MUSIC: PLAYLIST
