SETON HALL 85, RUTGERS 58
Since the start of Big East Conference play, Seton Hall has been something of an enigma. The Pirates appear capable of beating any team in the conference one day, then look hapless against one of the league's worst teams the next.
That Seton Hall would play well against Rutgers on Saturday night, after its terrible performance at West Virginia on Wednesday, was almost predictable.
But nobody could have forecast that the Pirates would play this well.
Andre Barrett had 20 points and 9 assists, leading five players in double figures, and Seton Hall embarrassed Rutgers, 85-58, at Continental Arena. It was the Pirates' second-largest margin of victory over their state rival, after a 109-81 victory in 1986.
''After the West Virginia game, we had to come out and prove that we could learn something from a game like that and be aggressive on the defensive end,'' Barrett said. ''When we do that, we can be a very good team.''
Many of Seton Hall's best former players were in the crowd as part of the program's centennial celebration. They saw the Pirates play one of their finest halves of basketball in recent memory, dominating a Rutgers team that had come into the game as a winner of four straight.
Seton Hall (15-5, 5-3) shot 54 percent from the floor in the first half, including 6 of 11 from 3-point range, connected on 8 of 8 free throws and outrebounded the Scarlet Knights, 24-13. Seton Hall led by 18 at halftime.
''This is a game where I don't think our guys could play much better than they did,'' Seton Hall Coach Louis Orr said.
After falling behind, 3-0, Seton Hall went on an 11-2 spurt that might have been their least impressive run of the half. The Pirates led by 23-8 eight minutes into the game on a 3-pointer by Andre Sweet that came right after Rutgers Coach Gary Waters called his second timeout.
The Scarlet Knights (13-7, 5-5) twice cut the lead to 10, but got no closer in the half. The Pirates buried the Scarlet Knights with 3-pointers in the final six minutes of the half.
Barrett's driving layup with just under a minute left in the half and two free throws by Kelly Whitney gave the Pirates a 44-26 halftime lead.
''Obviously, this is a very embarrassing situation for us right now,'' Waters said. ''But there is no point in getting mad. You have to give Seton Hall credit. They were just that good tonight.''
Rutgers shot 21 of 64 from the floor (32 percent) and made 5 of 24 attempts from behind the 3-point arc.
The Scarlet Knights cut the lead to 52-40 on a layup by Quincy Douby with just over 13 minutes left, but any rally was quickly snuffed out. The Pirates connected on consecutive fast-break baskets, the second by the reserve guard J. R. Morris, pushing the lead to 60-43 and ending the competitive portion of the game.
After Pittsburgh (8-1) and Connecticut (7-1), a logjam has formed in the middle of the Big East; the Pirates and the Scarlet Knights are two of perhaps seven teams harboring hopes of making the N.C.A.A. tournament next month. Games like this one may go a long way in determining the teams that make it.
But Barrett does not want to talk about the tournament yet.
''I'm not even worried about that right now,'' Barrett said. ''All I'm thinking about is playing Pittsburgh on Monday. That's all we really can worry about.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
