UPON opening the menu on my first visit to Mona Lisa Restaurant in Newtown, I had an unmistakable clue to the restaurant's popularity: low prices. It was only 6:30 p.m. and the place was jumping, with a long line already clogging the entryway.
Granted, it was Saturday night, but the restaurant was almost as busy during a later visit on a week night. When our appetizers arrived, before I had even put a fork to the food, another clue to Mona Lisa's popularity presented itself: large quantity. No wonder the enthusiastic turnout.
My appetizer the first evening was mozzarella en carrozza, a golden oldie that reminded me of the Italian restaurants 20 or more years ago. It has been at least that long since I encountered this classic on a menu in the area.
In fact, the entire menu was a step into the past. For one thing, it was enormous, with 13 different pasta dishes, an equal number of seafood choices, plus nine veal and nine chicken choices. In addition, our waitress recited a half-dozen specials, describing all the ingredients in each dish in detail.
But back to my starter. The large slices (halved) of deep-fried bread with melted mozzarella and a cascade of tomato sauce spilling over each half were so enormous I wondered if I would be able to eat an entree afterward. I need not have worried, as the cheese was so rubbery, the bread so hard and overfried and the sauce so banal that I left most of the dish on the plate.
Certain other appetizers were more successful, especially clams casino (another old-time favorite). The clams were chewy but flavorful, the bacon was crisp, and there was an appealing sauce. A cup of New England chowder was thick, but not glutinous, and there were plenty of clam bits. ''Escargot on top of mushrooms'' was just that: a handful of mushroom caps, each topped by a snail; it was rudimentary, but satisfying.
Salad comes with each entree order, and the plentiful variety of mixed greens with a choice of dressings made a tasty prelude to our main courses. Too bad the soft, tasteless bread wasn't better.
Entrees are so bounteous each one could easily serve two people. The best dish by far was shrimp scampi on linguine (rice was another option). The big juicy garlicky shrimp were broiled perfectly, cooked not a second too long. The shrimp in the veal and shrimp Juliet were also perfect. The lightly battered veal was tender and tasty, too, sautéed with artichoke hearts and mushrooms, but the green peppercorn brandy cream sauce was overwhelmed by the brandy. Subtlety was missing also from the brandy cream sauce surrounding chicken Voldastano. The dish was humongous also: a gargantuan chicken breast stuffed with prosciutto and blobs of melted mozzarella, along with meaty mushroom slices.
Baked lasagna, said to be layered with meat and cheese, should be a no-brainer in an Italian restaurant. But in this version, the most discernible ingredient was the ubiquitous mozzarella. The pasta layers were mysteriously stuck together as if glued and hard as a stone. There was no meat in evidence.
As for desserts, the most sweetly satisfying and rich were the Bourbon Street pecan pie and Mona Lisa's chocolate surprise, but we could have done without the mountainous gobs of canister whipped cream, which melted quickly into huge puddles like snow in April.
Rating Mona Lisa poses a problem. Most of the dishes we tried were competent but mundane. Yet the portions are so exuberantly generous that a family or couple on a budget looking for a pleasant evening out, without expecting a gourmet experience, might have a very good time here in surroundings that are warm and welcoming, with a friendly wait staff. But the food over all is satisfactory at best.
Mona Lisa Restaurant  160 South Main, Newtown  (203)426-6685
Satisfactory
Atmosphere -- Small, low-ceilinged dining areas create a sense of coziness. A room left of the entrance with raspberry walls and faux beamed ceiling is especially comfy.  Noise level -- Convivial.  Service -- Friendly; sometimes harried.  Recommended dishes -- Clams casino, popcorn shrimp, fried calamari, shrimp scampi, Bourbon Street pecan pie, Mona Lisa's chocolate surprise.  Price range -- Lunch: appetizers $4.25 to $9.95; entrees $8 to $17.95; Dinner: appetizers $4.25 to $11.95; entrees 14.95 to $22.95 (Alaskan king crab at $32.95 is an exception); desserts $4.95 to $6.25.  Credit cards -- Most major cards accepted.  Hours -- Lunch: 11:30 a.m.-2:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday; Dinner: 5 p.m.-10 p.m. Monday through Thursday; 5 p.m.-10:30 p.m. Friday and Saturday; noon-9:30 p.m. Sunday.  Reservations -- Recommended on weekends.  Wheelchair accessibility -- Ramp into entrance; restrooms on same level as dining rooms.  Reviewed by The Times Feb. 8, 2004.  Ratings -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING
