STALE pricing has been at the root of the mutual fund scandals. But couldn't out-of-date pricing be eliminated by allowing all investors to buy or sell funds throughout the trading day?
In November 2001, the Securities and Exchange Commission asked for public comment on a new kind of fund that would be actively managed and continuously priced and traded. The agency hasn't acted on the idea, and, because of some serious technical problems, it is unlikely to do so.
To understand why, a little background is in order. Stale prices result from the lag between the time a fund's securities are last traded and when per-share values are calculated. Currently, almost all open-end mutual funds calculate the per-share value of their assets just once each day, at the end of the trading session.
It takes the typical fund the better part of an hour to finish that calculation, according to Roger Edelen, who published four research studies on fund liquidity and pricing while he was a finance professor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. Mr. Edelen left Wharton last year to become managing director of research at ReFlow Inc., a firm that helps mutual funds manage the cost of inflows and outflows.
The details of price calculations make it unrealistic for fund companies to complete them rapidly and repeatedly throughout the trading day. Instead, the S.E.C. has been considering whether to allow an entirely different approach: the creation of actively managed exchange-traded funds.
For now, all E.T.F.'s are index funds, passively mirroring the movement of an unmanaged index. Although these funds can be bought or sold throughout a trading session, their prices are set by the market, not by the funds themselves. The question before the commission is whether this pricing mechanism may be used for actively managed E.T.F.'s.
In one sense, this model would seem eminently workable, because current E.T.F.'s have accommodated frequent trading and because the holdings of such funds need not differ from those in standard mutual funds. The Vanguard Group, which for years has been adamantly opposed to the frequent buying and selling of mutual funds, has created several exchange-traded funds that are additional classes of some of its index mutual funds; it introduced 14 late last month.
But one feature of exchange-traded funds has posed a big obstacle to their use as actively managed portfolios: the mechanism that prevents the market price of these funds from deviating by more than a tiny amount from the per-share value of assets. This is accomplished through an additional market for E.T.F. shares in which a few large institutional investors act as arbitrageurs.
Unlike retail investors, who can buy or sell these shares only from other retail investors, these institutional investors conduct their transactions with the fund itself. According to Mr. Edelen, these investors quickly trade an E.T.F.'s shares whenever the spread widens between its market price and per-share value. This has the effect of largely eliminating the difference.
Doesn't this institutional market require an E.T.F. to continuously calculate its per-share value? Mr. Edelen says no, because these transactions are conducted in kind, not in cash. When an institutional investor sells E.T.F. shares, it receives shares of the stocks that the fund shares represent.
For the process to work, institutional investors must know in advance which stocks an E.T.F. holds and the precise portfolio weights of each. This need for disclosure would create a huge problem for an actively managed fund, because it would require managers to divulge not only the exact composition of their portfolios, but also every transaction they intend to make. This would allow speculators to trade ahead of the fund, which would likely hurt its performance.
MR. EDELEN suspects that the E.T.F. model will never catch on among actively managed funds. And Gus Sauter, the chief investment officer of Vanguard, said late last month that it was difficult to imagine how ''the integrity of the fund could be protected.''
Is there another way for actively managed funds to allow investors to buy or sell at any time? Mr. Edelen says he is not aware of any. In any case, he doubts that any such proposal could eliminate funds' stale pricing problem, which he says is caused by how funds price themselves, not by how often they do so.
Mr. Edelen says that the problem will persist so long as funds calculate their per-share values using the prices of the last trades of the securities they own. Those trades often will occur well before those calculations take place and not reflect those securities' true value at that time.
STRATEGIES Mark Hulbert is editor of The Hulbert Financial Digest, a service of CBS MarketWatch. His column on investment strategies appears every other week. E-mail: strategy@nytimes.com.
