NOT since Sophocles has pop culture so eagerly lapped up the dramatic possibilities of filial malcontent.
Mothers, modern thinking seems to have it, are on earth less to bear children than to be borne by them. First, baby boomer daughters rebelled against the carefully made-up postwar femininity into which their mothers tried to induct them. With the next generation, there came the backlash, complete with mascara.
No one exemplifies this complicated dynamic more than the fashionable young novelist Maxine Swann. The daughter of a devout hippie and the granddaughter of a glamorous grandmother, Ms. Swann, 34, grew up on a farm in Pennsylvania in a house with a bare minimum of interior walls. She wryly recalled going to Southampton, N.Y., at 11 to visit her grandmother, who to her mother's deep dismay gave her and her older sister fur coats. There being few closets at home, the coats hung on pegs in plain sight like decadent admonishments to Ms. Swann's mother from her own.
''You weren't supposed to spend any time on your appearance,'' she said. ''And it's totally ridiculous. It's the most vain way to be.''
Today, Ms. Swann, whose novel, ''Serious Girls,'' documents a power struggle among a daughter, mother and grandmother, loves fur and was thrilled when her stepmother gave her a mink stole as a gift. Yet, to be honest, she doesn't often wear it. ''It's waiting until I can pull it off,'' she said with a trace of uncertainty. Living now in Argentina with her husband, Juan Pablo Domenech, a documentary filmmaker, she finds that the Levi's she grew up wearing -- and in which she was recently photographed by Richard Avedon for a Levi's ad -- suit her more, or at least more often.
So while she pines after her grandmother's way of life, she also takes after her mother, wearing little makeup, her hair in a simple ponytail. It is perhaps fitting then that her favorite possession is not in her possession at all. A necklace with an astoundingly large aquamarine (38 carats) of high quality in a setting with 28 small mine-cut diamonds, it is both austere and seriously glam.
Ms. Swann was not even aware of it until she married Mr. Domenech in 2000. ''Give Maxine those jewels,'' her grandmother told her mother. The necklace had lived in a safe deposit box for years. It had been a gift from her grandmother for her mother's 21st birthday. But when her mother moved away, she left it behind in her mother's house, where it was found by a maid cleaning out the house, which was to be sold.
Despite her love for the necklace, Ms. Swann wore it only at her wedding. ''It looked fabulous,'' she said. ''I did feel self-conscious. You know, I wore a long white gown, but I grew up going to hippie weddings, where the bride was in a tank top and the sister read some verses of sacred Indian text.''
The necklace went back into the safe deposit box. Ms. Swann often thinks of claiming the piece, but she is torn. ''I don't have the kind of lifestyle that permits wearing it the way my grandmother could,'' she said. ''And it all fits so perfectly this way -- that it's longed for and inaccessible, locked away.''
And so it sits in the bank, accruing a kind of compound interest all its own.
POSSESSED
