ON Long Island, where there are 25 hospitals, some of the older facilities are acutely aware that both medical technology and competition have increased in sophistication since they were built.
Now, two major hospitals -- Stony Brook University Hospital and South Nassau Communities Hospitals -- have initiated ambitious building projects. Both will be getting expansive new lobbies and adding space for state-of-the-art equipment.
''We want to give the image that the hospital is embracing technology, changing the image from the past and giving the hospitals a new face,'' said Tomas Alvarez, the design principal for the New York City office of Cannon Design, which is the architect for both hospitals. ''The projects are similar in that both hospitals needed more public gathering spaces, and in both cases new lobbies will be changing the look of the hospitals.''
At South Nassau, where a $93 million five-story addition is under way, less than 1 percent of the 500,000-square-foot original hospital was a public gathering space, he explained. The new project includes a glassed-in conservatory that will serve as a lobby, which will connect the original 75-year-old hospital with its new 170,000-square-foot building.
At Stony Brook, only 2,000 square feet was originally designated as a lobby within the 25-year-old, one-million-square-foot hospital. As part of the $169 million three-story addition, a new 11,000-square-foot glass-walled lobby will be at the hospital's entrance.
According to the State Health Department, Long Island hospitals are spending hundreds of millions of dollars on major construction projects to expand and modernize their aging facilities. Since Jan. 1, 2000, the department has approved 107 hospital construction projects on Long Island, totaling $925 million. There are 13 hospitals in Nassau County and 12 in Suffolk.
Stony Brook's new 150,000-square-foot addition, which is part of a five-year $300 million comprehensive master plan to update its three-building hospital campus -- will include the expansion of its emergency, surgical and obstetrics departments.
Another part of the plan is a new $18.5 million heart center, to be located on the main floor of the original building. This will expand, renovate and consolidate the current department, which has been spread out in various areas of the hospital.
Minimizing disruption to the hospital's schedule required a lot of planning, said Christopher P. Brennan, associate director of hospital facilities and development. For example, he said, construction is being coordinated with operating room schedules.
ACCORDING to the architects, there were many challenges involved in restructuring the building, which has a complex interior design.
The 504-bed hospital has two six-sided towers rising to the 19th floor from an L-shaped base at ground level, which is the building's fifth floor. The first four floors are below grade in an inverted pyramid-style, so that the first floor is one-third the size of the fourth floor.
''It's a tricky building to add on to,'' said Jane Franz, the chief planning officer. ''But, the architects had a thoughtful plan.''
Because of the inverted-pyramid configuration, it was impossible to add below the fourth floor, Mr. Alvarez said. ''So we went up, and then accomplished the client's other goals of changing the look of the building.''
The main entrance now faces southeast in the crook of the L-shaped building on the fifth floor. The emergency room entrance and helipad are lower on a hillside at the east side on the fourth-floor level.
The three-story addition will be connected to the original building starting at the fourth floor on the east side. On the fifth floor, the addition will incorporate the two-story-high glass lobby at the main entrance. A wide corridor will lead to a new wing, which will include the new neonatal intensive care unit, 10 labor and delivery rooms and 24 prepartum and postpartum beds.
The expansion will increase the size of the emergency department, which is on the fourth floor, doubling the number of beds to 70. The ambulance entrance will be moved to the rear of the addition as will the helipad, which had been near the front entrance and interfered with road traffic.
An elevated 100-space parking deck will be attached to the emergency room side of the addition.
The fourth-floor addition will also add 8,000 square feet to the existing 15,000-square-foot surgery department. Of 16 current operating rooms, 10 will be renovated and expanded; in addition, 10 new ones will be built.
''We are doing the best to solve the puzzle of this building, which is a very intricate puzzle, not just to provide better health care but to incorporate the 21st century,'' said Robin Cibrano, a Cannon principal and the project manager. ''Everything is very convoluted; there are many obstacles throughout the building. We want to simplify it.''
A main focus of the building is the new lobby, which will be filled with natural light, Mr. Alvarez said. ''Now, there is no sense of space or any natural light,'' he said. ''The lobby is like a maze, buried deep in the building.''
The new lobby will include other public functions that had also been buried within the building, like the chapel, gift shop, snack bar and waiting areas.
Off the lobby will be the new 40,000-square-foot heart center. It was designed by the Manhattan office of California-based Kaplan McLaughlin Diaz and is being built by the Manhattan-based ACC Construction.
The first part of the project, which was completed in November, included renovating the 14th floor in the south tower from administration offices to a 24-bed orthopedic unit, which had been on the main floor where the heart center will be.
The construction of a 28-bed area to include three new catheterization laboratories and two electrophysiology laboratories, is expected to be completed in May. Another section for 10 critical-care patients and 24 patients in transition between critical care and regular rooms will be completed by November.
''Technology is driving the need for space,'' said Bruce Schroffel, the hospital's director and chief executive.
As an example, he noted that in the 42-bed neonatal intensive care unit, each bassinet has 75 square feet of space, The new project would increase the section to 46 bassinets, each with 200 square feet, so each will have ventilators and monitors, and the infants would not have to be moved for care.
''Twenty-five years ago the units needed half the space because there was not the technology, and babies born under three pounds were not able to survive. Now they are coming here at two pounds and are surviving,'' said Mr. Schroffel.
Stony Brook is what is called a tertiary hospital, defined as one that has the highest level of care in major disciplines, like open-heart surgery, cancer treatment and transplants. ''Stony Brook is the only academic tertiary hospital in Suffolk, serving the county's 1.5 million people,'' Mr. Schroffel said. ''It is necessary to have the best care for the sick and support system for all other Suffolk hospitals.''
The hospital, which has an annual operating budget of $550 million, will be financing the project through state bonds provided through the State Construction Fund.
ABOUT 40 miles southwest, South Nassau's new three-story lobby will connect the original 435-bed facility to its new five-story addition, which will include 108 patient-care beds, a 26-bed maternity unit, 10-bed neonatal intensive care unit and a 30-bed behavioral health unit, according to Gail Carlin, a hospital spokeswoman. The estimated completion date is December 2005.
The lobby will include waiting areas, elevators and a gift and coffee shop. It will open to an outdoor courtyard with seating and plantings, including bamboo trees.
It will also have a view of the hospital's trademark cupola, which hospital officials say has been a longtime symbol of its role as a community hospital. ''We will be giving the hospital a new face,'' Mr. Alvarez said, ''but still paying reverence to the old building and its cupola.''
In the Region | Long Island
