AN END TO EVIL
How to Win the War on Terror.
By David Frum and Richard Perle.
284 pp. New York:
Random House. $25.95.
BEFORE Sept. 11, 2001, it would have been difficult to speak meaningfully about a ''neoconservative foreign policy.'' While there was a group of intellectuals and policy experts who were identified -- sometimes self-identified -- by the neoconservative label, they did not agree on foreign policy. Today a cardinal feature of neoconservative foreign policy is the aggressive use of American power to dislodge dictators and promote democracy. But the founding father of the movement, Irving Kristol, shunned this approach, speaking in the more cautious tones of realpolitik. Throughout the 1990's, Charles Krauthammer, a leading neoconservative commentator, was deeply suspicious of the use of American power against dictators in the Balkans, Africa and the Caribbean, while others, like Richard Perle and William Kristol, were far more sympathetic. Neoconservative foreign policy during that decade lacked a central theme.
Sept. 11 changed all that. It is now possible to describe a neoconservative foreign policy, and David Frum and Richard Perle's new book, ''An End to Evil: How to Win the War on Terror,'' is a useful guide to it. There have been many books written by neoconservatives on aspects of the war on terror, but because of the identity of the authors, the scope of the book and the vigor of argumentation, this one deserves special attention.
Perle, a colorful and controversial official in the Reagan administration -nicknamed the Prince of Darkness -- has been enjoying a revival of fame since 9/11, because he is widely seen as a proxy for key members of the Bush administration. Frum, a former Bush speechwriter, is the author of a bestselling White House memoir and two highly intelligent books on American politics and society. The two men have merged their skills, with Perle presumably providing more of the policy proposals and Frum the argumentation and lucid prose. (This seems the appropriate place to note that David Frum and I have known each other well for a number of years.)
The central substantive argument of ''An End to Evil'' is that the war on terror has only begun, that Islamic militants are dead set against the United States and will try to cripple it by any means possible. The authors see the war as an endeavor of decades that will require strenuous efforts on three fronts -- at home, abroad and in the world of ideas.
On the home front, they make a series of suggestions, ranging from tougher evaluations of visa applications to the creation of a national identity card to close monitoring of American organizations that, while masquerading as mainstream Islamic groups, in fact provide aid to terror organizations. Beyond our borders, the authors propose tackling the five regimes that have been most closely connected to terrorism -- North Korea, Iran, Syria, Libya and Saudi Arabia. The basic thrust of their argument is that the United States should get tough with these countries.
On the ideological front, Frum and Perle urge a battle against radical Islam, support for moderate Muslims and, in particular, the promotion of women's rights. They urge zero tolerance for the Saudi export of fundamentalism, and propose financing progressive and modern Islamic education as an alternative to madrassas. Above all, they want to make a success of Iraqi democracy.
Most of their arguments and proposals on these three fronts are intelligent and worthwhile. Many have been put forward by other writers and political figures at different points on the political spectrum (among them, Thomas Friedman, the editorialists of The Washington Post and this writer). But to say this would not please Perle and Frum, for the central stylistic pose of their book is angry radicalism. The war on terror has reached a ''crisis point,'' they declare. ''We can feel the will to win ebbing in Washington. . . . The ranks of the faint hearts are growing and their voices are echoing ever more loudly in our media and our politics.''
Frum and Perle make many of their proposals sound provocative and contested by sprinkling in sentences like, ''For some Democrats, winning the war has become a less urgent priority than winning the next election,'' and ''Many Democrats in Congress seem to be interested less in defending the homeland than in preparing to recover after the next terrorist attack'' and ''We have wanted to fight and they have not.''
Reading this book one might forget that in the last two years, with broad support from Democrats and the public, the United States has fought two wars, made antiterrorism the central focus of international politics, created a Department of Homeland Security, shifted its Middle East policies and instituted hundreds of changes to its law enforcement and immigration regulations. Support for such actions remains very strong across the board -- indeed the Department of Homeland Security was a Democratic proposal -- with the one exception of the original decision to go to war in Iraq, on which the Democrats, like the country at large, were and are divided. The authors talk tough on Saudi Arabia, for example, but might be dismayed to find that the candidate who most strongly echoes their views is Howard Dean.
The angry style is a hallmark of neoconservatives and their more traditional conservative colleagues. Though they run the most powerful country in the history of the world, controlling the federal government, the courts and a majority of state legislatures and executives, they still speak like a bitter minority, constantly outraged by the powers that be. It's an effective pose commercially, providing much grist for the best-seller mill. And one suspects that consciously or unconsciously this book has been influenced by the frothy best sellers that tell tales of Clinton's treason and left-wing media bias. But this is a pity (and quite unlike Frum's earlier work) because there is much here that could form the basis of a strong bipartisan antiterror foreign policy.
Occasionally Frum and Perle fear that a policy they suggest might seem too middle of the road, so they disguise it with acerbic rhetoric. In explaining Middle Eastern terror they begin by asserting that ''the roots of Muslim rage are to be found in Islam itself.'' For this vast claim they provide one vague quotation from the Koran and then proceed to give a persuasive historical explanation that dwells on Arab nationalism, America's rising power in the Middle East, Arab tyranny and the failures of modernization -- in other words, factors that have nothing to do with Islam. The urge to be politically incorrect actually subverts their main argument. If Islam is the problem, how is democracy the solution?
Nowhere is this kind of trumped-up radicalism clearer than in the book's references to the 1990's. While terror mounted, Frum and Perle say, the Clinton administration did nothing. They remind us that in one case (an anti-
Semitic attack in Argentina) ''it opened negotiations with the murderers.'' Now one can make the case that America's halfhearted responses have egged on Middle Eastern terrorists. But one should surely begin this story where the terrorists do themselves, with their huge attack on the Marine barracks in Lebanon in 1983 and America's disastrous decision to pull out immediately. Nor do the authors mention the most important instance of the United States ''negotiating with murderers,'' which was, of course, the decision to trade arms for hostages in the mid-1980's. Both events took place during the Reagan administration, when Perle was in high office.
Moreover, the impression the authors give is that they and their confederates were outraged by Clinton's (weak-kneed) efforts against Al Qaeda. In fact neoconservatives were silent about Al Qaeda during the 1990's. One searches vainly through the archives of the Project for the New American Century, the main neoconservative advocacy group, for a single report on Al Qaeda or a letter urging action against it before 9/11. (There are dozens on the China threat, national missile defenses and Saddam Hussein's weapons.) Clinton may merely have lobbed missiles at terrorists, but the neoconservatives did not even launch a blast fax.
The proposals in this book that have received attention are the authors' advocacy of a ''comprehensive air and naval blockade of North Korea'' and a more limited blockade against Syria, and the advice that we should promote secession in eastern Saudi Arabia (which is oil rich and Shiite). Frum and Perle criticize France (of course) as well as most of Europe, South Korea, China and Russia, and are predictably contemptuous of the United Nations. The world, they declare, is ''full of hypocrites and scofflaws.'' Much greater scorn is reserved for most of the institutions of American government -- the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the State Department, the Central Intelligence Agency and even the American military. These parts of ''An End to Evil'' are genuinely radical, and have their virtues. The authors advocate a muscular idealism that seeks to change the world, not accept it as is. But these sections also highlight why, with all its strengths, neoconservatism is ultimately not a serious guide to foreign policy.
Frum and Perle wish to revolutionize whole cultures, change regimes, deter potential threats, ''end evil'' itself. But they cannot abide the means to achieve it, which inevitably involves contact with other countries, negotiations, compromise, empathy. (This helps explain why there is not one foreign policy bureaucracy they speak kindly of.) To transform the world, you do actually need to engage in it. Many who think about American foreign policy share the goal of ''ending'' evil -- or at the very least diminishing its power and scope. They believe, however, that the most durable path to this goal lies in sustained measures, not one-shot deals, implemented not just by the United States but across the globe. And to take root, changes must be sensitive to the societies in which they are being imposed. Ending evil is a long, hard slog.
For neoconservatives such thinking amounts to appeasement. For example, Frum and Perle write that ''the illusion that Muammar el-Qaddafi is 'moderating' should be treated as what it is: a symptom of the seemingly incurable wishful delusions that afflict the accommodationists in the foreign policy establishment.'' What must they have made of this recent statement by an American official on learning of Qaddafi's offer to renounce terrorism and nuclear weapons: ''Libya has begun the process of rejoining the community of nations. . . . Its good faith will be returned.'' Thus spoke George W. Bush. The United States used many tools against Libya: sanctions, United Nations Security Council resolutions, diplomatic pressure, the shadow of the Iraq war, and together they all had an effect.
The issues of American foreign policy today are often not simply of doing good but of doing it intelligently. Heroic talk is easy, but how do we promote democracy in Muslim countries without producing a reversal for women's rights (as is now happening in Iraq)? How do we push Saudi Arabia toward free elections without speeding it toward a radical Islamist regime? How do we get the South Koreans to support a tougher policy toward the North when they fear that such a policy would mean a North Korean collapse -- which they would have to spend decades absorbing? It is by intelligently balancing such interests that we will make lasting progress.
Frum and Perle want transformation from 30,000 feet, without the moral taint of compromise. They scorn the diplomats who must deal with foreigners, not to mention the foreigners themselves. If the world's support is lacking in this struggle, they write, ''then we have to say. . . 'very well, alone.' '' But can the United States do it alone? If you believe in bolstering moderate Muslims, you cannot do things that make them hate you. If you want to transform Iraq, you need help from others, as the administration is belatedly learning. Even in places where Washington can wage a war (mostly) alone, its allies have been mighty helpful in building the peace. The European Union has spent more money in postwar Afghanistan than the United States, and the Afghan national army is being trained today by two countries -- the United States and France. Were Washington to continue to alienate the public in virtually every country in the world, over time many governments would reduce such support for American foreign policy. Do neoconservatives really want a world in which America has backing abroad only because it can pressure governments to ignore the wishes of their people? It is an odd kind of ''democratic'' foreign policy that is blind to the need for popular support. It reminds one of the crack about Woodrow Wilson, who, it was said, ''loved the people but hated people.''
Frum and Perle end the book hoping for a better world. America, they conclude, is not an imperial regime. It supports justice with power. It is the ''hope of the world.'' Except, that is, for Europeans, Middle Easterners, Koreans, Russians, Chinese and the assorted other hypocrites and scofflaws who make up that world.
Fareed Zakaria, the editor of Newsweek International, is the author of ''The Future of Freedom.''
