STANFORD 80, ARIZONA 77
The players were fished out from under the pile of bodies on the court, and they made their way through the crowd of fans to the locker room. The Stanford faithful, even Tiger Woods, had stormed the court after Nick Robinson's running 35-footer at the buzzer beat Arizona on Saturday afternoon.
Stanford Coach Mike Montgomery was jumping up and down, too. At halfcourt. Punching his fists in the air and taking it all in, he wanted to savor his team's 20-0 record. He was in no rush to join his players. He might even be hit with one-thousandth of the bill for the screws that popped out of the Maples Pavilion hardwood under the weight and pounding of the celebration.
''I am starting to think that this group might be something special,'' he said.
No. 2 Stanford overcame a 4-point deficit with 45 seconds remaining to beat No. 12 Arizona, 80-77, and remain perfect this season.
Robinson, a backup forward, stole the ball from Salim Stoudamire in the frontcourt, took off down the right side and let go a 3-pointer at the buzzer.
Arizona had led, 72-67, on a Channing Frye dunk with 3 minutes 21 seconds left, capping a 14-0 run. Stanford trailed, 77-73, when Josh Childress made one of two free throws with 43 seconds left. After a Matt Lottich steal, Childress hit a 3-pointer from the left corner to tie the score with 24 seconds to go.
That set up Robinson's shot only because the officials did not see Stanford point guard Chris Hernandez calling for a timeout after Robinson's steal with three seconds left.
''The ball was loose,'' Robinson said. ''I am not sure if he hit it or I hit it, but I got the ball, looked at the clock, took it as fast as I could and went straight for the basket. It felt good when it left my hands.''
Hernandez's 20 points and 5 assists led Stanford, which tied a team record with its 20th consecutive victory and is 11-0 in the Pac-10.
Childress added 18 points, 10 rebounds and 4 assists.
Center Rob Little scored 16 points. Robinson, starting because of injuries to the forwards Justin Davis (knee) and Matt Haryasz (ankle), finished with 8 points, 7 rebounds and 3 steals.
''We're not worrying about trying to go undefeated,'' said Hernandez, who added that Montgomery sometimes jokes about it. ''He has a great way of dealing with it. He'll tell us that we're not going to go undefeated, but that we're not going to lose the next game.''
Woods and Stanford alumni like George Schultz, Bill Walsh and Jim Plunkett were on hand to watch Stanford keep pace with No. 3 St. Joseph's as the only undefeated Division I men's teams. The victory also snapped a four-game Arizona winning streak at Stanford.
Stoudamire, whose 3-pointer with the shot clock winding down gave the Wildcats a 77-73 lead with 58 seconds left, finished with a game-high 24 points. Arizona (14-6, 6-5 Pac-10) was swept by Cal and Stanford this week despite shooting 50 percent in each game.
''The game was really won early on,'' Arizona Coach Lute Olson said. ''They came out and jumped on us.''
Stanford held Arizona without a basket for the first 4:32 of the game and led by 14-4, 27-15 and 38-25 in the first half. Stoudamire made a running 3-pointer at the buzzer in the first half to cut the Cardinal's lead to 44-35.
Stanford has won most of its games easily, but it survived a scare in Oregon last Saturday when it overcame a 19-point deficit with 17 minutes to go. Now the Cardinal has blown a lead against Arizona but refused to get discouraged and somehow pulled out the victory.
''Our guys might have been fearful of losing, but at some point, they couldn't be afraid to lose and just tried to do what it would take to win,'' Montgomery said. ''Everyone seems to make shots in critical situations. I was just glad to have a chance to get into overtime. Then I saw the ball released from Nick's hands and it looked like it had a chance.
''I was not thinking of calling a timeout when we got the ball. There were not a lot of coaching thoughts in my head at that time.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
