THE launch last week of a cable television show featuring live racing has made playing the horses and greyhound dogs simple for off-track betting customers in southwestern Connecticut.
But with state officials preventing Connecticut Off Track Betting from advertising its telephone betting service on the show, predicting how popular it might become is not quite as easy.
Last Wednesday at 9 p.m., Connecticut O.T.B began the two-hour nightly show called ''Racing Live,'' featuring races from tracks around the country, by leasing time on Cablevision's public access Channel 84 in Fairfield and New Haven counties. On March 5, it will expand the show to three hours and begin at 8.
Autotote Enterprises purchased the state's off-track betting operation in 1993. That deal included six simulcasting theaters where live racing and jai-alai are shown via satellite and also six outlets that take bets but do not show the races or games. The company plans to eventually carry races from noon to midnight on the program. It said it is also in negotiations with Charter Communications, Cox Communications and Comcast to use their systems to televise the shows throughout the state.
John L. Ponzio, Autotote's president, said putting the races in peoples' homes could increase the amount that is bet by phone in the state from $15 million a year to more than $20 million, and help the company compete with other forms of gaming.
''The industry is realizing that convenience is what you have to provide to keep the customer,'' he said. ''We are in competition for the entertainment dollar, so it behooves us to modernize.''
But for the show to reach its revenue potential, Mr. Ponzio said O.T.B needs to tell viewers that they can bet over the phone while they're watching.
However, the state's attorney general, Richard Blumenthal, who testified against Autotote advertising betting by phone at a hearing before the division of special revenue in August, said that would turn each household receiving the races into a betting facility, thus violating a legislative ban on new forms of gambling.
''The law deals specifically, in effect, with betting facilities in peoples' homes, which is what we said this would do if advertising the betting was combined with the simulcasting,'' he said.
Mr. Ponzio said Autotote is pursuing the matter in court. In the meantime, the company plans to advertise its phone betting system on other cable channels, through the print media and with direct mailings.
''Being able to advertise a legal product is a right you have,'' he said. ''Phone betting is legal. The show has been approved by the regulators and the attorney general. Why shouldn't we be able to advertise it?''
Mr. Blumenthal said the state would fight any legal challenge to the advertising ban.
Two of the state's other simulcast operators have a different concern about live racing on cable television, though. Both the Shoreline Star Greyhound Park in Bridgeport and the Plainfield Greyhound Park in Plainfield are worried it could hurt their business.
While officials from each recognized going to the track offers a unique experience for bettors, they said they will have to make decisions about whether to permit their own races to be shown on cable television. For now, the Plainfield track, which runs live races and offers simulcasting year-round, is allowing its races to be on the show. Shoreline Star, which does not begin running its own races until May, but is open year-round for simulcasting, is still studying the situation.
''The last thing I would want to do is give the people that come to the track the ability to just stay home and bet, because that's a losing proposition for me,'' said Stephen T. Alford, general manager of the Shoreline Star, which handled $48 million last year.
Jim Capiola, general manager of Plainfield Greyhound Park said he will have to reconsider his decision if Autotote reaches agreements with cable systems near his park.
''If it were in this area, we couldn't go along with that,'' he said. ''We'd want a zone of protection. We don't mind being on in Fairfield County. It's a good thing as long as it's not in our backyard.''
Both of the state's casinos, Foxwoods and Mohegan Sun, which operate simulcasting areas they call race books, said they did not believe racing on cable television would significantly hurt them.
''Hypothetically, you could say it might hurt business to some extent,'' said Mitchell G. Etess, executive vice president of marketing for Mohegan Sun. ''But being that the race book is a complimentary aspect to our overall experience, I don't think it would have a devastating effect.''
However, the Connecticut Council on Problem Gambling, which also testified at the hearing before the state's division of special revenue about the show, has an unrelated concern.
''Any time that gambling comes into the home via the computer or television, we're at an added level of concern because of the exposure to young people,'' said Marvin A. Steinberg, the council's executive director.
Autotote's show is not the first program to carry live racing on television in the state. Tele-Media cable has offered the Television Games Network, which also shows races from around the country, to its digital customers in the Waterbury and Seymour areas since June. And there were shows on various outlets in the early 1990's.
State officials said Tele-Media did not need approval for the Television Games Network because the network is not licensed to take bets in the Connecticut, and therefore does not advertise telephone betting here. They said the other shows ran before current laws took effect.
''Simply because somebody did something in the past doesn't make it legal now,'' Mr. Blumenthal said. ''The legislative ban on new forms of gambling was passed after many of those experiments.''
Even with the current battle for the right to advertise its phone betting system, Autotote expected that live horse and dog racing on cable television will be successful. It even plans one day having two channels that include racing from Australia and the Far East during the overnight and jai-alai games in the afternoon.
''Being able to view the race and bet on it from the comfort of your home is the trend,'' said Mr. Ponzio. ''We feel this is the logical extension of our business.''
