ON the day that the response cards for Lisbeth Scott's wedding were due, she and her fiancé, Nathan Barr, were still waiting to hear from 40 of the 350 invited guests. Frantic to get a final head count for the caterer, they began to chase guests down, making phone calls and sending out e-mail messages in the breeziest possible way. A week, and even days before the event, which was to be held at a family home in Greenwich, Conn., a dozen people remained unaccounted for.
''Both of us were really shocked at the number of people who didn't reply,'' Ms. Scott said. ''We had to take a deep breath and try not to take it personally.'' Still, the last-minute scrambling was a headache that Ms. Scott, a 35-year-old musician, and Mr. Barr, a 30-year-old film composer, had not expected. ''I think it was particularly hard on my mother-in-law,'' Ms. Scott said. ''She was calling me five or six times a day, wondering if any more R.S.V.P.'s had come in.''
These days, one can say S.V.P. all one wants, but that does not mean an R. will be forthcoming, even if the guests themselves are. Hostesses, party planners and etiquette authorities report that a new indifference to the old-fashioned protocol of invitations is turning entertaining into a guessing game. Even requests to attend seemingly monumental events like weddings, 40th-birthday parties and Christmas dinners routinely go unanswered. Whether it is a result of a more casual attitude toward socializing or an overabundance of nonevents that generate a kind of lavish junk mail of their own, hosts -- and not guests -- are now the ones feeling left out in the cold.
''It's giving so many people heartburn, they aren't entertaining anymore,'' said Letitia Baldrige, whose latest book, ''New Manners for New Times,'' was published last fall. ''They don't want to call someone three times to see if they are coming because it's embarrassing.''
Ms. Baldrige refers to the phenomenon as a disease she calls S.S., for social selfishness. She has heard countless stories of guests responding only at the last possible minute or ignoring the invitation altogether. Some people, she said, seem to think that responding to an invitation is somehow beneath them.
''It's complete arrogance,'' she said. ''Those are the folks who feel that their attendance at a party will ensure the success of the party, and they don't feel that it's necessary to reply.'' Ms. Baldrige's advice is, always respond to an invitation within 48 hours.
Meanwhile, as invitations go unanswered, the host is falling prey to every imaginable insecurity. ''It was a real blow to my ego when only half the people we invited to my baby shower bothered to respond,'' said Virginia Brown, a senior editor at Architecture magazine. ''And it was the same crowd we had problems with at our engagement party and our wedding. It's rude and it's really hurtful.''
Joy Lewis, the president of Mrs. John L. Strong, the venerable society stationer (in business since 1929), explained that répondez s'il vous plaît became a chic addition to invitations in the late 1800's. But its heyday may have come and gone. Ms. Lewis sees that as a consequence of the fast pace of modern life. ''If you're an adrenaline junkie, you're usually not good at the details, and unfortunately, responding often goes by the wayside,'' she said.
Ms. Lewis noted that the response card is a relatively new invention. At one time, a wedding invitation never asked for a response. ''Getting an important invitation was the highest honor that could be bestowed, and it was expected that you would respond in the same degree of formality,'' she said. That meant sitting down and writing a letter.
MS. LEWIS was quick to note, though, that it is important to keep up with the times and said that she saw nothing improper with an e-mail reply to an engraved request for the honor of your company at a black-tie wedding reception. The other day her company printed an invitation that asked that guests respond to motherofthebride@excite.com. ''I think the point is to respond, whether it happens on a nice handwritten note or with a quick e-mail,'' she said.
It is not surprising that online invitation services have entered this social terrain. ''The success of our business hinges on whether people R.S.V.P.,'' said John Foley, the president of Evite, the largest such service. ''I think we've had tremendous success because we've made responding to an invitation an interactive experience.''
Recently Evite added features to its invitations to allow people to include party-planning information, calendars and personal profiles. And the response list is always public. Last year, Mr. Foley said, Evite had a 63 percent response rate, which passes for good these days.
Many people, of course, are so overwhelmed with invitations that they think of them as a kind of junk mail on good stock. ''I think that's one of the biggest problems,'' said Debbie Bancroft, a social columnist for Avenue magazine. ''People are not quite sure how to prioritize.''
Ms. Bancroft, who receives 10 to 15 invitations a week, has observed that people sometimes keep their hosts in suspense in case something better comes up. She has also encountered insecure party-givers who send out invitations months in advance to ensure that guests will say yes. ''I don't think that's the answer either,'' she said, ''because it only puts pressure on people and makes them feel locked in.''
Ms. Scott, the frantic bride, admitted that she had been guilty of not R.S.V.P.-ing and that she had often dragged her feet on replying to wedding and dinner invitations. ''I think life is so much less formal these days,'' she said. ''I think the formality of an invitation confuses people. It was really only when we planned the wedding that I realized how important it is. I think it was some sort of weird payback, and I'll never not R.S.V.P. again.''
