NARCISO RODRIGUEZ is a scavenger, pillaging photography books, raiding the archives of libraries and museums, and obsessively taking snapshots during his travels. Eventually, the images he gathers turn up on what is known in the fashion trade as a mood board -- a collage of seemingly disparate elements tacked to a wall, some exquisite, some profane. There is the burly, gap-toothed rugby player, photographed by Ben Watts, pinned next to a group of young athletes shooting hoops, which competes for space with a snapshot of a sinewy young man lounging face down on the beach, his backside squeezed into a swimsuit. That picture, Mr. Rodriguez said, was included purely for the shrill blue of the swimsuit, an inspiration for the designer's fall colors.
''There is so much new culture, so much that is inspiring in everyday life,'' Mr. Rodriguez said, referring to the bits of cultural flotsam that have, along with the photographs, washed up on his board -- a toy plastic swordfish, a Nike swoop symbol. ''Nothing is too silly or humble to find a place,'' he said.
Mood or inspiration boards, as they are also called, tend to spring up organically as work on each new collection progresses. Assembled on walls, cork boards or in scrapbooks, the collages of magazine tear sheets, historic photos, fabric swatches and snapshots serve as conceptual tools that suggest the colors, textures and themes of a designer's new collection. In the weeks leading up to the New York fall 2004 shows, which began Friday and end Feb. 13, these boards and scrapbooks offered clues to fashion's next direction.
Tacked to a white wall in Zac Posen's TriBeCa studio are photographs of gnarled aluminum tree limbs by the sculptor Robert Lobe, photographs of mannequins wearing Jacques Fath suits and a portrait of Diana Vreeland, a familiar icon with her black lacquered hair and carmine cheeks. ''She represents the freedom to take risks, very important at this stage of a collection,'' Mr. Posen said. Over the past several weeks, he explained, he has been adding, deleting and moving the various images like so many pegs on a war map. A 1950's photograph of an elaborately draped coat designed by Claire McCardell, he said, was replaced with a more rigidly constructed photograph of a cone-shaped coat by Cristóbal Balenciaga, an indication, though no guarantee, that a more structured Posen silhouette may be in the offing for fall.
''Mood board images tend to be more metaphorical than literal,'' Mr. Posen said. ''They don't necessarily predict what will end up on the runway.'' By way of example, he pointed at a Japanese block print of a snowy landscape. He had pinned it to his wall simply because, he said, ''I find snow really opulent -- the way it glistens. For me it suggests the opulence of the coming season.''
Just as luxurious is a portrait of Marilyn Monroe, her contours encased in a form-fitting white satin dress. The image of Marilyn, Mr. Posen said, represents in part the return of womanly curves. Moreover, her dress, with its loosely draped top and tight skirt, creates a ''line that is severe and simultaneously fluid,'' he said.
The interplay of fluid and structured shapes was also a leitmotif at the studio of Lazaro Hernandez and Jack McCollough, the team behind Proenza Schouler. The designers began cataloging their inspirations about six months ago in a scrapbook as thick as a telephone book, which they edit almost daily. ''We're very into tailoring,'' Mr. Hernandez said. ''With tailoring you get silhouette; big shapes contrasted with body-conscious things.'' Which explains, said his partner, Mr. McCollough, ''why we are such fans of Christian Dior.''
Their leather-bound tome is, accordingly, clotted with photocopied black-and-white images of Dior's curvaceous but otherwise ascetic-looking 50's suits. There was, in addition, a photograph of a 1940's jacket with elaborately gathered ballooning sleeves. Were they planning to create an updated version for fall? Mr. Hernandez glanced hopefully at his partner. ''We'll see,'' came Mr. McCollough's cool reply.
Other images attest to a giddier mood. ''We're coming out of such serious times,'' Mr. McCollough said. ''What we're feeling now is the Eden Roc, poolside martinis and Frank Sinatra. There's a sense of optimism in the air.'' And a degree of flamboyance, as well, represented in the scrapbook by Las Vegas showgirls trussed in glittering body suits and a series of matadors flaunting gold braid.
Flip the page: here are Gianni Versace signature chain-mail dresses pasted beneath his exuberant paisley patterned skirts. Turn again to glimpse Jean Paul Gaultier's 1980's bodysuits with their built-in projectile bras. Bra construction is a constant in the designers' collections, and will probably turn up again for fall.
Displayed on the mood board above the desk of Peter Som in his new garment district studio was a gallery of familiar fashion icons: the socialite Millicent Rogers sitting rail-backed in a black silk cocktail dress with an unforgiving cut, and the aristocratic clotheshorse Babe Paley gazing moodily through a haze of cigarette smoke. But perhaps most telling is a photograph of Edie Bouvier Beale, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis's eccentric cousin, posing nonchalantly in a poster for ''Grey Gardens,'' the 1970's cult documentary about her life of squalor in a dilapidated East Hampton mansion. She wears a fur coat and a slip tied like a scarf around her head. The film has long been a fashion touchstone.
Mr. Som recalled that in the movie Ms. Beale, who clearly had seen better days, wears a shabby cardigan held together by a fancy estate brooch. ''It's fabulous -- it has such a Miss Havisham sensibility,'' he said. That dissolute look will filter into his collection by way of clothes that have ''lots of raw, fraying edges,'' he said. He plans to show randomly sequined evening dresses made of frayed chiffon, and gowns appliquéd with wilted-looking chiffon leaves that suggest decay.
Photographs of horses by Michael Eastman dominate a ledger-size mood book in Francisco Costa's studio. Their coats, he said, inspired his palette of sepia and cream as well as the textures of his collection, which is based on pony skin, leather and alpaca.
Mr. Costa, the new designer responsible for the Calvin Klein collection, was also moved by more traditional fashion references, like photographs of Lauren Hutton and Charlotte Rampling from the 1970's juxtaposed with the ponies and stallions. The pairing was perfectly logical to Mr. Costa. ''These women are thoroughbreds,'' he said.
Anna Sui treats her mood boards a bit like shrines. A focal point in her new studio in the garment district, four separate panels, each bordered in a trompe l'oeil Art Nouveau frame, set off photographs, fabric swatches and illustrations by Mary Blair, the creator of the storyboards for such Disney classics as ''Peter Pan'' and ''Cinderella.'' Ms. Sui selected those images in particular for their fairy tale quality, one that has since emerged in blouses and dresses embellished with velvet bows, handkerchief hemlines and lingerie lace.
Unlike other designers, who keep the clothes under wraps until the show, Ms. Sui offered a glimpse of her finished collection, in which Ms. Blair's vibrant palette was clearly an influence. Pulling out a velvet jacket in a brackish shade of green, she said, ''This looks like Peter Pan's lagoon to me.''
