WILLIAM H. MILLER III has beaten the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index for the last 13 years. So is his fund, the Legg Mason Value Trust, a good choice for investors? Not according to some mutual fund industry critics, who say investors should avoid funds with high fees.
Mr. Miller's fund has an expense ratio of 1.7 percent, compared with 1.5 percent for the average domestic stock fund, according to Morningstar Inc. The fund also charges a fee for marketing expenses, known as a 12b-1 fee, which many critics abhor. But Mr. Miller makes no apologies.
''Our record is out there, and people can make their own judgments,'' he said, adding that investors obsess too much over a fund's expense ratio, the most common yardstick for judging whether it is charging too much. ''Investors need to ask whether they are getting good value over all,'' Mr. Miller said.
Deciding whether a fund is giving investors good value is no simple matter. While almost no one argues in favor of high fees, some data used recently by regulators to assess fund fees is hard for the average investor to track.
John C. Bogle, the founder of the Vanguard Group, says that a low expense ratio is the single most important factor in evaluating a fund, but that it is not the only one. He also advises people to consider the fund manager's tenure, for example, and the frequency of a fund's trading.
With his investigations into mutual funds, Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general, has turned a spotlight on fees, arguing that individual investors are paying too much for money management, especially when compared with the biggest pension funds, which often negotiate discounted rates with fund companies.
Already, Mr. Spitzer has persuaded Alliance Capital, whose funds are among the industry's most expensive, to lower its fees by 20 percent, and Massachusetts Financial Services announced an agreement with regulators last week that included a 6 percent fee reduction.
But individual investors cannot easily compare their fees with those charged to pension funds. Mr. Spitzer obtained the information by subpoena, said David Brown, chief of the attorney general's investment protection bureau, who is in charge of the fund investigation day to day.
''It's nearly impossible for the average person to get this information,'' he said.
In part because of pressure from Mr. Spitzer, many fund companies are likely to cut various fees. Just last month, Putnam Investments, which has yet to reach a broad settlement with regulators, pledged to keep its expense ratios below industry averages. And legislation pending in Congress may eventually result in greater disclosure of fees by fund companies.
BUT in the meantime, investors could have a hard time assessing fee reductions. Instead, most people should focus on some simple guidelines to determine whether they are getting good deals, analysts and industry executives said.
Choosing a low-cost fund is a good way to start. When it comes to actively managed stock funds, investors should generally think twice about investing in a domestic fund with an expense ratio of more than 1 percent, said Max Rottersman, editor of FundExpenses.com.
And Mr. Bogle said investors should gravitate toward funds that have expense ratios in the bottom quarter of similar funds. Both Mr. Bogle and Mr. Rottersman said they would be wary of investing in Mr. Miller's fund because of its fees.
''I am a great admirer of Bill Miller,'' Mr. Bogle said. ''But I don't think the odds are at all good that over the next 13 years he will do well enough to outperform that high expense ratio.''
Still, the expense ratio is an incomplete measure. A recent study commissioned by the Zero Alpha Group, a network of financial advisory firms, for example, found that for 30 large mutual funds, trading by fund managers added 0.3 percentage points to annual fund expenses, an amount that was not reflected in fund expense ratios.
Yet the study found that such information was very difficult for investors to track. Some can be found in a hefty document called the Statement of Additional Information, produced by the fund company. Investors must request it from the company or print it out from the Securities and Exchange Commission Web site (www.sec.gov). Fund managers also report brokerage commissions to the S.E.C., but typically the companies make one filing for all the funds they manage, making it hard to extract information for each individual fund.
Information about some other fees is more accessible, but not everyone agrees about which ones deserve scrutiny. Some academics and analysts have focused on 12b-1 fees, which include fees paid to brokers to sell funds as well as advertising costs. These fees can add as much as one percentage point to mutual fund expenses.
''That's a dead-weight cost,'' said John P. Freeman, a professor at the University of South Carolina law school. He said investors should avoid funds with 12b-1 fees greater than 0.20 percent.
But if investors followed Mr. Freeman's advice, they would have to exclude from consideration Legg Mason Value Trust, which Mr. Miller has run for 22 years, piling up an enviable performance record. Not only has the fund outperformed its benchmark for 13 years running, but for the decade through January, it returned 16.9 percent, annualized, beating the S.&amp;P. 500 by six percentage points, according to Morningstar.
Mr. Miller says the fund's expense ratio tells only part of the story. Investors should pay attention to portfolio turnover, he said, because the more a fund trades, the more it spends on brokerage commissions. On average, over the last decade, just 25 percent of the Legg Mason fund's assets changed hands each year, he said.
As a general rule, Mr. Bogle said, turnover of more than 100 percent is too high.
Mr. Spitzer says that the best way to judge fund costs is by comparing the fees charged to individuals and to pension funds. The higher rates charged to individuals amount to about $10 billion each year, Mr. Spitzer said at a Senate hearing last month.
The fund industry trade association, the Investment Company Institute, argues that it costs substantially more to administer many small individual accounts than the equivalent assets in one pension plan.
Vanguard, the lowest-cost major fund group, charges small accounts with investments in its popular S.&amp;P. 500 index fund 0.18 percent of assets annually. But some pension funds with at least $200 million in assets can track the index for fees less than one-eighth that level, according to the company.
Because Vanguard's fees are so low, individual shareholders are unlikely to protest much about extra costs. But at Alliance, whose fees were far above the average, the cost difference may have more impact.
The average expense ratio for Alliance's domestic stock funds, according to Morningstar, is 2.22 percent, the highest among major companies. Alliance has charged individual investors twice what it charged pension funds, Mr. Spitzer said. An Alliance spokesman declined to comment about fees.
BECAUSE it is impossible to get data on the fees being charged to pension funds, most investors revert to looking at expense ratios. That could be the logic behind Putnam's move to keep its fees below industry averages.
Putnam, which lost $32 billion in assets in the last quarter of 2003, hopes the move will ''restore investor confidence,'' said Charles E. Haldeman Jr., its chief executive.
But Mr. Spitzer will most likely insist on judging the company based on a more rigorous, if less transparent, standard. ''The problem is, you are comparing the funds against others in the industry,'' Mr. Brown said. ''We think the entire industry has structural flaws.''
At this stage, investors may be tempted to throw up their hands. But there are a few simple yardsticks, besides the expense ratio, that individuals can use, Mr. Bogle said in a speech last month to financial planners. In addition to recommending that investors check a manager's tenure, he said they should know whether the management has limited the fund's size, say, by closing it once it gets big. Mr. Bogle also suggested checking whether the management is part of a conglomerate -- as is the case for 36 of the 50 largest fund companies, he said. Such companies tend to focus on profit margins more than shareholder interests, he said.
Ultimately, investors may just have to do more work to sort out worthwhile funds. ''I would remind people that they must take the time to make intelligent choices about their investments -- which means reading those boring annual reports and thinking for one's self,'' said Mr. Rottersman in an essay on his Web site addressing the fee controversy. ''There's no easy way.''
Correction:  February 15, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about mutual fund expenses referred imprecisely to those of one fund, the Legg Mason Value Trust. Its expense ratio, 1.7 percent, includes a marketing fee known as a 12b-1 fee; that fee is not an additional cost.
