MORE than 50 years after he was created, Astro Boy, the spunky, atomic-powered robot, is once again caught up in some high-flying adventures as the star of his own animated series, shown every Saturday morning at 8:30 as part of Kids' WB programming block on Channel 11.
Astro Boy was created in 1951 by Osamu Tezuka, a Japanese cartoonist, for the pages of a comic book. The character's appeal was widespread and he soon graduated to an animated series, becoming, in 1963, the first anime show imported to the United States.
''Astro Boy has been a favorite of fans worldwide for many years,'' said John Hardman, Kids' WB senior vice president for programming. ''He's one of the true icons of animation. He sits beside Mickey Mouse, Bugs Bunny and Batman.''
WB's series, which had its United States premiere last month, continues Astro Boy's mission as a force for justice, battling for human- and robotkind alike. Along the way, Astro learns about his origins and his creator, Dr. Tenma, a nefarious mastermind with many secrets. Other regulars on the show include Dr. O'Shay, who is mentor to Astro; the police detective Tawashi; and Atlas, a rebellious robot.
''Astro Boy'' is an adaptation of new adventures introduced in Japan last April. ''There are minor dialogue tweaks to Americanize the scripting process,''' said Mr. Hardman. But the main editing is for time. ''In Japan, the episodes run about 27 minutes, but we only have a 21-minute running time. So we might delete 10 seconds from a scene here and 10 seconds from a scene there.''
Joe D'Ambrosia, the executive producer of ''Astro Boy,'' has been working on the new series since its development for the Japanese audience. ''Japanese anime is very Shakespearean,'' said Mr. D'Ambrosia. ''They tell stories over many, many episodes.'' Part of Mr. D'Ambrosia's responsibility was to make sure that ''if kids tuned into any episode, they would get right away who Astro is, what his powers are and what his journey is.''
Mr. D'Ambrosia is especially fond of the episodes featuring Atlas, whom he describes as a robot possessing ''all the evil qualities of a kid.'' He likens Astro and Atlas to a mechanized Cain and Abel, but their relationship will not meet the same fate. ''In the end, he and Astro become friends and Atlas learns how to be good,'' he said.
Learning to be good is one of the lessons the series tries to impart, along with valuing tolerance and friendship. In one adventure, Astro meets a human child reared by robots and learns that there are all kinds of different families.
One of the most important aspects of Astro Boy is his ''kokoro,'' a Japanese term that describes a quality that encompasses heart, spirit and intelligence.
''Although we're shooting lasers all over the place, what really makes Astro win is that he's pure of heart,'' Mr. D'Ambrosia said. ''He fights for what he believes in.''
- George Gene Gustines
Blue Finds a Voice
''The Legend of the Blue Puppy,'' a ''Blue's Clues'' prime-time special tonight at 8 on Nickelodeon, includes a visit to Blue's Room, a live-action play space where the animated Blue is transformed into a puppet and discovers her ability to talk directly to preschoolers. The show also introduces new characters and play-along games. A visit to Blue's Room will become a regular segment on the series, shown weekday mornings at 10:30 and 11:30 on Nickelodeon.
Connections  www.kidswb.com has character biographies, episode guides, screen savers and games devoted to astro Boy and his friends.
FOR YOUNG VIEWERS
