OKINAWA, a newly minted and sometimes raucous hibachi grill and sushi bar, is a willing and able partner in this village's downtown renewal, a plan modeled on solid brick buildings and reliable retailers. Like its neighbors, which include a Starbucks, CVS Pharmacy and Victoria's Secret, Okinawa knows what people want, and how much they are willing to pay for it.
Part restaurant, part amusement park, Okinawa is a hot spot for children's birthday parties. The big lure is the hibachi grill, whose success relies on alarming eruptions of flame and steam, which send children into happy paroxysms. Parents can -- and do -- order three-olive martinis from the bar, perhaps to brace themselves for the meal ahead.
Although the hibachi experience has its moments, with red-hatted chefs employing spatulas and raw eggs in gestures worthy of high school majorettes, the food is by modern definition fried, not grilled, and the fried noodles, fried rice and fried entrees are saturated with oil. (After one visit, I had to hang the family's clothes out in the cold night air to expunge the smell of grease.)
Hibachi meals include an iceberg salad laced with ginger dressing, pedestrian miso soup, shrimp tainted by the acrid taste of their charred shells, an assortment of fried vegetables, fried rice and ice cream. Among the entrees, plump, translucent scallops stood out; bite-size cubes of medium-rare steak ran a distant second. I didn't spring for the relatively pricey filet mignon, chateaubriand or lobster tails, which ran between $25 and $30. Hibachi for children 10 and under is a bargain; waitresses have eagle eyes when it comes to spotting 11-year-olds. Diners who wish to converse will want to sit in the bar area, where greater calm prevails. (A wide-screen television flashes eerily mute rock-concert footage.) The cherry veneers and tatami-covered benches are nice touches, but the flimsy shoji screens are already poked full of holes.
Appetizers and entrees ordered from the kitchen were mostly disappointing. When touched by a fork, the breading on a chewy pork cutlet delaminated. Tempura was so heavily battered that there was no telling what lay beneath; eating it was like playing tempura roulette. Spring rolls left streaks of grease on my fingers. Beef sukiyaki was bland, as were pan-fried shrimp dumplings.
I did like the beef negimaki, little rolls of beef and scallion served with a zippy dipping sauce; delicate steamed shrimp dumplings; and broiled shrimp and scallops on wooden skewers. Okinawa further redeemed itself with its sushi. After learning that the kitchen had run out of kumamoto oysters, and suffering through a presentation of peppered fluke worthy of Las Vegas, my guests and I tucked into a series of beauties: freshly shucked scallops spread on a bed of lemon slices; delicate leaves of unadulterated fluke; broiled eel, glazed with tangy soy sauce; and ruby slabs of tuna belly.
Service here can be lackluster. In the sweltering grill room, water refills were long in coming. Communication, too, can be an issue, even with simple queries (''Do you serve Champagne by the glass?''). One waitress produced a second round of Shirley Temples after consulting the children, not the paying adults.
With the exception of green tea and red bean ice creams, desserts were not remotely Asian. In keeping with the fried food theme, the kitchen will fry not only ice cream but also cheesecake, a prospect that prompted one cheesecake-loving child to quip, ''I wouldn't even go there.''
Okinawa  39B South Moger Avenue,  Mount Kisco.(914)666-8188
SATISFACTORY
Atmosphere -- This casual Japanese hybrid is enormously popular with families. In the hibachi grill room, where entertainment value runs high, décor is beside the point. The bar area is more relaxed. Diners perched at the sushi bar will get a taste of the weather whenever the front door is opened. Kimonoed waitresses are not always able to communicate, but the manager is happy to interpret.  Recommended dishes -- Avocado salad, crab and cucumber salad, steamed shrimp dumplings, ''tuna special,'' sashimi (tuna belly, fluke, scallop, uni), glazed broiled eel, beef negimaki, seafood skewers, hibachi scallops or steak, ice cream.  Alcoholic beverages -- A broad array of sakes and specialty cocktails are offered, as well as standard Japanese beers. The wine selection is limited and unsurprising.  Prices -- Appetizers, $2.50 to $14.95. Sushi: $2.50 and up; some based on market value. Entrees, $10.95 to $34.95. Children's hibachi entrees: $9.95 to $10.95. Desserts: $3 to $7.50.  Hours -- Lunch: Mondays through Fridays, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. Dinner: Mondays through Thursdays, 4:30 to 10 p.m., and Fridays, 4:30 to 11 p.m. Continuous service on Saturdays, 1 to 11 p.m., and Sundays, 1 to 10 p.m.  Credit cards -- All major.  Wheelchair access -- Through the front door. The hibachi tables might prove awkward for someone in a wheelchair.  Review published: Feb. 8, 2004
DINING OUT westdine@nytimes.com
