Gen. Wesley K. Clark told a military historian four years ago that he was pressed by some members of the Clinton administration to end the war in Kosovo so that it would not interfere with Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign. But on Saturday he denied that there was any political pressure to end the war.
The comments to the historian were first reported on Saturday by The Washington Post, which examined papers from General Clark's two and half years as commander of NATO.
The Post quoted him as saying in a January 2000 interview with a NATO historian: ''There were those in the White House who said: 'Hey, look, you gotta finish the bombing before the Fourth of July weekend. That's the start of the next presidential campaign season, so stop it. It doesn't matter what you do, just turn it off. You don't have to win this thing, let it lie.' '' General Clark did not name the White House officials.
In a meeting with reporters here Saturday, however, General Clark said that the remarks were part of ''stream of consciousness'' recollection and that he never felt any political pressure or had any substantive disagreements with the White House over the conduct of the war.
''That's simply incorrect,'' General Clark said. ''There was never any politics involved in pressuring me to end the war prematurely or anything else. I had a very clear mandate to do, and I was very confident that the president and Sandy Berger would do whatever it took as long as it took to succeed in Kosovo.'' Mr. Berger was President Clinton's national security adviser.
NATO suspended its bombing of Yugoslavia on June 10, 1999, after Serbian troops began withdrawing from Kosovo.
General Clark has acknowledged that he had disagreements about the war with William S. Cohen, the secretary of defense, and Gen. Hugh Shelton, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff. He said that after the interview with the historian, he reviewed his materials in preparation for his book about the Kosovo campaign and the war in Bosnia, ''Waging Modern War,'' and changed his thinking about the events.
''I was trying to sort of take a stream of consciousness approach to all the things that happened during that period,'' he said of the interview. ''And then I took nine months and sorted it all out and it's all in the book. You have to read the book.''
General Clark said he was not backing away from the comments, but had simply re-evaluated them.
''Every comment that was quoted in that article was evaluated by me, and if it was significant it was in the book,'' he said. ''If it wasn't it was discarded.''
Almost none of the material quoted by The Washington Post was in his book. The Post article drew on General Clark's military files, which are stored at the National Defense University in the Washington area, and which were provided to the newspaper at its request.
The Post reported that General Clark's papers documented that throughout the war he was frequently at odds with top Clinton administration officials, including senior officers in the Pentagon, and that he was deeply skeptical of Washington policymaking.
Defense Secretary Cohen ended General Clark's command of the NATO alliance early, replacing him in 2000. The removal became an issue in the presidential race last September, when General Shelton, by then retired, said, ''I will tell you the reason he came out of Europe early had to do with integrity and character issues,'' and added that he would not vote for General Clark, who is seeking the Democratic presidential nomination.
General Clark has said General Shelton's comments were personal, not professional.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE RETIRED GENERAL
