AS the vice president for marketing of Nine West, the shoe company, Debbie Woloshin of Mount Kisco is not fazed by making important decisions.
But as the mother of a 6-year-old and a 9-year-old, this Mount Kisco resident isn't as comfortable making the decision of where to send her son to sleep-away camp for the first time. ''There's an abundance of information,'' she said in an interview. ''I went to a girls' camp in Maine that's not there anymore. Camps have changed a lot. I really didn't feel qualified.'' So, like increasing numbers of parents throughout the metropolitan area, Ms. Woloshin turned to Jill Tipograph, a camp consultant with Summer Solutions Inc., a 20-year-old company based in McLean, Va., who came recommended both by Ms. Woloshin's sister in New Jersey and a Westchester friend. A partner with Summer Solutions, Ms. Tipograph started the New York branch about 10 years ago, and has a White Plains office for Westchester clients.
''There are over 8,000 day and resident camps,'' Ms. Tipograph said. ''It's very important to get advice. Parents need someone to advise them. I'm educating parents about camps. There's a large group of parents who hadn't gone to sleepaway camp, and don't know where to begin.''
As Ms. Woloshin said in a telephone interview about her rationale for using a camp adviser to help her choose: ''I was concerned about the level of competition and safety. I wanted a strong level of instruction, sports-oriented, single sex that isn't too far away. Jill gave me lots of options.''
Just as parents of high school students in affluent communities increasingly turn to the private college counselors to identify potential schools for their children, so too, do these parents use camp consultants. They fill the gap between the camps' uniformly glossy promotional materials and the reality of what really goes on during the summer. Consultants also keep data on which camps can accommodate children with attention deficit disorder, or have peanut-free kitchens, or where the closest hospital is.
For first-time campers, parents may be concerned about how nurturing a particular camp is, or the safety precautions at a waterfront. They may need guidance about whether to choose a traditional sleepaway camp, with a variety of recreational activities, or help in selecting a specialty sports or performing arts camp. Some parents are horrified if a camp encourages hair dryers and cellphones, or if there are weekend trips to the mall instead of overnight hikes into the mountains.
''Parents need to have a conversation or meeting with the camp director to understand whether the camp's values are similar to a parent's,'' said Ms. Tipograph, who spends her summers traveling at her own expense to visit camps and programs so she can tell parents things like exactly how far the dining hall is from the bunks or what kinds of activities are available.
THE consultants generally do telephone interviews with parents (and usually with children, too, especially those in middle and high school) to find out what families want. Based on those conversations, the advisers will provide information about several camps. Most advisers focus on the first-time sleepaway camp experience, as well as the transition to middle school and teenage programs. They also help when a child wants to switch camps. Most won't bother with local day camps.
''It's a totally free service, like a travel agency,'' Susan Kasnett, a consultant with Student Summers Inc., and The Camp Lady, said in a telephone interview. ''When I talk to people, I try to get a feel for what a child is like. We don't really work for any one camp. We're unbiased. We know which camps are more competitive, which are a little more nurturing, which require uniforms.''
Another service that many camp consultants provide is helping families map out their trips to visit prospective camps and to make arrangements for visiting days, said Ms. Kasnett, who is based in Potomac, Md., and has an office in Scarsdale. Some consultants also help parents find camp uniform and supply services.
Although many of these companies have headquarters elsewhere, it pays to have Westchester offices to cater to an obviously receptive market. Parents don't pay for the camp consultants' services. Instead, the consultants earn commissions of about 10 percent to 15 percent on the cost of the camp for helping to place a camper in a particular program. None of the consultants interviewed for this article agreed to disclose their annual pay, but a little bit of math gives a hint: Private camps cost about $6,000 to $7,000 for a full summer, which means $600 to $1,050 for placing a child there, with fees of $10,000 for an eight-week session at many high-end camps.
These consultants have started to pick up a lot of business from parents of middle- and high-school students. Given college pressure, parents of teenagers want to be sure their high school children are doing something worthwhile with their summers.
''Parents want to know what is the value of a program for college applications,'' said Ms. Tipograph. ''I look at community service, internships, campus prep programs, travel abroad or here.''
Other needs are served as well. Parents who want to have summer vacations with their children may want an alternative to the traditional seven- or eight-week sleepaway camp. If divorce is in the picture, parents may want to juggle custodial agreements with summer camp.
Of course, individual camp consultants aren't all there is out there. The nonprofit American Camping Association can also help. Parents often ask their friends and neighbors, even their children's teachers, for word-of-mouth recommendations. Brochures and information can come from the Internet and from events like the camp fair that was held at the County Center in White Plains a few weeks ago.
Braving the bitter cold, parents, some trailing reluctant offspring, checked out theater camps, Y.M.C.A. camps, sports camps, teenage tours, horseback-riding camps, whale camps, a variety of sleepaway camps and traditional day camps.
One parent was Kevin King of White Plains, who was there with his daughter, Isabel, 5. ''My daughter's been going to the Y.M.C.A. summer camp program, which is one of the possibilities,'' he said. ''We want to see what else is out there.''
There are of course, skeptics who wonder whether camp consultants are as likely to steer families to low-cost programs.
''We can accommodate any pocketbook,'' Joanne Paltrowitz, of The Camp Experts and Teen Summers, with headquarters in Manhattan, said in a telephone interview. ''The parent needs to be honest with us.'' The company also has offices in Bedford and Scarsdale.
One camp director, who declined to be identified, said that many camps have increased their use of consultants and cut advertising. He explained that the consultants generate better quality leads, an important factor in competitive markets.
One who uses such consultants is Howard Landman, the director of Camp Kennybrook, a 39-year-old traditional co-ed camp in Monticello. ''The reality is that we are seeing more and more children coming from these referral agents,'' he said in a phone interview. ''They're bringing more and more people in. I love the referral agents. We get a lot of new leads from them. Parents don't have time to talk to seven or eight camp directors.''
Ultimately, of course, if their children enjoy camp, parents think that the consultants have earned their fees.
''If a child goes to camp and is happy,'' Ms. Kasnett said, ''that's a successful experience.''
IN BUSINESS
