THE canon of watchable or even semi-watchable hockey movies is pitifully small: ''Slapshot,'' ''Youngblood'' (a now forgotten Rob Lowe vehicle that was part teen romance and part coming-of-age story, about learning to drop your gloves and throw some punches out there on the ice), the three installments of the ''Mighty Ducks'' saga, ''Mystery, Alaska'' and just a few others. These movies, like sports movies in general, divide into two categories, or sometimes vibrate between them. There are the earnest, uplifting movies -- the ones that celebrate hard work, team spirit and the importance of staying faithful to one's dream. And then there are the movies, often funny and raunchy, that try to tell the truth, and to convey some sense of what athletes who play team sports are really like. Fans of this second kind of movie -- and hockey purists especially -- are apt to have mixed feelings about ''Miracle,'' which is only partly a hockey flick. Inevitably, it's also a flag-waving tearjerker about the last great battle of the cold war -- the one at Lake Placid in 1980, in which a bunch of clean-cut American college kids beat the grizzled lifers from the Soviet Union, restoring our national pride and striking a liberating blow against the entire Soviet athletic system.
Hockey purists are not very demanding filmgoers. They tend to regard ''Slapshot'' (the original, Paul Newman ''Slapshot,'' and not the appalling Stephen Baldwin remake) with the same reverence that other cinéastes reserve for ''Citizen Kane.'' What they expect above all in a hockey movie is good, realistic skating -- with none of those awkward, stiff-legged crossovers that made even Mr. Newman, for example, an occasional embarrassment in a mostly rink-seasoned cast, and certainly none of the lumbering wobbliness that made Russell Crowe so painful to watch in ''Mystery, Alaska.''
On this score, ''Miracle,'' which opened on Friday, does not disappoint. The actors on the United States team, most of them first-timers, were recruited for their skating ability, and most played either in college or in the minors. Several former pros, including Bill Ranford and Randy Heath (of the Oilers and Rangers, respectively) take the part of assorted European villains. Even Kurt Russell, who plays Herb Brooks, the American coach, seems at home on the ice. The film has many more hockey scenes, and far better choreographed ones, than your average hockey flick -- though invariably they seem neater and stagier than the real thing. Movie hockey always feels scripted, while an actual game never follows a single plot for very long.
The young actors look like hockey players, moreover; in many cases they bear striking resemblances to their real-life counterparts -- or to the way we remember them back in 1980. Patrick O'Brien Demsey is a dead ringer for Mike Eruzione, the team captain and scorer of the winning goal against the Soviets, so personable and expansive that he has made a living ever since just from talking about his Olympic experience. Eddie Cahill (who has appeared in ''Friends,'' and is one of the few Equity-card holders in the bunch) does a convincing job impersonating the goalie Jim Craig, capturing not only Mr. Craig's perpetual 5 o'clock shadow but also his flakiness and emotional fragility. That Billy Schneider looks a lot like the diminutive winger Buzz Schneider shouldn't come as a discovery: he's Buzz's son.
The actors also sound like hockey players. The Minnesotan team members were recruited from Minnesota, the Massachusetts players from Massachusetts, and their accents are region-appropriate. The Minnesotans speak with that crooning, Frances McDormand lilt, and the Bostonians have possibly the truest Boston accents in all of movie history -- far more accurate, for example, than the operatic versions currently heard in ''Mystic River.''
Sadly, however, the script gives these guys not a word to say that could not be printed in this newspaper. They don't begin to talk like hockey players, that is -- or any other kind of athlete. They don't spit like hockey players (who tend to be surprisingly gifted expectorators). And they don't rehydrate like hockey players. Except for a few brewskis at a team Christmas party, there's no drinking at all, and certainly no scene as authentic as the one from ''Boys on the Bus,'' the 1987 documentary about the Edmonton Oilers, in which an exceptionally cheerful Wayne Gretzky does bird calls for his teammates. Even the locker rooms are tidy, without a single wad of crumpled-up hockey tape, let alone the load of sweaty laundry that even a hockey practice typically generates.
''Miracle'' offers us the sanitized, family-friendly version of the game, in other words. For hockey's emotionalism, violent at times, it substitutes something more like sentiment. None of this should be a surprise, considering that the movie comes from Disney, the studio that gave us the ''Mighty Ducks'' trilogy. (One of the actors in the new film, Nathan West, who plays Robbie McClanahan, got his start as an extra on ''Ducks 2.'') ''Miracle'' leans heavily on themes of patriotism, effort, teamwork, dedication, the indomitability of the underdog, etc. etc. -- all of which would be unbearably preachy and sentimental, except of course that it really did happen this way. A collection of inexperienced 21-year-olds, melded into an inspired, overachieving team by a brilliant, unorthodox coach, beat the best hockey team in the world -- possibly the best hockey team ever assembled -- and for a moment, at least, transfixed all of America and lifted us from a long national funk.
It was a miracle, and even diehard purists, who have committed to memory Al Michaels's oration counting down the final seconds of the game against the Soviet Union, will puddle up all over again when Mr. Eruzione slaps in the game winner and, later, when Jim Craig, wrapped in the American flag, skates over to the glass and searches the stands for his dad.
Both at the beginning and at points along the way, ''Miracle'' drops in contemporary news clips to remind us how grim it was back in the 80's, and what a boost the Olympic victory was to our collective morale. Gas shortages. Carter's ''malaise'' speech. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The Iranian hostage crisis. The makers of ''Miracle'' no doubt hope to raise some of the same patriotic goose bumps now that we again find ourselves in troubled times. I doubt it will work, though. Miracles don't happen twice; we're older now, the world seems a far more complicated place (and besides, al Qaeda types don't know how to skate).
Almost in spite of itself, what ''Miracle'' really celebrates is not patriotism and collective effort but individual genius and obsession pushed almost to the point of madness. Thanks in large part to Kurt Russell's strong performance, Herb Brooks, the engineer of the unlikely victory, becomes not only the hero of the movie but its only real character, the only one who isn't a collection of traits and mannerisms.
Mr. Russell here looks like Brooks (who died last year in a car accident, at 66), he sounds like him and (thanks to some diligent thrift-shop scouring on the part of the wardrobe department) dresses like him, in those awful plaid pants and geeky sports jackets. Mr. Russell resists the temptation to make Brooks lovable: he's cranky, stubborn and manipulative, perfectly willing to lie or mess with young men's heads to get his way. But he's not a monster or a bully, either; he's a man in the grip of a dream, and endearingly nutty at times. He's not a coach in the manner of Emilio Estevez (who skippered all those ''Mighty Ducks'' teams not just to victory but to personal growth and political correctness), but, rather, a kind of homespun philosopher and inventor -- a classic American eccentric.
Mr. Russell's performance is so good that he almost does for ''Miracle'' what Dennis Quaid did for ''The Rookie,'' Disney's last feel-good sports flick -- he almost turns it into a real movie. ''Miracle'' never quite rises to that level -- it's mostly a heartwarming confection sunk in platitudes. But it's got one thing right that hockey movies have tended to ignore in the past. It's got a believable old-school hockey coach -- the kind that doesn't want your love, just your respect.
FILM
