THE setting sun is mocking the hardy few taking in the Boardwalk on one of the coldest days of a cold winter. The sky to the southwest is streaked with a fiery orange, but everything else is gray, a bleak midwinter's landscape. Young men dressed as if they are headed for the Russian front wipe their noses as they stand on the Boardwalk by their pushcarts, waiting for customers to emerge from the warmth of one casino looking to be wheeled to another. The men will make little money today.
On the corner of Pacific and Iowa Avenues, steel barricades direct traffic around a disaster site. Three months ago, a parking deck under construction at the Tropicana Casino collapsed without warning, killing 4 workers and injuring 20 others as one floor collapsed into another, and then into another, and into another. For now, the accident remains under investigation, so the skeletal remains -- broken slabs of concrete and exposed tangles of steel -- sit untouched and visible from the Boardwalk a block away.
The parking deck was an important part of a $245 million expansion project at the Tropicana. But for the now the garage is in ruins, casting a jagged shadow on a new tower intended to add rooms and retail space to one of the original casino hotels.
If this is not precisely a winter of discontent in Atlantic City, it is at least a season for reflection. Winter down the shore is slow; buses carrying white-haired slots players to the cavernous casinos are not so ubiquitous, the gambling floors are quiet, and dealers stand idly behind blackjack tables. The Boardwalk shops are closed except for a smattering of psychics and palm readers in their velvet salons. Loudspeakers play calypso music to small clutches of strollers wearing earmuffs.
In some ways, the respite provided by this bitter winter comes at an opportune time, for it has been a tumultuous several months for Atlantic City.
Last year, the city celebrated the opening of its first new casino in 13 years, the $1.1-billion Borgata, the beginning of Atlantic City's second wave of gambling-driven investment and the inspiration for hundreds of millions of dollars in expansion projects at other casinos and hotels. The Atlantic City Tourist and Visitors Bureau even rolled out a questionable new marketing theme -- ''Always Turned On'' -- to underscore the expansion and to attract a new, younger crowd. And the number of passengers using the much-maligned Atlantic City International Airport went over the million-passenger mark for the first time since 1998.
''The Borgata raised the stakes, and everybody upped the ante, and for the first time in years, there's a real flow of investment in the city,'' said Bryant Simon, a history professor at the University of Georgia and a native of South Jersey who is writing a book about Atlantic City.
If the story of 2003 ended there, with the Borgata redefining the Atlantic City experience and other casinos investing millions in new hotel towers and retail space and tourists arriving on airplanes instead of buses, casino owners would be spending these winter weeks counting profits and preparing for tomorrow's sunshine.
But the year also brought a noisy political rift between the casinos and Governor McGreevey over the imposition of a 7.5 percent tax on net profits; an untidy shake-up at the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, the agency that divvies up millions of dollars in casino profits and sends them off to one of New Jersey's many blighted urban areas; about a 3.5 percent decline in annual revenue among casinos not named Borgata; layoffs and huge debt in the Trump gambling empire; and the widening specter of competition from New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware and Maryland.
Even the Boardwalk's signature event, the annual Miss America competition, is in disarray. The pageant recently hired its fifth executive director in five years amid recurring concerns that the contest is a dying vestige of a vanished era.
Yet in the face of such adversity, this time-worn resort once again turned its cheek. The city cheerfully commemorated the 25th anniversary of its reinvention as a gambling resort last year, and the big event on this year's civic calendar is the 150th anniversary of the city's founding.
By looking back, the city and the gambling industry hope to look forward to a more vibrant future. Summer festivities are planned along a Boardwalk that is again the focus of development. In addition to the work at the Tropicana, the Showboat is basking in last spring's opening of a 544-room tower, and Caesar's plans to unveil a new retail, dining and entertainment complex next year. Resorts -- the first casino hotel to open in 1978 -- is adding rooms, and the Borgata, not even open a year, last week announced plans for a 500,000-square-foot expansion of retail and casino space.
And on the contentious political front, the governor and the casino industry are making nice with each other. Mr. McGreevey recently invited more than a dozen gaming analysts -- whose good opinion of the industry's finances and future is all-important -- to join him and other administration officials for dinner at Drumthwacket, the governor's mansion in Princeton.
Atlantic City's boosters will tell you that every aging institution should be so vital.
''Essentially Atlantic City is evolving,'' said Michael Pollock, publisher of the Gaming Industry Observer, a trade journal. ''Companies recognize that in order to make their properties competitive, they have to invest in building more hotel rooms and better attractions.''
The question is whether those investments will provide a proper defense as a pincer movement of competition closes around the city. At stake is the city's claim on the loyalties of about 35 million visitors who pour into the casinos and hotels every year spending, or losing, enough money to employ 45,000 people.
The challenges from neighboring states have gone from unlikely to inevitable over the last several years as politicians have grappled with shrinking tax revenue and looked enviously at the crowded buses emblazoned with the words ''Atlantic City.'' Gov. George E. Pataki of New York recently expanded his proposal for video lottery terminals -- slot machines by another name -- to include not just the state's racetracks but eight stand-alone gambling facilities. The first racetrack casino -- or racino, as they have been dubbed -- opened in late January at Saratoga Raceway, a harness track.
And as recently as the day after Mr. McGreevey reassured gambling analysts that he had no unpleasant surprises awaiting the casino industry, Gov. Edward G. Rendell of Pennsylvania unveiled his latest proposal to expand gambling in his state. Under the Rendell plan, similar to Mr. Pataki's, tens of thousands of video lottery terminals would be installed at Pennsylvania's eight racetracks and at four betting parlors, a move he hopes will generate enough revenue to slash property taxes. So far, the Pennsylvania Assembly has refused to go along.
Nor is the threat of video lottery terminals coming only from beyond the state's borders. In recent weeks there has been renewed talk among politicians in North Jersey of installing terminals in the state's racetracks. While politicians from South Jersey have vowed to fight off the threat, the Senate majority leader, Richard J. Codey of northern Essex County, is the most prominent supporter of such a venture. The casino industry estimates that video lottery terminals scattered around New Jersey would deprive Atlantic City of more than a half-billion dollars in annual revenue and result in the loss of about 12,000 jobs there.
But it is not just racinos that threaten to cut into Atlantic City's already diminished hegemony. The prospect of Indian-run casinos in the Catskill Mountains has gone from a frightening nightmare to a near certainty. Indeed, Caesar's -- which operates three casinos in Atlantic City -- signed an agreement with the St. Regis Mohawks late last year to develop a $500 million casino in Sullivan County. And other Indian-run casinos in New York's famed borsht belt -- a resort suffering the same faded fate that Atlantic has tried to ward off -- are in the works.
''The noose,'' one gambling industry source said, ''is tightening.''
The arrangement between Caesar's and the Mohawk tribe suggests just how far removed Atlantic City is from the days when it had a monopoly on East Coast gambling. Many of the state's political leaders and some gambling industry figures feel obliged -- if only by tradition -- to fight competition. Governor McGreevey recently announced his opposition to a proposed casino riverboat on the Delaware River, and Donald Trump lobbied Albany several years ago to block gambling legislation in New York. But the owners of most casinos and others interested in the future of Atlantic City are no longer so territorial about what seems to be inevitable. They can't afford to be.
''We wanted to actively oppose some of what was being proposed in the Catskills,'' said Micah Rasmussen, a spokesman for Governor McGreevey. ''But then we found that some of the players in Atlantic City were reluctant to do that because they had interests in the area.''
Many in the gambling industry contend that growth is inevitable, and that those who choose to fight expansion are ignoring reality. ''You can't dig a moat; you can't build a wall,'' said one gambling insider. ''And you can't stick your head in the sand and pretend the competition is going to go away.''
Faced with the mounting prospect of competition, Atlantic City is trying to weather the latest storm by transforming itself from a glimmery rest stop -- a place to play the slots for a few hours, eat a buffet dinner and jump on a bus back home -- to a true holiday destination. The Borgata is the template for this new vision of Atlantic City, a luxurious, Las Vegas-style resort with spas, upscale shopping, 11 restaurants, a hip nightclub and a gambling floor designed to appeal to high rollers.
''This market has an opportunity to define itself as a regional destination,'' said Larry Mullin, executive vice president of the Borgata. ''It's all about the perception of this market.''
Or as Robert Stewart, a spokesman for Caesar's Entertainment, which owns three casinos here, put it, ''We believe the best way to ensure the continued prosperity of the gaming industry in New Jersey is to create a unique destination in Atlantic City, and that's what we've spent hundreds of millions of dollars trying to do.''
To that end, Mr. Stewart's company has sponsored concerts featuring entertainers like Paul McCartney and Simon and Garfunkle in the new Convention Hall in an effort to bring nongamblers to the city and, perhaps, inspire them to play a few hands as long as they are in town.
''Atlantic City wants to get more money out tourists,'' said Professor Simon, noting that Las Vegas gets about 50 percent of its revenue from nongambling activities. Atlantic City, by contrast, relies on gambling for about 80 percent of its revenue, according to Mr. Stewart.
It is an aggressive and costly strategy, but Atlantic City insiders concede that the casinos have little choice, since the small-time gamblers who park themselves in front of slot machines account for 75 percent of their revenue. Before long, they will be able to try their luck closer to home in a racino or in a video gambling parlor.
The way Mr. Mullin of the Borgata sees it, those people will regard racinos and slots parlors ''as something of a convenience market, like a 7-Eleven,'' while Atlantic City ''will be offering the complete package'' - atmosphere, entertainment, shopping and other amenities.
Some falloff seems inevitable, but Mr. Pollock does not think disaster will ensue. ''The casinos can replace what they lose at the low end and move upscale, attracting more affluent people,'' he said. ''They might not come for the gaming, but if they pay for a hotel room and for dinner and then gamble a little, they will be profitable customers.''
But even as the Borgata made its debut last July, gaming analysts and industry insiders had one question: Would this approach create a new market for the city or simply lure customers from other casinos? Most observers say it is too early to tell, although statistics suggest that the Borgata is cannibalizing rather than creating.
Most of the 2.4 percent increase in gambling revenue here last year could be attributed to the much-ballyhooed opening of the Borgata. While the Casino Control Commission did not attribute the small increase to anything in particular -- the agency just reports the numbers -- it is obvious that with the other casinos showing a decline in revenue, the Borgata made the difference. In fact, of the 11 other casinos, 9 showed a drop, with some of the declines in double digits.
What's more, lurking on the horizon is the never-ending drama associated with Mr. Trump's three struggling properties -- the Taj Mahal, the Trump Plaza and the Trump Marina. Analysts expect Mr. Trump to refinance the $1.3 billion debt he owes on the Taj Mahal and the Trump Plaza, just as he refinanced about a half-billion dollars in debt on the Trump Marina last spring.
Simply servicing the huge debt on the Taj Mahal and Trump Plaza costs $74 million every six months, with the next payment due in late spring. As currently structured, the note matures in 2006. For now, analysts are watching warily as the Trump empire scrambles to make its interest payments. Standard &amp; Poor's downgraded its rating of the Taj Mahal and Plaza debt late last year, making it even more expensive for Mr. Trump to borrow. Mr. Trump has dug himself out of his share of financial holes in his life -- as he will happily point out -- but this one has Atlantic City insiders more anxious than usual.
In the meantime, as the landscape changes to accommodate the new vision of Atlantic City, so do some long-standing power arrangements in this city of day-trippers, double-digit unemployment and neighborhoods in plain view of the Boardwalk that are still struggling to survive.
Over coffee and two bananas at Perry's Cafe on Pacific Avenue on a recent day, State Senator William L. Gormley -- the powerful and mercurial Republican who has been representing Atlantic County in Trenton for 27 years -- was holding court on the subject of what is beyond Atlantic Avenue.
''The hospitality industry is providing thousands of people in this city with their first chance to participate in the American dream,'' Mr. Gormley said as he tried to carry on conversations with several other diners. ''These are jobs that are unionized, that provide health benefits and give people a chance to move up in the industry, or move up and then move on. Where else are some of these people, many of them immigrants, going to get that opportunity?''
The 57-year-old senator has been Atlantic City's most-formidable champion in the State Legislature, a savvy political operator who during the administration of Gov. Christie Whitman held extraordinary power over the hundreds of millions of dollars raised and disbursed each year by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority (CRDA). With an ally, James Kennedy, as the agency's executive director, Mr. Gormley had effective control over a teeming pot of money used to finance projects ranging from housing developments in the state's troubled cities to infrastructure improvements in and around Atlantic City.
But last year Governor McGreevey, a Democrat, began making his move to put his own person in charge of the authority. In the aftermath of the new tax -- on top of the 1.25 percent tax on the casinos' gross revenue that already goes to the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority -- which Senator Gormley fought bitterly but in vain, the governor then pushed out Mr. Kennedy, who in September left for a job at nearby Richard Stockton College.
''Because of the timing, it looked like McGreevey was punishing Gormley,'' said one Atlantic City insider. ''But, in fact, this battle was inevitable. It had nothing to do with the tax war. The governor wanted his person at CRDA (pronounced CREED-ah), not Gormley's. CRDA represents a big pot of money, and the governor wants to control it.''
On Friday, Governor McGreevey announced his choice to succeed Mr. Kennedy -- Curtis J. Bashaw, a Cape May real estate developer. In making the announcement, the governor praised Mr. Bashaw's ''strong ability to successfully manage redevelopment projects.''
Mr. Bashaw's name was floated late last year, to the surprise of some Atlantic City hands, who noted that he had no background in either state politics or the casino industry. But Mr. Bashaw --the son of the Rev. Carl McIntyre and the holder of an M.B.A. from the Wharton School -- is not without accomplishment in South Jersey. He took Congress Hall, a decrepit landmark hotel where years ago his father had preached fire and brimstone, and turned it into a chic new presence amid Cape May's abundance of Victoriana. He also has redeveloped several other sites in Cape May.
Privately, several Atlantic City observers say Mr. Bashaw is a good choice precisely because he has few apparent ties to the redevelopment agency. And as a founder of the Cape May Jazz Festival and Cape May Music Festival, he also has a résumé that fits with the city's new emphasis on non-gambling attractions.
Mr. Bashaw's appointment can only be taken as a sign that the McGreevey administration plans to be more hands-on in Atlantic City. During his private dinner with gaming analysts at Drumthwacket last month, the governor is reported to have told them he planned significant -- though unspecified -- changes at CRDA. Indeed, in a prepared statement accompanying Mr. Bashaw's appointment, he spoke of ''CRDA's need for financial focus.''
Mr. Bashaw's nomination must win approval from the agency's board, although that is considered a formality.
Certainly there is no mistaking the sense that an era at the powerful agency is gone. Mr. Gormley has not only lost his ally at the agency, but he himself, once chairman of the powerful Judiciary Committee before the Democrats won control of the Senate in November, is now in the minority. As wily as he is -- Mr. Gormley is legendary for breaking ranks to work with Democratic governors -- many political observers say his power over casino policy and economic development has also been diminished at the hands of the governor.
Still, the senator's enthusiasm remains intact. While others see a virtual tale of two cities as they venture beyond Atlantic Avenue here, where the neon fades and the visitors are few, Mr. Gormley is certain that he sees a version of the American dream under way.
''If you examine the multicultural experience that Atlantic City has become, you see that the city is a microcosm of America,'' he said. ''People are taking their first steps up the economic ladder here.''
Mr. Gormley is quick to point out that through the redevelopment agency, thousands of houses and several new schools now brighten the uneven urban landscape. ''People can see that the core infrastructure is being rebuilt,'' he said. ''Now we have the opportunity to compound the rebirth of Atlantic City. Now it's time to add rooms and to add retail space so that the city can become a destination.''
Skeptics respond that the city's supporters are fooling themselves, and perhaps making disastrous investment decisions, if they believe Atlantic City will be able to draw people here the way Las Vegas does. Yes, the city may have an underutilized beach and a famous Boardwalk, they concede, but try using either one in November, never mind February. And then there is the city itself. Some observers insist that restoring its reputation will require more than a new motto and even the prospect of another new casino, which MGM Mirage may build near the Borgata.
''The initial promise of gambling in Atlantic City was that it would be a unique experience in urban renewal,'' said Professor Simon, whose book, ''Boardwalk of Dreams: Atlantic City and the Fate of Urban America,'' will be published in June by Oxford University Press. ''But that hasn't worked. The city has to be a place to live and a place to work, and you can argue that the city is worse off in that regard. There wasn't a supermarket in the city until two years ago. The casinos are like 12 self-contained spaceships - people eat there, shop there, sleep there. None of the riches trickle down into the neighborhoods.''
The question is whether those spaceships can be retooled for a new, and perhaps hazardous, journey.
