Believe it or not, erectile dysfunction used to be a taboo topic. Now it is so thoroughly a part of public discourse that it's possible to hold water-cooler debates over the Super Bowl ads of competing impotence treatments. This is the environment in which Cialis, a Viagra competitor and a joint venture of Eli Lilly and Icos, made its debut in the United States. While new here -- it was approved for use in November, and advertising to consumers began in January -- Cialis has been on the market for about a year in Europe, and it's worth taking seriously because in that short time it has captured 16 to 35 percent of the major markets there. That early success may be either a result of scrupulous positioning by its makers and marketers or of vaguely salacious positioning by the media and the marketplace itself. Or both.
The selling point of Cialis (pronounced see-AL-us) is that it stays in the bloodstream longer. According to the company, in fact, its effects last 36 hours, which would be about six or seven times longer than Viagra and Levitra. (As with any prescription drug, there are a lot of caveats about who should be taking what and how individual results may vary; as the saying goes, ask your doctor.) It's a matter of coincidence that the Federal Drug Administration approved Cialis just in time for the run-up to Valentine's Day: the drug, its marketers say, is all about romance.
Instead of tough sports stars or anything echoing Levitra's ad of a man hurling a football through a tire swing, the first set of 15-second ''awareness'' TV spots for Cialis features slow, jazzy guitar music on the soundtrack. A middle-aged man and woman sit side by side in outdoor bathtubs, facing a smoldering sunset. The tag line: ''Are you ready?''
The winking nature of that line notwithstanding, the idea is to link the drug to committed couples, according to Matt Beebe, brand manager of Lilly Icos. After all, he says, the average man who uses an erectile dysfunction product is 55 and in a monogamous long-term relationship. Consumer research found that such men and their partners were stressed out about planning for a drug that lasts five or six hours and were attracted to the flexibility of a 36-hour time frame. So the couple-focused campaign, Beebe says, ''is all about this relaxing moment -- it could be a funny moment, a silly moment. Any moment in a couple's time together could turn into the right moment.''
In Europe, regulations rule out the marketing of drugs directly to consumers by way of ads. So Lilly Icos has sponsored radio talk shows about men's health issues, as well as a Feb. 7 concert for an audience of about 150 couples, featuring the tenor José Carreras and Blondie's Debbie Harry performing duets. But the drug has also relied on publicity and word of mouth in those strictly regulated markets, and because of its 36-hour duration, it has received a lot of each. Most notable is its unofficial nickname: the weekender or, even better, le weekender. This calls to mind not a monogamous long-term relationship but rather a macho swinger or a movie on an adult pay-per-view channel menu.
And while Cialis's American marketers may not openly embrace that term, they are not exactly running from it. On one hand, they emphasize that E.D. is a ''devastating disease,'' that treatments for it are not mere ''lifestyle drugs'' and that talk of ''recreational'' use trivializes a serious issue. On the other hand, Newsweek recently reported that Lilly Icos has sent press kits to late-night talk-show hosts and that its public relations team is meeting with sitcom writers.
Egging on professional makers of off-color remarks would seem to work against the dignity of the official Cialis story. But the European lesson of le weekender is that while a good, memorable and somewhat leering nickname might not be the best thing to use in an ad, it doesn't exactly hurt in the real world. Beebe says the nickname originated in a French media report; it so happens that Cialis has 35 percent of the erectile dysfunction market in France -- its biggest share in any country in Europe. So if a strategy of public dignity and whispered innuendo might help Cialis get a similar chunk of the significantly larger U.S. market, well, que sera, sera.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-8-04: CONSUMED  Correction:  February 22, 2004, Sunday  The Consumed column on Feb. 8, about Cialis, a competitor of Viagra, misstated the name of the agency that approved the drug for release in the United States. It is the Food and Drug Administration, not the Federal Drug Administration.
