Here's a nice way to run for office: No demeaning fund-raising, no scooting around for salable positions on difficult issues, no making nice to loathesome but useful people. Instead, because your job requires you to avoid even the appearance of politicking, your supporters organize a draft.
Right now, Christopher J. Christie, the United States attorney for New Jersey and the favorite of the Republican establishment for the 2005 governor's race, can enjoy that option. Since Mr. Christie will probably be in office (and conveniently clammed up) for at least nine more months, speculation about his plans will have to do.
The latest is that Mr. Christie will not run at all if President Bush is re-elected but, as a charter Bush booster in the 2000 campaign, will count on moving up in the administration or staying happily where he is. ''He loves this gig,'' one Republican said. The other half of this rumor is that if Mr. Bush loses -- and a Democrat taking over the White House would compel Mr. Christie to step down anyway -- he quickly scrambles into the governor's race.
Mr. Christie's recent press clips are bubbly, as supporters promote him as a bipartisan corruption-buster whom a fractured party can agree on. But some other Republicans are frustrated -- as if they weren't frustrated already -- to be put on hold while everyone waits for a presidential election and a personal decision.
Of course, many of those are supporters of some other presumptive candidate, like Bret Schundler, the former Jersey City mayor, who lost to James E. McGreevey in 2001, or State Senator Diane Allen. Some are Republicans who are thinking about running themselves. Some are just wondering how a candidate can keep clear of groundwork all summer and fall and then put together an effective campaign next winter.
Rudolph Giuliani managed to do this in New York in 1989, resigning as the United States attorney in Manhattan to run for mayor -- although in that round he lost, to David Dinkins. But Mr. Christie has next to no precedent in New Jersey. Among his predecessors in the United States attorney's office in Newark, none in living memory has quit to run for office.
For all the good reviews he has received as a prosecutor, and for all the pause he has given to legal establishment types who were skeptical when he was appointed, Mr. Christie is not a known political quantity.
He does not have a ready-made base, while several prospective Republican candidates have already run for statewide office. Mr. Christie's own political history is limited, and mixed; he was a Morris County freeholder for one term, losing a second bid, and he lost an Assembly primary in 1997.
There are some policy questions to be worked out -- on the subject of abortion, to take one example. In his freeholder campaign Mr. Christie was supported by the Morris County Right-to-Life group, and Patricia Sheils, its former president, said that ''to my knowledge, Chris Christie is pro-life.''
But in a letter he wrote to Republican leaders in 1993, when he announced his intention to run for the State Senate, Mr. Christie spoke approvingly of ''a woman's right to choose'' and said, ''A State Legislature in Trenton dominated by men should not be passing laws restricting the rights of women.''
So who knows? Mr. Christie might have more recent thoughts, or thoughts that would reconcile these two positions, but he cannot write a position paper about it now.
And for all the television cameras he has talked at in the last two years, he would have name-recognition problems. In a December poll commissioned by the Burlington County Republican Party organization, which is backing Senator Allen, Mr. Christie's name came in near the bottom of a list of eight possible candidates; 53 percent of the 500 likely voters who responded said they had never heard of Mr. Christie. Faring better were Assemblyman Paul DiGaetano (unknown to 49 percent), Ms. Allen (41 percent), Douglas Forrester (23 percent) and Mr. Schundler (21 percent). And a Star-Ledger/Eagleton-Rutgers poll taken last month found that 74 percent of the 823 registered voters surveyed had no opinion about Mr. Christie.
On the other hand, with enough money, name recognition can go from zero to 60 in short order. Just ask Mr. Forrester, barely known outside West Windsor when he ran for the United States Senate in 2002, or Jon Corzine, never heard of beyond Wall Street just four years ago.
And in the Star-Ledger poll, the response to Mr. Christie was no worse than that for the Senate president, Richard J. Codey (74 percent had no opinion), and the Assembly speaker Albio Sires (81 percent). The survey concluded that ''none register a significant impact on citizens of the state.''
So that's where political involvement will get you.
ON POLITICS Laura Mansnerus reports from Trenton for The New York Times.
