Consider the plight of the man who wears a skirt.
Schoolchildren snicker as he passes. Construction workers give him grief. Perfect strangers assume the right to criticize his wardrobe. He might be fired. He might be beaten up. His wife might leave him for a man in slacks.
Yesterday, in what future generations may look back on as the birth of the Male Unbifurcated Garment movement, some 100 men in skirts marched from the Guggenheim Museum to the Metropolitan Museum of Art to proclaim their rights to women's clothing.
''We're not transvestites, homosexuals or cross-dressers,'' said one marcher, David Johnson. ''We don't want you to call us Jean or Sally.''
''We're men,'' said Mr. Johnson, a retired global studies teacher from Poughkeepsie. ''Men who want the right to wear a skirt.''
If the cause of men in skirts has yet to take its place beside the gay rights or women's movements, one could hardly fault the marchers who assembled yesterday to make their case on a nippy February morning. They came from small towns and large cities all across this country. They came in minis, tutus, kilts and, in one case, a fluorescent orange number with matching orange shoes and orange vest.
Chris Taylor, 27, came from Levittown, on Long Island, in a full-length crimson dress. In the natural world, he said, the clothes horse of the species is invariably the male.
''The male bird is always the pretty one, not the female,'' said Mr. Taylor, who is difficult to disagree with at 6'3'' and 340 pounds. ''Why can't the male human being dress with style and color?''
Before the march began, there was much talk of the movement's history. Men, it was said, have been wearing skirts much longer than women. There were glowing mentions of the Highlanders of Scotland, for example. It was noted with pride that European nobles of the 16th century wore skirtlike outfits accompanied by heels.
It was the French Revolution that turned the tide, said Ingemar Johnsson, 39, who flew from Sweden to attend the march. The French peasant, he said, wore pantaloons. As the monarchy was overthrown, pants became the fashion. The modern men in skirts movement can be traced to another Swede, he said, a man named Roger Lewau. In the early 1990s', Mr. Lewau built a Web site, now defunct, known, he said, as the Skirts Lover Nest.
''But that was long before I joined the movement,'' Mr. Johnsson said.
These days, the movement finds its guiding spirits in Tom Manuel, 48, a computer consultant from Virginia, and Larrie James, who is 55 and from Wisconsin.
As he rallied his troops yesterday, Mr. Manuel explained that the movement had recently experienced a schism between the freestylers, who believe that all skirts should be worn, and the bravehearts, who tend to dress exclusively in kilts.
''There was almost a war, if you will, on the Internet,'' he said.
The term ''unbifurcated garment'' was created to address this rift. Kilts and skirts are both unbifurcated garments. Mr. Manuel is hopeful that with this new inclusive term, the tension will be finally laid to rest.
At a march of men in skirts, it is only natural that conversation would turn toward clothing. The following is fairly typical:
MARCHER 1: Who does that skirt?
MARCHER 2: Bear Kilt. You know them?
MARCHER 1: Yeah, but their tailoring doesn't work for me.
MARCHER 2: Really? They always fit me fine.
You would think that a hundred men in skirts with a bagpipe band marching on the streets at 10 a.m. would attract some real attention. But reaction was fairly tame. A couple of doormen came to watch, and the morning poodle walkers seemed a bit confused. The officers on escort duty all had smiles, but there was not a single a heckler.
In a matter of minutes, the marchers arrived at the Met where they planned to visit an exhibition called ''Bravehearts: Men in Skirts.'' They were gathered in the plaza near the fountains when a double-decker tourist bus pulled up.
The sightseers gazed in awe at the crowd of men in unbifurcated garments. Someone in the crowd called up to ask the tourists what they thought.
''What I think?'' said one young man with a clearly foreign accent. ''I think I love New York.''
