RING OUT FREEDOM!
The Voice of Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Making of the
Civil Rights Movement.
By Fredrik Sunnemark.
273 pp. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press. Paper, $19.95.
TO THE MOUNTAINTOP
Martin Luther King Jr.'s Sacred
Mission to Save America: 1955-1968.
By Stuart Burns.
Illustrated. 502 pp. San Francisco:
HarperSanFrancisco. $27.95.
A STONE OF HOPE
Prophetic Religion
and the Death of Jim Crow.
By David L. Chappell.
Illustrated. 344 pp. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press. $34.95.
WHAT do we know about Martin Luther King Jr. now that nearly 36 years have passed since his assassination? His voice and the mantra, ''I have a dream.'' But, in truth, those words -- ripped out of the context of King's subversive gospel -- are the ambient noise of a society eager for good news. The gadfly has been transmuted into a convenient symbol of the American dream. The tough-minded Niebuhrian who once shared a laugh with Elijah Muhammad as they debated the precise degree of white devilry has become a sappy version of Rodney King bleating, ''Can we all get along?''
In sorting through these disparate images, it makes sense to examine King's words. In ''Ring Out Freedom!'' Fredrik Sunnemark, who teaches cultural studies at University Trollhattan-Uddevalla in Sweden, seeks to make sense of King's rhetorical virtuosity. Given Sunnemark's opaque prose (''actualization of a religious superstructure through a ladder of signification''), he is not for the faint of heart. Still, his instinct -- to focus less on what King meant by his words than what he meant to do with them -- is sound. If King believed in ''a God of love that guarantees that history is a forward movement toward liberation, freedom and harmony,'' he worked that truth in different ways. When he spoke Amos's words -- ''Justice will rush down like waters and righteousness like a mighty stream'' -- to black protesters, King blurred profane and biblical time and reassured them that their earthly struggle was the incarnation of God's signature act of freeing the captives. Before educated white audiences, King tended to adopt a more highbrow idiom. Why, Sunnemark wonders, did King need Kant, Tolstoy and Tillich to back up his claim that segregation defied the unity of man? His reluctant white audience could fathom such authorities; quoting their own moral language exposed whites to self-accusations of hypocrisy. Thus King was translating not just the black experience for whites, but also the white experience, instructing them in the meaning of their spirituality.
Ultimately, however, there is a limit to what we can make of King from his rhetoric alone. Restoring the context of the insurgency that gave his words meaning is one of the achievements of Stuart Burns's ''To the Mountaintop,'' a straightforward history of King's life from the Montgomery bus boycott in 1955-56 to his death in 1968. His portrait is not of the adept speaker or silky smooth apostle of agape but of a tormented prophet adrift in the madness of the 1960's.
There is a debunking spirit at work here that seems motivated less by contrarian crankiness than by respect for King the fallible human being -- the libertine, the deal maker who betrayed colleagues, the indecisive grandstander who depended on the militant daring of others (for example, in the Birmingham insurgency in 1963, which was salvaged only when the firebrand James Bevel unleashed his ''kids' army,'' deploying hundreds of youngsters to face down Bull Connor's police dogs and fire hoses). In cutting King down to size, Burns reminds us that he was only one man in a crowded civil rights movement, of which he was less the catalyst than its totem, cheerleader and ambassador. The author of ''Daybreak of Freedom,'' a history of the Montgomery bus boycott and the editor of a volume of the King papers, Burns ably places King in these larger circuits of faith and defiance. In the swirl of activism, King's talent was unique and specialized: ''to articulate the word,'' not ''to make it flesh.'' But such articulation required teasing out latent themes of deliverance from an otherworldly religion, shifting attention from redemption in the next world to defiance in this one and fortifying faith that ''God will make a way out of no way.''
Poignantly, the man whose day job was to tell people ''There is a balm in Gilead'' frequently needed balm himself in 1967-68. As Burns recounts those years of despair, his focus on King dissolves in a glut of detail on the anti-Vietnam War movement, sectarian disputes on the left and the counterculture. But this much is clear: King's depression reflected the contradictions of a politics based on moral exhortation and his loss of moorings amid white backlash, black nationalist frenzy and Vietnam. A radicalized King did not shrink from his ''vocation of agony'' as onetime accolades gave way to cries of Uncle Tom and to Lyndon Johnson's aspersion, ''that goddamned nigger preacher.'' Before he would condemn ghetto rioters, King insisted on first chastising ''the greatest purveyor of violence in the world today, my own government.'' If the United States did not deal with its racism, King threatened in his ever-intensifying jeremiads: ''God will bring down the curtains on this nation, the curtains of doom. . . . Be not deceived. God is not mocked.'' The lingering image to emerge from Burns's book is the constant, disturbing power of King's prophetic faith.
Such righteous passion underscores the difficulty of neatly situating King within American liberalism. It is precisely this power of ''illiberal'' religion to further liberal ends that transfixes David L. Chappell in ''A Stone of Hope.'' If such a sweeping perspective on the civil rights movement takes us some distance from King, Chappell positions us to better appreciate his legacy by revisiting an elemental question: how did blacks succeed in toppling segregation? Only a crude summary of his answer -- which is intricate, dazzling in its reach into so many corners of black and white Southern life and fascinating at every turn -- can be sketched here.
Simply put, many people think about the Southern black struggle in the way the movement often saw itself, as David against Goliath. This vision is sustained by the hagiography of King as Moses working miracles. Chappell, who teaches history at the University of Arkansas, argues provocatively that we have got this history plain wrong. Southern segregationists were more vulnerable, liberal allies were more feckless and insurgent blacks were stronger than we typically perceive them. Flamboyant acts of racial animosity often obscured the more complex dynamics beneath the surface. Similarly, the organized unanimity displayed by Southern politicians was only a ''veneer of defiance and solidarity.'' Chappell's eye-opening conclusion is that ''the segregationists' foundations in Southern white culture were mushy. The segregationists had popular opinion behind them, but not popular conviction,'' for a variety of reasons.
Most important, as Chappell shows in riveting detail, they could not lean on religion as did their black neighbors. The decisive fact about the white church was not its aloofness from the black struggle, as King's ''Letter From Birmingham Jail'' had it, but ''that it failed in any meaningful way to join the anti-civil rights movement.'' Even racist ministers did not want to contradict ''the word of God that 'in Christ there is neither bond nor free.' '' The Southern Presbyterians and the Southern Baptist Convention both adopted pro-integration resolutions around 1954. Billy Graham, the symbol of the Great Awakening of Christianity in the 1950's, presided over integrated revivals in Alabama and befriended King, who shared the pulpit with him in Madison Square Garden in 1957 -- troublesome facts gingerly kept at bay by the Southern press. Phobic racism was simply less entrenched than the imagery of redneck virulence suggests.
One might think the unstinting devotion of white liberal allies made the difference. Once again, Chappell provides a lively revision. The 1948 civil rights plank that sparked Strom Thurmond's Dixiecrat bolt from the Democratic Party was not just a sign of liberal resolve to achieve equality; it was also a ploy to sabotage Henry Wallace, the nemesis of the anti-Communist Americans for Democratic Action. The chastened ''liberal survivors'' of that struggle sought to appease Southern Democrats. Gunnar Myrdal's seminal study of race relations, ''The American Dilemma,'' reflected the pervasive liberal belief that racism was a problem of prejudice that would naturally succumb to the American creed and education. Those muscular liberals who had embraced realism in the global arena clung to the fantasy of what the historian David Kennedy called ''a virtually painless exit from the nation's racist history.''
Such optimism was not shared by blacks, who did not stress enlightened rationality but the presence of sin and the need for its chastisement. This is the heart of Chappell's argument: prophetic religion was the powerful trump card of black insurgency, steeling activists with the morale needed for the long struggle. Early in the bus boycott, King put the case for action in prophetic terms at odds with those of white Christian pacifists and perfectionists: ''It is not enough for us to talk about love. . . There is another side called justice. . . . Justice is love correcting that which revolts against love.''
King was not alone in this gritty realism. Chappell sees it also in Fannie Lou Hamer, who knew the evil of the Mississippi police who tortured her and the goofiness of the idea that they would surrender to lofty arguments. Aggressive action was key to the young John Lewis's definition of nonviolence. For Bayard Rustin, nonviolence entailed not ''moral purism or faith in the oppressor's conscience'' but coercion and suffering.
Chappell has not tied down every twist and turn of this spiritual force. Nor has he quite figured out how Baptist shouters and secularists like the civil rights legend Bob Moses could dwell in the same church. And he is sketchy on the specific manner in which prophetic religion shaped activism. Black religion, he notes, counseled ''prophetic resistance to the corrupt tendencies of this world.'' It also inspired solidarity and a willingness to sacrifice for a cause. He is onto something vital in grasping that black religion encouraged a practical confidence that victory might be possible against all odds. ''It is hard to imagine masses of people lining up for years of excruciating risk against Southern sheriffs, fire hoses and attack dogs without some transcendent or millennial faith to sustain them.'' Still, this catalog of religious influence is too casual, only a start in capturing the complexity involved.
Yet none of these quibbles can detract from Chappell's achievement. In its mix of rigor, daring and perceptiveness, ''A Stone of Hope'' is a spectacular work. Chappell provides an alternative to the cloying rites of civil religious celebration that diminish King and our memory of the movement. We need to honor the practical prophet of justice whose commemoration should force us to recall a darker side of our history: that blacks were mainly on their own; that, all too often, liberals were less than heroic; that even respectable whites who forswore racism were often clueless and grudging in response to black claims. The point is not to pick at old wounds; it is that too much love and not enough justice betrays those who suffered then and sullies those who forget now.
Jonathan Rieder, a professor of sociology at Barnard College, is completing a book on Martin Luther King Jr., soul music and American citizenship.
Correction:  February 8, 2004, Sunday  Because of an editing error, a review on Page 6 of the Book Review today, about ''To the Mountaintop: Martin Luther King Jr.'s Sacred Mission to Save America: 1955-1968,'' misspells the author's given name. He is Stewart Burns, not Stuart.
