DORIS EATON TRAVIS, one of four living Ziegfeld girls, has gone from hoofer to dance teacher to horse breeder to author, a living testament to the fact that dancers are nothing if not flexible. Today, the follies are dead. Vaudeville is dead. Ballroom is dead. Five of Ms. Eaton Travis's six siblings are dead. But she is still dancing.
Born in Norfolk, Va., in 1904, Ms. Eaton Travis first came to New York City with her mother and sister Mary in 1914 to audition for a Shubert Brothers production of ''The Blue Bird.'' Her mother borrowed $200, packed a trunk with canned goods and a sterno stove, bundled her daughters on a train and headed for Broadway.
Ms. Eaton Travis recently returned to New York, from her 400-acre ranch in Norman, Okla., to promote her new book, ''The Days We Danced: The Story of My Theatrical Family,'' a rambling but moving memoir published by the University of Oklahoma Press.
She had wrapped her marvelously erect 5-foot-2 1/2-inch frame in a black coat with a wide collar of black fox fur. ''You have a bit of a wind out here,'' she said as she made her way to an interview at the Central Presbyterian Church, on Park Avenue, where the Ziegfeld Club, a nonprofit group that helps indigent women in show business, has its offices. In truth, it was painful outside, a bitter, blustery 15 degrees. One does not achieve the age of 99 by being a pessimist.
The club's headquarters have a spare, mausoleum-like quality -- putty-colored linoleum, fluorescent lighting and walls covered with old photographs: W. C. Fields with his thumbs at his waist; Florenz Ziegfeld in a fine pair of white shoes; Doris Eaton Travis, circa 1919, a pale, doe-eyed 15-year-old with a rosebud mouth and a steady gaze.
Ms. Eaton Travis stood before her picture and stared into her youthful face. ''Was that I?'' she said. ''Oh dear. All I can say is I've come a long way, baby.''
She can remember her first public performance, ''The Cupid Dance'' at age 5. She stood up to demonstrate: two simple, sweeping gestures with her arms and one brief turn and -- despite the cloud of white hair and markedly comfortable shoes -- she was the spitting image of a cupid, impish and preternaturally agile.
A week after graduating from eighth grade, Ms. Eaton Travis was cast in the 1918 Follies. She danced with them in 1919 and 1920 as well, and spent the next 15 years bouncing between Broadway and Hollywood. Then things went badly. The Depression took its toll, and worse, movies killed vaudeville. No Gypsy Rose Lee, Ms. Eaton Travis would not consider burlesque. By the mid-1930's, she was single, unemployed and hopeless. ''You'd go down to an agent and 15 other people were applying for the same job,'' she recalled. ''Psychologically you got so depressed.''
She decided she wanted something else in life: a salary. But for the intervention of an old suitor who put in a good word for her, she would have been a dime-a-dance girl, not an instructor at the Arthur Murray dance studios. She eventually built a franchise of 18 Arthur Murray studios throughout Michigan. It was at one of those studios that she met Paul Travis, a businessman and dance student, whom she went on to marry.
In the 1960's, the twist and television vanquished ballroom and drove her out of business. In 1970, she and her husband moved to a ranch in Oklahoma where they raised quarter horses. In 1980, she enrolled as a part-time undergraduate at the University of Oklahoma. Twelve years later, at age of 88, she graduated Phi Beta Kappa.
''What was I going to do?'' she said. ''Sit there day after day and hold my hands? No!''
The Eatons were a theatrical family; at one point in the 1920's, four of the seven Eaton children were performing on Broadway simultaneously. Her sister Mary, a ''toe dancer,'' actress and Lucky Strike girl, was a star -- the kind of woman who got her name in lights and inspired men to part with cars, furs and pianos. Another sister, Pearl, choreographed numerous films in Hollywood in the 20's and 30's but couldn't compete with Fred Astaire, who brought along his own choreographer, Hermes Pan. Unlike her two sisters, Ms. Eaton Travis stayed near the spotlight, but never quite in it. That fact -- and God -- she says, saved her.
''Their show business careers ended, and they seemed to end with them,'' Ms. Eaton Travis said. Mary died an alcoholic, in 1948, and 10 years later Pearl was found beaten and naked, in a pool of blood, in her Los Angeles apartment. The murder was never solved.
Ms. Eaton Travis has a message for young dancers today: your career will end. ''The final curtain does come down and then, for most people, there is nothing,'' she writes in her book. ''No more applause. No music. No opportunity.''
Still, dance remains deeply wired in her body. The only time she can recall not dancing, in fact, was when her husband died in 2000. ''I feel sometimes that I just need to dance,'' she said. ''In fact, sometimes at home, when I'm struggling with some problem, I'll just go turn on the music and dance.'' The movement and the music blending, she said, ''is just like medicine. So I do that, when nobody's looking.''
Ms. Eaton Travis has had a bit of a comeback in the last few years. In 1998, she returned to Broadway with a tap dance number for the Broadway Cares Easter Bonnet Competition. She had a cameo in Milos Forman's 1999 film, ''Man on the Moon,'' and has appeared on ''20/20'' and ''The Rosie O'Donnell Show.'' She'll be performing in the Broadway Cares benefit again in April. ''We might be doing a conga,'' she said with a grin.
DANCE
