An off-duty Rikers Island correction officer was killed and three people were injured early yesterday when gunshots were fired at a birthday party in Queens, the police said.
The shootings, which the police said were prompted by a fight over a woman, occurred shortly before 3 a.m. at a party inside the Lebanon Lodge, a Masonic lodge at 107-51 Guy R. Brewer Boulevard in Jamaica. The correction officer, Gregory G. Goff, 24, was pronounced dead at Mary Immaculate Hospital at 3:30 a.m. He was armed, but did not fire his pistol, and did not appear to be a target of the shooting, the police said.
He was among some 150 guests at a birthday party at the lodge, said Harry Croker, 67, a 10-year member of the lodge. ''This is unusual,'' Mr. Croker said. ''We're always very particular in who we rent it to.''
At some point early yesterday, two men at the party began arguing about a woman, the police said. One of the men approached the exit of the lodge, turned and began firing into the crowd. He was hit in the head with a bottle and dropped the gun, a 9-millimeter, and a second man picked it up and fired into the crowd, the police said. He, too, dropped the gun, and a third man picked it up and fled. About 15 rounds were fired in all. Mr. Goff was shot in the torso, the police said.
Detectives were questioning a suspect yesterday afternoon, the police said. It is unclear whether Mr. Goff was trying to intervene when he was shot.
A 23-year-old man was shot once in the arm, a 27-year-old man once in the buttocks and a 37-year-old woman once in the leg, the police said. They were listed in stable condition yesterday at area hospitals.
Correction officers are allowed to carry guns while off duty. Mr. Goff's grandmother said he had had his pistol for only a week.
''They called me and told me what happened,'' said, Mildred Butler, 65, Mr. Goff's grandmother, of 148th Street in Jamaica. ''By the time I got to the hospital, he was gone.''
Mr. Goff had lived with her since he was 7, after his father was killed, she said. ''No drinking, no drugs, no reefers, no nothing,'' Mrs. Butler said. ''He was a solid, clean guy.''
Mr. Goff attended John Adams High School and John Jay College of Criminal Justice, where he studied criminal law and corrections. He was hired as a correction officer in June 2002, and worked at the Otis Bantum Correctional Center, a Rikers Island jail for adult men, a correction spokesman said. He was single and had no children.
''He was in the roughest part of Rikers Island, but he had no problem,'' said his grandfather Solomon Butler, 66. ''You have to get along with people.''
He had attended the party with several childhood friends, and was scheduled to work yesterday, his grandparents said. His blue uniform still hung in the living room.
''He did so much so soon,'' his grandmother said. ''Yesterday, he said: 'I'm 24. I'm young. I'm going to act like I'm young from now on.'''
