A YOUNG woman sits at a table in a quiet interior. She is writing a letter, her hand tracking a quill across a sheet of paper. We do not know what she is writing, but her soft smile suggests she is writing to a loved one, or a lover. Her head tilts forward, exposing the elegant curve of her neck and a large pearl earring suspended from a blue ribbon beneath tight blond curls.
The woman I have just described is the subject of a painting by the 17th-century Dutch artist Gerard ter Borch, on view in ''Love Letters: Dutch Genre Paintings in the Age of Vermeer'' at the Bruce Museum of Arts and Science in Greenwich. To our eyes the painting seems genteel, but back in the mid-1650's, when it was painted, it heralded a quiet revolution: It is among the earliest surviving paintings of a woman writing a letter.
''Love Letters'' examines the interest in letter scenes among Dutch artists of the 17th century. Arranged in partnership with the National Gallery of Ireland in Dublin, it arrives at a time of near-feverish enthusiasm for books and films about Dutch art of the period, like Tracy Chevalier's ''Girl With a Pearl Earring,'' recently made into a movie. Now viewers can see the real thing, including paintings by Johannes Vermeer, Pieter de Hooch and Gabriel Metsu. And what's more, they're fabulous.
The history of painting is littered with letters. Mostly they appear in portraits, where they were used to denote the sitter's learning. By contrast, Dutch artists of the 17th century sought to make letters and letter writing the theme of the painting, using them as a pivot on which to turn complex psychology dramas.
So what prompted Dutch artists to suddenly begin depicting epistolary themes? Peter Sutton, the Bruce's executive director and curator of the show, writing in the exhibition catalog, links the evolution of this theme in Dutch art to growing literacy levels and a popular craze for letter writing in 17th-century Holland. While letters had long been used for commercial, military or state affairs, the 17th-century Dutch embraced letter writing as a highly personal and intimate form of communication.
The subject of letter writing was first broached in Dutch painting about 1630. Dirck Hals, brother and pupil of the famous portraitist Frans Hals, was probably the first to paint women reading letters. His ''Seated Woman With a Letter'' (1633) shows a lady in a blue jacket and gold skirt sitting on a chair holding a letter. Although we are not privy to the contents of the letter, a maritime painting on the wall behind her suggests that her loved one is far way. But her breaking smile reassures us he is safe.
The artist who did most to popularize the genre of letter painting was ter Borch. Born to a family of painters in Zwolle, he trained in Haarlem, and then in London with an uncle, who was an engraver, before traveling and painting throughout Europe. Among the most influential Dutch painters of the 17th century, his paintings possess a level of beauty and formal refinement absent in earlier treatments of the theme. He is also the first letter artist to give his subjects an inner psychological dimension.
Ter Borch is represented here by five paintings, including the one of the young woman with the pearl earring at her writing desk. Among others, there is a pair of complementary paintings, ''An Officer Writing a Letter With a Trumpeter'' (1658-59) and ''Woman Sealing a Letter With a Maidservant'' (1658-59). The first shows a man writing a letter, the next a woman sealing her written response. Together, they present viewers with an absorbing visual narrative.
Ter Borch's complementary paintings are, Mr. Sutton writes, ''among the first linking lovers through the theme of a letter.'' They were not to be the last, for the idea appealed to successive Dutch artists. One was Metsu, whose exquisite complementary paintings, ''Man Writing a Letter'' (circa 1665-67), and ''Woman Reading a Letter With a Maidservant'' (circa 1665-67), are highlights of the exhibition.
Bathed in clear, silvery light, both paintings are packed with pictorial symbols. In ''Man Writing a Letter,'' we see a young man at an open window composing a letter. Behind him are a globe and a classical pastoral landscape in a carved gilt frame. He is a man of means and education.
So, too, is his lady friend, who sits at home, also by the window, reading the man's recently delivered letter. Her face seems calm, although her one dropped shoe and the tempestuous maritime painting on the wall behind her, quietly revealed by the maid, suggest all is not well.
No exhibition of 17th-century Dutch painting that deals with the theme of letters would be complete without a painting by Vermeer: Of the 34 known paintings attributed to the Delft master, six deal with letter themes. This is easier said than done, for Vermeer paintings are rare, and very, very hard to borrow for exhibitions. That even one Vermeer is on display at Greenwich is deserving of high praise.
''Lady Writing a Letter With Her Maidservant'' (no date) is one of Vermeer's more enigmatic paintings. It shows a woman in a green dress with white cap and sleeves seated at a table writing a letter. On the wall behind her is a large, classical painting of a biblical theme, the finding of baby Moses, in front of which stands a maid looking out the window. Critical opinion is divided over the painting's symbolism, although the look of concentration on the face of the letter writer suggests a matter of some gravity absorbs her.
This painting is one of three, including the two Metsus, on loan from the National Gallery of Ireland, where the exhibition premiered in the fall. All three once belonged to Sir Alfred Beit, a wealthy English aristocrat who donated them to the gallery in 1987. Before that, the Vermeer had been repeatedly stolen from his home. It is no wonder that museums are unwilling to lend their Vermeers.
''Love Letters: Dutch Genre Paintings in the Age of Vermeer'' is on view at the Bruce Museum of Arts and Science, One Museum Drive, Greenwich, through May 2. Information: (203)869-0376.
ART REVIEW
