ADAM HEINRICH sat in the cab of his white Freightliner truck, trying to settle in for the night at the Paulsboro Travel Center.
Nestled on a bunk bed behind the driver's seat, the he was drinking Dr Pepper and surfing channels on a wall-mounted television set. The engine was idling, sending tiny tremors through the floor. All around him, a hive of trucks rattled and hummed in the parking lot, drowning out the sound of traffic from Interstate 295 and coughing a steady stream of diesel fumes into the air.
At the end of a long haul, truck drivers sleep; their engines do not. To save money and guard their cargo, drivers rest in their trucks, where the few amenities -- heat, air conditioning, television, lighting and maybe a small refrigerator or cooking appliance -- demand electricity. Like Mr. Heinrich, 29, most drivers generate power by running their engines, even as they sleep.
But their routine may soon change. Diesel fumes are a serious cause of air pollution in New Jersey, and legislators are looking at ways to limit the time that drivers spend idling their engines. One of the first innovations is scheduled to arrive this spring in the parking lot of the Paulsboro Travel Center. An independent heating and cooling system called IdleAire will be installed at 175 parking spaces.
Each parking space will feature a giant yellow hose, which can hook up to a parked truck through an adapter mounted in the passenger side window. The hose will supply a variety of services, including heat, air-conditioning, a phone jack with free local calls, cable, and access to the Internet, all controlled by a computerized console within reach of the driver. According to David Everhart, the chief operating officer of IdleAire, in Tennessee, all truck drivers have to do is tune in and turn off -- their engines, that is.
''The cab is these guys' home away from home,'' Mr. Everhart said. ''We bring all the things they'd normally have to go home to get through the window of the cab, and they get to sleep in a quieter, cleaner environment.''
IdleAire first appeared in 2001 at Hunts Point Market in the Bronx, and is currently operating at 13 sites nationwide. The company plans to start work in Paulsboro when the ground thaws, using a $660,000 federal grant and $1 million from a pollution settlement reached in October with the Coastal Eagle Point refinery nearby.
''There are two stories: an environmental story and an economic story,'' said Glenn Goldstein, a program director at Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use Management, which links air quality control divisions in eight northeastern states. ''Truck drivers aren't really concerned with what's coming out their stacks. If 175 trucks are using this space, they're saving between 175 and 225 gallons per hour.''
An idling engine can burn one gallon, or over $1.50 worth, of diesel fuel an hour, while adding to maintenance costs incurred by wear and tear. The IdleAire system, which costs $1.25 an hour to operate, can offer drivers significant savings.
''I love it and I think it's absolutely fabulous,'' said David Allen, 56, who had a cargo of Tyson chicken. Mr. Allen said he had tried IdleAire at other rest stops, and recalled how his occasional road companion, a 6-year-old daughter, was delighted that she could plug in her laptop.
Bobby Bishop, 25, a hauling paper products from Alabama to New York, thought IdleAire might help him sleep better. ''It'd probably cut down on vibrations and noise,'' he said.
But not everyone shares their enthusiasm. Some drivers wondered if their fleet owners would pay for IdleAire, or if the system could lead to a shortage of parking spots for drivers who chose not to use it.
As for Mr. Heinrich, he said he would be more enthusiastic if IdleAire included Playstation 2 video games. Other drivers said they had to let older trucks idle to keep fuel from gelling in cold weather. And some truckers were simply not enticed by the lure of cable and Internet access.
''I've been out here 30 years, and things haven't changed that much,'' said Charles Holman, a 62-year-old driver bound for Deptford with a load of Budweiser. ''I've got a library of books that keeps me occupied.''
But IdleAire is coming, like it or not. In his State of the State address last month, Governor McGreevey set a goal of reducing diesel soot pollution by 20 percent in the next 10 years. Meeting that goal could save 370 lives a year, according to the state Department of Energy, which also estimates that 10 percent of diesel emissions in New Jersey come from idling trucks.
''By any reckoning, New Jersey's challenges are among the most serious of all the states,'' Bradley Campbell, commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection, said. ''Diesel soot pollution is not only an environmental problem, it's a serious public health challenge.''
Mr. Campbell added that since New Jersey plans to retrofit 11 percent of its diesel fleet with modern filters, systems like IdleAire will be most useful in tackling another side of the problem: pollution from out-of-state trucks.
''For that segment of the diesel fleet, because they're transient and spend a relatively small fraction of their time in the state, there's more return than retrofits,'' he said.
IdleAire's arrival is also timely because federal legislation, effective Jan. 4, has extended the time that truckers are required to rest between long hauls. Until last year, drivers had to take 8 hours off for every 10 hours spent driving. The Department of Transportation changed the ratio to 10 hours of off-duty time for every 11 hours behind the wheel. And it all adds up: more hours of off-duty means more idling engines.
When IdleAire comes to Paulsboro, it will be at the forefront of efforts to reduce diesel soot in the state. But one variable remains. Truck drivers are creatures of habit; it's hard to tell how readily they will swap tradition for technology.
''I think it's a good idea, but there are going to be problems just like anything else,'' said Raymond Rose, 59, a road veteran and former truck driving instructor.'' ''Truck drivers are a pain in the neck. You can't get two truck drivers in a room that are going to agree about anything.''
ROAD AND RAIL
