FOUR years ago, I was quietly eating breakfast in the apartment my brother Andy shares with our mother in Port Elizabeth, South Africa, when he shoved back his cereal bowl and turned to me. ''All night I had a leopard on my brain. It wouldn't let me sleep. Let's go look for it,'' he announced, in that abrupt way he has. My brother jumped up, ready for leopard action.
''Sure,'' I said, ''let's go look for your leopard,'' not knowing yet whether he meant under the bed or somewhere else. But usually I'm happy to go along with whatever ideas my brother has.
Through childhood and adolescence, Andy and I became each other's best companions, roaming bush trails together in the Eastern Cape of South Africa. Those wanderings taught me things I didn't know I was learning: trust, the value of quiet companionship, self-amusement and a wide-ranging curiosity. All values that travel well.
But when Andy, who is three years younger than I, turned 19, schizophrenia knocked him back, and our bush walks ended. He spent the 1980's and early 90's roaming the corridors of South African mental hospitals instead. That period coincided with my political exile in the United States, after I'd fled an apartheid-related military call-up. For over a decade my brother and I became absentees from each other's lives.
But in recent years, as South Africa and Andy's mental health have both stabilized, some of my happiest travels have been voyages of return, quests to reignite not just an old brother love, but the aimless pleasures of our bush walks. Aimlessness is different from pointlessness: it often has a point, you just can't know it in advance.
My life, these days, feels clotted with purpose, and a nostalgic aimlessness has become my vacation ideal. Andy, on his good days, has a great passion for life, but that passion is liberated from the need to get anything specific done. So I relish the chance for bush wanderings in the company of this enthusiastic man who -- now in his mid-40's -- has never held a job or heard of multitasking.
''So what you think,'' Andy said, downing the first of the day's three liters of Coke to counter his dulling medication. ''How about we call the farmer, get permission to look for the leopard, then see what we can find?''
I was still playing catch-up. You don't get leopards anywhere near a metropolis like Port Elizabeth. No, Andy corrected me, some 30 miles away, a farmer had spotted a bushbuck carcass wedged into an acacia tree in a ravine. That could only mean stray leopard.
The farmer, when I called, gave us permission to roam. He mentioned a cave at the far end of the ravine: ''Maybe that's its lair.'' Then he guffawed. ''Of course, they're so damned cunning, even if it's there, you'll never see it.''
I laughed along with him. Of course, we wouldn't. Seeing it wasn't the point. The leopard that had weighed all night on Andy's brain was simply my brother's way of saying ''I'm feeling cooped up in the apartment. Let's go bush walking'' -- the way we used to in unison 30 years ago, when we both craved escape from our nine-member household and a claustrophobic school.
At the farm with the leopard kill we found a note pinned to the barn door. The farmer had gone to tend to some sheep. The note sketched directions to the cave: about a six-mile hike. For an hour, we climbed through the ravine's jagged north end. The silence felt light and wonderful, broken only by a blast of unprintable abuse heaped down on us by clifftop baboons.
Then the farmer's fox terrier joined us. A yappy, nosy, neurotic little dog that kept rushing ahead and scaring everything. The farther we hiked, the more annoying the terrier became. So when we encountered a jackal-proof fence spanning the ravine, Andy and I scaled it, leaving the mutt yowling on the other side.
We pressed on, accompanied mile after mile by the ruckus of the thwarted dog. The cave, when we reached it, released a rich stink of hyrax (rock rabbit) dung. But no traces of leopard: no carcass, no bones, no tracks. Any big cat would have fled by now, scared off by that car alarm of a mutt. I wished the leopard would emerge, if only to eat the dog.
The yapping stopped when, tracking back, we rescaled the fence. We'd no sooner clambered down than I felt a shadow skim low over us -- a shiny black eagle, perhaps reading my mind and pondering whether to nab the terrier.
No such luck. The immense bird angled away, landing on the ridge above. It began flapping wildly, wings battering the ground. Andy and I quickly concluded that the eagle was in trouble, probably snagged by a sheep farmer's trap. My brother was already scooting up the ravine's face, the terrier and me following. I'm not sure what we intended to do -- a black eagle boasts a seven-foot wingspan and a flesh-shredding beak. But Andy has a well-honed instinct for rescue.
As we reached the eagle, it broke loose and soared away. I bent down to check the trap only to discover a hole with some shrill creature shrieking deep inside it. The eagle had obviously impaled an animal with one talon and gotten into a flapping-versus-digging match with its prey-to-be. While I was taking all this in, the terrier dashed between my legs and plunged down the hole, emerging, after a brief snarly fight, with a hyrax clamped between its jaws. The dog gave the creature three neck-breaking shakes then smugly trotted off.
I was mortified. We'd snatched a meal from the eagle's talons and handed it on a plate to this dreadful dog.
At the ravine bottom, the terrier began to dig a hole to bury its booty for a later feast. Andy, meanwhile, had other plans: he'd decided the dead rock rabbit would make a perfect gift. His pal Bruce from mental hospital days had taken up taxidermy. Andy always kept an eye out for dead animals to give his friend. Mostly what he brought back was road kill in iffy states of decomposition. What a lucky break to have this fresh, unblemished specimen: perfect to skin and mount.
Andy made a rush for the carcass, only to see the dog grab it and race away. Thus we proceeded all the way down the ravine, the terrier hell bent on burying the corpse, my brother on exhumation. Each time Andy launched another sneak attack, the dog would hastily dig up the rock rabbit again. By the time we reached the farmhouse, the corpse had suffered so many muddy burials that it looked totally sordid.
Exhausted, Andy and I sat down for tea and bananas on a log. As we ate, my brother came up with one of his typical sidebars of creaturely information. A biologist he knew was researching black eagle nests in the mountains north of Pretoria. Amid the heaped rock rabbit skeletons, she kept finding unrecognizable bones. With a veterinarian's help, she eventually deduced that the bones belonged to poodles, plucked from the elite suburb bordering the mountains. Anxious about tarnishing the eagles' local reputation, the biologist decided, in her report, to label all poodle bones as ''unidentified mammalian remains.''
''The nests were littered with Fifi femurs,'' Andy said, adding, with just a hint of loser's gruffness, ''sadly, no evidence of fox terriers.''
We'd failed to get even a sniff of a leopard. And my brother had lost his tussle over the corpse that would have made a thoughtful gift. But on the drive home, we agreed it had been a great bush walk. Just like old times, when dad or mom would drop us off in the middle of nowhere, promise to pick us up at that tree over there in 10 hours, and we'd be off, vanishing together into a perfectly aimless day.
Essay ROB NIXON is the Rachel Carson professor of English at the University of Wisconsin at Madison.
