Even as the top-ranked doubles team in the world, Mike and Bob Bryan rarely play in the spotlight. They joked earlier this week that the only television time they have is on the Tennis Channel.
But on Saturday, ESPN2 cameras and a crowd of 5,327 at the Mohegan Sun Arena focused on their every move as the United States played Austria in the first round of the Davis Cup.
They seized their moment. It just did not last very long.
The Bryans, identical twins from Camarillo, Calif., dispatched Jurgen Melzer and Julian Knowle in straight sets, 6-2, 6-1, 6-4, clinching the three-of-five-match series for the United States, which leads, 3-0, with two singles matches left on Sunday.
Expedience trumped patriotism. The match lasted just 86 minutes.
''It's great to have a day dedicated to you,'' Bob Bryan said.
The United States has won 28 straight Davis Cup first-round matches on home soil, but has not won a Davis Cup championship since winning its 31st in 1995. [The United States will play Sweden, which clinched a victory over the defending champion, Australia, when Jonas Bjorkman defeated Mark Philippoussis, 7-5, 6-2, 6-2, on Sunday in Adelaide, Australia.]
After Bob Bryan fired a match-ending service winner at Melzer, the brothers leaped in the air and bumped chests, their signature gesture of joy. They paraded around the court and passed an American flag back and forth to teammates Andy Roddick and Robby Ginepri, who gave the United States a 2-0 lead on Friday with their singles victories.
In the reverse singles pairings Sunday, Roddick is scheduled to play Melzer and Ginepri will meet Stefan Koubek. But because the matches are now an afterthought, Roddick might defer to one of the Bryans.
United States Coach Patrick McEnroe said he thought it best to enlist men who play doubles for a living instead of those from the singles ranks. Last year, James Blake and Mardy Fish lost a two-set lead against Goran Ivanisevic and Ivan Ljubicic of Croatia. That gave Croatia a 2-1 lead and it won the series, 4-1, to oust the Americans in the first round for just the sixth time. The United States is 13-17 in doubles since 1992.
The Bryans won the confidence of their coach when they won in their Davis Cup debut last fall in a qualifying series victory over Slovakia.
''It's really relaxing to the other guys,'' McEnroe said. ''The other guys know they can focus on what they need to do. These guys give us the best chance of winning the doubles. That outweighs having singles guys step in.''
The Bryans, the oldest players on the American team at 25, had little trouble with the Austrians, who have never won a Davis Cup title.
Melzer smashed his racket after a poor return in the second set, but the anger seemed futile. It was a mismatch on paper, too. The Bryans won the 2003 French Open and made the final of the Australian Open last month. Melzer is a singles specialist ranked 76th and Knowle has a doubles ranking of 38th.
The teams were on serve until Melzer double-faulted on game point to give the United States a 4-2 lead in the first set. The rout accelerated from there. The Bryans zipped through their service games. They lost their serve once, but they were already leading by 4-2 in the third set. Bob Bryan, a left-hander with the bigger server of the two, was particularly impressive, nudging the radar gun to 139 miles an hour just one day after Roddick hit a record 150 m.p.h. serve.
''I was blowing my own mind,'' said Bryan, who has never served faster.
The Bryans also kept the Austrians off balance with aggressive service returns.
''They were just too good,'' Melzer said. ''There was no chance for us.''
Austrian Coach Gunter Bresnik used Melzer in place of Alexander Peya. Peya had a sore wrist and Melzer was impressive in building a two-set lead before losing his match Friday against Ginepri. That was among Bresnik's last moves as coach. He retired Saturday and said Thomas Muster would probably take over as Davis Cup coach.
Meanwhile, the Bryans said they hoped to qualify for the United States Olympic team. They could become the first American brothers to play Olympic tennis since Joseph and Arthur Wear, the great-great-uncles of President Bush. They played in the 1904 Games.
TENNIS
