SAVING ON BAGGAGE -- Luggage Concierge, which ships travelers' baggage and saves them the effort of carrying it, is taking 15 percent off its rates on any baggage shipped round trip to vacation destinations in California, Arizona or Florida from any United States location. Ask for the Direct to Sunshine package. It will also take 20 percent off its rates on skis and snowboards shipped domestically when travelers use the service for other baggage, under its Winter Ski Escape deal. Each offer is good through April 15. A 40-pound medium-size suitcase shipped with three-day ground service from New York to Florida costs $69 without the discount, $58 with it. Bags are picked up and returned to the customer's home. For a quote on rates, call (800) 288-9818.
AVERAGING IT OUT -- The Peninsula New York, to mark its 15th anniversary, has a 55th on Fifth Family Package available Friday through Sunday through April 11. The name comes from the location of the 239-room hotel, on Fifth Avenue at 55th Street. Up to four people can book a Grand Luxe room for $555 and get a connecting deluxe room for $15 more (plus tax). Guests have use of the gym and pool, a ride to the theater district and bottled waters. Packages are limited; (800) 262-9467 or www.peninsula.com.
PLENTY OF PARKS -- Beginning March 1, a $50 pass covering admission to more than 380 national parks will be on sale at www.nationalparks.org/oia or at (888) 467-2757. The pass is good for one full year after it is used for the first time and can be personalized with up to two names. It covers an entire vehicle and its occupants at parks with per-vehicle admission fees and the spouse, parents and children of the pass holder at parks that charge per visitor. Fees for camping, tours and other extras are not covered by the pass. Most of the revenue will go to preserving and improving the parks. A percentage of the proceeds will be given to the Outdoor Industry Foundation, a nonprofit branch of the Outdoor Industry Association, for use in programs that encourage outdoor recreation.
A HAMPTONS BREAK -- If you can't afford to go to eastern Long Island in the summer, try Hamptons Restaurant Week -- actually a Sunday-to-Sunday stretch that goes from March 28 to April 4. Participating restaurants, including Della Femina and Nick &amp; Toni's in East Hampton and the Plaza Cafe in Southampton, will serve $19.95 three-course meals all night (except on Saturday, when it's from 6 to 7 p.m.). Wine is extra. Lodgings have rates starting at $50 a night at the Enclave Inns in Bridgehampton, Southampton and Wainscott; (877) 998-0800. And the Hampton Luxury Liner, a bus that links Manhattan with the far end of the island, will have discounted one-way fares of $19.95 that week. For a listing of participating businesses, visit www.hamptonsrestaurantweek.com.
JOSEPH SIANO
TRAVEL ADVISORY
