IF continuity is the biggest friend of team play, then a two-year college where players shuttle in and out in such a condensed time frame presents a particular challenge.
How do you run an athletic program when teammates meet and say hi and goodbye at precisely the point when most college athletes are only halfway through their collegiate careers? Even in high school sports, it's the four-year arc that is the rule and in the pros, with long-term contracts and salary caps making player movement cumbersome, the tenure of individual players has stretched out.
Not so the two-year college.
''Not having kids more than two years is difficult,'' said Winston Nicholas, the athletic director at Westchester Community College in Valhalla and the college's basketball coach. ''Right when you really get going and time runs out.''
Westchester Community College has nine different athletic teams, and compounding the challenge from an administrative perspective, is that while all the teams play in the Mid-Hudson Conference of the National Junior Athletic Association, the teams compete on the Division 1, 2 and 3 levels.
The spread in the talent level and the tenor of the competition between divisions is considerable.
The Division 1 athletes, in sports like basketball, are using their two-year-college experience essentially as a way station to prove themselves, to do well enough academically and to get a scholarship to a four-year school.
Some of the best players in the county played at Westchester Community College, and then went on to schools like St. John's, Wagner and Iona. Division 3 athletes are less serious about pursuing the sport past their time at Westchester Community College and rarely get scholarships, Mr. Nicholas said. Division 2 (baseball at Westchester Community College) lies somewhere in the middle, he said.
Mr. Nicholas said that because so much can be at stake, the players generally come into the basketball program willing to condition and learn quickly. Though the time frame can be more of a challenge in Division 3, even in Division 1 there is not a natural institutional memory within the team itself that allows a junior or senior to get a freshman or sophomore up to speed on a certain play-set. As a result, Mr. Nicholas doesn't alter play-sets from year to year.
''We can get five guys, 6-foot-10, and the system will be the exact same,'' he said. ''With compressed time, the coaching staff has to be able to anticipate the exact questions the team will ask. They have to know just what they'll be walking into.''
Though more of a free-flowing running game seems like a natural, Mr. Nicholas said that he feels a responsibility to help his players showcase their talents to Division 1 schools.
They can best do that, he said, only by proving they can play in a structured setting.
The temptation of rolling the ball out on the court and telling all the newcomers to figure it out themselves while running up and down the court would do them a disservice, he said.
''We have to showcase basketball brains,'' Mr. Nicholas said. ''Division 1 coaches have to see that these players can read defenses.''
Such teaching can be challenged further in soccer, Mr. Nicholas said, which tends to attract a large number of foreign students, not all of whom get their paperwork done so that they can arrive by the start of the season in late August, compressing time even further.
As a coach, Mr. Nicholas added, he's quick to remind his team of the success players before them have had winning games and getting Division 1 scholarships, giving the team the instant sense of their shared history that they might normally get from upperclassmen back in the dorms.
Not only aren't there upperclassmen at Westchester Community College, but students also commute, so there aren't dorms to go back to.
Fortunately, as far as Westchester Community College is concerned, many of the teams they play are faced with the same challenges.
Also, at least for Mr. Nicholas on the basketball court, there is another advantage -- ''Wins tend to pull teams together quickly.''
FOR THE RECORD E-mail: Fuchs@nytimes.com
