IN an election year, there is no mistaking which side Ronald J. Klein is on.
Mr. Klein, a partner at Sachs Sax Klein, a law firm in Boca Raton, Fla., is also the Senate Democratic leader in the Florida Legislature, and often has to bow out of work meetings so he can fly to Tallahassee for legislative sessions or meetings with constituents. And in the last six months, three Democratic presidential contenders -- Gen. Wesley K. Clark, Senator John Kerry and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman -- have all dropped in on him at work.
But when employees at his firm ask about his specific political views, he is quiet, Mr. Klein said. ''I'm the first to talk about sports or movies in the workplace,'' he said. ''But politics is a personal thing. You certainly don't want to offend anybody.''
For politically active business leaders, navigating between the campaign and workplace worlds can be tricky, especially in a presidential election year.
''We're living in a very emotionally charged political environment,'' said Morris L. Reid, a political consultant who was an assistant to Ronald H. Brown, the secretary of commerce in the Clinton administration who died in a plane crash in 1996. ''If you're leading a company, you don't want people to feel pressured to support a cause that they might not believe in.''
But Mr. Reid said some chief executives may feel compelled to introduce their political beliefs at work, particularly at heavily regulated companies. ''Executives who have a business reason for supporting a candidate may feel the need to educate their employees,'' he said.
Indeed, new campaign finance laws, which force candidates to rely more on individual contributions, are leading some business leaders to work harder than ever to solicit donations from employees for candidates and political action committees, said Larry Noble, executive director of the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonprofit research group in Washington that tracks campaign donations. ''It's becoming standard operating procedure for chief executives in some industries to send out letters soliciting donations to a PAC or a candidate,'' he said.
J.Smoke Wallin, director and executive vice president of National Wine and Spirits Inc. in Indianapolis, a beverage distributor, said he felt that it was part of his job to encourage his company's 1,600 employees to become involved in politics. He said that he periodically encouraged employees to contribute to an industry PAC, the Wine and Spirits Wholesalers of America, if they could afford it, and that he was constantly telling the rank and file why President Bush is good for the industry.
''It's good for my employees to know how certain candidates stand on the issues,'' he said. ''Supporting the wrong candidate could hurt the industry and the company they work for.''
But other politically active executives choose to tread lightly in the workplace.
Christine J. Toretti-Olson, chairwoman and chief executive of the S.W. Jack Drilling Company, is a Pennsylvania representative to the Republican National Committee and a member of the National Petroleum Council and the secretary of energy's advisory board. Since 1990, Ms. Olson has given more than $750,000 to the Republican Party and Republican candidates on the national and state levels. In 2002, she established a training program for Republican women in Pennsylvania that prepares them for careers in politics.
Ms. Olson says she has also often stepped away from the day-to-day aspects of her position as chief executive to work for the Bush campaign. But she will go only so far in expressing her political beliefs to her employees, she said.
''If someone asks me, I may tell them why I think supporting Bush is good for the company,'' she said. But, she added: ''I would never say, 'You guys need to go out and vote for George Bush.' It would be very presumptuous of me to think that everyone thinks the way I do.''
Some politically active chief executives may announce their beliefs or bite their tongues, depending upon the audience. Robert Smith, president and chief executive of Aligo, which creates software for mobile technology, is an openly gay Democrat who says he is highly involved in the Human Rights Campaign Fund.
He divides his time between his company's headquarters in San Francisco and its office in Denver, and finds that employees' political beliefs run the gamut. ''We've got the staunchest of Republicans on our staff, and we've got people so left that they ask me, 'Why don't we have a socialist government in America?''' Mr. Smith said.
When he is in Colorado talking to employees and venture capitalists, many of them Republicans, Mr. Smith said, he is often silent when conversations turn political. But in San Francisco, where most members of the staff lean to the left, he is happy to engage in such talk.
Some executives say they do not mind stirring up some debate in the workplace. Art Coviello, president and chief executive of RSA Securities, a company in Bedford, Mass., that provides computer security software, has raised money for Mr. Kerry, and regularly entertains political debates on the job. ''Lunch discussions can get pretty heated,'' he said.
Mr. Coviello has invited some company employees to his New Hampshire home for fund-raisers for Mr. Kerry. The events were ''a great opportunity to hear a famous senator speak,'' he said. ''I didn't shove anything down their throats.''
POLITICAL and legal experts warn business leaders against pushing their agendas too far.
Last fall, Bristol-Myers Squibb, a major donor to Republicans, including President Bush, was criticized by four former executives as going too far in its solicitation letters to employees. But a spokesman for the company, Robert Hutchison, said such solicitations had always complied with federal election laws that prohibit actions that coerce political donations from employees.
John Myers, chairman of the labor and employment law division at Eckert Seamans Cherin &amp; Mellott, based in Pittsburgh, said he often advised executives to keep their political activities out of the workplace. While it is not illegal to encourage employees to support a political cause, he said, some states have laws that ban any adverse action against employees because of their political activities.
''If you give the impression that opposing or supporting a certain issue is frowned upon, you'll have employees believing that if they get fired, or something else bad happens to them, it must be attributable to their political view,'' he said.
But Mr. Klein, the Florida state senator, said he was more concerned about alienating employees than about being slapped with a lawsuit. ''You don't want to lose good employees because their political agendas don't mesh with yours,'' he said. ''That would be really stupid.''
Executive Life
