''Dadburn,'' Rummy fumed, squinting through his wireless glasses and waving his shotgun in the air. ''A trained ape could have found a little something in that stinking cesspool. Can you believe that tweedy blabbermouth David Kay came back without even a germ? Goodness gracious, wasn't he working for us?''
Dick Cheney didn't answer. He was even more immobile than usual, in his jungle cammies in the field of the Rolling Rock Club in Pennsylvania. Nino, his partner in electoral manipulation and fowl assassination, was at his side, smoking and sipping Montepulciano from a silver thermos.
One thing Rummy admired about Dick. He never cracked under pressure. Look at Martha Stewart. When her story fell apart, she turned into a trembly bowl of Jell-O, something she would never be caught dead serving.
Now, with the White House looking untrustworthy and desperate; with the national security team flapping around and pointing fingers at each other and, of course, Bill Clinton; with even the placid Laura getting testy; and with Newsweek reporting that the Justice Department is reviewing whether Halliburton was involved in paying $180 million in kickbacks to get contracts in Nigeria at a time when Dick Cheney was chairman, anybody else would be sweating.
Not deadeye Dick. His heavy lids didn't blink when it turned out he'd blown up a half-century of American foreign policy alliances on a high-level hallucination.
Here he was, fresh from presenting a crystal dove to an obviously perplexed pope, stolidly waiting for the club's pheasant wranglers to shoo the doomed birds into his line of fire. He had killed only 70 or so the last time out. But this time he was convinced that the bird population could sustain more casualties. Quack and Awe.
''This is our due,'' Dick said. He fired a shot: BLAM!
Dick loved Nino, even if he didn't understand how a justice so horrified by gay marriage could be so enchanted by La Bohème. Nino was always there to protect Dick's due -- from his presidency, er, vice presidency, to his absolute right to secrecy in all matters of public policy.
''Sometimes,'' Rummy said, in a growl that sent the 500 pheasants trapped in the net aflutter, ''when I watch the news and see another training film of Al Qaeda warriors in Saudi Arabia, I wonder if we should have just gone after them instead. But your pheasant-hunting pal Prince Bandar wouldn't have liked that. Heck, I'm too old for regrets.
''Here's how I see it: It's just as hard to connect the dots after as before. Intelligence is not perfect. Sometimes intelligence is not even intelligent. Analysts can only know what they think they know, what they know that they don't know, and what they think. Right, Dick?''
BLAM!
''The W.M.D.'s were just a decoy anyhow, not a smoking duck,'' Rummy ruminated. ''We knocked off Saddam to show we were the biggest, baddest junkyard dog around. We shouldn't be investigating ourselves with all these dagnab, goldarn, nosy Parker commissions. We should just tell everybody to buzz off.''
''Buzz off,'' said Dick. ''This is our due.'' BLAM!
The pheasants were scattered across the field like Plantagenets at the end of a Shakespearean tragedy.
''Dick,'' Rummy rumbled, ''I hear Rove and your daughters are putting you on a charm offensive, trying to humanize you. Why in the dickens would you want to be human?
''The kid should have come with us today. He's home hugging his feather pillow. He's worried about fancy-pants Kerry pushing his overblown heroics in Vietnam while Junior was occasionally showing up to fly jets defending Texas against Oklahoma. But my lord, it will be like shooting birds in a pen. Kerry's just Dukakis on stilts. All we need are a few gay nuptials outside the Boston convention hall and we're home free.''
Nino mumbled something bitter about states' rights and took another swig of Montepulciano.
''Rove needs to toughen up. Why fret over some J.F.K. wannabe who thinks he's going to sail to the White House on a sea of ketchup? Sure, he'll say you brainwashed Junior, exploded the deficit, let Halliburton fleece the government, let big business write environmental policy, turned the White House into a secret society, rewarded your rich friends and went to war on a wild surmise. But, golly, so what?''
''Yeah,'' Dick agreed. ''This is our due.'' BLAM!
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com
