WHAT is it we do out here on the East End in winter? It is a question many year-rounders are asked by our summer visitors. It's a question I ask residents of Block Island, R.I., when I visit there in the summer. I ask it only because I can't imagine living on an island where most of the businesses close after Columbus Day and is so remote that it can only be reached by ferry. On my most recent visit, I read a column in The Block Island Times written by a local who noted that it was a ''stupid'' question.
As a year-round local in Montauk, I disagree. I think it is nice that you show an interest.
Yes, it is sometimes quiet out here. But, more often, it's not. We are a social people who renew their friendships in winter with other locals who don't get to see each other as much as they would like in the height of the summer. We also clean our houses, which have been sorely neglected while we worked to make your vacation more pleasant. We have parties, share meals and while the fire roars in the hearth, we talk about you!
Yes, you. Remember that time you parked on my lawn to take a walk in the woods behind my house? That wasn't good. Sensing strangers in the area, the dogs barked for hours. Or how about the times you parked illegally in the beachside supermarket parking lot rather than pay the $10 fee to park for a day in the town-owned lot? While you were at the beach sunning yourself for three hours, we were driving around the lot looking for a place to park our cars so we could buy groceries before going to work. We weren't too happy about that.
Was it you who drank a full bottle of wine and then refused to pay for it because it wasn't properly chilled throughout the meal? And you there, do you remember the time you complained that your food was undercooked after you ate most of it? The woman who demanded two ears of corn before she had even opened the menu at a local seafood restaurant must have heard a ringing in her ears when we discussed her antics. For the life of us, we couldn't imagine a medical condition that requires a serving of corn. And for the record, the customer is not always right.
As a reporter for a local paper, I go to a lot of meetings in winter. It's interesting because I can sit and listen without having to offer an opinion. From my seat in the corner, I listen as people argue, confer and strategize for the coming season. Sometimes I feel like a character in a soap opera, but without the fancy clothes, bling-bling and big hair. We tend to dress down out here in the country. If we were to wear the latest fashions, we would surely be laughed out of town.
The East End is darker in the winter months. On clear nights, we count the stars and listen to animal sounds coming from deep in the woods. At dusk, we admire the sun setting behind trees that have dropped their leaves and been turned into stark, spindly sculptures created by nature.
Under the blackened sky, we watch out our windows as deer feed in our backyards. We listen to neighborhood dogs howl at the full moon. Taking long walks in the woods, we often come across opossums, foxes and the occasional owl. On a hike last month on the old road near the Montauk Lighthouse I came across two bucks standing on their hind legs fighting with their antlers entwined. They broke apart when I clapped my hands.
Sometimes, it can seem as if we are living on a nature preserve. In winter, we are forced to deal with uninvited creatures that are cold and hungry invading our homes. It is not unusual to find an earthworm that has found its way in from the cold wiggling on the bathroom floor, or a squirrel nesting in the attic. A dryer vent provides an easy entry for rodents who steal crumbs from the kitchen floor or bits of dog food from the pantry. Some of us trap and release the marauders, while others use deadlier methods.
If a stiff northeaster is predicted, we drive to the sea and watch as the ocean is whipped to a frenzy of white foam and huge waves. When a gale wind has blown through, we hug our jackets to ourselves and wrap a scarf around our heads to take a brisk walk on the winter beach to see what treasures the storm has washed up. Large pieces of driftwood and broken seashells end up coming home with us to add to our collections.
It is not unusual to be awakened by the buzz of a chainsaw as a neighbor stocks his woodpile. Snowstorms come rarely here, but when they do the sleds and inner tubes are dragged out of the garage. Everyone has their favorite hill for sledding, but the best is privately owned by a family who looks the other way when troops of parents and children trespass on their property.
And in February, the harshest month of all? We all leave town for vacation.
SOAPBOX Janis Hewitt lives in Montauk.
