WASHINGTON MUTUAL'S latest Westchester branch opened at the end of January in the Arcadian Shopping Center in Ossining. It is the fourth of eight new ''retail style'' branches that the Seattle-based financial services company has planned for the county, and part of a network of 40 such outlets that it is opening in the New York metropolitan area.
Commerce Bancorp, based in Cherry Hill, N.J., has also begun opening consumer-oriented branches in Westchester, with plans for six altogether. Its White Plains ''store,'' as the company calls its new branches, is also part of a rollout of 40 in the metropolitan area, said its chairman, Vernon Hill.
Another financial institution expanding in the county, Charter One Bank, based in Cleveland, opened its first Westchester branch in White Plains in December. The bank, which operates about 600 offices in nine states from Michigan to Massachusetts, plans to open a branch in Scarsdale by April. Julie Anne Robbins, senior vice president of finance at Charter One, said the bank planned further expansion in Westchester after that.
Webster Bank, which is based in Waterbury, Conn., and has been expanding in Fairfield County, opened a 3,500-square-foot branch in the village of Scarsdale in November. It plans to open two more Westchester branches this year, in Rye and in Yonkers. In all, it may open as many as 20 Westchester branches within the next two or three years, said John Spear, Webster's senior vice president for retail development.
Finally, Trustco Bank of Glenville, Schenectady County, has opened three branches in Westchester: in Briarcliff Manor, Bedford Hills and Elmsford. It plans to open another three county branches later this year, said Robert Leonard, a vice president.
In the wake of a rash of bank mergers and consolidations in recent years, the metropolitan New York area has become a prime target area for the new-style branches, Mr. Hill of Commerce Bank explained. He said that financial institutions like Washington Mutual and Commerce Bancorp saw an opportunity brought about by a perception that giant commercial banks born of the mergers were not focused on individual depositors or small businesses. He described the region as ''underbanked compared to the rest of the nation.''
Banks, which shifted their focus in the 1990's away from their branches to A.T.M. banking and, later, the Internet, have realized that their clients still want to do at least some banking in person, according to Ms. Robbins of Charter One. Hence, the focus on branch expansion now, she said.
Marsha Gordon, president and chief executive of the Business Council of Westchester, formerly the Chamber of Commerce, said the banks' expansion reflected recent economic growth in the county in general and particularly in its cities.
In addition to offering the usual services, many of the new branches are designed more like stores than traditional bank branches, and they are selling products like insurance and mutual funds as well as calculators, books and bank-branded merchandise. Indeed, the branches are based on the low-pressure marketing used by retailers like the Gap and Starbucks, and they bear little resemblance to branches of yesteryear, observed David Firestein, a principal and regional director for Northwest-Atlantic Real Estate Services in White Plains.
''They're not your grandfather's bank branches anymore,'' said Mr. Firestein, whose company represents Washington Mutual in finding sites for branches.
In the case of Washington Mutual, which acquired Dime Bancorp in 2002, the branches are being developed and furnished in the company's ''occasio'' style of retail banking. The word is Latin, meaning ''favorable opportunity.''
INTERIORS of occasio stores, which are usually 3,500 to 4,000 square feet, Mr. Firestein said, are designed to ''reduce barriers between customers and bank employees.'' They have open floor plans with colorful centers of activity offering loans, insurance or other products. There are no roped-off areas, vaults or plexiglass teller windows, and browsing is encouraged.
Bank employees are dressed in khakis and blue or white casual shirts, as opposed to dark suits. The employees do not count or dispense money, leaving cash deposits and withdrawals to be handled by automated teller machines. Employees greet customers at the entrance and direct them to service areas.
Besides its Ossining site, Washington Mutual has opened occasio branches in Mount Kisco on South Moger Street, in New Rochelle on North Avenue and in Yonkers at Getty Square. It plans to roll out retail banking outlets in Eastchester, Hartsdale, Mount Vernon and Port Chester later this year. There are four former Dime branches in the county (in White Plains, Mamaroneck, Harrison and Scarsdale) that are larger than the new occasio branches.
For its new outlets, Washington Mutual, sometimes shortened to WaMu, has leased property in busy shopping centers, with the goal of attracting the customer going to a Starbucks, supermarket or dry-cleaning establishment. Northwest-Atlantic Real Estate, Mr. Firestein said, searches for sites where people can run several errands, including banking, in a single outing.
''It's part of WaMu's effort to reinvent the banking business, to make it more consumer friendly in a period when everyone is always multitasking,'' said Mr. Firestein, whose company's other clients include Starbucks and Costco. ''The idea is to park the car only once.''
Commerce Bank takes a different tack when seeking real estate for its new branches. ''Our prototype is a free-standing, one-story building with parking and drive-throughs,'' Mr. Hill said. Commerce Bank, which purchases its sites, eschews shopping centers and looks for one-acre sites close to residential areas, a food market, dry cleaners and other service establishments.
Commerce's White Plains branch, which opened last fall on Mamaroneck Avenue next to a Food Emporium and across the street from new apartment construction, is typical of its latest branches. They have white brick and glass exteriors and a red ''C'' on one side, said John Tolomer, a senior vice president and Commerce's market manager for Westchester.
In White Plains, Commerce purchased and razed a diner that had been operating on the city's main street for many years, building the new branch in the center of what had been the parking lot.
Commerce's other new sites in the county, which also involve demolishing existing buildings, include two in Mamaroneck on Boston Post Road, one opposite the Jefferson Valley Mall in Yorktown, another in Mount Kisco and one in Chappaqua.
Commerce's branches are open seven days a week, with weekday hours from 7:30 a.m. to 8 p.m. Lollipops and dog biscuits are doled out at the drive-up windows; inside, customers have free use of an automatic coin-counting service.
Ms. Robbins at Charter One said her bank uses either free-standing space or stores near other retailers. In New York state, Charter One's focus so far has been in areas around Buffalo, Rochester and Albany.
Like the other banks, Webster is choosing highly visible locations for its new branches, which can be in shopping centers or among stores in downtown areas. Its Yonkers branch will be a 4,000-square-foot free-standing unit on a separate site, sometimes referred to as a pad, in front of a Bed Bath and Beyond store on Central Park Avenue. ''Generally, a pad next to a shopping center is what we look for,'' Mr. Spear said. ''But finding the appropriate site is sometimes difficult in Westchester because there's not a lot of new construction taking place.''
Despite a shortage of available properties, Westchester is an ideal location for bank expansion, he said, because of its demographics. It offers both middle- and high-income depositors -- as well as small and medium-size businesses -- ''the perfect combination for an expanding bank,'' Mr. Spear said.
Commercial Property
