FOR the first time since the late 1990's, the banking industry seems to be bitten by the merger bug.
Over the last few months, Bank of America has announced that it is buying FleetBoston Financial. Then J.P. Morgan Chase agreed to acquire Bank One. Last week, there were reports that a combination of Citigroup and Deutsche Bank had been under serious consideration.
Thomas K. Brown, the chief executive of Second Curve Capital, a financial services research and money management firm based in Manhattan, talked last week about the wisdom of bank mergers. Following are excerpts from the conversation:
Q. Please briefly review banking conditions over the last few years.
A. Bank earnings suffered in 1999, 2000 and 2001 due to high credit losses and acquisitions that had been made in the 1994 to 1998 period.
Then we had a great period, beginning in 2002 and accelerating in 2003, of an earnings recovery driven by lower credit losses, improving net interest margins, the mortgage refinancing boom and the fact that the banks weren't doing stupid acquisitions.
The economic fundamentals are improving, and that is by far the most important variable for the industry over all. Credit losses should continue to decline, and loan demand should be improving, along with net interest margins.
But part of the core business, taking in deposits, is looking tougher.
Q. Do you expect more bank mergers?
A. There will be more mergers this year, and more ill-considered ones. Investment bankers are out there urging people to get going. On the other side, the sellers are saying that the business is tough, we may not be able to grow at an attractive rate anymore. Also, price-to-earnings multiples in the banking industry have compacted, which makes it easier for the large banks to make big acquisitions than it has been over the last three years. So, the stars are aligned, which in this case is not a good thing.
Q. Why don't you find big bank mergers appealing? Doesn't size matter in this business?
A. The bigger the banks get, the less responsive they are to their customers. Also, and this is true in the United States, the bigger the deal, the less due diligence gets done.
To do a proper amount would potentially expose the fact that a transaction is about to happen. The due diligence in the Fleet/B. of A. deal, for example, was a joke.
As far as size is concerned, big is a relative term. When a $20 billion bank wants to buy a $10 billion bank, that is a big deal. If the acquiree is more than 25 percent of the size of the acquirer, the risk of that deal destroying value for shareholders goes up exponentially.
Q. You manage about $400 million worth of money in financial services companies. Is any of that money invested in big money center bank stocks?
A. We owned the money center banks in 2002 and 2003 on the basis of a recovery in credit quality and a return to their normalized level of earnings. We own none of them today.
The investment play here, as it has been since 1985, is to buy midsized and smaller players who know how to operate and grow their core businesses. The biggest myth in the banking industry is the one surrounding economies of scale. There is nothing that says profitability improves with an increase in size. Warren Buffett has said repeatedly that diversification is protection from ignorance. I prefer to own the banks that are not ignorant.
Q. Which banks are the best in breed?
A. In my opinion, the best bank in the country is Commerce Bancorp of New Jersey. They grow their core deposits over 30 percent a year by offering great service against the big banks that don't.
Southwest Bancorp of Texas is another great bank. They have only been in business for the last 14 years, based in Houston and Dallas. They focus on the corporate market, and with loan demand coming back and interest rates moving higher, they should do well. They have been killing bigger banks like J.P. Morgan Chase that operate in those markets.
Another smaller bank we like is M&amp;T Bank, which is based in Buffalo. Warren Buffett is their second-largest shareholder.
Q. Were you surprised to hear that Citigroup and Deutsche Bank were talking about a possible deal?
A. Yes, I was. Back in November, Charles O. Prince, the new chief executive [of Citigroup], said that perhaps they were going to get out of more businesses than they were going to get into.
After hearing about this, I think Citi is going to do something else. They are under pressure to have more deposit funding of their U.S. assets. I would expect them to acquire another large depository institution in the United States. Given its size, however, there is probably not an entity that Citigroup could acquire that would itself be transforming.
MARKET INSIGHT
