IN a well-ordered musical universe, when a valued troupe was preparing to leave the scene, a worthy successor would be in the wings. Things rarely work that way, of course, as feast gives way to famine and -- just occasionally -- vice versa. But for the moment, at least, one remote yet important corner of our typically chaotic musical universe seems reasonably well ordered.
For 18 years, Anonymous 4 has shone as one of the few bright lights, perhaps the brightest, on the early-music scene in New York. But this quartet of female singers, specializing -- improbably -- in European medieval music, has announced that it will disband after this season.
''Improbably,'' because most of the liturgical works that loom so large in the group's repertory were male preserves in the Middle Ages and have not often been ventured by women since. So as its members disperse to pursue their independent ambitions, Anonymous 4 leaves behind the niche it largely created.
And eager to fill it are three hip and lively Scandinavian women, the Trio Mediaeval, which was formed here in 1997 and is now, after a hugely successful debut album, receiving a major international push. The campaign includes a second album from ECM and, as part of a five-city American tour, a concert at the National Cathedral in Washington on Tuesday and a New York debut at the Orensanz Center on Thursday.
Yet for all their similarities, Anonymous 4 and the Trio Mediaeval differ significantly (beyond mere numbers). The trio's members -- Anna Maria Friman, 31, a Swede, and Linn Andrea Fuglseth, 34, and Torunn Ostrem Ossum, 39, Norwegians -- were only dimly aware of Anonymous 4 when they joined forces, they said recently.
Speaking in fluent English over tea in the lounge of an Oslo hotel, they made a charming picture, huddled on a narrow sofa: a matched set. They wear their assertively color-coded hair -- blond, red and brown, by whatever acts of God or man -- in similar styles, fashionably close-cropped.
The night before, they had performed in a Swedish-sect church here, celebrating the release of their second album. The concert confirmed impressions of both recordings. All three singers, though highly individual in vocal color and approach, can function as high-flying sopranos, pure and bright. But Ms. Ossum, possessing a particularly wide range, anchors the harmonies with rich and velvety lower notes.
''We wouldn't be doing what we are if we didn't have Torunn's voice and flexibility,'' Ms. Friman said. ''Because all of us can sing high. That's not a problem.'' (Easy for her to say.)
Carrying self-effacement to absurd heights, the soft-  and seldom-spoken Ms. Ossum said, ''I always wanted to sing, but I didn't think I was good enough.''
It is at any rate sheer joy in singing that drew the women together through various choral experiences and that continues to drive the trio. The medieval repertory, if not quite incidental, is what happened to suit its purposes at the time. Ms. Fuglseth, the group's founder, had returned from studies at the Guildhall School in London with a stash of medieval English carols. The trio quickly added Norwegian folk songs, and it has since commissioned new works in a neo-medieval style, which figure prominently in its current repertory and on its new recording.
In contrast, as fine as the distinction may seem, Anonymous 4 describes itself as more repertory-driven than voice-driven. ''Especially in our early years, we would look for program concepts, but you have to know what's out there,'' said Susan Hellauer, a founding member. ''The Trio Mediaeval seems to be looking for things that will make a more vocally varied program.''
Anonymous 4's choices of repertory tend to follow Ms. Hellauer's musicological bent. But Johanna Maria Rose and Marsha Genensky, the two other original members, provided the impetus for the quartet's latest recording, to be released on Tuesday: ''American Angels: Songs of Hope, Redemption and Glory,'' exploring the roots of American sacred music. Jaqueline Horner, who replaced Ruth Cunningham in 1998, chooses much of the contemporary music.
Anonymous 4, founded in 1986, took its name -- as a joke -- from an unknown theorist of the 13th century, identified by scholars as Anonymous IV. The group has led a charmed life.
It was quickly taken on by a particularly scrupulous record label, Harmonia Mundi France. No accident there: ''We actually researched in advance,'' Ms. Rose said recently over snacks with the rest of the group at a restaurant on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. ''We wanted to know what the buyers in the record stores thought of the record companies. Who do you like working with? Who----''
''Who doesn't lie to you?'' Ms. Hellauer interrupted.
The group's first album, ''An English Ladymass,'' appeared in 1992, just as a worldwide chant boom was about to lift medieval liturgical music, and thus Anonymous 4, to unimagined heights of popularity. The album spent 76 weeks on Billboard's classical chart and sold 150,000 copies in its first two years -- an astounding success by classical (let alone medieval classical) standards. Fourteen recordings followed (and another is still to come), with sales totaling more than 1.2 million copies.
''There was definitely some kind of millennial thing going on there,'' Ms. Genensky said of the chant phenomenon.
And now ''American Angels'' may catch another unlikely wave, this time centered on shape-note singing. A tradition that attaches scale syllables (fa-sol-la-mi) to specific musical symbols as an aid to reading music, it has drawn wide interest from its appearance in the soundtrack of ''Cold Mountain.''
'' 'American Angels' had been in the works for about three years,'' Ms. Genensky said. ''We had no idea 'Cold Mountain' was coming out.''
So why is Anonymous 4 departing?
''A lot of little things happened at once last year, and we had to make a gut decision,'' Ms. Rose said. ''Was Anonymous 4 going to be these people, three of whom have been there from the beginning, or would it be the kind of group that, as people come and go, the name would stay?''
Ms. Horner elaborated: ''Some of us have individual projects we want to pursue. There was just some thought to exploring other options, a different path in singing or a different choice of where to live. We just wanted a little space. There's no Yoko -- that I know of, anyway.''
Ms. Genensky added: ''It's so amorphous that sometimes we forget why we're quitting.'' But there it is.
Like Anonymous 4, the Trio Mediaeval has had the good fortune to connect with a highly respected and adventurous label, ECM, which prides itself on the quality of its production and its high-concept packaging. The trio's new record is inscrutably titled, ''Soir, Dit-Elle.'' A collector may be forgiven for thinking that that was also the title of the first album, as several reviewers did at the time.
The actual title of that album, ''Words of the Angel'' (taken from the one contemporary number, by Ivan Moody), was inconspicuously printed in a lower corner. The cover was dominated by the words ''Soir, dit-elle'' (''Night, she said''), included as part of an image of the Virgin Mary from Jean Luc Godard's ''Histoire(s) du Cinéma,'' itself an inscrutable choice.
That first album -- which has sold more than 25,000 copies since its release in 2002, one-third of them in the United States -- also stirred mild controversy for its failure to include translations of the extensive Latin and Italian texts -- or for that matter, texts themselves for the familiar parts of the Mass. The omission, it turns out, is a matter of principle on the part of ECM and the trio's producer, John Potter.
''After years of wrestling with the problem,'' Mr. Potter, a former member of the acclaimed Hilliard Ensemble, explains on ECM's Web site (ecmrecords.com), ''I feel that literal translations are at best misleading, and at worst restrict the creative listening process by appearing to channel listeners' attention into meanings that are no longer there.'' Debatable, but let it pass.
Mr. Potter, who has known the trio since it first attended the Hilliard summer school in Cambridge, England, in 1998, is now an adviser of sorts. ''I feel like an uncle, really,'' he said in Oslo. He has steered the trio toward some medieval liturgical repertory, including much of that on the two recordings. But for the most part, Ms. Fuglseth said, ''We find our songs ourselves.''
The scholar in the trio's midst is Ms. Friman, who is working, in England, on a doctorate from York University, studying modern performance of medieval music with an emphasis on women's performance in the early-music revival. Citing Daniel Leech-Wilkinson's book ''The Modern Invention of Medieval Music,'' Ms. Friman describes the evolution in early-music interpretation from a vain pursuit of period ''authenticity'' through an ideal of ''historically informed performance'' to a frank admission that historically informed performance is essentially a creation rather than a re-creation. So little can be known about actual performance practice that conjecture, educated guesswork, rules the day.
Not only did the Trio Medieval have Anonymous 4 to pave its way; it now has that group's longtime management firm, Herbert Barrett, to coordinate its activities. Still, the trio faces major personal and professional challenges as its ambitions grow. Ms. Friman spends much of her time in England, and Ms. Fuglseth and Ms. Ossum have families with three children each.
The trio now performs some 50 to 60 concerts a year in addition to school events throughout Norway. It will probably feel pressure to increase both the number of concerts and the distances traveled. Anonymous 4, for example, has been performing about 70 times a year, throughout the United States and at international festivals (including the Bergen, in Norway).
''We haven't really sat down together, seriously discussing what we should do with the group and what our level of ambition should be, considering that two of us have big families and Anna has big studies,'' Ms. Fuglseth said. ''We just have to find a way of solving the challenge of how to plan these things. And we have decided we don't want to travel too much, to tire ourselves and feel a bad conscience toward our families.''
Ms. Friman added: ''One of the great things about the trio is that because we limit the number of concerts we do, we always really enjoy giving them. Giving concerts for us is not something that feels like you go to work and you do your normal thing. It's an event.''
The women had a foretaste of being managed when they were encouraged to change the name of the trio. They brainstormed -- Pure Voices, and the like -- but finally stood firm.
''We couldn't come up with anything else,'' said Ms. Fuglseth, who chose the name Trio Mediaeval in the first place because she liked the antiquated (and Norwegian) look of the combined ''ae'' character on the covers of her books of medieval carols. ''So if somebody thinks it's a bit dull, we're sorry, but we like it.''
Whatever the perils ahead, the women so far seem to be enjoying the trappings of fame. Their comments are refreshingly unstudied, and they seem to approach even tedious tasks with a sense of adventure. Good spirits prevailed as they lip-synched at length in a frigid churchyard for a music video, part of a program Norwegian television is making about them.
They appear to be ready for the changing of the guard. So are the members of Anonymous 4, though they face it sadly. But there is still plenty to divert them. Anonymous 4 will perform a program based on ''American Angels'' on Feb. 18 at Merkin Concert Hall, tour the nation, then return for its New York farewell, on May 16 at Corpus Christi Church on the Upper West Side.
Its members already look forward to regathering for an occasional project in the future. Meanwhile, they will undoubtedly be watching the Trio Mediaeval with avid curiosity, as will we all.
The latest recording from the female vocal quartet Anonymous 4, ''American Angels: Songs of Hope, Redemption and Glory,'' illustrates the practice of shape-note singing, also exemplified recently in the soundtrack of ''Cold Mountain.'' It is intended to help an unschooled congregation read and learn a hymn. The score for ''New Britain,'' an 1835 setting of ''Amazing Grace,'' shows triangular and square note-heads (for the scale syllables fa and la, each standing for two pitches) as well as ovals or circles (for sol, also two pitches). In the early, four-shape tradition, the scale runs fa, sol, la, fa, sol, la, mi (a diamond), fa. The congregation first sings the appropriate syllables, to fix the melody in the ear, then sings the words.
Trio Mediaeval  Angel Orensanz Center for the Arts, 172 Norfolk Street. Thursday at 8 p.m.
MUSIC
