TO thwart memory loss, Janet Walsh uses her left hand to brush her teeth.
''You have to work at it,'' said Ms. Walsh, who is right-handed. ''That exercises the brain.''
Writing a grocery list with the opposite hand, memorizing and retelling a joke, or balancing a checkbook without using a calculator also helps the middle-aged brain stay sharp, she said.
Ms. Walsh, 48, is a cheerleader for mental fitness. Keeping the brain in shape, she claims, is as crucial to staving off forgetfulness as going to the gym is to keeping the rest of the body in optimal condition.
Ms. Walsh, of Sands Point, is the founder and chairwoman emeritus of the Long Island Alzheimer's Foundation. She spent much of the last 18 years developing day services programs, support groups and a lecture series to help stimulate the minds of those in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease. Working as a volunteer, she built the nonprofit organization into the largest social service resource center focused on Alzheimer's and related memory disorders in the country. In November 2003, Ms. Walsh received the first National Leadership Award from the Alzheimer's Foundation of America. But she still had one more dream she wanted to fulfill.
''By the time people get to the Alzheimer's Foundation, they are already diagnosed,'' Ms. Walsh said. She wants to reach out to baby boomers and Generation X with memory-enhancement techniques.
''We have to start doing things for our brains, just like we do for our hearts, and just like for our other systems, decades before we worry about this disorder,'' Ms. Walsh said.
To help, last year she invested a million dollars in her Port Washington-based startup company, Memory Concepts. Its signature product, an interactive Web site called Memory Sparks (www.memoryconcepts.com) with several hundred exercises and drills, went online Jan. 30.
The cerebral calisthenics include matching word pairs, memorizing lists, and a symbol selection exercise that tones the working short-term memory and attention span.
Shane Bush, a neuropsychologist with a practice in Smithtown, developed the mental workout.
''Hopefully it will help to prevent decline,'' Dr. Bush said. ''It may help to further develop one's cognitive reserve so if disease does strike they have more reserve to draw on.''
Evidence has been mounting in the last 10 years, Ms. Walsh said, ''that people who have greater brain capacity, are more educated, or multitask or have more stimulation in their lives or are more resilient to neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease.''
Ms. Walsh noticed that friends and family members who had suffered strokes or head trauma were able, through rehabilitation, to drive, walk, talk and continue their lives. She wondered why the same techniques couldn't be used to ward off the brain-aging process.
''Why not increase brain capacity before the trauma so there is more brain to combat these diseases and disorders?'' Ms. Walsh said.
For Ms. Walsh, Alzheimer's has long been a personal puzzle. In 1971, at age 58, her father started showing signs of memory lapses. Soon he couldn't drive or go to work. He was told he had Alzheimer's four years later and spent his final years in the psychiatric unit at the Northport Veterans' Hospital. Her maternal grandmother, who lived in Ms. Walsh's childhood home, was determined to be senile.
Worried about the genetic legacy she may have inherited, in 1996, Ms. Walsh took part in the human genome project by giving blood for analysis and undergoing three months of genetic counseling. She said that because she carried the ''risk gene'' for Alzheimer's from both her mother and father, she had a 50 to 90 percent chance of developing the disease.
She also signed up for a brain study at New York University School of Medicine. For the last eight years, Ms. Walsh has undergone PET scans, M.R.I.'s, spinal taps and neurological and physical exams along with three to four days of cognitive testing each year.
''Even if in the end it gets me, I gave to science and maybe I helped someone else,'' she said. ''More importantly, I am going to know when I am starting to slip.''
Her drive to increase brainpower is based on a recent study that said new neurons, the parts of the brain affected by Alzheimer's, can grow into one's 60's or 70's.
''Typically most people stop expanding their brain at age 30,'' she said. ''They are set in their ways, even if they think they are the sharpest because they play bridge every day or they play chess every day or they play the piano every day. That becomes rote and that's not stimulating any longer.''
Learning new things, like a language or ballroom dancing, can invigorate the mind. Last year Ms. Walsh started oil-painting classes.
Physical exercise and a healthy diet are also critical to toning the mind, Ms. Walsh said. She walks three times a week, does strength training, takes multivitamins and, because depression is often linked to Alzheimer's, tries not to be overwhelmed by sadness. She overcomes sadness, she said, by her gift of gab, by practicing joke-telling, being very spiritual and going to therapy when necessary.
She is also eager for the mind-building program on her Web site, to produce concrete results. Ms. Walsh added, ''The next time you go to the grocery store we want you to be able to remember that list.''
Headhunter for Love
Michael Zuckerman, a lawyer from Manhattan, wanted to meet someone special. But Mr. Zuckerman, 63, was too busy to look. Divorced for three years, he had just ended a relationship. He had previously dated and hated it. So he contacted Terri Sloane.
''Just do it,'' he told Ms. Sloane, a matchmaker who runs a boutique dating service for highly educated, busy professionals ages 35 and up. ''You are in the business. Help me.''
Ms. Sloane, who splits her time between her Manhattan and Remsenburg homes, checked her database. She suggested Janey Alexander, 54, a reading teacher at Lawrence High School who was getting divorced. Mr. Zuckerman replied that a woman from the Island was ''geographically undesirable.''
But Ms. Sloane, who like Mr. Zuckerman grew up in Lawrence, didn't accept the bridge and tunnel excuse. She insisted that Ms. Alexander was his match. Seven months later, Ms. Alexander and Mr. Zuckerman were married.
''It couldn't have gone any better,'' said Mr. Zuckerman, who paid $5,000 for the matchmaking service and now lives in Woodmere with his bride.
Ms. Sloane, who is in her 50's, claims to have a sixth sense for knowing who belongs with whom and has been fixing up friends since she was in high school. When her mother became a widow at 47, Ms. Sloane went looking for a husband for her without telling prospective suitors what she was really after.
''I found a lovely man for my mom and they got married,'' she said. ''That started my matchmaking career.''
Until five years ago, matchmaking was just a hobby for Ms. Sloane. But she was introducing so many of her friends that had gotten divorced to their second or third husbands that she decided to hang up a shingle.
Her professional experience also helps her hone her Cupid's arrow. She culls lessons from work as an executive recruiter and has a master's degree in counseling.
''I am a headhunter for a serious love match,'' said Ms. Sloane, who also sells real estate part time. ''The people coming to me are not looking for dates. They are looking for a meaningful connection or a long-term commitment. They send me on a real search.''
Ms. Sloane, who also includes dating coaching in her $3,500 matchmaking package, starts by interviewing her clients. If she doesn't have anyone appropriate, she searches on the cocktail party circuit.
''I go to cultural events,'' Ms. Sloane said. ''I go to the openings of art galleries. I try to meet what you are looking for by putting myself in the environment of those types of people.''
Ms. Sloane said that 50 percent of her clients end up marrying or living with the match she selects for them. She credits her success to the old-fashioned approach, meeting through an introduction.
''It is harder to find the right match when you get older.'' said Ms. Sloane, who is divorced and dating. ''There are less to chose from and less appropriate people to chose from. But it only takes one. It's just finding the right one.''
LONG ISLAND JOURNAL E-mail: lijournal@nytimes.com
