THE call came at 3:47 a.m., but an hour late. The fire, at 4 Garden Place in Nutley, had already taken the lives of Dr. Rose Prystowsky, 82, and her caregiver, Carolyn Threadgill, 59. A third person, Dr. Milton Prystowsky, remains in critical condition at Saint Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston.
I would never have heard about the fire, or the remarkable family whose home it destroyed, had it not been for my mother, who called me after the paid obituary appeared in the newspaper.
''You must find out about that woman who died in the fire,'' she said. ''She sounded like an extraordinary woman: a doctor, at 82, and all five sons -- doctors.''
Nutley has had more famous residents, like Martha Stewart and Annie Oakley, but none wanted fame less and deserved it more than Milton and Rose Prystowsky. He was a pediatric cardiologist - among the first in the state -- and she was a child psychiatrist. But as a couple, they served as a role model for physicians everywhere.
''Together, I think the Prystowskys were one of the most altruistic couples in medicine I have ever known,'' said Dr. Leah Ziskin, a former deputy commissioner of public health.
Although they treated thousands of patients -- Milton made house calls, still, and Rose talked to everyone -- they practiced medicine on many levels. ''When Milton spoke about a disease, he talked about that disease in a social context, how it affected the family, the community, and the programs that were needed,'' said Dr. Robert L. Johnson, chairman of the pediatrics department at New Jersey Medical School and a former student of Milton's. ''Then he would go down to Trenton, press flesh, and attempt to get those programs accomplished. He was always out on the front lines, and Rose, too. They were obviously a wonderful team.''
Of the two, Milton was more the activist.
''Everybody takes Dr. Milton's calls -- even the president of Blue Cross and the White House,'' said Francine Reibman, vice chairwoman of the Children's Emergency Medical Fund of New Jersey.
But if Rose took a back seat, it was only because of temperament. Self-effacing and with quiet dignity, she was a no-nonsense worker. She was also funny -- ''but you had to have some intelligence to get Rose's jokes,'' said Bertram Warren, a past president of the New Jersey Psychiatric Association.
In an age when medicine is equated with managed care, and doctors with foreign cars bearing M.D. plates, the Prystowskys drove ordinary American cars, saw patients regardless of whether or not they weren't covered by insurance, and devoted themselves to two concerns: medicine and their family. Hobbies? Their son, Barry, a pediatrician, laughed. ''If I wanted to talk to my mother, I had to sit while she did the dishes,'' he said.
Born in Anderson, S.C., Rose, older than Milton by months, was the youngest of seven children. She joked about having learned anatomy from plucking chickens, but she learned about charity from her mother, a widow since Rose was 3.
''What size do you wear?'' Rose's mother once asked a man who entered the family store barefoot.
''I can't afford shoes,'' he said.
''I didn't ask you if you could afford shoes; I asked your size,'' she said, sending him home with shoes.
In 1941, Rose graduated from the University of South Carolina, and three years later from the Medical College of South Carolina, the only woman in her class. She married a classmate, Milton, and together they interned at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn, where Rose gave birth to a son. While Milton went on to do a residency at Johns Hopkins, Rose deferred.
''Those were the years when a resident was paid $16 a month - minus the $3 the government kept in taxes,'' said another son, Michael, chairman of the pathology department at Montefiore Medical Center and Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York.
To supplement their income, Rose worked in a research lab, during which time she also earned a master's degree in public health.
Lucky for New Jersey, the stipend Hopkins offered Milton to stay was inadequate for a family, and he accepted a more modest position in Nutley. Wearing his trademark bow tie, he made his first house call, but when he saw that the family could not pay for the medicine he had prescribed, he bought it himself -- the first of countless times.
Among his crowning achievements were his efforts to establish the Catastrophic Illness in Children Relief Fund, which provided money for families of severely disabled children -- above and beyond what insurance would pay -- and the state's first pediatric cardiology center. Although less successful, his work for the old Children's Hospital in Newark was equally brave.
Pat Carroll, executive director of Irvington General Hospital, recalls standing with Milton Prystowsky as the hospital was being dismantled -- ''and if you've ever seen a hospital close, it's tragic: children in wheelchairs and ambulances on the street'' -- and being impressed not only by his concern but by his resolve.
''He wasn't a shouter or a screamer but had a quiet resilience,'' Ms. Carroll said. ''He comes from an era in which physicians did everything. They worked hard and didn't give up until the job was done.''
Eventually, when their youngest son was 4, Rose advanced her career. Never mind still being among a tiny minority; the hardest part of completing her residency at Mount Sinai were the hours she spent in the Lincoln Tunnel while her five children waited at home for supper. When Eric, now a cardiologist and a consulting professor at Duke, graduated from Mount Sinai a decade later, all he could think about as his mother ''hooded'' him -- the process by which doctors receive their degrees -- was, ''My God, how did she do it?''
During the next four decades, her accomplishments -- as a doctor and a humanitarian -- rivaled those of her husband. She taught, saw patients privately and at clinics, helped establish child psychiatry programs at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, and was a president of the New Jersey Psychiatric Association (in 1990 and '91) and a winner of its Golden Merit Award in 1996. All the while she was a devoted mother, supervising her children's' school work -- 98 wasn't as good as 100 -- and doing domestic chores.
''On car trips, we'd barely make it out of the driveway before someone asked for a piece of her Southern fried chicken,'' said Michael.
Even after her sons grew up and left Nutley, she and Milton remained.
''Here was this wonderful couple who could have retired to Fiji and yet they stayed in their simple home in Nutley, never even considering retirement,'' said Ms. Reibman of the children's emergency fund.
But when Rose had a stroke, on Mother's Day in 1995, and eventually got a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease, their focus shifted. For Milton, the priority was now Rose. ''I'd ask him to teach a class or attend a meeting and he'd say, 'I have to go home and give my wife her medicine,''' said Ms. Carroll. ''When I talked with him about this, he said she had given him everything; it was the least he could do -- which is why this tragic death is just so sad.''
Eventually, the family hired Ms. Threadgill, and she too became a part of their tight-knit community. When she first started working for the Prystowskys, she had been grieving the death of a fiancé, but after countless discussions with Rose, her sorrow lifted. In later years, she credited Rose with having saved her life, and vowed to the couple's sons that she would never leave her.
So the pair -- Milton and Rose -- became a threesome: Rose slumped in her wheelchair, Milton and Carolyn pushing. ''I don't think there was ever a closer bond between a caregiver and a patient,'' one friend said.
Ms. Threadgill's life was celebrated on Jan. 10 at St. Matthew A.M.E. in Orange. The program paid special tribute to the Prystowskys, most of whom were there. On the previous Friday, Rose was buried. Although only close relatives were notified, the memorial chapel in Clifton swelled with shopkeepers as well as eminent physicians. The rabbi spoke eloquently, but perhaps the most fitting eulogy for Rose are her own words.
When asked why she did so much work for people who could afford so little, she answered simply, ''Because it needed to be done.''
JERSEY
