Marion Jones is back. Not all the way, but far enough to indicate that she will be sprinting at a gold-medal level by the Athens Olympics in August.
After a 17-month maternity leave, she returned to racing Friday night in the 97th annual Millrose Games in Madison Square Garden. She won, not majestically because there were runners close behind, but she showed that the mechanics were still there and, equally important, the fierce drive was still there.
The race, a 60-meter dash, was really too short for a female sprinter so tall (5 feet 11 inches) to unwind. For 40 or 50 meters, Jones seemed headed for defeat. But she found another gear and got her body a foot in front at the finish. She won in 7.21 seconds, the second-slowest time in the 14 years this distance has been run at Millrose. Chryste Gaines won last year in 7.23.
But time was not the main consideration for Jones. Racing was. Jones, 28, had to start racing somewhere.
''I felt comfortable,'' she said. ''There were some nerves. I just wanted to start running and be done with all the hoopla. I wanted to be like the other athletes and blend in. It's so difficult to do that these days.''
In fact, it was impossible. People followed her and stared at her, an unsurprising fate for someone who won five medals (three gold) in the 2000 Sydney Olympics and says she hopes to try for four or five in Athens.
Still, Jones was content with her night's work.
''I was able to maintain my composure and pull it through in the end,'' she said. ''I'm pleased with that. I'm not overly pleased with the time, but I'm going to sleep well. I'm happy to be back in the swing of things.
''My biggest fear coming in was, would I be able to click on that intense focus I have? I was able to do that with no problem. It must be like riding a bike.''
The sprints and hurdles, usually run early in the meet, were moved to the end, and Jones's race was the last of the night. That kept the crowd of 14,154 in the Garden until the racing ended, a rarity in the past.
The best performances came in the 60-meter hurdles races from Allen Johnson and Gail Devers, both Olympic and world champions. Johnson won the men's race in 7.43 seconds, a Garden and Millrose record. Devers, 37, took the women's race in 7.76 seconds, a Millrose record.
Johnson, Devers and shot-putter Christian Cantwell (69 feet 9 3/4 inches) became world leaders. Johnson received the Fred Schmertz Trophy as the meet's outstanding performer.
There were lesser-known men's winners: Hudson de Souza of Brazil in the Wanamaker Mile (4 minutes 2.93 seconds), Asafa Powell of Jamaica in the 60 meters (6.56 seconds), Germaine Mason of Jamaica in the high jump (7 feet 3 3/4 inches) and Berhanu Alemu of Ethiopia in the 800 meters (1 minute 50.27 seconds). Alemu, who beat David Krummenacker of the United States at 1,000 meters last weekend in Boston, did it again here in the 800.
De Souza ran the slowest winning time in the Wanamaker Mile in 31 years, but he was the only contender to stay with a pacesetter running a reasonable pace. Mason said he appreciated being invited because ''Jamaica doesn't really have indoor facilities.''
INSIDE TRACK
In new 60-meter races for New York high schools, JALEEL DAVIS of Boys and Girls in Brooklyn won the boys' race in 7.03 seconds and JESSICA CLARKE of Bergtraum in Manhattan the girls' race in 7.74.
TRACK AND FIELD
