THERE is grace under pressure, and then there is giving a graceful party when your mother has just died, the Securities and Exchange Commission is pursuing an accounting snarl involving the company of which you are chairman, Time Warner, and there is a snowstorm outside.
It helps if you are the unflappable Richard D. Parsons, a world-class people person. And if your wife of 35 years is at your side. And if Rémy Martin is floating the boat.
On a wintry weekday at 6:30 p.m., Mr. Parsons was welcoming board members of the Apollo Theater Foundation to his duplex penthouse in TriBeCa. His mother had died three days earlier, and her wake was the next day, but that was not a subject of conversation. Instead, he and his wife, Laura Bush Parsons, a child psychologist, made their guests comfortable. No snow was going to stop the party.
''As long as I'm here, that's all that matters,'' Mr. Parsons said.
He and his wife have his and hers causes, eight in all. That means receptions, balls, meetings, charity auctions and parties. ''It used to be that no one did anything in February,'' Mrs. Parsons said. ''And now it's changed. You could spend your life at these things.''
Meanwhile, at this thing, it was 7:30, and the waiters and waitresses had stopped passing tarts of spiced poached pear and sage sausage; glazed shrimp; spring rolls; and sweet-potato tarts. They began handing the 50 guests she-crab bisque in little glasses with tiny spoons. Right behind came the Cognac.
''Hey, they're paying for it,'' Mrs. Parsons said, ''so we love it.''
David D. Rodriguez, the executive director of the Apollo, was recalling the board meeting that afternoon. ''I was tap-dancing as hard as I could,'' he said.
The scaffolding is about to come down on the marquee on 125th Street, ending the first stage of renovation. Four years ago, the Apollo had 50 acts a year. Now it has 300 a year. The budget was $3 million. Now it is $10 million.
At 8, Mr. Parsons announced the buffet dinner. George Wein, the jazz impresario, was at a little table. ''Dick is an old friend,'' he said. ''And he really has his heart in this apartment.''
The open loftlike space, with pearwood paneling on the walls, centered on matching dark blue L-shaped suede sofas and two enormous coffee tables. Around the space were examples of the couple's folk art collection.
Along the south-facing windows a long line formed for a groaning board of Cajun-Southern food: lamb chops, salmon, a black-eyed peas and arugula salad, savory collard greens and assorted biscuits, all catered by Alexander Smalls, who owned Cafe Beulah, in the Flatiron district.
''Corn bread!'' said the actor Ossie Davis, arriving at the biscuit station.
Meanwhile, Mr. Smalls stopped Toni G. Fay, the vice chairman of the foundation, with, ''You don't have enough food, dear.''
''I'm not worried about the biscuits,'' Ms. Fay said. ''I'm worried about this,'' and she patted her hips.
Mr. Parsons, who is 6-foot-4, and his wife, who is shy of 5 feet, shared a table along a wall, under a huge colorful painting by Jonathan Green, an African-American artist.
Serious eating began, but two guests held back. ''I actually have two dinners tonight, and I decided to eat at the next one,'' said Val Azzoli, a board member, and co-chairman of Atlantic Records.
''I'm having something later,'' said Alma Rangel, another board member and the wife of Representative Charles B. Rangel of Harlem. Then she and Mr. Azzoli compared the ways in which they relaxed. For her it was meditation. For Mr. Azzoli it was his hourlong commute to New Jersey. ''If I didn't have that hour to calm down, I'd take my wife's head off,'' he said.
By 9:05, some guests were leaving, others loading up on petit fours, chocolate-apricot bread pudding and pecan tarts. Mr. Parsons settled in to discuss Rémy's marketing campaign. ''I gave up drinking hard liquor 20 years ago,'' he said, sitting on a glass coffee table, ''but when I used to drink, it was Scotch.
''I don't know who drinks hard liquor these days,'' he continued. He asked two women: ''Do you? Do you?''
GOOD COMPANY
