The largest of three international unions that had endorsed Howard Dean's bid for the Democratic presidential nomination plans to withdraw its support, union officials and Dean aides said Saturday.
Gerald W. McEntee, the president of the union, the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, spent an hour meeting over lunch here on Saturday with Dr. Dean and his new campaign chief, Roy Neel.
Aides to Dr. Dean, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that at the meeting Mr. McEntee expressed concern about Dr. Dean's viability and the prospect that continuing his campaign could weaken the eventual Democratic nominee.
Later on Saturday, one union official said, ''We're stopping our activities in Wisconsin and we're shifting our focus to the general election.''
Mr. Neel said that Dr. Dean's other two major labor supporters, the Service Employees International Union and the International Union of Painters and Allied Trades, pledged to remain with the campaign at least through Wisconsin.
''We respect President McEntee and we will work hard to earn the support of A.F.S.C.M.E. members in Wisconsin next week,'' Dr. Dean said in a written statement on Saturday night. ''With the backing of hundreds of thousands of Americans, S.E.I.U., and I.U.P.A.T. we plan to win Wisconsin next Tuesday, regain the momentum our campaign needs, and win the nomination at the Democratic National Convention in Boston.''
Mr. McEntee, who throughout last year said his endorsement hinged on who he thought best equipped to beat President Bush, did not return a telephone message left at his home.
Mr. Neel said the meeting was ''frank and confidential,'' but refused to comment on whether Mr. McEntee would remain a part of the campaign. ''We did everything we could conceivably do to make him understand we're not running a scorched-earth campaign,'' he said. ''We needed to clear the air. We think we had a good meeting today.''
With 1.4 million members, A.F.S.C.M.E. was thought to be a huge boon to Dr. Dean's campaign when it offered its endorsement, along with the 1.3-million member service workers union, in November.
Indeed, the announcement began a string of high-profile endorsements from Democratic Party stalwarts that helped contribute to an air of inevitability surrounding Dr. Dean's campaign late last year, and A.F.S.C.M.E. members, in their green T-shirts, were ubiquitous at Dean events.
But the unions failed to produce any noticeable support at the polls in Iowa or New Hampshire, where Dr. Dean suffered double-digit defeats.
One labor leader close to the campaign of Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts said Saturday that the painters union, the first to back Dr. Dean, would announce early this week that it was switching its support to Mr. Kerry. But that directly conflicted with Dr. Dean's statement that he continued to enjoy the union's support in Wisconsin.
Andrew L. Stern, the president of S.E.I.U., also attended the meeting here on Saturday afternoon. Mr. Stern did not return repeated telephone calls. The president of the painters union, Jimmy Williams, who sat in on the session with Dr. Dean by telephone, could not be reached Saturday afternoon.
Dr. Dean's strategists said they would announce on Sunday a media strategy for Wisconsin that will include a contest giving grass-roots supporters a voice in their advertising campaign.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR  Correction:  February 12, 2004, Thursday  An article in some copies on Sunday about plans by the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees to drop its support for Howard Dean misstated its size ranking. With 1.4 million members, it is the second-largest union to have backed Mr. Dean. (The Service Employees International Union has 1.6 million.)
