ALFRED PREISSER and Christopher McElroen are theater rats, lean and hungry artsy types, the kind of guys who work too hard for too little money, don't shave on a regular schedule and generally look as if they need a few more hours' sleep, especially after the nights they've spent sacking out backstage.
These are the two men responsible for one of New York's more audacious theater enterprises: the Classical Theater of Harlem, a company that they founded in 1999 with about $9,000 of their own money and that is now in its fifth season in residence at the Harlem School of the Arts, where they are on the faculty. Working on a shoestring budget and mostly with black actors (many of whom live nearby and are relatively inexperienced), the two men -- who are, not incidentally, white -- have brought a rich diet of shows drawn from the brawniest and most difficult works in the literary canon to a neighborhood where professional theater has had no substantial foothold in decades.
The company's latest production, ''Mother Courage and Her Children,'' Bertolt Brecht's prickly tragicomedy about the demeaning effects of war on ordinary citizens, opened on Friday at the theater at the Harlem school, on St. Nicholas Avenue, near 141st Street. Written at the start of World War II but set allegorically in the 17th century during the Thirty Years' War, the play tells the story of a shrewd street peddler who is determined to protect and support her family but whose integrity is compromised through petty profiteering and shifting of allegiances.
With a large ensemble cast, an elaborate set (including a floor-to-ceiling bunker made of sandbags) and original music and choreography, it is a physically robust, theatrically adventurous production that, characteristic of both Brecht and the Classical Theater, is also unashamedly confrontational. As directed by Mr. McElroen, it is meant to illustrate just the kind of self-justifying human behavior that will resonate in an era of Enron, Halliburton, terrorism and Iraq.
''It's a fairly aggressive and modern approach,'' Mr. McElroen said recently in a joint interview with Mr. Preisser at the theater. ''Our Mother Courage is selling T-shirts that say 'Got Courage?' and 'I Survived the Bombardment of Riga.' I mean, if she were around today, she'd be down at the World Trade Center site selling trinkets.''
The rest of the schedule includes Euripides' ''Trojan Women'' in the spring, ''Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death'' by Melvin Van Peebles in the fall and, between them, an undecided-upon Shakespeare.
''We like things that are highly visual and we like an aggressive acting style, an exciting actor-audience relationship.'' said Mr. McElroen, 31, the company's executive director, about himself and Mr. Preisser. The two met in 1995 when both were working at the Ground Floor Theater Lab on the Lower East Side.
Mr. Preisser, 41, the artistic director, added: ''We like big theater, plays with large ideas.''
True enough, their ambitions and their limited resources occasionally result in seams showing through onstage. The inexperience of some of the actors can make performances uneven. And the productions can seem a little rickety: opening night of last fall's ''Crazy Locomotive,'' by the Polish playwright Stanislaw Witkiewicz, was interrupted after Mr. Preisser, who was performing in the show, inadvertently started a fire onstage when he tossed his shirt on a hot light.
But the company's verve and resourcefulness are always in evidence, and its profile was raised considerably last year when its ferocious production of Jean Genet's surreal, defiantly iconoclastic treatise on the subject of race, ''The Blacks: A Clown Show,'' received glowing reviews and moved to an Off Broadway theater downtown.
That show, with its proud indifference to convention and its implicit alignment of a white playwright with the perspective of black artists, also underscored the company's own piquant hierarchy. At a theater that expressly hopes to establish roots and loyalties in a traditionally black neighborhood, the skin color of the leaders is not an inconsequential matter.
''When I got here, one of the first questions I was asked was, 'Why isn't there a local person in there at the theater?' '' said Camille Akeju, who became director of the Harlem School of the Arts four years ago. The school, a nonprofit cultural center that offers after-school and Saturday classes in dance, music, theater and visual arts, was the birthplace of Dance Theater of Harlem and the National Black Theater. It has been a fixture in the neighborhood for four decades.
''There's a valid argument,'' Ms. Akeju said. But Mr. Preisser and Mr. McElroen, she added, bring things to the community ''that transcend what ethnicity they are.''
She continued: ''They're providing wonderful opportunities for both local and known artists. I won't apologize for having them here.''
Little, if any, of the resentment comes from artists. ''Yeah, there's some jungle fever going on up there,'' said André De Shields, the veteran actor who recently starred in the company's production of Derek Walcott's lyrical fantasia ''Dream on Monkey Mountain,'' directed by Mr. Preisser, and who is considering a return to the theater, perhaps in ''King Lear'' or ''Caligula.''  ''But if these are the guys who are up to the task, then the color of their skin doesn't matter.''
What particularly impressed him, he said, was Mr. Preisser's attitude toward performance. ''We're similar in that we have monastic approaches to our lives and work,'' said Mr. De Shields, whose performance in ''Monkey Mountain'' included remaining onstage in a strenuous fever-state during intermission, an idea of Mr. Preisser's that he said he acceded to instantly.
Mr. Preisser and Mr. McElroen are both from upstate New York, in the case of Mr. Preisser, way upstate. He grew up in the tiny Adirondack town of Speculator and came to the city in his 20's to study theater at Circle in the Square. In 1995, he took a job teaching acting at the Harlem School, which currently has a faculty of 77, an annual budget of about $3.4 million and 825 students between 4 and 18 who pay fees.
The next year he brought Mr. McElroen to the Harlem School to teach classes in the technical aspects of theater. When they approached the school's administration with the idea of establishing a professional theater company in residence, they were given the green light -- as long as they didn't ask for any money.
Instead, the school and the two men cut a bargain: in exchange for use of the school's theater space, the company agreed to hold open casting calls for all productions, to use students onstage and backstage to whatever degree possible and to pay them. Indeed, unlike at a lot of fledgling companies, just about everyone gets paid something at the Classical Theater of Harlem; actors generally receive between $400 and $1,000 -- total -- for the rehearsal period and run of a show, about nine weeks overall. The exceptions are Mr. Preisser and Mr. McElroen, who are paid for their work at the school but who take no salary for running the theater.
Their first production, ''Macbeth,'' which they presented in 2000 with a cast of 55, including 13 witches, was, the two men believe, the first professional production of the play in Harlem since 1936, when under the auspices of the W.P.A.'s Federal Theater Project, John Houseman, as producer, and Orson Welles, 21, as director, famously created what became known as the ''Voodoo Macbeth,'' set in Haiti and performed by an all-black cast.
Since the Classical Theater's ''Macbeth,'' the programming has been an eclectic mix of Shakespearean tragedy (''King Lear''), political allegory (''The Crazy Locomotive'') and masterpieces of modern black literature (''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom'' by August Wilson).
The company's most prominent success, however, was ''The Blacks.'' As directed by Mr. McElroen, the play became a sinister circus. The action took place literally under a tent, on a stage in front of the audience, on a platform behind it and on a walkway that cut through it. Black actors, flipping in and out of character, teased and heckled white theatergoers. The intention was to simulate racial tension and hostility and to send them up as well; the effect was a stunning sort of confusion.
The show created an instant reputation for the company as both fearless and resourceful. And not only were reviewers impressed, but the production did much to solidify the theater's place in the culture of both Harlem and New York, as a potential successor to troupes like the Negro Ensemble Company and the New Lafayette Theater.
''I was surprised that I didn't see their whiteness on the stage,'' said Michael Dinwiddie, a theater historian, about Mr. Preisser and Mr. McElroen. ''I was just knocked out by the quality of the work.''
An associate professor of dramatic writing at the Gallatin School of New York University, Mr. Dinwiddie, who is black, said seeing ''The Blacks'' moved him to join the theater's fledgling board.
Which brings up another issue: money.
The board has only seven members at the moment, and to be blunt, none of them are rich. Donald Farber, a veteran entertainment lawyer and a board member, said he had to tell Mr. McElroen and Mr. Preisser, ''Hey look, Judy Garland and Mickey Rooney, now it's time to raise some money.''
The theater has thus far been reliant on grants and a small number of corporate sponsors -- Washington Mutual Bank and Chase among them -- but fund-raising has been slow going. Michelle Y. Hodges, the theater's development director, said seeking out corporate money is a new priority.
''We've initially focused on private foundations,'' she said, ''but so many of them in New York that support the theater either don't accept unsolicited proposals from organizations they don't know and don't have prior relationships with, or else have long-term commitments already made.''
Another problem is expanding the audience. A vast majority of the 350 current subscribers -- who pay $60 for a four-play season -- are neighborhood residents, and there remains the perception among downtowners that Harlem is a dangerous place after dark. This is especially frustrating for the theater at a time when Harlem is fast becoming gentrified. Mr. Preisser and Mr. McElroen still live in Midtown with their girlfriends because, as Mr. Preisser said, only half-joking, ''We can't afford to move here.''
This year, the theater's budget is $260,000, an impressive increase in five years from, well, zero. And the future is certainly on the minds of many actors who live nearby, including Ty Jones, who won an Obie award for his work in ''The Blacks'' and has just completed his first Broadway show, ''Henry IV,'' at Lincoln Center.
''When I auditioned for 'The Blacks,' '' Mr. Jones said, ''I knew I was getting into a smaller production, and that it wasn't about pay, but about the piece. Plus, I thought if you can do great theater and shine a little light up in the neighborhood, you can't go wrong.''
In fact, Mr. Jones, who has just gotten engaged, said he and his fiancée were reconsidering their plans to leave the city to raise a family because the creation of a community center like the Classical Theater of Harlem is something they want to be part of. ''It's not about just a company,'' Mr. Jones said. ''It's about building something.''
'Mother Courage'  HSA Theater, 645 St. Nicholas Avenue.  Through Feb. 29.
THEATER
