An Israeli helicopter fired a missile on Saturday morning that killed a Palestinian militant traveling in a car and a 12-year-old boy who was walking by on a busy street in Gaza City, Palestinian doctors and the Israeli military said. Nine other Palestinians were injured.
In another development, four Palestinian men went on trial in a Palestinian security court on weapons charges linked to a roadside bombing that killed three American security workers on Oct. 15 as they escorted a United States diplomatic convoy into the Gaza Strip.
American officials have said the Palestinians have not done enough to solve the case, which has been a source of friction. The opening of the trial was not announced in advance, and after a brief session Saturday in Gaza City, the proceedings were adjourned until Feb. 29.
The Israeli missile slammed into the front end of a white sedan carrying two members of the militant group Islamic Jihad. A fire ignited, and several people on the street were struck by shrapnel and debris.
The two militants were seriously wounded, and one, Aziz al-Shami, died of his wounds, witnesses and doctors at Shifa Hospital said.
The Israeli military described Mr. Shami as ''a senior Islamic Jihad terrorist,'' and a security official said he was behind a 1995 suicide bombing that killed 22 Israelis, as well as an attack last October that killed three Israeli soldiers in Gaza.
The boy, Tarek al-Sousi, was on his way to school. Several children were among the nine wounded Palestinians, according to Shifa Hospital.
Israel has staged dozens of airstrikes against Palestinians suspected of involvement in violence against Israel. On many occasions, the attacks have also killed civilians.
Islamic Jihad has carried out many of the suicide bombings and other attacks against Israel during the more than three years of Middle East fighting. In response to the strike on Saturday, the group faxed a statement to news organizations saying, ''We promise that the response will be very painful.''
In the Gaza court case, the four Palestinians were not directly charged with killing the Americans, court officials said. They said the charges involved ownership of illegal weapons and planting bombs.
The court said that the four might have been trying to plant a bomb to strike at Israeli military vehicles and instead hit the American convoy, the court said.
At least some of the men belong to the Popular Resistance Committees, a loosely structured organization that includes militants from various Palestinian factions. The Palestinians announced several arrests after the bombing last October but have said little about the investigation.
The diplomatic convoy was traveling to Gaza to interview Palestinian academics for possible scholarships to the United States. Since then, American diplomats have suspended travel to Gaza.
Jibril Rajoub, the top security adviser to the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, accused the United States on Wednesday of ''blackmailing'' the Palestinians over the case. The State Department said the charge was ''ridiculous.''
Also Saturday, several thousand Israelis and Palestinians staged a rare joint protest against the barrier Israel is building in the West Bank.
A dozen buses filled with Israeli demonstrators joined the Palestinians at Al Quds University in Abu Dis, a village east of Jerusalem. The protesters then marched to the 25-foot-high concrete wall that separates Abu Dis from Jerusalem.
Israel says it needs the barrier to prevent attacks, while the Palestinians say the route confiscates land they want for a future state.
Meanwhile, more than 300 members of Mr. Arafat's Fatah party resigned in a protest against what they said was corruption and the mishandling of the conflict with Israel. The resignation, which did not include senior party figures, was seen as a sign of discontent among younger members.
