THE Bar Building, threatened with demolition to make way for new development, will remain a fixture on Main Street under an agreement reached last week.
Louis R. Cappelli, the developer who had wanted the building razed to make way for a project he plans called Renaissance Square, reached a handshake agreement Monday with the owners of the Bar Building, said Anthony Longhitano, who owns the Bar Building along with his brother Frank Longhitano.
Under the deal, the original portion of the building, which dates to 1926, is to be retained by the Longhitanos, but the newer annex, a four-story structure on the rear of the building, will be sold to Mr. Cappelli and demolished.
''To me it's a bittersweet victory,'' said Anthony Longhitano, who had his own plans for expanding the Bar Building over the annex. ''But I think the trade-off is worth it.''
Plans to raise the structure Mr. Cappelli planned at 199 Main Street, which included an attempt to get the city to use its power of eminent domain to condemn the Bar Building so it could be turned over to the developer, confronted stiff opposition from Mr. Longhitano, tenants in the building, citizens concerned about the changing face of the city and the White Plains Historical Society.
The building, although not designated as a landmark, is one of a handful remaining from the 1920's, and Mr. Longhitano said plans were in the works to get the building state and national landmark status.
The fate of the building has been in question for months as Mr. Cappelli pursued his plans for the $350 million downtown project, which will include a 200-room hotel, 200 luxury condominiums, 525,000 square feet of office space and new shops at street level. Mr. Cappelli had balked at going forward with the project as long as the Bar Building was there and Mr. Longhitano had said he was not interested in selling.
On Thursday, Mr. Cappelli took a major step toward resolving those differences by faxing the Longhitanos a letter offering to buy the four-story annex on the rear of the building for the existing debt on the entire building, which Mr. Cappelli estimated at $4.4 million. In addition, he said that he would leave on the table through the end of this year a standing offer to buy the rest of the building for $5.5 million should the Longhitanos agree.
''Our relationship goes too far back to allow this dispute to linger,'' Mr. Cappelli wrote in his fax to the Longhitanos, leaving a phone number where he could be reached.
Mr. Cappelli did not respond to repeated requests for comment.
Jack Harrington, former president of the White Plains Historical Society, said that the Bar Building, and six or seven other buildings in town, were built just before the Depression and that he was pleased by the deal. But he said he would remain watchful throughout the process.
''I can tell you we're going to be watching this very closely,'' he said, ''and we'll be speaking our piece if we see something we think is out of order.''
