LAGUNA GRILLE in Locust Valley is unexpected. It is nothing like the expensive, luxurious restaurants that previously occupied this attractive Mediterranean-style building. (Enoteca was the last.) Instead, it is a spot much like its older sibling, Laguna Grille in Woodbury, a small, casual, shopping center cafe. The new Locust Valley outpost has the same menu, pulsating Latin music and vibrant nuevo Latino food.
Unlike the Woodbury original, the building holds an inviting bar with table service and an immense dining room that ends in a stone wall elaborately decorated with vines, other greenery and brightly painted parrots, fish and lizards. That south-of-the-border look continues with a mural of Latin dancers and walls painted tomato red and bright gold, highlighted with more of those brilliantly hued salamanders. Gone are the white tablecloths and the carpeting of its predecessors. The present bare wood tables and tile floor help create a shouts-only noise level.
Laguna Grille is perfect for young families. Its portions are made for sharing, its prices won't blow the budget and no one will notice children acting like children. Toddlers can yell at the top of their lungs and be drowned out by the background music and general din.
Even though I'd given Laguna a three-month grace period before visiting, service was still in a shake-down mode. We had to request replacement silver (more than once) and dishes were slow in arriving. Entrees took so long one night, our embarrassed waiter offered free desserts as compensation. On a return visit, our server was a dynamo but even so, we had to flag a busboy for knives and forks.
The place is noisy and the service sketchy. Why go? Much of the food is delicious; the portions are mind boggling and the prices will make you smile.
Don't even consider an appetizer here. They are the size of entrees and should be ordered as such. Take the quesadillas. They are fill-the-plate, tasty wonders. We enjoyed the veggie one filled with grilled vegetables, caramelized onions and smoked gouda. Also topnotch were the tender and crisp fried calamari rings escorted by a spicy vodka-habanero sauce. Another good selection was the seafood Margarita ceviche, a pile of small, citrus-marinated shrimp and meltingly tender calamari in a cocktail glass. Skip the grilled shrimp arepas with their too-sweet balsamic-zinfandel glaze.
Salads, too, are whole meals. I've even split one for a satisfying lunch. My favorite was the tropical grilled chicken salad with mixed greens, pineapple salsa, roasted corn, diced tomatoes, crasins, banana chips and slices of still-warm grilled chicken. Request the tropical vinaigrette for a slightly sweet but splendid meal. The Gorgonzola salad with its highly herbaceous basil vinaigrette was another pleaser, as was the classic Caesar with big, tasty, homemade croutons. One night, though, two salads arrived without dressings.
Two fish led the entrees: perfectly turned out salmon in a lemon-chardonnay sauce with sautéed spinach and saffron rice, and plantain-crusted Chilean sea bass mated with sautéed vegetables, a red bell pepper sauce and whipped potatoes. We also liked the very unorthodox but flavorful seafood paella, which consisted of creamy saffron rice moistened with a light tomato-wine sauce and roasted garlic, all topped with calamari, scallops, shrimp and clams.
The fajitas were the usual production: sizzling platter, meat, onions and mushrooms with soft flour tortillas, guacamole and pico de gallo on the side. The citrus-marinated skirt steak would have been fine had it been hot rather than lukewarm.
Lukewarm was also the fate of the French fries that accompanied our sandwiches. Our dynamo waiter, though, recognized the problem and replaced them with piping hot ones. We gave high marks to the grilled vegetable sandwich served on a Cuban roll with diced plum tomatoes, sweet onion relish and a roasted garlic vinaigrette. The chicken Cubano sandwich was disappointing. It was not pressed, and its Jack cheese had not melted. Also nothing special was the overly compacted hamburger.
Who could have room for dessert? There were three good ones and one dud. The loser was called hot apple crunch à la mode: a plate of bland, right-from-the-can apple pie filling sprinkled with granola and topped with ice cream. Instead, go for the sweet and sticky but moist and delicious tres leches cake, the yummy chocolate caramel nut mirage or the coconut and cornflake-crusted fried ice cream nestled in a crispy shell.
Laguna Grille  146 Birch Hill Road, Locust Valley (516)671-9486
Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Casual, rollicking Latin restaurant.  SERVICE -- Hit and miss.  SOUND LEVEL -- Loud.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Seafood Margarita ceviche, fried calamari, quesadillas, Caesar salad, tropical grilled chicken salad, Gorgonzola mixed salad, seafood paella, salmon, Chilean sea bass, fajitas, grilled vegetable sandwich, French fries, tres leches cake, chocolate caramel nut mirage, fried ice cream.  WINE LIST -- About a dozen by-the-glass selections ($5 to $8) plus a short list of seven bottles ($20 to $26). Sangria, mojitos, Margaritas and frozen tropical drinks are the specialties here.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers $7 to $11; sandwiches $8.45 to $11; entrees $12 to $20; desserts $6.50.  CREDIT CARDS -- All the majors.  HOURS -- 4 to 10 p.m. Sunday and Monday, 11:30 a.m. to 10 p.m. Tuesday through Thursday, till 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday.  RESERVATIONS -- None accepted.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- Fully accessible.
REVIEWED BY THE TIMES -- Feb. 8, 2004.
RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING OUT E-mail: lidining@nytimes.com
