J-HORROR films -- the recent wave of fastidiously creepy thrillers emanating from Japan -- may be cult favorites and the new Hollywood fetish, but you have to move fast to see them on the big screen. ''Ringu,'' the best known of the bunch, played at festivals but never received a New York theatrical release before it was remade as ''The Ring,'' with Naomi Watts added but much of the creepiness drained away. ''Ju-On: The Grudge,'' a hit in Asia in 2002-3 and a subject of mad chatter on the Internet, is a similar case: if you want to see it before the remake starring Sarah Michelle Gellar arrives next year, you'd better get to the Walter Reade Theater this Friday.
The original (which shares several producers with ''Ringu'') is showing in the Film Society of Lincoln Center's annual series of movies chosen by the writers and editors of Film Comment magazine; the critic Gavin Smith, who selected it, calls it ''an amazingly sustained structural exercise in the organization of tension and release.'' It's also a haunted-house movie. As in ''Ringu,'' the dead crawl among us, wearing heavy black eye shadow and making life extremely unnerving. In this instance the ghosts are the members of a murdered family who visit their rage on anyone who moves into or happens to drop by their Tokyo home.
But where ''Ringu'' was heavily plotted -- part of its charm for American audiences was certainly the Nancy Drew-like industriousness with which its central character attacked the mystery -- ''Ju-On'' is more characteristically Japanese in its impressionism. It moves back and forth in time and presents what almost amounts to a series of vignettes as various people -- a social worker, policemen, a detective's daughter -- pay their ill-fated (and very loosely connected) visits to the house. What some viewers will praise as atmospherics, others will dismiss as incoherence, and following the story isn't made easier by the fact that the murders that set it in motion aren't fully shown here, having taken place in an earlier movie in the ''Ju-On'' series. But ''Ju-On: The Grudge'' does deliver the sustained queasiness, the base-of-the-spine tingle, that we expect from J-horror. And its relative lack of blood and special effects, along with its straight-ahead camera style, give it the minimalist feel -- compared to the bloat of most contemporary American horror films -- that's probably a key to the genre's popularity here.
''Ju-On: The Grudge'' is available as an all-region DVD from specialty Web sites, or on eBay. In fact, if you search you'll find four films, all directed by Takashi Shimizu, all called ''Ju-On'': in chronological order, two television movies (called ''Ju-On: The Curse,'' parts 1 and 2) and two feature films, ''The Grudge'' and ''The Grudge 2.'' And Mr. Shimizu isn't finished: he's now directing the American remake. Maybe this journey across the Pacific will have a happy ending.
MIKE HALE
TELEVISION: THIS WEEK
