TO the objective eyes of an obituary writer, Tom Swank was just a blue-collar guy who died relatively young. But in the world of Strat-o-Matic baseball, Tom Swank was a god.
Of course, everybody who plays that particular fantasy baseball game is a god, with the ability to draft players like Ruth and Gehrig, and even to pull a pitcher like Koufax out of the game. Unlike the better-known Rotisserie-league baseball, Strat-o-Matic allows its players to manage their games - letting them decide when to bunt or send a runner to steal second.
Tom Swank, who died last month of non-Hodgkins lymphoma at the age of 60, was the manager of managers.
News that Mr. Swank was dying spread on an Internet message board at a online fanzine called Somworld the week before his death, and people from around the country wrote in to recall playing the game with him decades earlier.
''His legend was pretty big,'' said a son, Bryan, of Caldwell. ''The myth of Tom Swank.''
So naturally at his funeral, Mr. Swank left this world amid a floral display worthy of the Tournament of Roses: two bouquets shaped like giant baseballs and another designed to look like a baseball diamond.
Although he had played the game with gusto for 35 years, Mr. Swank was able to give it full-time attention after his cancer was diagnosed and he went on disability. In the end, he had turned the den of his modest home here into a Strat-o-Matic parlor that operated day and night. He ran countless tournaments and recruited new players everywhere - in online ads, at the Yogi Berra museum, even in the hospital, where a CAT scan technician noticed that he was wearing a Strat-o-Matic T-shirt and told him that her husband played the game.
''He was a really good ambassador to the game,'' said Will Kolodzie, editor and publisher of Somworld.
Strat-o-Matic is played by about 15,000 players nationwide, according to Mr. Kolodzie, although Hal Richman, who invented the game, thinks the numbers are higher. Either way, statistics do not begin to paint a picture of a pastime so passionate that it tests and sometimes breaks marriages.
''As a subculture, Strat-o-Matic is a way of life,'' Mr. Kolodzie said. ''It goes beyond mere baseball. When you meet someone through the Strat-o-Matic hobby, you're making a friend for life.''
Even by the fanatic standards of the hobby, Mr. Swank was excessive. His first marriage ended in divorce, partly because of his relentless Strat-o-Matic playing. The best man at his second wedding was Ken Mackay, a longtime Strat-o-Matic friend.
''He was at the top; he was Mr. Strat,'' said Chuck Johnson, a former Strat-o-Matic opponent of Mr. Swank, who traveled from Hopewell Junction, N.Y., to the funeral, even though he had not seen him in 10 years.
Men of all walks of life joined Mr. Swank at the game. There were computer programmers, accountants, high school English teachers, salesmen - even an 11-year-old boy. Swank's leagues accommodated people at the margins of life, like a teacher from Brooklyn who was afraid to drive and had to take a bus, and a player in Pennsylvania who had multiple sclerosis and took part in the tournaments by telephone.
Mr. Swank himself spent the greatest part of his career in an overnight shipping job at Thomas Muffins in Totowa. For a few years, he sold tires. He looked and sounded like someone in a Budweiser commercial.
''Kind of Homer Simpson-ish in a way,'' said Bryan. ''But my father wasn't dumb.''
In fact, Mr. Swank, who was born and raised in Newark, once yearned to be an English teacher. He frequently wrote poetry, entered essay contests, and even started writing a book two years ago when another son, Aaron, died at 24 from an overdose of a party drug called gamma-hydroxybutyric acid, or GHA.
But Strat-o-Matic, not writing, turned out to be the area in which Tom Swank could best express his intelligence. ''I needed an outlet to feel better about myself,'' Mr. Swank told an acquaintance a little more than a year ago.
Mr. Swank was not just a competitive manager and an avid recruiter for the game. He approached it as a cryptographer, always looking for ways to make it more complex.
''Tom would come up with these exotic ideas,'' said Bill Bishop of Elmwood Park, a longtime Strat friend. Mr. Swank created an A-to-Z tournament, in which no team could field two players whose last name started with the same letter. He created an under .400 league for teams with dreadful records. Before he died, Mr. Swank was working on a tournament with teams whose players had only with four letters in their last names.
''You'd get a phone call or letter, 'I'm looking for a few good men for my new tournament,''' Mr. Bishop said. ''And then you'd call him up and say, 'What do you mean by this?'''
Players in Tom's many leagues and tournaments would have to wedge their way into the tiny den, which could hold only about three people comfortably, and which was crammed with all kinds of plaques, trophies and baseball memorabilia, including an antique peanut-vendor toy that played ''Take Me Out to the Ballgame,'' and a figurine of Abbott and Costello doing their famous ''Who's on First?'' routine. Adding to the cacophony were the sounds coming from the desktop computer where Mr. Swank played the CD-ROM version of the game. Strat-o-Matic on the computer features the sounds of dice rolling, a big stadium crowd and a hot dog vendor hawking his wares.
Once anybody spent time there, they fell under the spell of Mr. Swank's boisterous good spirits. ''One of the things that struck people about Tom was love for life,'' said a longtime friend, Alan Rowland. At Mr. Rowland's 1987 wedding, Mr. Swank spent so much time on the dance floor with his wife Maria that the videographer practically got more film of him than of the bride and groom.
''He always liked to be the life of the party,'' said his son Bryan. ''If we went somewhere, he was adamant about having fun. We were going to have fun whether we liked it or not.'' Besides Bryan and Aaron, two other Swank children had to compete with Start-o-Matic for his attention, Eric and Helene.
As it happened, the day Mr. Swank was buried, Friday, Jan. 30, was a holy day in the Strat-o-Matic calendar. It was, in the parlance of Strat fans, ''opening day'' -- the date when scores of hobbyists make their annual pilgrimage to Glen Head, N.Y., to pick up their new Strat cards for the year, because they can't wait two weeks to get them in the mail. To picture it, you have to imagine a bunch of kids lining up to see Santa Claus in a shopping mall. Turn the kids into a middle-aged men in baseball caps, put them in a Long Island parking lot, make them wait in line four or five hours, add a dash of icy rain or perhaps a snowstorm, and you pretty much have it.
Until Mr. Swank had a serious relapse on Jan. 3, he had been planning to make the haj himself.
When the doors opened on opening day, Mr. Richman, Strat-o-Matic's inventor and owner, came outside and asked if anyone was there to pick up order number 160 -- Mr. Swank's cards. ''I was going to put them at the front of the line and give them the first set for the year,'' Mr. Richman said. But the people sent to pick up Mr. Swank's cards, including Mr. Rowland, were busy with his funeral.
''When I mentioned the name, the place was just hushed,'' Mr. Richman said.
At the funeral, the officiating priest told Mr. Swank's family and friends to imagine the happiest moment in their lives, and to multiply that feeling by a million, to understand the happiness Mr. Swank was experiencing in heaven.
''The great Strat-o-Matic League in the sky?'' whispered one mourner.
''Tom has a new opportunity,'' answered Bill Bishop. ''He can actually get Babe Ruth out in the field. Shoeless Joe will play outfield for him.''
IN PERSON
