IN some ways, the main trading floor at BlackRock looks more like the cockpit of the Starship Enterprise than the nerve center of one of the industry's fastest-growing investment management companies.
A small army of studious portfolio managers sits in a vast amphitheater. The managers sit row upon row, hunched over their flickering screens, fiddling with the esoteric financial models that have become BlackRock's trademark. No shouts are heard, just the quiet hum of computer terminals.
The captain of this sleek corporate machine is Laurence D. Fink, 51, the founder and chief executive of BlackRock. And his new Mr. Spock is Peter R. Fisher, 47, a former under secretary of the Treasury who joined BlackRock last month, bringing his experience as the federal government's top bond trader.
With a fleet of 40 open-end mutual funds and 47 closed-end funds, and $309 billion under management, most of it in bonds, BlackRock already has a reputation as one of Wall Street's savviest bond investors.
Now, Mr. Fink is embarking on a campaign to market the company's risk management strategy, which BlackRock has developed and used for its own investment products, to a broader range of institutional clients.
In many ways, it is a brash step.
BlackRock's core asset management business has been a steady growth engine since Mr. Fink took the company public in 1999.
About $32 billion of its assets are in its mutual funds, with the rest managed for institutional investors, client by client.
As assets under management have grown, so have earnings. The company's stock reached a record high of $61.70 on Feb. 2 and trades at $60.02.
Now, with the hiring of Mr. Fisher, Mr. Fink hopes to convince prospective clients, including insurance companies and pension funds, that in addition to managing their portfolios, he can also assess the risk inherent in all of their assets.
With new laws intended to make chief executives more accountable, ''everyone cares about risk now,'' Mr. Fink said, adding, ''What we have is an information system that allows us to understand how portfolios change in value relative to changes in such variables as the yield curve.''
Mr. Fink, a former star bond dealer at Credit Suisse First Boston, talks about risk with the respect of someone who has made and lost millions over his years as a bond trader.
And today, with interest rates at historical lows, he worries that investors at the retail and institutional levels have become complacent.
''There is more risk out there today than at any point since 1998,'' he said, leaning back in a leather chair in a conference room adjacent to BlackRock's trading floor. ''Spreads are very tight. Everyone is taking for granted that the yield curve will remain steep for a much longer period.''
Mr. Fink is concerned that the stronger economy of recent months will prompt the Federal Reserve to start pushing up short-term interest rates, ending the easy profits that retail and larger-scale investors have reaped from trading bonds over the last couple of years.
Although he has strong views about the market, he says investment decisions at BlackRock are made by an investment committee. Some analysts say that this sets BlackRock apart from a major competitor, Pimco, where Bill Gross, its chief investment officer, plays a more dominant role in investing.
''At BlackRock, it's not driven by one individual,'' said Guy Moszkowski, a securities analyst at Merrill Lynch. ''They have shown themselves to be able to grow their business through all parts of the market cycle due to focused management and an excellent track record.''
Investors in BlackRock's mutual funds have come to expect conservative management, absent the soaring highs and bottom-scraping lows of some higher-risk funds. The funds have performed steadily, even during market crises in 1998 and 1999, reflecting the attention to risk that BlackRock managers apply to all their funds, retail and institutional.
BlackRock's flagship bond fund, BlackRock Core Total Return, with $2.6 billion in assets, has returned 6.52 percent, annualized, over the three years through Thursday, slightly higher than the category average, Morningstar said. That is still less than the 7.6 percent, annualized, for Pimco's flagship Total Return bond fund over that period.
Last year, before Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general, leveled criticism at the mutual fund industry, BlackRock reduced its fees, which had been among the highest in the industry and had dragged down performance.
In August, BlackRock Core lowered its expense ratio by 12 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, to 0.90 percent. That compares with an average of 1.07 percent for bond funds generally, according to Morningstar, and matches the expense ratio of Pimco Total Return.
Mr. Fink said the success of his retail and institutional funds in navigating the shoals of the bond market gave him the idea to market his risk management system, BlackRock Solutions, to institutional clients.
The system allows a pension fund or insurance company to assess the potential danger in its bond portfolio by coordinating all positions and measuring the risk level daily. BlackRock gauges the risk for more than $2 trillion in balance-sheet positions.
While still a small proportion of the company's overall revenue, BlackRock Solutions is growing at a much quicker pace than other parts of the business, the company said.
Now that Mr. Fisher has joined the company, analysts predict that sales of BlackRock Solutions will climb even faster. Mr. Fisher enters BlackRock as a managing director and serves on its management committee. His primary role is to advise BlackRock clients on the best ways to keep their portfolios or balance sheets as risk-free as possible.
It is a role for which he has had ample preparation. Before becoming under secretary, Mr. Fisher was responsible for open market and foreign currency operations at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. In 1998, he took a lead role in organizing the rescue of Long-Term Capital Management, the hedge fund that collapsed because of a disastrous bet on the direction of interest rates.
''Since 1998, I've given a lot of speeches about risk management,'' Mr. Fisher said. ''Now I get to spend the bulk of my time working with clients and advising them on various balance-sheet issues.''
BlackRock was originally the fund management arm of the Blackstone Group, the Manhattan-based private equity firm founded by two Wall Street grandees, Peter G. Peterson, commerce secretary in the Nixon administration, and Stephen A. Schwarzman, a former top banker at Lehman Brothers.
By 1995, BlackRock, led by Mr. Fink, had $18 billion under management and had become independent of Blackstone.
It cut a deal that year with PNC Financial Services, the regional bank giant based in Pittsburgh, which paid $240 million for a majority stake. As part of the deal, PNC, which now owns 65 percent of BlackRock, was allocated 4 seats on the 12-member board, and the bank gave Mr. Fink's team full autonomy.
NOW analysts wonder whether BlackRock, with its sterling reputation and $309 billion under management, would be an attractive target for investment banks looking to smooth out their volatile earnings streams.
Its stock soaring, BlackRock could also be a buyer.
Mr. Fink, the experienced bond trader that he is, will not show his hand. ''We get queries all the time,'' he said with a smile. ''But we take a pretty hard view on this. We have a jaundiced view of mergers in the investment world.''
