Mix and Match  In his Virginia Beach living room, the R&amp;B producer Teddy Riley has a powerful sound system that mixes new technologies and old.
''There's a lot of wattage going through there,'' Riley said. ''There are speakers all over that living room, all over that area. The brand is B&amp;W, and this particular model is discontinued, but I still have them because they sound incredible.
I've got a Macintosh amp that weighs about 125 pounds. It's all tubes inside; that's why it's so heavy. All natural power.
''I'm going to get one of my turntables back in the house, because I want to play turntable stuff. I want to play some classic things and get a feel for that analog sound on such a powerful system.
''I don't always like the newer stuff. With older stuff, you're losing some of the highs, some of the quality. But with a lot of the newer equipment, we're definitely going to lose a lot of the richness of sound.
''I do like the newer processors, so I bought the latest Yamaha, which has the newest smart-technology receiver so that if you have a movie like 'Jurassic Park' or 'Titanic,' you would hear things going on in the back.
''The piano is just there to be played. It's a little baby grand. The kids like it. Having a baby grand in your home is class.''
Easy Listening  Young hip-hop artists and producers aren't necessarily the greatest audiophiles, in part because they want their music to sound good on the everyday equipment that most people have. What they do value is ease and portability.
Pusha T from Clipse: ''My stereo at home is a boom box-style JVC, three-disc changer. I get the CD's and I put them in there, and that's how I write everything. That's the instrument that I use to write everything. I put my beats into the JVC.''
Chad Hugo from the Neptunes: ''I listen to a Bang &amp; Olufsen BeoLab swivel system (1), a portable-stereo thing. It's very minimal and more like a boom box than an actual stereo system. The way I got it is that it's situated between my bathroom and my bedroom, so I just move it depending on where I am.''
Malice from Clipse: ''I moved into a new house about a year ago and bought two Sony home-theater systems (2), one for the den and one for the bedroom. It's like for DVD's and stuff, but it bangs really loud. I got the same system for upstairs and downstairs. It's a home theater. That's what I jam on.''
STYLE
