After the explosion in her subway car, Anna A. Lvova clambered out without a scratch, but she said that was because she was buried under the dead.
At rush hour on Friday morning, Ms. Lvova, 31, said she was standing and reading a magazine in the second car of a train on Moscow's green line as it began to speed north from the Avtozavodskaya station, near Moscow's center, toward the big Paveletskaya rail hub.
A bomb -- hidden in a bag or suitcase on the floor, according to state news agencies -- exploded by her car's first door. The force threw her to the floor, flung torn bodies on top of her and turned the car into a shattered wreck.
''People fell on me,'' Ms. Lvova said on Saturday in an interview at Hospital No. 36, where she and more than a dozen other victims remained the day after the bombing, which killed at least 39 and wounded more than 130.
''Everyone was shocked that I look as well as I do,'' she whispered. She picked at her red fleece sweater and declined to say more.
The bombing has unleashed waves of grief, fear and suspicion in Moscow and beyond.
The Avtozavodskaya station, which was only briefly closed, quickly became an impromptu memorial for those killed, with people coming to lay flowers on the platform. Hundreds of people donated blood for the victims.
Moscow's mayor, Yuri M. Luzhkov, declared Monday an official day of mourning and warned grimly that the death toll could rise. More than 100 people remained hospitalized, 21 of them gravely injured.
Investigators continued to search for clues to the bombing. They interviewed many victims, like those at hospital No. 36.
Many appeared fearful. One, a young woman, emerged from her room to talk to reporters but grew quickly hostile to questions. ''I am great, really great!'' she snapped.
During the five years of Russia's latest war to quell separatists in the breakaway republic of Chechnya, Moscow and other cities have borne the brunt of terrorist attacks.
The police in Moscow -- acting on a tip, a spokesman said -- detained a man said to resemble a composite sketch of a man suspected of being an accomplice in Friday's bombing.
After two hours of questioning, however, the man was released, along with a companion who had also been detained.
Many people from the Caucasus, the southern region where Chechnya is located, have complained of detention and questioning in terrorist attacks here based on little more than their ethnicity.
The Tekstilshchiki subway station, not far from Avtozavodskaya in southeast Moscow, was evacuated Saturday afternoon after an anonymous telephone call warned of a bomb there. It remained closed in the evening as the police searched the station.
While security has been intensified at subway and railroad stations, as well as at airports and other public places, officials seemed to brace themselves for more attacks.
In the last year, terrorist attacks have often come in pairs. In December, a suicide bomber killed herself and five others outside the National Hotel in Moscow only four days after one or more bombers killed 47 on a commuter train in the Stavropol region of southern Russia. The authorities there, in the foothills of the Caucasus, ordered markets in the region closed on Saturday and Sunday.
The American Embassy warned its citizens to avoid the subway.
The bombing prompted rare public criticism of the security services. Izvestia reported that a senior officer of the Federal Security Service, the domestic successor of the K.G.B., had warned that the subway was vulnerable to an attack like Friday's.
For Georgi K. Kvitivadze, Hospital No. 36's deputy chief doctor, terrorism's grim results have become all too familiar; his hospital is one of the city's trauma centers and has been, in effect, on terrorist alert since two apartment bombings in Moscow in September 1999 killed and injured hundreds of people.
That means staff meetings include a strict accounting of supplies and reserves in case of emergency.
Daily calculations show how many beds can be quickly freed in the trauma wards by moving patients to the lightly populated obstetrics ward, for example, to accommodate a potential flood of victims.
Dr. Kvitivadze treated the victims of the siege of a Moscow theater in October 2002 that left at least 129 hostages dead, most of them from the effects of a nerve gas used by the commandos who stormed the building. Friday's bombing became a grisly repeat of a drill that has increasingly become a fact of life in Russia.
''Terrorism is a problem everywhere now,'' Dr. Kvitivadze said.
He said that the city's health department had warned the hospital to be prepared for an attack, based on a warning from the police about the threat of terrorism around Feb. 23, the 60th anniversary of Stalin's deportation of Chechens from Chechnya during World War II.
He said he and the hospital were already prepared for the next disaster.
''We are ready,'' he said, smoking a cigarette in his office.
