APPRENTICE TO THE FLOWER POET Z.
By Debra Weinstein.
242 pp. New York:
Random House. $23.95.
PITY the poor poet of the early 1980's. Before word processors, writers going through numerous drafts had to resort to rubber cement and -- for the really technologically current -- I.B.M. Selectrics with correction tapes. But writers lucky enough to have university appointments could avoid carpal tunnel syndrome by signing on pert young assistants, who not only eased the burden of poetry production but served as personal shoppers and occasional therapists.
Such a helpmate is Annabelle Goldsmith. The eager undergraduate narrator of Debra Weinstein's deliciously nasty first novel, ''Apprentice to the Flower Poet Z.,'' is thrilled to be allowed into the life of her favorite poet. That the poet turns out to be a coldblooded fraud will not come as a huge surprise to readers. (No woman is a heroine to her valet.) Nevertheless, Weinstein has buoyant fun with the pettiness and pretension of New York's literati. It's ''All About Eve'' for the sonnet set.
Elizabeth Bovardine (a k a Z.) is a tenured professor of creative writing best known for her searingly original, vaguely feminist flower poems. It's not long before Annabelle discovers that Z. is as exacting about everything in her life as she is about her craft: ''Z. signed all letters in jet black ink with a gold-nibbed Montblanc fountain pen. When it came to nibs, there was no comparison between 14 karat and the other metals, Z. had told me. . . . I learned how to convert Z.'s handwritten draft into a perfectly centered and left-justified document, so that each letter I typed was a miniature work of art.''
Correspondence is hardly the only task for Annabelle. She must help Z. with her anthology on Emily Dickinson, write Z.'s class syllabus, sew buttons on Z.'s jacket, shop for special gifts for Z.'s lover and restock Z.'s mentor, the powerful but ailing critic Mimi Van Elder, with prescription cat food. So busy is she protecting the ''psychic space'' of the celebrity poet that she barely has time for her own therapy appointments, much less her own writing. ''You're using poetry as a way of avoiding your feelings again,'' Dr. Sanger scolds her droll, deadpan patient.
Soon Annabelle is also serving the needs of Z.'s piercing-obsessed, possibly lesbian daughter, Claire, herself a poet, and Z.'s handsome husband, Lars, an actor turned writer. (''The point here . . . is to upstage me,'' Z. complains.) All this interferes with Annabelle's most sacred job responsibility: researching (and eventually writing) Z's poems. The flower poet, alas, turns out to know absolutely nothing about flowers.
Weinstein captures the great poet's majestic self-regard; Z. is an otherworldly genius with a really good French manicure. And Weinstein is equally adept at bringing life to her cast of extras, most notably Annabelle's lover, Harry Banks, a James Joyce-obsessed fledgling novelist who likes to playact smutty scenes from Joyce's letters to Nora, complete with spanking and long silk gloves. Also nicely captured is an up-and-coming poet named Braun Brown, whose black leather miniskirts and appearance on the cover of Vogue particularly rile Z.
''Apprentice to the Flower Poet Z.'' is especially funny about the cattiness and competition among putatively feminist poets. Each heiress of Plath and Dickinson insists on woman as the equal of man -- so long as she's the only woman in the room. In one of the novel's best scenes, the female writers at a Boston poetry retreat are promised bubble baths of sisterly encouragement. But positive reinforcement is not exactly what Annabelle gets when she follows Braun's command to tell the truth about the dysfunctional Bovardine family.
Annabelle's Bovardine-bashing poem is included in the novel, as are poems by Z. and Claire, along with those of Annabelle's classmates' and even Annabelle's heavily edited copies, with suggestions for rewriting. Weinstein, herself a poet, creates idiosyncratic cadences for each character's precious products. She has clearly served time in poetry workshops; her novel captures both the cant and the comical gravity of the proceedings. As workshop leader, Braun demands that each poem be read multiple times. Reciting a student's work, Braun ''sounded like someone you would want holding your hand, counting backward with you from 25, as you waited for the anesthesia to take effect.''
As an ''apprentice in life and in art,'' Annabelle comes to know just how shallow the writers she worships really are. Z. runs a famous poetry salon attended by some of the country's most revered writers, and from the snippets Annabelle is privileged to overhear (usually she's sent out on crucial errands like acquiring new hand towels for the bathroom), she's shocked at the low level of discourse: ''I had expected the conversation to become deep and meaningful, that they would open their briefcases and take out their poems, much the way we did in our writing workshop. Instead they spoke about margaritas and dental work, and shared strategies for getting out of jury duty.''
How far we have fallen, Annabelle realizes, from the classic poets, who commemorated their muses with wonderful works of art. Still, she would rather be Harry's girlfriend than the girlfriend of Robert Herrick, whom she studies so that Z. can fake familiarity with his work: ''It was the age of God and the virgin, and if a poet liked you and you played hard to get, you could end up naked, forever immortalized in his poetry. But I wouldn't have wanted to be Celia or Julia. In the 17th century, there was no running water, just perfume to cover up bad odors. These poets were probably very smelly.''
We meet Annabelle in her junior year at the University of New York City, a fictional campus that just happens to have a view of Washington Square. Since Weinstein herself is a graduate of New York University, it's tempting to read ''Apprentice to the Flower Poet Z.'' as a roman à clef. On the other hand, Weinstein may have just done a creditable job of inventing a convincing first-person narrator. Her young Annabelle is an utterly believable combination of moxie and cluelessness. By the time she realizes that -- in Lars's words -- her mentor'' has become ''her tormentor,'' readers are ready for her to exact her sneaky revenge.
Lisa Zeidner is the author of two books of poems and four novels, most recently ''Layover.'' She is a professor at Rutgers University in Camden, N.J.
