SEAN ASTIN talking about the Middle East, Martin Short on Iraq, Howie Mandel on weapons inspections -- these are some of the political commentators you might have seen on cable talk shows lately. Then there are the stand-up comics turned pontificating policy wonks who host these shows: HBO's ambitious but uneven ''Real Time With Bill Maher,'' CNBC's floundering ''Dennis Miller'' and, at the dismal bottom of the heap, Comedy Central's ''Tough Crowd With Colin Quinn.'' Today every comic is a pundit, every guest an analyst, and every new talk show -- or so it seems -- belongs to a category best described as political entertainments.
We should have seen this coming. For years, more and more people have been getting news from entertainment sources like ''Saturday Night Live,'' Jay Leno or David Letterman. If viewers respond to this easy-listening political chatter, why not build a show around it?
What these shows add to the political conversation is a different question. Most follow a standard formula: a monologue or sketch, then a guest panel featuring someone from the left, someone from the right, someone from show biz. Often the celebrity is no more or less astute than the average CNN viewer. During a ''Real Time'' discussion about the alienating effects of technology, Mr. Astin made a plea for world unity, wishing everyone could just pull together the way they did during the Los Angeles Olympics. Even Mr. Maher couldn't let such naïvete pass, pointing out that people pulled together during the Los Angeles riots, too.
But Mr. Maher isn't usually so quick to call his celebrity guests on their blather; he is, after all, the guy most responsible for today's everyone-is-a-pundit atmosphere, because of ''Politically Incorrect,'' his old talk show that mixed politicians with Hollywood celebrities.
Some socially active stars are well-informed, of course, but not nearly enough to go around. These talk shows quickly run out of smart celebs and start booking dolts. Gary Coleman, the washed-up actor from ''Diff'rent Strokes,'' got his start in punditry on ''Politically Incorrect.'' He seemed like a harmless curiosity then. The next thing we knew he was engaged in his stunt-run for governor of California, in a race won by that other Hollywood crossover. The star-as-politico syndrome didn't seem so harmless anymore.
By the time ABC dropped ''Politically Incorrect'' in 2002, the show had become fatally self-important. But its taste for know-nothing pundits lives on in the newer shows. Mr. Maher's own ''Real Time'' is a template of all that is best and worst in political entertainments.
At their most incisive, he and other cable satirists are clear-sighted about how the media shapes politics. While most commentators were earnestly analyzing Howard Dean's scream, Mr. Maher shrewdly and seriously put it in perspective. When you're running for president, he said, ''the art of watching out for your image is part of the obstacle course.'' And his list of ''New Rules,'' a feature of every show, skewers media-driven absurdities, social as well as political. One new rule: ''The end of 'Friends' is not a national tragedy.''
But the failing heart of the show is its debate. Mr. Maher recently introduced David Frum, the former Bush speechwriter associated with the phrase ''axis of evil,'' as part of the show's ''axis of entertainment,'' but that was a wish. Mr. Frum and his fellow guests -- Farai Chideya, an author who writes about race in America, and Richard Belzer, a stand-up and actor on ''Law and Order: S.V.U'' -- formed the standard mix of right, left, show biz. With a speechwriter meant to be entertaining and a comic meant to be a pundit, no wonder nothing enlightening or funny emerged about tax cuts.
While we're at it, why not a chimp as commentator? Oh, ''Dennis Miller'' already got there. Mr. Miller is a famous convert to the right wing, but that political flip seems to have cost him his satiric instincts. On his old HBO show, his rants were savage commentaries about social hypocrisy; no one was safe. On the first episode of his new show, he blandly began by saying, ''I believe that there's a common-sense revolution coming, folks,'' then cued his sidekick, Ellie the chimp. This wry swipe at both the masses and the media might have been more convincing if he and Ellie hadn't gone on for days hitting a button that played the Dean scream, long after that joke had become stale.
Like so many conversions, his seems to have led to zealotry, the last thing we need more of on television. Mr. Miller uses interviews to toss lavish praise at Republicans he admires, like Arnold Schwarzenegger. The governor might like to see himself as a common-sense response to politics as usual, but he is an undeniable example of how show biz can pave the way into office. And although Mr. Miller's panels rarely include comics, he lets the shrillest guests ramble on. The conservative commentator David Horowitz indulged in a tirade in which he called opposition to the Patriot Act ''an hysterical campaign conducted by the left,'' and ''a kind of seditious movement.'' So much for the common-sense revolution.
''Tough Crowd'' has a much more authentic common touch, and takes itself less seriously than others. It features little-known stand-ups (Mr. Mandel is the rare guest viewers might have heard of) and bills itself as ''four rounds of smart comedy.'' But Mr. Quinn, whose blue-collar persona made him the least convincing of mock news anchors on ''Saturday Night Live,'' has built a show that is proudly crass, the ''Man Show'' of political entertainments. One routine featured Mr. Quinn as a presidential candidate behind a sign reading ''Helf Care'' and ''Tax Kutz.''
And although the show is more politically incorrect than ''Politically Incorrect'' ever was, no one involved seems to realize that anti-p.c. name-calling is not the same as social commentary. In a typical satiric exchange about minorities, a white guy asks, ''What's next, blacks and women making as much money as we do?''
A black guy comes back with, ''You're Jewish and you're not even good at that.''
Dumbed-down political humor doesn't get dumber than that.
''Tough Crowd'' looks especially lame because it immediately follows ''The Daily Show With Jon Stewart,'' which deserves all the extravagant praise it has gotten. (It also deserves praise for not having a panel.) Mr. Stewart is so good at deflating media hype that he and other cable satirists are now creeping into the network mainstream. ABC's ''This Week with George Stephanopuoulos,'' a traditional Sunday news program desperately trying to beef up ratings, now includes weekly excerpts from Stewart or Leno or Letterman jokes, in a segment called ''The Sunday Funnies.'' On NBC, Mr. Stewart was interviewed by Tom Brokaw after the State of the Union address. Isn't this just the kind of media cravenness ''The Daily Show'' should make fun of?
TELEVISION
