The dirty gray snow was ankle deep on West 18th Street the other day, and on the block between Ninth and Tenth Avenues, a cold wind blew in off the Hudson River.
On the south side of the street, a mechanic stood in front of his garage smoking a cigarette. Two orange-and-white Citarella food trucks were parked in front of a featureless Verizon garage.
On the north side of the street, another Citarella truck was double-parked in front of the company's drab, yellow-brick warehouse, which was covered with graffiti and flanked by two scrawny trees. Workers loaded broken furniture into a Dumpster at Fulton Houses, a public housing project at Ninth Avenue.
Next door to the Citarella warehouse, behind one of the block's only other trees, is the street's unlikeliest inhabitant: a pretty red town house that is home to a European countess. On a block lined almost entirely with unprepossessing commercial and industrial buildings, it is an unexpected survivor, a living echo of another era.
The house is brick, with neat rows of potted plants on the windowsills. Next to a black iron gate is a dented metal sign that reads, ''Please do not chain bikes to railing.'' Its owner is Inmaculada Habsburg, an elegant blond woman whose father was once claimant to the throne of Spain. The countess did not want to talk about the house, where she has lived since the late 1980's, but her neighbors say she is friendly and generally patient with the block's louder inhabitants.
''It drives her a little nuts, I'm sure,'' said Tony Moschini, the managing partner of Drive In Studios, just to the east of the town house. He was talking about the big Citarella trucks, which he said begin pulling in and out every day at 2 a.m., often idling in the street. His business, a large facility where photographers rent studio space, tries to be more considerate, though he joked that the countess has not yet invited his workers up for tea.
''We sweep her walk,'' he said with a shrug. ''That's about our only interaction.''
There are two other studios on the block, owned by the photographers Michael Thompson and Michael O'Neill. The little town house, though, predates all that, although by just how long is hard to determine; an application for a building permit dating from 1960, for alterations to the bathroom and kitchen, describes it simply as ''old.''
People lived on the block before the 1840's, when city tax records list neighbors as a primary school and a Methodist church. By the 1880's, industry had crept in: Manhattan Gas Light Company owned three lots. The house is listed in a city directory from 1934, next to the Globe Theatrical Transfer Company, in the space now owned by Citarella.
In tax photos from the early 1940's, the house looks very much the same, but back then it had residential neighbors. At midblock, the photos show a row of five-story brownstones with big black sedans parked in front. Behind ornate lampposts one can see apartments and a storefront, and mothers and children standing on the sidewalk. By the mid-1960's, the buildings were gone, replaced by the parking lots of Fulton Houses.
Through all the changes, the little red house has endured. Taxis and buses speed past it all day long, and workers load trucks next door. The other day, a receptionist at the Drive In Studios noticed, the countess had visitors who arrived in three chauffeured sedans, one with diplomatic plates.
JAKE MOONEY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: CHELSEA
