''I HOPE you are here for a rest,'' says the gentle young woman who greets me upon my arrival at Ikal del Mar in Xcalacoco on the Riviera Maya of Mexico, a small, two-year-old resort at the edge of the Caribbean. Perhaps she wants to give me a chance to hop back into the car that has driven me the 40 miles south from Cancún Airport. If I've come looking for a scene, a casino, a pickup game of volleyball on the beach, or maybe just a pickup, I could always go back to Cancún. I whisper into the hush of this place, ''That's exactly why I've come.''
Relieved, she hands me a cool washcloth and a bottle of water, and suggests I send my bags to my villa while we take a tour. ''My purse, too?'' ''Of course.'' Already there's something about this place that makes me trust it. Off go my books, bathing suits, passport, return ticket and cash. Off to where? All I can see is jungle.
We begin a slow stroll down a twisting path beneath a canopy of local trees known only by their Spanish and Maya names; areca, xiat, chit, chaca, salam, mano de tegre, cocotero, palo de guaya and lengua de vaca. I take to calling them, collectively, Gabriel García Márquez trees. Exotic, mysterious, with names that sing. Orchids grow from their trunks and wave a colorful welcome as we pass.
The sound of water is everywhere, one of the many nods to Maya culture, whose survival depended on it. A waterfall tumbles down volcanic boulders. A spring is heard but not seen. There are many underground rivers here, I am told. That would explain the sinkholes, the trees that send their roots in all directions driven by some ancient memory of water. The air is dappled with butterflies, white, yellow, blue and gold. Dragonflies swoop in and out of the shadows.
On the trip from Cancún I have seen that the jungle here, left to its own devices, becomes an impassable and scruffy growth of anything that can survive the heat and unrelenting sun. It is not the jungle of Rima or Tarzan. No light can penetrate, and if it could you wouldn't be there to see it.
At Ikal del Mar we meander through an idealized jungle where birds squawk and pipe and trill, where the play of light is reminiscent of that through stained glass in Gothic cathedrals. Great care has been taken to maintain a ''natural'' landscape (hold the hibiscus and bougainvillea), requiring constant vigilance over nature's determination to spread and multiply.
''Where are all the people?'' I ask my guide, Gabriela. This place seems engaged in an endless game of hide-and-seek. The sign marking the turnoff from the main road was so small and faint that the uninformed would have missed it. The unprepared would get flat tires in the potholes or on the boulders of the dirt road that leads to the resort. Gabriela explains: ''Our guests like privacy. We don't allow walk-ins.''
Yes, but you do allow guests, so I'm wondering where they are. At full capacity the resort houses 60 people in 30 villas. At this time, there are only 38 other visitors. ''You hardly see them,'' she says. ''They stay at their villas, in their plunge pools, they're in the spa, they're at the beach. With room service, honeymooners never have to leave their villas.'' Ah, yes.
''And just where are the villas?''
''Well, here's yours,'' she says, pointing into the trees. A wooden bridge curves through the deep green of draecena and areca, a brook runs along their roots, and a waterfall sings at my back. From the path I can't see the thatch-roof splendor that awaits. When we arrive it is to a pool at the edge of a shaded patio with two large chairs and ottomans, a hammock and a basket of rolled white towels. Gabriela pulls back the shuttered sliding glass doors to reveal a large room with a king bed beneath gauzy mosquito netting.
A man in a white jacket has appeared with a bottle of Spanish red and a bowl of fruit. ''May we offer a glass of wine to welcome you?'' The wine is poured. the table and tone are set. No hokey rum drinks here.
I'm led into a marble bathroom with a comfortable easy chair, two large wardrobes, shower and a door leading outside to ''your jungle shower,'' shielded by the leaves of flor de mayo, chit and lirio. I know at a glance that it will be my shower of choice.
Mine is one of 30 bohios (bungalows) built by Maya carpenters in a traditional style. Such care has been taken to respect landscape and privacy that when I sit on my patio, no other guests or buildings are visible. The only sound is of the waterfall across the bridge and an occasional splash as small fruit falls from the tree above my plunge pool.
At this place where there is ''nothing to do,'' my days begin to fill. The first activity is to seek refuge in the cool, dark silence of my room. And why not test this fine bed? Yes, nice and firm. Yes, down pillows. Two hours later I awaken with a start and the vague guilt that plagues New Yorkers at rest.
I change into a bathing suit and head for the beach. No motorized vehicles are allowed on the series of pathways that connect the villas to dining room, beach and spa. The curves of paths prevent a fast pace. Traversing the steep slope of a wooden bridge requires attention. You won't rush by, missing the occasional, flamboyant, red flowered bromelia, party girl of the jungle. You become aware of all the different sounds of water. Springs, brooks, the still invisible sea.
Within five minutes the trees release me into the sun's glare and a wide (seven-mile) expanse of white beach glistening like a crystal necklace around an azure sea. A pool sits at its edge and a bartender delivers Mexican beer to the only couple reclining there on thickly cushioned lounge chairs next to baskets holding straw hats, umbrellas and fresh towels.
There is a theme here: Whatever you need is thought of before you need it.
Guests on the beach are stretched out on reclining chaises widely spaced and shaded beneath thatch lean-tos. I watch their shoulders drop like so many bowling pins as they accept a short free massage offered by two therapists from the spa. Oh, I think this place is going to work out just fine.
The reef directly in front of the resort provides good snorkeling but rough terrain under foot, so I walk three minutes to a sandier entrance. I can safely backstroke without bumping into another swimmer. There are no other swimmers. From this vantage point the only person I see is a fisherman throwing a gossamer net into the gentle roll of waves.
When I emerge, I stop to ask about treatments at the thatch-roof spa. Well now, I can avail myself of the Jacuzzi and steam room at any time free of charge. And I can be treated with Mexican herbal potions and Maya mud. I can be massaged beneath the moon at water's edge. I can have any of five different facials and exfoliations and six body wraps. A look at the price list determines my choice. I will exfoliate as I walk on the sand and I'll wrap myself in the mineral rich sea. But yes, of course I'll have a free consultation with Cora, the spa director.
Cora possesses the exotic beauty that might once have inspired Peter Beard to carry her away from ''the wilds'' to become a Vogue cover girl. She, like everyone else I've met, possesses a quiet and kind demeanor, a manner that elicits an honest answer when she asks what I would like. I explain that I have been unable to sleep since my husband died. ''Any treatments for that?'' I ask, catching a note of New York, sharp-edged cynicism in the question.
''You should see Olivia. She understands emotions.'' She suggests a massage followed by reiki. O.K. then, it's Olivia tomorrow at 4 p.m.
BUT now it's time for an outdoor shower followed by dinner on the second floor of the open-air restaurant on the beach where the waiter asks my name and for the next two days everyone uses it. How they remember and how those who haven't met me know it is a Maya mystery. As is the lime soup, a simple chicken broth lifted jubilantly by the addition of lime juice and zest. A local, baby lobster tail ceviche buried beneath a temple of julienned raw vegetables is delivered. Sweet flesh, pungent sauce. And as for those raw vegetables, yes, this is Mexico, and according to the information provided in the villas: ''All vegetables are carefully treated before going to your table. Our Chef would not let you go on a fast diet.'' Kind of him, considering the burst of flavors to be sampled in the meals that lie ahead.
And the next day, following breakfast delivered to my patio, I meet Olivia. I wonder how her tiny hands can possibly knead the knots from my muscles. ''My English is not good, but I work from my heart,'' she says.
I will just leave you with this: she is a magical realism massage therapist. I am quite certain that should I open my eyes, I will see her floating above the table to that place where she seems to have shepherded my aches and woes.
That night I sleep 10 hours.
Refined comfort, wild gardens
I flew American Airlines from Kennedy Airport to Cancún's airport, where a car from the hotel was waiting to take me to the resort (about 50 minutes, $120 round trip).
At Ikal del Mar, (888) 230-7330, fax (713) 528-3697, www.ikaldelmar.com, rates are $550 in the high season, Jan. 6 to April 30; $675 from Dec. 21 to Jan. 5, and $475 May to December, single or double. Breakfast is included, but tax (12 percent) and service charges (10 percent) are extra. The rainy season is typically September to early October. Dinner with a margarita costs $33 to $60 a person; the restaurant is open to resort guests only. Free yoga and holistic exercise are offered daily from 10 to 11 a.m.
Spa treatments include a massage by the sea with an application of Maya mud and herbs and essential oils ($120 for 50 minutes). The Moon Massage is performed at dusk by the sea with fire torches surrounding you. Aperitifs and hors d'oeuvres are then served by candlelight under a canopy on the beach ($150). Facials range from $28 to $120. Exfoliations include a 60- to 90-minute Maya Bath ($140). There is also a full-service hair, nail and waxing salon.
I witnessed one couple staying at the resort take part in a ceremonial Maya wedding and another couple participate in a Maya affirmation of vows, both lead by a shaman complete with fire, smoke, incense, drums, rattles and chants. There is also a Maya version of a sweat lodge.
Tours can be arranged to Maya ruins including the site at Tulum, two hours to the south, and there is free shuttle service to the nearby town of Playa del Carmen.
BARBARA LAZEAR ASCHER
BARBARA LAZEAR ASCHER writes frequently about travel.
