THIS winter's prolonged cold weather has made the problems of Long Island's homeless and indigent worse, filling emergency shelters to capacity and pushing the demand for food, warm clothing and fuel to an all-time high.
''Obviously, we're in a crisis,'' said Joan Noguera, the executive director of the Nassau-Suffolk Coalition for the Homeless, in Garden City. ''We've had extremely cold temperatures.''
Figures from the National Weather Service bear her out. Last month, the average temperature at MacArthur Airport was 23.5 degrees, which is 7.4 degrees lower than normal.
The figures from Nassau County reflect the demand. On Jan. 26, the county provided emergency shelter to about 50 single people and 180 families (216 adults and 366 children). That compares with 34 single people and 119 families (142 adults and 240 children) a year ago.
Bethany House, which has four shelters in Nassau for women and children, is operating at its 56-bed capacity. ''We call in with a bed and get a referral by the end of the day.'' said Linda Wilkonski, the program director.
Last year, Nassau County began its one-stop Warm Line, a 24-hour toll-free telephone line that is open from Dec. 16 to March 31, longer if the weather remains cold. After dialing 866-WARM-BED -- which translates to (866)927-6233 -- the county will send cabs to take callers to emergency shelters or to motels if no shelter spaces are available. The next workday, the callers are taken to the Department of Social Services to see what assistance programs they are eligible for.
''The program is going exceptionally well,'' said Connie Lassandro, who oversees the county's homeless intervention program. ''Unfortunately, we're way ahead of last year's figures,'' with 400 requests this winter, up 60 percent from last year. She gave two reasons for the increase: the cold weather, and the program is better known.
In Suffolk County, the number of homeless people has increased sharply since 1999, said Dennis Nowak, a spokesman for the county's Department of Social Services. Requests for emergency shelter have climbed from 258 in January 1999 to 580 in January 2003.
Mr. Nowak said the number seems to have leveled off this winter, in spite of the cold weather: 2,151 people were in emergency housing, including about 1,300 children. Of these, 1,700 live in shelters and about 450 in motels.
The stays at emergency shelters have grown longer, Mr. Nowak said, climbing from four to five months in 1999 to the current level of about 11 months.
He attributed the increased demand for emergency housing to the soft economy and the big increase in housing prices, more than to the cold. He said that in 2003, the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development said that the fair market rent on Long Island was $1,085 a month for a one-bedroom apartment and $1,324 a month for a two-bedroom apartment. To afford that two-bedroom, renters needed to earn about $52,000 a year or $25 an hour.
''While we haven't seen an increased demand for emergency housing,'' Mr. Nowak said, ''we do see an increase in people applying for home emergency assistance because of the high cost of fuel.''
Nassau County has recorded a similar increase. Karen Garber, a spokeswoman for the Department of Social Services, said that in the three weeks ending Jan. 23, the county had received requests from 84 families, compared with 59 requests for the same period last year.
Lynn Needelman, the executive director of Long Island Cares, which has 300 food pantries, said that demand has grown about 10 percent this winter, to 77,000 visits a month. ''It's a very serious situation,'' she said. ''The emergency food network is being stretched, and as the need increases, the available food has to increase.''
Because of the cold weather, she said, people are forced to use vouchers from social-service agencies for utility or medical expenses rather than food.
The Interfaith Nutrition Network, which provides meals, clothing and emergency shelter in Nassau and Suffolk, has also experienced an increase in demand this winter. ''We attribute it to the economy, the cold and the lack of affordable housing,'' said Tony Childs, the network's director of development.
Mr. Childs said that the average number of people at the network's largest soup kitchen, in Hempstead, climbed to about 300 a day last month, up from 200.
