THIRTY years ago, Chris Burden sent a blast of cold air through the art world with performance pieces that included getting shot in the arm by a friend, lying under a tarp on a busy Los Angeles street, crucifying himself briefly on a Volkswagen Beetle and spending 22 days hidden on a raised platform in an otherwise empty New York art gallery. Now 57, he has long since left performance behind to make sculptures that are discourses on military might, ominous models of overbuilt civilizations and experiments with art and technology. His current exhibition, at the Gagosian Gallery in Chelsea, is his first New York solo show since 1996. It includes recent work from a series of large-scale model bridges, made from originals and replicas of Erector-set parts, that he's been working on since 1997. Recently Mr. Burden talked to Susan Freudenheim, who is writing a biography of him, about this new work at his hangarlike studio in the mountains of Topanga Canyon, on the outskirts of Los Angeles.
ON THE MEANING OF BRIDGES -- I like bridges because, architecturally, they're really pure. They're about just one thing, and it's really clear.
Bridges, of course, have always had great symbolic meaning -- I see them as symbols of peace and optimism and connection. They're civil. My fascination with them came out of my interest in railways. And railways are interesting to me because they're the beginning of real nationhood, especially within the Industrial Revolution. They lead to thinking about what constitutes civilization, and what isn't civilizing.
ON THE NOSTALGIA OF TOY FACTORIES -- I built a lot of my early bridges myself. These projects take a lot of time. Just getting the parts, planning the parts, storing the parts. If I have the finances for it, I like having eight people working in my studio on a project. It feels like a little toy factory, and it even looks like one. If you look at the early pictures of Lionel or American Flyer factories, it's people working at long tables putting little assemblies together. And I come to my studio and see that even the process looks antiquated. It sounds schmaltzy, and it is a romance for the past.
ON LEARNING FROM LEGOS -- I think toys are important because they're the indoctrinational box of what it is to be in society. And I think my bridges are the promise of a toy fulfilled. The early construction sets -- Legos or Erector sets -- always were miniature models that you, too, as a child could build. Maybe you could make something as grand as the engineering feats you saw around you. But I don't think that promise was ever fulfilled. A child couldn't make these bridges; even my sophisticated builders can barely do it.
HOW 'TYNE BRIDGE' CAME ABOUT -- There's a specific history to ''Tyne Bridge.'' In July 2001, I was invited to an under-construction art center in Gateshead, England, called Baltic, the Centre for Contemporary Art. The director took me up to the top, and he said, ''Do you think you could do something in this huge, beautiful room?'' It looked like they were going to have an enormous window at one end, looking out onto the Tyne River and Newcastle, and directly outside that window was this beautiful, big, curved-arch bridge that lent itself perfectly to being made out of Erector sets. So I immediately proposed that. And it was a wonderful thing to see my bridge, and then the real bridge outside.
Zack Cook, my assistant, and I went through a tremendous effort to model ''Tyne Bridge'' accurately. Beam for beam, diagonal strut for diagonal strut. A lot of the parts were custom made to Meccano-Erector-set standards, which is a half-inch between holes. They were made in India and South America and shipped to Southern California. I thought it was such a shame to only make one set of parts. We should at least punch the parts out again; it's in the spirit of the thing, and I like the idea of making an Erector set that never existed, with 200,000 parts in it. So to supplement the bridge, we made ''Tyne Bridge'' kits, with all the preassembled parts, which are also in the show.
One of the things I really liked at the Baltic was that you could look up the river and see seven different bridges -- all spanning the same river and all different. Some are beautiful, and some are just dogs. And you think, yes, it's an engineering problem, but it's an aesthetic one, too. How can there be so many permutations on this simple A to B thing?
ART
