Hoping to assuage widespread international alarm about the sinking value of the American dollar, the United States and other members of the Group of 7 industrialized countries declared Saturday that ''excess volatility and disorderly movements in exchange rates are undesirable for economic growth.''
The statement, issued by finance ministers of the member countries, represented at least a tepid acknowledgment by the United States that the dollar's rapid decline and the euro's rise could jeopardize the exports of European nations even as American exports receive a lift.
By expanding on earlier calls for flexibility in exchange rates, the statement implied sharper criticism of Asian governments, notably China and Japan, that have actively worked to keep their own currencies from rising in value.
The statement was a compromise between the stance of the Bush administration, which has condoned the dollar's decline and argued that exchange rates should be driven by ''market forces,'' and that of European leaders, who wanted a more forceful effort.
Global currency markets are unlikely to be impressed, because American officials provided no hint that they are about to prevent a further gradual decline in the dollar.
Treasury Secretary John W. Snow, summarizing results of the meeting, did not even allude to the communiqué's statement about exchange rates. He refused to elaborate on its meaning. ''I don't think there is any point in trying to interpret the statement,'' he said. 'It's written in fairly plain English.''
The dollar has lost a quarter of its value against the euro in the past year, and a third of its value in the past two years. The weaker dollar has provided a big lift to American exporters, because a cheaper dollar makes American products cheaper in foreign markets. American exports shot up 19.1 percent in the final quarter of last year, and they are expected to keep rising this year.
But the strong euro is causing problems for European exporters by making their products more expensive in the United States. International anxieties about the United States' plunging currency and massive borrowing needs were higher at this Group of 7 meeting than in years.
European finance ministers and central bankers, having watched the dollar's slide against the euro in the past year, sought to reach some sort of agreement that would stop the dollar from falling further. Exports are virtually the only source of economic growth in countries like France and Germany.
Mr. Snow repeatedly told the ministers that the administration ''has a plan'' to reduce by half the United States' budget deficit over the next five years. Many budget analysts say deficit reduction will be extremely difficult because of the administration's support for large tax cuts as well as the costs of maintaining troops in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The budget deficit increases the United States' need for foreign borrowing, already at extraordinarily high levels. The American current account deficit, the broadest measure of trade and financial transactions with the rest of the world, is about $500 billion a year.
European leaders put part of the blame for the recent currency shifts on the Bush administration's willingness to let the budget deficit soar and the dollar fall. ''We are all interdependent,'' said Francis Mer, France's finance minister, of the American budget deficit, which the White House predicts will reach $521 billion this year.
Adding to the tension, European economic growth is much slower and more fragile than that of the United States. The European Central Bank has predicted that growth in the 12-nation euro zone will be about two percent in 2004, about half as fast as the growth expected this year in the United States.
European leaders loudly complained about ''excessive'' currency shifts, and pushed the Group of 7 to drop its previous call for greater ''flexibility'' in exchange rates.
The group adopted that position at its meeting last year in Dubai, largely because the United States wanted to push China to let its own currency rise in value against the dollar and other currencies. This year's statement still calls for flexibility, but the reference is now clearly aimed at Asian countries, not Europe.
The policies of Asian governments, particularly China and Japan, loomed over all discussions this weekend. Both countries have made huge purchases American Treasury securities and dollars to try to restrain their currencies from rising too much against the dollar. The Bank of Japan bought about $175 billion in American securities in 2003, then $67 billion more in January 2004 alone.
That did not prevent the Japanese yen from rising to its highest level in three years against the dollar, but Japanese leaders signaled that they are not about to stop their interventions just yet. ''I told him that currencies should reflect market fundamentals in a stable manner and that it is up to each nation to act against excesses,'' Sadakazu Tanigaki, Japan's finance minister, told reporters here on Friday, referring to his discussions with Mr. Snow.
