Hardly anyone debates the so-called ''death of the novel'' anymore, but whether or not certain memoirs have the right to exist at all is a question that still gets kicked around regularly. Even people working on their own memoirs will quickly follow up the announcement with a disclaimer explaining that while they hate the form -- it's self-indulgent, spurious and so over -- nevertheless they are, sheepishly, writing a memoir.
The furor around a memoir can be more revealing than the book itself. Last year passions ran stratospheric, for example, over ''A Million Little Pieces,'' by James Frey, as they still do over books by Elizabeth Wurtzel. Both authors write about being privileged young people descending into pits of self-destructive despair and struggling back to (probably fleeting) stability. Depending on which reader you ask, their books are either fiercely truthful gauntlets flung in the face of an unfeeling world or worthless, appallingly written frauds. The closer the reader is to the author demographically, the more violent the response, pro or con. She's either a soul mate, the only person (besides a gloomy rock singer or two) who understands your pain, or she's a whiny spoiled brat passing herself off as a generational spokeswoman.
Even less incendiary memoirs can act like Rorschach blots. Why, for example, did The Daily News decide that the most noteworthy thing in ''American Sucker,'' by the New Yorker film critic David Denby, was the author's admission that shortly after his wife left him he became briefly preoccupied with Internet pornography? Other newspapers and magazines marveled over this admission too, even though the passage takes up less than two pages in a 300-page book about Denby's disastrous effort to make $1 million investing in technology stocks. There's nothing remarkable in Denby's interest; porn is a major engine of the Web economy, after all, and it's not just a few furtive guys in raincoats fueling it. The revelation is only scandalous if you believe that New Yorker staffers are a kind of secular priesthood enjoined to forgo vicarious delights of the flesh, but perhaps the gossip columnists at The Daily News believe just that.
Fewer reviewers chose to mention Denby's affair with a married woman -- an uncontestable moral transgression -- as a sign of his post-breakup tailspin, and only Chris Lehmann, writing for The Washington Post, pointed out that one of the business ventures Denby found so dazzling, Samuel Waksal's ImClone Systems, depended for its success on charging desperately ill cancer patients a whopping $26,000 for an experimental treatment. Some critics chided Denby for confiding too much of his personal life in ''American Sucker,'' others for not exploring it more deeply. Those who also invested and lost sympathized with Denby's travails; those who never had the funds to consider it fumed at his sense of entitlement.
Although Denby begins ''American Sucker'' by announcing that his account will keep ''hindsight'' to a minimum and hew close to the ''bubbling enthusiasms'' of the moment, he can't avoid reflection entirely. Contemporary readers are wary of being duped into playing audience for a rampant exhibitionist; the memoirs that fire up the most anger are the ones that make people suspect they've indulged their worst voyeuristic impulses. Coming to a moral conclusion about what happened and who's to blame elevates the proceedings. When the author offers his own list of lessons learned, it edges the book that much closer to St. Augustine's ''Confessions'' and that much farther from ''My Secret Life,'' the Victorian-era erotic ''autobiography.''
But here the memoirist can betray himself by revealing that he hasn't really understood his experience. Denby hasn't figured out that he can't approach the economy as if it were the movies. His mentor, Pauline Kael, championed the pleasures of unabashedly pop creations over the spinachy standards of middlebrow art, and Denby evaluated capitalism in the same light. To him, Waksal and his ilk were great because they were stylish, energetic and reveled in high-end consumer goods; those who questioned the hubris and decadence of the boom were drab, puritanical ''prigs.'' But the movies are free to be vulgar or frivolous because they are, in the end, just movies. The economy is the food in people's bellies, the clothes on their backs, the roof over their heads, the medical care that shields them from pain and death -- and Denby spares no thoughts for those on the unlucky side of the growing economic divide. What's most embarrassing is that this doesn't embarrass him.
A new, cannier breed of confessional memoirist manages to avoid drawing foolish conclusions by avoiding conclusions entirely. Jennifer Lauck's ''Blackbird'' describes her misery at the hands of a mean stepmother from the naïve, limited perspective of her child self. Brad Land's new memoir, ''Goat,'' recounts in spare, numbed sentences how he was brutalized in a violent robbery and later subjected himself to similar degradations during a fraternity hazing. Like ''Blackbird,'' ''Goat'' is a creepy page turner, offering itself up as a raw, bleeding slab of experience, unseasoned by later judgments. But the immediacy of both is an illusion; the stunned, inarticulate narrator of ''Goat'' couldn't have written this memoir any more than the 8-year-old Lauck could have produced ''Blackbird.'' What at first seems like a relentless act of self-exposure is actually an artful impersonation of Land's past self. Today's Land, the author of ''Goat,'' and what he thinks about the humiliations he endured, remain concealed.
In principle, the memoir that reaches for understanding has greater merit than an untempered horror story. In inconvenient reality, ''Goat'' exerts a hypnotic power that ''American Sucker'' can't match. Where Denby labors manfully to arrive at fairly conventional insights, Land leaves the meaning of his story up to us. We can cut its profundity to suit ourselves. Even when you bare your soul, it's sometimes smartest not to tell all.
THE LAST WORD
