A look at the 19 teams in the Arena Football League, which enters its 18th season. *Playoff teams last season
By FRED BIERMAN
American Central Division
Chicago Rush (8-8)*  Last season, Chicago's defense was its strength, but this off-season the Rush has worked to improve on offense and seeks to be a contender despite losing Antonio Chatman to the Green Bay Packers.
Colorado Crush (2-14)  After a tough season, the Crush moved divisions and hired a 15-year A.F.L. coaching veteran in Mike Dailey, who won an Arena Bowl with Albany in 1999, to coach the team.
Detroit Fury (8-8)*  Fury quarterback Andy Kelly threw 93 touchdown passes last season but was intercepted a league-leading 20 times.
Grand Rapids Rampage (8-8)*  With a new quarterback in Jeff Loots and a new coach in Bob Cortese, the Rampage should be competitive within its division.
Indiana Firebirds (6-10)  The former N.F.L. quarterback Steve DeBerg is Indiana's first-year coach and Kevin Daft will be the new starting quarterback. Mike Horacek, who came over from Las Vegas, led the A.F.L. in receptions last season.
American Western division
Arizona Rattlers (10-6)*  Arizona is a veteran team led by quarterback Sherdrick Bonner, who is in his 11th season, and is coming off its second consecutive Arena Bowl appearance.
Los Angeles Avengers (11-5)*  The Avengers kept most of their core intact, including quarterback Tony Graziani, who helped them average 57.8 points last season. Add an improved defense and they are a favorite to reach the Arena Bowl.
Las Vegas Gladiators (8-8)*  Clint Dolezel (89 touchdown passes) and Terril Shaw (41 touchdown catches) came over from Grand Rapids and give the Gladiators a potent offensive combination.
San Jose SaberCats (12-4)*  Another contender to win the Arena Bowl. They return most of an offense that averaged 60.4 points a game and have markedly improved their defense.
National Eastern Division
Carolina Cobras (0-16)  Carolina will try to rebound after not winning a game last season and will do so with only two returning players, but maybe that's for the best.
Columbus Destroyers (5-11)  The Destroyers hope that relocating from Buffalo will change their fortunes with the former Ohio State coach Earle Bruce taking over. Columbus will need to replace Dwaine Carpenter, who signed with the 49ers.
Dallas Desperados (10-6)*  It was a tough off-season for the Desperados, who lost quarterback Jim Kubiak to an injury in training camp and lost a number of talented players to free agency.
New York Dragons (8-8)*  The Dragons started last season 0-6 but won the Eastern Division. Aaron Garcia, one of the best quarterbacks in league history, leads the offense. The Dragons gave up 32 sacks last season.
Philadelphia Soul (First season)  Coach Mike Trigg, who won an Arena Bowl with Grand Rapids, has assembled a veteran team that could contend right away. Jon Bon Jovi leads the ownership group.
National Southern Division
Austin Wranglers (First season)  The signing of quarterback John Kaleo, who led Tampa Bay to an Arena Bowl title last season, was a great start for this expansion team.
Georgia Force (8-8)*  The Force lost some key elements of a defense that led the A.F.L. in yards a game and scoring, but improved its offense in free agency.
New Orleans Voodoo (First season)  Coach Mike Neu, who coached Carolina in 2002, brought in the quarterback and receiver from that Carolina team and the familiarity should benefit the expansion team.
Orlando Predators (12-4)*  Coach Fran Papasadero died in a car accident in the off-season; Jay Gruden, the quarterback last season, takes over. Joe Hamilton, a standout at Georgia Tech, is the new quarterback.
Tampa Bay Storm (12-4)*  Tampa Bay will defend its Arena Bowl title without its starting quarterback, Kaleo, who signed with Austin, but the rest of the offense is intact. The Storm will need a strong defensive effort if it is to defend its title.
