The Thrills, a 20-something quintet from Dublin, has won raves for its debut album, ''So Much for the City,'' its sunny pop songs reminiscent of Graham Parsons and the Beach Boys -- with hints of Motown and the Monkees. But the band's haphazardly hip fashions, a mishmash of surfer and vintage 70's finds, also deserve recognition. ''In our music, we love mixing up ideas and influences in an irreverent way,'' said the singer, Conor Deasy, during a recent tour stop in New York. ''We don't take our clothes very seriously, either. We wear the same things on stage that we've worn all day.''
The band shows off some typical tour wear here. From left: Daniel Ryan, guitarist, bassist and banjoist, wears Vans, Dickies pants (''which come in loads of colors and cost $20,'' he said), an Urban Outfitters jacket and a Miu Miu sweater picked up during the filming of a music video. Kevin Horan, keyboardist, wears Dickies and Vans with a secondhand pea jacket. Ben Carrigan, the drummer, pairs his father's old ski sweater with Levi's and Converse Chuck Taylors. The bassist and guitarist Pádriac McMahon has assembled a Graham Parsons T-shirt, Replay jeans, a Fossil watch and a Gorrin hat. Mr. Deasy, far right, wears a T-shirt by Nathan Bogle, a secondhand coat, secondhand Levi's and Nikes acquired during the making of the video.
The musicians say they visit vintage shops wherever they perform. Their favorite haunts include American Rag Cie, in New York and Los Angeles; Santa Monica, in Tokyo; and Black Magic, in Toronto, where they recently bought long johns and winter coats, including the one on Mr. Horan, which pays homage to two of the band's musical heroes. ''Brian and Dennis Wilson of the Beach Boys wore coats like this all the time,'' Mr. Horan said.
JENNIFER TUNG
PULSE: WHAT I'M WEARING NOW  Correction:  February 15, 2004, Sunday  A report in the Pulse column last Sunday about clothing fashions favored by the Thrills, a pop group from Dublin, misstated the name of a singer whose work is recalled by some of their songs. He was Gram Parsons, not Graham.
