AROUND WASHINGTON SQUARE: An Illustrated Historyof Greenwich Village  By Luther S. Harris  Johns Hopkins University Press  ($39.95, hardcover)
One could hardly guess from the multilane truck route Houston Street has become that it was once a narrow residential street. Back in the early 1800's, Houston was the most northern in a progression of east-west streets built north of Canal Street according to the pre-1811 50-foot standard.
Its namesake was William Houstoun, Georgia's delegate to the Continental Congress and the son-in-law of Nicholas Bayard III, through whose farm the street ran. (The second u was inexplicably dropped from the street name sometime after 1811, and the first syllable is pronounced like house, never like the city in Texas.)
Houston Street first became attractive to developers when St. Thomas's Church and the Reformed Dutch Church bought lots there in the 1820's. Then, in 1832, with the northern stretches of the urban frontier nearing 14th Street, Houston Street became the southern boundary of the new 15th Ward. By the time the Third Presbyterian Church was built on the southwest corner of Thompson and Houston Streets a year later, the street was lined with many elegant homes.
One early resident, who lived at 26 West Houston Street on the northwest corner of Mercer Street, was Charles King, president of Columbia University from 1849 to 1864. His father was Rufus King, a member of the Continental Congress from Massachusetts in 1786, and afterward an ambassador to Britain and a U.S. senator from New York.
Charles's older brother John became governor of New York, and his younger brother James was a partner in Sam Ward's banking firm. In 1808 Charles had joined the shipping firm of Archibald Gracie, a leading merchant who was a close associate of his father and Alexander Hamilton. (Today, the summer place Gracie erected on the East River is the official residence of the city's mayors.)
THE IMPOSSIBLE MUSICAL: The 'Man of La Mancha' Story  By Dale Wasserman  Applause Books  ($25.95, hardcover)
Misfortune was due to have one more whack at us. On Nov. 9, 1965, on the occasion of our first dress rehearsal, at about 5 o'clock in the evening, all the lights in the theater went out. We waited. And waited. Everyone was warned to stand still, where they were. Then we learned, via a crew member's transistor radio, that the blackout had targeted not merely our theater but all of New York.
A bit later we learned it was more than merely New York; somewhere in Canada a switch box had failed, plunging the entire Eastern seaboard into darkness. There was no hint as to how long it would last. There was no precedent by which to measure it.
When it became evident we'd have no dress rehearsal, we organized carpools to return the cast and crew to their homes, as all public transportation had come to a halt. I rode shotgun with Mitch Leigh in his green Rolls-Royce as we delivered actors without personal transportation to their homes.
It was an eerie experience. New York was a city bewitched ... dark, strangely silent, and of course without streetlights or traffic signals. The only illumination came from automobile headlights, of which there were fewer and fewer as evening darkened into night.
Pedestrians desperate for transportation stood in the streets, trying to wave us down, to get a ride or commandeer the car. We kept the doors locked against possible attack.
AS TOLD AT THE EXPLORERS CLUB: More Than Fifty Gripping Talesof Adventure  Edited and With an Introduction by George Plimpton  The Lyons Press  ($24.95, hardcover)
A word about the club itself and its ''Long Table'': On May 28, 1904, 50 men well-known in exploration circles met at a dinner at the Aldine Association and decided to organize a club with its object to unite explorers in the bonds of good fellowship and to promote the work of exploration. The initiation fee to join this worthy cause was $10, $5 for nonresidents, and the annual dues were $20 for residents and just $5 for nonresidents.
Despite these come-hitherly low sums, the membership was small, meetings irregular and sparsely attended, largely because the club did not have its own quarters. This was rectified in 1912 when the club took over an empty loft at 345 Amsterdam Avenue.
Here the social activity increased to such a degree that in 1922 the club purchased a town house at 47 West 76th. In 1928, both solvent and popular, the club leased an eight-story building, hoping to payoff the investment by renting out five stories of bedrooms. The membership turned out to be better explorers than landlords; the lease was terminated, and the club moved twice more, finally settling into a building at 10 West 72nd opposite the Dakota House.
The club there has been described as having a distinctive smell one detected on coming through the front door -- ''a savour of carpets and camels and musk .. a beguiling pungent aroma, not too pervading.''
NEW YORK BOOKSHELF
