IN an early test of how he will fare with Republicans controlling the County Legislature, Steve Levy, Suffolk's county executive, is facing a challenge that could strip his new administration of control over the county's land purchase programs.
Mr. Levy, a Democrat in office for barely six weeks, has envisioned shifting the county's real estate division from the planning department to an Environmental Department to be headed by Michael Deering, the county's director of environmental affairs and the former executive director of the State Legislature's Commission on Water Resource Needs of Long Island and New York State.
Mr. Levy said last week that he would soon announce the names of new negotiators experienced in environmental preservation who would work under Mr. Deering as part of a shake-up of the real estate division, which negotiates county land purchases, subject to the County Legislature's approval. The new Environmental Department would also require legislative approval.
Since the 1970's, Suffolk has spent more money to preserve open land than most states, paying in excess of $450 million for more than 50,000 acres.
Now a plan coming before the county legislators envisions a sharply different approach to land buying that would put the county executive's office out of the picture. Allan Binder, a Republican legislator from Huntington, is proposing that the Legislature, in which Republicans currently hold an 11-to-6 majority, appoint an outside commissioner to take charge of the programs. The commissioner, once confirmed by the Legislature, would serve a five-year fixed term as the head of a new county Department of Real Estate.
Mr. Binder's measure, entitled the Real Estate Acquisition Anti-Corruption Reform Act, is notable because it shifts the prerogative of naming a department head from the executive branch to the legislative branch.
''I have taken the county executive out of the process,'' said Mr. Binder, who called the action justified because of scandals involving the land programs during the administration of Robert J. Gaffney, Mr. Levy's Republican predecessor.
Mr. Gaffney's appointee to run the real estate division, his former law partner Allan Grecco, resigned in 2001 amid allegations that the county overpaid for land whose owner was a client of his title insurance company. Other allegations, published in Newsday, were that politically influential sellers were favored in some other transactions.
''The way you stop the scandals is to professionalize the process and take it out of politics,'' Mr. Binder said. He said creating an independent Real Estate Department would insulate land programs from political pressures. ''I want to build a moat around the department,'' he said.
Mr. Levy said that he wanted to restore the land purchase programs, which had stalled because of the scandals, to a top priority and believed that the creation on an Environmental Department would make that happen. ''We haven't been lacking in funds for open-space preservation,'' he said, ''but there has been a backlog due to inefficient bureaucracy and, unfortunately, scandals. We are going to overcome that.''
He said he had spoken with Mr. Binder and understood his desire to reform the land purchase process.
''I knew he wanted to do something with the division of real estate, but I did not know that he was seeking to take away my ability to make the appointment,'' Mr. Levy said. ''But I am very happy for a dialogue to see if my ideas for reform can muster support from as many legislators as possible.''
''We know legislators are going to put in their own bills,'' said Mr. Levy, a former county legislator and state assemblyman, referring to Mr. Binder's proposal. ''And as long as it doesn't pass, that's fine.''
Mr. Binder, a legislator for 15 years, is the chairman of a newly created committee that will decide which bills come to a vote in the Legislature. He said he expected his proposal would be approved for a vote in March.
''This is the first major reform bill of 2004,'' he said in an apparent slap at Mr. Levy, who ran for county executive as a reformer.
A committee hearing on Mr. Binder's bill is scheduled on Tuesday.
The Long Island Pine Barrens Society, an influential environmental group, is opposing the plan and was asking other groups last week to join it in opposition.
Richard Amper, the society's executive director, said Mr. Binder's proposal purported to avert land scandals but would actually block future land purchases. ''He has not been a champion of the environment or open space preservation,'' Mr. Amper said. ''Now he is working to keep us from preserving land.''
Mr. Binder said that Mr. Amper backed Mr. Deering's appointment to assure his own influence over future land purchases. ''Mike Deering is his guy,'' Mr. Binder said. ''He was hoping he would have huge influence over land acquisitions. He wanted to be the Wizard of Oz behind the curtain.''
Mr. Deering was the president of the pine barrens society when it hired Mr. Amper in 1989.
David A. Bishop, a Democrat from West Babylon, said Mr. Binder's proposal was unlikely to prevail. ''It's a naked power grab, and I don't think it's going anywhere,'' he said. ''You have to let the county executive be the chief executive.''
Mr. Bishop said that even if the measure passed, Republicans would lack the two-thirds majority needed to override an executive veto. He said Mr. Levy's approach was the best way to speed up land purchases that had been moving at so slow a pace that the county's appraisals were outdated before deals were completed.
