LAST Wednesday, three longtime experts on state politics sat down in the Hartford offices of the public affairs television network, Connecticut Network, CT-N, to watch Gov. John G. Rowland's State of the State address. Roy Occhiogrosso has worked for the House and Senate Democrats and was William E. Curry Jr.'s campaign manager during his unsuccessful campaign for governor in 2002. He is a principal in the Global Strategy Group, a political and private-sector consulting firm. Christopher C. Healy is a lobbyist in Hartford at the law firm Updike, Kelly &amp; Spellacy, has worked on political campaigns at the local, state and national level and has served on the Republican State Central Committee. And Dr. Howard L. Reiter heads the political science department at the University of Connecticut. These are excerpts, compiled by The New York Times, of some of their debates about the address, prefaced by the relevant sections (in italics) of the governor's speech.
Cities
''Our vision and investments have permanently altered the landscape of these cities. That's the quiet triumph behind the revitalization of our cities.
Now we must unleash our cranes and ambitions to the needs of mid-size cities like Norwich, Torrington, Bristol and Norwalk.''
Mr. Occhiogrosso: From my perspective and I think more importantly from the perspective of the people actually living in the cities, I think this shows something of a detachment from reality I don't think there's any question that the effort's been there. I think it's been the wrong type of effort. I think it's gone in the wrong direction. I don't think you revitalize cities by building football stadiums and convention centers. But to suggest that Hartford, Bridgeport, Waterbury and New Haven are revitalized and now it's time to move on to the next set of cities would be a shock to the people who actually live there. Per capita I think Hartford is the poorest city in the nation, Bridgeport has the highest effective property tax rate in the nation, property taxpayers in Waterbury faint when they open their tax bills. The sewer lines are breaking there every single day. You can't drive down the city streets. The suggestion that we have revitalized these cities and now it's time to move on to the next ones, is, I think, just a testament to a lack of either understanding what's been going on there or a refusal on his part to acknowledge his own policy failures.
Mr. Healy: For 50 years while the Democrats ran this state, controlled the governorships and the Legislature, Hartford, Bridgeport and New Haven were three of the poorest cities in the nation, in the top 10. That has changed in the sense that the governor as a Republican put political convention on its ear and said the future of our state depends on first stabilizing our cities and then turning them around. A lot of these problems are endemic, sociological, or pathology that's at work. I agree with Roy that you can't fix a city by putting up public buildings, but you can change the attitude about the city by showing a willingness by working with the local leaders to turn the possibilities around
Dr. Reiter: I think he's clearly trying to expand his base from whatever support he's been able to increase from the big cities to the smaller ones. I think in some of the comparisons of Connecticut cities and others across the nation is kind of like comparing apples and oranges, although certainly all of the cities the governor mentioned have serious problems surrounding poverty. The per capita income or poverty rates are less comparable, because in other parts of the country cities absorb the suburbs, and therefore end up looking economically more healthy while the downtown inner city areas are just as poorly off as some of our cities
Education
''In this year of holding the line on spending, education is one of the few areas where I refuse to stand still. Our investment has produced higher performing students, better schools, increasing enrollment in our public universities and recognition that Connecticut is a leader in education policy.''
Mr. Healy: I think even the governor's fiercest critics would concede that, at least on the higher education system, the university system has not only been an attraction for kids here to go to school, but for kids from around the country and all over the world. And the community college system, the branches, which were previously neglected, are not anymore.
Mr. Occhiogrosso: As it pertains to education, there's always been a contrast between what Rowland talks about and what he actually does. And I agree with Chris, the focus on higher education theoretically is terrific and he deserves credit for that and he and the Legislature have invested billions in infrastructure. The problem is the governor hasn't invested money in students and so you have beautiful buildings, but a lot of folks can no longer afford to go there because tuition's been climbing, skyrocketing, and so it's one half of the problem. I agree that the focus is in the right place, but it is leaving something out of the equation to not address that.
Dr. Reiter: On higher education, there really was a lack of specifics here and as Roy said there has been a major commitment to the infrastructure at universities like mine. But I would also add to the fact that students may be underserved, we also have a sharp decline in the instructional staff. We may have students and we may have very nice buildings, and I don't mean to understate the importance of the infrastructure. I think it's great what's been happening. But we don't have the instructional staff to teach them and we're constantly scrambling for adjuncts or graduate students to teach courses so that our undergraduates can graduate on time. This is a major problem at UConn.
The Scandal
''The most important commodity we have is time. Time for ourselves, time for our families, time to reduce the stress in our lives Adversity can beat you down or it can make you stronger. Thank God that in America challenge is always followed by even greater success. This country does not know retreat and no where is that more apparent than right here in Connecticut.''
Dr. Reiter: I recently reread Clinton's 1998 state of the union address and I've heard that the governor is looking to Clinton as a role model for how to get through a crisis like this.
Mr. Occhiogrosso: Bet you never thought he'd say that. Bet he never thought he'd say that.
Mr. Healy: I don't think he said that.
Dr. Reiter: Well, at any rate, Clinton gave that address right after the Monica Lewinsky scandal broke. People were talking in terms of days left in his presidency. There was not even a hint in that speech, not even the coded language that we find in this one, about the scandal. Clinton was very focused on saying things are going to continue as usual, I'm going to do the job the people elected me for, and I think that it just shows the much more precarious situation that the governor's in. I felt that he could have gotten away without any reference to the problems he's having and as he tried to universalize his experience and tried to make it sound as though we're all in tough times and we're all going to get through it. I don't think that will work because clearly there are revelations coming out all the time.
Mr. Healy: Don't forget, this is a man who's spent his whole life in politics. He's an alumni of the chamber. He has worked very effectively with Democrats over the last nine years. Roy can attest to the fact that it wasn't too long ago when these guys were having beers at night and singing ''Bye-bye, Miss American Pie.'' Things have changed obviously since then. I think what he was trying to do was to basically say ''Look, I'm a human being. I have a family and I know what I did was wrong. Whatever will happen will happen, but I'm resolute in finishing what I started.'' I agree with Howard. It's sort of like an 800-pound gorilla there in the room, pink elephant, whatever you want to call it. I thought he handled it well. And I think legislators showed a remarkable decorum. There weren't the walkouts that were anticipated. I wouldn't switch places with him for all the money in the world. Whatever you think of him, it takes courage to walk into the chamber under those circumstances and say ''We've got a state to run here.''
Mr. Occhiogrosso: I get the sense that he's at a funeral, but he's the only one who doesn't know that he's dead. I would respectfully disagree with what Chris said. It doesn't take courage to walk in there. It's the ultimate act of selfishness. Because at this point it really is all anybody's focused on. Nobody was really listening to what he had to say today. Everybody's sitting there thinking, ''Huh, I wonder how much longer he's going to be here? And will this be the last state of the state speech he gives? Will this be the last time he addresses the chamber?''
