CHARLES LUDLAM, who died in 1987 at age 44, was the mastermind of the Ridiculous Theatrical Company, and creator of his own genre of theater, ridiculousness.
Simply put, ridiculousness is beyond absurdism. Practically speaking, it is an extraordinary fusion of stylistic contradictions that somehow transform melodramatic excesses and lowdown sight gags into high theater art, suddenly finding new meanings in the oldest clichés and outlandish puns.
Although Mr. Ludlam wrote more than two dozen plays, one of which was about the invention of a third gender, he had only one hit, ''The Mystery of Irma Vep.'' The play -- rearrange the letters of Irma Vep, and you get vampire - is a maniacal variation of the ''penny dreadful,'' the Victorian genre cluttered with ghouls, corpses, dismembered legs and bony hands, and unidentified creatures that howl in the night while lightning flashes and thunder rolls.
The play calls for two actors, playing seven roles, and so promotes the artful deception that it can be produced on the cheap. For this reason, it has become a staple of regional theaters, from community to professional companies, where it sinks relentlessly.
But not at Hartford Stage, where it is being presented in all its lavishly intricate theatricality and measured insanity. Two master actors, James Lecesne and Jeffery T. Roberson perpetuate the illusion that one and one add up to seven -- people, that is.
But the cast list also includes a portrait that bleeds, at one point revealing a live face peering through it. The picture, an ominous centerpiece over the mantel in the library drawing room of the Hillcrest estate is a likeness of the presumably dead title character, Lady Irma Hillcrest, who, on her deathbed, swore that she would return to life. For a time, the portrait of Lady Irma is fittingly replaced by one of Lady Enid, new wife to Lord Edgar.
Mummies disappear, werewolves fall -- it turns out that the wrong wolf was killed -- and characters themselves assume different guises, as when Lord Edgar dresses in the costume of an Egyptian priest.
Jeff Cowie's opulent sets range from the Hillcrest manse with its French doors, African masks and Japanese screens to an eye-popping second-act curtain that rises upon a sarcophagus and leads into Lord Edgar's first line, ''Ah Egypt.''
Staged by Michael Wilson, this extravagant creation played to a packed house last Saturday night. When a stage full of dressers and production assistants took bows, after Mr. Lecesne and Mr. Roberson's series of giddy curtain calls, waves of love flowed from audience to stage and back.
''Irma Vep'' is having a heady effect here. In six seasons as artistic director, Mr. Wilson has produced Tennessee Williams marathons and given homage to plays by Horton Foote, old and new. The time has come for all out Ludlamania. Ask the people out there in the dark.
A Tortured Soul, In Mexican Exile
Jon Robin Baitz's four-character play, ''Ten Unknowns,'' about the complexity and cross purposes of the modern art ''scene,'' opened a limited run in Manhattan's Lincoln Center in March 2001. Ever since, Steve Campo, the artistic director of TheaterWorks in Hartford, has been negotiating for the rights.
Mr. Campo's heart was set on producing ''Ten Unknowns'' last season. Although he did not succeed then, he did not give up, and the theater is putting the play on now. Mr. Campo directs.
It would be satisfying to add that the effort was blessed by the theatrical gods. It is not; nor is it a critical mismatch.
Mr. Baitz's play demands an extraordinary presence in the primary role of Malcolm, a 72-year-old bitter, once prominent, New York painter, thrust into obscurity 28 years ago by the then new movement of Abstract Expressionism. Self-exiled to Mexico, and from the world, Malcolm is visited by Trevor, an opportunistic but knowing art dealer, who seizes the chance to orchestrate Malcolm's major comeback. It would be called a retrospective, though resurrection is as apt. The year is 1992.
Malcolm, played originally by Donald Sutherland, suffers from a creative block, a shattered ego and a need to self-destruct. He is insufferable, and at the same time, has killer charm.
James A. Stephens is not wrong for the role; he simply is not all right. The contradictions and contrariness of a tortured soul who has created beauty, and perhaps still can, while making life hell, are merely etched in by Mr. Stephens.
Besides Trevor, there is Judd, his former lover, a junkie taking his umpteenth route to rehab, who may be some sort of muse to Malcolm. Judd, who is the beneficiary of many of Mr. Baitz's sharpest, most acerbic lines, is also many layered; Matthew Schmidt's performance is not.
The excellent Angela Pierce plays Julia, a graduate student who carries the weight of too many of the playwright's plot purposes and not enough of the character's own struggles. Ms. Pierce, whose reactions to other actors are remarkably sensitive, is still trying to figure out why she is there.
As Trevor, Matthew Greer is self-consciously slick.
Resorting to uncharacteristic stock staging devices, Mr. Campo may have realized that his cast lacks potential as an ensemble, or even that the play is not as fulfilled as he might have thought. Seemingly struggling to create his own work of stage art, he is still unable to connect the dots.
''The Mystery of Irma Vep'' is at Hartford Stage Company, 50 Church Street, through Saturday. Box office: (860)527-5151. ''Ten Unknowns'' is at TheaterWorks, 233 Pearl Street, Hartford, through March 7. Box office: (860)527-7838.
THEATER REVIEWS
