AS this Land of Lakes freezes over, Osmo Vanska is beginning to feel at home. The all-important sauna has been installed in the loft condo he and his wife, Pirkko, recently moved into. His countryman Antti Laaksonen headlines the local National Hockey League team, the Minnesota Wild. And Mr. Vanska has acquired a Yamaha Drag Star just like the one he has at home in Finland, where he led the Lahti Symphony Orchestra to world renown.
It's hard to picture this mild-mannered Finn burning rubber on a street bike. But in his professional life, he's been steering a savvy course between rigor and risk, and the results will be on display at Carnegie Hall tomorrow when he makes his first New York appearance as music director of the Minnesota Orchestra.
Mr. Vanska, 50, represents the latest wave of the Finnish tide sweeping the classical music world, and he is the third Finn to command a North American orchestra, after Esa-Pekka Salonen in Los Angeles and Jukka-Pekka Saraste in Toronto. Like them, he studied conducting under the legendary Jorma Panula at the Sibelius Academy in Helsinki, but unlike them, he plays down Mr. Panula's influence, calling his 11 years as an orchestral clarinetist ''the best school.''
Also unlike his classmates, Mr. Vanska is no meteor. Arriving in North America more than a decade after them, he has chosen to make haste slowly. He invested most of the last two decades in the plucky 68-member orchestra of Lahti, a once depressed lumber center, population 100,000, 65 miles northeast of Helsinki. Today Lahti boasts a spiffy new highway and a soon-to-be-completed express railway to Helsinki, as well as rejuvenated timber and woodworking industries, jump-started by the orchestra's splendid new home, the all-wood, 1,250-seat Sibelius Concert Hall, opened in 2000.
What definitively landed Mr. Vanska and the Lahti Symphony on the international musical map was the complete Sibelius edition they began recording for the Swedish label Bis in 1990. Quietly earning the confidence of the wary Sibelius descendants, Mr. Vanska gained access and exclusive rights to early versions and unfinished, unpublished or unplayed scores by Finland's musical hero. Mr. Vanska meticulously studied the composer's original texts and instructions, stripping the manicured European veneer to reveal a wilder, craggier, more modern, more Finnish Sibelius.
Much as happened with Simon Rattle in Birmingham, England, Mr. Vanska, a volatile fledgling conductor, and the Lahti Symphony, a mediocre regional ensemble, whipped each other into fighting shape. They forged a lush sound, a stunning dynamic range and an individual identity, freeing themselves from both real and imagined limitations through a fierce focus on the music and a ruthless work ethic. Orchestra members are quick to volunteer the punch line of a well-worn anecdote: ''This guy is never going to give up. We might as well play it his way, so we can go home.''
That singular determination also allowed Mr. Vanska, from 1996 to 2002, to transform the BBC Scottish Symphony from a technically flawed regional band into what many now consider one of Britain's finest orchestras.
Off the podium, there is little evidence of this iron will or of the demonic energy Mr. Vanska radiates in front of an orchestra. In several conversations, both in Minneapolis and in Lahti, Mr. Vanska, plain and fuzzy as the velours and corduroys he favors, seemed unable (or unwilling) to articulate his formula for success or his specific goals, other than ''to play better.''
''Music starts to speak when all the details are there,'' he said in his studio at Orchestra Hall. ''We must be transparent. We have to wipe off the dust, so we can see. And I have to create an atmosphere where every player can feel open to do this. No whips and chains.''
Later, at a rehearsal of Rachmaninoff's ''Symphonic Dances,'' Mr. Vanska shed his Clark Kentian reserve to become Super Schoolmaster. He let the orchestra play through the third movement, outlining its arc. Then, keeping the players on the edges of their seats, he drilled them mercilessly on rhythm, pitch, tuning and balance, harping on a fiendish page for 45 minutes.
''I know you think it's impossible,'' he said, flashing the players a wry smile, ''but I believe it isn't.''
His stubborn perfectionism might have turned off another ensemble. But the Minnesota Orchestra was starving for a tough taskmaster after the surprising appointment and seven-year tenure of Eiji Oue, a little-known protégé of Leonard Bernstein. Although Mr. Oue, a gifted but relatively green conductor, boosted the orchestra's confidence and revealed its virtuosity, he sometimes let dazzle supersede depth as he painted with typically bold, broad strokes.
Mr. Vanska was warmly welcomed when he became the Minnesota Orchestra's 10th music director in September. His origins don't hurt, here in a state with a high proportion of Nordic immigrants and some 100,000 Finnish-Americans. Neither do the intersecting musical tastes of the orchestra, the community and Mr. Vanska, all firmly rooted in the core Romantic repertory: Beethoven, Brahms, Mahler, Tchaikovsky and, of course, Sibelius.
But Mr. Vanska's Minnesota honeymoon has not been cloudless. Last year, during the orchestra's search for a new president, Mr. Vanska exerted what many viewed as undue influence on the appointment of Tony Woodcock, then the president of the Oregon Symphony. Though Mr. Woodcock was finally approved, 51 to 7, some resented Mr. Vanska's muscle-flexing. A few major board members defected.
Both Mr. Vanska and the orchestra have since made conciliatory moves. And Mr. Vanska has brought a Lahti tradition to Minneapolis: ''family days,'' when players and staff members meet in small groups to discuss their challenges and dreams. ''The stage is the window,'' Mr. Vanska said. ''What happens there is most visible, but it is the result of all the people working here. If the cleaning ladies don't do well, we can't play as well.''
Mr. Vanska's hiring continues the Minnesota Orchestra's fairly dazzling lineage of music directors, including Eugene Ormandy, Dimitri Mitropoulos, Antal Dorati, Stanislaw Skrowaczewski, Neville Marriner and Edo de Waart, all represented in a 12-CD set of performances dating from 1924 to 2002, just released by the orchestra to celebrate its centennial. But Mr. Vanska's appointment also highlights the continuing reluctance of major American orchestras to engage American music directors.
He admits that he faces a steep learning curve in American music, yet he seems eager to explore it under the guidance of Aaron Jay Kernis, the Minnesota Orchestra's new-music adviser. Already this season, Mr. Vanska has gamely tackled John Adams's Violin Concerto and the premiere of Stephen Paulus's Concerto for Two Trumpets. And he will soon take up Mr. Kernis's ''Color Wheel.'' Next season, he will present works by Ives and Osvaldo Golijov.
IN polite Midwestern fashion, the Minnesota Orchestra has long hovered outside America's Big Five (the major orchestras of Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, New York and Philadelphia). But Mr. Vanska has boldly informed the players that he expects to see them ''on top'' in 10 years. Now feeling its oats, the group is embarking on an 11-city European tour, ending in Lahti.
Even more brazenly, the Minnesota Orchestra will soon begin recording a complete Beethoven symphony cycle for Bis. It's tempting to ask why, at a time when most American orchestras have priced themselves out of the market for recordings, and more than 75 recorded versions of the Beethoven cycle already exist. Mr. Vanska offers the usual explanations: Beethoven's inexhaustible meaning and popularity, improved technology. But the real answer may be that the orchestra is recording a Beethoven cycle just because it can. An unusual loophole in the players' contract gives management the right to record and broadcast without additional payment.
Mr. Vanska's stock is running so high these days that he could easily fill the rest of his calendar with guest-conducting dates and even other music directorships. Yet for the foreseeable future, he and his wife will retain their home in Riihimaki, 37 miles from Lahti, and Mr. Vanska will spend 13 to 17 weeks a year with the Lahti Symphony, even leading them on an American tour next season. The good burghers of Lahti needn't worry, yet.
Minnesota Orchestra  Carnegie Hall.  Tomorrow at 8 p.m.
MUSIC Cori Ellison is the dramaturg at the New York City Opera.
