BABAR'S MUSEUM OF ART
By Laurent de Brunhoff.
Unpaged. New York: Harry N. Abrams. $16.95.
(Ages 4 to 8)
DAN'S ANGEL
A Detective's Guide to the Language of Paintings.
By Alexander Sturgis.
Illustrated by Lauren Child.
Unpaged. Santa Monica:
Kane/Miller Book Publishers. $16.95. (Ages 4 to 8)
THE SHAPE GAME
Written and illustrated
by Anthony Browne.
Unpaged. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $16. (Ages 4 to 8)
Children love to draw. Their books are filled with pictures. Yet adults fear they will not like art. Or rather, we are afraid they will not like ''real art'' -- art in museums -- as if electronic media and action figurines will inevitably turn our youth into art-hating heathens if we don't do something about it.
Three new books -- two from prizewinning British illustrators, one from a longstanding lion of children's literature -- are symptomatic of this anxiety. They are effectively primers on art appreciation, each documenting the conversion of a child, or group of children, from skeptic to museum enthusiast. As such, they're also a return to a kind of didacticism that's largely been the domain of mass-market series like the Berenstain Bears and Mr. Men and Little Miss, which have been teaching good manners, telling the truth and lessons of that sort even as the riotous ridiculousness of ''The Cat in the Hat'' and the intense, surreal passion of ''Where the Wild Things Are'' (among others) shifted the concerns of literary picture books from education to entertainment and emotional identification in the mid-20th century.
In ''Babar's Museum of Art,'' King Babar and Queen Celeste renovate a defunct train station into a thinly disguised Musée D'Orsay for their mammoth art collection. The story is predictable: the young elephants of Celesteville learn that art is fun, and meaningful too. In keeping with his father's original vision, Laurent de Brunhoff, who has been writing and illustrating Babar stories for 50 years now, injects the book with humor that's based on the incongruity of elephants living a cosmopolitan life. In the original story by Jean de Brunhoff, Babar is freshly arrived from the ''great forest'' and longs for smart clothes such as gentlemen wear. Attired in spats and suit, he becomes a raconteur and pastry connoisseur, driving around in a red two-seater convertible.
Now he has an art collection full of famous paintings and sculpture -- only with elephants in them instead of people. The jokes will largely be lost on children who don't know the originals, while prurient adults like myself will wonder at the inclusion of multiple nudes, weirdly neuter, in paintings like Manet's ''Déjeuner sur l'Herbe'' and Michelangelo's Sistine creation of Adam. Still, the text (by Phyllis Rose de Brunhoff, the writer and the artist's wife) has a lightness more appealing than the unfunny elephantization of the art. The children think ''they might like to be artists when they grew up, or collect art, or teach, or make T-shirts.''
''Dan's Angel: A Detective's Guide to the Language of Paintings'' is a first picture book by Alexander Sturgis, a curator at the National Gallery in London. In it, an aspiring young detective named Dan wanders into the gallery. The angel Gabriel pops out of an annunciation by Fra Angelico and acts as tour guide, spurring Dan to decipher hidden meanings in paintings by Rembrandt, Botticelli, Picasso and Van Gogh, among others. The picture that comes to life is a tried-and-true fantasy, but here it doesn't stem from any urgent feeling Dan has for the angel, and the angel himself is more sassy rebel than celestial being: at the end, a museum guard chases the naughty creature back where he belongs. However, the exegesis of each painting is uniformly insightful. ''When you get close,'' Dan says of Jackson Pollock's ''Number 1, 1950 (Lavender Mist),'' it looks all splattered and messy, and it feels wild, but when you step back, it looks calm and smooth like a polished stone.''
Though her work is largely overshadowed by the large replicas on every page, Lauren Child's mod style -- familiar from ''I Will Never Not Ever Eat a Tomato'' and ''Clarice Bean, That's Me'' -- reminds us that Dan is having a good time, and this book might genuinely push readers to think more about the symbols and images in paintings, which is no small thing.
The most personal of these three books is the most effective. Anthony Browne, whose ''My Dad'' was both completely specific and completely universal in its portrait of a comical father, brings the humor and sensitivity of today's best picture books to his work. ''The Shape Game'' came from Browne's tenure as writer and illustrator in residence at the Tate Britain in London. It's apparently autobiographical: the narrator's mother wants to spend her birthday at the museum, dragging along her meaty, jokey husband and two boys, who would rather be watching soccer on television. ''What on earth is that supposed to be?'' Dad asks, looking at a modern sculpture and scratching his bald spot. ''It's supposed to be a mother and child.'' ''Well, why isn't it?'' says Dad.
The paintings are replicas, but Browne's funny watercolors make the biggest impression: the young Anthony imagines his father in several paintings, as if making sense of his dad in a new context. Dad himself makes a series of pitiful-yet-laugh-aloud jokes to diffuse his discomfort in the highfalutin environment. ''It's gone, gone forever, I tell you!'' ''What has?'' Anthony asks. ''Yesterday!'' Dad cries.
The core of the story is the family's day together. Not in front of the telly, not in the safety of home, but out in the world, seeing some new stuff. On the last page, Mom keeps the kids busy in the train home by showing them ''the shape game,'' in which one person draws a shape -- ''any shape, it's not supposed to be anything, just a shape'' -- and the next person turns it into something. ''In a way,'' Browne writes, ''I've been playing the shape game ever since.'' Readers turning back to the first page will have a new context: an older Anthony, now an artist with the same bald spot and pudgy stomach as his father, draws family portraits in his studio.
We leave the story with a sense that somehow the museum outing has mattered -- not only to Anthony, but to everyone. And that is how it really is when we take our children into the world and experience something new together. Browne's book does what neither of the others even attempts. It brings the lesson home.
Children's Books Emily Jenkins's new children's book, ''Daffodil,'' will be published this spring.
