PENELOPE HOBHOUSE, the English garden designer and historian who taught many Americans how to use color in their perennial beds, has abandoned her walled paradise in Dorset, England, to write about the garden in a more profound sense.
It started four years ago, when she first went to Iran with a group of fellow Cambridge University alumni.
''It had nothing to do with gardens, and I was bowled over,'' Ms. Hobhouse said recently over gumbo at a pub in Richmond, Va., where she was to lecture at the Lewis Ginter Botanical Garden the next day. ''We were in high desert, on a plateau 5,000 feet up, surrounded by mountain ridges that go up 12,000 feet.'' The whole landscape is brown because it's so dry, she said. ''Except for the buff color that goes rather pink when the sun sets,'' she said. ''The browns turn red from the reflected light.''
Now and then, they came to orchards -- pear, apple and almond -- surrounded by baked mud walls. How anything could grow in such a parched land was so intriguing to Ms. Hobhouse that she returned twice in the following years, exploring gardens and irrigation systems both ancient and modern. The result is her latest book, ''Gardens of Persia'' (Kales Press, 2004, $49.95), with photographs by Jerry Harpur.
And last week, at a symposium at the Botanical Garden, she spoke about how the principles of these ancient gardens could enlighten contemporary design today. (The symposium, ''The New Oasis Garden: Making Havens That Nurture the Senses,'' was sponsored by the Lewis Ginter Botanical Garden, the Monrovia Nursery and Horticulture magazine.) ''I think the garden is increasingly an escape, a spiritual oasis from the cement jungle'' Ms. Hobhouse said.
The simplicity of the Persian garden, and its early underground irrigation systems, have much to teach Americans dealing with increasing heat and drought. ''If you stick to very few plants and a few water rills, it's very labor-saving,'' she said.
The earliest Persian garden still tangible, its broken columns rising out of a ruined foundation, was built by Cyrus the Great on a high plain northeast of Shiraz, Iran, at the site where he defeated the Medes in 550 B.C. The garden, divided into four sections by rills, or channels of water, and surrounded by shady pavilions, was not only a refuge in the scorching desert -- a paradise on earth -- but also an emblem of an empire's power and reach.
''They dropped trenches down to the water table, where melted snow flowed from the mountains,'' Ms. Hobhouse said. By the fifth century B.C., Persian kings were building gardens fed by aqueducts, which flowed into rills and basins. The Persian word pairidaeza -- ''a wall around'' -- filtered into Greece as paradeisos, which was used to describe the Garden of Eden in the Greek translation of the Bible. Originally, the gardens ''were fenced around to keep out the wind, or marauders or a desert full of evil spirits -- the djinns,'' Ms. Hobhouse said. The English gardener had always taken water for granted.
''But there, it's sacred,'' she said. '' Without water, there is no life.''
The earliest gardens in Mesopotamia, built in the deltas of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, are described on cuneiform tablets from around 4000 B.C. They describe how Enki, the Sumerian god of water, provided fresh water to the dry land of Dilmun, transforming it into fields and fruit trees.
This is where the Sumerians dug canals to irrigate their farmland, building the city states Ur and Uruk, Ms. Hobhouse writes.
By 2250 B.C., the Sumerian capital, Babylon, had hunting parks and stepped terraces ''constructed to resemble mountains linking earth with heaven,'' Ms. Hobhouse writes. ''There really were hanging gardens in Babylon,'' she said.
Though no archaeological evidence of these early gardens has been found, written descriptions record their existence. And by the time the Muslims conquered Persia in the seventh century, Ms. Hobhouse said, the Koran was describing the garden as a foretaste of paradise, ''underneath which rivers flow,'' suggesting an irrigation system on an earthly level and, more metaphysically, the eternal waters of the spirit.
Gardens spread with Muslim conquerors to North Africa, Spain and India, where the gardens of the Taj Mahal were laid out in quadrants divided by water channels.
By A.D. 800, Baghdad was a great center of scholarship, giving birth to mathematics and medicine. By the 16th century, Prince Babur, the first Mogul emperor, had brought the Persian garden to India. Ablution pools in mosque courtyards symbolized the oasis in the middle of the desert. Decorative mosaics depicted trees and water.
''I'm off to India in a few weeks, to start a book on the Mogul gardens,'' said Ms. Hobhouse, who is 74.
Her own garden in Dorset, so rich with flowers and vines, may require some simplifying of its own as she continues her exploration of the garden as refuge and spiritual oasis.
''When I first began gardening, I wanted to know the name of every single plant,'' she said. ''But now, I'm in deeper waters.''
CUTTINGS
