It's Fashion Week in New York, and while the reed-thin models on the catwalks may typically pack an undernourished 110 pounds onto a 5-foot-10 frame, one fledgling designer has his eye on more generously proportioned women who tip the scales at double that weight, or more. When Leon Hall makes the rounds at the shows this week, he plans to glean style ideas for women who wear at least a size 14.
This season, Mr. Hall, who is also a fashion consultant, has rolled out for those women a new line of furs, which are being sold at Saks Fifth Avenue. The industry labels this market ''plus size,'' but Mr. Hall hopes that this fashionspeak will give way to the sexier, more poetic -- and, perhaps, more salable -- ''diva size.''
''I asked the women I had in mind, 'What do you like to be called?''' Mr. Hall said. ''They all loved 'diva'; they said it empowered them.''
Many designers are thinking about luxury this season as the economy climbs out of the doldrums.
''It's not only O.K. again to look rich -- it's desirable; it's in,'' said Douglas Hannant, who designs clothes for the well dressed and well heeled, with basic suits, in cashmere, starting at $4,000. ''That's going to be the look for the season. It's going to be very luxe.''
When Mr. Hannant, whose show is on Tuesday, talks of ''the pendulum swinging toward luxury and decadence and all those wonderful things,'' he isn't kidding. He's using crystal, alligator and mink detailing. ''This is my priciest collection to date,'' he said, adding that the way people dress is reflecting a deeper class separation.
Among the celebrities and executives at the shows will be relatives. After all, in this business, as in any other, the greatest muse is sometimes Mom or Dad. At Michael Kors's show, his mother, Joan, is as much a regular in the ringside seats as the regulars of the social pages.
The designer Alice Roi does fittings at the Inn at Irving Place, owned by her mother, Naomi Blumenthal, who dispenses pointers about running a business and what to wear on the day of the show.
Cynthia Rowley will be showing a velveteen jacket in the same shade of celestial blue as her father's eyes.
But that is as close as her father will get to the catwalk this season, said Ms. Rowley, whose parents, Ed and Clementine, have been regulars at her shows. She has not put Mr. Rowley, a retired science teacher from Barrington, Ill., into her show since he last modeled men's wear about five years ago. ''I'm sure he would love to be in a show again, and maybe he'll be back,'' Ms. Rowley said. ''But until my mom walks the runway, I don't think I can ask my dad again.''
She recalled the aftershocks of his last walk on the runway: ''He said it was the happiest day of his life, and my mom was like: 'How about our wedding day? The birth of your three children?'''
''He was telling everyone as a wry joke that he had a go-see with Calvin,'' Ms. Rowley said, referring to a tryout for modeling. ''He had just learned that term and was intoxicated with his new career. I told him, 'If I ever see your picture in your underwear on the side of a bus, I'm going to have to leave town.'''
Francine Parnes
