He is a standard-bearer of the Democratic Party, one of the best-known figures in American politics and the presidential candidate who won more popular votes in 2000 than George W. Bush. But is an endorsement from Al Gore the kiss of political death?
That is the question -- and the joke -- buzzing through Democratic circles and late-night talk shows as even Howard Dean, the candidate bestowed with Mr. Gore's endorsement, traces his precipitous tumble from front-runner to the day in early December that Mr. Gore gave him his seal of approval.
Of course, Dr. Dean turned his view into a compliment of sorts when Bob Woodward of The Washington Post asked him on the CNN program ''Larry King Live'' if perhaps he might be in a better position today had he said no to Mr. Gore's support.
''I actually do think the endorsement of Al Gore began the decline,'' Dr. Dean began, to what must have been some astonishment from Mr. Gore. But Dr. Dean instantly amplified his statement to indicate that the endorsement from Mr. Gore, a powerhouse of the establishment, so threatened the other Democratic candidates that they began the attacks on his candidacy that helped derail it.
''The establishment in Washington really realized that I might be the nominee and they did not like it,'' Dr. Dean concluded.
(On the same program, former Senator Bob Dole, the Republican presidential candidate in 1996, had a less complicated view, which he imparted on behalf of Senators John Kerry and John Edwards. ''My advice to Kerry and Edwards is, if Gore calls, don't take the call,'' Mr. Dole said. ''I mean, it may be an endorsement.'')
Beyond the impact for Dr. Dean, some Democrats said there might be political consequences for Mr. Gore, who, in backing Dr. Dean, did not first alert his 2000 running mate and another Democrat then in the race, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman.
Some Democrats say Mr. Gore's endorsement now looks like an effort to jump on the Dean freight train when it appeared to be hurtling nonstop to the party's nomination.
Even if Dr. Dean did not win, or so the theory goes, Mr. Gore would have spent 2004 near the center of the political stage, and so be better positioned to try for the presidency again in 2008. Mr. Gore will now suffer, they say.
''I suppose people are going to be running away from Al Gore the way the devil runs away from holy water,'' Paul Begala, a political adviser in the Clinton White House who prepared Mr. Gore for the 2000 presidential debates, said in an interview. Mr. Begala asserted that the problem was Dr. Dean, who with Mr. Gore's endorsement went on a confusing journey from Mr. Outside to Mr. Inside.
Mr. Gore, whose aides said Friday that he was turning down all interview requests, has campaigned only sporadically for Dr. Dean. He traveled with him the day of the endorsement, then campaigned for two days in Iowa and a day in Michigan last week. But on Sunday, Mr. Gore is appearing in Nashville at a Democratic dinner, timed to the Tuesday primary, partly as Dr. Dean's surrogate, although the event is also billed as a celebration of ''Tennessee leadership and values.'' Campaign officials say that Mr. Gore and Dr. Dean talk about once every 10 days.
Other Democrats counter that Mr. Gore's endorsement was the bold act of a man who was excited about the Dean campaign's energy and its innovative use of the Internet for fund-raising and organizing. Mr. Gore, these supporters say, truly thought he could help Dr. Dean.
''You can Monday-morning quarterback any decision, but he wanted to make a difference at a time when he thought he could have an impact on the campaign,'' Roy Neel, a longtime friend of Mr. Gore's who is now the chief executive of Dr. Dean's campaign, said in a telephone interview on Friday.
Mr. Neel called Mr. Gore's endorsement a daring act.
''When you're in politics, if you want to stay relevant, you take bold steps that involve some risks from time to time,'' Mr. Neel said. ''Whatever happens in this campaign, I don't think Al Gore stepping out for Howard Dean has done anything to hurt his political involvement.''
Carter Eskew, a former senior adviser to Mr. Gore, said the former vice president's primary motivation in the Dean endorsement was not himself but Dr. Dean. ''I think the guy is in a different place from short-term political calculus,'' Mr. Eskew said of Mr. Gore. ''I don't think he endorsed Dean thinking ahead to 2008. And if he did, the safe thing was to endorse no one.''
But a good friend of Mr. Gore's said Mr. Gore appeared to have more complicated motives. The friend disagreed with the Dean endorsement and did not want to be identified publicly as being critical of Mr. Gore.
''Why did he do it?'' the friend said. ''Well, who knows? As with most things, it's a Rorschach test for people reading their own views into his actions.'' In this friend's view, Mr. Gore jumped aboard after giving a speech to 3,000 people at Constitution Hall in Washington in early December. The speech had been promoted by Moveon.org, an Internet movement that supports Dr. Dean's campaign.
''I think Gore read into that that this was something big that he wanted to be a part of,'' the friend said.
The friend added that it was not insignificant that Mr. Gore endorsed Dr. Dean during what he called a ''ministorm'' of news coverage about whether the Clintons were trying to secretly undercut Dr. Dean, whom some centrist Democrats consider too liberal to defeat Mr. Bush in November. The Clintons and Mr. Gore have had an on-again, off-again relationship since the 2000 presidential race.
''It further reinforced the idea in the party that there were anti-Gore and anti-Clinton factions,'' the friend said. ''It's the final dot in the ideological rebranding of Al Gore from centrist Democrat to left-wing Democrat.''
At this point, it is unclear how much Mr. Gore's endorsement will resonate beyond the Washington Beltway, where endorsements are not treated with the same fanfare. In Tennessee, for example, there seemed to be a collective shrug, although in part because his relationship with his home state, which he did not carry in 2000, has been strained.
''Al Gore's relationship with the people of Tennessee was already a bit frayed,'' said Richard A. Pride, a political science professor at Vanderbilt University. ''When he did this, it looked a bit opportunistic, but it didn't have much traction with the folks here.''
Mr. Pride added that people in Tennessee had noticed that Mr. Gore did not inform Mr. Lieberman of his decision to endorse Dr. Dean and that it was viewed as not the behavior of a ''Southern gentleman.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO  Correction:  February 18, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Feb. 8 about the impact of Al Gore's endorsement of Howard Dean on the campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination referred incorrectly to the position of Moveon.org, a liberal political group. It supports the broad goal of defeating President Bush in November; it does not prefer Dr. Dean or any other candidate.
