Has our long national parenthesis finally come to a close -- or at least begun to come to a close? Have we, that is, returned to the earthy stuff of political debate, which is to say, jobs and wages and health care, after more than two years of the awful glamour of terrorism and war? President Bush appears to hope that we haven't; but while it's not 1992 again -- perhaps it will never be 1992 again -- the kitchen table is rapidly gaining parity with the aircraft-carrier deck.
One early sign of this return to normalcy came in the Iowa caucuses, when three-quarters of voters said that they opposed the war in Iraq, but only 14 percent rated it the most important issue, far behind the economy and health care. John Edwards made remarkable inroads by ignoring the war in favor of such quaint Democratic standards as fighting poverty. And Howard Dean's support collapsed not only because voters feared he'd never beat George Bush, but also because they wanted to hear about something other than war and ''taking the country back'' (though it is an open question whether John Kerry can conduct the kitchen-table debate more effectively than Dean).
A more ambiguous piece of evidence came with the president's State of the Union address a day later. A steady flow of leaks and hints had prepared listeners for ambitious, or at least ambitious-sounding, proposals on issues like tax-free savings accounts that would allow the president to campaign as an activist on domestic policy. A few nervous Democratic policy experts associated with the Center for American Progress had already disseminated elaborate rebuttals. And then . . . nothing. The president shelved the big-ticket items and instead offered himself to the public as the hero of Baghdad and the scourge of terrorism. This appears to have been a rare miscalculation by a group of extremely gifted politicians. A CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll of voters who watched the speech found that it was less popular than either of the president's two previous State of the Union addresses -- and even less popular than President Clinton's 1999 speech, shadowed by the Senate's impeachment trial.
President Bush may well have scored some points off his future Democratic foe when he warned of ''the dangerous illusion that terrorists are not plotting and outlaw regimes are no threat to us.'' At the same time, it almost sounded as if he was trying to fan the ebbing flames of our national anxiety. After all, when the terrorist plots have been foiled and the outlaw regimes subdued, you may find your mind wandering to subjects like whether you can afford to send your daughter to college. And polls have found that most Americans, and not just caucusgoers and primary voters, across the country rank the economy well ahead of national security in their hierarchy of political concerns.
The Democratic presidential candidates understand -- because pollsters and pundits and experts have been ceaselessly drumming it into their heads -- that they must cross a certain threshold on national security issues before they can get a hearing on the domestic policy terrain where their comparative advantage lies. And so the major candidates have learned to make impressively bellicose noises. But an unanswered, and in fact unasked, question is whether President Bush has to clear a comparable bar on the home front before he can drag the contest back to Saddam Hussein's spider hole, where he would like to see it waged.
No one understands better than George W. Bush the danger of resting on your foreign policy laurels, since he watched his father lose the presidency that way. The White House has already begun to roll out new proposals meant to show daring activism -- space exploration, immigration reform -- and the State of the Union address was studded with inexpensive, Dick Morris-style goodies. But the president may have been forced to drop his bolder plans when conservatives balked at adding to a deficit that is already expected to exceed $500 billion this year. A leading Republican strategist recently was quoted as admitting that the deficit is limiting Bush's ''ability to have new things to talk about in 2004.'' This may explain why in his speech Bush dwelled at such length on past achievements, including prescription drug coverage and tax cuts.
It's instructive to compare President Bush's most recent State of the Union speech with Bill Clinton's valedictory one in 2000. Despite the obvious opportunity to bask in past accomplishments, Clinton devoted well over three-quarters of the speech to new initiatives, some of which were cheap goodies, and some more substantial -- a $30 billion ''college opportunity tax cut'' for the middle class, making the child care tax credit refundable for low-income families, increasing the ranks of federal gun prosecutors, doubling spending on failing schools, helping the uninsured afford medical coverage and on and on and on. And the avalanche of proposals was unified by a central theme: we had, Clinton declared, replaced ''outmoded ideologies'' with a ''vital center'' pledged equally to ''opportunity'' and ''responsibility.'' It seemed, at the time, that he was right.
The terrorist attacks have, of course, radically shifted the balance between domestic policy and national security concerns. The war in Iraq and the war on terrorism have absorbed many billions of dollars that might otherwise have gone to the programs Clinton advocated. But that new source of vulnerability has scarcely erased the sense of economic insecurity that middle-class and working-class Americans feel, and that was the central preoccupation of Clinton's time in office. And now that Americans have begun to emerge from their psychic bomb shelters, they may begin to clamor for answers to problems they cared deeply about in a time not so very long ago.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-8-04 James Traub is a contributing writer for the magazine.
