Gail Goodrich rarely failed on the basketball court. At U.C.L.A., he won two national championships. With the Los Angeles Lakers, he won an N.B.A. title, and was the scoring leader on a team that featured Wilt Chamberlain and Jerry West.
But Goodrich knew that, even in a game he had nearly mastered, success was not automatic. So unlike his former teammates Pat Riley and Paul Silas, Goodrich never entered the coaching ranks.
''I don't think I would've been a very good coach when I left the game, because I'm not sure I had the patience at that particular time in my life,'' the 60-year-old Goodrich said. ''I'm pretty much a perfectionist. I pretty much don't understand turnovers. Coaching probably would not have been good for me from a health perspective.''
So at the close of his 14-season Hall of Fame career, Goodrich found something that would enable him to relax and live a long, stress-free life: golf.
''When I was a player, I thought golf was too slow,'' said Goodrich, who averaged a career-high 25.9 points in helping the Lakers win the 1972 championship. ''I played tennis and racquetball, sports that required quickness. I didn't realize at the time that golf is a sport I could play forever.''
Goodrich, who lives in Greenwich, Conn., says he has never become very good at golf, but the game has afforded him a comfortable career nonetheless. For the past 20 years, he has made a living acquiring golf courses for various companies.
When not inspecting fairways and greens, Goodrich would analyze his first love, avidly watching basketball games on television. About a year ago, he got the itch to be more than a viewer.
''I was watching all these games and I said, 'I'm really having fun doing this,' '' Goodrich said. ''I guess I've got a renewed passion for the game this year.''
That renewed passion led Goodrich into broadcasting. Once a week, he offers analysis on NBA TV, and he also does color commentary for Central Connecticut State and the Northeast Conference.
Now, he would not mind returning to the N.B.A. in some capacity.
''I would consider a front-office position because I think I certainly have the ability to evaluate talent and really help a team,'' Goodrich said. ''I'm in a better frame of mind now and would even be better suited to coaching if I did it. But coaching is not something I aspire to do. If I made a contribution to a team, it would be better for me to do it by assisting people in coaching or in the front office, where I could help create the team concept that's ultimately important to winning.''
When it comes to basketball, Goodrich knows about winning, even if it means saying no to coaching.
Then and Now
