FOR the last four years, residents and business owners in downtown Mystic have stewed over the fact that the site of a prominent downtown building destroyed by fire has remained vacant.
Last week, however, a developer from Puerto Rico gave them some hope after he said he had signed an agreement to buy the site and build shops and condominiums there.
George Pavarini, who used to live in the nearby village of Noank, said he would close on the property March 18 if certain contingencies were met. He declined to discuss the specifics of his plan.
''Things are going well, but I don't want people to get really excited and then get disappointed again which is what has happened in the past,'' he said.
Mr. Pavarini is planning a three-story building with six shops on the first floor and seven condominiums on the upper two floors. Some permits for the property have expired and he will need to get some new approvals before being able to start construction.
''We have a lot of work to do over the next few weeks,'' he said.
The news was welcomed by those in the downtown area.
''I'm overjoyed to think there will be a building there,'' said Linnea Lindstrom, the executive director of the Mystic Chamber of Commerce. ''It's certainly good news for everyone in Mystic. I hope it happens and I wish him luck.''
When the West Main Street block burned down in March of 2000, the building's owners, Rufus Allyn and Roy Bohlander of Mystic, vowed to quickly rebuild. But four years later, the site is still vacant. An eight-foot wooden wall stretches along the street. Portholes cut into it offer a view of an empty lot over the Mystic River.
The two men originally obtained the approvals needed to construct a three-story building containing shops and apartments. They decided not to proceed with those plans and have been trying to sell the site for $900,000.
Many local officials and downtown business owners have been frustrated by the lack of progress. They say the property, which is situated a few yards from the historic drawbridge, is an eyesore that is hurting tourism.
Last year a former town councilor in Groton, which governs the section of Mystic where the building is situated, suggested that the town acquire the land by eminent domain, but the town did not pursue the idea.
''From a community perspective it's very sad that this thing has sat there for so long,'' said Mark Oefinger, Groton's town manager.
Mr. Oefinger likened the vacant lot to ''a missing front tooth'' on West Main Street, which attracts tourists to its shops and restaurants.
''Tourists don't expect to see a site boarded up year after year,'' he said. ''It's not going on in places like Newport.''
Edward McCabe, president of the Mystic Chamber of Commerce, said that while it was difficult to quantify the impact of the empty lot on business, it has hurt.
''I'd like to see anything other than what's there now,'' Mr. McCabe said.
UPDATE
