LOVING CHE
By Ana Menéndez.
Illustrated. 229 pp. New York:
Atlantic Monthly Press. $22.
ONE of Cuba's most famous sons was actually an Argentine -- Ernesto (Che) Guevara.
Ana Menéndez's first novel, ''Loving Che,'' deftly captures the fluid sense of identity that accompanied the now mythic early days of Cuba's revolution, but it also portrays the Cuban exile's later experience, the ''endless pining for the past.'' Menéndez first introduced readers to these subjects with her accomplished story collection, ''In Cuba I Was a German Shepherd.'' Now she returns to them with the story of a young woman's search for the mother she never knew.
Raised in Miami by a grandfather who refused to provide many details of her history, Menéndez's unnamed narrator becomes increasingly obsessed by her family's past: ''As a girl I had already begun to sense a void behind me, and as I grew older I became more and more preoccupied with the blank space where my mother should have been.'' Eventually, her grandfather hands over a piece of paper containing a few lines from a love poem that had been pinned on the narrator's sweater when she was left with him as an infant. It was the early 1960's, and he was fleeing Cuba; the narrator's mother was to join them later. Instead, she disappeared. The reader can guess from the novel's title that politics played a role in dividing the family.
The narrator begins a series of trips to Cuba in search of her mother, each time leaving without any leads. Then, suddenly, a package arrives in Miami, postmarked Spain and with no return address. What spills out of it, in letters and photographs, is the fragmentary story of a married woman, an apolitical artist, who has a love affair with Che and then has a child.
It is dangerous territory, this fictionalizing of historical characters, and, once embarked on it, Menéndez seems to have second thoughts, backing out of what she has started by turning the novel into a more conventional -- and rather slight -- mystery. (For the curious: one of Guevara's children, a daughter, is a pediatrician in Cuba and is about the same age as the narrator of ''Loving Che.'')
Armed with more facts, Menéndez's narrator returns to Cuba, but doesn't make much progress. She spends one day being persuaded by a young boy to buy groceries for his family, then ends up following him home and being invited to dinner. The boy's mother talks about their struggle to survive, remarking that it would be more interesting if Cuba were an actual police state. ''Instead,'' she sighs, ''they have anesthetized us with boredom.''
Another day, the narrator is hailed from a balcony and summoned to the home of an elderly woman. ''The tendency of the Cuban to talk about everything but the subject at hand,'' we are told, ''had worn me down to the size of a pencil stub.'' Why is she bothering with these people? One is forced to conclude that it's Menéndez's way of providing historical context. Oddly enough, these digressions turn out to offer the primary pleasures in ''Loving Che.''
When the narrator is finally approached by someone who claims to know about ''the woman you are looking for,'' we suspect a possible scam. She is also told that a number of paintings, all of Che and presumably all by her mother, have been sold off to tourists because the woman who had them was in desperate need of money. In fact, the hunt for dollars comes up often in ''Loving Che.'' Its conflicts are neatly symbolized by a family joke a Cuban friend recently told me: expatriate visitors are welcomed as traidólares (brings dollars), a play on the word traidores (traitors).
Menéndez is at her best when depicting this sort of social detail, revealing what life is like for many Cubans today. She captures Cuba's potential, its desperation and decay, and also its dark humor. You could say, then, that in ''Loving Che,'' the search for the narrator's mother turns out to be more important -- at least to the reader -- than the prospect of finding her.
Ruth Lopez's most recent book is ''Chocolate: The Nature of Indulgence.''
