AFTER being stung by a bee last fall, Stacey Breindel of Ardsley experienced an allergic reaction. She decided to drive to Dobbs Ferry Community Hospital, a little more than a mile from her home, but found herself snared in Ardsley's infamous traffic snarls. After much angst, she said, she made it to the hospital just before she went into a medical crisis.
The day before Thanksgiving, Steve Wittenberg, a 20-year veteran of the volunteer ambulance corps, got a cardiac arrest call. He raced to his car and headed for the ambulance garage, but went nowhere fast. When he finally got the ambulance on the road, he said, he had trouble making his way through the streets even with his lights flashing and his siren blaring.
''It's difficult trying to tell the family of someone who has collapsed on his front lawn that you couldn't get there because you were stuck in traffic,'' Mr. Wittenberg said. ''Lucky for him that his next door neighbor was a doctor and administered CPR, but it doesn't take a rocket scientist to know that traffic is choking this village.''
Traffic is the bane of almost every municipality in the county, but Ardsley is eager to stake its claim as a special case with excessive traffic tie-ups. Even as Ardsley officials and residents complain, state transportation officials insist that there may be no easy solution to the problem.The The village and the State Department of Transportation have been at odds over the issue for the last two years, according to village and state officials. Ardsley officials and residents complained about delays in two projects overseen by the state that affected local traffic, then bombarded the transportation department's regional office in Poughkeepsie with letters concerning the traffic situation, said Colleen McKenna, spokeswoman for the regional office.
''There clearly has been enormous friction between the department and the village,'' said State Assemblyman Richard Brodsky, who helped defuse tensions. ''It was so bad, we didn't want to hold a meeting until we knew we would get a good result. Now, we're moving forward.''
Last month, village and state officials met at the office of State Senator Nicholas A. Spano to take the first steps toward breaking the logjam. At the meeting, the state agreed to conduct a study to determine who is driving through the village and where they are going. Survey-takers with clipboards will begin to canvass drivers when the weather warms up, said Mayor Samuel Abate Jr. of Ardsley.
''Traffic is by far the No. 1 thing that everybody talks about,'' Mr. Abate said. ''The merchants scream that they're losing business and people routinely avoid the village. Once we get information and data, we will be able to pinpoint the problem and hopefully fix it.''
The gridlock, at its worst from the time school lets out through the evening rush hour and on certain holidays, is worst at the intersection of Ashford Avenue, a local road, and Route 9A, a state route also known as the Saw Mill River Road. Both thoroughfares are truck routes. Buses and pedestrians jam the routes, too, and along Route 9A, where it sometimes takes two or three light cycles to pass through the intersection, a car seeking to merge into traffic from the side streets and parking lots often relies on the kindness of strangers.
Complicating matters, Ashford Avenue is the main east-west route between Interstate 287 to the north and Jackson Avenue to the south. Traffic from an exit on the northbound side of the Saw Mill River Parkway, which empties onto a three-lane bridge that leads to Route 9 in Dobbs Ferry and spans the parkway and the New York State Thruway, is controlled by a signal at midspan, just a few hundred feet from Route 9A. Many people attribute the problem to the state's modernization of the intersection, completed two years ago. (The state did the work because Route 9A is a state road.) The project, designed to upgrade safety, added lanes and altered the traffic light sequence to give each leg of the intersection its own green light and protected turn arrows.
The village questioned the state's configuration of Addyman Square, a small cul-de-sac of stores at the intersection's northwest corner, which led to ruffled feathers, Mr. Abate said. The square adds a fifth leg to the intersection, which is one reason why the light cycle lasts for more two minutes during peak traffic times. Sensors help make the intersection more efficient: if there is no traffic coming out of the square, for instance, the light does not turn.
Robert Dennison, regional director of the Hudson Valley Region of the State Transportation Department, said that the traffic light requires a dedicated light cycle for each leg of the intersection, along with left turn signals, which is too many phases and which backs up traffic. The state has considered creating a new exit from Interstate 87 near the intersection of Route 9A and Dobbs Ferry Road (Route 100B) that would allow traffic not destined for Ardsley to bypass the village, he said.
''We've had numerous conversations with the village to come up with a solution, but we have done studies and our position is that it is as efficient as it can possibly be,'' said Mr. Dennison, adding that the number of cars on the road has increased over the years. Mr. Brodsky, an Ardsley native, argues that overdevelopment in the village is the root cause of the problem.
A new residence for the elderly, the Woodlands at Ardsley, on Route 9A, is nearing completion. The mayor said that the property owner had long planned to develop the land and that a 175-unit residence for the elderly will generate far less traffic than would a strip mall or a 15-screen Cineplex. Automobile registrations in Westchester rose to 665,287 in 2001, the last year for which figures are available, from 597,825 in 1992.
Besides delayed ambulance response times, which the village has proposed to combat by installing a mechanism in the vehicle to control traffic lights, the village will face a potential problem in coming months when it upgrades its firehouse on Ashford Avenue just east of Route 9A, Mr. Abate said. The village is looking at temporary sites to house the fire engines, including the old Gulf service station on Route 9A just north of Ashford Avenue or in Ashford Park, located near the middle school about a half-mile from the Ashford Avenue-Route 9A intersection.
''We're a one-square-mile village that is landlocked between other towns and we're unlike any other place,'' Mr. Leon said. ''This isn't just an Ardsley problem, it's also a Hartsdale problem, a Hastings problem, and a Dobbs Ferry problem.''
TRAFFIC  Correction:  February 15, 2004, Sunday  A picture last Sunday with an article about traffic problems at the intersection of Ashford Avenue and Route 9A in Ardsley was published in error. It showed Ashford Avenue and Route 9 in Dobbs Ferry.
