IN 1998, Brian Jungen, a 27-year-old artist in Vancouver, took apart a heap of identical Nike Air Jordans, splayed them open and restitched them into an improbably accurate rendering -- complete with real hair -- of a ceremonial mask used by the Haida people of British Columbia. He called it ''Prototype for New Understanding.''
Curators and viewers alike were drawn to ''Prototype,'' finding it both playful and provocative. It rounded up a number of contemporary ideas: an obsession with brand-name products, references to a global economy that allows them to be mass produced cheaply, and a postcolonial angst resulting from the buying and selling of North American native culture like so many Air Jordans themselves. The last of these Mr. Jungen knew well, living in Vancouver, where native products are a major part of a thriving tourist economy.
Soon Mr. Jungen, who is of European and Native Canadian heritage (his father, a Swiss, and his mother, a member of the Dunne-za tribe, both died when he was 8), was showing masks (he started with 9 and later expanded to 12) and other work in Canada, Europe and the United States. Currently he has a new site-specific installation at Triple Candie in Harlem. There he has shoved together 221 industrial sewing tables -- remnants of Harlem's sweatshop past -- and reconfigured them as a half-size, college regulation, though unplayable, basketball court.
Where he once used Native Canadian references, he has now stepped into the heavily freighted history of another North American minority culture, African Americans. ''A lot of sports gear was mass-produced right there in Harlem 40 years ago,'' Mr. Jungen said. ''I'm drawing parallels between the history of industry and sweatshop production there and the attention given to sports as a way of escaping that manual labor, that manufacturing life.''
The rift between aspiration and reality is a potent artistic motif for Mr. Jurgen. In ''Shapeshifter'' (2000), for example, he dismantled hundreds of white plastic stackable chairs and reconfigured them into the skeleton of a full-size right whale, a weighty spiritual symbol among Northwest native cultures. In another recent piece, ''Beer Cooler'' (2002), Mr. Jungen carved a host of traditional native images into a disposable polystyrene cooler, filled it with Budweiser King cans and took it to the Hammertown art exhibition in Edinburgh.
At the opening, the perplexed crowd looked on, not sure what to make of it. ''That's because it was in an art museum,'' Mr. Jungen said. ''People knew not to interfere with the work.''
But keeping people away was hardly the idea behind ''Cooler.'' Mr. Jungen was giving alcohol back to the Europeans, centuries after European colonialists had introduced it to native North Americans, with ruinous results. So he took it upon himself to break the ice, withdrawing a beer, pulling the tab and taking a sip. ''I wanted to make sure that people knew this was my gift, so I helped myself,'' he said, chuckling.
Was he kidding? Yes and no. Sanctity is not one of his priorities. As with the Nike masks, or the Triple Candie project, ''Cooler'' treads a line between humor and the politically incorrect. ''I don't think all my work employs humor,'' he said. ''Some of it does, but incidentally. It's more a sense of the absurd.''
Mr. Jungen's dual heritage could be interpreted as a license to take jabs at both sides of it, but it's a notion he disavows. ''There are so many people willing to burden me with certain ideas of identity politics,'' he said. ''So it's very tricky. There's a certain nuance of Native Canadian identity, but I'm not necessarily interested in exploring my identity as an individual. I'm more interested in cultural identity in general.''
Mr. Jungen sees the Harlem work as a broadening, not abandoning, of his basic themes. ''A lot of people will look at what I've done and predict that I'll be doing a certain kind of work all my life,'' he said. ''But I'm interested in all sorts of things. If I could reduce it down to my most basic take, I would say I like to dismantle purity and absolutes.''
Brian Jungen  Triple Candie, 461 West 126th Street. Through March 14.
ART Murray Whyte is an arts writer for The Toronto Star.
