Senator John Kerry on Saturday challenged Republican assertions that he was too liberal for America with a sharp-edged characterization of his own: that President Bush was pursuing an ''extremist'' agenda that was ''fundamentally at odds with our history and our hopes.''
As he rolled to victories in caucuses in Michigan and Washington, Mr. Kerry campaigned in Tennessee and Virginia, where he is hoping to shut out his two Southern-born rivals, Senator John Edwards and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, in primaries on Tuesday. And he unveiled a new speech in which he positioned himself in the ''mainstream'' and in favor of fiscal responsibility, law and order, a strong defense and aid to veterans.
''I want to make it clear: We Democrats will not run from a debate about who represents mainstream America,'' Mr. Kerry said at the Virginia Democratic Party's Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner here. ''We welcome it.''
The three major Democrats competing in the state all appeared at the dinner, as did the Rev. Al Sharpton, who followed Gov. Mark Warner of Virginia in addressing nearly 2,000 raucous party activists. But it was the gathering momentum of Mr. Kerry, whom Mr. Warner was expected to endorse Sunday morning, that provided the evening's backdrop.
''This administration has followed the extreme path of the first administration in the history of our nation, when we are at war, to give the highest tax cuts in history to the wealthiest Americans,'' Mr. Kerry said.
''It is no secret,'' he said, ''that the extreme policies of this administration have watched and squandered goodwill, while manufacturing jobs in our nation are going overseas -- three million jobs lost. The stock market, according to Elaine Chao, the secretary of labor, is the final indicator of an economy. That's their view of a world in which corporate profits have gone up 46 percent, while workers' pay increased only three cents on the hour, and workers lost $1,500 on the year. Well, let us make it clear -- it is not our mark.''
Each of the major candidates speaking here made a special pitch to Southern Democrats. Senator Edwards, from neighboring North Carolina, spoke to the Virginians as a native son.
''You know the folks in the South are tired of the Republicans taking the South for granted,'' he said. ''They are tired of the Democrats ignoring the South. What they want is somebody who will fight for them.''
He added: ''This is not about political strategy for me. I will fight for the people I grew up with in the South exactly the same way I will fight for people across America who desperately need someone in the White House who will stand up and fight for them.''
General Clark focused on the values he said he grew up with, and which he said he shared with most Americans: patriotism, faith, family and inclusive leadership.
''I've never stood for elective office before,'' he said. ''I've just been a soldier. But I dedicated my life to serving this country. I think I'm the best man to beat George W. Bush.''
Though he acknowledged that family values might seem like part of a Republican platform, he said real family values concerned things like jobs and health care, which allow someone to raise and take care of a family; education, which allows someone to get a job, and ''the one that drives old Tom DeLay crazy: the environment,'' because it is passed on to the next generation of families.
Mr. Kerry made common cause with two politicians who remained popular in the South even after being defeated here.
''We know what the Bush administration will do in the light of their failures: they'll start to tell a lot of stories about Democrats,'' he said. ''My friend John McCain learned what it is like when they start. My friend Max Cleland learned what it was like when they start. And I will tell you, it's not going to work in 2004.
''They're the ones who are extreme,'' Mr. Kerry continued. ''We're the ones who are mainstream. And when we sideline their attacks with the truth, they will truly get desperate and have to do something they've never done before, which is actually talk about the issues and their record.''
The Rev. Al Sharpton suggested that President Bush was diverting attention from issues like health care and job losses by talking of a possible constitutional amendment barring gay marriage.
''We are not going to let you turn this debate this year into one on who you are sleeping with,'' Mr. Sharpton said. ''This debate will be on whether you have a job when you wake up.''
The major candidates vying in Virginia and Tennessee all campaigned furiously before the banquet on Saturday night. General Clark, who has concentrated on Tennessee, where he believes he has the best chance of victory, spent a rare full day in Virginia. In Memphis, Mr. Edwards sought to play down the significance of a loss in either state, saying that contrary to the thinking of many Democrats, his campaign would survive such a blow.
''This is very much for me a long-term process'' he said after a speech at the University of Memphis. ''It's a war of attrition. I'm in it until I'm the nominee.''
Mr. Kerry, whom Republicans have derided as a Massachusetts liberal in the mold of Senator Edward M. Kennedy or Michael S. Dukakis, began his day with a rally in Nashville alongside former Gov. Ned McWherter of Tennessee and Representative Harold Ford Jr. Mr. Ford said that, although ''this tall guy here's from another part of the country,'' Mr. Kerry ''understands the needs of Tennessee.''
Mr. Kerry's own remarks, and his jokes, seemed aimed at reversing the damage done when he suggested recently that a Democrat could win the White House without carrying the South.
''This administration is busy trying to paint everybody else as out of touch, out of sync, somehow not in the mainstream,'' he said. ''I'm not worried about coming down South and talking to people about jobs and schools and health care and the environment, I think it's them who ought to worry about coming down here and talking to people about the things they haven't done.''
He accused the president of licensing a ''creed of greed'' in corporate America, saying: ''Whether you come from Alabama, Mississippi or Kentucky or Tennessee or Georgia or any other state in the South, you're picking up the bill for their friends who are walking away with the store. And I think it's time for us to stand up.''
He told about 1,000 students and Democratic activists crowded into an atrium at Belmont University that he awoke Saturday with the lyrics to a country tune rolling around in his head.
''You know how country is: you got to write about things that are happening that aren't so great in life,'' he said. ''So I wrote about a guy who was losing all his friends, the future looked kind of bleak, losing his job - and I called it 'The Ballad of George W.' ''
Mr. Kerry also subtly injected a few religious references to his normally secular stump speech. ''So help me God,'' he said, vowing to eliminate tax loopholes for companies that move offshore. And he said environmental quality was eroding because Americans do not tend to the things ''God challenged us to pay attention to in the beginning.''
General Clark chose to focus his efforts on Saturday on western and southern Virginia, areas rich with veterans and far from the wealthy Washington suburbs. In Norfolk, he contrasted his career military credentials with his opponents' service in Washington. ''While they've been talking and debating about going to war, I was leading in war,'' he said. ''While they were trying to figure out what to do and how to say it, I was trying to figure out how to do it.''
He added: ''I'm the toughest, smartest person in this race.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: BATTLEGROUNDS
