YEARS ago, when Mel Gibson was the host of ''Saturday Night Live,'' he starred in a sketch whose very title sent a cascade of knowing laughter through the audience: ''Mel Gibson, Celebrity Gynecologist!'' But as Mr. Gibson determinedly scrawled graffiti on his heartthrob persona, he forgot one element: a bit called ''Will Suffer for Per Diem!'' In the midst of the controversy surrounding his ''Passion of the Christ,'' it's important to remember that it isn't Mr. Gibson's first foray into Christian iconography.
After all, this is someone whose production company, Icon, uses an overwrought Renaissance victim-figure as a logo. When I heard that Mr. Gibson would direct a film adaptation of the life of Jesus, my first thought was, ''What took him so long?'' At the time, the most unfortunate thing about the project appeared to be that, after a career of playing characters doomed to Christ-like suffering, he was too old to play the lead.
Eyes often misted over with anguish and sorrow, Mr. Gibson has been martyred on screen more often and more photogenically than anyone since Joan Crawford. It's likely that his appetite for roles with a high pain quotient stemmed at least in part from a slight sense of embarrassment over his own astonishing good looks. Remember him as the mentally disabled hero of ''Tim,'' pushing a lawnmower over Australian greenery while his outfit -- tight shorts and a wife-beater -- had him breaking hearts on both sides of the sexual equator? Here and elsewhere, he seemed anxious to show that he was more than just a pretty boy.
But what began because of his ambivalence about having a USDA Prime seal seared into his upper thigh continued even after he'd established his props as an actor. That happened in 1983, with Peter Weir's ''Year of Living Dangerously.'' Mr. Gibson played Guy, a young foreign correspondent in Indonesia just before the fall of the Sukarno regime. For the first time in his career, Mr. Gibson could not just use his profile to signal a morose ingenue; his star quality had to be an active rather than an inert ingredient.
Guy is brought down by a blow to the head that nearly costs him an eye, and he takes to his bed for a night of hurt that has to represent a body blow to Western arrogance. That assault -- psychological as well as physical -- set a pattern that's been visible in Mr. Gibson's film work ever since. In the ''Mad Max'' movies, he had become the first action-film star whose character had a glimmer of a heart, of a soul -- an action star who was not impervious to pain. And in 1987, ''Lethal Weapon'' captured this quality with white-knuckle grandeur. Martin Riggs, Mr. Gibson's loose-cannon cop -- or live-wire cop, depending on which set of clichés you choose for this post-Starsky loner -- has had a death wish since his wife's untimely death. Riggs's action-figure despair results in his placing himself -- and eventually his sane new partner, Murtaugh (Danny Glover) -- constantly in harm's way.
In one of the most florid action-picture scenes ever, the besotted-with-melancholy Riggs, shivering with full-body sobs, puts his gun in his mouth and cocks the hammer, finger dancing around the trigger guard; in the background, ''Bugs Bunny's Christmas Carol'' blares away in the lonely-guy trailer home. (In an infamous re-creation of this grim tableau, an acting student injured himself doing this scene with a gun loaded with blanks.)
And that's just the start. Later Riggs -- his body and 80's metal-band hair extensions doused with water -- is hoisted into a crucifixion pose so he can be questioned by one of the bad guys (Gary Busey). When Riggs refuses to talk, the villains jam contacts from a car-battery charger onto his wet skin and blast current into his body. He bellows in magnificent, aching rage. Mainstream movies generally got the hero off the hook with either a last-minute escape or a discreet cut that lasted until the worst was over and the hero's battered resourcefulness could come into play. ''Lethal Weapon'' was among the first studio pictures, along with ''Midnight Express'' and, more important, ''Sharkey's Machine'' (another movie with a boy-toy star with a martyr complex, Burt Reynolds) to let the violence wash over its hero to such histrionic effect. But there hadn't been a character (or an actor, perhaps) with such a taste for sacrificial iconography. It's later balanced by Old Testament vengeance -- Riggs virtually rises from the dead and dispenses his punishment with singleminded fury.
Mr. Gibson gets the opportunity to undergo physical horrors in each of the ''Lethal Weapon'' sequels -- and in most of the movies he's starred in since. Partly it's a result of Joel Silver's vision of the action movie. As the ''Lethal Weapon'' producer, he created a new genre, the male tearjerker, by combining action, suffering and revenge; his ''Die Hard'' movies are built on the same underpinning. But Mr. Gibson made the man's-agony theme his own with his directorial debut, ''The Man Without a Face'' (1993). In that film, he's a horribly disfigured outcast castigated for striking up a friendship with a lonely boy who is also the subject of ridicule. The character eventually gets the small town to face up to its pettiness by giving a heartfelt speech about acceptance. It's one of the few times Mr. Gibson gets his point across without bloodshed.
Since then, he's endured the tortures of the damned. He was strapped to a wheelchair and almost drowned in ''Conspiracy Theory.'' He was slowly disemboweled in ''Braveheart,'' his Oscar-winning follow-up to ''Man Without a Face.'' He watched his eldest son get killed in the ridiculously politically correct American Revolution drama, ''The Patriot.'' Mr. Gibson's stage blood has been spilled on backlots all over the world. He has shown a heartstopping aptitude for -- and interest in -- the portraiture of the martyr. His taking on ''The Passion of the Christ'' was, as the old song goes, only a matter of time.
FILM
