THE SNOW FOX
By Susan Fromberg Schaeffer.
438 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $24.95.
LADY UTSU, the heroine of Susan Fromberg Schaeffer's latest novel, inhabits the world described in ''The Tale of Genji,'' the 11th-century novel written by a Japanese court lady -- a world in which aristocratic women live out their lives largely unseen by men, hidden discreetly behind screens. Nevertheless, rumors quickly spread of Utsu's beauty. Graceful, red-lipped and with hair so long it takes six women an entire day to wash it, she is also fearless and full of fun. In her early years at the palace, she teases the emperor mercilessly and fills the ladies' quarters with laughter.
But then her secret lover, the powerful Lord Norimasa, sets her a cruel test. When he orders her to kill the first man she has ever really loved, she has no choice but to obey. Utsu hardens her heart and serves her lover a meal laced with ground glass. The experience changes her forever, giving her the power to defy convention: when Lord Norimasa sends his own favorite, the young samurai Matsuhito, to guard her, she shocks him by ordering him to join her behind her screen. A secret romance soon develops between the two.
Schaeffer is known for writing passionate novels -- ''The Madness of a Seduced Woman,'' ''Buffalo Afternoon'' and ''Anya,'' among others -- that evoke widely different worlds in intimate detail. In ''The Snow Fox,'' she conjures up a society defined by both exquisite beauty and bloody battles; here aristocrats write poetry and go on snow-viewing parties, then set off to wreak ferocious vengeance on their enemies. (After Lord Norimasa slices his rival's head ''like a melon cut through with a sharp knife,'' he has it stitched back together and slammed so fiercely onto a stake that ''the stake protruded from the top of the head like a horn.'')
Schaeffer tells her story in epic style, as if it were being related by a chronicler contemporary with the events described. Much is not explained, creating the illusion that the knowing reader is also a part of this world. When, for example, Lady Tsukie, Lord Norimasa's wife, has a child, we are expected to take it for granted that archers will twang their bows to keep evil at bay, that exorcists will be summoned. The novel's language is slightly stilted and portentous, like a translation of an ancient text. We see events not directly but from the perspectives of various participants. Everything is described obliquely -- sometimes confusingly -- through dialogue and dreams, memories and thoughts.
In the second of the four books that make up ''The Snow Fox,'' we move to territory made familiar by the films of Akira Kurosawa. A ronin, a masterless samurai, saves a village from bandits, then rides off on a lone quest into the mountains. He is searching for a woman who travels with a fox -- Lady Utsu, it turns out. She has taken the fox as a pet, reminiscent of Japanese legends in which this animal adopts the form of a beautiful woman in order to bewitch men. The ronin, we realize, is Matsuhito.
When he finds Utsu living in a remote mountain hut and she allows him to see her face, he is shocked to realize that she, like him, is now old. Eventually, both the former lovers reveal their stories, explaining how their lives came to change so drastically. Away from the court, with its rigid conventions, they can look and speak and act as they never have before.
Despite the archaic setting, the underlying theme of Schaeffer's novel is timeless -- the endless complications of the relations between men and women. For the men in the story, women are far more unpredictable and dangerous than the most dreaded enemy. ''Lord Norimasa studied two things: battle and the doings of women. 'They are both the same thing,' Lord Norimasa had said. 'Although a strategy for a war is simpler than seeing through the schemes of a woman. I read books on strategy, but I sharpen my mind trying to understand women.' ''
One of the stories Schaeffer weaves into her book is that of Ono no Komachi, a ninth-century Japanese poet who was said to be the most beautiful woman who ever lived. Like Lady Utsu, she was cruel to her suitors. And she suffered the ultimate punishment: she grew old and hideous. Using this poet as a model, Schaeffer digs deep into Lady Utsu's pain. How does it feel to have been such a great beauty, only to lose that allure? The book is imbued with the Japanese concept of mono no aware, ''the sadness of things'' -- the poignancy and fragility of simply being human.
Lesley Downer's most recent book is ''Madame Sadayakko: The Geisha Who Bewitched the West.''
