INVESTORS have been understandably irate over executive pay recently. But because disclosure in the area is so woeful, they don't know the half of it.
Summary pay tables, required by the Securities and Exchange Commission since 1992, help investors see where their hard-earned money goes. But three areas cry out for reform by regulators: deferred compensation, supplemental executive retirement plans and executive payouts when a company undergoes a change in control.
As Brian Foley, a compensation expert in White Plains, put it, ''The big print giveth but the small print giveth even more.'' And, sometimes, there is no print at all.
Consider deferred compensation, the career-ender for Richard A. Grasso, former chairman of the New York Stock Exchange. The only thing companies must reveal about deferred compensation is the difference between the market rate of interest and the rate earned by the executives on the amounts they have collected. That is the only clue to how mountainous deferred compensation can be.
At Wyeth, a drug maker, executives can earn an astonishing 10 percent interest rate annually. The 2003 proxy reported that John R. Stafford, Wyeth's former chairman who is a consultant, earned $1.6 million in above-market interest alone on deferred compensation. A Wyeth spokesman declined to say how much Mr. Stafford has in total.
Robert J. Ulrich, chief executive of the Target Corporation, a retailer, earned $688,218 based on deferred pay in 2002, the most recent year for which data is available; four top colleagues there made a total of $470,000.
Supplemental executive retirement plans are also annoyingly opaque. Actual amounts in executives' plans are undisclosed; tables outline only what executives may receive based on years of service, salary and bonus.
Such plans can loom large. Last month, Hercules Inc., a chemical maker, restated third-quarter 2003 results to account for a $4.7 million pension benefit paid to William Joyce, former chief executive. Hercules' net income was cut by $2.9 million or 14 cents a share.
Tim Ranzetta, president of Equilar, a compensation analysis firm, said: ''The disclosure of the myriad executive compensation plans -- pension, supplemental executive retirement plans, deferred compensation, split dollar life insurance -- is not adequate in answering a fundamental question: What is the projected value of these plans to the executive upon his retirement?''
Finally, there are the potentially huge payouts to executives in a merger, a matter of consternation among shareholders at MONY, the insurance concern weighing a bid from AXA, the French insurance giant.
If the deal goes through, MONY executives will receive $98.2 million -- more than 6 percent of the $1.5 billion transaction.
Executives' take in a merger is rarely detailed in routine filings. In last year's proxy, MONY discusses only broadly what executives could get: a lump sum of three times an executive's salary, bonus, long-term performance pay and other things. Such disclosure, or lack of it, is typical at companies.
Jesse M. Brill, a securities and compensation lawyer and chairman of the National Association of Stock Plan Professionals, is urging lawyers to disclose all compensation received by chief executives this year, not just adhere to outdated requirements. His disclosure advice is at www.naspp.org.
Shareholders are paying these bills. They have a right to know the costs in plain, shocking English.
MARKET WATCH
