To the Editor:
Regarding the article ''For Group Doctors, a Winning Model,'' (Feb. 1): I wish to clarify several points and correct certain mistaken implications. The Mount Kisco Medical Group exists to serve our patients and our community. This is the driving force behind our growth, and it is indeed our obligation, on behalf of our patients, to be prudent in the way we manage the ''business'' of health care.
Our medical group became a partner in the Ambulatory Surgery Center of Westchester because such a center would benefit the community, particularly in view of the very important fact, omitted from the article, that at the time the surgery center was established, the anesthesiologists of Northern Westchester Hospital participated in few managed care plans, creating financial hardship for patients. This has since changed, but until the surgery center came into existence, patients with managed care were at a financial disadvantage. Surgeons who are not part of the Mount Kisco Medical Group at the surgery center are investors as well as users.
Our medical group has only the best intentions for Northern Westchester Hospital as a vital local institution, and our management team is working closely with Joel Seligman, C.E.O. of the hospital, and with the hospital itself to try to enhance the quality and variety of outpatient services in our community. Mount Kisco Medical Group physicians also serve the hospital as department chairmen and board members.
Our group physicians are not required to refer to other specialists in the group and they always make their referral with the patient's best interest as their primary concern. Large group practices such as Mayo Clinic and Cleveland Clinic are known for having strong specialty departments, and I am proud that this is true of our group as well. This is confirmed by the fact that Mount Kisco Medical Group specialists receive many referrals from non-group physicians.
Lastly, no physician at our group is told how to practice medicine. The sound fiscal management that is facilitated within a well-run large group practice actually empowers our doctors to provide the best care they can, freed from the increasingly intrusive administrative concerns that are known to plague small practices and that, understandably, can preoccupy physicians in such practices.
Scott D. Hayworth, M.D.  President and C.E.O.  Mount Kisco Medical Group
