THE residential real estate market may be sizzling -- but not so much, brokers say, if a smoker's home is the one for sale.
''Everything sells eventually, even horrible closet-size apartments,'' observed Frank Torre of the Corcoran Group, who markets condominiums and co-ops in Manhattan. ''But a place smelling like tobacco? It is going to take longer.''
Agents who have assisted people selling or shopping for everything from starter-home Capes to Victorian mansions, agree: as the number of public places a person can smoke has shrunk, so has the number of home buyers who are even willing to consider a house with smoking in its past.
''A smoker's house may sell,'' said Pat Hoferkamp, president of Burgdorff ERA in New Jersey, ''but not in the shortest amount of time, and not at optimum price.''
Last summer, when the condo market was torrid, it took Mr. Torre six months to find a buyer for the Murray Hill apartment of a chain-smoking playwright who worked at home.
Relying on tips from other realtors, Mr. Torre used a variety of tricks to absorb or mask the odor lodged in the carpets, the furniture, the fixtures, the appliances, the very paint on the wall. He would always arrive an hour before a showing of the apartment, toting his own Mighty Mite Eureka vacuum with a HEPA (high efficiency particulate air) filter, to go over the carpet and upholstery. He would empty the ashtrays and hustle the trash to the outdoors bin. He lighted sticks of incense, aromatic candles or both. He ground coffee beans and left them out in the kitchen and put little paper cups of white vinegar behind the sofa in the living room.
Still, ''people would walk in, and it would register,'' he said. ''Some didn't want to say anything, and other people did ask.'' If he had to field the question directly, Mr. Torre recalled, he would not lie, but would try to flick the question away like an errant ash.
''It does seem that someone might have been smoking in here recently, doesn't it?'' Mr. Torre said he would sometimes respond with a polite smile.
Legal Niceties  No Requirements On Disclosure
There is no requirement in any state that sellers -- or their representatives -- disclose if the current residents smoked inside a home. In multifamily buildings, there is no requirement to disclose that smokers live next door to the unit for sale. The nose is supposed to know, according to Allen Susser of the law firm of Cohn Lifland Pearlman Herrmann &amp; Knopf in Saddle Brook, N.J., who specializes in real estate law.
''Obviously, most people can determine if smokers live in a place the minute they walk in,'' he said, ''and they can then walk out if they don't like what they smell.'' The venerable common law principle of caveat emptor -- let the buyer beware -- is always in play during a home purchase, Mr. Susser emphasized.
He and other lawyers said they had never heard of a lawsuit based on a claim that a buyer had been hoodwinked into purchasing a home that required cleanup and odor control. Christopher Hitchcock, a real estate lawyer with Ohrenstein &amp; Brown in Manhattan, said he thought that a buyer who could prove an attempt to deceive -- in which the true condition of a dwelling had been temporarily disguised -- that had led to unexpected cleanup costs might have a credible legal argument. ''But it would have to be a material attempt to deceive -- not natural methods,'' he added. ''Not cups of vinegar or cookies baking in the oven.''
James Repace, a secondhand smoke consultant who worked with the Environmental Protection Agency for 19 years, said he had been seriously considering buying a home in Maryland when he noticed a plethora of scented candles and air fresheners set in niches and shelves around the place. ''I thought, This person is trying to cover something up!'' he said.
So he asked the realtor to move the scented paraphernalia to the garage, went outside and breathed fresh air, re-entered the home and was hit with the smell of tobacco smoke. ''Most people aren't going to think about doing that, though,'' he said. Mr. Susser said that if buyers were concerned that olfactory evidence may not be enough to protect their interests, they should make sure to alert the house inspector to look carefully for evidence of smoking residue.
The costs of cleaning out the last whiff of long-vanished smoke can be an unpleasant surprise. Barbara Margulis, a veteran broker with Burgdorff ERA in Livingston, N.J., said, ''Today's buyers, who are taking advantage of low interest rates, can afford the mortgage, but don't have the cash to do fix-up.'' She said she routinely advised buyers against purchasing homes that may require costly cleanup of smoke odor and residue.
Ms. Margulis advises smoking sellers who seek top price for their home to consider paying for cleanup and new paint before any potential buyer gets a whiff.
Yet it is true that in a seller's market like the current one, fewer buyers can afford to be sticklers, brokers say. Jacelyn Botti, a senior vice president at Weichert Realtors who oversees brokers in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and Pennsylvania, noted that the always-coveted ''8-4-2'' colonial, a standard suburban-size house with at least eight total rooms, four bedrooms and two baths, can ''smell whatever it wants to smell like,'' because the inventory of such homes is so low.
And in cases where there are many bidders on the same house, it is not unheard of for a bidder to waive a house inspection in order to make an offer more enticing to the seller. Sometimes, because the house or neighborhood is so appealing, buyers just decide to hold their noses. Sometimes, their olfactory sense may be dulled by desire.
Eighteen months ago, Mary Alice Williams, a broadcaster with WCBS radio, bought a stately 80-year-old, five-bedroom colonial from a friend -- before it was listed on the exceedingly competitive Montclair, N.J., market, where it would probably have triggered a bidding war. Ms. Williams had visited the home numerous times and knew the homeowner had smoked for many years. Having been around newsrooms all her life, she is familiar with smoke-filled rooms and the lasting consequences. ''But when I got this house, I didn't even notice it,'' she said, ''until I moved in, and went, 'What is that? Doesn't it smell like smoke?' ''
She purged the home of all fabrics and had it repainted -- except for the kitchen, which she is planning to redo. ''In the kitchen, I used everything I could think of to get it out,'' she said. ''There's no way. There are greasy yellow drips of nicotine that actually coat everything. Clorox bleach at least gets rid of the smell, sort of, but the stain doesn't leave.''
Cleaning Up  Professional Help Can Cost Thousands
Professional smoke-residue cleaners, whose fees range from about $1,500 for a relatively small job to more than $10,000 for deodorizing a really large, really stinky home, employ a wide variety of cleaning agents and air-freshening machines and generally base their fees on square footage as well as what eyes and nose tell them about the condition of a property.
Mollie Abend, an agent for Prudential Connecticut Realty in Hartford, said she helped her cousin and her husband find a house in Warren, N.J., a few years ago. The couple needed to live in Warren, in a particular neighborhood if possible, because the husband of Ms. Abend's cousin was going to be the rabbi at the local synagogue.
''They found a place on a quiet street that was perfect,'' she said, ''except the house belonged to an elderly couple who were heavy smokers. They hated the smell, and I hated it, but they wanted the house.''
Ms. Abend said the buyers threw themselves into an effort to remove the odor -- first installing a fresh-air-replenishing device known as an ''ozone machine'' and then removing all window treatments, ripping up all carpeting and padding, having the floors beneath refinished and repainting every square inch of the house.
''By the end, I don't think it was noticeable,'' Ms. Abend said. The couple had no difficulty reselling the house recently when he moved to another synagogue outside Boston.
Of course, individual sensitivities do differ, Ms. Abend noted. Her husband smoked until three years ago -- only outside their home and never in her car, she said. Still, if he borrowed her car, she could catch the scent of cigarettes the next time she laid hands on the steering wheel.
And when Ms. Abend assisted a client in purchasing a charming, smoke-ridden estate in a Hartford suburb, her lungs were pushed to the point of pain. ''The buyer decided she was up to the challenge,'' Ms. Abend said. But as the sales agent began spending a great deal of time in the house helping the buyer get estimates from contractors and decorators, ''I would literally walk out of there with my chest hurting.''
While the harmful effects of secondhand smoke on nonsmokers have been well documented, with a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report putting deaths of such persons from lung cancer at 3,000 a year, no claim has been made that any of these cases involved leftover smoke in a home. Data is simply not kept on that situation, according to Joel London, a spokesman at the C.D.C.
Mr. Repace, the secondhand smoke consultant based in Maryland said, ''This is not a trivial thing. But to be able to quantify the risk? It has not been done.''
Mr. Repace, who served as a policy analyst with the E.P.A., said: ''It is pretty clear that any place where people have been smoking regularly for a while will have tobacco tars and nicotines on room surfaces, including the ventilation ducts. Unless surfaces are washed and then painted, there will be outcasting -- or re-emission of tobacco tars and nicotine from surfaces on which they have absorbed.
''HEPA filters work on the particles, but not on the gases that are byproducts of smoke residue,'' Mr. Repace said. Cancer-causing chemicals and toxins are continuously emitted, he said, until utterly eliminated -- which he pointed out is rarely done inside ventilation ducts. In his view, ''if somebody has been smoking in a house, it's going to be contaminated.''
A new urine test kit called TobacAlert, which can be purchased for $15 at drugstores, permits individuals to measure their own level of exposure to cancer-causing agents in second-hand smoke. Developed by the Nymox Corporation of Maywood, N.J., the test is sensitive enough to detect an hour of second-hand smoke exposure in the previous three days, according to the company's vice president Brian Doyle.
''There are tons of implications that have to do with real estate,'' Mr. Doyle said, ''from fire insurance, to the effects on people who live next to smokers in apartments or houses that are semidetached.''
Lingering Odor  No Guarantees From Cleaners
How long do the smell and the pollutants hang on if left untreated? It is difficult to specify a half-life for the chemical compounds in a given environment, say scientists and experts in the house-cleaning field. But cleaners cannot -- and do not -- guarantee they are removing all harmful residue, even when they remove all odor.
Older, draftier houses and apartments are less likely to retain the scent of the past, many realtors observed, than newer, airtight dwellings. Also, the number of people smoking inside a particular home and the number of cigarettes, cigars or bowls of pipe tobacco consumed per day obviously figure in.
Tom Tsilionis of Livingston, N.J., a pack-and-a-half-per-day smoker who works at home as a Web site developer, said he confines his puffing to the garage to minimize the effect on his 3-year-old son. Last fall, when Mr. Tsilionis and his wife were moving to a new and larger house, the sales agent for the old house, Barbara Margulis, told him the garage habit had to go, as long as the house was on the market.
''I admit that the garage really smelled, even though we kept it immaculate, and I used an ashtray,'' Mr. Tsilionis said. ''When you opened the door, the smell rushed into the whole house.''
A 30-day airing out, during which he carried an ashtray into the backyard well away from the house, solved the smell issue during showing, Mr. Tsilionis said. ''Barbara told me the house inspector said he smelled smoke in the garage, and I said, 'Hey! You only said I had to stay out of there until we had a contract!' ''
Mr. Tsilionis said that the four-bedroom home sold for well over the asking price, and that the 30-day sacrifice was well worth it to him.
Mary Jo McNally of the Corcoran Group recalled a more urban scenario. ''My husband and I sold a place with three smokers in one apartment,'' she said, ''and our sellers were not totally agreeable to doing all we were suggesting. So it took us twice as long as it would have otherwise.''
Ms. McNally, who previously worked at an upscale Manhattan hotel, said she recommended the same techniques used in the hotel business to turn a ''smoking'' room into a ''nonsmoking'' one: an ionizer, dry cleaning, rug shampoo, oxidizing wash for the walls and -- if possible -- paint.
If a smoker's home is made available ''as is,'' she said, she will sometimes reach out to attract European and Asian customers, for whom the smell of cigarettes may be routine -- and not outright offensive -- as was true in this country until recently.
In New York, where smoking in restaurants and bars has been banned for six months, apartment buildings remain an intimate meeting ground for the smoking and nonsmoking cultures.
The number of legal battles over secondhand smoke can be expected to surge in this arena, said Edward Sweda, who heads the Tobacco Products Liability Project at Northeastern University Law School in Boston. That has already happened in California, where state and municipal regulations against smoking are stricter than anywhere else in the country, and nonsmokers' right not to be harmed is generally accepted and well-defended, he said.
''A number of claims have been successfully brought by condo residents who had smoke seeping through the walls,'' he said.
''Cathy Blau, a vice president of Corcoran Group who kicked nicotine three years ago after lung cancer was diagnosed in her mother, said, ''Before I quit smoking, you could smell my apartment as soon as you got off the elevator, all the way down the hall.''
Now, Ms. Blau said, she herself recoils at redolent hallways or smoke that wafts from an adjacent terrace -- and has genuine sympathy for people who live next to smokers.
Co-op and condo boards are frequently called upon to weigh the rights of smoking and nonsmoking residents, noted Mr. Hitchcock of Ohrenstein &amp; Brown, which has offices in Manhattan, Newark and Long Island and represents many such boards.
Some boards are now banning smoking among newcomers, he noted, at the same time ''grandfathering in'' current residents who smoke.
''I see the tide turning,'' Mr. Hitchcock said. While he agreed that antismokers used to be perceived as fussbudget types -- like Felix from ''The Odd Couple'' -- now it is people who smoke inside who are becoming the outcasts.
''When issues come up about smoking and health, a board has the ability to tell a smoker, 'Listen, this is affecting others,' and to order change and remediation,'' he said. ''Of course, some boards are more strident than others -- and sometimes it depends on who the smoking person is.''
The most commonly used solution, however, Mr. Hitchcock said, is clean and simple: ''a board's normal reaction is to tell people on both sides to exercise some courtesy.''
Correction:  February 8, 2004, Sunday  An article on Page 1 of the Real Estate section today about selling homes occupied by smokers includes a lawyer's erroneous reference to the policy of some co-op boards. Christopher Hitchcock, a lawyer for boards, originally said that some boards were banning smoking by new residents while allowing it by current owners. After the article had gone to press, Mr. Hitchcock was approached for a proposed article on boards that had done that. He then said that he had misstated the situation -- that while he knew of some boards that were considering such action, he did not know of any that had yet taken it.
