ON being told they were going to see ''Dr. Cat,'' some young patients would enter his office and question his pedigree. ''Are you really a cat?'' they would ask, or ''Do you meow?'' If it meant calming down an anxious child, the pediatrician would meow. Sometimes he would conduct an examination on a stuffed animal or doll, gently showing a child what to expect. More often, he just spoke to them quietly.
After a practice that spanned nearly 40 years, Dr. Ben S. Caterinicchio -- ''Dr. Cat'' to thousands of children and their parents -- is retiring. He has seen major changes in the practice of medicine, in the relationships between doctor and patients, and even in the development of children themselves. Known as the doctor who walked to work, his tall, slim figure loping down Route 133 was a familiar sight in Mount Kisco, where he maintained his practice.
Though he was known by his patients for his devotion -- he used to sleep in his office when he was on call, and until last year still made the occasional house call -- Dr. Caterinicchio, 71, said it was only toward the latter part of his career that he decided he had chosen the right profession.
''It's in the last 10 to 15 years that I understood that I've done the right thing, and I'm really happy with this,'' he said. ''I always had the suspicion in the back of my mind that I wasn't geared to do this. In order to surmount the feeling that I wasn't doing what I was really passionate about, I had to do better. I had to try to be the best.''
His real passion was movies, he said. Dr. Caterinicchio owns more than 200 films on laser disks and estimates he has seen ''Sunset Boulevard'' at least 50 times.
It was a sense of duty toward his parents, immigrants from Sicily who passed through Ellis Island, he said, that kept him focused on medicine, a profession they respected. His father, a laborer, and his mother, a seamstress, thought it would be a fine thing to have a doctor in the family, he said.
Dr. Caterinicchio arrived in 1964 at the Mount Kisco Medical Group, which then had roughly 14 doctors. (Today it has nearly 90.) The group originally practiced in a small house; Dr. Caterinicchio was the fifth pediatrician to join the practice. Back then, he said, one rarely saw cars on the Saw Mill Parkway, north of Hawthorne. The sprawling complex that now houses the medical group was all woods at the time, he said.
He kept the family car at the office for house calls, he said, and at first often got helplessly lost in northern Westchester on his way to his patients' homes. Sometimes, his wife, Gladys, went along to help navigate. He was paid an additional 50 cents per house call. Seeing families at home, he said, fostered an intimacy between doctor and patient that has diminished over the last decades.
The early years of his practice were a struggle, emotionally and financially, he said. He graduated fifth in his class from New York Medical College and went to Johns Hopkins University for his internship. Newly married, he was paid $360 a month, and his parents sent care packages of hams and salamis to help the young couple get by. A residency at Cornell University was followed by a two-year stint in the Army. Now retired, Mrs. Caterinicchio taught French in high school.
When they moved to Mount Kisco, the Caterinicchios had two children. It took time to build his practice, Dr. Caterinicchio said. But eventually he saw so many children that when the Mount Kisco Medical Group announced Dr. Caterinicchio's retirement last December, it sent letters to 4,000 families. As for the Caterinicchios' own children, a son, Ben, works in computer graphics in Los Angeles, and their daughter, Maria, works in personnel at I.B.M. in White Plains.
Watching families develop and interact was a joy, he said. ''I love to see the child from the newborn period on, and see how the parents' world evolves around the child and watch them delight in this child's development,'' he said. ''Being able to help them when that child is sick or has a problem, and getting their trust, that is such a privilege.''
He found he was good at calming anxious children, and when that failed, he would listen to chests between sobs and peer into throats between screams. As the years passed, he developed an avuncular feeling toward many of his patients, and was delighted when children sent him pictures, invited him to birthday parties, and eventually to bar or bat mitzvahs and weddings. Particularly gratifying, he said, were former patients who returned with their own children.
David Russell, of Brewster, said that Dr. Caterinicchio had been both his and his wife's pediatrician. When their first son, Duncan, was born, taking him to Dr. Caterinicchio felt like a visit to a relative, Mr. Russell said.
''Dr. Cat was always so comfortable to be around,'' he said. ''Even as a little kid I was never afraid to go to the doctor, and I think my kids feel the same way. He just makes kids feel good. He still talks to me quietly, too, and he still keeps me calm.''
Children and parents have changed over the decades, Dr. Caterinicchio said. Children are maturing earlier physically and have become more savvy about social issues. He said he sees more sexual promiscuity and drug use among pediatric patients than he did earlier in his career. Parents, he said, are generally more anxious. Parents have become more knowledgeable about health issues, which is a positive development, he said, but some have a ''consumerist attitude'' toward doctors.
''It felt as if, 'Hey, I'm paying for you the same way as I'm paying for the plumber, and I want it done this way and I want it to turn out right,''' Dr. Caterinicchio said.
Advances in medicine have rendered diseases that were once potentially fatal now easily treatable, Dr. Caterinicchio said. But at the same time, technological advances have changed the doctor-patient relationship because, often ''you're simply the person who's ordering the tests,'' he said.
Compounding the loss of intimacy is the volume of patients, he said. Early in his practice, Dr. Caterinicchio saw about 10 children a day. Even after he curtailed his practice in his later years, he said, he was seeing an average of 35 patients daily.
Dr. Caterinicchio said that he didn't feel ready to retire, but that his contract mandated that he do so. He hopes to volunteer at a medical clinic, and of course to spend more time at the movies. He watches his all-time favorite, ''Gone With the Wind'' at least once a year, belongs to several film clubs, and is the host of weekly ''Classic Nights'' at his home.
Ultimately, Dr. Caterinicchio said, he was immensely moved by the letters he received since he announced his retirement and has finally come to believe he made the right career choice.
''It took me quite a while to realize that this was the right thing to do,'' he said, ''and all I can say is that I hope I've done the best I was able to do for everyone.''
IN PERSON
