THERE was absolutely no point in scolding Bobby Knight for losing his cool amidst the croutons and the spinach leaves at the salad bar.
Instead, Texas Tech should have gigged the chancellor who neglected one of the cardinal rules for living with a distempered celebrity who brings in $10 million to the university's coffers. That rule is: Do Not Provoke.
The chancellor should have known there are separate rules of behavior for the most famous and accomplished in our society. Whether it is wackos like Michael Jackson or corporate plunderers like the Enron Gang, certain megastars can go a long way without being called to task.
This is particularly true in sports, where we need our nights in front of the tube, our haughty superstars and our arrogant coaches, and we are willing to suspend our instincts of normalcy.
The chancellor, David R. Smith, should have known better when he sidled up to Knight, in what is described as an ''upscale'' grocery near the campus, and told Knight he had been doing a very good job.
Knight says the chancellor used the word ''lately.'' The chancellor says he used the phrase ''the last few weeks.'' Either way, the chancellor lives in an academic world. He ought to have known better than to sidle up to Coach Knight over the bulgur wheat and volunteer such a limited compliment (or maybe even a veiled taunt)?
Now it turns out that the two had a tiff a year ago, after Smith signed on with Knight already in place. In view of the bad feelings, addressing Knight in public about his good behavior seems a foolish and foolhardy venture.
Just about everybody in North America knows you do not casually make comments to Robert Montgomery Knight. Knight has a public rap sheet of strangers who regretted their brief brushes with him: the police officer he dissed in Puerto Rico, the fan he stuffed into a garbage can at the Final Four, the kid he cussed in Indiana, to say nothing of players, referees and school officials he savaged.
In this case, Smith was like a zoo attendant who pokes a stick at the cranky polar bear. People are plunking down money to go see the bear. Nobody pays to see a chancellor.
The man might have thought he was being collegial, but he ought to have known not to push the quivery buttons of a sensitive chap like Coach Knight. The chancellor may not read the sports pages, which is fine, except when your health may be at stake.
Knight has reached the stage that poor, addled Billy Martin reached in his later years. Even when he was trying to behave himself, Martin was the target of every marshmallow salesman who wanted to engage him. For Martin, there was a heckler in every bar. For Knight, there is a perceived insult at every salad bar.
After the ''lately'' inference or implication, Knight apparently snapped back at the chancellor and confronted him outdoors. Nobody was dumped into the curried tofu. Nobody was suspended or fired. And Knight has survived to win another game and donate more salary to the library.
Yet what is the real cost of this cynical arrangement? Everybody has to kowtow to the value system that makes exception for self-centered celebrities.
''I think if a faculty member did this, they would be sent for psychiatric evaluation,'' Nancy B. Reed, the head of the university's faculty senate, said.
Reed is correct. There are double standards for a Bobby Knight and the rest of the faculty. This is all explained away by Texas Tech's improved basketball record since the great man arrived, after his exile from Indiana, which took a decade too long to figure out Knight was more trouble than he was worth.
But we're all to blame. Public opinion might have had influence on the O. J. jury. Some officials turned their backs on sexual depravity among clergy members. Martha Stewart dumped on subordinates, which worked until the subpoenas started flying. William Bennett moralized and gambled. The president of the United States hit on a young woman, which would get tenured professors fired. And athletes make commercials for expensive sports gear -- and the rest of their night is basically droit du seigneur.
We get what we deserve. We all get angry about Janet Jackson's ploy, and we miss the basic sordidness of what corporate sponsors, the networks and, by proxy, the N.F.L. are pushing on us, to further debase us and our children.
We're all suckers. But at least most of us know better than to tiptoe up to Bobby Knight in a crowded lunchroom. Pickled beets don't wash.
Sports of The Times
