KUNITAKE ANDO, the affable and self-deprecating president of the Sony Corporation, laughs as he holds up his digital camera to show off pictures of himself playing golf in Hawaii.
Yet when talk turns to the challenges facing Sony, Japan's best-known company, Mr. Ando, 62, turns deadly serious. And for good reason. At a trade show in Las Vegas in January, he got yet another glimpse of the chaos enveloping the consumer electronics business. Companies from Dell to Microsoft to Nokia want a piece of the market for home-entertainment hardware that Japanese companies, including Sony, once dominated.
For a company that has long flexed its muscles and built a reputation on being first, Sony is now in the awkward position of having to play catch-up, and Mr. Ando knows it. But, he says, Sony will prevail by leap-frogging the competition and developing a new generation of products that few consumers can now imagine.
''It's not scary for us'' to compete against so many others, Mr. Ando said. ''Offense is the best defense. Everyone is coming into this field, so we just can't wait and see what's going to happen.''
Mr. Ando might have added that Sony has little choice. It is under attack from a number of electronics and software companies, many with billions of dollars to throw around, and it risks being marginalized if it sits tight. Just as worrisome, each new entrant to the business threatens to steal not just market share, but also the mantle of originality that Sony has built so carefully.
A few years ago, Sony would have sniffed at a low-cost computer maker like Dell producing flat-panel television monitors or a cellphone manufacturer like Nokia making hand-held video games. Not anymore. Sony executives know that these newcomers to the home-entertainment business can produce what they say they will, and do it for less than any company in Japan. Apple Computer's success with iPod, the digital music recorder, is also a reminder that Sony no longer has a monopoly on tech cool.
Sony, of course, has been under attack before, and often has rebounded in ways that few analysts had expected. Rarely, though, have so many competitors joined the home-entertainment market at once. Thanks to the commodification of the electronics industry, companies can buy components easily from suppliers in Taiwan, South Korea, China and even Japan. Having honed their cost-cutting skills, these companies can often produce products faster and more profitably than Sony can.
Having been upstaged by Apple, Samsung and others in certain product categories, Sony is taking action. Mr. Ando is one-half of a two-man team heading the company's ambitious, multipronged strategy, called Transformation 60. It is an effort to bolster profits, revamp the company's product lineup and repair what many critics see as a damaged reputation. To be completed by Sony's 60th anniversary, in 2006, the plan includes eliminating 20,000 jobs, cutting billions of dollars in expenses and quadrupling operating margins, to 10 percent.
Mr. Ando, who at times comes across as a bookish numbers guy, is in charge of meeting these targets, which, intentionally or not, will make Sony look more like a profit-driven American company than a typical Japanese one bent on grabbing market share at all costs.
The other major pillar of the plan is to design a new generation of products that will allow Sony to fend off challenges from Hewlett-Packard, Intel and others that are trying to put personal computers, not the television, at the center of home entertainment. Ken Kutaragi, whose is best known for creating the PlayStation video game console, is spearheading the development of these products.
Mr. Kutaragi's appointment to executive deputy president has helped to reassure skittish investors that Sony is serious about regaining its edge. Though its electronics are admired for their styling, Sony in recent years has rarely produced a hit that redefines the electronics industry the way the Walkman and compact disc player did years ago.
One exception has been Mr. Kutaragi's PlayStation, which produced a disproportionate amount of Sony's profits in 2002 and 2003.
To vault past the competition, Sony is joining hands with outsiders in some product areas. The company will spend $2 billion to produce next-generation liquid crystal displays with the Samsung Corporation of South Korea. Sony is also working with the Toshiba Corporation and I.B.M. to develop CELL, a high-powered chip that will become the centerpiece of an array of new digital gadgets. Last week, Sony said it would spend 120 billion yen ($1.14 billion) this year alone on building these chips. In other areas, most notably video games, Sony will try to blend its electronics and content businesses to produce the long-sought-after ''digital convergence,'' the integration of software and hardware.
MR. KUTARAGI, 53, is a brash engineer and a rebel inside Sony, respected for his success but brushed aside by the company's more traditional managers. PlayStation has become a legend, not just because of its success, but because Mr. Kutaragi stomped and shouted until Sony executives agreed to build it.
While Mr. Kutaragi enjoys the limelight and his maverick image, Mr. Ando seems content to roll up his sleeves and tackle Sony's structural problems. He heads weekly meetings to cajole executives into making cuts to their divisions and working with rival factions in the company.
Though he is president, Mr. Ando has a difficult task in wielding authority. Thanks to the company's co-founders, Akio Morita and Masaru Ibuka, Sony is dominated by proud, territorial engineers whose competitive spirit often produces superior results. But while the culture of the founders encouraged inquisitiveness and independence, it also bred extravagance. To the older generation of managers, cutting costs is synonymous with abandoning the founders' vision of a place where creativity comes first.
Though Mr. Ando says the company's restructuring plan is ''on track,'' he acknowledges that he has had to play hardball with recalcitrant managers who resist his demands. For example, some division chiefs continue to hire workers even as they let others go. That has made it difficult for the company to reduce its head count and has complicated the efforts to eliminate 16 outdated product lines, and cut both its factory floor space and its number of warehouses by 30 percent, as planned.
''For the first time, we have to say, clearly, 'no,''' Mr. Ando said. ''Creativity is not just doing whatever you want to do. As long as you can make a profit, it's O.K.''
Early efforts are starting to pay off. On Jan. 28, Sony said it had earned a larger-than-expected profit of 92 billion yen ($872.1 million) in the October-to-December quarter last year. Though the electronics group is still vulnerable to threats from low-cost rivals, and PlayStation2 console sales have peaked, the company raised its profit target by 10 percent for the full fiscal year ending in March.
Notably, the number of workers taking the company's offer to retire early has exceeded expectations. As a result, Sony plans to spend 150 billion yen on restructuring efforts this fiscal year, 7 percent more than the company had announced earlier.
But much more work needs to be done in the next two years if Transformation 60 and Mr. Ando are to be judged a success. And much is riding on that happening. For decades, investors have given Sony the benefit of the doubt, even when it racked up huge losses developing the compact disc, buying a movie studio and introducing a bevy of unique but ultimately marginal products. Patience, though, has worn thin as Sony's stature in the electronics market has diminished. The company, some analysts say, clung too long to analog technology that propelled it in a previous generation. While it tried to wring more profits out of its older televisions and video decks, other companies -- Sharp, Pioneer and Canon, to name just a few -- focused on a handful of hit products like flat-panel digital televisions, DVD recorders and digital cameras.
''Sony shifted too slowly,'' said Hiroshi Takada, an analyst at J.P. Morgan Securities. ''They thought the change to digital wouldn't come so quickly.''
Mr. Takada says Sony understands that it is in ''an emergency situation.'' The company has shown, he said, that it can turn on a dime and make the most of its brand name, most recently through its successful line of Cybershot digital cameras and its DVD recorders.
Still, it will take several years before Sony and its investors reap the fruits of Transformation 60, analysts say. That is because many of the investments in new technology, like the designer CELL chip, will take time to make their way into new products.
THOUGH he appears content to work in the shadow of Nobuyuki Idei, Sony's chairman and the public face of the company, Mr. Ando, in many ways, has prepared his entire career for this moment. Born in Tokyo on New Year's Day 1942, he acknowledges being ''neurotic'' as a child. To challenge himself, he graduated from Bucknell University in Pennsylvania before earning a second bachelor's degree in economics, from the prestigious Tokyo University.
Mr. Ando's facility in English and exposure to Western culture made him a natural for Sony, which he joined in 1969. Unafraid to break with convention, Mr. Morita promoted the young Mr. Ando ahead of older managers. After stints in the contracts and licensing division and the television division, Mr. Ando set up a venture with Prudential Life, now called the Sony Life Insurance Company.
Mr. Ando cemented his reputation as someone who could tackle big projects and think creatively by bucking custom in Japan and hiring male college graduates as salesmen instead of homemakers, who go door to door for most mainstream insurers. Mr. Ando also worked closely with Mr. Morita and later ran Sony's American electronics operations, a business he was asked to revamp in the 1990's despite fierce opposition. His stature grew in '96, when he helped develop Sony's new PC, the Vaio.
Mr. Ando works closely with Mr. Idei. Unlike his often intimidating boss, Mr. Ando is down to earth. Instead of sitting in judgment at meetings as Mr. Idei does, he encourages debate before decisions. Where past presidents like Mr. Morita and Norio Ohga could be imperious, Mr. Ando is inclusive.
Or, as one Sony employee puts it, ''The room does not go silent when Ando enters.''
The company's goals, however, are neither small nor easily achieved. But with all the encroaching competition, Mr. Ando says he must put aside his nice-guy image and go all out. ''Our credibility will really be questioned if we can't deliver what we promised,'' he said.
