WHERE have all the catchers gone? To new teams, that's where.
Of the 19 catchers who started more than 100 games last season, 8, or 42 percent, are with new teams this year. More than 25 catchers in all have changed teams, voluntarily or involuntarily. It has been an unusually active winter for catchers.
The Oakland Athletics were involved with three of the catchers. They traded Ramon Hernandez, the catcher on their four consecutive playoff teams, to San Diego, then acquired Michael Barrett from Montreal and traded him to the Chicago Cubs, from whom they obtained their catcher, Damian Miller.
Even before the Athletics touched off that series of deals, the Minnesota Twins reluctantly sent A. J. Pierzynski to the San Francisco Giants, who decided to jettison Benito Santiago after three creditable years.
Kansas City, whose manager, Tony Peña, is an old catcher himself, signed Santiago and Kelly Stinnett after letting Brent Mayne leave. Mayne signed with Arizona, which gave up Chad Moeller and Rod Barajas. Moeller went to Milwaukee, as did Gary Bennett, who was the Padres' primary catcher last season.
Baltimore's Brook Fordyce switched to Tampa Bay, but the biggest switches came from Javy Lopez, who took his .328 batting average, 43 home runs and 109 runs batted in from Atlanta to Baltimore, and from Ivan Rodriguez, who took his World Series championship ring from Florida to 119-loss Detroit, of all places.
Although Rodriguez's four-year, $40 million contract is not completely guaranteed, a baseball executive speculated that he decided to go to the Tigers because they offered the most money and this is probably going to be his last contract.
Money, too, was involved in the Twins' trade of Pierzynski, who batted .312 and drove in 74 runs last season. ''I was trying to free up some dollars to retain Stewart, Guardado and Hawkins,'' General Manager Terry Ryan said. ''Trading Pierzynski enabled us to make a run at them.''
The Twins were able to retain outfielder Shannon Stewart but not relievers Eddie Guardado and LaTroy Hawkins. Yet they have opened the catching job for 20-year-old Joe Mauer, the No. 1 overall draft pick in 2001.
''If Mauer wasn't around, we wouldn't have done it,'' Ryan said of the trade. ''We're bringing him into camp to give him the chance to claim the job. Anything that's been asked of Mauer the past two and a half years he's done. We think he can handle the job.''
The Padres initially talked to Minnesota about Pierzynski, but the Twins wanted one of San Diego's young pitchers, whom the Padres didn't want to give up. So they went after Hernandez. ''We felt our biggest need this off-season was to upgrade the catching,'' General Manager Kevin Towers said. ''We feel this is a significant upgrade.''
Towers said that he and Billy Beane, the Oakland general manager, began talking about Hernandez last June but that the Athletics were in no position to trade him then.
The Padres gave Oakland outfielder Mark Kotsay for Hernandez and outfielder Terrence Long, who was another key element of the deal because the Athletics saved money by shedding his contract.
Hernandez is seven years younger than Miller, the Athletics' new catcher, but Beane said the difference wasn't a factor in his planning.
''There's not a huge gap between catchers and their performance,'' Beane said. ''Other positions, there are eras where you have some dominant guys, but there's a bunch of pretty good catchers somewhat tightly bunched together in their performance or expected performance. The career performances of these two guys are close enough.''
So the Athletics traded Hernandez Nov. 26. On Dec. 15 they obtained Barrett from Montreal, which did not want to go to arbitration with him. They passed Barrett on to the Cubs the next day. Four days later, they got Miller from the Cubs.
Miller was signed for this year, but the Cubs did not plan to keep him beyond 2004. They also liked the way Paul Bako developed last season, so they will use Bako and Barrett. They also saved money on Miller's salary and used it to help sign Todd Walker to play second base.
The Closer Near the Red Sox
If the Boston Red Sox want to talk about a need for a closer, they have to look no further than their N.F.L. neighbors. The New England Patriots will attest to the importance of a strong closer.
For the second time in three years, the Patriots won the Super Bowl because their closer, Adam Vinatieri, kicked a last-play field goal in regulation time, in football's equivalent of the ninth inning.
The Red Sox eschewed the role of traditional closer last season, thinking they would reinvent the game. Instead they undermined their bullpen until it turned into a disaster.
''We got caught up in nomenclature,'' Larry Lucchino, the Red Sox' president, said. ''We wanted a strong closer.''
But they didn't want one they had to pay millions in salary, and they didn't want one who would, like Mariano Rivera and most others, be responsible primarily for the ninth inning.
''It's not that there shouldn't be a strong closer type, but it's where and when that person should be used,'' Lucchino said.
Maybe the seventh inning is the one that's important, Lucchino added. If the Red Sox are ahead by a run and the other team loads the bases, maybe that's the spot where they should use their closer.
Their problem last season was they could not find anyone to get out of that seventh-inning jam, let alone one in the ninth. This winter, though, Boston signed Keith Foulke, who led the American League with 43 saves and 67 games finished last season.
Now they have to decide where they want to use Foulke: the seventh, the eighth or the ninth. In considering that decision, they would do well to remember Adam Vinatieri.
Pitching Experiment Debated
Now if you're really looking to reinvent the game, or at least conduct an intriguing pitching experiment, consider a plan percolating in the mind of the Milwaukee Brewers' general manager, Doug Melvin. He is in the early stages of a plan to have relief pitchers start some minor league games, then have starters come in beginning in the third inning.
''We want our starters to pitch important innings, the eighth and ninth, and not look for the bullpen,'' Melvin, a former minor league pitcher, said. ''We want them to know it's their game. This is what we're developing them for. Some guys never see the ninth inning.''
No premium seems to be placed any longer on a pitcher's finishing what he starts. Teams have closers, set-up men and set-up men for the set-up men.
Melvin said he didn't see the disappearance of a closer under his plan, but the starter would at least have a better chance of pitching at the end of a game.
''Even if the relievers give up runs early,'' Melvin said, ''you have more time to come back than if a reliever gives up runs in the eighth and ninth.''
A 1999 playoff game influenced Melvin's thinking. Pedro Martínez relieved for Boston in the fourth inning, with Cleveland ahead, 8-7, and held the Indians hitless for the final six innings in what became a 12-8 series-clinching Red Sox victory.
''We might consider it for one of our teams at a lower level, for the fourth or fifth starters,'' Melvin said. ''The minors is the place to experiment,'' Melvin said. ''It's just a matter of having enough nerve to do it.''
On Baseball
