IT'S official, though still partly unofficial: a Bronxville man has been selected as the first Westchester candidate to receive a makeover by the five gay cast members of ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy,'' the hit reality show on Bravo.
The identity of the designated straight guy, who lives somewhere among the elegant porches and columns of the mansionettes sprinkled across stately Bronxville, however, is top secret.
Though not a particularly well-guarded secret.
Executives at Bravo, the NBC-owned cable network, declined to reveal details about the show's Westchester foray until the episode is closer to its spring broadcast date. In fact, they refused to identify the straight guy, or to disclose where he was being made over to conform to the urbane standards of the stars of the show, the now-celebrated, Manhattan-centric homosexual men. (''The Queer Eye'' premise is that the hosts tutor a clueless straight guy on five aspects of life: grooming, culture, fashion, cuisine and home décor.)But despite the hush-hush nature of the mission, last month a Westchester resident tuned in to chatter about telephone calls to a Tarrytown hair salon from ''Queer Eye'' producers seeking a suitable location for a Westchester episode. Following this lead, and aided by keen investigative skills, the resident established beyond doubt that ''Queer Eye'' was, indeed, present in Westchester.
Eyewitnesses, of which there are more than a dozen, have seen the straight guy, several ''Queer Eye'' guys themselves, and more than a dozen members of the crew.
According to their reports, Westchester's first ''Queer Eye'' makeover was successfully done during the last week in January.
The designated straight man, nominated by friends and family for a slightly humiliating but often-effective physical and emotional overhaul, is a 40-ish athletic coach with thinning hair.
His name, while not a secret, is apparently difficult to remember.
He introduced himself many times, witnesses said, but not one of them can recall his name.
''I can't for the life of me remember his name,'' said L.T. Sherpa,a co-owner of the Village Natural Market in Bronxville, where the ''Queer Eye'' group made its cuisine stop in Westchester. Likewise, at the Elizabeth Arden Red Door Salon and Spa at The Westchester in White Plains, no one could recall his name. (The straight guy did, however, receive $145 worth of treatment at the Red Door and an $85 spa goody bag, which included hair revitalizing products, all donated by the salon.)
''There were so many people around, I can't remember his name,'' said Crystal Haviland, 21, a stylist who met the man and gave him a deep conditioning treatment with a scalp massage.
Ms. Haviland also trimmed and shaped up his hair, she said, using a product ''for men when they are experiencing hair loss.''
The Bronxville man was also treated to a hydrating milk bath in a hydrotherapy tub, which is another way to say that he took a pricey bath at an upscale mall. At the Red Door, the bath involves a loud and intensely bubbly 98-degree immersion in an oversize tub into which a massage therapist, Joe Capodilupo, adds one scoop of milk whey bath powder and another of detoxifying tangerine amber crystals. The 72 water jets ''hit all the chakras and trigger points, and can be too intense,'' said the general manager, Leah Fretwell, so the treatment lasts no more than 15 or 20 minutes. Neither she nor Mr. Capodilupo could recall the man's name.
Whatever his name, this special customer seemed happy and relaxed after his stay at the spa, Ms. Haviland said.
She did not, however, receive any tips.
The next morning, the Bronxville man and the ''Queer Eye'' crew paid a visit to the Village Natural Market.
Mr. Sherpa said that the straight guy stocked up on wheat-free flour, frozen raspberries and cottage cheese, gathering ingredients for a wheat-free dessert he was to prepare for his wife. The man also took home wheat-free cookies and cereal, Mr. Sherpa said, and was surprised by the number of such products available. Mr. Sherpa said he donated about $100 worth of health foods.
As for the no-longer-clueless Westchester straight guy, his name is Mark Finegan, and he is a 37-year-old gym teacher and coach at Pelham High School. .
Mr. Finegan's wife, Cindy, 32, said in response to questions that the couple signed an agreement with Bravo not to discuss the experience until the show has been edited.
"We don't want to ruin any surprises," said Bill Brennan, the publicity director for Bravo. He noted, however, that the episode of ''Queer Eye'' featuring the Westchester guy is scheduled for April 13.
COMMUNITIES
