Vijay Singh could probably play with someone else's clubs these days and still finish in the top 10.
His streak of 11 consecutive top-10's, which began in August at the NEC Invitational, is the longest top-10 streak on the PGA Tour since 1994, when Greg Norman completed a streak of 11 straight.
Wherever Singh plays these days, he expects to contend, and he believes that he can win. Who can blame him? He has been the world's most consistent player for eight months, and during the third round of the Pebble Beach National Pro-Am on Saturday, Singh put himself in position to win again.
Shooting a four-under-par 68 on one of golf's most picturesque stages, Singh was tied with Arron Oberholser heading into Sunday's final round at Pebble Beach Golf Links. They are at 13-under 203 for the tournament. Oberholser, 29, a Northern California native and a former star at San Jose State, has never won on the PGA Tour.
Phillip Price was tied for third place at 10-under 202, three strokes off the lead, along with the second-round leader, Luke Donald, and Jeff Maggert. Phil Mickelson was in sixth place, four strokes off the lead at 207.
Final-round fireworks are common at Pebble Beach, but Singh was the favorite heading into Sunday, and having never won at Pebble Beach only added to his motivation.
''This is one of my favorite golf courses,'' said Singh, who made five birdies in a six-hole stretch, starting at No. 11. ''I always enjoy the scenery here, the golf course is great, and you cannot ask for a better place to play golf and win a golf tournament. I would love to do it.''
Last year, Singh won the Tour's money title for the first time, and he won a career-high four times on Tour. But complacency is not Singh's style. Consistency is. Though he has not won this year, Singh finished second at the Mercedes Championships, tied for 10th at the Sony Open in Hawaii and tied for third at the FBR Open.
It is almost as if Singh's name is permanently affixed to the leader board, and it is a feeling that he has grown accustomed to.
''I feel like it's part of the way I've been playing,'' he said. ''If you play consistently and smart golf on the weekend, you have a good chance of, you know, climbing up the leader board.''
On another sun-drenched day by the Pacific Ocean, Singh made his climb at Pebble Beach after first digging a hole. He uncharacteristically bogeyed the first two holes, including the par 5 No. 2, when his second shot, an errant 3-wood, sailed wildly out of bounds.
''It was not a difficult shot at all, but it had a little mud on it,'' Singh said. ''It just took off right and kept going right with the wind. It wasn't a good shot.''
Singh salvaged a bogey at No. 2, and more important, he kept his composure. Then, after making the turn at eight under par, Singh's putter got hot.
He made an 18-footer for birdie at No. 11, an 8-footer for birdie at No. 12, a 22-footer for birdie at No. 14, a 10-footer for birdie at No. 15, and a 25-footer at No. 16, a downhill putt with serious right-to-left break.
''The putt I made on No. 16, if I stood there another 10 balls, I would probably never make it,'' he said.
''I think it's just the momentum that picks up and you start hitting good shots. It makes you feel good. If that's a zone, I don't know, it may be. But I feel like I have been doing that a lot lately, making a lot of birdies in a row. It's maybe because I'm hitting good shots, making the right putts at the right time. I can't explain it. It's a good feeling when it's going in, let me tell you that much.''
It was a feeling that Singh has become familiar with. Another top-10 finish looked almost guaranteed.
CHIP SHOTS
PHIL MICKELSON, starting Sunday four strokes off the lead, hurt his chances by failing to make a birdie on the back nine at Pebble. ''You can come back from three, four or five shots back,'' Mickelson said. ''I'll have to play a great round. I'll have to be six, seven, eight under. It's not that easy to do at Pebble Beach, but I think I have a shot at it.'' . . . TIGER WOODS, who skipped Pebble Beach for the second consecutive year, was in the San Francisco Bay Area anyway on Saturday, attending Stanford's men's basketball game against Arizona.
ARRON OBERHOLSER, who had Saturday's only bogey-free round, didn't mind being in the role of underdog. ''I don't think that anybody expects me to win except for me,'' said Oberholser, whose best career finish is a tie for fourth. ''But I feel like I belong out here.'' . . . MIKE WEIR (seven under par) set the back-nine record at Poppy Hills Golf Course (30).
GOLF
