LET'S begin with what could have been an ending. In October, an editor asked me to prepare Courtney Love's obituary. Nobody actually believed that Courtney Love had died, but many thought she was heading in that direction. If she had a fatal overdose or sudden heart failure, we needed to be ready. It was the first time, in 10 years of newspaper writing, that I had been asked to write an advance obituary for someone under 40.
I did not know Ms. Love personally: I'd never interviewed her, talked to her or even been introduced to her. But a few weeks before, I had been the victim of one of her famous phone blitzkriegs. Somehow, she had gotten my phone number and left five long, Joycean messages. ''I'm charmed, I'm cursed, I'm [expletive] up,'' she said before going on to discuss her ''bio-dad'' and the way her daughter compared her to Shrek. Her reason for calling was that she wanted to ''talk to a rock specialist.''
Ms. Love's life seemed like a forest being gradually consumed by an inextinguishable fire. It was safe to watch from a distance, but not to get too close to. Nearly every week brought new headlines: Overdose! Arrest! Lawsuit! Tantrum! Feud! Public nudity! But the biggest surprise of all was the news of a CD release.With all the hoopla, I had forgotten that she was a musician and a performer -- and an exceptional one, no less.
It has been six years since she released a CD, and 10 years since she released a great one. In pop terms, that's an eternity. Generally, when your twentysomething fans have reached their 30's without hearing a new musical note from you, it's time to consider taking that job at the Guitar Center and waiting for the day when the obsequious host of VH1's ''Bands Reunited'' comes a-knocking.
The first question people ask about the new album, ''America's Sweetheart'' (Virgin), is, ''Who wrote it?'' It is an obnoxious question -- one that would probably not be asked of a male musician. Ms. Love is not only one of the least respected rock stars working today, but she also has to deal with -- if not embody -- the double standard applied to women who live the rock 'n' roll lifestyle. After her breakthrough CD, ''Live Through This,'' there was talk (always denied) that musicians sat in her management office straining to hear if Kurt Cobain's vocals were detectable on the master tapes. When her softer, deeper follow-up, ''Celebrity Skin,'' was released, her collaborator, Billy Corgan, was given most of the credit. So, of course, the wags are asking who's responsible this time. And the answer is pretty much Linda Perry, the former 4 Non Blondes singer whose work on Pink's ''Missundaztood'' has turned Ms. Perry into the Diane Warren of the edgy set. (In fact, at least two of the tracks sound like they could be Pink songs.)
But, really, who cares? Looking to outsiders for material didn't make Johnny Cash's final 10 years or the Grateful Dead's oeuvre any less credible. Some musicians go it alone, others collaborate. And it is ultimately the fiercely honest stomp and screech of Ms. Love, who is credited with all the lyrics on the album, that makes this CD sing. Linda Perry is simply the Dr. Dre to her Eminem.
This is no gratuitous comparison. Ms. Love has more in common with Eminem than she has with most rockers. Both are loose cannons, a gossip columnist's dream: they can dish it out but they can't always take it. And so in the studio, the personal becomes the musical. Both use their angst-riddled, self-obsessed songs to answer critics past and future. And both tend to be smarter than their tormentors.
Where Eminem hints at a liaison with Mariah Carey, Ms. Love alludes to one with Julian Casablancas of the Strokes, in the song ''But Julian, I'm a Little Older Than You'' (though reportedly they've only met once). Where Eminem sings about destroying his spinal column on ecstasy, she discusses the reasons for her pill-popping in graphic detail. She uses drugs, she sings, because she's ''famous,'' because ''she's bored,'' because ''you're dead'' (presumably Kurt Cobain), because she is ''the worst and best dressed,'' and because she has certain unprintable problems.
One can hear a theme developing: Ms. Love is wrestling with time. At 39, she intentionally understates when she says that she's just ''a little older'' than Mr. Casablancas and she takes pills because she's ''more than 21.''
The CD begins with the bellicose ''Mono,'' in which Ms. Love demands one last shot at the rock pantheon. ''Hey God, you owe me one more song,'' she sings, ''so that I can prove to them that I'm so much better than him.'' Though the pronoun has already been attributed to several different rock stars (from Kurt Cobain to Fred Durst), the lyric sheets add a clue with the words, ''Him . . . hmmmm . . . Eminem?''
Musically, the inspiration for ''America's Sweetheart'' is punk bands like the Ramones (whose ''gabba gabba hey'' she quotes) and their garage-rock predecessors. In fact, Ms. Love even attacks punk's original nemesis, the virtuosic bloat of classic rock represented by Led Zeppelin, in the purposely misspelled ''Zeplin Song,'' which is basically all about how sick she is of hearing the same old song, presumably ''Stairway to Heaven.'' It is a target that seems too easy and obvious for a woman who prefers hipper, more personal enemies (such as Bikini Kill).
Though there is the occasional touch of 80's metal and the odd ballad (one written with the Elton John collaborator Bernie Taupin), ''America's Sweetheart'' is Ms. Love's attempt to revisit the territory of her messy first CD, ''Pretty on the Inside,'' with a big-budget and a cast of experienced musicians (among them Kim Deal of the Pixies, Wayne Kramer of the MC5 and Scott McCloud of Girls Against Boys). Nearly every song is about the pop trifecta of sex, drugs and rock 'n' roll, along with its shadow, narcissism. And its best lines are not quotable here, because curse words are to Ms. Love what a sword is to a samurai: essential, precise and deadly.
She may turn out to be the Cher of her generation, with a career that, against all odds, outlasts those of her contemporaries. She has extended what many thought would be her 15 minutes after the suicide of Cobain into 10 years. If she had just recorded a bad, sprawling CD, then music fans could have written her off as a victim of her own shenanigans and the moment would have waned. But ''America's Sweetheart'' is good enough to renew the Courtney Love drama for at least another season.
However, it is also too much too late. If the CD had been released in 1996 (in the interstice between her second and third CD's), it just might have given Ms. Love her rightful standing as one of rock's most powerful women. But Ms. Love the celebrity has eclipsed Ms. Love the musician. Being in the news constantly doesn't sell albums; it only creates brand recognition. Otherwise, Michael Jackson's ''Invincible'' CD and Tommy Lee's Methods of Mayhem side project would have fared a lot better in the long term.
While this CD should succeed on its merits alone, the fact that it's from Ms. Love may end up making it a liability. If the same venomous rock 'n' roll came from a newer female-fronted punk band like the Distillers instead, it would be received differently. Brody Dalle of the Distillers is a fresh canvas to paint our fantasies on. But the name Courtney Love already has too many coats of paint: it polarizes music fans the way the name George Bush polarizes voters.
For better or for worse, the moment in pop belongs not to the Courtney Loves of the world, but to the Norah Joneses, the Josh Grobans and the American Idols. Their songs can be played in schools and in supermarkets; their promotional campaigns are engineered to be as safe and scandal-free as political ones; and their songs are so vague that no listener feels left out. Pop culture certainly needs the electric shock of an album like this one, especially since even teen rebellion is packaged in the parent-friendly wrapping of Avril Lavigne. And certainly, as the lyrics on the album show, Ms. Love wants to be the matron saint of rock disobedience. But Courtney Love today stands only for Courtney Love. She is the girl who wants to belong so badly that she doesn't fit in anywhere.
