SUPER Bowl Sunday, a fine night for Peter Luger's. Surely it's easy to get a table. For these three couples, each married a decade ago, it was perfect: no one in the group likes football, even the policeman, though he seems to fit the demographic. One man doesn't even know who's playing, didn't realize that one of the states in the contest even had a football team. Which Carolina is it, anyway, north or south?
Luger's should be an escape, a land with no football, just steak, tomatoes, onions, home fries -- and bacon, a secret that's not on the menu, introduced to the group by the policeman. He knows stuff like that.
Brooklyn's Broadway is quiet and gated up on this wintry night, the spindly towers of the Williamsburg Bridge dark in the background. Somewhere, a football game is being played. In the parking lot of the HSBC bank, where Luger's customers park, the attendant is warm in his car, the radio on. The sound of cheering seeps through the fogged-up windows.
Walk in through the heavy doors, and the escape is a mirage. There it is, on the worn dark wooden bar. A television set, a big one. And on it, THE GAME. Men are gathered around, including waiters in white shirts holding sizzling platters of steak, pausing for just a moment. Somewhere, someone is hungry.
The shorter of the bartenders isn't paying much attention. He makes an absolutely expert martini, with tiny ice floes on the surface and firm, snappy olives at the bottom, and then goes back to his dinner, smoked salmon on rye bread, sprinkled with chopped raw onions. It looks so good that one of the six men, who has been craving steak all day, now craves smoked salmon on rye, sprinkled with chopped raw onions.
The front dining room doesn't seem quite full; the mood is subdued. At a few tables, women sit without men. Cheers flood in from the bar.
The food comes: tomatoes and onions, the secret bacon -- and shrimp, flavorless but beloved by the wife of the man who didn't know that Carolina (north or south?) had a team. Then the porterhouse, and it's great, and it's still sizzling. The game is over.
Alex Raynes, a manager, said the big television spent most of the year in the employees' lounge, where cooks and waiters and busboys and bartenders on break can watch it. But on this night, it comes out for its moment in the sun.
He remembered when it came out for a week: ''When we had the -- what was it? -- the Subway Series. You know, baseball?''
He conceded that the big television got the best seat at the bar to improve a historically slow night. ''We had a pretty good and busy night,'' he said. ''But let's just say because we work here every day, we know that a different night might look a little busier than Super Bowl Sunday.''
WENDELL JAMIESON
URBAN STUDIES/ESCAPING
