MY PRISON WITHOUT BARS
By Pete Rose with Rick Hill.
Illustrated. 322 pp. Emmaus, Pa.:
Rodale. $24.95.
When managing the Cincinnati Reds, Pete Rose tells us, he would occasionally go see his boss, the team owner Marge Schott, at her house. They got along well, and this was usually a pleasant experience, except for one thing: Schott had a St. Bernard named Schottzie, who would stick her head in Rose's lap and slobber all over him. Rose tried to be polite about it, but he finally had to complain. '' 'Hey Marge,' I said. 'Can you do something about your dog?' Marge just stabbed me with a look. 'The dog lives here, Pete. You're just visiting.' ''
Wait, it gets better, or almost. Still on the subject of pets, Rose casually told Schott that he owned a lion. She, naturally, was surprised and wondered why he would have such a thing. As a reader, I too was surprised and wondered why he would have such a thing. What primal need does a pet lion fulfill? And given that Rose was, around that time, disappearing into a sinkhole of gambling debts, how could he afford such an extravagance? You wouldn't want to have to scrimp on a lion's supper.
But no explanation is given. Rose skips briskly on to another subject, and that's all we hear of pets, ferocious or otherwise. Which is a shame, because it's the immodest peculiarities of Rose's life that would make this book worth reading, not the folksy, too-little-too-late confessions that have caused all the headlines and been picked apart ad infinitum.
Somewhere, in an enchanted land unspoiled by global media, it may not be fully understood that Pete Rose, while employed as manager of the Reds, broke baseball's most sacred rule by betting on games and then lied to cover it up. But most of us could not have avoided learning the sordid details of the Rose saga if we had tried, and I, for one, wasn't anxiously waiting for the accused to confirm them belatedly. It seemed like only a matter of time before he worked up the nerve to do it, and now he has. Congratulations to Pete Rose. Someday the Hall of Fame will no doubt admit him, but it may be a while yet.
''My Prison Without Bars'' is the second autobiography of Rose's literary career, and it feels as if doing it was a chore. His early exploits are described with all the vigor and spontaneity of a stump speech delivered late in a hopeless campaign. He attempts to give his father, a bank teller who excelled in semipro football, the hero treatment, but the elder Rose comes off as a joyless and unreasonably demanding parent. Rose's mother liked to crack wise, and that's about all we learn of her. Oh, and that when she died, one of her daughters slipped a can of Pringles into the coffin.
Rose also marches drowsily through most of his playing career, plodding from year to year, citing batting averages and salary figures (the former high, the latter never high enough). He describes his accomplishments on the field so blandly that they seem to have lost their meaning for him. Not so his accomplishments at the racetrack. His most prized remembrances are of betting on the ponies with his dad's colorful pals. Every winning wager is engraved into his memory and recounted with pride. It's dull stuff to read, no doubt about it. As he gets toward the later part of his playing career, though, the narrative picks up. His first marriage ends in a frightful mess when his wife tracks down the other woman he is seeing (later to become his second wife) and punches her out in a parking lot. Here again, it'd be nice to know the details of how all that got settled, but Rose merely notes that he has ''always thrived on conflict'' and that after he was served with divorce papers, he went on a 20-for-28 tear at the plate. Now there's a stat you won't find on the back of a baseball card.
By the mid-1980's, as his playing career ended triumphantly and he took over as manager of the Reds, Rose's life was in constant turmoil. It seems clear, although he never says it, that he was bored being a manager, that the job lacked the competitive rush he felt as a player. Baseball managers may wear a uniform, but they don't get to barrel over catchers trying to block the plate.
Rose's attention was diverted elsewhere, to the racetrack and to sports betting, for which he relied on a cast of petty rogues and hangers-on. In official baseball parlance, these characters are referred to as ''undesirables,'' and Rose proved as effective at surrounding himself with them as he once did at racking up base hits. These new friends helped him lose a lot of money. And then, he says, while he signed autographs for anyone who would pay and sold off mementos of his career, they cheated him and stole from him, and eventually ratted him out to Major League Baseball.
Rose presents himself as a master storyteller, and in person he must be. His former teammates tell stories about his stories. But most of the tales told here stagger under the weight of the message they are designed to impart. He praises his former manager Sparky Anderson for visiting a cancer ward, but in a self-serving way that suggests he really wants to make known that he went there too. This is less a book than a legal brief delivered to the court of public opinion.
To this end, his inept co-author, Rick Hill, an actor and director who has written screenplays, has annoyingly larded the text with testimonials from Rose's supporters and doctors. Throughout the book, in the middle of passages that are putatively in Rose's voice, an extensive quotation will appear either extolling Rose's gifts as a human being or explaining his various afflictions in the most banal pop-psychology terms. One doctor, noting Rose's ''Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder,'' remarks that ''in fact, Pete Rose is not unlike Einstein.''
Even as he expresses remorse for his behavior, Rose claims confusion about why he has been singled out, how it is that wife beaters, drug addicts and other players with nasty social habits have been admitted to the Hall of Fame, but not him. The news media consensus is that his transgressions involved baseball, unlike most of the others, and that his apologies lack conviction. I'd say that's about right.
Rose's post-baseball life started with a five-month prison term for tax evasion (the news here: the guards humiliate you and the food is dreadful, but the camaraderie of fellow cons gets you through), which was followed by a series of enterprises that included theme restaurants, radio shows, horse breeding, a whole lot of ''personal appearance'' gigs and a brief, exhilarating career as a speedboat racer. There is no reason to feel sorry for Pete Rose. You might not want his life, but for the last 15 years, he has maximized the profit potential of his fame as efficiently as a sausage maker squeezing every last chewable thing out of a pig. Nothing is wasted. That, as much as anything, is what this book is about.
Hugo Lindgren is an editor at The New York Times Magazine.
