ON the 1918 facade of the Sutton movie theater, on 57th Street near Third Avenue, the delicate fluting of the columns, the crisp Ionic capitals and the broad frieze have been smashed back to crude, ghostly approximations of their original forms. It looks a little like the Parthenon frieze in Athens after the occupying Turks' powder magazine was exploded by Venetian shells in 1687.
The change follows a $50,000 alteration made in November. ''Repair facade as required,'' says the application filed with the Buildings Department that month. The scaffolding that was up while the work was being done has been removed. But no repair is evident.
The theater's new owner, the Clarett Group, a real estate development firm, bought the property that month. Both Clarett and the alteration architect, Ismael Levya Associates, have declined to comment on the work.
The theater, which has a wing on Third Avenue, has an intricate history. In the 1850's, when a horse-drawn surface railway was built on the avenue, a small brick building was put up on what became the wing. Around 1880, as denser development swept east from Midtown, a small brownstone-front apartment house was put up on the 57th Street portion.
The two parcels were still not connected in 1912 when, apparently by coincidence, theaters began operating on both sites. A motion picture operator, Peter Tisch, installed a small theater on the Third Avenue ground floor. It was perhaps no more than a few benches in the back of a saloon, but research by the late theater historian Michael R. Miller indicates that it operated as the Idle Hour.
At the same time, a composer and producer, Adolf Philipp, built a new theater building at 205 East 57th Street. The New York Times said that Philipp's Fifty-Seventh Street Theater was to showcase German and Viennese operettas.
In 1914, Philipp's theater was remodeled as the Bandbox by a loosely associated group of Greenwich Village writers, artists and actors that soon evolved into the Washington Square Players. Among the members were the activist and artist Ida Rauh and the left-wing writer Floyd Dell.
The Players opened in February 1915 with four short plays. The Times wrote hyperbolically that ''Washington Square was evacuated'' for the performance; 200 people were left without seats (the seating capacity is unclear). The paper noted that despite the location on a ''remote and inaccessible stretch of East 57th,'' the street ''was filled with limousines of the latest liquid lines''; the socialist Max Eastman (Rauh's husband), the writer Edna Ferber and the poet Louis Untermeyer were in the audience.
The troupe met with unexpected success and moved in 1916 to West 41st Street, leaving the 57th Street theater to be adapted for German plays. Perhaps the United States' entry into World War I had something to do with the next change: in 1917, the German plays were out, replaced by the Chatham and Phenix National Bank.
The bank completely remodeled the old 57th Street theater and joined it to the Third Avenue building. It is not clear what the earlier theaters looked like, but the new bank, finished in 1918, presented a chaste and elegant facade. The architects, Mowbray &amp; Uffinger, were bank specialists -- they designed the spectacular 1908 Dime Savings Bank building at DeKalb Avenue and Fleet Street in downtown Brooklyn.
It is not clear if the stonework was marble or limestone, but the building was particularly elegant for a bank branch, with bronze trim and a broad, double-height banking floor. Although it is hard to tell now, the exterior columns were executed with a slight bulge in the middle -- the architectural term is entasis -- to counteract the illusion of an inward curve caused when the column sides are perfectly straight. The columns of the Parthenon are the best known example of this device.
IN 1932, the Manufacturers Trust Company absorbed the Chatham and Phenix Bank, and in 1933 the architect Ben Schlanger converted the building again -- from a bank back to a theater. Schlanger was an important theorist who restudied almost every aspect of motion picture theater design. He felt that other architects still used devices appropriate for live performances and for the giant picture palaces of the 1920's.
In his now-demolished Thalia theater of 1931, at 95th Street and Broadway, he used a band of silver leaf around the screen to reduce eyestrain. It is not clear if Schlanger also used this device at the Sutton, but he did repeat the Thalia's pronounced dip in the middle of the auditorium.
He developed and patented what he called the ''parabolic reversed floor'' because he thought that the traditional live theater auditorium was not suited for viewing the flat movie screen; with Schlanger's floor system, a patron could sit straight in the chair, instead of bending back or forward, no matter the location. With the architect Abraham W. Geller, Schlanger designed the Cinema I and II theaters at 59th and Third in 1962.
The 57th Street theater's original name, the Sutton Cinema, suggests a high-toned character, and 1930's and 40's listings indicate that foreign films were shown regularly. When the 1920 black and white film ''Nanook of the North'' was revived in 1948, it played at the Sutton. Alfred Hitchcock's thriller ''The Birds'' played there in 1963.
The theater gradually became known just as the Sutton. It became a twin cinema years ago, and it seems indifferently kept, although Schlanger's reverse parabolic floor can still be seen in Theater 2.
Outside, the results of the $50,000 alteration are sadly evident. The application for the permit was filed by Ismael Leyva Architects, which has done many high-rise projects, including the residential portion of the new Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle and the Post Toscana at 389 East 89th Street. Mr. Levya did not return calls asking about the nature of the repair work.
The Post Toscana, completed last year, is a project of the Clarett Group with Post Properties.
Clarett's Web site, www.clarett.com, says that in December 2002, it formed Clarett Capital L.L.C. in conjunction with Prudential Real Estate Investors ''to develop more than a dozen rental and condominium apartment buildings in the New York metropolitan area over the next five to seven years.''
If the Sutton survives for any length of time, the mutilated bank facade may take on the romantic aspect of a ruin. But at the moment such changes eliminate almost any chance of landmark designation.
Neil Klarfeld of Clarett, who is listed on the building application, referred queries about the building to Jimmy Lappas of Great Ink Communications. After some delay, Mr. Lappas said that he had tried ''for a week to get them to talk to you, but there's really nothing they want to say.''
Streetscapes | The Sutton
