Yellow cabs move like apparitions through the boroughs outside Manhattan. They may go to Queens or Brooklyn to drop off clubgoers late at night, but then they turn right around and head straight back to Manhattan, as if they might be transformed into pumpkins.
City Councilman Peter Vallone Jr. hopes he can change all that. He has a plan to persuade some drivers of yellow cabs to linger in Queens and is working to set up a taxi stand with a uniformed dispatcher at the end of the N subway line on 31st Street in Astoria, which attracts thousands of commuters every workday.
He wants to model the stand on one that has been running for six months in downtown Flushing at the No.7 train's Main Street stop. That stand has a uniformed dispatcher who helps passengers and shoos away livery cabs, which are not allowed to make unscheduled pickups on the street. With a similar setup in Astoria, Mr. Vallone hopes to attract some of the 900 new yellow cabs that city officials are proposing to add to New York's streets during the next three years.
''We need to provide the best possible transportation for our community,'' Mr. Vallone said. ''Bringing yellow cabs to Astoria would be a major step in that direction.''
The question is how to pay for it. The Flushing dispatchers are paid by the Metropolitan Taxicab Board of Trade, an association of 11 yellow cab fleet operators. Ron Sherman, the group's president, said the Flushing stand had brought good business to his drivers. ''We've documented over 11,000 trips in this location,'' he said.
In Mr. Sherman's opinion, an Astoria stand makes sense. But he contends that a proposed fare increase, which he says will give most of the money to drivers and almost nothing to fleet owners like him, would cut into his profits and keep him from investing in taxi stands.
That puts Mr. Vallone and his constituents in an old bind. Although there is a taxi stand at the end of the N line, it is used solely by livery car drivers, who are prohibited by law from making street pickups. But they do it, anyway, lining up along 31st Street under the el.
This angers local shop owners because their customers can't find parking. So the Taxi and Limousine Commission makes periodic sweeps to scatter the livery cabs, in turn angering commuters, who leave the train and have no one to drive them home.
''It is one of the biggest business centers in all New York,'' Mr. Vallone said. ''We have to make it better.''
JIM O'GRADY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: QUEENS UP CLOSE
