The Bush administration offered two reasons to wage unilateral war in Iraq -- Saddam Hussein was stockpiling vast quantities of weapons, and efforts to contain him through sanctions and inspections were hopeless. The more time passes, the more it appears that both arguments were wrong. Not only are the weapons probably not there, but a decade of international import restrictions, United Nations arms inspections and United States military deterrence look far more effective than once thought. That is a crucial lesson for Americans to digest at a time when other countries dream of building biological, chemical and nuclear weapons and when the risks of waging preventive war on the basis of faulty intelligence have become so starkly evident.
In response to Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait and its defeat the next year by an American-led military coalition, the United Nations Security Council imposed oil export restrictions, a ban on the import of weapons and potential weapons ingredients, and a series of disarmament requirements to be monitored by aggressive international inspections.
None of the measures worked exactly as intended. All were met with Iraqi deceptions and resistance. Oil export sanctions were evaded with increasing success. United Nations inspectors were repeatedly obstructed and often felt threatened. They were withdrawn in advance of American bombing strikes in 1998, and not permitted to return until 2002. Yet the totality of these measures, particularly the prohibitions on importing weapons and their ingredients, now appears to have worked surprisingly well, apparently persuading Mr. Hussein that he would never be able to rebuild his weapons programs so long as sanctions remained in effect. That was exactly the message Washington wanted to send.
The most crucial sanction banned the import of all prohibited weapons and of any ingredient that could conceivably be used to make them, including many items that also had consumer and medical uses. To reinforce this arms embargo, Iraqi oil exports were initially banned. Then, under the oil-for-food program, oil revenues were channeled through a United Nations bank account, so that Saddam Hussein could not use them to purchase prohibited weapons material on the black market.
Oil export restrictions became increasingly porous over the years, and American authorities are now investigating some of the companies and individuals that may have helped Iraq bypass these sanctions. By 2001, Baghdad was collecting as much as $1 billion a year in illicit oil revenues, money that many feared Mr. Hussein could have used to import prohibited weapons ingredients. It now seems clear that he did not, most likely because he could not. Potential sellers did not want to be caught breaking the arms embargo. Instead, illicit oil money most likely went to build palaces, pay security officials and the Republican Guard, and fatten the Hussein family's foreign bank accounts.
The case of Libya also illustrates the effectiveness of sanctions. Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi's renunciation of his weapons programs was not simply -- perhaps not even principally -- a reaction to the American invasion of Iraq. It came in response to years of painful economic pressure through sanctions, along with diplomatic assurances that changed Libyan behavior could bring relief. President Bush emphasized this point after Libya announced its decision, telling other pariah countries that they too could rejoin the world economy and international community if they gave up their unconventional weapons programs. Clearly spelling out the steps needed to win relief from sanctions can motivate at least some countries to change their offending behavior.
Sanctions are hardly a perfect tool. They hurt innocent civilians, require broad international enforcement and work best when backed up by effective inspection arrangements. But under the right conditions, they offer American administrations an effective alternative to military force, which, it is now clearer than ever, should be employed only as a last resort.
Today's Editorials
