THE atmosphere of ''Feels Like Home,'' Norah Jones's second album, is full of a tasteful quiet. Not a literal lack of sound, of course: there's a lot of girlish exhalation, and a bit of wry womanhood, and some ghosts of soothing 70's radio hits and American roots music. But there is a kind of void at the heart of ''Feels Like Home'': Song after song about inaction.
Nothing much happens in a Norah Jones song, whether she writes it or not. (She had a hand in 6 of the album's 13 songs, and most are written with various members of her group, the Handsome Band.) She reflects, she wonders, she grows wistful; she considers falling in or out of love, and when she pledges it, as in the song ''What Am I to You?,'' she does so in certifiable clichés about skies falling and butterflies. One entire song, ''Toes,'' contemplates the possibility that its narrator will go swimming -- but in the end, as the chorus goes, her toes just touch the water. If every pop star transmits a persona, hers remains sweet and blank and diffident. To the extent that she has an idée fixe, it's time and its passing. The first song, ''Sunrise,'' is about staying in bed with the clock stuck at 9:15, and by the sixth track the word ''afternoon'' has cropped up eight times.
Despite Ms. Jones's obvious gifts as a singer, she's still hiding out in work that's so low-key it verges on the studied. Instead of being a cipher that nobody can identify with, she has calibrated her crème-fraîche voice to the point of becoming a singer that anyone can identify with, if only in general terms. ''Feels Like Home'' (Blue Note) is more one-size-fits-all than her first album, the 18-million-selling ''Come Away With Me.''
The persona in her songs -- let's not call it Ms. Jones herself, because her life couldn't be this dull -- might have lived practically anywhere in the developed world, at any time during the last century. Somehow Ms. Jones's work has managed to make a virtue of vagueness. (The virtue wasn't quite so apparent when she played at the Beacon Theater in New York during last year's tour for ''Come Away With Me''; she was too fidgety and lacking in stagecraft to make her close-quartered music get over in a large space.) This is multipurpose music: whatever your circumstances, you can plug in your own life's coordinates and project yourself into her songs.
Where she spends her money, aesthetically speaking, is on creating a vibe. As co-producer of the album with Arif Mardin, she mixes low volume with warm, slightly antique-sounding instruments -- electric piano, steel guitar, accordion, acoustic bass. And her piano style comes pretty much whole from the one invented in the 1950's by the Nashville pianist Floyd Cramer, who helped create the ''countrypolitan'' sound of Patsy Cline's records, among hundreds of others. It's a cool, subtly kitschy choice, and it trails through almost every tune on ''Feels Like Home.''
If all that sounds like a description of ''Come Away With Me,'' the new album is more buoyant than its predecessor, which was weighed down by morose medium-slow tempos. (They were like torch songs that were designed by Pottery Barn, with natural fibers and sand-washed color standing in for emotion.) The new album is slightly leaner, with more of the snapping, boom-chicka-boom rhythm of early Johnny Cash; it even upshifts to bluegrass for ''Creepin' In,'' a song she sings with Dolly Parton. But on balance it's the Norah Jones you've already heard.
Ms. Jones's peek-a-boo act, coming through a lush voice, isn't artless: that's a game she's playing with her audience, and her voice is original enough to pull it off. The musical influences behind the tunes are almost all two to three decades old: Bill Withers, the Band, Neil Young, Maria Muldaur, Bonnie Raitt, Rickie Lee Jones. Still, there's an even stronger precursor for the general sound of her records, over and above those memory trip-wires. Simply put, it's hard to imagine this music without Cassandra Wilson.
On a run of albums starting in the early 90's, and with her original producer Craig Street -- incidentally, the original producer for Norah Jones's first album, before Arif Mardin was called in to remake it -- Ms. Wilson crafted an upside-down version of what's considered elegant in jazz, with the roots on top and the leaves on the bottom. Saxophones were out; acoustic guitars and mandolins were in. The usual cosmopolitan images were out; evocations of rural America under dark skies were in. The Wilson records smushed entire traditions together without a second thought, with simplicity as a common denominator. But underneath it all were elements that came unmistakably from jazz: a sense of controlled soloistic ideas, an organic feeling of a group playing together in real time, even within the songs' pop brevity, and in her singing, a lot of patience.
Ms. Jones, 24, inherited this blueprint, as well as a similar feel for material. On ''Feels Like Home'' Ms. Jones puts bluegrass, singer-songwriter pop, blues and Duke Ellington's song ''Melancholia'' together on one aligned field. Ms. Wilson once covered Robert Johnson; Ms. Jones once covered Hank Williams. Two years ago, Ms. Wilson recorded the Band's song ''The Weight''; Ms. Jones hired the Band's Garth Hudson and Levon Helm to play on ''Feels Like Home.'' The big difference is in vocal hues and styles: where Ms. Wilson's voice is wisdom-weighted and draped irregularly over bar lines, Ms. Jones's is young, fresh and rhythmically regular.
Essentially, Ms. Jones's albums feel like the commercial refinement of a brilliant idea. But even at their second-generation remove, Ms. Jones's albums still retain their little nubs of American identity, details that connect with national myths and cultural memory, and for some reason, soothe us. Those details are all over ''Feels Like Home,'' though shyly played and coyly low in the mix -- be it the modified banjo Kevin Breit plays on ''Sunrise,'' Mr. Hudson's accordion on Townes Van Zandt's ''Be Here to Love Me,'' the pump organ Ms. Jones plays in ''Humble Me'' or the box Andrew Borger taps on as the only percussion in ''The Long Way Home,'' written by Tom Waits and Kathleen Brennan. But when Dolly Parton starts in on the second verse of ''Creepin' In,'' blazing forth with a flash of melismatic mountain singing, suddenly here's a rock-ribbed, authentic national music, instead of a glib pop deconstruction. The eyelids, pleasantly lowered, suddenly pop open.
Perhaps what listeners respond to in Norah Jones isn't the honesty of the acoustic sounds, but the limited emotional range of the music. Perhaps we want someone who sounds self-assured, sexy, basically happy, talented, and untroubled. (''No More Drama,'' as Mary J. Blige put it a few years ago.) Is Ms. Jones making the world safe for soft-rock again? I'm afraid she is. But that's not all she's doing: she's a musician making clear connections to several different traditions, from country to folk-rock to jazz. One can imagine her lending star power to lots of worthy musicians along the way, but she herself has enough breadth within her for several careers, if she can just get her clock fixed, rise up and wander away from her cozy home.
