WHEN Dawn Geannette, a special education teacher, looks through her scrapbooks from the 1970's and 80's, she sees photographs of many students who were be labeled ''neurologically impaired'' or ''communications disabled.'' Today, they would be identified differently.
''There are more children being classified as autistic,'' said Ms. Geannette, who has seen the number of students characterized as autistic soar from only one or two to 35 a year in her South Orange/Maplewood district in the last 25 years.
In 1991, when the state first introduced autism as a classification, 234 public school students were identified that way. By 2002-2003, the latest year for which figures are available, the number had soared to 4,607, according to Barbara Gantwerk, director of the Office of Special Education Programs for the state Department of Education.
For school districts throughout New Jersey -- already struggling financially because of a rising number of students and an increasing number of state and federal mandates -- the distinction has become enormously challenging for teachers and costly for taxpayers.
In an era when school districts are already beset with additional costs for special education, like the rising number of students classified with attention deficit disorders, plans for autistic children -- with an emphasis on individual instruction -- are generally more expensive than those for any other mental or physical disability. The cost of schooling an autistic child ranges from $30,000 to $150,000 a year compared with $10,000 for educating a normal student.
As the state's 610 districts prepare their budgets, with new programs and more specialists focused on autism, doctors and educators are trying to answer a vexing question: Is autism more prevalent, or are children just being classified with greater frequency?
''We do not know the answer to if there is an increase in the actual numbers or just in the numbers we are identifying,'' Ms. Gantwerk said. ''We are including a larger group in the autism umbrella.''
Indeed, a federal study encompassing a dozen states is looking for answers. In New Jersey, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is conducting studies in Essex, Union, Hudson and Ocean Counties to try to establish an accurate census.
''There has never been a baseline prevalence investigation for autism,'' said Walter Zahorodny, principal investigator for the study, which was begun two years ago. ''There is a great dispute if the increase is a real increase or whether it reflects changing classification patterns.''
In Ewing, the New Jersey Center for Outreach and Services for the Autism Community, an advocacy organization, says it is flooded with 5,000 to 6,000 calls a year from parents whose children have had a diagnosis of autism.
Rebecca Hernandez, a spokeswoman for the group, estimates that one person in 500 has some autistic disorder, but ''we don't know'' if it is more prevalent these days.
''There are so many factors,'' Ms. Hernandez said.
The state defines autism as a ''pervasive disability that significantly impacts verbal and nonverbal communication and social interaction that adversely affects a student's educational performance.'' Autism usually starts before age 3 and includes such behavior as unusual responses to sensory experiences, resistance to change in environment or routine and lack of responsiveness to others. Verbal skills and IQ can vary greatly.
''In autism you have talking versus nontalking, compliant versus noncompliant, those who are in touch with others and those who are not,'' said Ms. Geannette.
The educational price is staggering. Almost half of the autistic students in the state are placed out of district -- in private placements or neighboring districts -- compared with only 22 percent of the students classified as mentally retarded. Such out-placement invariably costs far more than educating a student within a school's own district.
For instance, at the Middlesex County Educational Services Commission, which provides special education for the county's 25 districts, schools are charged $26,820 a year to educate a child with multiple disabilities compared with $33,480 for a child with autism, said Mark Finkelstein, superintendent of the commission.
''Class size is a big factor,'' Mr. Finkelstein said. ''We are extremely limited in the number of students we can have in a class. That raises the cost more than anything.''
Specifically, he said that there cannot be more than six students in the classroom with one full-time teacher and two full-time aides. Frequently, Mr. Finkelstein added, the students need a one-on-one aide in a class and specialists in such areas as speech as well as physical and occupational therapy that can cost from $65 to $90 an hour.
''All of these services contribute to higher costs, and those costs continue to escalate as the needs are increasing,'' he said.
As parents become more educated and advocacy groups more vocal about autism, more services are often demanded. Students who might have received two sessions of speech a week and one of occupational therapy in 1995 when the program started are now often getting speech every day and both occupational and physical therapy three times a week
Some districts -- with enough classified students to make it financially feasible to provide their own programs -- are finding that they are attracting families with autistic children. The Cherry Hill district in South Jersey, for instance, had 23 autistic students in December 2001 and today it has 45, said Charlie Lange, director of special services in the district of 11,600 students.
''When districts have good programs, they become magnets,'' Mr. Lange said. ''There are now five classes of autistic students, three of which have been added in the last year.''
While larger districts can create their own programs for students with autism, the cost of a severely autistic child can be devastating to a smaller one.
When Stephanie Bilenker started as superintendent and director of special services at Green Brook Township School District, in Somerset County, on her first day she was given a file of a student who was sent to a residential facility outside the state at the cost of about $200,000 a year -- between 2 and 3 percent of the school's annual budget in a district of almost 1,000 pupils.
Ultimately, Ms. Bilenker said, the district petitioned the state and was given ''extraordinary aid'' because of the exceptional costs. As a rule, schools paying more than $40,000 for a child's education can seek financial help from the state.
In recent years, the Green Brook district started a preschool class for children exhibiting autistic behavior in an effort to keep them within in the district. ''There is a lot a district can do when a child is young,'' she said. ''And it's not just supporting the child, but supporting the family.''
Of course, supporting and training families is another facet of autism education that increases the costs because in addition to academic needs, many of the children need help with social skills and interaction.
''The normal special education teacher doesn't usually have a big background in social and behavioral needs," said Chris Graham, who teaches autistic children at the Rosa Middle School in Cherry Hill and is part owner Interactive Kids, a company in Marlton that works on social skills with autistic children and their families.
The program offered by Interactive Kids costs $780 for six weeks of two-hour weekly sessions and is in great demand, Ms. Graham said, because autistic children often lack what she calls the ''sixth sense, which is a social sense.''
School districts are also finding shortages of speech and behavioral therapists in the field, she said, because ''the job requires such a different type of teaching.'' said.
For now, there is no sense that the number of cases is leveling off. ''It goes up every single year,'' said Ms. Gantwerk of the Education Department. ''These students typically need intensive services, and the programs are expensive.''
EDUCATION
