Upfront With Music
Bob Eicher of Pelham was listening to his children practice the piano one day when he had an idea. Why should children practice for hours just to play one song at one or two recitals a year, he wondered. Wouldn't music be more fun and interesting for 12-year-old John, 10-year-old Catherine, 9-year-old Caroline and 5-year-old Emily if there were more opportunities to perform?
Why not provide the same opportunities for all of Pelham's musical children, not just his own?
So with his wife, Lauren, Mr. Eicher set out to organize the Pelham Music Festival. They started by contacting 35 music teachers in town - in private and public schools - and looking for children to sign up. They expected around 50 young musicians, but in the end 150 pianists, violinists (including William Healy, right), drummers, clarinetists, flutists and string players from elementary through high school enthusiastically participated in a day of performances at the Pelham Country Club. Each child paid $15 to participate, for which they received two guest tickets and a framed picture of themselves. An audience of 750 people showed up to hear the budding musicians at $5 per ticket, many exclaiming at how good the performers were. The next day, a professional string quartet and a jazz group gave a concert that the children and others attended.
The final event in the festival, which the Eichers hope to repeat next year, will take place on Wednesday at 7 p.m. at Steinway Hall in Manhattan, where 18 high school students will perform. (Steinway lent the Eichers two pianos to use at the country club.) Mr. Eicher, a human resources consultant, said he wanted to promote the value of music as an extracurricular activity. ''So much of our children's out-of-school time is spent doing sports,'' he said. ''It seems like a good time to help restore a little balance in their lives.''
Information: (212)246-1100.
If Only It Had a Shell
The Westchester Choral Society, the first chorus to perform at the White Plains Performing Arts Center, became the first group to rate the new hall as well, giving it mixed reviews.
''The place has enormous potential,'' said Lyndon Woodside, conductor of the chorus, which rented the theater for its recent winter concert. ''But it desperately needs a shell.''
The lack of an acoustical shell, used in theaters to project sound outward from the stage, spelled disappointment for the chorus and its piano accompanist, David Ralph. The sound absorption by the center's thick carpeting and plush seats also didn't help.
Although the choral society rehearses weekly at the Music Conservatory of Westchester in White Plains, the conservatory's new theater, Stadther Recital Hall, is too small for the 75-member chorus. So hopes were high that the new White Plains center would answer the needs of the choral society and other classical music groups seeking an alternative to the Performing Arts Center of Purchase College, where rents are more expensive.
Moreover, the Recital Hall at the Purchase center, where the chorus used to perform, has its own acoustical problems, Mr. Woodside said; when a section of the shell is removed to accommodate the number of singers, the sound quality suffers.
So the Westchester Choral Society's quest for an affordable performance space continues. Coni Guhl, a soprano and board member of the group, kept her sense of humor about the White Plains concert.
''The audience members I spoke with were pleased,'' she said. ''I'm told the seats are very comfortable, and I was afraid the snoring might drown us out. But apparently the concert was lively enough to keep people awake.''
For Arts in Schools
Arts-in-education programs are flourishing north of the border -- in Dutchess and Ulster Counties, that is. The arts councils of the two counties, along with the New York State Alliance for Arts Education and the Dutchess and Ulster Boards of Cooperative Educational Services, recently held the first joint session for teachers and teaching artists to network at an all-day conference, called New Visions in Arts Education.
Loretta Spence, program director of the Dutchess County Arts Council, based in Poughkeepsie, said the purpose was to showcase artists and to demonstrate how arts programs could be linked to the curriculum at various grade levels.
''It was a huge success, attracting 200 people instead of the 30 who came last year,'' Ms. Spence said, ''when Dutchess County did it alone.''
ROBERTA HERSHENSON
Correction:  February 15, 2004, Sunday  A brief report in the Footlights column last Sunday about the Westchester Choral Society misidentified its piano accompanist. He was David Baranowski, not David Ralph.
