FOR as long as anybody can remember, a dam has cleaved the Mill River in downtown Stamford, its shimmering, tinsel waterfall an attractive beacon to local residents strolling under cherry trees, international bankers commuting to work and, according to local legend, even George Washington.
Admirers of the dam may soon have to find inspiration elsewhere.
A group of ecologists, sport fishermen, open space advocates, public housing directors, business leaders and the mayor has bonded together in an attempt to remove the dam and restore the Mill River to its unencumbered, pre-Colonial condition. Within the next few months, the Army Corps of Engineers will invite the public to comment on a proposal to tear down the dam and its adjoining concrete walls and get the river's waters flowing again, even if the idea may not sit well with some old-time Stamford residents.
The rationale is this: If the Mill River runs free, habitats for fish and birds will improve, which will allow fishermen and kayakers to rediscover a local waterway that they long ago wrote off as too polluted, ugly and impassable.
''The removal of one dam may not seem like a lot, but restoration won't happen overnight, just like the fragmentation of the river system didn't happen overnight,'' said Laura Wildman, regional coordinator for American Rivers, a conservation group in Washington working to remove dams around the country. ''We're just taking small steps in a positive direction.''
Across the state, there is a burgeoning movement to dismantle dams of this type; not the kind used for hydro power or flood control, but the nonfunctional, typically privately owned structures mostly built in the 19th century and long ago abandoned by the farmers or factory owners who put them up. For the most part, they now resemble little more than cute manmade waterfalls. And the reasoning is more or less the same as it is in Stamford: remove the dams and improve public health.
Though they might be relics, however, disposing of the dams is no small task because the process can be expensive and sometimes there are battles with residents who don't want the dams removed.
According to unofficial estimates by the people who want the dams removed, Connecticut is home to a staggering 9,000 dams, built across brooks, creeks and streams that feed the Housatonic, Connecticut, Shetucket, Quinebaug and Quinnipiac Rivers. (In comparison, New Hampshire has a total of about 4,900 dams, according to the dam bureau of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.)
Of the Connecticut dams, groups that support removing many of them estimate that 4,500 are the old-and-in-the-way variety like Stamford's, scattered from Torrington to Wallingford to Willimantic.
Locating all of them can be a painstaking challenge, though one made easier through partnerships with agencies like the Department of Environmental Protection, whose Inland Water Resources Division each year singles out about 30 different dams for repair. Those actions in turn become useful leads for the dam removal coalition, because in the best-case scenario, dam owners realize it is cheaper to get rid of their dams than fix their cracks.
How much cheaper? The D.E.P. estimated that there is on average a one-time cost of $150,000 to remove a midsize dam. Repairing a similar-size structure, on the other hand, could cost more than $300,000, plus regular maintenance costs for patching and dredging.
Based on average cost and the number of dams that no longer serve any practical purpose, removing them could cost $675 million.
Unlike typical environmental restoration projects of this scale, however, the money to pay for it can come from numerous sources, from local businesses, to state universities, and the Army Corps.
The network to put these kinds of projects together is unusually organized in Connecticut, according to those involved, and those who support dam removal are able to pull together forces that might typically be opposed, like people who want to protect fish and those who would rather catch them for dinner.
''It tends to be a group that has less friction and more of a get-it-done common-sense attitude,'' said Ms. Wildman of American Rivers. ''They are results-oriented, and I like that.''
Ms. Wildman, who has worked on dam removal in 10 states and whose grandfather built dams for a living in Arizona, was intrigued by the challenges Connecticut presents.
''The state has more of a need for restoration because historically we have been altering our rivers longer than a lot of states, and I like to be in a place where there is a need for what I do,'' Ms. Wildman said.
Of course, dams can't always be altered without a fight. In some instances, toxins from roads, lawns and machinery have accumulated over the years in the sediment that tends to build up behind dams, and stirring up that muck could release poisons into the water.
Also, removing dams during the wrong season, such as the spring melt, might release torrents of water that would destroy people's property built right along the river's banks.
Then there are the homeowners who don't want to lose picturesque backyard lagoons that were created when the rivers were dammed.
Opponents aren't always ready to lose swimming or canoeing areas, either, like at Lower Guilford Lake in Guilford, where the 100-year-old, 10-foot-high Duffield Dam, formerly part of a mill, collects the East River into a 14-acre body of water.
In the late 1980's, the D.E.P. told the Guilford Lakes Improvement Association, the 240 homes that own the dam, that the dam needed to be fixed. Otherwise, the dam would have to be torn down, according to Al Duffield, the association's project manager and ultimate inspiration for the dam's name.
Mr. Duffield, like many people who live on or near Lower Guilford Lake, was insistent that the dam be preserved.
''Most of us here moved here because of this lake,'' said Mr. Duffield, a 20-year resident. ''It would have been a huge loss of property value for us.''
After years of negotiations, the association and the state agreed to fix the dam, but also, in a nod to ecological concerns, add a fish bypass channel around it, a construction project completed last summer. Mr. Duffield said the total project cost $150,000, most of which was paid by the association.
Mostly, though, opposition comes from history-minded town residents who want to maintain the status quo.
''Sometimes the reaction isn't even logical, it's sentimental, based on how somebody drank their first beer below the dam,'' said Steve Gephard, the supervising fisheries biologist with the Inland Fisheries Division of the D.E.P.
Mr. Gephard said dam removal is unequivocally the best way to get fish like salmon, shad, alewife, which need to swim upstream to spawn, back where they belong.
''But usually when the dam is finally removed, these opponents no longer have a problem,'' Mr. Gephard said.
Still, in a state historically known for its prodigious industrial output, dams define many water views, and as such, have come to occupy special places in many residents' memories. Stamford's Mill River Dam is no exception, home to all types of manufacturing since a gristmill was constructed there in the mid-1600's. In the 19th century, that drop in the river would become ideal for powering a woolens factory.
Today, the Mill River's more modern reality is less picturesque, with clumps of leaves, logs and debris submerged in the murky waters.
''The whole place needs a cleanup, there's no doubt about it, but there's so much history there,'' said Don Russell, an op-ed columnist for Stamford's The Advocate newspaper and a historian who has written several books on the city's history.
Mr. Russell said that George Washington, on his first trip to Connecticut after becoming president in 1789, ''saw the morning sun on the waterfall and called it one of the most beautiful sites he had ever seen.'' ''The dam is part of our heritage, it truly is,'' Mr. Russell said. ''I think we should leave it standing.''
In Wilton, a less controversial project is under way on the Norwalk River, where organizers are eying two dams for demolition: the privately owned Flock Process Dam and the town-owned Merwin Meadows Dam. A third dam, Cannondale, will remain standing but probably add a bypass channel for fish so that when completed, the project will allow migratory fish 17 miles of unfettered access up the Norwalk River from Long Island Sound.
''People like to say that because dams have historical value they should be kept in place, but what they don't realize is that the river running freely is its most historical condition,'' said Bill Shadel, a director of the environmental advocacy group Save the Sound, which is leading the project.
To get it done, though, Mr. Shadel has joined forces with a perhaps unlikely ally: Trout Unlimited, a national group that protects the rights of fishermen. Trout Unlimited has sponsored the Cannondale project.
''We have an eye on a goal and getting there is the important part, so we are not always picky about who we work with,'' Mr. Shadel said.
Some other dams eyed for demolition in the near-term include the Pin Shop Pond Dam on the Steele Brook in Naugatuck; the Chase Brass Dam on the Naugatuck River in Watertown; the Savage Mill Dam on the Coginchaug River in Middletown; the Springborn Dam on the Scantic River in Enfield; the Plume-Atwood Dam on the Naugatuck River in Thomaston, and the Pizzini Dam on the Eight Mile River in East Haddam. There are also dams that should be removed on the Quinnipiac River in Wallingford's Yalesville section, on the Cheshire town line, and behind a Southington bowling alley, according to those who support removing them.
The most immediate challenge, however, will come in Willimantic, where the newly formed Willimantic Whitewater Partnership is hoping to demolish four 19th-century dams along a two-mile stretch of the Shetucket River near the city center.
The partnership, which counts the University of Connecticut and the Appalachian Mountain Club among its list of supporters, has a twofold goal: encourage whitewater recreation while renewing a moribund downtown.
''The main benefit here is to connect diverse interests,'' said Dan Mullins, president of the partnership. ''For us, it's not just about environmental concerns.''
Yet in a town whose history is inextricably linked with its textile mills, Mr. Mullins admitted there would be local opposition.
One concerned voice so far comes from Bev York, the curator of the Windham Textile and History Museum, who would like to see at least one of the four dams saved, citing, like the Stamford opponents, the town's heritage.
''This is part of our industrial landscape, and there is nothing like seeing the dam in person, to appreciate the mighty river,'' said Ms. York, an occasional canoeist on the Shetucket. ''We don't use the Erie Canal locks any more, but they are still there.''
Complicating the issue even further is that two of the four Shetucket dams generate hydroelectric power. There is also a cost issue, a daunting one in an impoverished community like Willimantic.
Yet taking a patchwork approach to financing the project, Mr. Mullins said that a combination of grants will let him sidestep town financing. He said organizations like the National Science Foundation or Housing and Urban Development can make it so the town doesn't have to raise taxes to remove the dams.
''Judging by people's reactions so far, I'm very confident I can get this done,'' Mr. Mullins said.
Dam removal supporters realize their project is so long-term in scope, it could take decades to finish. In fact, the effort to keep rivers running freely in New England has taken place for centuries, according to Ms. Wildman of American Rivers, who discovered that a lawsuit was filed just 20 years after some Pilgrims dammed their first stream in Plymouth, Mass.
''It's fascinating how far back the conflict goes,'' Ms. Wildman said. ''Dams have always had these highly turbulent histories.''
