FARMINGVILLE, in central Suffolk County, is a world away from the South Fork. But some residents here say that over the past year they have noticed uncomfortable similarities with that hamlet, the infamous epicenter of Long Island's immigration wars.
Here, as in Farmingville, there has been a rapid increase in undocumented, mostly Latino, workers, and increasing tensions about their presence. In Farmingville, those tensions erupted in violence in 2000. In the South Fork, people wonder: Could that happen here?
So it follows that a screening on Jan. 28 of the documentary film ''Farmingville,'' a chronicle of the firestorm there, should draw a standing-room-only audience in Bridgehampton, even though it was on the evening after a major snowstorm. That the film won a special jury prize last month at the Sundance Film Festival no doubt was a draw. But audience members, Latino and Anglo, said they ventured out mostly because they were worried about whether the events in Farmingville could be repeated here.
''We're in for it, aren't we?'' said Maryann Calendrille, a co-owner of Canio's bookstore in Sag Harbor.
Ms. Calendrille pointed out that in Southampton, there is a controversial proposal to build a hiring hall to keep day laborers off the streets, and that in East Hampton, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority was cracking down on the congregation of such laborers at the train station. She also said that the opponents of illegal-immigrant workers have been increasingly vocal, as Latinos have exhibited growing political strength.
In Farmingville, disputes over the congregation of day laborers at a 7-Eleven swiftly accelerated into a battle in the Suffolk County Legislature over a proposed hiring hall. There were also battles there over overcrowded housing.
''This film shows the human scale of how people are dealing with each other day-to-day in increasingly horrific ways,'' Ms. Calendrille said after the screening of ''Farmingdale,'' which was at the Bridgehampton National Bank headquarters. ''We can explain economic theory forever, but if people are demonizing each other, well, that's the real danger and the thing we all have to work on.''
About 140 people, roughly a quarter of them Latino, filled every seat in the bank's community room and stood along three walls. Among them were Dennis Suskind, a Southampton town councilman, a local lawyer, political advocates, business owners and day laborers.
The film was shown with subtitles in either Spanish or English to correspond with the dialog. The screening was sponsored by a local progressive Unitarian-Universalist congregation.
Latinos in the audience said it was important that the film be shown. ''I am glad to see how many people came,'' said Chini Alarco, an organizer of a 42-team Latino soccer tournament in East Hampton. ''People here need to know what happened in Farmingville.''
Ms. Alarco, just like Farmingville residents interviewed in the film, discovered that soccer's popularity among Latinos ''translates to political power,'' she said, then laughed wryly. ''It's the main reason they haven't allowed us to build more soccer fields here.''
''Farmingville,'' shot largely as events there unfolded, grants equal time to all sides: Anglos, Latinos, anti- and pro-immigrant advocates, county lawmakers and the police. The filmmakers, Carlos Sandoval and Catherine Tambini, said they got access by persuading those involved that they would be impartial.
Mr. Sandoval, who left a career as a Manhattan lawyer and now lives in Amagansett, said he was inspired to make ''Farmingville'' after reading a newspaper article about two Mexican day laborers lured to an abandoned warehouse, then brutally attacked. Photographs of the attackers' white supremacist tattoos, used as evidence in their criminal trials, provided one of the film's more chilling moments.
Ms. Tambini lives in Hampton Bays and was a co-producer of ''Suzanne Farrell: Elusive Muse,'' a 1990 documentary nominated for an Academy Award. She and Mr. Sandoval said they believed the Farmingville scenario could play out here, pointing out that Sachem Quality of Life, the homegrown base of Farmingville's anti-immigrant movement, has growing support on the East End. Mr. Sandoval said he found striking parallels between the South Fork and Farmingville, including the derogative language that some local residents use to refer to Latinos.
''I thought the Hamptons would be more progressive, but about 1999 or 2000 something changed,'' he said. ''It was a souring experience.''
Latinos on the South Fork have formed Organización Latino Americana, which has more than 100 active members and strong links to national, pro-immigrant groups.
The group's president, Isabel Sepulveda de Scanlon, said after the screening that her organization was planning a Latino film festival with Southampton College. ''There should be more Latinos making their own films and telling their own stories, don't you think?'' she said.
FILM
