TESTED: 2004 Volvo S80 2.5T AWD
WHAT IS IT? Midrange luxury sedan.
HOW MUCH? $37,885 including $685 shipping charge; $42,525 as tested, with options including $2,495 premium package (leather seats, power moonroof and power passenger seat), $695 traction control and $500 bi-xenon headlamps.
WHAT DRIVES IT? In-line 5-cylinder with light-pressure turbocharger (2.5 liters, 208 horsepower); 5-speed automatic; all-wheel drive.
HOW QUICK? 0 to 60 m.p.h. in 7.7 seconds, according to Car and Driver magazine.
HOW THIRSTY? E.P.A. rating of 20 m.p.g. city, 27 highway.
ALTERNATIVES: Audi A6 quattro, $40,170; Mercedes-Benz E320 4Matic, $51,295.
DESPITE Volvos' reputation as safe, solid and secure automobiles, and despite the company's experimentation with bolder styling and brisker powertrains, the stereotype persists: if you drive a Volvo, you must be a political leftist, a liberal arts professor or a granola-crunching activist.
Before the Iowa caucuses, an antitax group, the Club for Growth, attacked Howard Dean in a television commercial that described his campaign as a ''latte-drinking, sushi-eating, Volvo-driving, New York Times-reading, body-piercing'' freak show.
I heard this while testing the new all-wheel-drive version of the S80, Volvo's biggest sedan. I was sipping coffee -- black, nothing fancy -- and driving home with my favorite Sunday newspaper on the plump leather-covered passenger seat. New York was getting the fiercest storm of the winter, so it was a perfect time to test the Volvo's prowess in snow.
The car performed well, clambering quietly over snowpiles left by plows, as all around two-wheel-drive cars performed a symphony of spinning tires. And putting the S80's power through all four wheels eliminated my persistent complaint about turbocharged front-drive Volvos: torque steer that whipsaws the front wheels on heavy acceleration.
Power is adequate, but hardly excessive, and the car exhibits considerable understeer, a tendency to forge ahead when the driver wants to turn. But this is a common and often desirable trait for a family car, as it helps to prevent spinouts. The Volvo's steering is agreeably hefty, but could provide more feedback.
Volvos strike me as the most American feeling of European cars, and the S80 fits the mold. The Swedish sedan is cushy, comforting and undemanding to drive, neither as rigid as a Mercedes E-Class nor as crisp as a BMW 5 Series. It handles predictably but does not embrace curvy backroads. It is most at home on the highway.
The ride was smooth, but there was considerably more wind noise and road drone than you might expect in a $40,000 car.
In other respects, too, the S80 registered a bit high in N.V.H., industry shorthand for noise, vibration and harshness. With the car idling at stoplights, you feel faint vibrations through the steering wheel from the 5-cylinder engine, whose attributes do not include silky smoothness.
But the interior is pleasing, with an intuitive, no-nonsense simplicity that was a welcome relief after time at the wheel of some overcomplicated German luxury cars. The controls, well-placed and well-labeled, require no laborious study of the owner's manual. There are big knobs for the stereo and what may be the best climate controls in the industry.
For a car so large, though, the outside mirrors seemed underscaled, as did the dashboard gauges.
Peter Horbury's sleek design was innovative if not quite revolutionary when the S80 arrived as a 1999 model, and it has worn well. A thick shoulder runs from the front fender to the elevated rump, which achieves aerodynamic efficiency without the tacked-on bustle of new BMW's.
The look is largely unchanged, though the S80 received a freshening for 2004, with Volvo citing some 700 changes. One of the most significant is the addition of all-wheel drive.
The S80 gets the Haldex system used on other all-wheel-drive Volvos, which is also being adopted by Ford. On the S80, most of the power is normally sent to the front wheels, until slippage is detected. Then, Haldex directs power to the rear using hydraulics, based on characteristics that are programmed into its electroic controls. These controls allow the flow of power to be tailored to each vehicle and each drivetrain.
In contrast to some systems, though, it does not actively apportion power from side to side. Volvo relies on the antilock system to brake wheels individually and maintain traction.
Like other Volvos, the S80 has a range of safety features: side air bags for the front seats, a window-curtain bag that covers the side windows, seats that guard against whiplash and pyrotechnic devices that pull the safety belts taut in a crash.
In this and other ways, the S80 AWD seems like a safe -- dare I say conservative? -- choice. And if you feel the urge to grab a latte on your way to the piercing parlor, well-designed cup holders are at your disposal. This big Volvo may not be radically chic, but it will get you to Vermont even if you encounter snow on the way.
JAMES G. COBB
AROUND THE BLOCK
