I AM constantly amazed at the growing gap in living costs between big American cities like New York and San Francisco and the rest of the country.
This difference, of course, can be good news for future retirees and most likely explains the increasing number of baby boomers who tell pollsters that they may relocate when they retire. They're just facing reality. The boomers have not been as good at saving as their parents were; a downsized lifestyle in a cheaper place will help them retire with less financial worry than if they try to stay put.
Evidence of the price gap keeps piling up.
Last month, Runzheimer International, a management consulting firm based in Rochester, Wis., released partial results of two studies that show just how widely prices can vary across the country.
The first compared the annual cost of conventional automobile insurance for a midsize sedan in various cities. The amount ranged from a low of $978 in Nashville to a high of $4,945 in Detroit. The four highest-cost cities after Detroit were Philadelphia, at $3,666; Newark, $3,557; Los Angeles, $3,258; and New York, $2,762. The four lowest-cost ones after Nashville were Boise, Idaho, $990; Richmond, Va., $1,038; Burlington, Vt., $1,039; and Evansville, Ind., $1,045. Runzheimer said the cities with the lowest insurance rates had fewer accidents and vehicle thefts.
The second Runzheimer study compared child care costs, not a big issue for retirees but nonetheless indicative of the price gap. The study found that the monthly cost for five-day-a-week day care for a 3-year-old in a for-profit center can be as high as $1,057.83 in Manhattan and as low as $339.44 in Baton Rouge, La.
Nowhere is the price gap more glaring than in homes, which for most people represent their greatest expenditure as well as their greatest asset. The February issue of Country Living magazine has ads for two houses that may jar you a bit if you're struggling with the mortgage payment on a cramped New York apartment or an overpriced California bungalow.
The first is a 3,560-square-foot Victorian house in Geneva, Neb., that was built in 1891. Listed on the National Register of Historic Places, it has four bedrooms, two and a half baths, three fireplaces, a two-car garage and an in-ground swimming pool -- all on a one-acre lot. Property taxes are $2,900 a year and utilities average $320 a month. The asking price is $195,000.
Carlene Whitehead, an agent at Bergen Real Estate in Geneva, a town of 2,200 in eastern Nebraska, about 55 miles southwest of Lincoln, said the magazine ad for the house had generated interest from many potential retirees. In fact, the day we talked she was awaiting the arrival of a possible buyer from New York.
''I had a lot of calls from people in higher-priced areas of the country -- New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia, Boston -- who are looking for a bargain, for a place to retire,'' Ms. Whitehead said. ''Some of them said they're tired of coping with big-city life. We didn't have any idea we would get such a response.''
But she said that many of the callers might not realize how small Geneva is. In 2003, the average price of the homes she sold was $78,000. Nevertheless, she said, high-speed Internet service is available there, and the Lincoln airport is less than an hour's drive.
The second ad in Country Living is for a 3,252-square-foot house in Clay, Ky., a town of about 1,200 in the western part of the state. Built in the 1930's, the house has six bedrooms, two baths, a family room, an office and an enclosed porch. It also sits on a one-acre lot. Taxes are $1,790 a year and utilities run about $225 a month. The asking price is $179,000.
Maggie Sheets, an agent with Remax Heritage Homes in Madisonville, Ky., about 20 miles southeast of Clay, gives an account similar to Ms. Whitehead's. Ms. Sheets said that 75 percent of the people calling about the house were potential retirees.
''Many of them are just overwhelmed by the price and features of that house,'' she said. ''But sometimes they don't realize how rural Clay is. They ask about museums and things like that." She said her average home sale last year was $78,000, the same as Ms. Whitehead's.
Clay, like Geneva in Nebraska, also has high-speed Internet service. There is a small commuter airport at Madisonville with flights to regional air hubs. There is a larger airport in Evansville, Ind., 45 miles to the north, and an even larger one in Nashville, about 130 miles southeast.
Homes are not the only things that are less expensive in these two towns. According to www.bestplaces.net, a Web site that compares cities and towns, it costs almost 60 percent less to live in the Kentucky region that includes Clay than it does to live in New York City. For the Lincoln-Geneva area of Nebraska, it's nearly 58 percent less. That means if you make $100,000 a year in New York, you can duplicate your lifestyle in Kentucky for a bit over $40,000, and in Nebraska for a little over $42,000.
These comparisons assume that you continue paying a mortgage and have work-related expenses. If, however, you have enough equity in your present home to pay cash for a new, less expensive one, and you are downsizing your lifestyle, the mortgage payment disappears and expenses drop even more. If you're retired, there go work-related expenses, too.
The boomers may be on to something.
SENIORITY Fred Brock is an editor at The Times and the author of ''Retire on Less Than You Think: The New York Times Guide to Planning Your Financial Future.'' His column on the approach and arrival of retirement appears the second Sunday of each month. E-mail: fbrock@nytimes.com.
