The Rev. Donald J. Harrington, the president of St. John's, said yesterday that an incident that began with some St. John's basketball players making a trip to a strip club was not an isolated problem and reflected an atmosphere that had developed around the team.
Harrington, speaking publicly about the incident for the first time, absolved the team's interim coach, Kevin Clark, of responsibility for the actions of several players hours after St. John's game at Pittsburgh on Wednesday night. Harrington said that what he called the culture of the team developed long before Clark took over in December after Mike Jarvis was fired.
Harrington shied from directly blaming Jarvis either, but he referred generally to other problems that have plagued the team in recent months. Jarvis coached St. John's for five-plus seasons. Harrington said repeatedly in an hourlong interview in his third-floor office at Newman Hall that he did not want to cast blame.
When told that his remarks seemed to be placing blame on Jarvis, Harrington said: ''These young men made decisions and they're responsible for those decisions. I know that Mike Jarvis would never want this to happen and I'm sure Mike would've tried to avoid that. You all have written about the struggles of the past year. That's probably about all I want to say.''
Harrington described a culture -- carefully saying he did not mean it in ethnic or religious terms -- that he said had pervaded the basketball program and instilled an attitude that certain behavior was permissible.
What triggered Harrington's comments was an episode early Thursday in which several players went to a suburban Pittsburgh strip club after a game and later had sex at the team's hotel with a woman they had met at the club. She told the police that she had been raped by several players, accusations the police eventually discounted after one player produced video recordings from his cellphone of consensual sexual intercourse and threats by the woman.
The woman was later charged with making fictitious reports to law enforcement, prostitution and criminal theft by extortion.
The university disciplined six players, expelling one starter and moving to expel two others.
Harrington said Clark was not responsible for what happened.
''I do not blame Kevin Clark for this,'' Harrington said. ''Kevin Clark is a fine man. Kevin Clark has, it is my understanding, he has tightened the team policies and regulations.''
The players involved, Harrington said, ''were formed before Kevin was really the responsible one.''
Jarvis did not respond to messages left at his home and on his cellphone.
The past year has been a bleak one for St. John's basketball team. After winning the National Invitation Tournament last spring, considered a consolation prize, the team lost a player, Willie Shaw, earlier this season after his second marijuana-related arrest. Then Jarvis was fired after a poor start and, under Clark, the team is en route to its worst season. It is 5-14 over all and 0-8 in the Big East, and enters today's game with Boston College at Madison Square Garden with an eight-man roster.
Then came Thursday morning's events. With Harrington in Florida to begin a fund-raising trip, the university acted quickly Thursday afternoon to punish the six players.
Grady Reynolds, who was already on disciplinary probation at the university, was expelled immediately. He was charged last year with assaulting a female student; he agreed to go to anger-management classes in settling the case. Elijah Ingram and Abe Keita were suspended, with the university seeking their expulsion pending a hearing Tuesday.
Lamont Hamilton and Mohamed Diakite were suspended from the team, with a hearing Tuesday. Tyler Jones, a freshman reserve, was suspended for today's game for breaking curfew and visiting an inappropriate place, Harrington said.
Harrington talked about problems that had begun under Jarvis, who led St. John's to within a victory of the Final Four five years ago.
''Due diligence led us to believe Mike was the right person, and Mike had some great success in the early years, and all of you I'm sure have some insights on why it didn't continue to be that way,'' Harrington said. ''This is not to continually speak about Mike Jarvis. The real thing I'm focusing on and that we have to address is this. This is not an isolated incident. It's a terrible incident. It's the worst incident we've had, and hopefully we'll never see it again. But it's not isolated. Each of you has written about other incidents in recent months.''
He stopped short of saying that harsher punishment in past incidents could have prevented the latest one.
Harrington said forfeiting the remaining games would have been considered if the players had wanted to, but that St. John's would then be breaking commitments to its opponents and Big East obligations.
Harrington said he would try to answer a fundamental question: what has caused a once-mighty program to fall so far?
''I have been asking myself that question with increasing degrees of intensity the last year as I saw things clearly slipping,'' Harrington said. ''The tendency of some in a situation like this is to look for the person to blame or the persons to blame, kind of the scapegoat approach.''
Instead, he said he would work to fix the problems, using past events as a guidepost without assessing blame.
''I will do all in my power to fix this and to understand what happened so we can be stronger as we move forward,'' Harrington said.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
