''YOU'RE invited to our annual New Year's Eve party in Colima,'' my old friend Roberta wrote me. She and her husband, Ken, assured me it was a sleepy place devoid of tourist attractions. They hoped it would stay that way.
Colima is hardly a secret, being the capital of the southwestern Mexican state of the same name. Its past includes a characteristic type of pre-Columbian pottery and the distinction of being the first colonial city west of Mexico City, founded in 1523. As well as being a state capital, it's a university town with a population of 130,000. But, less than three hours from Guadalajara and 90 minutes from the Pacific Coast, Colima is off Mexico's usual travel circuits, and outsiders like Ken and Roberta, who bought a house there, are rare indeed.
This Dec. 31, I danced in the New Year to mariachi music under the stars -- my third New Year's Eve in Colima. I stay in the town's most handsome hotel, the Ceballos, which shares the main square, the Jardín Libertad, with the cathedral, the government palace, the history museum and some shops. It must be admitted that textbook Mexican charm, in Colima, pretty much begins and ends with the plaza. I have found I can while away hours on the square, drinking beer or coffee at an outdoor cafe and admiring the jungly, palm-filled garden in the center, the Ceballos's dramatic Gothic arches, the neo-Classical interior of the cathedral or the de rigueur revolutionary mural on the staircase of the government palace. While by no means first-class examples, these emblems of Mexican town life have a nonchalant, seductive glamour.
Off the square, strolling Colima's shabby (but safe) streets, I have other choice spots: the Jardín Torres Quintero, on the other side of the palace -- a more disciplined garden than the Libertad, alive with roses and ferns -- and the most disciplined garden of all, the Jardín Núñez, at Madero and Juárez. Along its pedestrian avenues that radiate from a central fountain, couples, grandparents and children, shoeshine men and juice-sellers carry on their business amid huge topiary birds and sky-scraping palms.
The city's situation near two volcanoes and in an earthquake zone means that it has little architecture worthy of the name, old or new, and the standard building is a ground-hugging, one-story structure. Perched on the edge of disaster, fading, peeling, dignified Colima continues its precarious life without pinning its hopes on grand monuments or dressing up for visitors. Last year an earthquake with a magnitude of 7.8 caused at least nine deaths in Colima and hundreds of thousands of dollars in damage. Each room in the Ceballos has a ceramic sign in the archway between bedroom and bathroom that says, ''En caso de sismo, párese aquí'' (''In case of earthquake, stand here''). This year, I eyed the decorative plaque with new respect.
As a result of the earthquake, Colima now has an estimated 500 construction sites. Every so often, there's a rubble-strewn lot between two standing houses, like a missing tooth in a smiling mouth. One of the city's few remaining colonial buildings, the church of San Felipe de Jesús, at Constitución and Vicente Guerrero, has an elaborately carved 18th-century facade and a plaque noting that the revolutionary hero Miguel Hidalgo served here as a parish priest. Ominous cracks run like veins behind the altar, and the congregation has decamped to the chapel, leaving the main church bare except for a few lonely statues.
But Colima has a long history of picking up the pieces. When I returned for New Year's I found all my favorite places intact, including a pleasing constellation of pastel houses with pilasters and window grilles around Andador Constitución and 5 de Mayo; the handicraft shops on Andador Constitución, where I never manage to buy anything; the covered market at Centenario and Manuel Álvarez, where I always find a lemon squeezer or earthenware mug I can't live without; and the city's three museums.
Like Colima itself, the museums are small-scale, nontaxing and rewarding. On the Jardín Libertad, the Museo Regional de Historia has a good collection of local pre-Columbian pottery, and a one-page English guide to the artifacts. They include statues of agricultural deities, baleful and gnomic; flattish sculptures of men and women sitting on benches -- a sign of prestige in a hard-working society -- and an anthology of the ceramic dogs that are a hallmark of Colima pottery. (A dog statue in your tomb guaranteed entry to paradise.) In a room called the Zoología Fantástica, the dogs share space with statues of other mythological animals, among them a lovable pig apparently hiding his eyes, Siamese-twin ducks and a comical winged turtle.
In addition to the permanent collection, the museum has an engaging temporary exhibit (until the end of this month) of Mexican calendar art from the 1930's to the 1960's. In this lush, highly colored never-never land, Indians with washboard abs carry off swooning bare-breasted Indian maidens; Hidalgo, bearing the banner of Our Lady of Guadalupe, is crowned with laurel and kissed on his bald pate by an angel wearing a poodle cut and spaghetti-strapped dress; and a gorgeous señorita, in regional costume and very high red heels, plants a Mexican flag on a stony peak. Great fun.
Colima's other two museums have no English signs at all, but that frees you to concentrate on the artifacts. In the case of the Museo de Artes Populares about 15 minutes' walk north from the Jardín Libertad, two airy floors are devoted to the folk arts of western Mexico, especially those associated with local masks and dances. Frequently grouped by material, cases full of straw, tin or ceramic things will speak to you or not. I love the jointed Betty Boop-style dolls made of papier-mâché, wearing cloche hats, dangly earrings and white ankle socks. The museum has an appealing gift shop, with books, handmade toys and other crafts for sale, but I've never found it open. Maybe next year.
About seven blocks west of the folk art museum, in a leafy, prosperous neighborhood, the Museo de las Culturas de Occidente is housed in a handsome modern building with a palm grove in the center. Wonderful objects stand on plinths against turquoise stucco walls, often vases in the round, ribbed shape of the calabash gourd, a Colima favorite for two millenniums. A bulbous jug from A.D. 300 has a face on its neck: realistic, deeply carved nose and ears; narrowed, appraising eyes. The jug's lip serves as the man's hat. On the second floor, where pottery is arranged thematically, a case describes the ''ciclo de vida'' (cycle of life). Small, charmingly detailed figures represent pregnancy, birth and infancy up to an aged man on his deathbed.
Not all culture in these parts is so meditative. On Jan. 1, Roberta and Ken took six friends to the village of Comala, about 15 minutes outside Colima. (A taxi costs $6.25, at 11.2 pesos to the dollar, or you can take a bus from the Suburbana bus station.) The village, with cobblestone streets, has a church in mustard and gray stucco and a white-on-white appliquéd bandstand on the square. Outdoor cafes line one side of the square, and an order of beer (which comes in a plastic bucket with an opener on the side) brings with it generous rounds of free antojitos -- snacks like guacamole and tamales with various toppings. Solemn, tireless mariachi musicians serenade the drinkers, for about $18 for five songs, and take requests. Couples dance around the bandstand, and an occasional rider on horseback crosses the square, exciting the local dogs to barking madness.
Next day, six of us traveled to Suchitlán, a poorer village about a dozen miles northeast of Comala. First we walked up a dusty road to the little collection of shacks -- cement blocks, twigs and corrugated iron roughly cobbled together -- where Herminio Candelario lives and works. Mr. Candelario is a nationally recognized maker of masks, often used for the pastorelas, or pageants, performed in the church and on the square, in which he takes a keen interest, and his workshop (more outside than inside) holds costumes, swords and other props as well as masks. Made of a light balsalike wood from trees that grow on his property, a brightly painted lion or three-eyed monster by Mr. Candelario or one of his sons, Gorgonio and José Guadalupe, costs $40. Smaller masks, like the speckled owl I fancied, cost $13.50. One of the group chose a fierce rooster that needed a few last touches; my owl lacked eyes. What kind of eyes did I want, Gorgonio asked me. Whatever you think best, I said.
While our masks were being finished, we went to the village square for lunch. Los Portales de Suchitlán, a former coffee plantation, seats guests under coffee bushes grown leggy at tables covered with red, green and yellow checked cloths. You know a place is not geared to gringos when it doesn't serve margaritas. Instead, Los Portales offers tequilas, beers, superlative hot chocolate and the wicked local ponche, or punch, made of mezcal and peanuts. The food, including pozole, a hominy-and-pork stew, is similarly authentic. When we returned to the Candelarios', my owl mask was almost dry and transformed, its wide-awake yellow eyes circled with bold, black lashes.
Palm-filled plazas, folk art and huevos
Colima is two hours and 45 minutes from Guadalajara, by bus. A one-way ticket on the ETN line, including reserved seat, lunch and a movie, costs $16.50, at 11.2 pesos to $1.
Where to Stay
Hotel Ceballos, Portal Medellín 12, (312) 312 4444, fax (312) 312 0645 and www.vivecolima.com/hotelceballos, has 54 air-conditioned rooms, some interior and without windows. Ask for a room that overlooks the square; a double costs $67. There are exercise machines in a tiny gym, a very small rooftop pool, reading nooks in the broad hallways, and a second-floor sitting room that looks onto the square. Service is willing but not speedy.
La Merced, Hidalgo 188, (52-312) 314 2734, has 34 fairly spartan but clean rooms arrayed around a central courtyard, in downtown Colima, at $20 for a double.
Where to Eat
In Colima, Mariscos Pepe's, Maclovio Herrera 284, (52-312) 313 3053, has a grass roof, red plastic chairs and terrific seafood. A meal for one of assorted hors d'oeuvres, garlicky shrimp and beer costs about $9. Open 9 a.m. to midnight.
On the southwest corner of the Jardín Libertad, El Trebol, (52-312) 312 2900, is a good outdoor cafe for breakfast and lunch. Huevos al gusto (eggs the way you like them), sweet rolls and coffee cost about $5.25. Open 8:30 a.m. to 11 p.m.; closed on Sunday.
Los Portales de Suchitlán, (52-312) 395 4452, is open from 8:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. Guacamole, chiles rellenos or a Mexican steak, and a flan de Nescafé (coffee-flavored baked custard), with tequila, costs about $13.50 for one.
What to See
The Museo Regional de Historia, (52-312) 312 9228, at Morelos and Reforma, is open Tuesday through Saturday, from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m., Sunday 5 to 8 p.m. Admission $2.40 (free on Sunday).
The Museo de Artes Populares, at Gabino Barreda and Manuel Gallardo, (52-312) 312 6869, is open Tuesday though Saturday from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. and from 5 to 8 p.m., and on Sunday from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Admission 90 cents (free on Sunday).
The Museo de las Culturas de Occidente, at Calzada Pedro Galván, (52-312) 313 0608, is open Tuesday through Sunday 9 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. Admission $1.35.
The Candelarios' workshop is at Lirio y Jazmín, No. 38, Comunidad de Suchitlán, Suchitlán.
KATHERINE ASHENBURG writes about architecture.
