FOR nearly three months now, Thomas R. Suozzi, the Nassau county executive, has been buffeted by accusations that one of his former top deputies, Peter Sylver, misused federal grant money to pay for perks like a trip to London and tinted windows for his county car.
But the scandal took a much uglier turn late last month when allegations of sexual harassment involving Mr. Sylver emerged, leading Republicans to accuse the Democratic administration of trying to buy the victim's silence with a job transfer and a $5,000 pay raise in exchange for a confidentiality agreement. Last week, the county district attorney's office began an investigation of the case and the county's handling of the case.
The allegations of financial and sexual misconduct have not only given ammunition to Mr. Suozzi's Republican critics in the County Legislature, they have also severely strained his relationship with the Democratic majority, threatening to bring many of the county executive's other initiatives to a standstill.
Mr. Suozzi insisted in an interview that his administration had done nothing wrong in its handling of the sexual abuse charges. ''This administration acted entirely appropriately through this process and I believe that the district attorney's investigation will confirm that,'' he said. County officials investigated the charges and abided by the employee's wishes to keep her case confidential, he said.
Mr. Suozzi said he hoped that his appointment last week of a new deputy county executive for economic development would help the county ''get back to the important work we started.'' The appointee is Patrick Duggan, who was executive director of Sustainable Long Island, a Huntington-based ''smart growth'' group.
The charges surfaced during legislative hearings into the spending irregularities, when Peter J. Schmitt, the Republican minority leader, began questioning a former assistant to Mr. Sylver about the alleged sexual misconduct. The 23-year-old woman declined to discuss the charges on the witness stand, but Mr. Schmitt said that she had told his aides about repeated inappropriate behavior on Mr. Sylver's part and that she had described one incident as a sexual assault.
Mr. Schmitt also said the assistant was fired after she rejected an advance on Nov. 4, but was subsequently given a $50,000 job in a different department after signing a release agreeing not to lodge a formal complaint.
In a timeline laid out by officials in Mr. Suozzi's office, the assistant was interviewed by the county's human resources director, John Donnelly, two days after the reported Nov. 4 incident. They said that the assistant met with Mr. Donnelly on several other occasions, accompanied by her mother, and that mother and daughter made clear that they wanted to keep the case confidential and that they believed the young woman should receive some financial consideration. Confronted by Mr. Donnelly with the accusations on Nov. 7, Mr. Sylver denied them, but by Nov. 18 he had been told he would have to attend training sessions on sexual harassment in the workplace, and the assistant had received the new job. At the same time, the charges of financial misconduct began to surface. Mr. Sylver resigned on Nov. 26.
Mr. Suozzi said the county was not obliged to report the assistant's allegations to the police and was required to keep the case confidential by the county's equal opportunity policy and complaint procedures. ''Without confidentiality, we can't encourage people to speak up,'' he said. ''The legal and ethical thing to do was to protect the employee's wishes.''
Kenneth L. Marten, a lawyer representing Mr. Sylver's former assistant, defended the confidentiality agreement. ''The whole point of a confidentiality agreement was to keep it confidential,'' he said.
But county legislators have taken serious issue with a policy that does not require county officials to refer criminal complaints to either the police or the district attorney's office and instead has the county investigate charges internally. ''The county is not set up for criminal investigations,'' said Lisanne Altmann, a Democratic legislator. ''So that sets us up for obstruction even if it's not intended.'' Even if a victim requested secrecy, she said, ''we have the responsibility to protect what could be future victims.''
Mr. Schmitt called the policy misguided. ''It tells me that the administration has no moral compass, no sense of right or wrong,'' he said.
Martin Schwartz, a professor at the Touro Law Center, said he did not believe the county was legally bound to report any alleged crimes to the authorities. He noted that even police officers are allowed to use their discretion when deciding whether to turn a case over to the district attorney. But when dealing with a sexual assault charge, he said, ''That becomes something of public concern because it's of public interest to see that public employees are not subjected to that kind of conduct.''
Ms. Altmann said the Legislature would seek to change the policy. ''Sometimes there's a difference between legal and ethical responsibility, and this is one of those times,'' she said. ''We need to do better because the current policy is not adequate.''
Patrick Halpin, a Democrat and former Suffolk county executive, said that while the Suozzi administration has handled the claims of financial misconduct openly, ''in hindsight, they probably should have turned the other charges over to the district attorney'' because ''it would have removed the whole thing from the political realm.''
Herbert D. Rosenbaum, a professor emeritus of political science at Hofstra University, said the Suozzi administration's mistake was ''they didn't honor the time-honored assumption that in politics there are no secrets.'' The maxim is especially true in Nassau County, he added, ''because of its highly charged partisan atmosphere.''
As a result, Dr. Rosenbaum said, the case is now completely out of the administration's control. ''They've been overtaken by the Legislature and the district attorney now,'' he said. ''And it will be very expensive for them politically.''
The first cost Mr. Suozzi must reckon with is the damage done to his relationship with the Democrats on the Legislature, who hold a 10-to-9 majority.
Members of the delegation and their staff members said they had repeatedly asked Suozzi administration officials for full disclosure as they headed into the legislative hearings on Mr. Sylver and his economic development agencies, only to have Suozzi aides assure them that they knew everything there was to know. The Democrats said they felt blind-sided when Mr. Schmitt brought out the sexual abuse charges.
''It would have helped us if we had been aware of the allegations,'' said Judy Jacobs, the Democratic majority leader, ''because then we could have directed it to the district attorney to begin with and it never would have made it to the floor of the Legislature.''
But Mr. Halpin said he did not fault Mr. Suozzi for keeping the allegations from the legislators. ''The moment you tell one legislator, you might as well broadcast it to the world,'' he said. ''But now he needs to have some frank conversations with the Democrats because he needs them to keep his other initiatives going forward.''
