SURREALISM still has the power to enchant, even 80 years after the movement's magic was first spread about. This may be in part because of the personalities of the artists involved. ''The artists were creative, insane, funny, erotic, innovative and normal,'' the collector Ira Drukier writes of them. ''They had a good time creating the works.''
A large part of Mr. Drukier's collection is on view in ''The Invisible Revealed: Surrealist Drawings'' at the Frances Lehman Loeb Art Center at Vassar College here. He says that he ''had a good time collecting the works,'' and the show -- with its pieces by leading Surrealists including René Magritte, Max Ernst, Salvador Dalí, Roberto Matta, Kay Sage, Yves Tanguy and Francis Picabia -- is proof of his enthusiasm. The art reveals the traits Mr. Drukier listed, as well as elegance. Surrealism can weave its spell because it's usually so well drawn.
Mr. Drukier, who owns several small hotels in New York City, first became interested in Surrealism in the late 1960's when he was an undergraduate at Cornell. Early on he sought works by one of the youngest of the Surrealists, the Chilean Roberto Matta. (Matta died last year at the age of 92, leaving Leonora Carrington, who is approaching her 87th birthday, as the only survivor from Surrealism's golden age.) In a strange Surrealist twist, Mr. Drukier added, Gordon Matta-Clark, Roberto Matta's son and an artist, was at Cornell at the same time as Mr. Drukier was, but he found this out later.
Surrealism has several styles, and the eight Mattas in the show are a virtuoso display of biomorphic Surrealism, which can be roughly described as abstract shapes come alive, or threatening to come alive. Matta greatly influenced Arshile Gorky, the first of the Abstract Expressionists, and the relationship is clear in two untitled works featuring motifs associated with Gorky.
The marquee names are prominent here. Salvador Dalí has five works. The major one is ''Soft Skulls and Harp'' from 1935, which includes examples of both Dalí's abilities as a representational artist and the odd, elastic forms for which he is famous. An interesting minor piece is a rare postcard-sized collage by Dalí that brings together images of a ski slope and a basket of Dalmatian puppies.
An important landmark work is a gouache from 1926, ''The Lost Jockey'' by René Magritte. The small work is conceived like a stage set with parted curtains. A galloping racehorse hemmed in by trees with menacing branches takes over the action in the center. This could certainly be an image from a dream, but it seems to have touched something essential in Magritte, and it set him on the course of the odd dreamlike scenarios he followed for the rest of his life.
Picasso had a Surrealist period in the 30's; it's sometimes referred to as his bone period. His ink drawing, ''The Elongated Nude,'' tries hard to be more enigmatic than is usual for him. We don't see the figure at all; just a diamond shape that is a disembodied mouth or possibly a vagina. More prominent are a bottle and a ball of yarn on a tabletop.
Called a metaphysical artist, Giorgio de Chirico's aims are more closely linked to those of the Surrealists. His best works are strange landscapes of modern life. A frequent scenario is a locomotive going past classical ruins. His 1913 ''Sleep'' is perhaps an ecological prophecy: a train crosses, and a man sleeps in front of, a power plant.
It was said that whenever Max Ernst arrived in America from Europe the weather would be especially tumultuous. Ernst, who worked in a wide variety of styles and disciplines, was a towering figure and yet an elusive one. He made large sculptures as well as small drawings and prints. He might be more mysterious than his artwork because his pieces in the exhibition seem charming or even winsome. In his ''Sand Fleas'' and ''Landscape With Leaves,'' the eponymous objects are lined up very accessibly in rows. Ernst created a character he named Loplop, and ''Loplop Presents Witticisms'' is basically a line drawing that is reminiscent of Saul Steinberg, who came close to being America's latter-day Surrealist.
Mr. Drukier obviously has a fondness for the Romanian-born artist Victor Brauner. Nine of his works are in the show. Brauner has what can almost be described as a signature motif: a face with a prominent nose in profile and a large eye. It's often as comical as it's described, and makes Brauner into a droller artist than is usual in classic Surrealism. But this works against him, depriving his work of the sense of mystery that seems necessary for Surrealism. Though humor is found in Surrealism, it usually has an edge that Brauner lacks.
Francis Picabia's near-silhouette portrait of André Breton, the founder of Surrealism and its major spokesman, is one indication that the Surrealists were an especially close group of artists. Women were prominent in Surrealism: Dorothea Tanning was married to Ernst and Kay Sage was Yves Tanguy's wife. One's first guess would be that Sage's meticulous ''Secret Journey'' was a drawing. Instead it's a collage, and the shapes conjuring up sea life were cut out with scissors.
''The Invisible Revealed: Surrealist Drawings'' is at Loeb Art Center at Vassar College through March 14. Information: (845)437-7000 or at http://fllac.vassar.edu/
ART REVIEW
