A Connecticut bartender once praised for never missing a day of work vanished last March 24, leaving the police to wonder whether he had left voluntarily or been the victim of foul play.
Three days later, a man carrying little more than the Marlboros and Dentyne in his pockets died in Key West, Fla., leaving no clues to his identity.
The police in both states were stumped.
That is, until a 52-year-old disabled woman in Georgia solved both mysteries with a few strokes of her computer keyboard.
The woman, Brenda J. Pass, a former nurse who spends a lot of time in bed because of rheumatoid arthritis, said she was in bed on Jan. 25, trying to get her mind off her own family's problems when she came across an Internet database of unidentified people who had died in Florida.
Ms. Pass, whose hobbies are genealogical research and cybersleuthing of this sort, pulled up the database and noticed one of the first entries, dated March 27, 2003.
It described a 5-foot-6, 190-pound white man with wavy brown and gray hair who was ''balding in vertex area.''
Intrigued, she moved to another database that she visits often, the Missing Persons Cold Case Network. She typed ''March 2003'' into the search engine and almost immediately found an entry for a David William Bargman, a 6-foot-tall, 200-pound Fairfield, Conn., man last seen on March 24.
Included in the description of the 44-year-old man was a mention that his ''hairline is receding'' and that ''his hair is graying on the sides.''
Ms. Pass was not sure she had a match, but thought the dates might be more than coincidence. ''I said, well, what have I got to lose?'' Mrs. Pass said. ''I'll turn it in, and I'm going to take a chance on it.''
Ms. Pass said she did what she had done probably a hundred times before. She sent an e-mail message with the information to investigators handling the cases. Because of her tip, the Monroe County medical examiner's office in Florida contacted the police in Fairfield.
A comparison of fingerprints allowed the medical examiner to identify the man in Florida as the missing bartender, whose last name is actually spelled Bargmann.
In Westport, where Mr. Bargmann spent 12 years tending bar at the restaurant known as V's, for vino, friends and family were sad to hear of his fate.
Ever since he failed to report for work last March, ''people were still coming in wanting to know if we heard anything,'' said Mark Goad, the general manager.
But while his fate is now known, the case is not closed.
The Monroe County medical examiner's office, which had initially listed the cause of death as pneumonia, has reopened the file.
Michael Bates, a forensic investigator with the office, said that until very recently, his office did not have information about Mr. Bargmann's death that was in a police report.
According to a police report dated March 27, 2003, an officer was dispatched at 7:56 a.m. to a bus stop in Key West after a report about a man who appeared ill. The officer noticed that the man had labored breathing, was foaming at the mouth and was disoriented. The man told paramedics, ''I overdid my medication,'' but was otherwise unable to communicate.
He died that morning at Lower Keys Medical Center. The police report quoted a doctor at the hospital saying that the dead man had a ''lethal dose of aspirin in his body.''
Mr. Bates, who is conducting further tests, said, ''We're continuing our investigation as to the cause of death. But it doesn't appear to be suspicious.''
From the beginning, Mr. Bargmann's disappearance was anything but ordinary. The police learned that he owed money to his ex-wife, as well as thousands of dollars to a friend. His Jeep Wrangler was found in Bridgeport, not far from the bus and train stations, with the keys inside, suggesting to some that his departure was voluntary.
His ex-wife, Laura Bargmann, said she still had doubts.
''I don't know why they're so adamant about no foul play,'' she said. To her, the fact that he left town hastily without certain belongings or photographs of their two children made her think it was not voluntary.
Ms. Pass said she had helped solve at least one missing persons case before, although it took years.
In that case last June, she was able to trace an unidentified woman who had been found dead in Utah in 1991 to a Texas woman who had disappeared a year earlier. The match was possible, she said, because a photograph of the Texas woman showed her to have distinctive cheeks, as did the composite sketch of the dead woman in Utah.
''I had looked at the picture and the photo for a couple years and never made the connection,'' she said. ''Then one day I realized I was looking at the same person.''
A national registry of missing persons and unidentified bodies would make searching easier, she said. As it is, she was fortunate that Florida's new medical examiner recently put all its John and Jane Does online.
Sgt. Edward Greene of the Fairfield police said he was ''not aware of any plans for a national database, but it certainly would have been helpful in this situation.''
Still, he said, Ms. Pass had one advantage over the police. ''She has a lot of time on her hands, and thank God she does.''
