IN the song ''Hackensack'' by the band Fountains of Wayne, a hardwood floor installer longs for the girl on whom he had a crush in grade school; she has since moved to California to become a movie star. He promises the girl, who is unaware of his feelings, that when she tires of her celebrity life, ''If you ever get back to Hackensack/I'll be here for you.''
With that poignant refrain, the song portrays the unfulfilled desires and dreams of suburban New Jersey. These themes have been part of the state's rock n' roll traditions since Bruce Springsteen began eulogizing the boardwalks and boarded-up storefronts of Asbury Park in the early 1970's; they are receiving their most recent replay in the music of Fountains of Wayne, one of whose founders is a Montclair native.
But these themes have national resonance, speaking to an ever growing suburban audience. This explains why Fountains of Wayne broke into the national consciousness last year through its album ''Welcome Interstate Managers'' with songs like ''Hackensack'' and ''Stacy's Mom,'' a top 40 hit last summer that received substantial airplay on MTV. It may also explain why this year, so many New Jersey artists, among them Fountains of Wayne, have been favored by nominations for Grammy Awards, to be presented tonight in Los Angeles.
Fountains of Wayne, named for a store on Route 46 that sells kitschy lawn ornaments and patio furniture, has been nominated for the best new artist award. It has also been nominated for best pop performance by a duo or group with vocals for ''Stacy's Mom,'' a tale of geeky teenager lust.
Two veteran New Jersey rockers are also up for awards: Mr. Springsteen, for best rock performance by a duo or group with vocals for his guest appearance on the late Warren Zevon's album ''The Wind,'' and the band Bon Jovi for its single ''Misunderstood,'' competing against Fountains of Wayne for best pop performance by a duo or group with vocals.
Other New Jersey artists are also contenders at the Grammys this year. Although their music is not associated with the themes of suburban angst and small-town struggles, they reflect the musical diversity of the state and its strong local music scenes -- from Asbury Park to Hoboken and New Brunswick--that inspire a constant influx of new artists.
Nominated in various jazz categories are the saxophonist and Newark native Wayne Shorter; the pianist Keith Jarrett, from western New Jersey; the percussionist and Newark resident Stefon Harris; and the pianist, composer and arranger Jim McNeely, of Montclair, has been nominated for best instrumental arrangement for an album by Renee Rosnes and the Danish Radio Big Band.
Meanwhile, Robert Randolph of Morristown has been nominated for best rock gospel album for ''Unclassified,'' a visceral mix of gospel, blues and steel guitar sounds. Howard Tate, from southern New Jersey, is in the running for best contemporary blues album for his comeback release ''Rediscovered.'' Mr. Randolph and Mr. Tate also illustrate how the state's musicians historically have embraced eclectic musical genres, creating something new in the process.
Adam Schlesinger, from Montclair, and Chris Collingwood, of Sellersville, Pa., formed Fountains of Wayne in the late 1980's. The band also includes Jody Porter, a guitarist, and Brian Young, the drummer. After two albums of catchy character portraits, they released ''Welcome Interstate Managers'' in 2003. The album's songs tell the stories of office clerks, waitresses and middle-management nobodies, using New Jersey and surrounding states as a backdrop.
Mr. Schlesinger, 36, the band's bass player, points to universal qualities in New Jersey life that have meaning in other parts of the country.
''Northern New Jersey, where I grew up, has a strange and complicated relationship with New York City, and that's an angle I like to examine,'' he said in a telephone interview. ''But we write about other places on the eastern seaboard as well. I guess the main point is that a large percentage of Americans live in suburbs or outskirts, rather than in cities, and so many people can identify with a song set in a place like that.''
Robert Santelli, director of programs for the Seattle-based rock museum, Experience Music Project, and a New Jersey-born journalist, said Mr. Springsteen helped bring New Jersey to the mainstream.
''Springsteen understood right from the start that New Jersey possessed this sense of New Jersey being a microcosm of America,'' he said. ''If you can have an intimacy with characters and settings and place in New Jersey, at the same time, there's a universality about it because it represented America in general.''
But Mr. Santelli added that Fountains of Wayne builds on the images of working-class life, popularized by Mr. Springsteen, to add a portrait of more upscale suburban life.
''There's the blue-collar, street punk, tough guy kind of image,'' he explained. ''Of course, it's only been perpetuated with 'The Sopranos' and so much more. Over time, that grows stale, and today there are new interpretations on the state of New Jersey, ones that are more relevant.''
In purely musical terms, Fountains of Wayne follows two strands of New Jersey rock, said Gary Wein, author of ''Beyond The Palace,'' a history of the Asbury Park music scene.
''One is the Springsteen, the balladeer, with an R&amp;B and saxophone-driven style,'' he said. ''The other is more Beatles pop, exemplified in the Smithereens or the Four Seasons. I see Fountains as a part of these traditions.''
Mr. Schlesinger, who writes the song for the group with Mr. Collingwood, said, ''I have always admired Springsteen as a lyricist.''
''During the period when Springsteen first rose to prominence, there were a number of great new songwriters who told stories about everyday people and created vivid character portraits in their songs and this is something we aspire to do as well,'' he added.
Ever since Sarah Vaughan and Frank Sinatra came of age in New Jersey after World War II, the state has been renowned for its loyal audiences and vibrant music scene. In the 1970's and 1980's, nightclubs like the Stone Pony in Asbury Park and Maxwell's in Hoboken gave rise to numerous bands that were both deeply provincial but willing to borrow from different styles.
Southside Johnny and the Asbury Jukes began as a bar band that capitalized on the white R&amp;B horn band in the Memphis Stax Records tradition. The Smithereens were a college rock band with an unabashed obsession with British Invasion pop; Bon Jovi took Mr. Springsteen's working-class sensibilities and merged them with tuneful heavy metal that appealed equally to teenagers and homemakers.
Many of today's artists are no less eclectic. ''Unclassified,'' by Robert Randolph and the Family Band features a hard-driving amalgam of rock, soul, funk and gospel styles united by Mr. Randolph's country steel pedal guitar, an instrument traditionally associated with the country twang of Southern bars and Nashville studios.
''Robert Randolph is someone who in the next few years will be straddling a few different categories,'' Mr. Wein said. ''A lot of people think that he's going to have a big industry push very soon. He seems to have a lot of crossover ability.''
Raised in Irvington, Mr. Randolph, 25, learned to play pedal steel guitar at age 16 by watching so-called Sacred Steel players in the House of God Church, an African-American Pentecostal denomination in Orange. After an appearance at the first Sacred Steel Convention in Florida in the spring of 2000, Mr. Randolph began performing in New York City sites like the Bowery Ballroom and the Wetlands, which led to his 2002 album ''Live at the Wetlands.'' The aptly titled ''Unclassified'' is Mr. Randolph's first studio album fronting his Family Band, which features his cousins, the bassist Danyel Morgan and the drummer Marcus Randolph.
In ''Rediscovered,'' the R&amp;B singer Howard Tate straddles the genres of blues, gospel and horn-driven Philadelphia soul. He also presents a made-for-Hollywood story. A minister's son who was born in Macon, Ga., in 1938, and grew up in Philadelphia, Mr. Tate had a promising career going into the 1960's and early 1970's. His voice and emotionally charged songs had people comparing him favorably with Sam Cooke, and his 1967 album, ''Get it While You Can,'' is considered one of the greatest soul albums of all time.
Yet fed up over unrelenting tours and not getting paid what he felt was due him, he abandoned the music business in 1975. He sold securities to support his wife and six children but after a 13-year-old daughter died in a house fire the following year, his 19-year marriage ended and he descended into a world of drugs and alcohol. By 1983 he was living on the streets of Camden, sleeping in doorways or abandoned cars.
''I turned to alcohol, drugs and cocaine,'' Mr. Tate said in a telephone interview. ''It took me down so low, I became homeless for 10 years. I was so bitter when I left the industry that I swore I would never give a glass of water to anybody in the music industry if I saw them dying of thirst.''
A 1994 religious experience led to Mr. Tate's founding and pastoring a local church and eventually to a fateful reunion with Jerry Ragovoy, who had produced much of his vintage work. Mr. Ragovoy invited him to his studio in Georgia, where Mr. Tate realized that his voice was still intact, despite the years of drug and alcohol abuse. ''Rediscovered,'' was released on the Private music label and features 10 new songs plus a new, stripped-down version of ''Get it While You Can.'' Proceeds from the album benefit a homeless shelter that Mr. Tate runs through his fellowship in Mount Holly.
Mr. Jarrett is a longtime resident of rural western New Jersey, far from the state's historic jazz epicenter of Newark. Among the most important and idiosyncratic pianists to emerge since the 1960's, he has led a celebrated trio with the bassist Gary Peacock and the drummer Jack DeJohnette over the past 20 years that uses American Songbook standards as a point of departure for daring free jazz improvisations. The trio's 2003 release ''Up For It,'' features the track ''Butch &amp; Butch,'' which has been nominated for best instrumental song.
The Grammy-nominated performances by Mr. Springsteen and Bon Jovi feature the time-honored spirit of straight-ahead guitar-based rock. On ''The Wind,'' the album by Mr. Zevon, Mr. Springsteen contributed vocals and guitars on the rollicking ''Disorder in the House.'' Bon Jovi demonstrates its enviable staying power with the infectious ''Misunderstood'' from the band's eighth album, ''Bounce.''
Both Mr. Springsteen and Jon Bon Jovi, lead singer of his band, live in Middletown and are known to make surprise appearances at nightclubs in the Shore area along with performances in major arenas and stadiums. This loyalty to their local roots has been an important quality for critics and fans alike over the years.
''New Jersey artists have a tendency to claim a piece of geography when they present themselves,'' Mr. Santelli said. ''The best rock n' roll comes out of working-class roots, basements, old garages and foul-smelling clubs. There is always that sense of rebellion and wanting to break way.''
