IMMEDIATE gratification takes too long, and who wouldn't want to look good in a bathing suit without doing situps?
David Bach, a financial adviser and radio talk show host, understands. And so he has created a savings and investment approach that he says will make you rich -- without lifting a finger.
The title of his new book, published by Broadway (Random House) and making its debut today on the New York Times business best-seller list, at the No.1 position, says it all: ''The Automatic Millionaire: A Powerful One-Step Plan to Live and Finish Rich.''
That one step is to arrange your finances so everything necessary to increasing your wealth is handled without your intervention. Have money automatically taken out of each paycheck and deposited into your corporate retirement account, he advises. Have the mortgage, plus a little extra, removed each month from your checking account. Arrange investments into mutual funds the same way, and use debit cards instead of credit cards so there is no way that debt can mount.
As a result, you waste less money -- if you never see it, you can't fritter it away -- and you give it a better chance to build over time.
THE MAIN IDEA -- None of Mr. Bach's underlying strategies are new: Save at least 10 percent of what you earn. Own, don't rent. Never take on credit card debt. Pay yourself first -- put money into your savings and investments before paying your bills. The twist here is the suggestion that you have money for your investments withdrawn automatically from your paycheck or checking account. That way, you are forced to save or invest regularly, without, as he says repeatedly, having a budget.
EXCERPT -- ''There is a very simple reason why budgets don't work in the real world. They aren't fun. And because they're not fun, they are very hard to stick to. Think about it. What budgeting boils down to is depriving yourself financially today for the sake of your future well-being. This is certainly a responsible idea, but as a strategy it goes against human nature. Even worse, it goes against the 3,000 marketing messages that bombard you every day, urging you to spend every penny you can.''
WHO IS HE? -- Mr. Bach is the author of four other books, including ''Smart Couples Finish Rich'' and ''Smart Women Finish Rich.'' As AOL's ''money coach,'' he gives advice to AOL subscribers. He is also the host of a program on Sirius satellite radio and is a former senior vice president of Morgan Stanley.
HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE TO READ? -- About two hours, maximum. The book is relatively small (8 1/2 by 6 inches) and it reaches 240 pages only because of the fairly big type, generous margins and added information, like the names and addresses of various brokerage firms.
BEST FEATURE -- The financial examples are clear. They typically take this form: If you save $X for Y years, you end up with a total of $Z.
WORST FEATURE -- The self-promotion. In addition to constant references to the seminars Mr. Bach puts on, and the two-page author biography at the end that pushes his other books, there are three full additional pages promoting other products from him.
NICE TOUCH -- The author provides links to his Web site, www.finishrich.com, where you can sign up for a free newsletter and download a free motivational audio to help put the book's lessons into effect.
DOES THE ADVICE WORK? -- There is nothing wrong with the author's math. If you follow his advice and make half a mortgage payment every two weeks, instead of one payment a month, you can indeed pay off a 30-year mortgage about 7 years early. The reason is that you are making 13 mortgage payments a year instead of 12.
His financial projections, however, are a bit high. Mr. Bach assumes that money invested in the stock market will earn 10 percent a year. While that is in line with historical rates of return for the market, it takes into account neither investment fees nor taxes.
Mr. Bach recommends that you live on 80 to 90 percent of what you make, and save or invest the rest. That isn't sexy. In fact, it sounds an awful lot like being on a budget. But if you can call used cars ''pre-owned'' and tax increases ''revenue enhancements,'' then there is nothing wrong with calling a budget by another name, especially if it persuades more people to live below their means so they can achieve their financial goals.
OFF THE SHELF
