GHOSTFIRES
By Keith Dixon.
279 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $23.95.
IN ''Ghostfires,'' Keith Dixon's fierce and intimate first novel, everybody is in pain and addicted to something that mutes or disguises that pain. These palliatives include drugs and booze, of course, but also addictions to notions of one's self: status, that image of success and the house that proves it, the stylish identity you can wear when it's known that you live at a certain address. Nobody likes to go back down the ladder from relaxed prosperity to scuffling for a buck, but some families can manage it without imploding. The Bascombs are not one of those. Well before illegal drugs enter their midst, the Bascombs are an unhappy constellation, divided by a mess of old angers and enigmatic hostilities, but the drugs give a great boost of momentum to their destruction. ''Ghostfires'' is a brilliant autopsy of sorts on a family that is not quite dead yet, with various addictions wielded as scalpels, making the cuts that reveal each character's story.
The Bascomb patriarch, Warren, is a surgeon who has lost his career as a result of his addiction to the synthetic morphine Dilaudid, an addiction he acquired after being severely burned while trying to rescue his own father from a house fire. Not expected to live, Warren was put on heavy medication. ''Though his survival wasn't exactly miraculous, it was something of a surprise. . . . Already, it was too late. Just a few weeks later, he began to sense that the daily injections were about something other than pain relief.'' Warren's addiction promptly costs him his career (while high he operates on a patient's healthy knee). He had been an esteemed figure, a doctor who had done good works in impoverished Africa, but now he has become a very different man, with narrowed concerns: ''Warren often reflected that his life was similar, in structure and schedule, to that of an incontinent. His particular urge came to him slyly but suddenly, arriving in parking lots and supermarket lines, a need that couldn't be bargained with or reasoned away. When he couldn't wait until he was home, he sought out public restrooms. . . . Safely inside the sanctum of his affliction, he sought his unique form of relief, and then crawled out once again, a recast man, a furloughed junkie, only slightly filthier for the journey.''
Warren has found a niche of the illegal drug trade, smuggling Dilaudid for Victor, a middleman from New York. Unfortunately, Warren is by now too much an addict, too unreliable to be a courier, so in order to get his drugs, he has to talk his son into making the deliveries. Ben does need money, but the amounts involved are rather small compensation for the risk, so his participation must have other motivations as well. Ben and his father despise each other, an enmity that seems to have come about as Ben's mother was in the final stages of cancer and sometimes said she wanted to end the pain. Warren considers his son's act to be murder, but Ben ''agreed to help her, because she wanted it . . . because it had already killed her -- death was just taking its time. . . . He agreed because it was killing all of them.'' Warren is outraged by his wife's suicide, three months before her cancer was expected to kill her, and from then on the men seem determined to stay close enough to destroy each other.
The Bascomb business was founded by Warren's father, William, who never forgave his son for ''killing'' his wife in childbirth; in his will he spitefully ignored Warren and left everything to his grandson. The business failed with Ben at the helm; failure sent him to the bottle and fractured the relationship with his wife, Emma. He sobers up for a while and manages to keep the nice house and eke out a living by doing repairs on vintage cars in his barn and by making the monthly drug run.
Early on we see Ben and Emma at a neighborhood party where ''he'd been steadily drinking tomato juice with Tabasco and lots of ice, a drink he sometimes called, frighteningly enough, the White-Knuckle Express.'' The couple are uncomfortable because the party is the sort of gathering they won't be invited to very much longer. Emma casts a sharp eye on the scene, musing about money: ''When I had too much of it I was bored and restless, and now that I have none at all I'm a bore and I make others restless.'' Dixon continues, ''Eventually . . . they'd be written off those invisible social lists and the telephone would fall silent.'' As Ben says, ''It's impossible . . . to be on equal footing with someone whose oil you changed last week.'' That very night Ben attempts a fraud he thinks might save them, a fraud that involves family heirlooms and beating himself with a baseball bat. The scheme backfires with miserable consequences; he misses his drug run, and true street menace is introduced into the Bascomb family.
Dixon's prose is supple but insistent, cool and measured, a style well suited to a story that, despite its pivotal fires, is a brave, chilly look into the human soul. ''Ghostfires'' might be called a suspense novel, and it is that in part, for it does have drug dealers and their attendant violence to grease the wheels of the plot, but the grand crucial themes are treated here as well: life, death, love and why there isn't more of it. Dixon, an editor at The New York Times, openly has Camus in mind, using two quotations from him as epigraphs and tipping his cap to ''The Fall'' in one long scene, and clearly aspires to a similar gravity.
The scene at the house fire in which Warren was burned so horribly may explain a great deal about the Bascombs: ''William was . . . up in the attic, shouting for help and throwing boxes and paintings and pieces of furniture out the window. . . . It was such a long drop that everything he was trying to save splintered. . . . The flames had leaped over to the barn.'' The old man ignores his burning horses in his attempt to save his furniture -- ''ignored living, feeling things for inanimate objects. You could smell the burning flesh and hair.'' The Bascombs are a family for whom the old saying ''The apple never falls far from the tree'' is a terrifying curse. Certainly they all feel conscripted into bitter dramas that have been passed on by the generation before and perhaps generations before that. The drug dealers -- direct, mean, elemental -- give them the chance to thrash it all out.
Daniel Woodrell's most recent novel is ''The Death of Sweet Mister.''
