When Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg took office, he outlined a welfare policy that was similar in many ways to Rudolph W. Giuliani's -- demanding work from recipients, keeping the number of people on the rolls down -- but one that added a pledge to put new emphasis on educating and training women so they could leave welfare for sustainable work.
Two years later, despite a weak economy, welfare rolls are down from 2002 levels, and many former recipients are staying at their new jobs longer. The decline has occurred even as the local economy has floundered in the aftermath of September 11, an accomplishment noted in passing by Mr. Bloomberg last month when he gave his State of the City speech.
But Mr. Bloomberg's satisfaction is hardly universal. His commissioner of the Human Resources Administration, Verna Eggleston, has managed to provoke dismay and anger among many in the social service and political establishment, and even among the mayor's own advisers .
And many in the city's vociferous nonprofit advocacy community who had expected a rollback of Mr. Giuliani's distinctive toughness complain that the current commissioner is as hard-line as her predecessor, Jason Turner. Worse, they say, Ms. Eggleston can be foggy on details and wavers on policy approach from meeting to meeting.
City Council members, meanwhile, say the commissioner has undermined their efforts to expand training programs and increase the availability and use of food stamps.
Contractors who provide services like housing and counseling to the city's welfare clients say that Ms. Eggleston has thrown well-established programs -- like supportive housing for AIDS patients -- into disarray.
Ms. Eggleston is unbowed. She said she has achieved Mr. Bloomberg's central ambitions despite a recession and has improved on the efforts of Mr. Giuliani's administration as a result of good management. She has started a pilot program to cut lines at the city's welfare centers, rewarded providers of social services for keeping former welfare recipients in jobs longer and included wage subsidies and a professional training component in Mr. Giuliani's controversial program to have able-bodied welfare recipients clean the city's parks.
Ms. Eggleston, whose mother received welfare when the commissioner was a child, views much of the criticism directed at her as personal attacks resulting from a misunderstanding of her passion.
''People did not want an African-American, female Republican,'' she said. ''They wanted an African-American female Democrat and a return to the old mode of thinking. I don't fit the type. We were seeing seven generations trapped in poverty. Our programs were destroying races and communities. I won't do that.''
There seems to be little doubt that some of the animus directed at Ms. Eggleston stems from differing political visions of welfare reform.
''We anticipated a less hostile team, under Bloomberg,'' said Andrew Friedman, a co-director of Make the Road by Walking, a nonprofit advocacy group. ''They are fairly systematically failing to live up to this.''
But Mr. Friedman says his problems are not just politics or tone. Ms. Eggleston, he said, can simply be poorly informed or equipped to tackle complex policies. He asserted that at one point she could not distinguish between the city's position and that of social service providers on the question of employing language translators at the city's welfare centers.
''On substantive policy issues, she is earning a reputation of not being up to the job,'' he said.
There is disgruntlement, too, among some outside agencies that work on contract for the city's welfare agency. They say Ms. Eggleston's shortcomings make delivering services a practical problem.
As an example, they cited H.R.A.'s request last September for outside contractors to develop new proposals for housing for AIDS patients as decade-old contracts were expiring. The contract guidelines indicated that the city wanted to pull back from offering the range of services -- social work, for instance -- that it had offered in the past.
But the contract, the agencies said, was poorly conceived and confusing.
''It was also confusing because it is hard to get a clear answer from her,'' said a co-director of the New York City AIDS Housing Network, Jennifer Flynn. ''She is all over the place.''
In the end, the city simply extended the old contracts temporarily.
Some say Ms. Eggleston's problems stem from her mercurial style, which former and current staffers, as well numerous social service providers, describe as often compellingly insistent but sometimes needlessly inflammatory.
In January 2003, for example, the City Council moved to pass a law that would allow welfare recipients to use required work hours for a vast variety of training and education programs. The concept of the legislation was in line with changes Ms. Eggleston had said she supported. Yet several people involved in the late stages of negotiations with the mayor's office over the bill said that Ms. Eggleston arrived at one of the final negotiating sessions declaring that she was opposed to the bill and considered it an affront to her authority. She then stormed out.
The mayor ended up vetoing the bill, largely at her insistence, creating much frustration within the City Council, which eventually passed the bill anyway. ''I respect her passion and respect her experience in this field,'' said the chairman of the council's General Welfare Committee, Bill De Blasio, ''but perhaps that same passion makes it harder for her to find consensus and to hear dissenting voices.''
Ms. Eggleston said that she is happy to work with the council but that council members have unrealistic expectations of how closely she can deal with them on a day-to-day basis. She said she could not discuss the dispute over the training bill, which is now the subject of a lawsuit.
In another example of a political left-footedness, Ms. Eggleston dismayed the mayor's closest advisers with her support for a plan to cut off welfare money to entire families, including children, if a parent failed to meet the city's work requirements. Her unexpected position, according to one government official, caused a schism in the mayor's inner circle that almost cost Ms. Eggleston her job. Ms. Eggleston denied that she had ever pushed for such a policy change but admitted that she would like ''more tools'' for managing the welfare caseload. She also said that she had the full support of City Hall.
The mayor's chief of staff, Peter J. Madonia, also denied that there had been any talk of firing Ms. Eggleston, saying she had met the mayor's bottom line -- keeping the welfare rolls down.
''She has got strong feelings about the kinds of policy things that she wants to get done, but she is by no means a renegade,'' Mr. Madonia said. ''People can do business with her, and in the end, that is what it is all about. We are not here to socialize.'' By her own account, the achievements Ms. Eggleston is proudest of concern management innovations.
Under Mr. Giuliani, for example, the city paid contractors a fee when they helped place a welfare recipient in a job, and then paid them a much smaller additional fee if the person was still on the job six months later. Ms. Eggleston reversed the size of the payments, and the result is that six-month retention rates have risen to 72 percent from 65 percent, according to figures provided by the Human Resources Administration.
''It sounds small,'' said Pat Smith, Ms. Eggleston's first deputy, ''but it is revolutionary.''
Through Ms. Smith, the commissioner also claimed credit for humanizing perhaps the most controversial part of Mr. Giuliani's welfare reforms -- the Work Experience Program in the city's parks. At the height of the program, some 7,000 able-bodied welfare recipients worked cleaning parks as a condition of receiving benefits checks.
Some complained that the jobs were exploitative since the wages were far below those paid to full-time unionized staff members, and because they did not lead to employment or even employable skills.
Ms. Eggleston has greatly reduced the program and transferred the 3,000 remaining welfare workers into the Parks Opportunity Program, which includes a weekly day of training in an employment field of their choice. And the city, partly in response to a lawsuit by the unionized workers, has also raised recipients' wages to $7.50 an hour.
The project that Ms. Eggleston says she hopes will become her biggest legacy is a new model welfare center on Third Avenue at 127th Street in East Harlem, where she is trying to tackle a longstanding problem for the welfare agency: customer service.
''We heard the people complain,'' the commissioner said, ''and we responded.''
During the Giuliani administration, the city consolidated many diverse benefit offices into giant centers. The justification was convenience, but the outcome was often the opposite -- clients spent hours on lines, often the wrong lines. Cynics saw a deliberate effort to discourage applications.
Employing and refining innovations first used at the Department of Motor Vehicles and at Medicaid offices, the Harlem center is designed to shrink those lines. Clients are greeted at a front desk, where they are assigned translators if necessary and handed pastel colored tickets that match the paint of the area where staff members who deal with the related public service can be found -- mint green for food stamps, for example, and powder blue for public assistance.
It is too early to tell how the center will work, but Alan B. Siskind, the chairman of the Human Services Council of New York City, an advisory group to the commissioner, and the chief executive of the Jewish Board of Family and Children Services, gives Ms. Eggleston high marks for trying.
''She is very sensitive to the needs of clients,'' he said. ''Frankly, I am impressed with the energy that has gone into making this agency more responsible.''
Correction:  February 12, 2004, Thursday  An article on Sunday about the policies of New York City's Human Resources Administration under Commissioner Verna Eggleston referred imprecisely to the advisory role of Alan B. Siskind, chairman of the Human Services Council of New York City. When he said he advises the agency, he meant as a member of its Citizens Advisory Committee, not in his capacity with the council. Although the council also offers advice, it is a nonprofit association of social service agencies and not primarily an advisory group to the commissioner.
