No other senator wanted the job. His closest advisers said he was making a political blunder.
But John Kerry, who had first appeared in the national spotlight 20 years before as an angry Vietnam War hero who turned against the war, agreed in 1991 to become chairman of a special Senate committee to investigate the emotional question of whether American prisoners of war were still alive in Vietnam.
After years of tedious negotiations with the Vietnamese, raw encounters with veterans' groups and families of the missing, and ugly arguments with zealots steeped in Rambo movies, Mr. Kerry managed to forge a consensus that there were no more P.O.W.'s in Vietnam.
And with his Republican colleague and fellow Vietnam veteran Senator John McCain of Arizona, Mr. Kerry then persuaded President Bill Clinton in 1995 to enter full diplomatic and economic relations with Vietnam, 20 years after the war.
By his own reckoning and that of his colleagues, this is probably Mr. Kerry's proudest accomplishment in 19 years as a senator. It is emblematic of his career in the Senate: his emphasis on foreign affairs, his interest in investigations and oversight rather than legislation, and the importance -- and political advantage -- of his background as a decorated Navy officer in Vietnam.
''It represented a long period of work, 10 years really of sustained engagement,'' Mr. Kerry said in an interview on Friday. ''It represented walking through some minefields and bringing your colleagues along with you. And that represented keeping faith with something that had a profound impact on our generation and bringing it full circle.''
Mr. Kerry, a Democrat from Massachusetts, has had a career in the Senate that is not easy to pigeonhole but is already figuring large in the presidential campaign.
Terry Holt, the spokesman for President Bush's re-election campaign, suggested a line of attack that would be used against Mr. Kerry.
''John Kerry has been an extremely liberal member of the United States Senate,'' Mr. Holt said, arguing that he had consistently voted against new military spending and weapons programs.
The Republican National Committee accuses Mr. Kerry of being ''for higher taxes and against tax cuts'' and ''extreme on abortion.'' And Grover G. Norquist, a conservative strategist, said: ''We know how to beat standard-issue national Democrats. We do it regularly. When you stand up and say here's a Massachusetts liberal whose voting record is nearly identical to Ted Kennedy's, you just lost 45 percent of the electorate -- and that's the starting point.''
Other critics assert that he lacks legislative accomplishments, for all his talk of ''leading fights'' on issues like health care. They note that much of the legislation that became law, for which he was chief sponsor, involves matters like ocean research, protecting marine mammals from commercial fishing and providing grants to small businesses owned by women -- hardly the fuel that drives presidential campaigns.
In the debate of Democratic candidates in South Carolina last week, Howard Dean asserted, ''I mean him no insult, but in 19 years in the Senate, Senator Kerry sponsored 11 bills that had anything to do with health care, and not one of them passed.''
Mr. Kerry responded to Dr. Dean that there were many ways to influence legislation, from amendments on the floor of the Senate to framing debates and filibusters. And, he argued, ''sometimes your accomplishments are not in what you get done, but in what you stop other people from doing.''
Still, he is not known as a legislator's legislator. Defenders say Mr. Kerry's background as a prosecutor and Vietnam veteran pushed him in a direction different from that of most other senators -- toward early investigations of the contras in Nicaragua, the corrupt Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega and the elections in the Philippines under Ferdinand Marcos.
''They represent a part of the lesson I learned early about governments that tell lies and governments that don't keep their promises to people, which all comes out of the experience I had of being lied to and seeing the consequences,'' he said, alluding to his time in Vietnam. ''The efforts to hold government accountable to the people we really represent is to me the centerpiece of why I'm there.''
His presidential ambitions were assumed almost from the day he arrived in Washington. But around the Senate Mr. Kerry is often described as aloof, patrician, a bit of a lone ranger.
Mr. Kerry has suffered by comparison with Senator Edward M. Kennedy, the senior senator from Massachusetts, a man of considerable bonhomie and power as the top Democrat on the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee. ''John gets this rap that he's aloof in part because he is always going to be compared to Ted Kennedy, and Ted is the most engaging politician I've ever met in my life,'' said former Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, now the president of New School University in New York.
Mr. Kerry himself said he was never bothered by the comparison, although he added: ''Is it a reality that he is a huge presence? Yes.''
Voting With Liberals
Republicans maintain Mr. Kerry is every bit as liberal as Mr. Kennedy, and in most respects, Mr. Kerry's voting record puts him solidly in the liberal camp.
He has consistently voted in favor of abortion rights, even on matters where polls showed the public to be in favor of restraints. Last year, for instance, he voted against legislation that outlawed the procedure that opponents of abortion call partial-birth abortion. ''Even on the most difficult issues, we've never had to worry about John Kerry's position,'' said Kate Michelman, president of Naral Pro-Choice America.
Similarly, he has been a strong advocate of gay rights, even when most senators were on the other side. In 1996, he was one of only 14 senators who voted against the Defense of Marriage Act, a law signed by President Clinton prohibiting federal recognition of same-sex marriage.
At the time, Mr. Kerry said he opposed gay marriages but felt that ''this debate is fundamentally ugly, and it is fundamentally political, and it is fundamentally flawed.''
Environmentalists also consider Mr. Kerry to be one of their most stalwart allies in politics. He took a leading role in blocking Republican energy legislation in 2002 and 2003 that would have allowed oil and gas exploration in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
''John Kerry has one of the best environmental records in the Senate,'' said Betsy Loyless, vice president for policy of the League of Conservation Voters.
On other issues, Mr. Kerry voted for the Clinton tax increase, raising the minimum wage, stiff gun control laws, antismoking measures and a nuclear test ban treaty. He voted against the Bush tax cuts, capital punishment, the Star Wars missile defense system and the confirmations of Robert H. Bork and Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
To appeal to gun owners, Mr. Kerry makes a point in his stump speeches of noting that he is an avid hunter, but that position has not converted the Republican-oriented National Rifle Association. ''He may be successful in selling himself as a sportsman and hunter in Beacon Hill, Boston,'' said Andrew Arulanandam, the association's spokesman, ''but he's going to have a very tough time convincing voters in Beckley, W.Va.''
On Other Side of Issues
But there are some exceptions to this liberal record. Mr. Kerry was one of the first Democrats to cosponsor the 1985 Gramm-Rudman-Hollings legislation, which was meant to lead to a balanced budget, and at various times he advocated a lower capital gains tax and the elimination of income taxes on stock dividends.
He supported President Clinton on some legislation that many liberals opposed, including the North American Free Trade Agreement and work requirements for welfare recipients. And more recently he voted for President Bush's education initiatives and the USA Patriot Act, which eliminated legal rules that might have made it more difficult to catch and prosecute terrorists. He has also spoken in favor of federal aid to religion-based charities.
In 1991, he opposed sending troops to fight in the Persian Gulf war. But he voted in 2002 to authorize fighting in Iraq, and he supported military action in Panama, Somalia, Kosovo and Afghanistan.
''I think he's a moderate Democrat -- very liberal on social policy and reasonably conservative on foreign policy and defense matters,'' said former Senator Warren B. Rudman, Republican of New Hampshire.
While Mr. Kerry's votes over 19 years -- more than 6,000 votes in all -- are sure to be scrutinized, his supporters say the real measure of his Senate career is his focus on investigations and oversight.
Early in 1985, in his first year in Congress, with the Senate controlled by Republicans, he got wind of how a Marine lieutenant colonel on the White House staff, Oliver L. North, was illegally arranging support for the rebels, called contras, who were trying to overthrow the left-wing government of Nicaragua.
Sensing that the Reagan administration was misleading the public in what he said felt to him like a potential replay of Vietnam, Mr. Kerry went to Nicaragua on a fact-finding mission. He was ridiculed by Secretary of State George P. Shultz and accused by conservative commentators of aiding communists.
But ultimately, the ad hoc investigation paid off. Suspicions about Colonel North increased. The Foreign Relations Committee began a formal inquiry. Documents found in a plane that was shot down in Nicaragua indicated involvement by the C.I.A. And in November 1986, a Middle Eastern newspaper reported that United States arms had been secretly sold to Iran with the proceeds diverted to support the contras.
By then, Democrats had won back control of the Senate in the midterm elections, and in early 1987, a special committee was formed to investigate what had become known as the Iran-contra affair.
Mr. Kerry was left off the committee. Senior Democrats like George J. Mitchell of Maine and Daniel K. Inouye of Hawaii wanted part of the first big televised inquiry since Watergate, and they exercised the prerogative of their seniority.
As a consolation, the party leaders made Mr. Kerry chairman of a panel on terrorism, narcotics and international operations. He used that post to investigate reports that Mr. Noriega in Panama was engaged in drug trafficking. That in turn led to an investigation of Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the shady worldwide banking operation that turned out to be involved in money-laundering and illicit arms deals.
A byproduct of the bank investigation was that Mr. Kerry helped expose the activities of the former Defense Secretary Clark M. Clifford, who was chairman of a Washington bank that turned out to be a shell for B.C.C.I.
Unraveling P.O.W. Issues
Those investigations were precursors to Mr. Kerry's work on prisoners of war in Vietnam.
Over the years, Mr. Kerry had become friendly with Mr. McCain, a prisoner in Vietnam for more than five years, and the two agreed that the still-open wounds of the Vietnam War needed to be healed. To do that, they first had to deal with whether the rampant rumors of P.O.W.'s still alive in Vietnam were true.
One politician who believed the rumors was Senator Robert C. Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, and he successfully sponsored legislation to create a special committee to investigate the matter. When no other Democrat stepped forward to head the panel, Mr. Kerry agreed to become chairman.
''It was a totally thankless job, and it was all-consuming for the next year and a half,'' said Frances Zwenig, who was the committee's chief of staff. ''We were dealing with desperate families and raw emotions, and the Rambo movies were very popular.''
Mr. Kerry made repeated trips to Vietnam, said Nancy H. Stetson, the senator's chief foreign policy adviser for more than a decade. He persuaded the reluctant Vietnamese to give him access to records and archives, not just in Hanoi but in the provinces. He even managed to dispel rumors that prisoners were buried beneath Ho Chi Minh's tomb.
In the end, Mr. Kerry persuaded even Mr. Smith to sign the report saying no prisoners remained.
Then, he and Mr. McCain turned their attention to persuading President Clinton to normalize relations between the countries, and in 1995, they succeeded.
''Kerry was crucial,'' said Nancy E. Soderberg, the staff member on Mr. Clinton's National Security Council who dealt with Southeast Asia.
Ms. Soderberg explained: ''Clinton wanted to put the Vietnam era behind us, but the politics were very difficult. The family and veterans' groups were very much opposed to recognition. He had not served in Vietnam and had difficult relations with the military. Kerry and McCain provided the validation for him to move on.''
Mr. Kerry's allies argue that the skills he showed in the investigations are more transferable to the executive branch than the incremental give and take of the legislative process.
Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, observed that every Democrat elected to the Senate from Massachusetts in the last 50 years has run for president and that the only one who succeeded, John F. Kennedy, had the least legislation to his name.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
