A WINTERY landscape gives a special sparkle to the peninsula that forms the northerly section of Douglaston as the sun flits over ice floes dotting the dark blue waters of Little Neck Bay.
''The light is so white and silvery, but every season is beautiful here,'' said Ann Jawin, chairwoman of the Doug Bay Manor Civic Association, which she helped to found in 1968, two years after she moved here with her husband, Edward, into a new high ranch with views across the bay. ''We feel privileged to live here.''
The other three boundaries of this northeast Queens community are the Grand Central Parkway to the south, Alley Pond Park to the west and Marathon and Little Neck Parkways to the east. It has six distinct neighborhoods: Doug Bay, Douglas Manor and Douglaston Hill on the peninsula north of Northern Boulevard; Douglaston Park, between the boulevard and the Long Island Expressway; and two areas south of the expressway, Douglaston and a small section called Winchester Estates.
All six sections share certain attractions: excellent schools, good shopping and a parklike setting, with housing that includes everything from one-bedroom co-ops to 15-room mansions on the water. In addition, there are good transportation options, with major highways and quick access to Manhattan by the Long Island Rail Road.
''Douglaston is one of the jewels of the city of New York,'' said Jerry M. Iannece, chairman of Community Board 11. ''People who want to remain in the city rather than move to Westchester or Long Island pick northeast Queens and particularly Douglaston because it is so incredibly convenient, with all the benefits of living in the country.''
The community's appeal comes at a cost. ''The prices here are astronomically high for even the most modest detached house,'' said Lynne Jaffe, an associate broker with Doug North Realty on Douglaston Parkway. ''The cheapest house I can think of that sold recently was a small Cape in Douglaston Park on a 40-foot-by-100-foot lot that needed to be totally gutted, and it sold for $530,000.''
In general, asking prices range from $550,000 for a small detached house south of the Long Island Expressway to close to $4 million for a mansion in Douglas Manor. Buyers of more modest means, however, can find one-bedroom co-ops for $120,000 at Beech Hills, a 816-unit garden apartment complex on 45 acres just south of the expressway. There are also co-op apartments in four- to six-story apartment houses close to the Douglaston train station. These sell for $170,000 for a one-bedroom to $490,000 for a three-bedroom, Mrs. Jaffe said.
Douglaston's most sought-after neighborhood is Douglas Manor, where winding, hilly streets, many private, are lined by large houses. The waterfront is a ribbon of private parkland, with a marina and four acres of playing fields, that the homeowners, as members of the Douglas Manor Association, own in common.
In 1997, the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission designated Douglas Manor as the Douglaston Historic District, ensuring that nothing could be altered externally or built there without the commission's approval. Because of restrictions, even new houses look as if they have been there a century.
In its historic district designation report, the commission said the Manor, as it is often called, is ''an important example of an early 20th-century planned suburb adapted to the site of a 19th-century estate.''
THAT estate once belonged to George Douglas who settled here in 1835, purchasing 240 acres and a Greek Revival mansion, built in 1819 by a wealthy merchant, Wyant Van Zandt, at West Drive and Manor Road. The mansion now houses the Douglaston Club, a private country club.
George Douglas's son William inherited the estate on his father's death in 1862, and the name Douglaston was born four years later, when the North Shore Railroad extended service to the area and named its new stop Douglaston, in return for William's donation of an outbuilding for use as a station house.
The Rickert-Finlay Realty Company of Manhattan, which purchased 175 acres of the holdings -- 65 acres had previously been subdivided for the adjoining neighborhood, Douglaston Hill -- formed the Douglas Manor Association in 1906 and laid out a planned community in a setting beautified by 159 varieties of trees, including exotic species like magnolias, European linden and Japanese pagoda trees, that George Douglas had delighted in planting.
Houses were built in a variety of architectural styles including Colonial Revival and Arts and Crafts, popular at the turn of the last century, and Tudor and Mediterranean, in vogue from 1915 to 1930. Deed restrictions imposed by the association and still in effect controlled the size and placement of houses on their lots. The 600 or so homeowners in the Manor pay $425 annually in dues to the association, which maintains the marina, swimming area and waterfront park.
''There's a tremendous sense of community here because these facilities bring people together,'' said Bernard Haber, the association's president.
Douglaston Hill, the area's oldest section, adjoins the Manor to the south. It was laid out with very large lots in 1853, at the very beginning of a movement in the United States to create garden suburbs, said Kevin Wolfe, an architect and the co-founder and vice president of the Douglaston/Little Neck Historical Society.
The society, which spearheaded the effort to gain city landmark status for Douglas Manor, is seeking the same for a section of Douglaston Hill where there are many gracious Queen Anne-style and Victorian houses dating to the turn of the 20th century.
One, built in 1901 and known locally as the White House, sits on a 100-foot-by-250-foot lot at 240-35 43rd Avenue in the heart of the Hill area. It was recently sold and fears are that it may be torn down to make way for a four-house subdivision. ''Should that happen, it would destroy the historic area and bring an end to that neighborhood as we know it,'' Mr. Wolfe said.
A section of the Hill was designated a historic district on the National Register in 2000, but unlike local landmarking ''that comes with no restrictions of any kind; it's just an honor,'' said Julia Schoeck, a co-president of the historical society. Last month, the Landmarks Preservation Commission turned down the society's original proposal for a Douglaston Hill Historic District but invited residents to submit alternate proposals with fewer buildings.
Another section with gracious old houses is Alameda Avenue in Douglaston Park, a street with a landscaped center mall that Mr. Wolfe of the historical society called ''another planning idea of how to make a beautiful suburb.'' Most of the rest of Douglaston Park consists of 1960's Capes, Tudors and ranches. ''Are they historic? No,'' Mr. Wolfe added. ''Are they nice? Yes.''
Less attractive are the attached one- and two-family town houses and four-story condominiums found on blocks near the Douglaston Plaza Shopping Center, some built as late as the 1980's. Still, those houses are also sought after, said Nina Kowalsky, an associate broker with Bryce Rea Associates, a real estate firm in Little Neck. The one-family town houses sell for $425,000 to $475,000, and two-families for $825,000 to $850,000, she said.
The shopping center, with Macy's and Waldbaum's as anchors, includes a six-screen movie theater. A cluster of neighborhood stores and restaurants can also be found at Douglaston Parkway and Northern Boulevard, and additional stores are on the south service road of the expressway.
The quality of the schools is a major reason families want to move to Douglaston, said Eliott Socci, president of the Douglaston Civic Association, a group that represents the entire community.
The two public elementary schools are Public School 98 at 40-20 235th Street and P.S. 221 at 57-40 Marathon Parkway; both offer kindergarten through fifth grade. Students excel on fourth grade reading and math tests, with 95.6 percent of those at P.S. 98 reading at or above grade level last year, and 100 percent at or above grade in math. At P.S. 221, 93.5 percent met the reading standards and 100 percent the math.
Most children continue on to Middle School 67 at 51-60 Marathon Parkway for sixth through the ninth grades. On eighth grade tests last year, 68.4 percent of children read at or above grade level, and 71.4 percent achieved that level in math.
A Roman Catholic school in the neighborhood is St. Anastasia School at 45-05 245th Street. It offers kindergarten through eighth grade and has an enrollment of 225 children. Annual tuition is $3,200 to $3,800. In state tests, 80 percent in both the fourth and eighth grades were reading at or above grade level; 100 percent in the fourth grade and 92 percent in the eighth grade achieved that level in math.
DOUGLASTON'S zoned high school is Benjamin N. Cardozo in Bayside, which has almost 4,000 students. The school, which in 1998 was ranked by Newsweek magazine as being among the top 100 schools in the nation, has 21 advanced placement courses among its other offerings.
Last year, 80.6 percent of students scored a passing grade on the Regents exam in English and 81.2 percent in math. Average scores on the S.A.T. reasoning tests were 488 in English and 533 in math, compared with statewide averages of 496 and 510. Of last year's graduates, more than 65 percent were attending four-year colleges and almost 10 percent, two-year colleges.
Residents say living in Douglaston means being part of a real community. ''There's a lot of pride in neighborhood here,'' said Patrick J. Holtkamp, the rector of the Zion Episcopal Church on 44th Avenue.
That sense is fostered by a wealth of community events. Theater à la Carte, for example, provides live theater at the Douglaston Community Church, and the Douglaston Community Theater players perform at the Zion Episcopal Church. The 74-year-old National Art League on Douglaston Parkway offers classes and provides a place for artists to show and sell their work. Monthly concerts are held at the Douglaston Community Church.
In many ways, Douglaston exemplifies everything that is desirable in a New York neighborhood, said Tony Avella, the city councilman who represents Douglaston. A land use plan being prepared by his office for his district will push for zoning-code changes to protect against overdevelopment, he said. ''My goal is to make sure we preserve this quality of life in these stable communities that have been the bedrock of this city,'' he added.
If You're Thinking of Living In | Douglaston, Queens  Correction:  February 22, 2004, Sunday  The Gazetteer chart on Feb. 8, about the Douglaston section of Queens, misstated prices for rush-hour commuting to Manhattan. The daily fare is $6.75, not $3.25, and the monthly rate is $146, not $94.
