SOMEONE TO RUN WITH
By David Grossman.
Translated by Vered Almog and Maya Gurantz.
343 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $24.
DAVID GROSSMAN is one of Israel's most prominent novelists, but he also fills a position of broader cultural and political import -- as a commentator upon the conflicts of his native land. Whether in a sprawling, innovative novel like his masterwork, ''See Under: Love,'' or in more contained and strictly realistic endeavors, Grossman is always a political novelist because of the very questions that his fiction addresses.
His latest novel, ''Someone to Run With,'' turns its lens not on the legacy of the Holocaust or the plight of the Palestinians but on the misfortunes of Israel's young runaways, taking as its protagonist a young middle-class singer named Tamar, who, for reasons that only become gradually apparent, willfully thrusts herself into the tumultuous, drug-ridden maelstrom of a busker's life on the Jerusalem streets. Hot on her heels is an innocent named Assaf, an awkward youth of 16 charged by his summer employer at the city hall with returning a runaway dog to its owner. This remarkable creature, named Dinka, leads Assaf on a picaresque quest for the missing Tamar, and in so doing embroils him in Tamar's personal dramas.
Political in the broad sense -- its passionate and heartfelt engagement with Israel's disenfranchised youth is based, we are told, on extensive research -- the novel is also, presumably, realistic in its portrait of the ''hostel'' to which Tamar finds herself led, a dormitory for aspiring street artists that is part youth group, part pimpery and part prison, overseen by a menacing underworld figure named Pesach Bet Ha Levi. But in many other aspects, Grossman's novel is like a fable, and it is at times difficult to reconcile these disparate elements.
The book opens with Assaf as he embarks unwittingly upon his search. And yet the reader is even more ignorant than he, since the narrative affects a divine neutrality in which the characters start off nameless, seen from afar: ''A dog runs through the streets, a boy runs after it.'' While we are swiftly given some indication of Assaf's situation, clearer factual information that would illuminate these details is withheld. When we encounter Tamar, several pages later, it is with a similar detachment: ''A month before Assaf and the dog met -- 31 days before, to be precise -- on a curving side road above one of the valleys surrounding Jerusalem, a girl stepped off a bus, a small, delicate girl.''
As readers, we are being toyed with. There is something disingenuous in an aside like ''31 days before, to be precise,'' that suggests narrative intimacy and, above all, precision, even as the narrator denies us the facts we need in order to comprehend fully the scenes that proceed to unfold. Grossman is a highly intelligent writer, and this decision to reveal information progressively, while attempting to suggest that information is not being withheld, is surely taken for a purpose.
That purpose coincides, perhaps, with his apparent wish to tell a story that is at once universal and specific, a classical fable of love brought to contemporary Israel. This is nowhere clearer than when we are following Assaf's trail, at the end of Dinka's leash, through the various compartmentalized arenas of Tamar's former life. While some stops seem less than freighted with meaning, others -- like the mysterious retreat of an aged nun named Theodora -- are heavy with fairy-tale significance.
Theodora, we learn, is the last survivor of the Greek island of Lyxos, sent to live alone in a convent in Jerusalem 50 years earlier. In all the intervening years, she has never been outside; instead, she has studied life through books and correspondence. Assaf realizes that ''her world was made entirely of words, descriptions, written characters, dry facts. His mouth opened a bit, with a wondering smile: why, this is exactly what his mother had warned him would happen if he spent all his time in front of the computer.'' Yet it is Theodora who can teach Assaf that ''no such thing as a silly story exists. . . . Every story is connected, somewhere, in the depths, to some greater meaning. Even if it is not revealed to us.''
The novel is replete with stories, from Theodora's colorful history to that of Victorious (another apparently symbolic friend of Tamar's, his face covered by a huge burn) to Sheli, Tamar's companion in the hostel, who comes to a sad end. The stories that might be central, however -- those of Assaf and Tamar -- remain oddly oblique. Assaf's problems with his childhood friend Roi and his sister's ex-boyfriend, Rhino, seem banal and insufficient, while Tamar's ultimate motivation in casting off her known life in favor of the dangerous streets is kept shadowy for much of the book. This patchiness of background revelation raises other questions -- Where are the parents of these young people? Why aren't their surrogate guardians more attentive? -- that aren't answerable in realistic terms. Grossman's tale requires that Tamar and Assaf be independent agents in order that they may fulfill their respective quests and (inevitably) find each other. Did Tristan and Isolde have Mom and Dad on hand? Did Sleeping Beauty and Prince Charming?
In time, however, the novel does not merely attempt to straddle realism and romantic archetype but throws in some baser elements for good measure. The plot, as they say, thickens -- and the brush broadens. When Tamar flees Pesach's clutches, she is pursued by his thugs, and Assaf, following Dinka, becomes their target as well. We enter a world of notes passed to strangers, clandestine trysts, a hidden cave -- the stuff of television thrillers, of adolescent fantasy. In this translation by Vered Almog and Maya Gurantz, there are some truly awkward lines, as when Pesach tells Tamar: ''This whole time, something smells fishy about you. I have a sixth sense, and I'm feeling it about you, and I'm never wrong about these things, never.''
''Someone to Run With'' is a curious novel, an uneasy hybrid. It succeeds best where it strives least -- its climax is, in the way of cliché, most satisfying indeed -- but it also provides food for thought. What provokes is not Grossman's portrayal of the doubtless miserable entrapment of teenagers on the streets of Israel's cities but his insistent manipulation of diverse and incompatible narrative strategies. Ultimately, this is a literary political novel, or a politico-literary novel, that engages us with the means and effects of its storytelling more intently than with its depiction of any actual world.
Claire Messud's most recent book is ''The Hunters: Two Short Novels.''
