There was a comeback, a giveback and ultimately a victory -- all of which took place in a five-goal outburst over a frantic 4-minute-51-second span at the end of the game. Blood even flowed, as if the drama on ice needed help.
In the last 4:15 of regulation, the Islanders overcame a two-goal deficit against the Vancouver Canucks on Tuesday night with three goals before surrendering a goal that sent the game into overtime.
But the Islanders scored on a power play 36 seconds into overtime on a slap shot by Adrian Aucoin to complete their improbable comeback, 5-4, before a crowd of 12,853 at Nassau Coliseum.
The Islanders went into the overtime with a man advantage because one of their former captains, Trevor Linden, was called for high-sticking with 57 seconds left in regulation after he struck defenseman Janne Niinimaa and opened a cut above his right eye.
Aucoin's goal made it four goals by the Islanders and one by the Canucks in less time than it takes to make popcorn.
''That was as wild as I can remember,'' Aucoin said after the Islanders rallied from a third-period deficit for the second time in two games after failing in their 19 previous attempts. ''It shows a lot of resilience and a lot of character.''
Understatement did not seem to fit on an evening in which the Islanders overcame the free-skating Canucks. The Islanders (26-20-5-2) extended their points streak to six games and their home unbeaten run to five games (4-0-1).
The Islanders began their rally when Mariusz Czerkawski's goal cut their deficit to 3-2 with 4:15 remaining. Arron Asham followed with a goal 67 seconds later, and Michael Peca appeared to score the game-winner 68 seconds later.
Czerkawski, who has been bothered by back spasms and had not scored a goal in eight games, assisted on both goals.
But Henrik Sedin tied the score 36 seconds later, with 1:32 to go, for the Canucks (30-15-7-3), who bounced back a night after a listless loss to the Rangers.
Dave Scatchard had the other goal for the Islanders. Martin Genier and Wade Brookbank, defensemen who entered the game with one career goal between them, scored to give Vancouver a 2-0 lead. Daniel Sedin had the Canucks' third goal.
Despite rapid transitions, there was physical play, too. The Islanders' Radek Martinek smashed Brad May's face into the glass and was ejected and given a 10-minute misconduct in the first period. It took a few minutes for May to pick himself off the ice.
The Canucks' Brent Sopel returned the aggression after an aborted short-handed break by the Islanders. Sopel knocked down Jason Blake by using his stick to slam Blake's face into the glass.
The Islanders rarely see a free-skating team like the Canucks in the zone-trapping Eastern Conference, where many teams grind out games while waiting for mistakes. But they enjoyed the wild final minutes.
''I don't know what it was,'' Asham said. ''Something clicked for some reason.''
HOCKEY
