THERE is no meter ticking, but the taxi motif is king in Andrew Murstein's undeniably Lucullan office at the Medallion Financial Corporation, a wall-of-windows aerie decorated by Juan Montoya and equipped with its own fleet of miniature yellow vehicles, several doubling as nosh trays: cinnamon cake, cookies and jelly beans proliferate, as do Starbucks lattes and pink Snapples. What a spread!
Who knew taxis would be the urban cash cows of the 20th century, and with a proposed 26 percent fare rise and the imminent city-sponsored sale of 900 more medallions, of the 21st as well? Apparently, the Mursteins did.
''This whole thing happening now with the taxi industry is very good for everyone involved, and no, we didn't lobby for it even though we're obviously in favor of it,'' explains Mr. Murstein, an elegantly clad desk jockey who, observing a family tradition of workaholism, labors straight through lunch and boots himself up with a 15-minute latte break at 3 each afternoon, hence that cardboard cup in his fist. ''The city is doing a great thing by selling medallions: not only will it raise money for the budget, but the riding public is going to end up with better service, bigger cars, and more cabs during rush hour,'' he says. ''I never do the subway, never take buses. I always take taxis: New York has the best taxi system in the country.'' And that fare increase? ''It's worth it!''
Easy for him to say: he even gets a free ride occasionally from drivers who purchased their cabs with loans from his firm, and just once has he raised his arm and hailed a cab only to find himself dissed by a driver behind on his payments. Medallion, he adds, has lent over a billion dollars and never had a loss; it repossesses an average of just two medallions each year out of 3,000 loans. And only, he says, as a last resort. His first job with the company, after getting his M.B.A. from N.Y.U., was cold-calling clients who owed Dad and Grandpa money. Good training for the future; Leon Murstein was not a sentimental soul, and aside from dumping $12,000 into the rehabilitation of an old Checker cab to serve as Medallion's company limousine, neither is his suave grandson.
Tired of borrowing money from the banks at 5-percent interest and lending it to clients at 7 percent or more, Andrew Murstein came up with a Robin Hood-ish scheme: ''I figured why not form our own bank and cut out the middleman.'' Last October, Medallion Bank, an industrial loan corporation chartered by the state of Utah, received F.D.I.C. approval. ''I don't mind at all cutting out the banks because I never liked the banks: they're big, bloated, and arrogant. We're trying to be the antibank.'' As for his own money, he deposits it in a couple of ''niche'' banks, Sterling and Atlantic. ''I like the Davids versus the Goliaths. I'm that kind of guy.''
EXCEPT when the subject is sports. Then he's strictly major league. ''My two business goals five years ago were to start a bank, which I've done, and to get involved in sports ownership.'' Mr. Murstein is a cocky investor in Bruce C. Ratner's plan to move the Nets to Brooklyn: ''How often does New York get to take a team away from another place?'' (Especially New Jersey.)
Medallion's board includes former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, and if Mr. Murstein wants to check out the way his Hermès tie complements his blue shirt, he has only to glance toward a wall-mounted taxi sculpture with a windshield that does practical duty as a mirror: it's a whimsical gift from another board member, Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the former senator and governor from Connecticut. He recruited both because he admires them. Their clout doesn't hurt, either.
Mr. Murstein, with his father, Alvin, has a financial stake in one out of every three taxis on the city streets: ''We either own it, finance it, or supply the advertising on the top of the car. I think driving a cab is one of the hardest jobs in the city; I mean, think about it. Drive around the city for two hours and you're pulling your hair out of your head. But it's also a job where you can be your own boss, own your own company, reap your own rewards.''
Almost makes a person feel embarrassed to have accessed this assignation courtesy of a company-authorized $2 jaunt on the E train rather than cruising uptown first class in one of the sunny vehicles that have made a fortune for Mr. Murstein, 39, his father and his grandfather, Leon, the venture capitalist who got the ball rolling when he purchased his first medallion in 1937.
That one cost $10 and Leon Murstein, a Polish immigrant, drove it himself. Sixteen hours a day. Six days a week.
Lucky thing he liked to drive and, unlike his mechanically disinclined grandson, who has never driven a taxi for hire and zips from his Upper East Side apartment to East Hampton in a Lexus sedan with the wife and two kids, lucky thing Grandfather actually knew how to change a tire.
Over 30 years, Leon Murstein built a fleet of 500; then, making use of Alvin's M.B.A. and a federal program for minority loan-seekers, he began selling off medallions and providing loans. Putting his fellow immigrants behind the wheels of their own taxis turned out to be one heck of a lucrative niche; still is. Just ask the grandson.
''The most recent medallion went for $300,000,'' he says. And soon there will be 900 more on the market? ''If you do the math, it's pretty positive.''
PUBLIC LIVES
