The Devils still have 30 regular-season games to play, then more after that. So a Tuesday night game in early February, even one against a conference rival, may not mean much by this spring.
Or maybe it will. The Devils are jockeying for playoff position with the Ottawa Senators, and Sergei Brylin won a jousting match for a loose puck that led to a late goal by Jeff Friesen and a 2-1 victory for the Devils.
''We don't need guys leading the league in scoring, we need guys who can step up,'' Friesen said.
The Devils (28-13-10-1) hurdled over the Senators (28-15-7-3) into fourth place in the Eastern Conference with the help of Friesen's 12th goal of the season, scored with 6 minutes 13 seconds to play.
Brylin did the hard part by outworking Senators defenseman Wade Redden to the left of Senators goaltender Patrick Lalime. Brylin flipped the puck to Devils right wing Jamie Langenbrunner, who passed it to Friesen in front of the net.
''I had a pretty good idea that's where he was going to go,'' Langenbrunner said of Friesen.
Friesen then nudged the puck under Lalime's pad.
The Devils have won five of their last six games and are just a point behind the Philadelphia Flyers, the Atlantic Division leaders, who have played two more games.
''It's important we start winning these games in hand,'' Langenbrunner said. ''I guess our motto now is to keep pace.''
It was Langenbrunner's first point since he returned to the lineup last Thursday against Detroit. Langenbrunner had missed 28 games after arthroscopic knee surgery, and he has formed a quick bond with Friesen and Brylin on a new line.
''It makes it easy to play alongside of him,'' Langenbrunner said of Brylin, ''because you always know what you're going to get from him.''
Ottawa took the lead on a goal by Radek Bonk 14:11 into the second period. Senators right wing Josh Langfeld cruised around Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer into the Devils' zone, then flipped a pass to Redden.
Redden took a shot and Bonk, jostling for position with Devils defenseman Colin White in front of the net, tipped it over the left shoulder of Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur (23 saves).
But the Devils tied the score after a mad dash by two of their fastest players. Scott Gomez avoided an offsides call, caught up to the puck and tried to shovel it past Lalime (24 saves). Gomez's shot went wide, but he tracked down the puck.
Gomez flipped it to Patrik Elias, who was alone in front of Lalime, and he waited until Lalime lunged. Elias made the score 1-1 at 19:07, with his 20th goal of the season. Elias has five goals in his last six games.
''Players who have instincts like that, you have to let them go with their instincts,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said.
Before the game, the National Hockey League announced that Devils defenseman Scott Stevens, who missed his 13th straight game Tuesday because of what he said could be postconcussion syndrome, would not play in the All-Star Game on Sunday.
Stevens, 39, was replaced by Devils defenseman Brian Rafalski on the Eastern Conference roster. Rafalski, 30, will be playing in his first All-Star Game. He missed the 2002 game in Los Angeles because of a right knee injury.
Niedermayer, who has served as the Devils' captain in Stevens's absence, will be the Eastern Conference captain in Sunday's game, which will be in St. Paul.
Ottawa was without defenseman Zdeno Chara and centers Mike Fisher and Jason Spezza, among others, because of injuries, but that did not diminish the victory for the Devils. They won the regular-season series with the Senators, three games to one, and they are moving up.
''We're just trying to get every point we can,'' Niedermayer said.
HOCKEY
