Health insurance companies, which receive a large increase in federal payments under the new Medicare law, said Tuesday that they would use the extra money to increase benefits and reduce premiums and co-payments for the elderly.
In addition, some health plans said they would return to markets they left in the past few years, as Medicare payments fell short of their rising costs.
''Congressional action is getting results,'' said Karen M. Ignagni, president of the American Association of Health Plans, which merged recently with the Health Insurance Association of America. ''Millions of beneficiaries will receive better benefits, lower premiums and expanded choices in 2004 as a result of the Medicare legislation.''
The changes suggest that the new law may halt or reverse trends of the past five years. From 1999 to 2003, health plans dropped more than 2.4 million Medicare beneficiaries. Many plans reduced benefits and increased premiums.
Republicans want to increase enrollment in private health plans, which they see as more efficient than the traditional Medicare program. Many Democrats opposed the higher payments. They said that Republicans were creating a ''slush fund'' and offering ''bribes'' to lure insurers into the Medicare market.
The law, which President Bush signed Dec. 8, adds prescription drug benefits to traditional Medicare in 2006. But it will immediately increase Medicare payments to health maintenance organizations and other private health plans.
Friday was the deadline for health plans to submit details of changes in premiums and benefits to the government. If the changes are approved by Medicare officials, as expected, they will take effect on March 1.
Aetna said it was lowering premiums or enhancing benefits, including drug coverage, for many Medicare recipients in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and California.
In New York, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield said it would eliminate the $95 monthly premium it charged to people in its Medicare H.M.O. in Westchester and Rockland Counties. Empire also said it would reduce its $140 monthly premium to $22 in Nassau County and $62 in Suffolk County.
Representative Sue W. Kelly, Republican of New York, said Empire's actions showed that the law was working as Congress intended, to make private plans ''more affordable and accessible.''
In Massachusetts, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care said it was reducing premiums for Medicare beneficiaries and increasing payments to doctors and hospitals, to keep them in its network of providers.
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Massachusetts and the Tufts Health Plan, based in Waltham, Mass., said they too were reducing premiums for Medicare beneficiaries.
Health Net, one of the nation's largest managed-care companies, said it would lower co-payments and reduce or eliminate premiums for Medicare beneficiaries. In addition, it expects to expand its service area later this year. Health Net provides coverage for 171,000 Medicare beneficiaries in Arizona, California, Connecticut, New York and Oregon.
The administration said last month that Medicare payments to H.M.O.'s would be increased an average of 10.6 percent this year, after several years in which annual increases were typically 2 percent.
''This isn't just nickels and dimes, this is a quantum leap in the amount of money H.M.O.'s will get for serving seniors,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer, a New York Democrat who championed legislation increasing Medicare payments to health maintenance organizations.
Oxford Health Plans said that thousands of Medicare recipients in New York City would see increased drug benefits this year. The annual limit on brand-name drug coverage under two of its plans, now $250 or $500, will rise to $1,200.
Independent Health, one of the largest health plans in western New York, said it was cutting the premium for its most popular Medicare plan by half, to $21 a month from $42.
Pacificare Health Systems of Cypress, Calif., says its Medicare enrollment declined to 686,000 this year, from 1.1 million in 2001. But Tyler Mason, a spokesman for Pacificare, said the company expected to see enrollment rise as it offered additional benefits.
In Dallas, Mr. Mason said, Pacificare is eliminating a $25 monthly premium and reducing the co-payment for a doctor's office visit to $5, from $15.
Representative Pete Stark of California, the senior Democrat on the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, said beneficiaries should be cautious in joining private plans. If Medicare costs rose too much, Mr. Stark said, Congress could cut payments to private plans. Also, he said, ''if the plans do not make a sufficient profit, they may reduce benefits or withdraw from Medicare.''
