He was the witness the crowd had been waiting for and he did not disappoint.
When Douglas Faneuil finally took the stand late yesterday afternoon in the Martha Stewart trial, he injected a note of high drama into proceedings that until that point had been about as entertaining as a class on accounting (or crocheting).
Looking rather like a young Matthew Broderick, the 28-year-old Mr. Faneuil started his testimony slowly and softly, explaining in response to questions from a prosecutor, Karen Patton Seymour, that he had worked as an assistant to Peter E. Bacanovic, Ms. Stewart's former stockbroker and co-defendant.
After he confessed quietly that he had done something illegal -- ''I told one client what another client was doing in his account and lied about it'' -- the judge told him to speak into the microphone.
But as he testified, he gained confidence and stopped beginning every sentence with ''Um.''
Mr. Faneuil, wearing a gray suit, light shirt and patterned tie, revealed some interesting details (interesting, at least, to mavens who have tracked this case obsessively). Who knew that Mr. Bacanovic's private e-mail address was Bigchow@aol.com?
He drew chuckles from the audience when he described why he had not always followed Merrill Lynch procedure when he answered the phone. He said he was supposed to say, ''Good afternoon or good morning, Merrill Lynch, Peter Bacanovic's office. This is Doug. How may I help you?''
Why didn't he always do this? He sighed. ''Well, it was a mouthful, clients would often interrupt me, and it was uncomfortable.''
Reporters and trial-watchers had been waiting eagerly for Mr. Faneuil's appearance, which had been scheduled for last week. So far, much of the testimony has been from executives of Merrill Lynch, who have identified documents and explained terms like ''limit orders.''
Indeed, until Mr. Faneuil appeared, the most entertaining moment yesterday occurred when a prosecutor, Michael Schachter, was obviously surprised by the answer a witness gave concerning Mr. Bacanovic's generosity to his assistants.
The judge, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum, gave him a kind if schoolmarmish piece of advice: ''It is always a good idea to know the answer to the question you are going to ask.''
At least one spectator who said she was attending the trial for its entertainment value dozed off, then left. Some jurors looked like they wanted to follow suit.
But then, at about 3:25, Mr. Faneuil took the stand.
The most exciting part of his testimony, which will continue today, concerned the early events of Dec. 27, 2001, the day when Ms. Stewart sold her shares in ImClone Systems, the company run then by her friend, Samuel D. Waksal. Mr. Waksal later pleaded guilty to crimes including securities fraud and is now serving seven years in prison.
Mr. Faneuil said that Mr. Waksal's daughter Aliza had ordered him to sell all of her shares at whatever price she could get. He recounted how Mr. Waksal's accountant bullied him to expedite the sale of Mr. Waksal's own shares, telling Mr. Faneuil that ''I had to act like he was my No.1 client.''
And he asked the judge if he could ''beep'' a curse word used by another Waksal daughter, Elana Waksal Posner, when he told her that ImClone's stock price was falling.
The judge said he could.
Then he described Mr. Bacanovic's call to Ms. Stewart's office, though he was vague about the details because ''I didn't want to feel like I was eavesdropping.''
Soon after, Mr. Faneuil said, Mr. Bacanovic told him to tell Ms. Stewart about the Waksal family sales efforts. Mr. Bacanovic himself, Mr. Faneuil said, was going to be incommunicado on his boat.
And on that exciting note, the court adjourned for the day.
Correction:  February 5, 2004, Thursday  An article in Business Day yesterday about the trial of Martha Stewart and the testimony of Douglas Faneuil, a former stockbroker's assistant, misspelled the given name of a member of the Waksal family who sought to sell shares of ImClone Systems the same day that Mr. Faneuil said he was ordered to tell Ms. Stewart about the family's plans. She is Elana Waksal Posner, not Ilana.
