He had no party, victory or otherwise, on his schedule. He did no photo-ops at polling places. He did not step foot in a state where voting was taking place. He made no concession speech.
He made only the faintest of nods to the seven states voting on Tuesday. ''Well, the votes are starting to come in and we're going to have a tough night tonight,'' Howard Dean told supporters at a rally here at the Pantages Theater on a night when he failed to win a single state, managing no better than a third-place showing in the most important contests.
''Here's why we're going to keep going and going and going and going and going, just like the Energizer Bunny,'' Dr. Dean said. ''We're going to pick up some delegates tonight, and this is all about who gets the most delegates in Boston in July, and it's going to be us.''
By all but ignoring Tuesday's primaries and caucuses he could say little about his now 0-9 record in the Democratic presidential nominating contest, and field few questions about his failure to make the 15 percent threshold required to earn delegates in most places.
Trying to look ahead, Dr. Dean said Tuesday morning that the caucuses here on Saturday would be ''the turning point -- if we win -- of this campaign.''
So he reminded audiences at every turn to go to the polls, and to take friends. ''Bring Ten People!'' read the little slips of paper on each seat at a town hall session in Spokane.
''I need your help,'' he told the hundreds gathered in a hospital auditorium. ''If you want change in America, at 10 o'clock on Saturday, you can have it.''
Speaking to reporters at Pike Place Market in Seattle after indulging in the traditional candidate's catch of a slippery king salmon (he dropped the first, got the second), Dr. Dean also looked forward to March 2, when 10 states -- and 1,151 delegates -- are at stake in what is known as Super Tuesday.
''I don't think there will be any significance to these votes, other than delegates,'' he said. ''Until we hit Super Tuesday. That's when the real votes come.''
Asked whether Dr. Dean's supporters in Congress or labor were pressuring him to abandon his campaign, Roy Neel, Dr. Dean's new campaign chief, said in a telephone interview that they were not.
Mr. Neel said he and Dr. Dean would meet with labor leaders this week in Michigan to discuss their future involvement in the campaign.
''We accept the low expectations that everybody's dealt to us for tonight,'' he said.
Like a lagging runner whose only hope is to move the finish line, Dr. Dean keeps changing his mind about when he must post a victory to remain viable.
After New Hampshire, he vowed to make a good showing in this weekend's contests here, in Michigan and in Maine. Then he looked to the Feb. 17 primary in Wisconsin, where he plans to run his first television advertisements since New Hampshire. On Tuesday, he looked beyond even March 2, to Florida's primary on March 9, saying, ''I don't plan to disenfranchise Florida a second time.''
''If you don't run, you can't win,'' Dr. Dean told reporters, noting that at that moment he had just one fewer delegate than Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, but not mentioning that most are elected officials and others known as superdelegates, who are free to change candidates.
On Monday, Dr. Dean said he still believed he could win New Mexico. But early returns showed him trailing. On Monday, he said he was confident of getting 15 percent of the vote in South Carolina; he finished in fifth place with 5 percent.
No matter.
''We're going to go on, to Michigan, we're here in Washington, to Maine, Wisconsin, Virginia and so forth and so on,'' Dr. Dean said of the states voting in the next two weeks.
And if he loses Wisconsin?
''Then we'll go on to Utah, Idaho, Hawaii and ultimately Super Tuesday,'' he said. ''It's all about delegates.''
Mr. Neel said the campaign planned a ''major buy'' on Wisconsin television but would not say when the new advertisements, being made with help from supporters in Hollywood and New York, would begin running. He said the campaign now had 125 people on its payroll, not including the fast-shifting troops of field organizers, and was not in debt.
''It's been an unconventional campaign from the beginning, and it's going to be that way from here on out,'' he said.
As Dr. Dean headed into the Westin hotel in downtown Seattle on Tuesday night a few supporters were waiting and asked him to autograph copies of his campaign book. He declined and walked by.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
