The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled Tuesday that prosecutors who planned to seek the death penalty must first present evidence to support a death sentence to a grand jury as part of the indictment process.
Until now, a prosecutor could simply obtain an indictment for murder, making no mention of the death penalty to grand jurors, and decide later to argue for the death penalty on the basis of aggravating circumstances. The court on Tuesday clearly increased the state's burden in capital cases, as it has done steadily for a decade.
New Jersey reinstated the death penalty in 1982 but has yet to execute an inmate.
The decision, in which the court overturned the conviction of a death-row inmate, raised the prospect of grand jurors who opposed the death penalty refusing to indict. ''I can see a grand juror saying, 'If I vote for this I'm authorizing a death penalty case,''' said David A. Ruhnke, a lawyer who has handled capital cases.
The New Jersey attorney general, Peter C. Harvey, said that ''prosecutors are going to have to make decisions about seeking the death penalty much sooner in the process.'' Mr. Harvey said his office had yet to sort out other implications of the ruling.
While the prosecution must now seek a new indictment against the death row inmate, Steven R. Fortin, whose murder conviction was overturned by the court on other grounds, the court said its new rule would apply only to future prosecutions -- and not, therefore, to the 13 other men on death row.
Many lawyers said prosecutors might try to exclude people who oppose the death penalty from grand juries. Robert D. Bernardi, the Burlington County prosecutor and president of the County Prosecutors Association of New Jersey, agreed that many would, since any grand jury might be called upon to hear a murder case.
The Supreme Court ruling applies only to cases that have not yet reached the penalty phase. The court said that the state could obtain a murder indictment and return to the grand jury later for a supplemental indictment. But Dale Jones, the deputy public defender who supervises capital cases, said that the state should not be permitted to obtain such an additional indictment after a jury is sworn.
Mr. Jones said five death penalty cases are now being tried in New Jersey, including two in which juries have not been selected, two in which testimony was under way and one in which the death penalty phase began Monday. Mr. Jones said it was not clear how the ruling would affect the defendant now in death penalty proceedings, Brian Wakefield, in Atlantic City.
Mr. Bernardi said the court had provided little guidance to the prosecutors now in trial. ''What happens to that case now?'' he said. ''You start all over again? It's not fair to prosecutors or to the witnesses or victims in cases that began when this was good law.''
In the penalty phase, the jury weighs certain aggravating and mitigating factors surrounding the crime. To impose a death sentence, the jury must decide beyond a reasonable doubt that the aggravating factors outweigh the mitigating ones.
Jacqueline E. Turner, the assistant public defender who represented Mr. Fortin, said he would be moved from death row to await retrial, beginning with a new grand jury hearing. The justices found flaws in several stages of the prosecution of Mr. Fortin, convicted of the 1994 murder of a 25-year-old woman who was walking in Woodbridge.
Mr. Harvey said the 4-to-2 decision brought New Jersey in line with the federal courts' treatment of death penalty cases. Most other states do not require grand jury screening in criminal cases, including murder cases. But the decision Tuesday cited the New Jersey Constitution's guarantee of a right to indictment by grand jury.
The court had ruled in 1993 that that right did not require an indictment for aggravating factors when the state sought an indictment, since those factors were not elements of the crime. But in 2002 the United States Supreme Court, in a decision that struck down Arizona's death penalty law, said that aggravating factors were ''the functional equivalent'' of elements of a crime.
In view of that ruling, the New Jersey court said, it had to overturn its own 1993 decision.
The court's opinion Tuesday was written by Justice Barry T. Albin, joined by Chief Justice Deborah T. Poritz and Justices Virginia Long and James R. Zazzali. Justices Peter G. Verniero and Jaynee LaVecchia concurred in part and dissented in part. Justice John E. Wallace Jr., the court's newest member, did not participate in the decision.
