Until Tuesday, Senator John Kerry was the man with all the momentum, the only winner of a caucus or primary yet and, as such, the main dish the news media were serving up to voters, piping hot.
''What Kind of President Would John Kerry Be?'' Time magazine asked on its cover Sunday. ''Kerry Leading Bush in New Poll'' was the main headline on USA Today's front page on Tuesday, though Senator John Edwards was also ahead of the president in that poll.
All this indignity, which had not gone unnoticed at Mr. Edwards's campaign headquarters, was dealt a blow on Tuesday night: the political pundits on television news plugged the senator's strong showing here and in Oklahoma into their instant-analysis machinery to reframe the Democratic presidential race for the second time in two weeks.
Mr. Edwards's performance in South Carolina had been expected, but his surprisingly strong results in Oklahoma prompted commentators' discussion about what sort of momentum the night would give him. It was those very commentators, of course, who would do much of the initial giving.
Opinions differed, but most agreed on at least one thing: Though Mr. Kerry might have won several states on Tuesday, and more delegates, he must now share a greater portion of the national media stage with someone else.
''It's Edwards who has the momentum in terms of setting the tone of the debate,'' the Newsweek columnist Howard Fineman said on the MSNBC television program ''Hardball'' after Mr. Edwards's South Carolina victory speech.
And Peter Jennings of ABC News reported that while Mr. Kerry had put in the strongest showing, ''John Edwards of North Carolina has a reason to say he can go forward and try to make this a two-man scrabble.''
Mr. Edwards seemed to have benefited from some well-managed expectations. In the days leading up to Tuesday, he and aides played up the Kerry campaign in trying to persuade reporters to portray a victory in South Carolina as more than just that of a native son who could be expected to win it anyway. Like other candidates, he feared that Mr. Kerry's expected sweep of most of the states with caucuses or primaries on Tuesday would add to a growing sense that a Kerry nomination was inevitable.
Mindful of that very possibility, political reporters and television commentators had been debating among themselves how much momentum the media could bestow on Mr. Kerry after those expected triumphs, given that there were still so many primaries ahead.
''To the extent that the media elevates John Kerry, that creates the appearance of momentum that may or may not be there,'' the CNN political analyst Jeff Greenfield told an interviewer Tuesday afternoon. ''In the meantime we need to refresh and reload, because there will be another moment in this contest for another candidate to challenge John Kerry. And the question is, When will that be, and which candidate will that be?''
By midafternoon, when exit polls began to show his strength in Oklahoma, the chances grew that it would be Mr. Edwards. Even when Gen. Wesley K. Clark later claimed victory there in a very tight race with Mr. Edwards, many pundits were identifying the senator as the one with the momentum to pose a challenge to the Kerry campaign. (Those who did change their tune to discuss more of a three-way race did so only after 11 o'clock, Eastern time, when many viewers had heard for hours about Mr. Edwards's newfound strength and gone to bed.)
Speaking on MSNBC shortly before 12:30 a.m. Wednesday, the MSNBC political analyst Lawrence O'Donnell said that aside from Mr. Kerry, ''Edwards gets the longest bounce out of this,'' explaining, ''Clark did not win decisively in his neighborhood.''
All the same, not everybody agreed about how big that bounce would be. Though acknowledging that Mr. Edwards might have exceeded some of the news media's expectations, Fred Barnes, executive editor of The Weekly Standard, said on the Fox News Channel that even if Mr. Edwards were to win Oklahoma as well as South Carolina, ''he's somewhere between being an alternative candidate and a nuisance.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MEDIA
