While ricin is one of the deadliest known poisons, and can be made from common castor beans, it has been used only rarely as a murder or terror weapon.
It is normally just a white protein powder, and its plain appearance has led to false alarms in detecting it.
A speck of pure ricin the size of a grain of salt is enough to kill if it is injected or swallowed, said Dr. Michael P. Allswede, a toxicologist at the Center for Biosecurity at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. But about 10 times that much would be needed if it is inhaled, so sending it through the mail is not as deadly as mailing anthrax, for example.
Even high-quality homemade ricin, if that is what was found in a Senate mailroom on Monday, is only about one-third pure, so a lethal dose would mean inhaling or swallowing at least three times as much as a pure dose.
None of the dozens of Capitol police and Senate staff members who were decontaminated by showering and throwing away their clothes yesterday showed signs of poisoning.
The toxin in castor beans is in the pulp left after the oil is squeezed out. The oil has long been used as a laxative and in paints and lubricants. The beans grow wild in the United States and are farmed in many countries.
There is no antidote for ricin poisoning. Doctors can offer only secondary support like fluids, oxygen and blood pressure drugs.
Ricin (pronounced RICE-in) can cause severe swelling and fluid in the lungs or bleeding in the stomach and intestines, and it destroys the liver and kidneys. A survivor of ricin poisoning would probably have permanent organ damage.
It is not a good battlefield weapon because, unlike hardy anthrax spores, its long, linked proteins break apart in dry, sunny conditions. Unlike nerve gases, it is not easily absorbed through the skin.
''It's best used as an assassination weapon or a food contaminant,'' Dr. Allswede said. ''It needs to be targeted at an individual.''
Last April, French officials were embarrassed when sophisticated tests revealed that a small bottle of powder found in a locker at the Gare de Lyon actually contained ground wheat germ and barley.
Initial tests in March identified it as ricin, which has similar proteins, and officials had boasted that they had probably thwarted a terrorist attack.
It was found during random locker searches when Paris was on a state of high alert because of the Iraq war. Three months earlier, a small amount of ricin had been found in a London apartment used by six North Africans who were arrested because of information gleaned by French police after the arrests of terror suspects in the Paris suburbs.
The most famous ricin murder was that of the Bulgarian dissident, Georgi I. Markov, who was killed in 1978 at a London bus stop by the Bulgarian secret service, apparently to silence his broadcasts on the British Broadcasting Corporation. A platinum pellet injected into Mr. Markov's leg with a spring-loaded umbrella contained a dose of ricin that killed him after three days of intense fever and vomiting.
In the 1990's, American white supremacist groups tried to kill police officers and tax officials by coating doorknobs and steering wheels with homemade ricin, hoping it would be ingested.
The poison has also been used in extortion attempts. Last October, an envelope containing ricin inside a sealed metal container was left at an airport postal building near Greenville, S.C. Accompanying it was a typed letter to the Department of Transportation that was signed ''Fallen Angel.'' The writer claimed to be the owner of a truck fleet and demanded that a change in federal regulations to give drivers 10 hours of sleep between shifts instead of 8 be canceled. On Jan. 8, the Federal Bureau of Investigation offered a $100,000 reward for the arrest of the author.
It is still very easy to find crude amateur recipes for turning castor beans into ricin. They have been printed in books on unconventional weapons like ''Silent Death'' and ''The Poisoner's Handbook,'' and intelligence agencies have said that translations of those recipes have been found in Al Qaeda hideouts.
A five-minute Internet search yesterday produced a kitchen recipe using lye and acetone, which did contain a warning that making it at home could be fatal.
As recently as last year, a 1962 Army patent for making weapons-grade ricin was available on a public computer at the United States Patent Office. That Web page has been closed, but the military's recipe is still available elsewhere on the Internet.
RICIN ON CAPITOL HILL: THE POISON
