LeBron James and Carmelo Anthony will finally have to wait for something.
James and Anthony played a combined one year of college basketball, were selected Nos. 1 and 3 in the N.B.A. draft and occupied much of the league's attention through the first half of the season. But when the reserves for the All-Star Game were announced yesterday, James and Anthony found themselves in an unfamiliar position. They were the kids who weren't picked.
''I was like, 'Oh, man, I should have been on there,' '' Anthony said. ''But it's my first year and I still have a long way ahead of me.'' He added: ''Even though it's just the All-Star Game, it's much deeper than that. We'll take it as motivation. I probably deserved to make it, but things happen for a reason.''
The N.B.A. generally rewards youth and potential over other things, but experience seems to count most in the All-Star selection process. The Nets' Kenyon Martin, who was angered when he was not selected last season, persisted this season and is headed to his first All-Star Game, on Feb. 15 at Staples Center in Los Angeles. So are Indiana's Ron Artest, Milwaukee's Michael Redd, New Orleans's Jamaal Magloire, Minnesota's Sam Cassell and Utah's Andrei Kirilenko. Those players, as different from one another as they may be, share one essential quality: they are not rookies.
''This is a great thing,'' Martin said yesterday. ''It's exciting; something we were waiting for finally happened. It's good to have on your résumé.''
The fans pick the starters, and they went with the veterans Allen Iverson (Philadelphia) and Tracy McGrady (Orlando) as the Eastern Conference guards, over James, who is averaging 20.8 points for Cleveland. They also chose Tim Duncan (San Antonio) and Kevin Garnett (Minnesota) as the Western Conference starting forwards, over Anthony, who is averaging 19 points for Denver.
The two rookies had expected to fill out the roster, but the league's coaches vote for the reserves and they apparently decided that James and Anthony needed more time. After all, even Kobe Bryant was not an All-Star as a rookie. Yao Ming was last season, but he was voted in as a starter. Michael Jordan also went to the All-Star Game as a rookie, and this may be the ultimate sign of how far James has to go to validate comparisons to Jordan.
Before the announcement was made, James told The Associated Press: ''Being on the All-Star team, it wouldn't be anything new to me. I've been on All-Star teams my whole life. I'd be very excited about it, but if it doesn't happen, it's not the end of the world.''
He and Anthony will participate in the Rookie Challenge on the Friday of All-Star Weekend, then watch their elders play on Sunday. Jason Kidd (Nets) is back for his 7th All-Star appearance, Shaquille O'Neal (Lakers) for his 11th and Vince Carter (Toronto) for his 5th. The coaches also selected hard workers over high fliers, picking Sacramento's Brad Miller, Seattle's Ray Allen and Dallas's Dirk Nowitzki as reserves.
For the first time in 10 years, the Nets have more than one representative. Indiana also has two (Artest and the starter Jermaine O'Neal, as does Sacramento (Miller and Peja Stojakovic). Of course, the Lakers are sending their usual couple, Bryant and O'Neal, who should get the loudest cheers at Staples Center.
For the third time since 2001, the Knicks do not have a representative. New Orleans point guard Baron Davis is nursing a sprained left ankle, and if a replacement is needed, Stephon Marbury is a candidate. Marbury, who was traded to the Knicks from Phoenix last month, would have had a hard time in the Western Conference beating out Houston's Steve Francis, the starting point guard.
Because the West is so strong, Anthony said he had doubts about making the team, but he could not have imagined that James, his close friend, would also be shut out.
''It's disappointing that we're not going to have anyone there,'' Cavaliers General Manager Jim Paxson told The A.P. ''For the players who are going, all of them with the exception of Paul Pierce are on teams with winning records.''
James and Anthony have had their run of the league since they entered it. They are among the most marketable players in the N.B.A. The television ratings for the All-Star Game may suffer without them.
But they have to get in line behind some of their more experienced but lower-profile peers.
''You have to understand that there are steps to take,'' said Nets forward Richard Jefferson, a third-year player who warranted All-Star consideration. ''Luckily, I learned from Kenyon's situation. You start to get some recognition, you're right there on the cusp. You've got to have a year when you're pretty close before you make that jump.''
PRO BASKETBALL
