After months of acrimony, the largest shareholders of Yukos and Sibneft, Russia's No.1 and No.3 oil producers, signed a protocol to reverse the $13 billion merger of the two companies.
The marriage would have created Russia's largest oil producer and the world's fourth-largest oil company, but both sides agreed to a rapid unwinding after Yukos dropped its demands that Sibneft pay compensation for killing the deal.
Late Monday, representatives of the largest shareholders of Yukos and Sibneft signed a protocol ''on the execution of a de-merger transaction for the two companies,'' according to a statement by Millhouse Capital, which is also the majority owner of Sibneft, the smaller of the two oil concerns.
The actual transfer of money and shares has yet to be worked out. Under a likely ''mirror deal'' reversing the original merger, Yukos would transfer the 92 percent of Sibneft it received from Millhouse to the original owners, and Millhouse will return $3 billion in cash and a 26 percent stake in the combined company.
Sibneft called off the merger in November after the arrest of Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, Yukos' former chief executive, in late October.
Significantly, the dissolution agreement was signed not by the directors or management teams of the two companies, but by agents of the two oligarchs who founded the oil companies.
The core shareholder in Yukos is Mr. Khodorkovsky, Russia's richest man, who derived his estimated $8 billion fortune from his ownership in the company. Mr. Khodorkovsky stepped down as chief executive of Yukos after his arrest. Prosecutors accused him of tax evasion, fraud and embezzlement in a separate part of his financial empire, and he has been in jail awaiting trial ever since.
The core shareholder in Sibneft is the Russian industry magnate Roman A. Abramovich, who owns his stake through Millhouse Capital, the holding company for his businesses.
Anton V. Drel, a lawyer for Mr. Khodorkovsky, signed on behalf of Group Menatep, the successor holding company to Mr. Khodorkovsky's failed Menatep Bank. Mr. Drel said in a telephone interview on Tuesday night that he acted on instructions from Mr. Khodorkovsky, who is also the largest shareholder in Group Menatep, which controls Yukos. ''I confirmed that I signed the protocol for Yukos' core shareholders,'' Mr. Drel said. ''As for my client, he knows about it.''
David Davidovich, the managing director of Millhouse Capital in Moscow, signed on behalf of Sibneft.
The deputy chairman of the Yukos management board, Yuri Beilin, confirmed an agreement had been reached. ''Two groups of shareholders, by signing a protocol, have all the necessary rights to adopt any decision which does not run counter to the law and company charter,'' he said in a statement to the Interfax news agency. ''Yukos, acting in the interests of all shareholders, will be guided by accepted rules of corporate governance and their corresponding corporate procedures.''
With the protocol, Mr. Abramovich, who owns the Chelsea soccer club in Britain, could regain control of his oil company and the freedom to sell it to another buyer. Sibneft is considered one of the fastest-growing oil companies and Mr. Abramovich was reportedly selling some of his Russian assets last year amid fears that the government was looking to reassert control over properties it sold for pennies on the dollar during Russia's controversial privatization auctions in the 1990's.
Western oil majors like Exxon Mobil and ChevronTexaco of the United States, and France's Total have been mentioned as possible suitors, though Sibneft, with $15 billion in market capitalization, said it was not currently in talks with any buyer.
''We're always in contact with people in the industry,''  a spokesman for Sibneft, John Mann, said on Tuesday. ''But right now we're focused on operating as an independent company.''
Stan Luckoski, a spokesman for ChevronTexaco at its San Ramon, Calif., headquarters, said the company did not comment on rumors. He added, however, ''We have a continuous interest in new energy resources, and Russia offers significant growth potential.''
Tom Sirigliano, a spokesman for ExxonMobil in Irving, Tex., also declined to comment on any talk of a merger.
Despite the protocol, the investment community remained skeptical that the details of the unwinding were complete, especially since shares had not yet been returned. And any proposal to unwind the merger still would require board approval.
''This was not a final contract,'' noted Timerbulat Karimov, oil and gas analyst at Aton Bank in Moscow. ''It's just an understanding that the two sides, Millhouse and Menatep, will proceed with this. It's still impeded by the fact that decision makers on one side are in jail or in exile.''
Late last month, Russia placed 10 Yukos shareowners, including Group Menatep executives Mikhail B. Brudno, Vladimir M. Dubov and Leonid B. Nevzlin, on an Interpol wanted list, as part of its investigation into accusations of tax evasion and embezzlement.
Mr. Khodorkovsky was arrested in what is generally perceived as a Kremlin-inspired attack against the oil tycoon for financing political parties opposing Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, and his one-time ambition to run for president.
