Two months ago, Representative Major R. Owens said he would run for re-election for the last time this year, an would retire at the end of his term in 2006. Several of Mr. Owens's fellow Brooklyn Democratic officials, however, are not abiding by that timetable, and are planning to challenge Mr. Owens, a 22-year incumbent.
City Councilwoman Yvette D. Clarke said yesterday that she was running for the Congressional seat this year. Ms. Clarke, a Democrat who represents parts of Crown Heights and Flatbush, said Mr. Owens, 67, would be perceived as a lame duck and would not be effective.
''I am offering my candidacy because we don't have the luxury of waiting until 2006,'' Ms. Clarke said in an interview yesterday. ''There is a need for new ideas, for someone fresh from the community who is willing to go to Washington and establish new relationships.''
But Ms. Clarke, 39, is hardly the only one considering running against Mr. Owens. Councilwoman Tracy Boyland, who represents parts of Bedford-Stuyvesant and Ocean Hill-Brownsville, said yesterday that she, too, was planning to run for the seat.
Another Democrat, Assemblyman N. Nick Perry, said he was planning on a 2006 campaign, but was prepared to run this year if political events changed.
''I know that he plans to make this his last year,'' Mr. Perry, 53, said of Mr. Owens. ''But I have suspicions that the congressman might have other plans. I have to be prepared for any eventuality, and I am getting prepared.''
What has fueled much of the interest in Mr. Owens's seat is rampant speculation among Brooklyn Democrats that he might obtain the Democratic nomination, then decline it, allowing his son, Chris Owens, to become the Democratic nominee in the 11th Congressional District. The younger Mr. Owens, 44, has long been active in political and school board affairs in Brooklyn and is managing his father's re-election campaign.
Chris Owens said there was no plan for a family succession before the 2006 campaign.
''My political plans are simple,'' Chris Owens said yesterday. ''I plan to run and succeed my father in 2006, and that's it. The congressman has made it clear that he plans to serve another two years.''
Nonetheless, several Democratic officials, including Ms. Clarke and Mr. Perry, point to the succession involving a Congressional seat in Queens in 1998. That year, Congressman Thomas J. Manton announced his retirement from Congress. But the announcement came at the end of the season of petitioning for political office, too late for candidates to compete in a primary. The decision on who would replace Mr. Manton on the ballot was handed to a Queens Democratic Party committee. Mr. Manton, the Queens Democratic Party leader, was then able to handpick his successor, Assemblyman Joseph Crowley.
With that in mind, the Brooklyn Democrats are getting their campaigns started.
''This is a move to open the process,'' Ms. Clarke said. ''I don't think there is a parent out there who wouldn't want to advantage their child. But in a democracy, we have an opportunity to chose among candidacies, and I'm offering mine.''
Ms. Clarke, who was elected in 2001, is considered one of the new generation of Brooklyn leaders and is widely respected in Democratic circles in Brooklyn. She succeeded her mother, Una Clarke, who was barred by term limit laws from running for re-election to the City Council. Ms. Clarke has hired a political consultant and is raising money.
Ms. Boyland, who is not eligible to run for re-election to her Council seat in 2005, is from a well-known Brooklyn political family. Her father, William F. Boyland, stepped down a year ago after 11 terms in the Assembly. He was succeeded by his son, William F. Boyland Jr. Ms. Boyland, 35, has formed a committee and has registered it with the Federal Elections Commission. She said yesterday that she had already raised more than $140,000 toward the congressional race.
This is not the first time Mr. Owens has been challenged. He faced a bitter Democratic primary four years ago when Una Clarke, then a councilwoman, challenged him. Yesterday, Mr. Owens focused on Yvette Clarke's candidacy, and said he was not fazed by a potential race against her or any other challenger.
Not all aspirants to the congressional seat plan to run this year. Another official, State Senator Carl Andrews, who has long indicated his interest in running for Congress, said he was taking the congressman at his word and would wait to run to succeed him in 2006.
''I am running only when there is an open seat,'' Mr. Andrews said. ''I believe Major Owens to be a man of his word. And, unless there is some unforeseen reason that we don't know about, I assume he will serve until 2006.''
Several Brooklyn Democratic officials also suggested that Ms. Clarke and Ms. Boyland were acting pre-emptively, with 2006 in mind. By running now, they add to their name recognition and develop the campaign operations that could serve them well later.
Mr. Owens said he was also seen as vulnerable because he had raised relatively little money.''A lot of this is about money,'' he said. ''I have difficulty raising money because I'm not interested in raising money. I look at this with great interest. But I'm not trembling. I can assure you of that.''
