FOURTEEN months ago, Mike Richter was just getting used to the netherworld of concussion victims, trudging his way through the shadowy hours. Then Eric Lindros, his fellow Manhattanite, dropped over.
''I think he just wanted a sandwich -- or five,'' Richter recalled.
The big boy did not necessarily come over to eat (although he may have consumed whatever was offered, out of politeness). Rather, Lindros had come over to advise his fellow member of the concussion club.
''He has a lot of experience, unfortunately,'' Richter said. ''He was really specific. He asked me what shades of gray I was seeing in the morning.''
They had this little consultation at the tail end of 2002, after Richter had sustained the concussion from an accidental collision, which would end his career without his ever playing goal again.
Tonight, Richter's No. 35 will be retired by the Rangers at Madison Square Garden. Lindros will not be in uniform because he has sustained his eighth concussion since 1998.
''I hope he listens to his own advice,'' Richter said yesterday. ''It's not a good thing.''
Richter will not publicly counsel Lindros to retire, any more than any athlete would bluntly tell Pat LaFontaine of the Rangers or Troy Aikman of the Dallas Cowboys to retire, which they both did, with their wits intact. No concussion victim would come out and tell Scott Stevens of the Devils that he should not come back from the lingering effects of his recent concussion. But Stevens has missed 13 games with postconcussion syndrome.
There seems to be a pattern here. When the symptoms continue, and athletes feel like recluses, dizzy and disjointed, that is a good starting point for finding a second career.
Richter will always remember how Lindros, the very large and quite articulate bruiser, materialized at his town house.
''He came to me when I was injured,'' Richter recalled. ''I hadn't been told I wasn't playing for the rest of the season. I was going day by day. I was waking up every morning and trying to ride the bike, which maybe was irresponsible. I had a hard time.''
Lindros had been through it. He had seen his brother, Brett, have a brief career ended by concussions. Fourteen months ago, Lindros was playing, although he has never gotten back to where he was a decade ago, a nearly frightening mixture of bulk and speed and aggression.
Then the concussions started to add up. One was inflicted by the very same Scott Stevens, a legal upper arm that leveled Lindros almost like a cartoon character, in the seventh game of the 2000 Eastern Conference finals. Yet Lindros came back and, by the end of 2002, Lindros was in better shape than Richter.
''He came to me and told me: 'Go to Jamaica. Just get away,' '' Richter recalled yesterday.
Good advice sank in. Nobody was putting the old-school pressure on Richter, telling him it was all a matter of character.
''You do take risks,'' Richter said, meaning that all athletes learn to defy pain. Then he added, ''In this situation, you shouldn't.''
Richter listened to Lindros, listened to Jim Ramsay, the Rangers' medical trainer, listened to the specialists. This is a mind worth preserving. Richter has been one of the special athletes in New York, a 14-season lifer who lived right in the heart of the city, took courses at Columbia University, got around.
''New York has made me what I am,'' Richter said yesterday, which is more than most athletes say after they have been here a while.
Richter went through months of ill health, months of denial, but now his sharpness has returned, and his hope for tonight is that he will ''say the things you want to say without boring the heck out of people.''
Now his teammate, his mentor, is back in the clouds. Last week an opponent laid a hard, legal hit on Lindros, and the Rangers all flinched.
''It makes you sick,'' Richter said. ''I didn't think he hit his head, and you could see he was mad. But we've all seen him take hits like that. The last few years, he's shown resiliency, but once you have a series of concussions, it reinforces your thinking.''
Richter has spoken to Lindros twice in the past week and expects to see him tonight. Lindros is just trying to put one foot in front of the other and feel he is still a hockey player.
''I'll see Ricky before, be there for the ceremony, then probably head home after that,'' Lindros said yesterday.
Now it is Lindros who must wait for medical clearance to even attempt a comeback. He acknowledges that he is getting tired of recurring concussions.
''I didn't go to school in this field,'' Lindros said. ''But I probably have more knowledge about it than I want to have. You listen to what the experts advise.''
Lindros is the expert who instructed Richter about the perils of coming back from a concussion. One of these days Richter should invite Lindros over for a reverse consultation. He can offer Lindros a sandwich -- or five.
Sports of The Times
