So far, the college football recruiting season has looked a lot like the football season itself. The battle for superiority has come down to Louisiana State and Southern California, with some people not sure which deserves the mythical title for having landed the best high school seniors. At the least, each team can say it has laid the groundwork for successful teams for years to come.
Recruiting season ends today, national letter of intent day, when the last few uncommitted top prospects will make their college choices known and teams can officially announce their incoming talent.
Southern Cal has reloaded with several of the country's top-ranked high school players. Center Jeff Byers of Loveland, Colo., and wide receiver Fred Davis of Toledo, Ohio, will be going there. On the defensive side, the Trojans will be adding linebacker Keith Rivers of Lake Mary, Fla., and defensive end Jeff Schweiger of San Jose, Calif. Southern Cal may not be done. It remains in the running for the elite wide receiver prospects Cameron Colvin of Concord, Calif., and Dwayne Jarrett of New Brunswick, N.J.
Louisiana State has landed Early Doucet of St. Martinville, La., and Xavier Carter of Melbourne, Fla., considered two of the top four wide receivers by several recruiting services. Defensive linemen Marlon Favorite of Harvey, La., and Glenn Dorsey of Gonzales, La., will add even more luster to L.S.U.'s recruiting class.
Southern Cal and Louisiana State appear to have fed off the momentum of successful seasons and are led by energetic coaching staffs that know how to get what they want.
''They've got a friendly aggressiveness that works like a charm in recruiting,'' the recruiting expert Tom Lemming said. ''Pete Carroll and Nick Saban are the leaders, and they both have good staffs when it comes to talking to kids nationally. U.S.C. assistant Lane Kiffin is a great recruiter and he handles most of their national stuff. He is relentless, aggressive and personable, and you can't beat those qualities.''
''A lot of people think Saban doesn't smile,'' Lemming said. ''I think he's one of the best around. He's relentless and aggressive, and he'll show some personality when he has to. The kids love him.''
Michigan and Florida State have also gotten high marks from the recruiting experts, most of whom will release their rankings today. Though only a handful of top players are still available, Allen Wallace, the editor and publisher of SuperPrep magazine, expects something to happen to tilt the scales.
''Signing day is always crazy,'' he said. ''You wouldn't think that much could change because this process has been going on for so many months. In reality, I can't recall a signing day when I wasn't floored by something that happened, some major switch or an unexpected combination of players all deciding to go to one place.''
The top available recruit may be linebacker Willie Williams of Carol City High School in Miami. He had narrowed his choices to Florida State and Miami.
Three players -- Colvin, linebacker Brian Toal of Wyckoff, N.J., and offensive lineman Roland Martin of Chicago -- will announce their decisions today live on ESPN.
Toal, who played at Don Bosco Prep in Ramsey, N.J., had whittled his list to Rutgers, Tennessee, Miami, Boston College and Penn State. When Toal took in the Rutgers-Notre Dame basketball game Saturday as part of his official visit to Rutgers, he was greeted by the crowd's chants of ''We want Toal!''
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
