THE PRICE OF LOYALTY  George W. Bush, the White House and the Education of Paul O'Neill  By Ron Suskind  348 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $26.
When President Bush first announced the choice of Paul O'Neill to be his secretary of the treasury, some veteran political observers thought they discerned in him a more liberal-minded worldview. Even so, they tempered their optimism, suggesting that he was more likely chosen because, as one pundit put it, the Bush-Cheney circle regarded him as ''a familiar old friend to all of them, experienced and capable, above all loyal.''
These observers may be forgiven for making the same error in judgment that Mr. Bush and Dick Cheney made. Mr. O'Neill's Boswell, the respected journalist Ron Suskind, drew on 19,000 documents -- almost everything that passed across the secretary's desk -- to write a disturbing book proving just how wrong they were.
In ''The Price of Loyalty'' Mr. O'Neill demonstrates that while he believed in loyalty to his old friends, he was guided by two higher loyalties: first to the truth, as Mr. O'Neill understood it; second to himself.
Because of that first loyalty, Mr. Suskind's book, which Mr. O'Neill read and approved before publication, provides an invaluable contribution both to the historical record and to the fierce public debate over the nature of the Bush administration's true views and motivations on issues of war and peace.
But Mr. O'Neill's loyalty to himself can make the book a decidedly trying read. Rarely does our hero flinch from his brave calling. He is always demonstrating his ''independence,'' his ''maverick streak,'' his genius for ''intellectual pragmatism.'' Mr. O'Neill, in the Suskind/O'Neill version, is portrayed as kind of C.E.O. version of Jimmy Stewart in ''Mr. Smith Goes to Washington.''
''So while one marvels at the revelations in ''The Price of Loyalty'' -- and Mr. O'Neill is nothing if not credible, given both his access as well as his immunity to retaliation from those he calls nasty people who ''have a very long memory'' -- a few admitted flaws in our hero would have gone a long way.
Still it would be a mistake to allow the book's few shortcomings to diminish its historical and potential political significance. Mr. O'Neill is describing the takeover of the Republican Party -- and consequently of the executive branch -- by what is portrayed as a group of single-minded right-wing ideologues with loyalty only to their narrow and rapacious political self-interest.
Mr. O'Neill was one of the last of the Mohicans. An old-fashioned Establishment Republican and self-styled ''small-c conservative,'' he saw himself as a sometime corporate executive and as a sometime public servant (he worked in the Nixon, Ford and Bush 41 administrations) who believed in making decisions on the basis of rational inquiry and long-term public interest. Boy, was he in the wrong White House.
Parts of the book have made headlines, most notably Mr. O'Neill's likening President Bush to a ''a blind man in a roomful of deaf people'' and the disclosure that planning for the invasion of Iraq began as early as January 2001. But what is most devastating is the textured insider portrait of the top Bush players bringing their ideological and partisan agenda to every issue of public policy.
Mr. Suskind himself gave us a hint of this kind of thinking, when, in a January 2003 Esquire article, he quoted the departing Bush adviser John DiIulio's marveling: ''What you've got is everything -- and I mean everything -- being run by the political arm. It's the reign of the Mayberry Machiavellis.''
But the O'Neill version picks up the same story, fleshes it out and documents it. The pressure to decide every issue on strictly ideological or political grounds is such that Mr. O'Neill -- a man referred to in a profile in The New York Times as a ''prototypical Republican'' -- is deemed an untrustworthy heretic.
Mr. O'Neill is appalled by what he sees as a betrayal of real conservatism; he even at one point draws a parallel between the absolutists fighting to take over Pakistan for Muslim fundamentalism and the absolutism at work in the Bush White House.
''The Price of Loyalty'' is filled with convincingly demonstrative anecdotes, in which the outcome is ruthlessly predetermined and the facts, such as they are, are marshaled deductively. There is the time that President Bush used phony figures to defend his tax cut in his first State of the Union address because the political team -- in particular Karl Rove -- had made an end run around Treasury economists, refusing to vet their calculations with experts.
Although Mr. O'Neill does not make the comparison, one is reminded of the same political mind-set that led to the famous ''16 words'' about an attempt by Iraq to buy yellow cake uranium in Africa that were included in the following year's State of Union, despite wide knowledge in both the C.I.A. and the State Department that the claim was based on false information.
In another meeting, this one on tax policy, Vice President Cheney -- depicted as the power behind the throne of a disengaged and clueless president -- proposed a 50 percent cut in the individual tax on dividends. Mr. O'Neill says he ''jumped in, arguing sharply that the government 'is moving toward a fiscal crisis,' '' pointing out ''what rising deficits will mean to our economic and fiscal soundness.''
But Mr. Cheney was uninterested in such goo-goo concerns, Mr. O'Neill recounts, quoting him: ''Reagan proved deficits don't matter. We won the midterms. This is our due.'' Mr. O'Neill professes he left Mr. Cheney's office ''in a state of mild shock.'' He knew Mr. Rove and others believed this ideology, but ''to hear it from the vice president seemed to stop the world turning. The inscrutable Dick had finally shown himself.'' (It is Mr. Bush himself who points to the elephant in the room and asks, ''Didn't we already give them a break at the top?'')
His abrogated tenure in the Bush administration was clearly a disillusioning experience for Mr. O'Neill. He discovered that his friends were not the men (and women) he thought they were, and the Republican Party to which he had proudly belonged had been taken over by political extremists. There was no comfortable place anymore in George W. Bush's Washington for the old fashioned moderate Republican who sought to temper a love of capitalist competition with a dose of compassion for those it left behind.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES Katrina vanden Heuvel is editor of The Nation.
