The European Commission plans to take legal action against France on Wednesday, accusing Paris of failing to open up government contracts to competitive public bidding as required under European Union laws.
The commission will also warn Italy that it faces a similar action unless it stops handing helicopter contracts to the Italian manufacturer Agusta without inviting competitors to bid, according to the commission's statement, which is scheduled to be released on Wednesday.
The European Union has stepped up an effort to crack down on governments that hand lucrative contracts to domestic companies.
''Open and competitive tenders are an essential safeguard against corruption,'' said Jonathan Todd, the commission's spokesman on internal market issues. ''Transparency makes it impossible for firms with cozy relations with their local public authorities to win contracts by offering them kickbacks.''
He declined to comment on the legal action against France and the warning to Italy.
The commission warned France in fall 2002 about its failure to open its public procurement procedures. France promised to take action but has still not introduced open and competitive tenders in several important areas. These include banking services and legal services to local authorities, the commission said in its statement.
When the Italian police, coast guard and firefighters need new helicopters, they automatically place orders with Agusta without inviting rivals like Sikorsky, the helicopter division of United Technologies, to bid, according to the commission.
''The commission believes this practice is in breach of the European public procurement directive of 1993,'' the commission said.
The warning follows a decision in July to take Italy to court for failing to run open tenders for helicopter contracts from its forestry authorities.
Under European Union rules, competitive bidding can be avoided only in cases of emergency, when the rapid appointment of a supplier is essential or where national security is at stake. The commission said the civil contracts handed to Agusta did not meet these criteria.
The commission has estimated that opening public contracts to competition has reduced governments' costs about 30 percent.
