But will they go up?
Only the customers themselves can answer this crucial retailing question: whether shoppers will ascend the Time Warner Center's four-story atrium, bursting with shops large and small, when it makes its public debut tomorrow.
More than 80 percent of the center's retail outlets will be open when they are unveiled to invited guests this evening. Most of the building's much-anticipated new high-end restaurants, presided over by celebrity chefs like Thomas Keller, Gray Kunz, Charlie Trotter and Jean-Georges Vongerichten, will open in the coming weeks and months. Ultimately there will be 40 stores and 10 restaurants and bars at the $1.7 billion Time Warner office, hotel, entertainment, dining, condominium and shopping development at 10 Columbus Circle. But New York's fickle, street-loving pedestrians will have to brave two obstacles that have vexed many of the city's would-be vertical retailers: escalators and elevators.
The center's developers -- the Related Companies and Apollo Real Estate Advisors -- insist that the retailing mix in the multi-use building will be irresistible.
But ''vertical retailing hasn't worked very well in New York,'' said Alan Victor, an executive vice president of Lansco, a brokerage firm that specializes in retailing properties.
Luxury shopping never had a chance at the Herald Center, on 34th Street at Herald Square. And Trump Plaza on Fifth Avenue, once synonymous with glamour, ''had success initially as a specialty center, but lost its luster,'' Mr. Victor said.
Should customers deign to ascend in the four-story, glass, steel and stone Time Warner atrium, however, they will be enveloped by a 500,000-square-foot people-moving engine calibrated to deliver visitors and their credit cards, to a wealth of shoppertunities.
The complex is home to the new 865,000-square-foot world headquarters of Time Warner; a 251-room, five-star Mandarin Oriental hotel; 191 luxury residential condominiums up to the 80th floor; 200,000 square feet of additional office space; a 504-car parking garage; and the 150,000-square-foot Jazz at Lincoln Center with its three main performance spaces.
Then there are the Shops at Columbus Circle, as the retail stores are grandly branded, with 350,000 square feet of space that is more than 90 percent rented. Its developers are touchy when their new assemblage is likened to an urban mall. ''The mall is a suburban paradigm,'' said Kenneth A. Himmel, president of Related Urban Development, the managing partner of the center's retailing component. ''A mall is antiseptic, it has no architectural stamina and it's not culture-based. This is a different animal.''
Then what is it? ''This is an urban retail entertainment department store,'' Mr. Himmel said, ''with great chefs.''
Crucial to the center's grand design is the east-facing atrium at Columbus Circle, which has sacrificed 50,000 square feet of potential rental space to a soaring hall - modestly anointed ''the Great Room'' -- with a curving, two-block-long gallery that affords views of the exterior streetscape and Columbus Circle.
''You will always be oriented to the street,'' Mr. Himmel said, ''while visually, your eye will constantly be caught by people walking in the galleries, and moving through the stores.'' He disparaged other vertical urban retail locations ''where you're enclosed by four walls, and feel like you could be anywhere in the world,'' he said.
The sense of vista and orientation is enhanced, Mr. Himmel said, by the curving, indoor, passageway paralleling Broadway that he termed ''a great gallery like those in London, Paris and Milan.''
The 57-year-old Mr. Himmel assembled similar mixed-use developments at Water Tower Place in Chicago and Copley Place in Boston. ''The view here will be like a magnet,'' he said on a recent afternoon, standing on the fourth level and pointing to Columbus Circle and the Fifth Avenue massif across a snow-covered Central Park.
He added that the 3.4-acre site, at the juncture of Central Park and Midtown, is within walking distance of 35 million square feet of office buildings and is ''the gateway to the Upper West Side,'' where there are some 265,000 potential shoppers. A somewhat smaller contingent from the Upper East Side is also expected to visit.
Though there is not an obligatory Gap or Banana Republic, the atrium will contain Manhattan's ninth Sephora, its sixth J. Crew and its fourth Williams-Sonoma.
But there are some new offerings, including the first free-standing Joseph Abboud fashion store -- a flagship -- and the first satellite of J.W. Cooper, a Miami-based luxury accessory retailer of buckles, belts and boots with prices ranging from $75 key chains to $20,000 gem-encrusted buckles.
''I think this customer mix will be a perfect fit for my store,'' said Todd Rauchwerger, the store's owner, who signed a 10-year, ground-floor lease.
But the center is hardly a playpen of super-high-end salons. ''I can't upstage Fifth and Madison,'' Mr. Himmel said, pointing out toward the gold coast of the city's most exclusive retailers. ''But our restaurants and our jazz can be world class. What we have here is a collection of worldwide destination restaurants, each of them hand-crafted - along with a broad spectrum of shopping choices.''
Skeptics say that there is more than enough retail duplication in the metropolitan area, and visitors to the center are more likely to shop the Sephoras in their own neighborhoods. ''No great retail space has shops that are 100 percent unique,'' countered Stephen M. Ross, chairman of the Related Companies. ''And retailers know not to establish a store in a new location if it will cannibalize their sales.''
That said, ''moving people up in a development like this is the biggest challenge,'' Mr. Himmel acknowledged. And so, as visitors cruise the atrium corridors of brushed stainless steel, burled mahogany and book-matched rosewood paneling, they may not be aware of their role as charged particles attracted by powerful forces in a large-scale controlled retailing environment.
The two escalators leading up into the space have been aligned with the two east-west sidewalks on Central Park South, ''as a subliminal invitation to come in and move up,'' Mr. Himmel said, using the u-word again.
Escalators will deposit visitors just where the developers want them: facing stores on lower floors, and facing Columbus Circle on the high-end restaurant level, the fourth floor. From the second level, two escalators will deliver customers to the front door of new restaurants presided over by Mr. Kunz and Mr. Trotter.
Jazz and restaurant customers, and those bound for the below-ground Equinox Fitness Club, can be whisked directly to their destinations by special elevator banks. ''We feel that the restaurants will drive people to the upper floors,'' Mr. Ross said. Also driving traffic, he added, will be the condominium units, 70 percent of which have been sold. A studio tour of the new CNN television facility and its gift shop could continually replenish the upper levels with visitors, Mr. Himmel said. And Jazz at Lincoln Center on the fifth floor is expected to drive evening-hours traffic and deliver patrons to stores and restaurants before and after performances.
Rents are said to range from $350 per square foot on the ground floor to $65 per square foot up top. But several retailers said that the developers had offered incentives such as free rent and construction financing to lure sought-after tenants.
Mr. Himmel commented that although a few retailers had been given free rent to compensate for an opening that was delayed from last fall -- and though several favored tenants were given concessions matching their construction cost -- ''90 percent of the space is on guaranteed rents,'' he said.
To its developers, the building itself ''is an event,'' Mr. Ross said. But this raises the possibility that New York's been-there, done-that consumers will visit once, never to return.
The designers say they have anticipated this reaction by providing retailers that will regularly attract office workers, neighborhood residents and other repeat visitors, principally the 59,000-square-foot Whole Foods Market, which is to be Manhattan's largest supermarket.
Of the 17 million yearly visitors projected to circulate through the center, 3 million of them, Mr. Himmel said, will visit Whole Foods, which will have 42 registers. Its staff of 390 will offer fresh produce and prepared foods; specialty food stations are adjacent to seating for 248 people. There is a wine shop, a bakery, a brick-oven pizza station, a stir-fry station and a sushi bar with eight stools covered in nori seaweed. (You can buy a roast beef sandwich with blue cheese and roasted shallots for $6.29, but not a hamburger.)
Furthermore, the Equinox club ''will build repetitive visits,'' Mr. Himmel said, as will a 30,000-square-foot Borders store.
Mr. Himmel notwithstanding, naysayers question whether large numbers of restaurant customers, Whole Foods shoppers, gymgoers or jazz patrons will have much inclination to do retail shopping - and vice-versa. These skeptics also say that Columbus Circle itself -- and its raging traffic and pedestrian-unfriendly street crossings -- could pose a scary transportation barrier to office workers, tourists and potential shoppers from the East Side.
Mr. Himmel acknowledged that pedestrian barriers were originally a concern of the developers, but said that a $30 million renovation of Columbus Circle, to be completed next fall, would provide new landscaping, paving and widened pedestrian corridors ''to provide better access from the east,'' he said.
This refurbishment will also include a tweaking of the Columbus Circle fountains ''by the same people who did the fountains at the Bellagio,'' Mr. Himmel said of the Las Vegas hotel that helped inspire the atrium. ''Inside and out, this place will be great for New York.''
