It's the last thing you'd expect: a movie that is a commentary on socialism, a film noir and entirely compelling. But that is the case with Li Yang's ''Blind Shaft,'' which opens today at Film Forum.
The story, set in China, allows him to create a hybrid and convey his documentary experience, steadily adding more and more character detail until a dazzling shocker moment. It's as if someone had unearthed a nonfiction film made by the noir novelist Cornell Woolrich.
In Mandarin with subtitles, ''Blind Shaft'' starts in a dilapidated mining complex, and has the bleak, grinding atmosphere of a real-life look at underpaid, trapped miners at work. A spooky shot of an elevator descending into the coal mine rings true because it creates mood and later serves as metaphor.
Initially this film is harsh and claustrophobic enough to make us expect that we are going to have to endure a collapse that will strand the workers in the dark and hard-to-see environment. Eventually there is a collapse, but it occurs after one miner, Tang (Wang Shuangbao), has killed his friend and fled the site. Tang's partner, Song (Li Yixiang), makes a bogus claim against the mine owner, extorting a payoff for the man he claims is his brother, who died in the catastrophe. This is the life they lead, moving from one shabby mining operation to another, concocting fake ID's and collecting on the deaths of ''relatives.'' They then burn through the money on whores and alcohol. The mine owners they bilk are just as heartless; they would rather throw money at the problem than investigate it. When asked why not simply have Tang and Song killed, one owner says it would require more cash to silence the cops.
Because ''Blind Shaft'' is directed with airtight ruthlessness, its relentless and tough-minded storytelling has a grueling precision. The closest thing it offers to character explication -- the kind of thing that would ruin the movie if there were too much of it -- is when Tang offhandedly says, ''I just kill anyone in the path of my fortune.''
Instead the characters are shown spending money and griping about how badly they are treated by everyone. The movie is chillingly lacking in frills; the only times music is heard is when it comes from the actors. Song hums constantly, and music is used for a laugh at a karaoke bar, when two prostitutes teach the men lewd lyrics to the old work song ''Long Live Socialism.''
''Blind Shaft'' wrings humor out of the pettiness of its determined killers. Its brooding meticulousness and lack of flourish evokes an old-school B-picture before the genre was overinflated and sentimentalized into big-budget doggerel in the United States. It could be set in one of those faded boomtowns outside of Las Vegas and guided by the master B-movie director Sam Fuller. The wan, gray skies and omnipresent squalor give the feel of a black-and-white film, though splashes of color filter through.
If someone eventually remakes ''Blind Shaft'' (and it deserves such revisiting), let's hope the new version does not implode from gooey overstated emotion. The compact narrative generates tension when Tang and Song run out of money; it is clear that they will have to find a new patsy. They locate a dim, shy teenage boy who is anxious to send money home and to be liked by the older men he thinks will help him. His desperation might induce flinches if the film weren't so sure and intense.
''Blind Shaft'' deftly swings to a spartan, engrossing climax, and the final twists spell out what the murderers are made of and the setting responsible for creating them. It is a true piece of film magic.
BLIND SHAFT
Produced and directed by Li Yang; written (in Mandarin, with English subtitles) by Mr. Li, based on the novel ''Shenmu'' (''Sacred Wood''), by Liu Qingbang; director of photography, Liu Yonghong; edited by Mr. Li and Karl Riedl; art director, Yang Jun; released by Kino International. At the Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, west of Sixth Avenue, South Village. Running time: 92 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Li Yixiang (Song Jinming), Wang Shuangbao (Tang Zhaoyang), Wang Baoqiang (Yuan Fengming), An Jing (Xiao Hong), Bao Zhenjiang (Boss Huang) and Sun Wei (Tang Zhaoxia).
FILM REVIEW
