The United States and North Korea have agreed to resume six-party talks later this month over the North's nuclear weapons program, the State Department said Tuesday.
The negotiations, scheduled to start in Beijing on Feb. 25, are likely to focus on North Korea's offer to suspend its nuclear programs in return for a security guarantee and other concessions.
A first round of talks in August ended without an agreement, and a follow-up session in December was postponed. Both the United States and North Korea have insisted that the other side must make the first concession before talks can resume.
It was not clear whether any concessions had been granted to get the talks restarted. State Department officials said Chinese diplomats had worked exhaustively to help them narrow their differences with North Korea. China, South Korea, Japan and Russia were enlisted as parties in the talks, primarily at the insistence of the United States, which seeks regional guarantees for any deal that is reached.
Richard L. Armitage, the deputy secretary of state, discussed North Korea in meetings in China and Japan this week, and James Kelly, the assistant secretary of state for East Asia, met with his counterparts in South Korea and Japan as well. Mr. Kelly is expected to lead the American delegation later this month.
Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said the United States had not backed off its central demand, the elimination of North Korea's weapons program and safeguards to ensure that the program is never reconstituted. North Korea moved slightly closer to the American demand last month when it offered to freeze its program as part of a deal.
''We're looking for a round that can move toward the goals of verifiable elimination of North Korea's nuclear weapons programs and, in return, a provision of whatever security assurances might be helpful in helping North Korea go down that path,'' Mr. Boucher said.
He said the administration had not offered any financial compensation to lure the North back to the bargaining table and had not discussed having other parties provide such aid. ''We're not talking with anybody about compensating the North Koreans,'' he said. He observed, however, that South Korea was exploring new investment opportunities in North Korea, anticipating a day of normalized commerce.
Lee Soo Hyuck, South Korea's deputy foreign minister, tried to lower expectations for the meeting. ''We cannot resolve the North Korean nuclear issue with one sweep through the next round of talks,'' Mr. Lee said. ''But if we are able to launch working groups of experts, we will be able to have more substantive and specific talks and negotiations.''
Kim Ryong Song, head of a North Korean delegation that arrived in Seoul, South Korea, on Tuesday for bilateral talks, said the success of the negotiations would depend on the United States.
''Judging from the current situation, no matter how long the winter may be, spring will eventually arrive,'' Mr. Kim said. ''It all depends on what attitude the U.S. brings to the talks. We have maintained our stance all along.
''The fact that the U.S. is coming to the talks at all seems to indicate that it has reached a certain understanding on our basic demands.''
The North has made conciliatory gestures toward Japan, whose financial contribution would be crucial to any eventual deal. North Korea said it was ready to release the children of five Japanese kidnapped years ago if the parents came to get them in North Korea.
The still unresolved cases of kidnapping of Japanese nationals have hardened sentiments in Japan and remain an obstacle to any agreement. Last week, Japan's lower house of Parliament passed legislation that would allow Tokyo to impose economic sanctions on North Korea by restricting the flow of money and goods that are vital to the North.
