Dan Marino surprised the Dolphins on Tuesday by resigning as the team's senior vice president for football operations three weeks after accepting the job.
Marino, a former star quarterback for the Dolphins, had no front-office experience when he took the job Jan. 12. He received a sampling of his new challenge before heading to the Super Bowl as a football analyst for HBO and CBS and apparently decided that he had misjudged the amount of work involved.
''I knew it would involve a significant lifestyle change, but after further reflection, it became clear that those adjustments were ones that my family and I are not prepared to make at this time,'' Marino, who is married with six children, said in a statement released by the Dolphins.
Two days earlier, with speculation circulating that Marino was having second thoughts, he denied through a team spokesman that he planned to resign.
Marino, who holds the N.F.L. records for touchdown passes (420) and passing yards (61,361), was hired by the Dolphins' owner, H. Wayne Huizenga, in the aftermath of Miami's second straight failure to make the playoffs.
Coach Dave Wannstedt kept his job but was stripped of control over most personnel decisions, and the club interviewed seven people to fill the role. Since he retired in early 2000, Marino said he had been talking with Huizenga about a meaningful position with the Dolphins, and this time, Huizenga created a new position for him.
In his statement Tuesday, Marino said, ''I am grateful to Wayne for giving me this opportunity, and the last thing I would ever want to do would be to disappoint him, the Miami Dolphins' organization or its fans.''
Huizenga, who has periodically sought Marino's advice on the Dolphins, seemed to be taken aback by Marino's announcement.
''I'm disappointed,'' Huizenga said. ''I wish it didn't happen. But we'll just have to go on and find someone to fill those shoes.''
Huizenga said the Dolphins would look for someone to oversee their football operations. The front office has been in a state of uncertainty since Marino's hiring because his authority was never clearly defined while he learned on the job.
''Our franchise will continue to move forward, and Dan's decision will not adversely affect our ability to prepare for the 2004 season,'' Huizenga said in a statement. ''I still firmly believe in the structure that we have created, and in the people we have in place to carry out their responsibilities.''
Marino is expected to continue his television work, leaving him plenty of time for his many charitable endeavors, for his family and for his side passion, golf. In a league in which team executives routinely try to outwork each other, he might have been expected to put in 60 or more hours a week.
PRO FOOTBALL
