Stephon Marbury screamed, Keith Van Horn punched the air, Kurt Thomas high-fived Penny Hardaway, and the rest of the Knicks walked off the court clenching their fists, knowing that they had made every last play to overmatch the best team in the Eastern Conference.
Reggie Miller and Jermaine O'Neal were in town with the Indiana Pacers, the team that fired Isiah Thomas, a move that made him available to reconstruct the Knicks.
Calmly, Thomas watched the Knicks deconstruct Indiana, 97-90, last night at Madison Square Garden. When the most jubilant victory of the season was complete, Marbury found his boss immediately.
''This was for you,'' Marbury told Thomas.
Dikembe Mutombo followed and echoed the sentiments, giving Thomas a bearhug in the locker room.
''We all knew how badly he wanted to win,'' said Marbury, who scored 17 of his game-high 23 points in the first half. ''That gave guys extra incentive, even though we've been playing hard, we did all the little things tonight to win.
''We had big stops, big rebounds, played great defense down the stretch. All those things in one equation, the answer for a win for Isiah and the rest of this group.''
The Pacers have two All-Stars, O'Neal and Ron Artest. The Knicks have none; Marbury was snubbed and Allan Houston was on the injured list. The Knicks (23-27) won their third straight game without Houston, their captain and leading scorer, and topped the yardstick Indiana (36-14) provided. ''They're the best team in the East,'' Thomas said, playing down his personal satisfaction. ''Anytime you get a win against those guys it's meaningful. And our players played great.''
There was incentive and significance again, converging inside the Garden to whip up a playoff-like atmosphere. The Knicks not only played to the moment, they seized it and made the playoffs seem possible this spring.
''It was huge, the guys were all pumped up,'' Coach Lenny Wilkens said. ''When you beat the conference leader, it shows that you belong. It's very satisfying for all of us.''
Nothing was more satisfying than the ending. ''We didn't want to see Reggie Miller dance on our court,'' Mutombo said.
The Knicks were leading, 95-90, with 6.9 seconds remaining when Miller got the ball in the corner and prepared to shoot a trademark 3-point dagger. But Hardaway was draped all over him and forced him to put up an air ball. Marbury grabbed the ball as it came down and was fouled. He then sank the clinching free throws.
Less than a minute earlier, one of Miller's 3-pointers rattled in and out with 1 minute 7 seconds to play. Foreshadowing, perhaps. Miller scored 31 points in his last trip to New York, foiling the Knicks. But not this night. He finished with 17, shooting 6 of 10.
Van Horn had 20 points and 12 rebounds, his final rebound coming off Artest's second straight miss from the foul line with 39.7 seconds left. The Knicks were ahead, 93-90, and got the ball to Hardaway.
He drove into the lane, spun around Jamaal Tinsley and banked in a 10-footer with 17.2 seconds left to seal the victory.
''I feel part of this rebuilding,'' said Hardaway, who had 14 points off the bench. He credited Thomas. ''I knew he wanted to win and I didn't want to let him down. I felt like when he got myself and Steph and Moochie, that was the beginning of something.''
In the 15 games since the trade for Marbury and Hardaway, the Knicks are 9-6, playing .500 basketball for the first time in more than two years.
''They are certainly a team on the rise and I see them continuing to move up,'' Pacers Coach Rick Carlisle said.
The Pacers came into the game with the most victories in the league -- two ahead of their record after 49 games last season, when Thomas was their coach. Indiana fizzled in the second half of last season, leading to Thomas's dismissal by Larry Bird.
''We always joked around, if we were ever separated I'd always want him to be the second-best team if he was in my conference,'' O'Neal said. ''I feel with the Knicks, those guys turn it up the second half of the season and get to be second, third place in the Eastern Conference, I'm extremely happy. As long as Indiana is No. 1.''
Last night, that honor belonged to the Knicks.
They overcame an 18-7 Pacers run in the third quarter, sparked by Tinsley's three 3-pointers. They dived for loose balls. Van Horn played tough on Artest, even blocking a shot. Thomas spun off picks and knocked down open shots, the clutch one coming with 45 seconds left to give the Knicks a 93-90 lead.
Thomas was emotional after the game with his former and current players. He went into the Pacers' locker room after he visited his own. ''He was so happy, just so happy,'' Mutombo said. ''Some of those kids over there in Indiana, he helped them.''
When Bird fired him in August, Thomas was hoping to find another coaching job. Instead, he is rebuilding the Knicks, and Mutombo was grateful for the Pacers' decision. ''Thank you for sending the man our way,'' he said.
REBOUNDS
JERMAINE O'NEAL said he believed ISIAH THOMAS would return to coaching. ''Before he got this job, he always wanted to coach,'' he said. ''Right now, he's learning that position as far as being a president. I don't think he'll coach the next couple of years, but before it's all said and done, maybe four or five years down the road, I think he'll be coaching again.''
PRO BASKETBALL
