The teenage parents of a 6-month-old girl have been charged with assault after she was found at a homeless shelter in Harlem on Monday with cigarette burns in her eye and on her back, the police said.
The parents, Katrina Allen and William Butts, both 18, were arrested on Monday night at the shelter, at 30 Hamilton Place, and charged with second-degree assault and endangering the welfare of a child. Paramedics took the baby girl, who was also bruised and scratched, to St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, where she was treated and released to the Administration for Children's Services. She is now in the care of a relative, said Elysia Carnevale, a spokeswoman for the agency.
The agency began investigating Ms. Allen on Jan. 23, after a confidential source told it that she was providing inadequate guardianship to the girl, Ms. Carnevale said. A caseworker visited the mother and baby at the shelter on Jan. 29 and noted that the child had no bruises or marks, Ms. Carnevale said.
The couple lived at the shelter for eight days, according to the Department of Homeless Services. Ms. Allen pleaded with the police not to take the baby, said Tasha More, 24, who lived on the same floor of the shelter and said she saw the arrest.
''She was howling and screaming,'' said Ms. More, describing Ms. Allen at the time of the arrest. ''The cops were telling her, 'You're just as bad as him for letting him beat the baby.'''
The police did not release details about when they believe the abuse took place, or about the circumstances surrounding it, saying only that they were still investigating. They did not believe that Ms. Allen and Mr. Butts had a criminal history, a police official said. No other children were in Ms. Allen's care, Ms. Carnevale said.
The police received an anonymous call at 10:30 p.m. on Monday that a child had been abused at the shelter, they said. When the police arrived, the parents and the baby were in a third-floor apartment. The police found cigarette burns on the baby's lower back and right eye, and bruises and scratches on her body, the police said.
The police arrested Ms. Allen and Mr. Butts that night and called paramedics, who took the girl away in a blanket, Ms. More said. ''She was more upset than him,'' she said of Ms. Allen.
When the police led the couple away, Mr. Butts was silent, Ms. More said.
The Administration for Children's Services also received a call on Monday, from an anonymous source who said that the baby had scratches and bruises, Ms. Carnevale said. The agency called the police, who were already aware of the case, she said.
In the short time the family lived there, neighbors heard screaming, crying and arguments between the parents coming from the apartment, said a 26-year-old resident who lives on the fifth floor but would not give her name.
''They didn't think it was as bad as it was,'' said the woman, who said she saw Mr. Butts leave the apartment on Monday morning and heard the baby screaming.
The caseworkers at the shelter are mandatory reporters; they are responsible for reporting abuse or neglect, said an official with the Department of Homeless Services. Ms. Carnevale said that because of confidentiality, she could not disclose whether the caseworkers at the shelter had made any calls to the agency regarding the abuse.
The shelter, the Hamilton Place, between West 138th and West 139th Streets, is a seven-story brick building with about 150 apartments, where homeless families stay for extended periods of time, several residents said.
