Surrounded by family and supporters, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the Democrats' 2000 vice-presidential nominee, ended his candidacy for the presidential nomination on Tuesday night in a small, nondescript ballroom here.
''The judgment of the voters is now clear,'' said Mr. Lieberman, who took the stage to Frank Sinatra's ''Fly Me to the Moon'' and left it to his ''My Way.''
He congratulated Senators John Kerry and John Edwards on their victories and thanked his rivals for their willingness to serve the country.
''But for me,'' he said, as a few people cried in the background, ''it is now time to make a difficult but realistic decision. After looking at the returns and speaking with my family and my campaign team, I have decided tonight to end my quest for the presidency.''
Although Mr. Lieberman failed to win a single state, aides said he believed he had stayed true to himself and what he believed. Indeed, speaking to about 200 cheering supporters here, he stood up for the moderation so soundly rejected by voters and suggested that he would stay in public life.
''I offered a mainstream voice,'' he said, ''and I still believe that that is the right choice and the winning choice for our party and our country.''
But in the end, it was his stands, like his staunch support of the war in Iraq and his embrace of bipartisanship, that may help explain how Mr. Lieberman went from being the most nationally prominent Democrat in the field to being just a step ahead of an asterisk in the race.
In a year marked by partisan fervor, some Democrats said, Mr. Lieberman could make voters like and respect him but could not clinch their votes with his brand of bipartisan conciliation.
William E. Curry Jr., a former adviser to President Bill Clinton who lost a race for governor in Connecticut in 2002, said voters seemed to be looking for a candidate who was ''more critical of the president on national security and more critical of Washington.''
Mr. Curry, a friend of Mr. Lieberman, added that ''Joe emphasized helping to make the establishment work.'' But he added that it was ''a time when lots of Democrats want to blow the establishment up.''
Still, there was dissension in the campaign over what went wrong. Some of Mr. Lieberman's aides cited a lack of attention from the news media, saying it gave voters the impression that he was not a serious contender. Others said that dull advertisements, ever-shifting campaign messages and Mr. Lieberman's attacks on rivals had hurt.
Even some of Mr. Lieberman's supporters said that his early advertising campaign, showing the candidate sitting alone at a diner, wearing shirt sleeves and a tie while addressing the camera directly, diminished his stature and made him seem isolated and out of place.
Mark Penn, who helped shape Mr. Lieberman's campaign as his pollster, disagreed. ''It's unfortunate people would make those kind of comments,'' Mr. Penn said. ''I think it's clear to everyone that he was true to his beliefs and that those came through crystal clear in his messages. And it just may not have been his time.''
But there were also missed opportunities along the way by the only prospective candidate who had already run on a national ticket.
Mr. Lieberman delayed laying the groundwork for his campaign until Al Gore, who had chosen him as his 2000 running mate, said he would not run, and the campaign never seemed to gain its footing. With lackluster fund-raising, Mr. Lieberman skipped the Iowa caucuses and delayed running advertising until late in the campaign, banking on the assumption that he did not need to be introduced to voters.
Before large audiences of Democrats, Mr. Lieberman's performances were frequently uninspired -- or peppered with jokes -- where his rivals were impassioned. He almost skipped an N.A.A.C.P. convention in July, annoying the organization's leaders. And he frequently retooled his message as he tried to find the right way to cast himself as an independent-minded centrist who could bridge party lines.
One day he tried to emphasize his similarities to former President Clinton and cast himself as the protector of the Clinton legacy. On another day he was comparing himself to Senator John McCain, the maverick Arizona Republican who lost his own bid for his party's presidential nomination in 2000.
Mr. Lieberman's main campaign message toggled back and forth, about the American dream, or about leading with integrity. There was giving the country a fresh start, making the country strong in the world and strong at home and being the candidate who could match President Bush where he was strong and beat him where he was weak.
In the final weeks, when aides say Mr. Lieberman himself took control and ran the campaign he had wanted all along, things began to pick up.
Instead of the diner series of commercials, the campaign began running a biography advertisement packed with powerful images of John F. Kennedy, Mr. Lieberman and his family. Mr. Lieberman all but dropped references to Mr. Clinton and stopped going after his rivals, refusing to allow reporters to goad him into making direct comparisons with the other candidates.
But by then, aides and supporters said, events in Iowa, where he did not compete, had overtaken him as Senators Kerry and Edwards emerged as the candidates to watch.
Some Democratic strategists said that one practically unmeasurable factor that may have affected Mr. Lieberman's campaign was his religion.
As a Jewish vice-presidential nominee in 2000, he was groundbreaking and helped give Mr. Gore a life out of the Democratic National Convention. But sometimes along the presidential campaign trail, voters expressed reluctance to vote for Mr. Lieberman because of his religion.
At the same time, Al From, the chairman of the Democratic Leadership Council, a centrist Democratic group that Mr. Lieberman is close to, said that in his presidential race, Mr. Lieberman was unable to win the widespread support of Jews.
''I think there are a lot of people who loved the idea of him in the No. 2 spot,'' Mr. From said, ''but were nervous in a post-Sept. 11th world about him being No. 1.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CONNECTICUT SENATOR
