A Newark-based security company and its top executives have been charged with failing to do required background checks on employees who guarded area airports, utilities, bridges and other places vulnerable to terrorism, and with bribing officials to help them keep their contracts, Attorney General Peter C. Harvey said on Tuesday.
Mr. Harvey announced the indictments of the company, Haynes Security, its president, John D'Agostino, 50, and Carol A. D'Agostino, 48, his wife and the company's executive officer, at a news conference here. He said that the couple and the company had been charged with commercial bribery, theft and conspiracy, and said that the investigation would continue.
The indictment, returned on Monday, charges that since 1999, company executives had paid bribes of $1,000 to $7,500 to managers of Public Service Electric and Gas, a utility company, and of Continental Airlines operations at Newark Liberty International Airport in exchange for their help in holding on to lucrative security contracts with the utility and the airline.
In addition, Mr. Harvey charged that company officials had failed to submit fingerprints of security employees to the New Jersey State Police for screening against state and national data banks of convicted felons. Under the state law regulating private investigation and security companies, such background checks are required. In that time, 27 felons managed to gain employment with the company, he said.
But Mr. Harvey added that the company began to submit fingerprints -- in large numbers -- when they got wind of the state investigation. No felons are currently employed by Haynes at the utility or at the airport, he said. Furthermore, he said, since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, security screening and other monitoring responsibilities have been taken over by the federal Transportation Security Administration, so since then, no Haynes employees have been involved in screening passengers or baggage. ''I don't think that we should panic and think that when we go to the airport we are in danger,'' Mr. Harvey said. ''But we do believe that there has been commercial bribery and lax procedures which can put us in danger in our public lives.''
Seth Taube, a lawyer representing Haynes Security, scoffed at the indictment, charging that it was the state police fingerprint-checking operations that were slow and inadequate in catching convicted felons once the company submitted the prints. He accused Mr. Harvey of using public fear about terrorism at airports to ''scapegoat'' Haynes for the criticism the state attorney general has come under for not aggressively pursuing official corruption cases in the state.
''Peter Harvey has had his day before the press, and Haynes will have its day in court,'' Mr. Taube said. ''We intend to fight this and even challenge whether the charge on the fingerprinting is even a crime.''
An indictment was also handed down against Benjamin R. Riggi, 51, of Edison, who is a manager with PSE&amp;G. The indictment charges that Mr. Riggi, who monitored security services for the utility and was in a position to recommend a contractor, accepted a $7,500 ''loan'' from Mr. D'Agostino for which the security executive never requested repayment.
The indictment also charges that Mr. D'Agostino provided $1,000 in home security equipment to a Continental Airlines manager who had responsibility for awarding security contracts. The Continental employee, who is cooperating with investigators, was not charged.
The Haynes contract with Continental at its Newark terminal was valued at $12 million annually, and the PSE&amp;G contract brought in $10 million a year. According to Mr. Harvey and Mr. Taube, the services included security at construction sites in and around airports, security for airport parking lots, and security at a limited number of sites that afforded access to runways and other sensitive spots. In addition, the company provides security services for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey at both La Guardia and Kennedy Airports in New York City. Until last November, they held the contract with the port agency to guard access points to sensitive systems and key support structures for several bridges and tunnels.
Mr. Harvey said that in view of the indictment on the charges, which could mean a penalty of 10 years in prison, individual fines of $15,000 and corporate fines of $450,000 upon conviction, New Jersey was considering barring Haynes from doing business in the state at all. In addition, Robert Van Etten, the inspector general for the Port Authority, said that the agency was also reviewing its relationship with Haynes.
It is not the first time that private security firms have come in for criticism, especially with regard to airport security. Just after the Sept. 11 attacks, Argenbright Security, a private firm that staffed screening operations and was considered the dominant firm in airport security, was dropped by the federal Department of Transportation for security lapses, which paved the way for the creation of the Transportation Security Administration.
