On Friday afternoon, Kurt Landgraf, the president of the Educational Testing Service, the nonprofit Princeton-based organization that produces the SAT, met with consultants to discuss whether his organization should be ratcheting up security.
There was no specific threat, but that night was the opening of ''The Perfect Score,'' a movie about six high school students who see the E.T.S. as the obstacle to their dreams, and decide to ace the SAT by stealing the answers.
Security is already tight at the E.T.S., despite the country campus with 11 buildings spread over hundreds of acres. The doors from one area to another lock automatically and can be opened only by inserting an identification card. Anyone who leaves without keying out an identification card cannot return without a visit to security. Visitors and staff alike must let the security guards examine their papers as they leave.
But is that enough? ''There's always that possibility that the movie will encourage kids to think they should try hacking into our system, and we just want to be sure we have everything in place that we should,'' said Mr. Landgraf, who added that he had not been consulted on the movie -- and then took pains to stress, a bit defensively, that he bears no resemblance to his movie counterpart, an inattentive single father with a succession of young girlfriends.
There is plenty in the movie for the testing service to be defensive about. While it is not high art, ''The Perfect Score'' captures many high school students' sense that the E.T.S. is a hateful entity that ruins young lives.
''I think every kid goes into that movie with some bad feelings toward the SAT,'' said Katie Schaffer, a New York private school student who saw the movie on opening night. ''You identify with the idea that the kids are the good guys and E.T.S. is the bad guy. We came out and talked about it, and we all agreed the SAT's are a bad way of testing people.''
Outside Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan yesterday, Jake Haskell, a senior there, said of the SAT: ''It creates a lot of anxiety. It kind of grips the school in April and May. There's a mania going on, and people consume themselves with preparations.'' He paused, then added, ''There's something weird and not right about it.''
Tom Ewing, the spokesman for the testing service, said he was no longer surprised by such views, in part because he takes so many calls from high school journalists who start the conversation by asking why the SAT is so racist, so sexist, so intent on crushing young lives. He believes the blame lies less with the testing service than with the test-prep industry, which has worked this generation of students into a frenzy over the SAT.
''The Perfect Score'' seems to have a special resonance among high school seniors, who have finished their tests and are awaiting word from colleges. Many have made a ceremony of throwing out their test-prep books, or even burning them, and they are flocking to the movie with real delight in the premise of students uniting to get back at the SAT for the grief it has caused them.
While it may no longer be so clear, the original idea of a standardized college-admission test was to create a new meritocracy, in which the smartest young people, whatever their background, could go to elite colleges that had long been the private domain of rich, socially connected prep school graduates.
But for those now in high school, that is not what the SAT signifies.
Just what does it stand for? That is not so easy to say. As the movie correctly explains, it used to be the Scholastic Aptitude Test, but several years ago the Educational Testing Service announced that it was no longer the S.A.T., but just the SAT, standing for nothing in particular. (The movie offers other ideas about what SAT means, but they are not printable in a family newspaper.)
What does it do for students? Nothing good, according to the movie. ''It's not about who you are, it's about who you'll be,'' one boy explains.
The character, an aspiring architect who got a 1020 score out of a possible 1600, tells his guidance counselor he needs a 1430 to go to Cornell. For the African-American basketball star, it's the 900 that will get him onto the St. John's basketball team. The student whose father runs a garbage business says it is the SAT that will decide whether he will drive a Porsche or the garbage truck.
Even the straight-A student fears that she will never get into Brown if she keeps getting distracted by the story problems in the math section: when the woman gets onto the train going X miles an hour, and the man gets on later, the student gets lost in wondering where the woman is going and why she is alone.
The test is written by a bunch of rich white guys who make millions of dollars on it, the characters say, so ''you think they care about us?''
Actually, ''The Perfect Score'' makes pretty much every argument that critics of standardized testing have come up with.
There is the race bias, the gender bias, the ''stereotype vulnerability,'' leading some groups to score badly simply because they are aware that they are expected to. There is the failure to measure creativity. The movie even has a schoolteacher mother, grading bubble-scored standardized tests for the little tykes, who tells her high-school son, ''I hate to say it, but there's more money in bubbling than in reading.''
Mark Schwahn, the lead screenwriter of ''The Perfect Score,'' said that line was a direct quote from a friend who teaches first grade.
''I never took the SAT,'' he said. ''I took the ACT because I'm from the Midwest, but I felt that same pressure to perform. And I do think standardized testing is a villain.''
