''The Blackwater Lightship'' tries to keep a secret and generate suspense around it, but the secret is negligible.
Alone, the secret is not dark or gothic enough to justify the movie's long silent sequences and sorrowful soundtrack, both of which suggest heartbreak without end. Still, the movie, which has its premiere on CBS tonight, is a beautiful tour of Ireland and Irish-looking faces, and its beauty manages to convert what might have been monotony into sumptuous melancholy.
Angela Lansbury, who played mothers 42 years ago, carries off the role of great-grandmother now. She's nearly 80, but she looks 60. By appearing ageless but never young, Ms. Lansbury has long confounded every calculus for actresses and aging.
This quality of hers serves the movie, whose subject is three generations of Irish women and their attempts to care for a young man, Declan, who is dying of AIDS. Declan (Keith McErlean) is the grandson of Ms. Lansbury's Dora, the son of Lily (Dianne Wiest), and the brother of Helen (Gina McKee). (Helen herself has two sons, who are away with her husband for the action of the film.) Declan is little more than a faultless martyr, the type who in earlier movie days might have suffered from consumption or an obscure hurt sustained in a war.
This rural Catholic family transcends the stigma of homosexuality and AIDS, such as it still is, rather quickly. (''The television is full of it,'' Dora says.) Instead the tension in Dora's seaside house, which serves as a hospice, comes from past family offenses that are less than novel -- why didn't you tell me X, or call me when Y, or invite me to Z -- and they evaporate by rote in light of Declan's suffering. This is not much of a plot.
The success of the film comes instead from point-blank tear-jerking. A very handsome and frail man is dying, and that's enough for a sob or two, especially when set against the cold Irish seaside, the lush landscape and the unpredictable light.
Simultaneously the human forms command attention here. There's the twinkly granny-ness of Mr. Lansbury, whose beauty may now be at its peak, and the swan-necked elegance of Ms. McKee. But finally it's the swollen, sensuous Ms. Wiest who's most captivating. She put on weight some years ago and kept it, though without, somehow, giving notice, which means she now plays fat women whose fatness is not spoken of and therefore does not stand in for sexual doom. This is a wonderful niche.
To my ear all the actors, who are of various nationalities, pull off their dialects, keeping the brogues gentle, as befits the hush of the movie.
''The Blackwater Lightship,'' which is based on the book by Colm Toibin and is a Hallmark presentation, indulges in fine melodrama, including a pietà scene near the film's end and a summary of life by Dora: ''It's a vale of tears, Lily. It's a vale of tears.'' In this context of gorgeous Irish misery, the observation seems perfectly reasonable.
THE BLACKWATER LIGHTSHIP
CBS, tonight at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time  Directed and produced by John Erman; written by Shane Connaughton, based on the book by Colm Toibin; Richard Welsh, executive producer; Brent Shields, co-executive producer.
WITH: Angela Lansbury (Dora), Dianne Wiest (Lily), Gina Mckee (Helen), Keith McErlean (Declan), Sam Robards (Paul) and Brian F. O'Byrne (Larry).
TELEVISION REVIEW
