Senator Susan Collins tried to get into the Capitol on Tuesday but was blocked by armed police officers who did not recognize her. Senator John B. Breaux insisted on entering his office to feed his goldfish, just as he did during the anthrax attacks of 2001.
Senator John McCain, who survived five years as a prisoner of war during the Vietnam War, did his best to be blasé, declaring, ''I'm going to die in bed.''
On the day after the poison ricin was found in a mailroom in the office of the majority leader, Bill Frist, the Senate was open for business on Tuesday, though it was hardly business as usual.
With all three Senate office buildings closed, most staff members were forced to work at home, and their bosses were jammed into any available spot in the Capitol. Inside the chamber, lawmakers trudged on with what Dr. Frist called ''very productive, very useful business'': debate on a $318 billion transportation measure. Outside the chamber, there was a gritty determination to continue working, and a distinct, uneasy sense of having been there before.
''It feels like déjà vu,'' said Ms. Collins, Republican of Maine.
Yet the feeling was not quite the same this time. The 2001 anthrax attacks, coming just weeks after the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, left lawmakers and their aides terrified. The ricin episode, many said, is more of a frustration and a nuisance.
''Less fear, more aggravation,'' said Mr. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana.
Instead of shock, there is what Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, called ''a fatalistic acceptance'' that tainted mail was simply apart of life in the post-9/11 world.
Still, there was a sense in the Senate on Tuesday that this was unfamiliar terrain. Lawmakers can easily tick off the names of biological threats -- anthrax, smallpox, plague, botulism and the like. Now there was yet another threat that had slipped in through the mail, neither a bacterium nor a virus, and therefore impervious to the system of irradiating letters and packages that lawmakers thought would keep them safe from such assaults.
''Never heard of it,'' Mr. Harkin said when asked if he knew what ricin is. ''It makes me uneasy that somehow it got in here, and where else is it? It could be the kind of thing where you could get it on your finger, you could eat a sandwich, rub your eye or whatever, and all of a sudden you've got it.''
At the Republican and Democratic policy luncheons, which are held each Tuesday, the featured speakers were the Capitol physician, Dr. John Eisold, and William Pickle, the Senate's sergeant-at-arms, who oversees security. Afterward, the press corps was treated to an unusual sight: Dr. Frist, the Republican leader, standing side by side at a joint press conference with Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader.
Dr. Frist, a surgeon who has written a book about bioterrorism, spent much of the day doing what he loves: dispensing medical wisdom to colleagues and the press. Much to the chagrin of some Democrats, who privately complain that the majority leader plays up his role as a doctor, Dr. Frist stood before a throng of reporters, citing medical data and other case histories, including ''the famous case in 1976 in Bulgaria.''
The reference was apropos, if not precise: In 1978, the Bulgarian dissident Georgi Markov was assassinated by a Bulgarian intelligence operative who jabbed him with a ricin-tipped umbrella as he waited for a bus in London. Mr. Markov died after three days of intense fever and vomiting.
''Things are going very well -- not perfectly, but very, very well,'' Dr. Frist told reporters. But some of his colleagues begged to differ. While the majority leader learned of the suspicious substance about 3:15 p.m. on Monday, a number of senators said they did not hear of it until this morning, when they turned on their televisions.
As the day wore on Tuesday, some senators were growing impatient. In a reprise of a scene from the 2001 anthrax attacks, Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, was camped out along with a group of his aides in the Capitol Hill rowhouse he shares with Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, and two members of the House.
''The first thought is, 'Thank God no one's hurt,' '' Mr. Schumer said. ''The second thought is, 'Thank God, it doesn't seem like it's spread.' The third thought is, 'Why is it taking so long to get us back to our offices?' ''
Senators were allowed limited access while the investigation continued: Mr. Breaux got into his office in the Hart Senate Office Building and reported back that his fish were fine. But throughout the Capitol, security was intense. A suspicious package was removed from the Capitol, but turned out to be harmless.
When Ms. Collins tried to get in, she had to identify herself. ''I'm Senator Susan Collins,'' she told the officer, ''and I'm just trying to go to the policy lunch.'' They let her in.
Without their offices, lawmakers and their aides were forced to make do. Mr. Harkin entertained union members in the Capitol's Rotunda. Surrounded by statues of Abraham Lincoln, Andrew Jackson, Thomas Jefferson and Ulysses S. Grant, Mr. Harkin interspersed policy talk with a history lesson for his guests.
Those senators who have hideaways -- tiny, unmarked offices in odd corners of the Capitol awarded on the basis of seniority -- ensconced themselves there. But newcomers to the Senate were forced to scramble for space, sometimes seeking comfort from friends back home.
Senator John Cornyn, a freshman Republican from Texas, wound up in a suite belonging to a fellow Texan, Representative Tom DeLay, the House Republican leader. Senator Jim Talent, Republican of Missouri, sought refuge with another Missourian, Representative Roy Blunt. Senator Norm Coleman, Republican of Minnesota, emerged from the Republicans' policy lunch with a shiny silver key to Senator Mitch McConnell's hideaway tucked in his coat pocket.
''Now,'' Mr. Coleman said, a slight tone of exasperation in his voice, ''I just have to find out where it is.''
RICIN ON CAPITOL HILL: THE SENATE'S BUSINESS
