Officials of New Jersey's troubled child welfare agency have set aside $300,000 for a new program to ease the state's reliance on foster homes for newborns whose parents are unable or unwilling to raise them.
The newly appointed commissioner of the Department of Human Services, James M. Davy, said on Tuesday that it is becoming difficult to recruit foster parents for the infants -- commonly known as boarder babies -- and that the state instead will focus increasingly on finding relatives or family friends to care for them.
''Relatives are always, always our first choice,'' Mr. Davy said at a news conference at University Hospital here. ''It is important to place these babies with relatives as quickly as possible.''
The new program is among the reforms Mr. Davy ordered in the Division of Youth and Family Services after Gov. James E. McGreevey appointed him commissioner of human services in mid-January. They are part of a plan for a broad overhaul of the division that must be submitted to a federal judge here by Feb. 18.
The changes are required under an agreement made last June with Children's Rights Inc., an advocacy group based in New York, which had sued the agency, alleging shoddy oversight of children it supervised. Criticism intensified in January 2003 after a 7-year-old boy in foster care, Faheem Williams, was found dead in a Newark basement.
Mr. Davy's other immediate reforms include retraining DYFS workers to assess the safety of foster homes; reviewing the files of 6,000 children under the agency's supervision to see who no longer requires state oversight; arranging for more pediatricians to examine children before placement in foster homes; and transporting more children under agency care to school, child care and after-school programs.
Mr. Davy and aides said that New Jersey, like many other states, has struggled for several years to find homes for the babies weeks after they have received medical clearance to be discharged from hospitals. In many cases, their mothers are addicted to drugs, infected with H.I.V. or suffering from other medical or mental health problems.
In the mid-1990's, some of the babies remained in hospitals for up to a month while child welfare officials sought homes for them. Since then, the average stay has been reduced to about two weeks, state officials said.
However, Mr. Davy made it clear on Tuesday that he is eager to have them discharged and placed in suitable homes more quickly. To speed the process, three social workers from DYFS have been assigned full time to University Hospital -- where state officials say the problem is most acute -- to seek relatives or friends of the mothers and fathers of the babies. Previously, the searches for foster homes and relatives generally started after the birth of boarder babies, officials said. Now the team of social workers will start the searches late in the pregnancies of the women in hopes that suitable homes will be available as soon as the newborns can be discharged from the hospital, officials said.
The issue of boarder babies has been most persistent in Essex County -- primarily in Newark -- and in two other counties, Middlesex and Union, Mr. Davy said. Generally, about 50 boarder babies are born each month in the three counties, including 35 in Newark, officials said.
On Tuesday, there were 23 boarder babies at hospitals in the three counties, including 14 at University Hospital, Mr. Davy said. Last year, the hospital spent $1 million caring for boarder babies, its officials said.
Currently, the Division of Youth and Family Services spends about $137,000 a year in the three counties to find foster homes for babies, officials said. The extra $300,000 now available for the three counties will be spent for cribs, clothing, car seats and other baby supplies, as well as for background checks on relatives who agree to take the babies and safety checks at their homes.
When Mr. Davy took office on Jan. 14, 21 boarder babies were hospitalized in the three counties. He ordered them placed as soon as possible. Officials said on Tuesday that 12 of the babies had been taken in by foster families, 4 by relatives, and one by its mother. Four remained hospitalized.
In addition, 19 others born after Jan. 14 are hospitalized in the three counties now, including 14 at University Hospital, the officials said.
