DerMarr Johnson's doctor told him after the horrific car accident on Sept. 13, 2002, that he would be able to walk again but that his basketball career was probably over.
Johnson was the Atlanta Hawks' 2000 lottery pick, a pencil-thin guard chosen No. 6 after spending one year at the University of Cincinnati. His right arm bears a tattoo -- N.B.A.: King of the Court.
But he has not played an N.B.A. game since Sept. 13, 2002, when he broke four vertebrae in his neck when his Mercedes slammed into a tree outside of Atlanta and caught fire.
Nearly 18 months later, the Knicks gave Johnson another chance.
When Allan Houston went to the injured list yesterday to continue rehabilitating his knees, Isiah Thomas plucked Johnson, a 6-foot-9 guard and forward, from the Long Beach Jam of the minor league American Basketball Association -- Dennis Rodman's latest stop -- and signed him to a 10-day contract.
''I'm just lucky to be walking and especially lucky to be playing,'' Johnson said at the Knicks' morning shoot-around.
With the Jam, Johnson averaged 22.9 points and gained interest from N.B.A. teams as the season progressed. ''I was in the minor leagues, but I felt good to be playing basketball,'' he said.
Knicks Coach Lenny Wilkens said: ''Why not take a look at him? It doesn't cost anything.''
Wilkens said he was curious to see whether Johnson's talent ''is still there.''
All-Star Snub for Marbury
Stephon Marbury was not voted to the Eastern Conference All-Star team as a reserve, and he was matter-of-fact about missing the chance to be named for the third time.
''I felt like I was supposed to be on the team,'' he said.
Marbury is averaging 20 points and 8.7 assists. He averaged 3 more points than Jason Kidd (one fewer assist) and one more assist than Baron Davis.
Marbury will still be going to Los Angeles to participate in the point guard skills challenge during All-Star Weekend.
Latrell Sprewell and Allan Houston were the last Knicks All-Star in 2001.
Time Off for Houston
Allan Houston must stay on the injured list for a minimum of five games, which is what he was planning to do. Houston will not return until after the All-Star Game break.
Houston said he is still planning to return after the All-Star break, on the Feb. 17 game against Detroit.
''Over the last few days, I have made some progress,'' Houston said. ''In order for my mind and body to be as strong as I want it to be, it's going to take it a little while. I just think it's the right time for it, especially after seeing tonight. It makes it easier.''
PRO BASKETBALL: KNICKS NOTEBOOK
