The number of college hockey players majoring in theater is not a readily available statistic, but a number of them showed up last October at an open casting call in Vancouver, British Columbia, where work on the movie ''Miracle'' was beginning. ''Miracle,'' which opens Friday, tells the story of the United States team, which was made up mostly of college players, that upset the Soviet Union en route to the Olympic gold medal in 1980.
The producers and the director Gavin O'Connor set out to cast hockey players who could act -- or be taught to act -- rather than actors who could skate. They wound up giving key roles to seven former college players.
''Everybody and their brother who played hockey in Boston was trying out for these roles. I saw so many kids I knew,'' said Michael Mantenuto, who played as a freshman at Maine in 2000-1, while majoring in theater. Mantenuto was cast as Jack O'Callahan, the Boston University standout who led the United States team in penalty minutes.
''The first audition, there were a lot of actors who said they could play hockey but really couldn't,'' said Eric Peter-Kaiser, who had been studying drama at SUNY-Potsdam, where he had six goals and four assists as a freshman last season. Peter-Kaiser, a native of West Vancouver, was cast as Mark Johnson, who scored two goals against the Soviet Union and currently coaches the University of Wisconsin women's hockey team.
Forty actors were invited to a final audition that was more like a training camp than a Hollywood screen test. ''We had a full hour-and-a-half practice, they split us up into two teams, and then we had a full-out, 60-minute game with referees,'' Peter-Kaiser said. ''The fact that I looked like I was in the 70's already, with long hair, sort of helped me a little bit. I've always just sported the hockey hair, I guess.''
Peter-Kaiser said the filmmakers' quest for realism extended to the shooting of the game sequences, in which former junior hockey and minor-league players portrayed the national teams beaten by the United States.
''If anyone says that this isn't real, I have about eight injuries that can prove that every hit was real,'' he said. ''I took stitches in the face. I ripped every ligament in my shoulder. We took it to heart.''
After Coach Shawn Walsh died of cancer in September 2001, Mantenuto left Maine. After transferring to Massachusetts-Boston, Mantenuto learned about the ''Miracle'' casting call. He has relocated to California to pursue an acting career.
Peter-Kaiser has decided not to return to Potsdam State. In a telephone call from Los Angeles, Peter-Kaiser said, ''I just couldn't pass up an opportunity to do what I wanted to do.''
HOCKEY EAST  UMass-Lowell Forfeits 5 Games
Massachusetts-Lowell (8-17-3, 5-8-1) has forfeited five victories after school officials determined that the River Hawks used an ineligible player. The player, who was not named, transferred last spring from another Division I school, but did not earn the required total of credits during the mandatory waiting period of one academic year.
The prime beneficiary of the violation was Massachusetts. The Minutemen (15-5-5, 11-3-2) picked up 4 points from the forfeiture of Massachusetts-Lowell's back-to-back victories over them in January. That, and victories over Northeastern, 4-2, and Merrimack, 3-1, propelled Massachusetts into second place in Hockey East.
COLLEGE HOCKEY AMERICA  Robert Morris Replaces Findlay
C.H.A. will add a new member, Robert Morris, to replace Findlay, which is abandoning varsity hockey at the end of this season. By adding the Pittsburgh-area university, C.H.A. will remain a six-team league and retain its automatic bid to the N.C.A.A. tournament.
Robert Morris has been competing in club hockey level and won the 2002 Division III American College Hockey Association national championship.
WOMEN  Nos. 1 and 2 to Meet
Dartmouth, ranked No. 1 in the United States College Hockey Online Poll, will travel to Minnesota for a weekend series against the second-ranked Golden Gophers.
The Big Green (16-1-2, 9-0-1) is on a six-game victory streak and is unbeaten in 11 games. In games last weekend at Union College, which is in its first year of Division I play, Dartmouth won by 7-0 and 11-0.
Minnesota, coming off victories at Bemidji State by 4-0 and 4-1, is without important players because of injury and academic ineligibility, but is bolstered by the play of Krissy Wendell, who scored two goals and five assists at Bemidji.
Slap Shots
SNOW STOPS GENESEO -- Geneseo (12-4-3, 6-2-1), a surprise team in Division III after a nine-victory season last year, had to postpone its game on Friday at Oswego because of a snowstorm that dumped four feet of snow on the area.
WENTWORTH COACH REPLACED -- Wentworth (10-7-2, 9-1-0), tied for first place in the E.C.A.C. Northeast Conference going into last night's action, has replaced Coach Bill Bowes with the assistant Jonathan Deptula. In a telephone interview, Donald Main, Wentworth's vice president for development, said that there were ''philosophical differences.''
HOCKEY: COLLEGE REPORT
