THE Indiana Pacers roared into Madison Square Garden last night against the new-look Knicks, falling, 97-90, in a game whose story line was the grudge match between the teams' executives: the Pacers' Larry Bird and the Knicks' Isiah Thomas.
But the real story had more to do with the N.B.A., progress and what happens when a group that is out finally begins to claim its share of the pie. You discover that human nature -- the survival instinct -- prevails.
The latest chapter of this story began last spring, when Joe Dumars, the Pistons' president of basketball operations, fired Coach Rick Carlisle despite his leading Detroit to the Eastern Conference finals.
During the summer, Larry Bird, who had become the Pacers' president, fired Thomas as coach; Thomas had failed to take the Pacers past the first round of the playoffs for the third straight season. Bird then hired his friend and former teammate Carlisle to coach the Pacers.
The N.B.A.'s progress unfolded in December, when Thomas resurfaced -- not as a coach but as president of basketball operations for the Knicks. After trading for Stephon Marbury, Thomas finally put an end to an agonizing death watch by firing Coach Don Chaney. Dumars, a black executive, fires Carlisle, a white coach. Bird, a white executive, fires Thomas, a black coach. Then Thomas, a black executive, fires Chaney, a black coach, and hires a black coach, Lenny Wilkens, to replace him.
This, I thought, must be progress. In David Stern's N.B.A., everybody does everybody in.
For young fans, this coaching bloodletting is a natural occurrence. For someone like Bernie Bickerstaff, who joined the N.B.A. in 1973 as an assistant coach, Thomas's presence in New York signals a new juncture in the push for power by blacks in a sport they've dominated numerically for nearly 30 years. Bickerstaff is the general manager and coach of the Charlotte Bobcats, the N.B.A. franchise that begins play next season. Ed Tapscott, the former Knicks G.M., is the team president. The owner is Robert Johnson. All three are African-American.
Bickerstaff -- who has been witness to this evolution toward equal-opportunity hiring and firing that Thomas exercised when he let Chaney go -- grew up in Kentucky under strict segregation. ''When I got on the bus, I went straight to the back,'' he said. ''I didn't even think about it, because that's what my grandparents did.''
The most incredible thing for Bickerstaff was when the University of Kentucky hired a black basketball coach in 1996, after Adolph Rupp had refused to recruit black players for decades. ''I listened to that radio every night because they were my favorite team,'' he recalled. ''I didn't see color. The most amazing thing to me was that a Tubby Smith was hired. That's something, growing up, that I never envisioned.''
Bickerstaff entered the N.B.A. in 1973 as an assistant to K. C. Jones with the Bullets. The push then was more jobs, more coaching opportunities for the growing number of black players who wanted to stay in the game.
Bill Russell became the first black head coach in 1966 and Lenny Wilkens the second in 1969. Bickerstaff spent 12 years as an assistant in Washington. In 1985, he replaced Wilkens as coach in Seattle. Bickerstaff was eventually hired by Wes Unseld as coach of the Bullets and was fired by Unseld, who at the time was one of the league's few black general managers.
''Obviously, there's progress that's being made,'' Bickerstaff said from his office yesterday afternoon. ''What I like about the N.B.A. is that the opportunity has been presented.
''Back then there was the push just to try to get the opportunity. You have to get people in, in order to grow and perpetuate. You have to be in a position to make decisions. But those decisions have to be solid, because ultimately it's about having a quality environment around you and a quality situation where you can succeed.
''You have to make tough decisions. And the meek, they don't survive.''
Last night, I spoke with Jets Coach Herman Edwards. Edwards, the first African-American head football coach in New York, fired Ted Cottrell, who is also black, as his defensive coordinator. Cottrell was hired in Minnesota. The significance of Isiah Thomas's resurfacing in New York, and Cottrell's resurfacing in Minnesota, is that hiring, after years of pushing, is becoming colorblind.
''Twenty years ago, sometimes the guy that got hired wasn't the right guy; he was the most convenient guy,'' Edwards said. ''You want to make sure you're giving the right people the opportunity.
''You got to make sure that you exhaust all the avenues to give everyone an opportunity. Doesn't mean they get the job. They get a chance to have their day, to stand before you and say, 'Hey, I'm the right guy for this job.' ''
I asked Edwards, who was always active in the push to hire more black coaches, what he felt the pushing and lobbying was all about. He said learning the value of fair play and teaching that value. ''When you get in that position, you make sure that you treat people fairly,'' he said.
Dumars fires a successful white coach and replaces him with a coach, Larry Brown, who is already in the Hall of Fame. Larry Bird fires a Hall of Fame player as coach, the player is hired to run the Knicks and fires the black coach who was once Bird's teammate. Over in New Jersey with the Nets, Lawrence Frank, who never even played high school basketball and was the manager of the Indiana University team where Thomas once played, is the N.B.A.'s hottest coach.
The Knicks defeated the Pacers last night, and Thomas exacted a very small measure of revenge, but the larger lesson in Thomas's hiring and performance in his short time as the Knicks' boss is that from Dumars to Bird, winning in the N.B.A. has become colorblind.
Sports of The Times
