The Bloomberg administration has revised its five-year, $13.1 billion school construction proposal so that it now calls for building 90 schools with a capacity of 66,000 students. The original plan, unveiled in November, called for building 76 schools for 63,000 students.
Nine of the 14 additional buildings are needed because officials overestimated the size of schools that could be built at previously designated construction sites. Limitations at those sites will force the city to build smaller schools..
To pay for the 14 additional buildings, city officials reduced the plan's emergency fund by $220 million, to $371 million from $591 million. The emergency fund is money set aside in the capital plan for unexpected renovations or repairs.
Kathleen Grimm, the deputy schools chancellor for finance and administration, said that officials were comfortable reducing the emergency fund, which is based on a percentage of the overall construction plan, because the plan is far larger than a typical five-year school capital budget.
The Panel for Educational Policy, the successor to the Board of Education, is scheduled to vote on the plan Monday night. City education officials revised the plan in response to citywide public hearings. The plan still relies on $6.5 billion in extra aid from Albany, money that Gov. George E. Pataki has suggested will not be forthcoming.
To create 3,000 more student seats, the revisions add five new buildings, including one in each of three neighborhoods -- School Districts 25 and 29 in Queens and District 19 in Brooklyn -- that were not slated to get new buildings in the original plan.
The two other buildings will be in District 6 in Upper Manhattan, where schools are severely overcrowded. The November plan had included just one new school -- of 440 students -- for District 6, and parents and community groups complained bitterly. The two new schools will accommodate 630 students each in kindergarten through eighth grades.
The construction plan also calls for an effort to rebuild and renovate low-performing schools, at a cost of more than $2 billion. And the revised plan names 120 low-performing schools that are to get work in the plan's first year -- 46 of those schools, or more than a third, are in the Bronx.
Eva S. Moskowitz, the chairwoman of the City Council Education Committee, said the revisions included some much-needed fixes, particularly in upper Manhattan. ''The revisions corrected some glaring inadequacies,'' she said. ''District 6 has a problem, a very significant problem.''
Ms. Moskowitz, however, said she remained concerned about many aspects of the plan, particularly its reliance on New York State to pick up half the price tag. ''All of this is talk until we get $6 billion from Albany,'' she said.
