As moments of cultural incoherence go, it was hard to beat the Super Bowl halftime show last Sunday, which culminated -- if that's the right word -- in a brief display of Janet Jackson's bare but armored right breast. Consider, to begin with, the strange tangle of interested parties mixed up in the post-debacle legal scrum. CBS broadcast the game, MTV produced the halftime entertainment, Viacom owns both CBS and MTV, the F.C.C. is investigating the incident, and the N.F.L. is miffed at MTV. At the center of it all are Ms. Jackson and Justin Timberlake, who tore off the critical part of Ms. Jackson's costume to the words ''have you naked by the end of this song,'' which come from Mr. Timberlake's ''Rock Your Body.'' And then, of course, there is the rest of the world.
The Federal Communications Commission plans to try to decide whether the breast baring was intentional and, if so, what fines to levy. The real problem -- something for viewers to ponder, not the F.C.C. -- is the pyramid of contradictions embodied in the Super Bowl extravaganza. There seemed about as much relation between the hyperbolic sexuality of the dancing and the offending part of Ms. Jackson's anatomy as there is between the hypertrophied athleticism of the football players on the field and the erectile dysfunction ads that peppered the broadcast. Tempting as it is to single out a corporate or individual villain here, the incident is a cultural short-circuit. During the game, an enactment of rage. During halftime, an enactment of lust. During the ads, an acknowledgment of sexual dysfunction. During the dance, the peekaboo that exposed the pretense of it all. The only thing missing was a flyover by military fighters.
CBS can pretend all it wants to honor the pristine values of network television, as if the networks were a sex-free safe zone for family viewing. MTV can deny -- in its most solemn utterance ever -- that the unveiling was intentional. The N.F.L. can take its stand on the sanctity of the game. Let the blame fall on Mr. Timberlake and Ms. Jackson's costume designer, whose sense of infrastructure is woeful. Since the endless furor over all this has displaced any discussion of the actual game, it looks as if the real victim is Tom Brady.
