Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran's supreme leader, met Tuesday afternoon with President Mohammad Khatami and the speaker of Parliament, Mehdi Karoubi, in an effort to resolve the country's deepening political crisis, but they were unable to come to any agreement, said a person knowledgeable about the talks.
The meeting had been seen as a last-ditch effort to prevent the country from falling into political chaos.
The person said the ayatollah refused to agree to any delay in parliamentary elections scheduled for Feb. 20. President Khatami and other reformers had asked for a postponement so that the hard-line Guardian Council, a 12-member panel that reviews candidates, might allow more candidates to run.
The conflict between President Khatami supporters, who control Parliament, and their hard-line opponents has been building since early January, when the Guardian Council barred from running nearly half of 8,200 people who had filed as candidates. Last week, the council reinstated 1,160, but most of the liberal candidates, including 87 sitting members of Parliament, remain excluded. On Sunday, some 125 members of Parliament resigned in protest.
The student democracy movement, long frustrated by the slow pace of government reformers, had kept its distance during a three-week parliamentary sit-in after the bans were announced.
But forecasts that the crisis would reunite those groups seem to be bearing out. A pro-democracy student group broke its silence on Tuesday, holding a meeting in support of the lawmakers who resigned and calling for a referendum over the future of the Islamic state and for a boycott of the Feb. 20 vote.
A request by Tehran University students to demonstrate on Wednesday was denied, but the students said they would protest on Sunday, the Student News Agency reported.
The leading reform party, the Islamic Participation Party, announced that it would boycott the elections unless the vote was delayed and all candidates were allowed to run.
Twenty-eight provincial governors, the officials normally responsible for organizing elections, laid out the same conditions in a letter to President Khatami on Tuesday. Meanwhile, the Guardian Council has ignored the Interior Ministry's intention to delay the vote, leaving open the possibility that the military may run the elections.
The possibility that the Khatami government will step down is being widely discussed.
President Khatami meets with his cabinet on Wednesday morning.
