Consolidated Edison said yesterday that it had corrected 110 cases of stray voltage and inspected about half the manhole and service box covers in New York City, following a woman's electrocution last month.
The company, meanwhile, came under increased pressure to change its policies. City Council Speaker Gifford Miller joined labor leaders, community advocates and other council members in calling on Con Ed to overhaul its inspection, repair and maintenance policies. The woman, Jodie S. Lane, 30, died after stepping on an electrified metal plate while walking her dogs in the East Village on Jan. 16.
''Our job at the City Council is to hold people accountable, and we intend to do just that,'' Mr. Miller said yesterday. He said that the Council's Transportation Committee would conduct a public hearing on Feb. 12 to further investigate the utility's practices and propose methods for preventing a repeat of the accident.
As he spoke, Mr. Miller waved photographs from around the city showing corroded wires dangling from light poles and service boxes exposed to the elements. ''I'm no electrician,'' he said, ''but these certainly don't look up to snuff.''
Assemblyman Michael N. Gianaris, from Astoria, Queens, said he was introducing legislation requiring Con Ed to conduct annual inspections of service box and manhole covers, and to report its findings publicly.
During the news conference, two Con Ed representatives distributed a news release saying that the utility had already inspected more than 120,000 of the 250,000 manhole and service box covers in the city. The release also said that Con Ed shared responsibility with the Department of Transportation for electric service to city light poles, of which the utility said it had inspected 100,000 and found 157 with errant voltage.
But several speakers criticized the utility for what they said was a tendency toward hasty patchwork rather than careful solutions.
Councilman Peter F. Vallone Jr., from Astoria, said that a few months ago, a Con Ed transformer across the street from his office blew out and was fixed with a temporary structure called a shunt, only to explode last week, setting an adjacent building and a vehicle on fire.
One of the more unusual suggestions came from Sally Haddock, a veterinarian at St. Mark's Veterinary Hospital, where Ms. Lane's dogs had been treated. Ms. Haddock said that dogs could serve as an early-warning system -- the urban equivalent of canaries in a coal mine.
She said that during her 17 years as a veterinarian in the city, countless clients had complained to her about their dogs getting shocked, but she had doubted the claims.
She added, ''I doubt no longer.''
