As he notched a string of victories across the country, Senator John Kerry looked past Senator John Edwards and the other Democrats still in his path and trained his sights on the president.
''George Bush, who speaks of strength, has made America weaker,'' Mr. Kerry said here Tuesday night. ''Weaker economically, weaker in education, weaker in health care. And the truth is that George Bush has made America weaker by overextending the armed forces of the United States, overstraining our reserves, driving away our allies, and running the most arrogant, reckless, inept and ideological foreign policy in the modern history of our country.''
Brandishing victories in Arizona, Delaware, Missouri, New Mexico and North Dakota, Mr. Kerry went on the attack as if the fall campaign were just around the corner.
''We will take nothing for granted,'' he said. ''We will compete everywhere. And in November, with your help, we will beat George W. Bush.''
Mr. Edwards's victory in South Carolina, of course, and Gen. Wesley K. Clark's in Oklahoma, made clear that the Democratic nomination remained very much in contention. And Mr. Kerry showed no sign of being distracted from the job at hand: he chose to celebrate his victories in Seattle with an eye to Saturday's Washington state caucuses, while minimizing the gains of those who dug in and poured money into just one or two states.
''I think coming in second, given where I've been, is enormous,'' Mr. Kerry said after learning of Mr. Edwards's victory in South Carolina.
But as Mr. Kerry's momentum picked up after his victories in Iowa and New Hampshire and as his standing in some national polls has risen above the president's, the outlines of a general-election have come into view.
Gone is Mr. Kerry's call for ''answers, not anger'' and ''solutions, not slogans'' -- his implicit rebuke to Howard Dean. Seldom does Mr. Kerry remind audiences he has been ''a Democrat my whole life,'' his thinly veiled smack at General Clark.
Instead, Mr. Kerry promises to don political armor and take on the ''powerful special interests'' that he says dominate Washington. ''I know there are powerful interests arrayed on the other side of this struggle, and the obstacles sometimes seem overwhelming to Americans,'' he said. ''But I am ready for this mission.''
Mr. Kerry's martial rhetoric has a clear purpose.
Already, Republicans have tried to depict Mr. Kerry as a kind of Dukakis redux, a weak-on-defense Massachusetts liberal, and the senator's Democratic allies have painted President Bush, whose handling of the war on terrorism may be his greatest electoral asset, as a chicken hawk who ducked out on his National Guard service while Mr. Kerry was braving enemy fire in Vietnam.
While the volleys and countervolleys give a taste of just how bitter and personal a campaign could be in store this fall, the exchanges also are a reminder that, in the post-Sept. 11 age, national security has become a paramount issue in the eyes of Republicans and Democrats alike.
Yet other kinds of security are important to Americans as well, Mr. Kerry's advisers say -- job security, retirement security, the security of having health insurance, to name a few -- and he has long believed that these, too, will play an enormous role in the 2004 election.
''The undergirding theme is the enormous anxiety out there,'' an aide said. ''If you haven't lost your job you know someone who has, or your 401(k) is down, or you've got aging parents, or you're worried about how to stay in your home, or you know someone in the National Guard whose service is becoming deployment after deployment.''
In his speech, Mr. Kerry touched lightly on that theme. ''At the heart of this campaign is a commitment to an America where the future is built on fairness for all, not on a privilege for few,'' he said. ''So we will repeal the Bush tax cuts for the wealthy and invest in health care and the education of our children.''
As much as Mr. Kerry has adapted to his front-runner's role by refraining from engaging his rivals, what is striking about his emerging strategy against Mr. Bush is how little it will have to change, Kerry aides and Democratic strategists say.
''The candidates that have had a pretty good general-election message -- Kerry and Edwards -- have actually emerged as the ones that at this point are doing best,'' said Gene Sperling, who was President Clinton's economic adviser.
The classic Democratic path -- running to the left in a primary and tacking back to the center in a general election -- appears not to apply much in Mr. Kerry's case, his aides say: after all, he ran well to the right of Howard Dean tax cuts for the middle class, trade, the war in Iraq and gay marriage.
''You could argue that the best thing that ever happened to John Kerry was Howard Dean,'' said an aide, who also acknowledged that such words would have been unthinkable just a month ago.
What has received precious little attention as the primary calendar intensified is Mr. Kerry's platform.
''Showing you're in touch and you have a powerful critique opens the door to people listening to you,'' Mr. Sperling said. ''Then, when they're listening, you have to show them that you have your own action plan as well. He's got a good manufacturing jobs tax credit, a good tax credit for college education.''
Mr. Kerry gave only a hint of those ideas in his speech Tuesday night. But in lofty terms, he was clearly seeking to reach a wider audience than just primary voters.
''Now I ask all Democrats all Americans to join now in the journey of our time,'' Mr. Kerry said, ''to define our character and recapture our own spirit. With faith in our ideals and in each other, we can return America to a road of greatness and justice.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
