Prime Minister Tony Blair announced Tuesday that he had set up an inquiry into Britain's prewar intelligence on Iraq's illicit weapons, but he added that the committee would not have a mandate to examine the political decisions to go to war.
The inquiry will work largely behind closed doors and report its findings to Mr. Blair before Parliament adjourns this summer. As such, it will be much shorter than the inquiry President Bush said Monday that he would establish to examine intelligence on Iraq and report in 2005.
''I think it is right,'' Mr. Blair said in a morning meeting with a parliamentary committee, ''that we have a look at the intelligence that we received and whether it is accurate or not.'' But the prime minister said he was opposed to any inquiry that reviewed the political judgments to go to war and how intelligence findings were used in support of those judgments.
The inquiry will be headed by Lord Butler, who served as private secretary to Prime Ministers Margaret Thatcher, Harold Wilson and Edward Heath.
Mr. Blair said an inquiry had become necessary after the chief United States weapons inspector, David A. Kay, said in Washington that stocks of Iraqi chemical and biological weapons might not have existed and that intelligence assumptions about the immediate threat from Saddam Hussein might have been broadly wrong.
Mr. Blair made the announcement at a question and answer session with parliamentary committee chairmen. In shirt sleeves, the prime minister was affable and in good humor, admitting recent mistakes in how he had handled major legislation and asserting that the period for questioning his integrity over the preparations for war had come to an end with Lord Hutton's verdict last week. Lord Hutton found that the government had not exaggerated or deliberately distorted the intelligence on Iraq to persuade a reluctant public to go to war.
Mr. Blair said that Lord Hutton's was the third full inquiry into circumstances related to the war and that the only thing left to examine was the intelligence process itself.
''I honestly think that the political judgment has got to be in the end the government and Parliament, and you can't subcontract that to a committee, and I don't believe frankly that the committee would want to look into that,'' Mr. Blair said.
The announcement touched off a lengthy debate in Parliament over whether the inquiry would settle the most contentious questions of how political leaders used intelligence findings to support the assertion that Saddam Hussein was an imminent threat to the region and to ''the stability of the world,'' as Mr. Blair warned in September 2002.
Robin Cook, a former foreign secretary under Mr. Blair, asked from the floor of the House of Commons, ''Does he really believe he can separate the intelligence judgment on the threat from the political judgment to go to war?''
But other members like Ann Clwyd pointed out that even Kurdish leaders in Iraq believed that Mr. Hussein had chemical and biological weapons that he was ready to use on them in March. She called it a ''disgrace'' that the international community had not acted sooner to end the ''genocide'' that she said Mr. Hussein was practicing.
Michael Howard, the Tory opposition leader, said his party supported the inquiry because Mr. Blair had promised that all questions on how intelligence was used in the political decision making ''came fairly and squarely within the remit of this inquiry.''
The Liberal Democratic Party refused to endorse the inquiry after lengthy negotiations with Mr. Blair and his aides on Monday night. Menzies Campbell, speaking for the Liberal Democrats during the debate, said the party had withdrawn because ''any inquiry'' that failed to address the foundation of Mr. Blair's judgments over going to war ''would be unlikely to command public confidence.''
