When Officer Richard S. Neri Jr. killed an unarmed teenager, Timothy Stansbury Jr., on a Brooklyn housing project roof two weekends ago, there were cries that he had fired too quickly and that the shooting was another example of the department's indiscriminate hostility toward the city's black residents.
But a review of department statistics shows that as crime has declined over the last 10 years, the number of police shootings has dropped by almost two thirds, as has the number of people, including suspects, wounded by the police. The number of deaths dropped from 29 in 1994 to 11 in 1999, then leveled off. Last year, 14 people were killed, the data show.
A Brooklyn grand jury is weighing the evidence in the Stansbury case to determine if the officer will face criminal charges.
Although Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said the Stansbury shooting did not appear to be justified, the department has deemed the vast majority of police shootings justified, usually because an officer or a civilian was threatened. There is no national database of unjustified police shootings.
''The reality is that New York City police officers take great care in the use of deadly force, and that's reflected in the data,'' Mr. Kelly said yesterday through a spokesman. ''When there is a shooting, each and every firearm discharge is thoroughly reviewed.''
Last year in New York, two officers were killed by civilians, four were wounded, four were accidentally shot by other officers and three accidentally shot themselves. Officers fired 122 times in 2003, compared to 331 times in 1994, hitting 35 dogs, 38 offenders, including the 14 who were fatally shot, and one bystander.
For the purposes of these statistics, ''offenders'' includes anyone the police intentionally hit. The 11 people in that category killed in 1999 would include, for example, Amadou Diallo, who was killed five years ago today when a team of street-crime officers mistook his wallet for a gun. Among the 14 people killed last year was Ousmane Zongo, an unarmed man shot in Chelsea.
The New York police shooting numbers compare favorably with those of other, much smaller agencies like the Los Angeles Police Department, where 14 people were killed by officers last year, and the Chicago Police Department, where 17 were killed. The New York Police Department has 37,000 officers compared with Los Angeles's 9,200 and Chicago's 13,500.
But in Miami, where at one time police shootings of civilians were so frequent they caused a public outcry, its 1,100 officers did not fire a single shot at civilians last year, Chief John Timoney said. Over the previous 14 years, Chief Timoney said, the department averaged two to three killings, eight injuries and eight civilians shot at without being hit.
Last year, Miami officers were given taser guns, which most New York officers do not have, and the department instituted what the chief called the most restrictive weapons policy in the country. Officers are forbidden from touching the triggers of their guns unless they intend to fire. ''Initially, there was some minor resistance'' to the policy, Chief Timoney acknowledged. But now, he said, ''They can't believe that they went a full year. They're very proud.''
A major issue in the Stansbury case is the fact that Officer Neri was patrolling with his gun drawn, and possibly his finger on the trigger, when he shot Mr. Stansbury, 19.
Officer Neri and his partner, Jason Hallik, were conducting a routine patrol of the roof of the Louis Armstrong Houses when they approached a door to check the stairwell. At the same time, Mr. Stansbury and two friends were coming up the stairs to the roof. It is unclear whether Mr. Stansbury or the officers opened the door, but witnesses agree that no words were exchanged before Officer Neri fired once, killing Mr. Stansbury.
In response to the shooting, Commissioner Kelly appointed a panel to review training and tactics like patrolling with a drawn gun, but at the same time he has repeatedly said that officers must be allowed to use their own judgment about when to draw their guns.
Over the years, police policy has tried to balance civilian and police officer safety when it comes to weapons. As Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown's deputy, Mr. Kelly testified that semiautomatic weapons were more likely to go off accidentally and officers using them tended to overshoot. But officers, pointing to a 1986 incident when an officer was killed while reloading his revolver, wanted weapons to equal the guns criminals used, and when Mr. Kelly became police commissioner he authorized 9-millimeter semiautomatics.
Still, for the first class of recruits to be issued the 9-millimeter guns, in 1993, Mr. Kelly limited the magazines to 10 rounds instead of the standard 15, as a guard against overshooting. Officers objected to having fewer rounds than the criminals they were confronting and were ultimately given the full magazine.
In 1998, under Police Commissioner Howard Safir, the department approved the use of hollow-point bullets, which are deadlier for targets but considered safer for bystanders because they are less likely to ricochet or pass through objects.
