Glamour is returning to some of the less-chic areas of Fifth Avenue as fashion apparel stores and luxury goods are replacing bank branches, airline ticket offices and products based on cartoon characters, according to retail brokers. High rents, they say, mean that only stores with high profit margins can afford to operate in the well-trafficked area along the avenue from 49th to 58th Streets.
One of the biggest changes is about to happen at the corner of 57th Street and Fifth Avenue, where a Louis Vuitton luxury leather goods store is to occupy a space where Bugs Bunny was the leading character in a Warner Brothers Studio store during the brief flourishing of movie-based retailing on the avenue.
The Warner Brothers and Disney stores in the Times Square area have departed as well, and brokers say it remains to be seen if Disney will hold onto its store in an area increasingly dominated by such luxury goods retailers as the recently expanded Asprey in Trump Tower and the DeBeers jewelry store scheduled to replace the existing Louis Vuitton store at 55th Street once the new one is open.
''The area just north of Saks is one of the most desirable shopping areas in the country,'' said Benjamin Fox, an executive vice president of Newmark New Spectrum Retail, a brokerage company. He said rents along the avenue in the blocks north of Saks, which occupies the blockfront from 49th to 50th Streets, ranged from $800 to $1,200 a square foot a year, making them among the highest in the nation and the world. South of 49th Street, he said, rents were in the $200-a-square-foot range.
The new Louis Vuitton store will be in space once occupied by Manufacturers Hanover Bank before it was merged out of existence. A bank branch was almost as incongruous as Warner Brothers at an intersection whose other corners are occupied by the Tiffany, Bulgari and Van Cleef &amp; Arpels jewelry stores.
Bank branches are not popular with other retailers, Mr. Fox said, because they interrupt ''retail continuity'' by closing on weekends and having operating hours different from stores selling goods.
To improve the retail climate on this prime shopping street, zoning was changed several decades ago to make it difficult to replace bank branches or airline ticket offices once a lease expired, said Tom Cusick, president of the Fifth Avenue Business Improvement District.
One of the more significant new stores on the avenue, American Girl Place, which sells expensive dolls and accessories, took the space of a Korean Airlines ticket office at the southeast corner of 49th Street, noted Faith H. Consolo, vice chairman of Garrick-Aug, a retail broker.
In addition to the coming DeBeers store, a women's fashion store, Zara, is scheduled to open at the northeast corner of 54th Street. The store will be carefully positioned between expensive designer stores and those with more mass market appeal, said Laura H. Pomerantz, a principal in PBS Realty Advisors, a brokerage firm.
''It is for the woman who cannot afford Chanel, but who wants a designer look,'' she said. Zara, a Spanish company with operations worldwide, sought the location because of the image it projected.
''Most designers will not go below 52nd Street,'' Ms. Pomerantz said. ''They want to be between 52nd Street and Bergdorf'' at 58th Street.
''And because there is only a finite number of retail space, it drives up the rent. One reason why true retailers have been replacing ticket offices is that service business cannot afford ground floor retail rents.''
Retailers are investing big money, not only in rents, but in the construction of their stores to establish an image, said Michael Hofmann, the director for retail operations at Colliers ABR, a brokerage and services company. Asprey invested an unprecedented $2,000 a square foot to build its store in Trump Tower to showcase its luxury goods. (Typical office installations are about $75 a square foot.)
DeBeers is taking not only the old Louis Vuitton space at 55th Street in the St. Regis Hotel but is adding the Godiva space next door to develop a 7,000-square-foot store, he said.
Rising costs have been forcing retailers to consider locations to the south of what had been considered prime on the street, brokers say. They note that both American Girl Place and Lacoste have their stores on the south side of 49th Street.
These pressures and the large number of retail spaces already vacant or due to become available could change the nature of the avenue between 42nd and 49th Streets, said Richard Hodos, president of Madison HGCD, a retail brokerage concern.
He said the space at the southeast corner of 46th Street that housed the Wiz store was vacant and the HMV store across the street was due to become available. The Today's Man store at 44th Street is also on the market.
''Huge blocks of space will become available over the next few years that could change the character of the avenue,'' Mr. Hodos said. ''It may not be as much luxury as farther north, but it will change.''
Regional Market Manhattan
