Senator John Kerry rolled to substantial victories in the Democratic presidential contests in Missouri, Delaware, Arizona, New Mexico and North Dakota last night, but Senator John Edwards won handily in South Carolina, allowing him to portray the contest as a battle with Mr. Kerry and keep the race alive at least through February.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark declared himself the winner late last night in Oklahoma, after unofficial returns showed him with nearly a 1,300-vote edge over Mr. Edwards in a state where General Clark had been looking for a victory to keep his candidacy afloat.
But General Clark, an Arkansas native, came in fourth in South Carolina, a state where he had once been confident of victory, behind Mr. Kerry and the Rev. Al Sharpton.
Mr. Kerry, a senator from Masschusetts, said his victory in five of the seven states where there were votes last night demonstrated his national appeal, as he sought to rally the party around his candidacy.
''I am ready for this mission,'' Mr. Kerry said at a victory rally in Seattle. ''From standing up to Richard M. Nixon to stopping George Bush and the big oil companies from drilling in the Alaska wildlife refuge, I know how to take on those powerful interests. I've done it all my life.''
''I pledge to you tonight,'' he added. ''I have just begun to fight.''
Looking exuberant if a bit weary, Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, celebrated his victory in South Carolina at 8 p.m. sharp, at a rally in Columbia, in the heart of the state where he was born and where he had said he must win to proceed with his first bid for the White House. Mr. Edwards, who spent six of the past seven days campaigning in the state, won about 45 percent of the vote, defeating Mr. Kerry by about 15 percent.
''Tonight you said that the politics of lifting people up beats the politics of tearing people down,'' he said.
General Clark said, ''As an old soldier from Arkansas, I could not be any prouder of your support in this first election that I have ever won.''
The results prompted Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, the Democratic candidate for vice president in 2000, to abandon his bid for the presidency. Mr. Lieberman rode into this campaign last year as the best-known candidate in the field, placed fifth in New Hampshire last week and last night won just 11 percent of the vote in Delaware, a state where he had focused much of his time and resources.
''It is now time to make a difficult but realistic decision,'' Mr. Lieberman said.
The voting on the busiest night thus far in the Democratic battle is recasting the race as the candidates churn ahead through a difficult month of contests, starting this weekend with Washington and Michigan, two states where Mr. Kerry is in strong shape, and continuing to Virginia and Tennessee next Tuesday, providing Mr. Edwards another opportunity to display his Southern strength.
For now, at least, Mr. Kerry faces an energetic challenge from Mr. Edwards. And aides to General Clark were looking to a victory in Oklahoma to establish him as a player in a race where he has often seemed to be standing at the sidelines.
Mr. Edwards posted his victory in the state where he was born, and some Democrats said the first-term senator would be under pressure to prove that his appeal went beyond the South. But Mr. Edwards came in second in the Iowa caucuses, and Mr. Kerry's advisers have increasingly viewed him as their biggest obstacle to the nomination. And his strong showing in Oklahoma startled some of Mr. Kerry's supporters, and put him in a position where he could least keep a foot in the door, providing an alternative for Democrats who are uncomfortable with Mr. Kerry.
Aides to Mr. Edwards announced that he would take a bus trip on Friday through Virginia, which has a primary on Feb. 10, and that he would compete in the Michigan caucuses this Saturday, in an effort to erase a perception, being pressed by the Kerry campaign, that his was merely a regional candidacy.
Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, who had once looked to clinch the nomination with the round of contests yesterday, suffered another disappointing night. Dr. Dean spent no money on advertising in those states where there were contests yesterday but had campaigned in South Carolina, Arizona, New Mexico and Missouri.
Dr. Dean was trailing the pack in Arizona, Missouri and South Carolina, and he moved early in the night to try to blunt the damage of the showing, with an appearance before supporters in Washington State, which will hold a caucus this weekend, where Dr. Dean had turned his attention.
''Well, the votes are starting to come in and we're going to have a tough night tonight,'' Dr. Dean said. ''But you know what? Here's why we're going to keep going and going and going and going and going, just like the Energizer bunny. We're going to pick up some delegates tonight, and this is all about who gets the most delegates in Boston in July, and it's going to be us.''
Mr. Edwards's aides said he had about $1 million on hand, though he will now be under intense pressure to raise far more money quickly.
Mr. Kerry won states far outside his home region, including in the Midwest and the Great Plains. In South Carolina, he came in second, ahead of General Clark, who is also a Southerner and who had once looked to win in the state, and Mr. Sharpton, the only black candidate in the race, who had at one point predicted he could win a state where about half the Democratic electorate was African-American.
The contests yesterday marked the first time the candidates faced competitive races in states with sizable groups of minority voters.
In South Carolina, surveys of voters leaving the polls found that Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards each drew about one-third of the black vote. Mr. Sharpton drew just one-fifth.
Mr. Kerry did well among Hispanic voters in Arizona. Nearly 2 in 10 voters in Arizona said they were Hispanic, and half of them voted for Mr. Kerry.
The poll in South Carolina also found that voters looking for a candidate who stands up for what he believes were much more likely to vote for Mr. Edwards than for Mr. Kerry. But voters looking for someone who could defeat President Bush were more apt to back Mr. Kerry.
Nearly half the voters in South Carolina said the economy and jobs were the most critical issues in casting their vote; nearly half of them voted for Mr. Edwards, twice as many as voted for Mr. Kerry.
The polls were taken in Arizona, Missouri, Oklahoma and South Carolina, and were conducted by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International for a pool of the five television networks and The Associated Press.
Democrats interviewed as they cast their votes around the nation yesterday echoed the same themes that were heard among party members in New Hampshire and Iowa: that they were looking first and foremost at who could defeat Mr. Bush.
But in St. Louis, Mike Showers, 54, who said he had been unemployed since a Norwegian company bought the food processing plant where he worked and shut it down, said he was worried about Mr. Kerry.
''I don't believe that Kerry is the strongest candidate,'' Mr. Showers said. ''To me, he reminds me of Al Gore, who they all said could beat George Bush easily.''
He said Mr. Edwards ''doesn't have a lot of political experience, but he's from a middle-class family and he has middle-class values, and that's the most important thing to me.''
Mr. Edwards, looking fatigued, said in a television interview last night that he would seek in the days ahead to draw contrasts with Mr. Kerry, based on differences in the two men's upbringings and some of their positions.
But pressed in an interview on CNN by Bob Dole, who was the Republican candidate for president in 1996, about how he would do it, Mr. Edwards acknowledged that he might be constrained by the way he had presented his candidacy as avoiding the kind of attacks that are part of politics now.
Mr. Dole, who said he was speaking from experience, suggested that it would not be enough for Mr. Edwards to try to distinguish himself from Mr. Kerry by pointing only to their differences on the North American Free Trade Agreement, which Mr. Kerry voted for in the Senate.
''The key for me, Bob, is I got to this place by running a very positive, uplifting campaign, which is something that you and your spouse know a lot about,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''I have to be very careful not to lose that.''
''That doesn't mean that I don't have to point out clear differences between myself and other candidates, between myself and Senator Kerry, that go beyond trade and background,'' he said. ''There are significant issue differences between us, and those will become clear as we go forward.''
How the Voter Polls Were Conducted
The primary day polls were based on questionnaires completed by voters as they left voting stations yesterday throughout Arizona, Missouri, Oklahoma and South Carolina.
The polls were conducted by Edison Media Research of Somerville, N.J., and Mitofsky International of New York City for the National Election Pool, a consortium of ABC News, Associated Press, CBS News, CNN, Fox News and NBC News.
The results are based on voters in 30 to 40 randomly selected precincts across each of the four states: 2,093 voters in Arizona, 1,378 in Missouri, 1,501 in Oklahoma and 1,982 in South Carolina. The Arizona results include 401 self-described absentee voters interviewed by telephone.
In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results from such polls should differ by no more than plus or minus three or four percentage points from what would have been obtained by seeking to interview all voters who cast ballots in each of these four Democratic primaries.
Results based on smaller subgroups have a larger potential sampling error.
In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of voter opinion on Election Day, like the reluctance of some voters to take time to fill out the questionnaire, may introduce other sources of error into the poll.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW  Correction:  February 5, 2004, Thursday  A front-page article yesterday about voting in the Democratic primaries on Tuesday misstated the size of John Edwards's South Carolina victory over John Kerry in some copies. It was about 45 percent to 30 percent -- a difference of 15 percentage points, not 15 percent.
