The death of John J. Geoghan, the defrocked pedophile priest who was killed in his prison cell last summer, was largely a result of a series of mistakes and failures by the state prison system to treat him fairly and responsibly and to protect him in jail, according to a report issued on Tuesday on a state investigation.
The inquiry, by a three-member panel appointed by the state public safety secretary, found that guards ''unduly harassed and physically abused'' Mr. Geoghan at one prison and that he was repeatedly written up in ''overzealous and unwarranted'' disciplinary reports.
Those reports were in turn used to classify Mr. Geoghan, a frail 68, as more dangerous than he was and to transfer him wrongly to a maximum-security prison, the investigation found.
It was at the maximum security prison, the Souza-Baranowski prison in Shirley, that Mr. Geoghan was strangled and beaten to death in his cell on Aug. 23 just after lunch. Another inmate, Joseph L. Druce, 38, who is serving a sentence of life without parole for killing a gay man and who has acknowledged neo-Nazi and antigay beliefs, has admitted that he killed Mr. Geoghan, Mr. Druce's lawyer has said.
The panel's report found no evidence that guards were complicit in the killing, but it found lapses in staffing and procedures that could have contributed to it.
At the time of the killing, one guard was supervising the 26 inmates in the unit who had been let out of their cells for lunch, and that guard failed to check that each prisoner had been locked back in his cell.
''There appears to be a gap between what the department says it does and what it actually does,'' the public safety secretary, Edward A. Flynn, said in releasing the report.
Mr. Geoghan, Mr. Flynn said, ''was where he should not have been.''
''And,'' he added, ''in fact if we look carefully at Geoghan's passage through the Department of Corrections, it is clear that he was the subject of harassment by correctional personnel. We're sorry that happened. That should not have happened.''
Mr. Geoghan, accused of molesting 150 boys over 30 years, was the man whose case ignited the scandal about sexual abuse by members of the clergy when Roman Catholic Church documents showed that he was transferred to six parishes by archdiocesan officials in Boston who knew of his pedophile background. At his death, he was serving a 9-to-10-year sentence for fondling a 10-year-old boy in a swimming pool.
In the first 14 months of his sentence, at the medium-security state prison in Concord, Mr. Geoghan's lawyers complained that guards harassed him and filed trumped-up disciplinary reports.
The study found that the investigation of those complaints was not always rigorous and that in one case prison officials had improperly ruled unfounded Mr. Geoghan's complaint that a guard hit him in the strip-search area of the visiting room. In fact, the report said, Mr. Geoghan was physically assaulted by a guard, who has since resigned.
The report found that at Concord Mr. Geoghan received more disciplinary reports than any other inmate in his unit and that they ''were more the result of personal animus'' than ''serious infractions that required formal findings.'' One guard filed more than half the infractions.
The investigation found that some senior prison officials relied on the long list of disciplinary infractions to justify reclassifying Mr. Geoghan as a more dangerous prisoner. The superintendent at Concord overrode the recommendation of a classification board that recommended keeping Mr. Geoghan there.
''It seems clear to us that they did not take the time to review the quality or the seriousness of these disciplinary reports,'' Mr. Flynn said, adding that when Mr. Geoghan's lawyers appealed the classification decision it was reviewed and reapproved by the official who had originally approved it.
''If we rigorously applied the standards that are in place, this wouldn't have occurred,'' Mr. Flynn said, and Mr. Geoghan ''would have remained at M.C.I.-Concord.''
''We would have found out that his discipline was bordering on harassment.'' Mr. Flynn said.
The report cited other contributing factors to Mr. Geoghan's death. It said inmates and guards knew that the cell doors at Souza-Baranowski could be easily jammed closed. The authorities have said Mr. Druce jammed Mr. Geoghan's door using a book, a nail clipper and a toothbrush, preventing guards from entering to stop the assault.
The report also cited a state court ruling that requires even inmates in the most secure units to be allowed out of their cells at meals and other times.
A lawyer for Mr. Geoghan, Leslie Walker, executive director of Massachusetts Correctional Legal Services, said: ''We're pleased that preliminarily the panel has validated what we have been saying for years, that the classification system is inadequately and woefully broken. John Geoghan's death was only the tip of the iceberg. Prisoners today are being treated as badly as he was, but they're not high-profile inmates.''
Mr. Flynn's panel did not investigate whether the problems were systemwide. That is the task of another panel, appointed by Gov. Mitt Romney, that will receive a copy of the Geoghan report.
Before the report, several correction officials were removed, including Correction Commissioner Michael T. Maloney, who was replaced in December, and Michael Grant, the superintendent at Concord, who was removed last month. Mr. Flynn said it was not clear whether other officials would be replaced.
''If nothing else, inmates must leave our custody with a belief that there is moral order in their world,'' Mr. Flynn said. ''If they leave our care and control believing that rules and regulations do not mean what they say they mean, that rules and regulations can be applied arbitrarily or capriciously or for personal interest, then we will fail society, we'll fail them, and we will unleash people more dangerous than when they went in.''
