The Rev. Al Sharpton failed to achieve the two main goals he had set for himself in this state's primary. He did not win a single delegate and, according to surveys of voters leaving the polls, he did not garner strong support among black voters.
With nearly 85 percent of precincts reporting, Mr. Sharpton placed a distant third, with just under 10 percent of the vote, compared with about 45 percent for Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and 30 percent for Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts.
Though Mr. Sharpton was quick to boast that he had bested Howard Dean, Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, his anemic showing leaves him hard pressed to present himself as the candidate best able to speak for minority voters within the Democratic Party. It also undermines his strategy of using delegates to leverage influence at the Democratic National Convention this summer.
''He is not catching fire with the black vote,'' said David Bositis, an analyst with the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies in Washington. ''The black vote is looking for a winner and they are not looking to make a statement about race. John Kerry is one of the whitest guys, you know what I mean. The fact that he is getting almost twice as much as Sharpton is getting, that sends a message.''
Mr. Sharpton's showing in the other state primaries was even worse, but he had staked his credibility on South Carolina, spending more time here than in any other state, hoping the large number of black voters would accept him as the defender of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s legacy.
Yet polls of voters who had cast ballots showed that he had received 19 percent of the black vote as against 32 percent for Mr. Kerry and 36 percent for Mr. Edwards.
Perhaps more telling of Mr. Sharpton's failure to sell his message was his inability to earn any delegates in the Sixth Congressional District, which has a higher concentration of black voters than any other district in the state. With nearly 70 percent of the precincts counted in that district, Mr. Sharpton had just 12.5 percent of the vote.
Mr. Sharpton insisted that he was satisfied with his showing, though he had been saying for months that his strategy was to win delegates.
''I think that this is a tremendous boost to our campaign,'' he said, ''because for me to be able to come to South Carolina with no money, no TV ads and do double digits, come in third, ahead of Wesley Clark, double Howard Dean and triple Joe Lieberman, no one would have ever believed that would happen.''
He said he was heading next to Michigan, which will hold its caucuses on Saturday, and believed he could do better in Northern states when it was just a three-way race between himself, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards. But as Mr. Sharpton tries to press on, his campaign is nearly half a million dollars in debt.
Yet, many people say that Mr. Sharpton has benefited from his primary run, even though he may not have achieved the level of success he had hoped for. But Mr. Bositis said it was a fragile victory, one he could lose if he was not careful.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MINISTER
