THE New Zealand wine industry came out of nowhere in the 1980's, producing a flock of pungent, razor sharp sauvignon blancs that many people found irresistible. But the sauvignon blanc is a grape of vast likability and dubious glamour, and the New Zealanders preferred talking about the great pinot noirs that were coming rather than the fine sauvignon blancs that were already here.
By contrast, Australian winemakers hardly ever mention pinot noir. While the Australians have successfully produced almost every other sort of wine, from dry riesling to powerful cabernet sauvignon and shiraz to rich tawny port, pinot noir is the rare grape that does not come to mind. In fact, when the Dining section's wine panel decided to taste New Zealand pinot noirs, it was almost as an afterthought that we decided to toss in a few from Australia that we had come upon. In the end we tasted 17 pinot noirs from New Zealand and 8 from Australia.
Imagine our surprise when 5 of our top 10 wines, including three of our top five, turned out to be from Australia.
Was this because the Australian pinots were so strong or the New Zealand pinots were so weak? It's not clear, although it's fair to say that while the panel found enjoyable wines it did not find many impressive wines. Joshua Wesson, a chief executive of Best Cellars, a small chain of wine shops, characterized the bottles we tasted as ''a thousand points of lightness.''
''They're pleasant rather than complex,'' said Mr. Wesson, who joined Florence Fabricant, Amanda Hesser and me in the tasting. ''I couldn't dream in any of these wines.''
Dreaminess, after all, is one of those elusive traits that make great pinot noir such a holy grail among wine lovers. Cabernet sauvignon may conjure up awe, like an unforgettable oration, but, at the risk of sounding sappy, pinot noir can be pure poetry. Still, most of the examples we tried reminded me of those potentially exotic foods that, in the end, taste like chicken.
Part of what makes pinot noir so exciting is its elusive nature. From one moment to the next, the aromas and flavors of a good pinot noir can change in the glass, making it difficult to pin down. Sometimes, tasting pinot noir is like a game of musical chairs -- you have to stop the music arbitrarily, capturing the wine at one point of its evolution. But these wines changed very little.
One that did was the 2001 Giant Steps from the Yarra Valley in Victoria, in southeastern Australia. Initially this wine was dominated by tough, earthy tannins that made its underlying fruit difficult to taste. Still, we sensed potential in the wine. As an experiment, Mr. Wesson, at one time a prize-winning sommelier in New York, took one glass of the Giant Steps and an empty glass. He then vigorously poured the wine back and forth to add oxygen and, in effect, to mimic the aging process. In fact, with the added air, we all agreed that the wine improved by leaps.
Our top wine needed no such parlor tricks. It too was Australian, a 1998 Lenswood from the Adelaide Hills, just outside the city of Adelaide, and it impressed us with its balance and spiciness. Our No. 2 wine was also the top New Zealand pinot noir, a 2001 Mt. Difficulty from Central Otago, the world's most southern wine region. Ms. Fabricant called it elegant and I found harmonious. At $25, it was also our best value, which points out a problem with these wines: they are seldom inexpensive.
While I especially liked two other New Zealand pinots -- the 2001 Villa Maria and the 2001 Cloudy Bay -- most of these wines, both New Zealand and Australian, lack a true sense of identity. This, of course, is not surprising. By the standards of the Old World, pinot noir winemaking in New Zealand and Australia is still in its infancy. Burgundians have had centuries to figure out exactly which sites make the best vineyards. Californians have had decades and are still experimenting. In New Zealand, around 85 percent of the pinot noir vines -- covering almost 6,800 acres today -- have been planted in the last 10 years, and most of those in the last five.
Pinot noir is New Zealand's most widely planted red grape, but Australia has almost three times as much pinot noir as New Zealand. Nonetheless, it accounts for just a small percentage of the red grapes there, badly trailing shiraz, cabernet sauvignon, merlot and grenache, among others. New Zealand has staked far more of its winemaking future on pinot noir than Australia has.
These high hopes are already causing problems for New Zealand winemakers. At a conference on pinot noir in New Zealand last month, speaker after speaker, according to The New Zealand Herald, emphasized that the country was producing too much pinot noir at too high a price for too limited an audience. It was suggested that winemakers concentrate on producing more moderately priced wine and fewer high-end bottles. That makes sense. It would make even more sense to produce better, more distinctive wines before charging those high prices.
Tasting Report: In a Region Still Learning, Some Successful Lessons
Lenswood Australia $40  *** [rating: three stars]  Adelaide Hills 1998  Balanced and enjoyable, Eric Asimov said. Joshua Wesson called it big, brash and warm, while Amanda Hesser found it spicy. It reminded Florence Fabricant of the flavors of coffee and Cognac.
Mt. Difficulty New Zealand $25  *** [rating: three stars]  Central Otago 2001  Elegant, Fabricant said, with spice, cinnamon and vanilla flavors. Wesson liked the aromas and called it complex. Asimov found it harmonious and textured, and Hesser called it chipper.
Giant Steps Australia $28  ** 1/2 [rating: two and a half stars]  Yarra Valley 2001  Really improved with exposure to air. Tannic now, but lots of potential, Asimov said. Hesser liked the spicy aromas.
Ata Rangi New Zealand $40  ** 1/2 [rating: two and a half stars]  Martinborough 2001  Rich, round and Burgundian, Fabricant said. It brought me back for more, Wesson added. Hesser found it brisk, with flavors of spices and leather.
Sticks Australia $19  ** [rating: two stars]  Yarra Valley 2002  Light and sweet, said Asimov, who imagined drinking it with roast chicken. The aroma reminded Wesson of oolong tea. Hesser likened it to shiraz.
Saint Clair Doctor's Creek $20  ** [rating: two stars]  New Zealand Marlborough 2001  The right stuff, Wesson said, and Fabricant agreed, calling it rich and elegant. Hesser found flavors of cinnamon and spice. Asimov was a holdout, likening it to cough syrup.
Villa Maria New Zealand $30  ** [rating: two stars]  Marlborough Cellar Selection 2001  Overripe in the California style, Asimov said, but with depth. Hesser called it brawny, while Wesson found aromas of cherry and cola.
Cloudy Bay New Zealand $32  ** [rating: two stars]  Marlborough 2001  A gutsy wine with more intensity than many of the others, Asimov said. Wesson called it big but clumsy, and Fabricant found it tannic.
Henschke Australia $45  ** [rating: two stars]  Lenswood Giles 2001  Real pinot noir perfume, Asimov said. Wesson called it floral and quiet. Fabricant noted a fruity softness, while Hesser found it very likable.
Pipers Brook Australia $18  ** [rating: two stars]  Ninth Island, Tasmania 2003  Hesser liked the aromas, and Wesson detected the aroma of cooked plums.
WHAT THE STARS MEAN  (None) Pass it by  * Passable  ** Good  *** Excellent  **** Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the panel's reaction to the wines, which are tasted with names and vintages concealed. The panelists this week are Eric Asimov, Amanda Hesser, Florence Fabricant and Joshua Wesson, a chief executive of Best Cellars, a chain of wine shops. The tasted wines represent a selection generally available in good retail shops and restaurants. Prices are those paid in liquor shops in the New York region.
Tasting Coordinator: Bernard Kirsch  nytimes.com
Recent wine columns from the New York Times are online: nytimes.com/wine.
WINES OF THE TIMES
