Sabato F. Catucci stalks the piers on the Red Hook waterfront in Brooklyn, where he has built a thriving business handling cargo containers, lumber, coffee and cacao beans. Mr. Catucci, the owner of American Stevedoring, has plans for a liquor distribution center on Pier 12, where his company would unload beer and spirits bound for Brooklyn, Queens and Long Island, bringing hundreds of new jobs to Red Hook.
But last month, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey told him it would not extend his lease of Piers 6 through 12 beyond April, while it explored ''alternative uses for the property.'' Though Representative Jerrold Nadler says he may have persuaded the Port Authority to grant a temporary reprieve, the longer-term fight to save Mr. Catucci's maritime operation is just one skirmish in a battle raging through Red Hook and neighboring Gowanus over the future of the hardscrabble area.
The small manufacturers, distributors and businesspeople who have helped revive that stretch of the Brooklyn waterfront in the last decade say the city and the Port Authority are writing off the area's maritime and industrial base in favor of a future filled with luxurious waterfront apartments featuring spectacular views of Manhattan and Governors Island. They say rents have risen sharply and speculators are holding industrial properties off the market in the belief that the city will rezone the area for residential development -- a move they contend will make it all but impossible for many of these companies, and thousands of jobs, to survive.
The struggle mirrors what is happening in Long Island City, Queens, and Greenpoint and Williamsburg, Brooklyn, where gentrification and a shift to residential zoning are under way, worrying manufacturers who provide blue-collar jobs.
''This is in many ways the most complex land-use battle in the city,'' Deputy Mayor Daniel L. Doctoroff said of Red Hook. ''You've got competing uses, with tradeoffs between jobs, waterfront access, housing, retail jobs and industrial jobs. It requires a very textured approach.''
He and other city officials say that a good number of Red Hook's buildings sit unused or underused, so the city and Port Authority are studying the area to determine how to make the transition from an industrial waterfront to an office-based economy. They will not say whether they envision luxury apartments, though they say they favor a mixed-use neighborhood where residential and commercial developments coexist.
But the small-business owners say coexistence is a pipe dream. A boom for luxury apartments will price them out of the neighborhood, they say, and the new developers and residents will have little tolerance for the gritty realities of a working waterfront.
''People who live in Red Hook depend on these jobs; they're willing to put up with the truck traffic and the congestion,'' said Igor Katsman, vice president for operations for Snapple Distribution, which rents warehouse space and employs 250 workers. ''But when you start putting up $500,000 condominiums, those people don't want trucks on the streets.''
In the meantime, Mr. Katsman said, he fears that the uncertainty over the area's future will put him out of business. ''Nobody wants to give us a long-term lease because they're all speculating that the zoning will be changed to residential,'' he said.
Mr. Doctoroff said that the city and Port Authority expect to complete their latest study on the future of Piers 6 through 12 sometime this month. He also said that Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg plans this spring to issue the city's long-awaited policy on preserving industrial space citywide.
But there is an increasing fear at Community Board 6, whose district includes Red Hook, that the Bloomberg administration has a different vision for the neighborhood. Last month, the city granted a variance to convert four floors of a six-story industrial building to 152 luxury apartments. The Red Hook-Gowanus Chamber of Commerce filed a lawsuit opposing the variance, saying it would touch off a conversion craze.
''It feels like Red Hook is being dismissed as the viable maritime and industrial community that it is,'' said Phaedra Thomas, the chamber's administrator. ''They've determined that its future is as a luxury waterfront community.''
Until the 1950's and 60's, much of shipping industry in New York Harbor docked in Red Hook and South Brooklyn, where longshoremen, warehouse workers and truckers lived in the neighborhood and walked to work. Most of the jobs disappeared as the Port Authority built a modern container port on the other side of the Hudson River in Newark and Elizabeth, N.J., a move that is still seen as a profound betrayal in Brooklyn.
But in the last 10 to 15 years, the Red Hook waterfront has come back to life as light manufacturers, artisans, distributors and woodworkers moved into abandoned industrial buildings and shipping resumed on some of the piers. According to a survey by the South Brooklyn Local Development Corporation, the number of businesses in Red Hook climbed to 457 in 1999, from 291 in 1991.
Mr. Catucci said he moved 110,000 shipping containers at the Red Hook container port last year, up from 18,211 in 1994. He established the biggest port for cacao beans in the world, although it has lost ground in recent years to Camden, N.J. and Philadelphia. He said he employed roughly 750 workers, including many from the nearby Red Hook Houses, where unemployment runs as high as 30 percent.
The Port Authority has complained that it spends millions of dollars a year subsidizing a barge that transports the containers from Brooklyn to New Jersey. But Mr. Catucci says he pays about $6 million of the $10 million cost of the barge and is developing plans for beverage and food distribution centers that would import goods bound for Brooklyn, Queens and Long Island, not New Jersey. He says that could eliminate the need for the barge in five years.
If the city decides that in the long run the piers could be better used for housing or recreation, he said, he will gradually move his business to the largely deserted South Brooklyn Marine Terminal. But he has lost business while the Port Authority kept him in limbo over his lease -- and the city, he said, could lose hundreds of jobs, once again to New Jersey.
''I'm not going to stand in the way of progress, but I've got to know where I'm going,'' he said. ''We lost 400 jobs at Domino Sugar last week. I don't want to lose these jobs, too. You'll never get them back.''
A senior city official suggested that the loss of American Stevedoring could be offset by new jobs at a passenger ship terminal, an Ikea store and a Fairway supermarket all proposed for the area.
Robert Hughes, manager of the Erie Basin Bargeport, where 500 people work on barges and tugboats and at a beer distributor, said it was critical that the city retain Red Hook as its last working waterfront aside from Howland Hook in Staten Island. Tom Fox, president of New York Water Taxi, said the growth of ferries would continue only if there are places in the harbor to berth, repair and service boats.
''There's a mile or more of waterfront property that, depending on the whims of elected officials, might be taken out of maritime use,'' Mr. Hughes said.
A year ago, Carnival, the big cruise ship company, worked out a proposal with the local community board and Mr. Catucci to build a $100 million passenger terminal at Pier 7 for the Queen Mary 2 and other ships, because of overcrowding at the city's terminals on the west side of Manhattan. But the city rejected the plan. Yesterday, Kate Ascher, an economic development official, said the city would invest $250 million over the next 10 years in passenger terminals, including two berths in Red Hook, although she acknowledged that she did not know where the money would come from. In the meantime, the city offered Carnival a temporary berth at Pier 7.
Community leaders worry that if the city does not move more quickly on a permanent terminal, Carnival will follow Royal Caribbean, another cruise line, to Bayonne, N.J. ''We expected the departure of Royal Caribbean would be a wake-up call for the city,'' said Giora Israel, a Carnival vice president. ''But so far we haven't received a viable proposal.''
Bruce Batkin, an owner of the building at 160 Imlay Street that was granted a residential variance, said he thought the city's study indicated that the waterfront was well suited for residential development, despite the lack of public transportation. Across a short stretch of water, he said, the city plans to create a resort and conference center on Governors Island.
''We think this should be a template for successful coexistence of commercial and residential,'' he said.
Jeffrey Levi, chief executive of John's Gourmet, a high-end food manufacturer that employs 70 people a block away from Imlay Street, is not convinced. The people moving into expensive apartments, he said, will have concerns about truck traffic, noise, smells and Dumpsters. He pointed out how the Gillies Coffee Company in Sunset Park, another Brooklyn industrial neighborhood undergoing gentrification, was fined by the city last year after a resident complained about the smell of coffee.
With the area's future so uncertain, Mr. Levi said he is considering moving to New Jersey.
''For me to expand, it means I would have to invest another quarter of a million dollars,'' he said. ''I'm not sure it makes sense if I'm going to have baby strollers rolling down the block.''
Correction:  March 2, 2004, Tuesday  An article on Feb. 4 about development along the Brooklyn waterfront misstated the role of Community Board 6 in a now-defunct proposal by Carnival, the cruise ship company, to build a $100 million passenger terminal in Red Hook. It has generally supported the idea, but it did not negotiate a deal with Carnival.
