TEMPERAMENT plays an important role in cooking. If you are the sort of person who, when catching a train, needs to arrive at the station with time to spare, you will cook in a very different way from someone who habitually boards the train while it is inching away.
Those like me who need to arrive on time take comfort from cooking that can be done in advance. It makes us feel safe and relaxed, knowing that not too much frenetic last-minute activity will be necessary. We are not the stir-fry crowd. But even if you are a skin-of-the-teeth type who feels that planning smacks of regimentation, there will be times when you need to get ahead of yourself.
Life, after all, is not always arranged according to our own inclinations. If a crowd is coming for supper at midweek and you work late every night, then it makes sense to find the time on a Sunday afternoon to get dinner well under way. And let's be frank: what else is there to do on gray February weekends? Finding an excuse to stay inside, and to feel good about it, can be only a good thing. It's even better knowing that you have a dish of chili or winter-warming stew stashed away in the refrigerator for a night when you scarcely have the energy to boil water.
The chili here is vegetarian, chock-full of kidney beans and red lentils. This should be spiced to taste, but I don't see the point in a chili without bite: I want heat from red pepper flakes and smoky warmth from ground coriander and cumin, crushed cardamom pods and a scant amount of cocoa.
A certain amount of chopping and stirring is involved, but with a friend to chat with in the kitchen, this can be an unhurried way to unwind on a weekend. At times, it is even more gratifying as a peaceful, solitary activity, an allowable escape.
With the bulk of the work dispatched, the chili can be kept in the refrigerator several days and just heated up in the oven for half an hour when you need to eat it. A little last-minute finessing will be needed before it is reheated, but the effort involved is minimal: just fork together some buttermilk, eggs, a tiny bit of honey, cinnamon and oil and stir them over some cornmeal and a small amount of flour in a bowl. Spread this wet-sand mixture over the chili in its dish and sprinkle lavishly with punchy mature Cheddar.
In cooking, this topping turns into the most fabulous crunchy corn bread -- more a crumbly dry biscuit -- that you push into the chili as you eat to absorb the hot juices. You need do nothing more to this golden dish than sprinkle freshly chopped cilantro and a dollop of palate-salving sour cream over the top.
There is nothing to stop you from dishing up the spiced beef in red wine, from the other recipe, at a relaxed midweek supper party, but proper cooking should not be undertaken only for company. I make a batch of the beef and, when it is cool, bag it up in single portions and put it in the freezer. It makes a great warming supper for nights when you are lazing on a sofa watching television. Just because it's Wednesday, you need not have to resort to a bagel or grilled cheese for dinner.
The stew does need something alongside, however. Inspired by the corn bread topping on the chili, I have gotten into the habit of preparing some instant polenta; I cook it in broth and whisk in a knob of butter at the end. The glorious golden color of the cornmeal mush does much to enhance the stew.
If polenta does not appeal to you, just throw some sweet frozen peas into the pan when reheating the meat. With the effort of preparing supper well behind you, all that's left for you to do is to enjoy it.
VEGETARIAN CHILI WITH CORN BREAD TOPPING  Time: 1 hour 35 minutes
For the chili:
2 tablespoons olive oil  2 medium onions, finely chopped  2 cloves garlic, minced  3 cups red bell peppers (about 2 large peppers), finely diced  2 teaspoons hot red pepper flakes  1 teaspoon ground coriander  1 teaspoon ground cumin  3 cardamom pods, lightly crushed  1 1/2 cups red lentils  3 cups canned chopped tomatoes  3 1/2 cups drained canned kidney beans
1/4 cup ketchup
1/4 cup tomato paste  1 tablespoon unsweetened cocoa powder
For the corn bread topping:  1 teaspoon salt  2 cups cornmeal  2 tablespoons flour  3 teaspoons baking powder  1 teaspoon ground cinnamon  1 cup buttermilk  2 large eggs  1 teaspoon honey  2 tablespoons vegetable oil  1 cup coarsely grated Cheddar cheese
For serving:  2 cups sour cream  1 cup chopped cilantro.
1. To prepare chili, heat olive oil over medium-low heat in a deep, wide pan with a lid. Add onions, garlic and bell peppers, and sauté until softened, about 5 minutes. Stir in red pepper flakes, coriander, cumin and cardamom pods. Stir in lentils.
2. Add chopped tomatoes, kidney beans, ketchup, tomato paste, cocoa and 3 cups water. Stir well. Cover, and simmer, stirring frequently, until mixture is thickened and beans are tender, about 45 minutes. Chili can be made ahead to this point and topping added later. (In that case, cover, and refrigerate for up to 3 days, bringing to room temperature before proceeding.)
3. For corn bread topping, heat oven to 425 degrees. In a mixing bowl, combine salt, cornmeal, flour, baking powder and cinnamon. In a separate bowl, whisk together buttermilk, eggs, honey and oil. Pour liquid ingredients into dry; stir until combined.
4. Pour chili into a baking dish 13 by 9 by 3 inches. Spread corn bread topping evenly over chili, and sprinkle cheese on topping. Bake until topping has risen and turned golden brown, about 25 minutes.
5. Remove from oven, and let chili stand about 5 minutes. To serve, cut into squares, and pass sour cream and cilantro at the table.
Yield: 8 servings.
SPICED BEEF IN RED WINE  Time: 2 1/2 hours
2 slices bacon, roughly chopped  2 large onions, roughly chopped  2 large leeks, white and light-green parts only, roughly chopped  3 medium carrots, peeled and roughly chopped
1/2 cup fresh parsley
1/3 cup flour  Salt and freshly ground black pepper  2 1/2 pounds chuck steak in 2-inch cubes  2 tablespoons vegetable oil, or more as needed  Pinch ground cloves  1 1/2 cups red wine  2 cups beef stock or canned beef broth  2 tablespoons Worcestershire sauce  3 star anise  1 tablespoon light brown sugar.
1. Working in batches in a food processor, process bacon, onions, leeks, carrots and parsley until finely chopped. Transfer mixture to a large bowl, and set aside. Place flour in a freezer bag or other plastic bag. Season with salt and pepper. Add steak cubes, seal bag, and shake until cubes are well coated.
2. Place a flameproof casserole dish over medium heat, and add 2 tablespoons oil. When hot, add beef in batches, turning until well seared on all sides. As beef is browned, transfer to a plate, and set aside.
3. If casserole dish is dry, add 1 tablespoon oil. Place over medium heat, and add bacon and vegetable mixture and ground cloves. Sauté until softened, about 10 minutes. Meanwhile, in a medium saucepan, combine wine, beef stock, Worcestershire sauce, star anise and brown sugar. Place over medium-high heat, and bring to a boil. When vegetables have softened, pour liquid over vegetables.
4. Return beef to pan, and stir well. Bring to a boil, partly cover, and reduce heat to low. Simmer gently until beef is tender, about 2 hours. Serve hot. If desired, stew may be cooked and then covered and refrigerated for up to 2 days or frozen for a month.
Yield: 6 servings.
AT MY TABLE
