Former Prime Minister Alain Juppé vowed Tuesday to continue in political life pending an appeal of his conviction last week on corruption charges.
Before the verdict, Mr. Juppé had pledged to quit politics if convicted, but he then reversed himself, saying in an interview on TF1 television's main evening news program: ''If this decision confirms my ineligibility, I will turn the page forever. I am appealing, and as the appeal places the sentence on hold, I will continue to exercise my responsibilities.''
Mr. Juppé was given an 18-month suspended prison sentence and barred from public office for 10 years. Calling the verdict too harsh, he said, ''I believe I don't deserve this.''
His decision followed a solid show of support by President Jacques Chirac, his cabinet and leaders of Mr. Chirac's governing party, the Union for a Popular Movement, which Mr. Juppé now heads.
Mr. Chirac, who nurtured and supported Mr. Juppé politically for nearly three decades, urged him to remain in politics in the hope that the verdict might be overturned on appeal, publicly calling him on Monday a man of ''honesty'' who is needed in French politics.
On Monday, Mr. Juppé attended a private dinner at Élysée Palace, officials said.
Mr. Juppé, 58, long considered Mr. Chirac's possible successor as president, has been under some pressure to quit after he was found guilty last Friday of illegal party financing of a fake jobs scheme. His departure would leave a vacuum at the top of President Chirac's center-right party.
But on Monday Mr. Juppé appealed the sentence. Under French criminal law the appeal allows him to keep his three political perches: mayor of the city of Bordeaux, member of Parliament and president of his party.
Mr. Chirac has come under fire as well, with critics charging that he should have been standing trial himself. Mr. Chirac was mayor of Paris and Mr. Juppé was his chief financial officer during the financing scheme between 1989 and 1995. As long as he remains president, Mr. Chirac is immune from prosecution.
Mr. Juppé, who has maintained his innocence, suggested during the interview, as he has before, that the now illegal practices of which he was convicted were common at the time.
