When executives of Unilever's home and personal care products division of North America decided in 2000 to seek cost savings by streamlining the distribution system, the company had 15 warehouses across the country, the result of mergers since the late 1980's with two other manufacturers, Chesebrough-Ponds and Helene Curtis.
Some warehouses stored cartons of soaps and detergents, fast-moving items that can be stacked on top of each other. Other warehouses contained hairsprays and other products that are ordered in smaller quantities and have to be handled more carefully because they come in aerosol containers. Truck drivers had to make multiple stops to fill their trailers, raising delivery costs.
To make its distribution system speedier and less costly, Unilever turned in 2001 to ProLogis, a real estate investment trust based in the Denver suburb of Aurora that helps companies solve their logistic problems -- not only by developing the warehouses but also by advising on new locations and local labor issues, overseeing negotiations for government incentives, securing financing and even contributing to the design of the racks inside the buildings.
Two and a half years later, Unilever had whittled its distribution network to five warehouses while losing only 500,000 square feet of office space. Each warehouse has 32-foot ceilings, occupies a million square feet and is one mile in circumference, except for the $15.5 million, 442,000-square-foot, cream-colored building in this Dallas suburb, which serves Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas. Each distribution center accommodates all the Unilever lines. The manufacturer says it has lowered its distribution costs by 7 percent.
Unilever's consolidation reflected, in part, the urgency that manufacturers feel to reduce distribution costs in response to pressures from Wal-Mart and other big-box retailers. These pressures are having a ''profound effect on the warehouse business,'' said James P. Sullivan, a senior analyst at Green Street Advisors, an independent company in Newport Beach, Calif., that specializes in real estate investment trusts.
''In an economy in which it's hard to raise prices,'' Mr. Sullivan said, ''companies have increasingly looked at the cost side and tried to figure out how to improve the bottom line. More and more warehouse users are employing this strategy.''
Fred M. Berkheimer, vice president for logistics at the Unilever division, acknowledged that demands from larger retailers drove the company to rethink its warehouses. ''You have to find ways to suck waste out of the system,'' he said. ''Some of the larger retailers push pretty hard.''
As a result, the siting of a warehouse has become something of a science. Once Unilever decided that it wanted to be in the Dallas area, ProLogis identified possible locations and then narrowed the choices to two. The site on Samuell Boulevard that was ultimately selected is not only close to several Interstate highways but is also a mile from Union Pacific Railroad's intermodal center, which can handle 225,000 transfers a year between railcars and trailers or containers. The location also passed other tests. ''If a truck has to make a left-hand turn with no light every time,'' said Rick Roth, a ProLogis first vice president, ''that's something to consider.''
Working with one real estate company allowed Unilever to achieve many economies of scale, including a uniform design and a standard lease for all five warehouses. The four larger distribution centers are in Pontoon Beach, Ill., outside St. Louis; Carlisle, Pa., near Harrisburg; Rialto, Calif., in Southern California; and Palmetto, Ga., a suburb of Atlanta. All are new, except the Palmetto warehouse, which was acquired by ProLogis in a 1999 merger with Meridian Industrial Trust and was expanded by 444,000 square feet.
Cost (including land, but not equipment) of the distribution centers ranged from $40 a square foot in Rialto to the ''high $20's'' in Mesquite, said John W. Seiple Jr., the president and chief operating officer at ProLogis North America. Rents are generally from 9.5 percent to 10 percent of the building's cost, he said. With the exception of the Palmetto warehouse, all the buildings are owned by Macquarie ProLogis Trust, a company listed on the Australian stock exchange that is a joint venture of ProLogis and Macquarie Bank, the international investment bank based in Sydney. ProLogis has retained a 15 percent interest in the properties, Mr. Seiple said.
Arlene Isaacs-Lowe, a senior vice president at Moody's Investors Service, said it made sense for manufacturers to deal with a single real estate company rather than a different one in each market. ''There isn't a lot of uniqueness to the kinds of facilities they want,'' she said, ''and it's far more consistent for them to deal with one developer who has expertise in a number of different markets.''
The new system has saved Unilever $20 million a year, Mr. Berkheimer said. The biggest savings have come in trucking and freight costs because each warehouse is equipped to handle all Unilever products, eliminating the extra stops.
In five years, he said, Unilever's product line has grown from about 1,200 items to about 2,000, reflecting the huge array of choices in household items. Just buying a bar of Dove soap today, for example, means deciding among ''new gentle exfoliation,'' ''all-day moisturizing,'' ''sensitive skin,'' ''nutrium nourishing'' or ''nutrium age-defying.'' And each version might be sold singly, in a double pack or in a shrink-wrapped package containing six or more bars.
As new products are introduced, others are discontinued, but generally at a slower rate. Mr. Seiple said ProLogis's research showed that in manufacturing, ''for every three products introduced, only one product gets taken away.''
Unilever is now able to make deliveries in one day to its customers at least 86 percent of the time, an improvement of about 14 percent, company executives said.
Michael W. Peters, a first vice president of ProLogis, said initially, many companies hope to do even better than that. ''When you show them how much it's going to cost,'' he said, ''they say, 'Well, maybe we can afford 85 percent.''' In what Mr. Berkheimer described as one of the company's toughest decisions, Unilever refrained from building a distribution center in Northern California or the Pacific Northwest, leaving a large section of the country uncovered. ''We'll wait and see if more people move up there,'' he said.
Other developers are also building larger warehouses in response to the proliferation of product variations. Five years ago, said Ted Antenucci, the president of Catellus Commercial Group, a division of Catellus Development Corporation of San Francisco, warehouses were usually 350,000 to 500,000 square feet. ''Now,'' he said, ''there is a lot of demand for warehouses over 600,000 square feet.''
Catellus has drawn repeat business from many clients, including Ford Motor, Gillette and Kellogg's, Mr. Antenucci said. But he said it was unusual for one developer to build an entire network of warehouses for one manufacturer, as ProLogis did.
Mr. Sullivan of Green Street Advisors said the centralized approach worked well for warehouses but was not practical for the office market. A chief executive looking for office space is likely to choose a location based on more personal considerations, he said. ''Office decisions tend to be made locally,'' Mr. Sullivan said. ''In the end, the guy in the office market is going to say, 'I like this location because it's close to where I live,' or 'I like this location because it's across the street from my favorite restaurant.'''
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
