For a brief period in 2002, corporate America had a new odd couple: Kenneth Lay and Martha Stewart. The deposed king of the energy industry and the queen of all things house and home had never had much in common, but for a while, they stood together as emblems of everything that was wrong with the business world. They were using their positions, we were told, to get richer at the expense of ordinary investors.
Today, Martha Stewart is making headlines all by herself, her criminal trial a staple of the nightly news programs. Kenneth Lay, meanwhile, remains safely ensconced in his multimillion-dollar Houston condominium. More than two years after Enron declared bankruptcy, he still hasn't been charged with wrongdoing.
What gives? To give the government its due, the Enron case is far more complex than the Martha Stewart affair, and it has taken prosecutors time first to untangle what actually happened and then to work their way up the corporate hierarchy. (Andrew Fastow, the company's former chief financial officer, only recently entered a guilty plea and he is now cooperating with the investigation.) Prosecutors also know the value of publicity, and Ms. Stewart's celebrity status makes her an attractive prize.
Yet the fraud and subsequent collapse of Enron, which cost investors $70 billion, is a far greater crime than the one Ms. Stewart is charged with, which saved her all of about $50,000. So why is it that Ms. Stewart is the one who is on trial?
Consider: as the longtime chief executive of Enron, Mr. Lay led a company that was engaged in an enormous, long-running financial fraud resulting in the second-largest bankruptcy in American history. As Enron spiraled toward bankruptcy, its market value plummeting almost to zero, Mr. Lay used a loophole in securities laws to surreptitiously sell some $80 million of Enron stock -- while urging Enron employees to continue buying shares. When the company filed for bankruptcy in December 2001, many Enron workers saw their life savings vanish while other investors lost hundreds of millions of dollars.
And Martha Stewart? Her criminal charge stems from her decision to sell 3,928 shares of stock -- worth about $228,000 -- in a company called ImClone Systems on Dec. 27, 2001, the day before the Food and Drug Administration revealed its decision to reject the company's application to market a new cancer drug. In its indictment the government asserts that Ms. Stewart was tipped by her broker's assistant that Sam Waksal, her friend and the chief executive of ImClone, was trying to sell his stock.
Yet prosecutors have not, in fact, charged Ms. Stewart with insider trading. Instead they have charged her with obstruction of justice -- for covering up a crime she has not been accused of -- and securities fraud.
The fraud charge, as even the presiding judge has pointed out, is a particularly novel application of securities law. According to the government's theory, Ms. Stewart violated the law when, among other things, she issued a press release explaining her sale and saying she had done nothing wrong. In so doing, say prosecutors, she was misstating the facts to prop up the stock of her company, Martha Stewart Omnimedia. No chief executive has ever faced such a charge before, much less been convicted of it.
That includes Kenneth Lay, of course. Unlike Ms. Stewart, he has not been charged with securities fraud -- or insider trading, for that matter. His defense can be summarized in a single word: ignorance.
He says he didn't know about Enron's shaky financial condition. He claims he didn't understand the accounting rules that Enron used to keep billions in debt off its balance sheet. He says he thought the actual businesses were as good as the company was claiming. As for his stock sales, he says, he sold only because he had to: he was liquidating his stock in order to pay off margin debt.
Ignorance has often been a legitimate defense for a corporate executive; under the law, prosecutors must prove intent. But Mr. Lay was chief executive of Enron for all but six months of its existence before it declared bankruptcy. He was chairman of the board the entire time. Most of the important figures in the fraud ultimately reported to him. The actions of people he was responsible for hiring, promoting and overseeing cost many people many millions of dollars.
Shouldn't he have to face a criminal trial for his role in Enron's fraud? Prosecutors could be just as ''creative'' in finding ways to charge Mr. Lay as they have been with Ms. Stewart. Otherwise, the perverse lesson will be that the legal system rewards ignorance but punishes those who dare to proclaim their innocence.
Op-Ed Contributor Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind, senior writers at Fortune, are the authors of ''The Smartest Guys in the Room: The Amazing Rise and Scandalous Fall of Enron.''
