Douglas Faneuil, the former stockbroker's assistant at the center of the Martha Stewart stock-trading case, took the witness stand yesterday in a packed Manhattan courtroom and testified that his boss had told him to give Ms. Stewart the tip that led her to sell nearly 4,000 shares of ImClone Systems.
The phones had been ringing all morning on Dec. 27, 2001, in the office at Merrill Lynch in Midtown that Mr. Faneuil, now 28, shared with Peter E. Bacanovic, who was Ms. Stewart's broker, as well as the broker for Samuel D. Waksal, the chief executive of ImClone, and other members of the Waksal family. A fax had arrived from Dr. Waksal's accountant, ordering the ''imperative'' transfer of nearly 80,000 shares from Dr. Waksal's account to that of his daughter Aliza, Mr. Faneuil testified in Federal District Court. The accountant himself had called again and again, being ''pushy,'' as Mr. Faneuil put it. And at the direction of Mr. Bacanovic, who was in Florida, Mr. Faneuil placed a call to Ms. Stewart, whose assistant told the two men that she was traveling and unavailable.
''Peter called me back and said, 'Martha's going to call. You've got to tell her what's going on,''' Mr. Faneuil told the jury. ''I said, 'Can I tell her about Sam? Am I allowed to?' He said, 'Of course. You must. You've got to. That's the whole point.'''
With that, Mr. Faneuil described a moment that has become pivotal in the case against Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic. Both were indicted on charges of conspiracy and obstruction of justice after an investigation into ImClone trades made by the Waksals widened to include Ms. Stewart's trades. Dr. Waksal is serving a seven-year sentence for an assortment of crimes, including securities fraud, after orchestrating sales of ImClone shares just before the company announced disappointing news about a much-anticipated cancer drug.
Mr. Faneuil will be cross-examined today by defense lawyers, who are eager to discredit his testimony. Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic maintained that she had sold her stock because they had agreed to sell if the share price fell below $60. Mr. Bacanovic is accused of altering a document to support that story. Ms. Stewart is charged with securities fraud for proclaiming her innocence, a move prosecutors say helped stem losses in the share price of her own company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, where she was chairwoman and chief executive until she stepped down in June after she was indicted. She remains chief creative officer and the company's most powerful shareholder.
Mr. Faneuil's appearance, in which he was far more poised than when he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge of lying in October 2002, came late in the afternoon, after hours of testimony from a Merrill Lynch administrator over the fine points of sell orders, margin calls, bonuses for associates and other policies at the brokerage firm.
The administrator, Julia Monaghan, said that Ms. Stewart had ''maybe 10'' accounts at Merrill Lynch, ranging from trust accounts to personal accounts, and that Mr. Bacanovic had earned financial rewards for bringing in business linked to her. Among those was a $51,300 ''finder's fee'' when Ms. Stewart's company went public in 1999. Mr. Bacanovic also handled hundreds of new accounts for Ms. Stewart's employees, who had received shares in the public offering.
But Mr. Faneuil's testimony was far more riveting, particularly because it came after a controversy that had kept him out of the courtroom for several days. Last week, defense lawyers complained that the government had unfairly delayed handing over a document in which a former lawyer for Mr. Faneuil raised doubt about whether Mr. Bacanovic or someone else ordered Mr. Faneuil to give information to Ms. Stewart. That prompted Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum to scold prosecutors and order a one-week delay in Mr. Faneuil's appearance to give defense lawyers more time to investigate.
On Monday, Judge Cedarbaum announced that Mr. Faneuil could testify yesterday instead of waiting until Thursday.
Mr. Faneuil testified for about an hour and 35 minutes, but that was not long enough to bring up the issues related to his delay. He calmly described coming to Merrill Lynch in June 2001 after spending four years at a hedge fund, and he called Mr. Bacanovic ''the best boss I ever had.'' He said Mr. Bacanovic had been ''demanding'' as well as ''appreciative,'' and he called their working style ''an easy relationship.''
And for Mr. Bacanovic, Ms. Stewart was a top client, Mr. Faneuil testified: ''I know Martha Stewart gave Peter some friends-and-family shares when the company went public, and Martha Stewart also established the company stock options plan at Merrill Lynch.''
Mr. Bacanovic sat motionless, staring straight ahead, throughout the prosecution's questioning of his former assistant. Ms. Stewart, clad entirely in black, sat equally still, glancing occasionally in the direction of the jury and rubbing the back of her neck when her Merrill Lynch account statement from November 2001 was flashed on the courtroom screen, showing a balance of more than $2.6 million.
Mr. Faneuil said he had had little direct contact with Ms. Stewart, speaking to her only about five times in the year that he spent at Merrill. But he added that he had spoken ''at least once a week'' with one of her employees, Heidi DeLuca, who made requests to wire money or transfer funds on Ms. Stewart's behalf.
He confirmed that there was talk of reconciling Ms. Stewart's investing in the final weeks of 2001 with ''tax-loss selling,'' in which some securities would be sold at a loss to balance profits made from other trades. But it did not seem to be going so well. ''Peter expressed concern on more than one occasion about not being able to get in touch with Ms. Stewart or with Sharon Patrick,'' the president of the company at the time, ''to come up with a tax-loss selling plan before it was too late,'' Mr. Faneuil testified.
On Dec. 27, when Mr. Faneuil was alone in the office, activity erupted around ImClone. The first calls came from Dr. Waksal's accountant, Alan Goldberg, wanting those shares transferred, and Aliza Waksal, who had plans for the more than 39,000 shares she already owned. ''She called me to say she wanted to sell all of her shares,'' Mr. Faneuil told the court.
Another call came in from her sister, Ilana Waksal Posner, ''in a rather hurried voice, asking me, 'What's ImClone at?''' Mr. Faneuil said he told her the trading price, ''and she swore, and said, 'It's already going down.''' He said he could hear her discussing with her husband, apparently as they drove in their car, whether to sell or not. Then she decided to sell, although Mr. Faneuil said he could not handle the sale himself because the shares were in an online account.
With all that unfolding, he called Mr. Bacanovic. ''We just talked generally about the morning's events, how crazy it was,'' he told the court, ''and suddenly he said, 'Oh, my God, get Martha on the phone!'''
