In recent years, John F. Kennedy High School in the Bronx has turned out more horrifying tales than success stories. There was the substitute teacher whose hair was set on fire, the assistant principal hospitalized after being knocked down by students, the assorted objects -- trash cans, ceramics projects -- hurled from windows, sometimes into teachers' parked cars. In 2002, one summer school student fatally stabbed another outside the school. A few months later, things became so rowdy after a fire drill that the police officers on duty used Mace.
But this fall, Kennedy had an old-fashioned homecoming celebration for the first time in recent memory. There was a dance with red and white streamers in the third-floor cafeteria, and when the football game broke for halftime, Kennedy's new principal presented the homecoming queen with roses and a rhinestone tiara.
The principal, Anthony Rotunno, said a police lieutenant on duty paid him perhaps the highest compliment one can give the head of a large urban school: he said he felt as if he were in suburbia.
When Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg announced a plan last month to flood 12 of the city's most violent and unruly schools with extra police officers and safety agents, Kennedy was not among what quickly became known as the ''dirty dozen.'' Instead, the mayor proclaimed Kennedy a prime example of a dangerous school tamed.
Behind this makeover was Mr. Rotunno and his formula for fixing a school of 5,000, a mix of infusing fun and school spirit into the school day and a determined effort to weed out students standing in the way of improvement. He describes his approach as ''quality of life,'' and it is reminiscent of the Police Department's crime-fighting approach by that name. It is as much about cracking down on the school system's version of petty criminals -- the chronic hall-walkers and the persistently disruptive -- as it is about enhancing the school experience with dances and freshly painted walls.
''That's what high school should be all about,'' Mr. Rotunno said. ''School isn't about saying, 'This is a safe school because there's no one killing anybody.'''
When Mr. Rotunno became principal a year ago this month, he received two gifts: a biography of former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani from a former colleague, and from an anonymous admirer, a copy of the movie ''Lean on Me,'' about Joe Clark, the principal famed for bringing Eastside High School in Paterson, N.J., under control by patrolling the hallways with a baseball bat. Mr. Rotunno cringed at the mention of Mr. Clark, but lit up when the topic turned to Mr. Giuliani, calling his own efforts at Kennedy ''a microcosm of what he did.''
Kennedy is in an eight-story building and draws most of its students from the Bronx and northern Manhattan. It straddles the border of Marble Hill, technically a Manhattan neighborhood, and Kingsbridge, in the Bronx. Many of its students, who are predominantly black and Hispanic, speak English as a second language, and in 2001-02, 80 percent of them qualified for free lunches.
After one year under Mr. Rotunno, Kennedy, which has 4,700 students -- along with 300 in two new, small schools that are based inside the building -- still has problems. Forbidden objects like box cutters are still confiscated at the metal detectors, which were installed after the fatal summer school stabbing, and two weeks ago, one student stabbed another about a block from the school.
But teachers -- some of them Kennedy graduates still cherishing memories of the school's glory days of science awards and Ivy League acceptance letters in the 1970's and 80's -- generally agree: the school has turned the corner.
''I feel a lot safer,'' said Sheila Brady, a special education teacher who no longer flattens herself against the walls to avoid stampeding students during class changes and who is now confident enough to teach with her classroom door unlocked. ''I was very afraid.''
The question of how to tame a big, violent high school is looming large in New York City and around the country. In some places, schools are resorting to zero-tolerance policies that put students in handcuffs for dress code violations.
In New York, an increase in disruptive incidents this year coupled with logistical problems in a new system for suspending students accused of serious infractions have made school safety one of the most heavily scrutinized topics in the city.
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's plan for cracking down on school violence involves a new 150-member police task force, charged with imposing order on 12 of the city's most unruly schools.
Kennedy has two police officers and about 20 unarmed safety agents and supervisors. Extra agents help at the metal detectors in the morning. But beyond that, Mr. Rotunno discourages uniformed reinforcements.
''I appreciated their hard work, and they do work hard, but that wouldn't solve the problem,'' he said. ''My belief always is, putting more police and putting more uniforms in a school building is like putting a Band-Aid on a cancer. Sooner or later, the police officers leave. We're here for the long run, so we need to create a great school.''
Mr. Rotunno grew up in the Bronx and was a linebacker on the football team at Herbert H. Lehman High School. He later spent 20 years there as a math teacher, an assistant principal for security and a football coach. In 2001, he was tapped to be in charge of security for Bronx high schools, a job that brought him to Kennedy all too often.
''If I was a salesman,'' he said, ''this was my biggest account.''
He started making changes at Kennedy in November 2002, even before he was named principal. He adopted no-nonsense -- some critics might say overly unforgiving -- policies toward students who disrupted school by walking the halls during class, fighting, pounding on doors and the like. He studiously combed the records for students 17 or older with fewer than 10 credits (it takes at least 40 to graduate). Through staff members, he relentlessly pursued parents to come in for meetings to discuss alternative placement.
''I took a very, very, very hard stand on the hard-core bad kids,'' Mr. Rotunno said. ''I refused to allow these kids to enter the building. We had a lot of fights. Parents got in touch with attorneys and advocates. We were accused of denying kids an education.''
In addition to the few dozen who left after such meetings, last spring, Mr. Rotunno placed 30 students in a New Beginnings center, one of 16 set up in the last year for disruptive students. This semester 10 are returning and 40 more are going.
A red trailer outside the school now holds a detention center. If students are caught walking the halls during class once, they go to the trailer for that period. Twice, and they are held until a parent comes. For the first few weeks of school, there were as many as 100 students in the trailer at once, forcing a G.E.D. class that meets there to move inside. These days, there are a couple of dozen at most.
Students with chronic behavior problems are given what are called conduct sheets. If they fail to collect their teachers' signatures attesting to their good behavior, the trailer awaits.
''We have to keep coming up with imaginative programs,'' Mr. Rotunno said.
Portable CD players are confiscated at the metal detectors, and parents must come to school to retrieve them. Do-rags caught at security are not returned.
A ''sweep team'' of two deans and five security aides patrols the hallways during classes. Students who arrive at school more than 10 or 15 minutes late must stay in the auditorium until the bell rings.
Teachers say the crackdown has been crucial.
''Word got out to the students that the party was over,'' said Mary DeCesare, the school's college adviser, who has worked there since 1981.
There are, to be sure, sweeter changes.
When Mr. Rotunno became principal, he opened virtually all the student bathrooms, many of which had been bolted shut after a rash of arson and flooding, prompting some students to urinate in the stairwells. Trash cans, previously seen as an invitation to arson, were placed in the halls.
The main gymnasium, which had been defaced with graffiti, the padded lining along its walls slashed, was renovated. Broken basketball hoops were replaced, and the divider in the gym, broken for more than a decade, was fixed, easing the coexistence of four separate gym classes.
Teachers and parents said Mr. Rotunno was persistent in demanding money and resources for the school. He acknowledged that there was a benefit to being the new guy plucked to clean up a disaster zone.
''I think people saw that I was new, I was trying, and let's try to help out and see what happens,'' he said.
Mr. Rotunno has his challenges cut out for him. In the 2001-02 school year, shortly before Mr. Rotunno became principal, Kennedy had a 79 percent attendance rate, as compared to a citywide average of nearly 84 percent. That year, only 37 percent scored a 65 or above on the English Regents Exam.
The question about whether academics improve will be answered gradually.
There have been more tutoring sessions this year, and the first indications look promising. Of 248 students who took the English Regents Exam last week, 104, or 42 percent, scored 65 or higher, Mr. Rotunno said. Last January, only about 40 out of 300 students, or 13 percent, scored as well, he said.
The leader of the school's teachers' union chapter, Maria Colón, said that it was still too soon to say what Mr. Rotunno's legacy would be, but that so far, he had been willing to listen to teachers' concerns.
''In terms of security, it's been a blessing,'' she said.
After 20 frustrating years, Lance Corey, a social studies teacher, said he had finally found a principal willing to take seriously his idea of creating a boxing program based on the philosophy that ''the guy you fight is your best friend.''
Cesarina Javier, 17, said fights in the hallways were something of a novelty these days.
''It used to be like, 'A fight, all right, that's something typical,''' she said. ''Now it's like, 'Oh, it's a fight.'''
Robert Colón, a former Kennedy student and now a special education dean, likes to print T-shirts with inspirational messages for sports teams he coaches. At Kennedy, it used to be tough to come up with them.
''I was not happy,'' he said.
But this fall, he went out on a limb and printed T-shirts for the girls' varsity cross country team.
''The Pride Is Back,'' they declare.
