Aventis, the French pharmaceutical company that is the target of a $60 billion hostile takeover bid by a domestic rival, Sanofi-Synthélabo, has been in talks to sell some assets, according to an executive close to the discussions.
Such asset sales might be seen as an effort to make Aventis seem more viable as an independent company, helping to fend off a takeover bid. But, the executive said, the talks were not prompted by Sanofi's offer, which was announced on Jan. 26.
Potential buyers for the noncore pharmaceutical businesses include the American private equity firm Blackstone Group, the executive said. A deal is not imminent, the executive added.
A report Tuesday in the daily Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung said a deal with Blackstone could be worth nearly $2 billion.
Aventis has, in the past, expressed its desire to shed drug lines with slower growth than some of its newer drugs. In January, Aventis completed the sale of its generic drug business in France to Ranbaxy Laboratories, India's leading drug maker.
The offer for Aventis did not come entirely out of the blue, a filing by Sanofi with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission indicates.
Executives from the two companies held informal discussions as early as 2002 about the possibility of combining their companies, according to the filing, which was made last week.
While attending industry meetings, including one for the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations, Sanofi's chief executive, Jean-François Dehecq, and Aventis's chief executive, Igor Landau, as well as other Aventis managers discussed the ''merits of a possible future combination of Sanofi-Synthélabo and Aventis'' in general terms, the filing says.
Sanofi has been seriously exploring the possibilities of such a deal since 2003, the document says. During the first eight months of 2003, Sanofi executives and financial advisers from Merrill Lynch in France further studied the merits of such a deal.
On Jan. 7, Mr. Landau of Aventis called Mr. Dehecq of Sanofi to ask if he was planning to make a bid for his company. According to the filing, ''During the telephone conversation that followed, Mr. Dehecq did not respond to Mr. Landau's inquiry.'' On the same day, Sanofi submitted a filing to the European Commission about such a deal.
Both companies issued statements on Jan. 16 saying that they were not in negotiations toward a merger.
Sanofi executives also held confidential conversations with members of the United States Federal Trade Commission about regulatory issues before they announced their deal for Aventis, the filing said.
One regulatory hurdle was cleared on Tuesday. French market regulators said that Sanofi's offer for Aventis could proceed. A date when investors can begin tendering their Aventis shares to Sanofi has not yet been set.
Shares of Aventis, which have climbed steadily since the Sanofi announcement, retreated a bit on Tuesday. The shares closed down 0.50 euro at 62.60 euros. Aventis is scheduled to release full-year results and further outline its defense on Thursday.
