YEARS ago I had the good fortune to be in Burgundy at harvest time and was invited to lunch with the pickers. Big bowls of blanquette de veau, a bourgeois veal stew in cream sauce, were laid out on tables and served with a young, unassuming pinot noir.
The pairing of creamy veal with a light red wine was surprising but broke no rules. Many people would instinctively select a white wine, but there was enough heft in the dish to keep a young red wine in its place. The stew was made with meaty veal, not the delicate milk-fed kind, and the simple wine demanded no more.
In choosing a dish for the pinot noirs from the Antipodes, I was reminded of that lunch. Like the other tasters, I found the wines to be mostly pleasant lightweights that lacked the earthy concentration needed to shoulder a slab of red meat.
So I dusted off some recipes for blanquette de veau, including one from Richard Olney that recommended a ''simple, young red wine'' with it. But his called for a French cut of veal.
The straightforward blanquette in the new ''Balthazar Cookbook'' did the trick. It was the main event at a dinner that I started with thin slices of prosciutto alongside a thatch of slivered endive and Asian pear, tossed with hazlenut oil and sherry vinegar.
The first course picked up the typical hint of smokiness that showed in some of the wines. And the blanquette, which I made with grass-fed veal and served with buttered noodles, brought out a touch of dressy elegance in the wine.
BLANQUETTE DE VEAU  Adapted from ''The Balthazar Cookbook'' by Keith McNally, Riad Nasr  and Lee Hanson (Clarkson Potter, 2003)  Time: 2 1/2 hours
6 cups chicken stock  3 pounds veal shoulder in cubes  1 medium onion, in eighths  1 celery stalk, in 1-inch pieces  2 leeks (white part), chopped  4 cloves garlic, sliced  1 pound button mushrooms, quartered  5 sprigs thyme  5 sprigs flat-leaf parsley, plus 2 tablespoons, chopped  Salt and ground white pepper  10 ounces pearl onions, peeled  3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil  3 tablespoons unsalted butter
1/4 cup all-purpose flour
3/4 cup heavy cream.
1. In a 4-quart casserole place stock, veal, onion, celery, leeks, garlic, 1 cup mushrooms, thyme and parsley sprigs, and salt and pepper. Bring to a boil, then simmer for 1 1/2 hours, skimming frequently.
2. Boil pearl onions for 5 minutes. Drain. Heat oil in a large skillet. Add remaining mushrooms and cook until tender. Toss in onions. Set aside.
3. When veal is tender, drain it. Reserve 3 cups stock, discarding vegetables and herbs. Wipe out casserole and melt butter in it. Whisk in flour, cook one minute. Whisk in stock, cook 5 minutes. Whisk in cream. Add veal, mushrooms and onions. Simmer 5 minutes and re-season. Serve, garnished with chopped parsley.
Yield: 6 servings.
PAIRINGS
