Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin of France said on Tuesday that Muslim head scarves must be banned from public schools because they undermine the French republican ideal of freedom and equality.
''Certain religious signs, among them the Islamic veil, are multiplying in our schools,'' Mr. Raffarin told the National Assembly in introducing a divisive bill to ban most religious symbols from public schools. ''They are taking on a political meaning. Some want to know how far they can go. We are giving them a response today.''
He rejected arguments from observant Muslims and Jews that their religions require head coverings and that the ban would violate their freedom of belief. ''Religion,'' he said, ''cannot be a political project.''
Until now, most French officials, including President Jacques Chirac, have avoided casting the debate on the banning of religious symbols as singling out Islam. But in ''us against them'' language, Mr. Raffarin spoke of France as ''the old land of Christianity,'' and he called on France's Muslims to behave like good citizens.
''Today, all the great religions in the history of France have adapted themselves to that principle,'' of secularism, he said. ''For the most recently arrived, I'm speaking here of Islam, secularism is a chance, the chance to be a religion of France.''
The bill, as drafted, would ban from public elementary and high schools ''ostensibly'' religious symbols, including the Muslim head scarf, the Jewish skullcap and large Christian crosses. It would not apply to private schools or to French schools in other countries. The punishment for violators of the new law would range from a warning to temporary suspension and expulsion.
With passion and anguish during the debate, which is expected to last four days, some speakers defended the measure as a necessary step to stop the spread of radical Islam, while others predicted it would be impossible to enforce.
Pascal Clement, the head of the law commission of the National Assembly, called the measure ''the flag of France whose colors we want to raise today, once again, above the schools.''
But the measure, proposed by Mr. Chirac in December after the recommendations of a presidential commission, has met with unexpected opposition from a small center-right party, the Union for French Democracy, and criticism from some members of Mr. Chirac's own commission that its work has been distorted.
It also has divided the French cabinet and enraged France's Muslim minority and some of the teachers' unions, even as it has heartened both Muslim and non-Muslim feminist groups. The conference of French Catholic bishops and France's tiny Sikh minority oppose the measure; French Jewish leaders are in favor.
Still, the draft law is expected to pass because Mr. Chirac's party, Union for a Popular Movement, holds 364 seats in the 577-seat National Assembly, and a bill needs only 288 votes for passage.
Even within the French government, there is no agreement on what the new law would ban. Last month, the minister of national education, Luc Ferry, said bandannas and even beards would be banned if they were considered to be religious symbols; a few weeks before, the interior minister, Nicolas Sarkozy, had said Muslim girls would be allowed to wear small bandannas.
Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin was widely quoted in the French press as warning in a cabinet meeting that the measure was misunderstood abroad and would damage French relations with Muslim-dominated countries. The foreign ministry officially denied he made the remarks, but officials confirmed Mr. de Villepin's intervention.
Some speakers suggested amendments that would ease the penalty for violators or replace the word ''ostensibly'' with ''visibly'' to better define prohibited symbols. A leader of the Union for French Democracy, François Bayrou, said that a ban on all visible religious symbols would violate the French Constitution and European Union human rights regulations.
In a new poll issued by the polling organization Sofres on Tuesday, 57 percent of the French said they believe that ostensibly religious symbols in school are ''a threat to national cohesion.'' But in a separate survey by the BVA polling organization for the left-leaning newspaper Libération on Jan. 28, 58 percent of the French said they think that the new law would be difficult to enforce.
About 140 lawmakers in the National Assembly, the lower house of Parliament, are expected to speak about the bill, which is scheduled to go to a vote on Feb. 10. If passed, it will go into effect in September for the next school year.
