An unidentified powder was discovered late Monday at a mail distribution center here, where anthrax spores were discovered in 2001. A federal law enforcement official said on Tuesday evening that the substance had tested negative for ricin.
State health officials said the gray, sandy powder was discovered leaking from an envelope in an area where mail is hand sorted. The envelope, addressed to the Republican National Committee, was found around the same time that a white powder tested positive for ricin, a deadly poison, in the office of the Senate majority leader, Bill Frist, in Washington.
The results of tests for biological or chemical agents should be available on Wednesday, health department officials said.
The mail center remained open and a normal shift of 150 workers were on the job on Tuesday, though the area where the envelope was discovered was cordoned off. The worker who handled the envelope had been wearing gloves, officials said. None of the workers needed medical treatment, said Carl Walton, a spokesman for the United States Postal Service.
There have been at least 125 incidents at the Wallingford center over the last two years in which a suspicious powder or package was found, said John Dirzius, president of the American Postal Workers union of Greater Connecticut, which represents two-thirds of the 1,200 people who work at the center.
''It is premature to close the facility without knowing what we're dealing with,'' Mr. Dirzius said.
The envelope was a business reply envelope that does not require postage, officials said, and appears to have been mailed within Connecticut. The powder was discovered by a postal worker late on Monday. By midnight, the postal inspector began contacting state and federal authorities.
In 2001, a 94-year-old woman in Oxford, Conn., died after inhaling anthrax bacteria. Investigators believe she may have died from exposure to a letter that had been contaminated as it passed through the Wallingford center.
RICIN ON CAPITOL HILL: CONNECTICUT
