''DO you want to take the elevator?'' Angus McIndoe asked Matthew Broderick. It was 11:45 on a recent Wednesday night when the temperature hovered at 12, and like every other actor in the restaurant who had done two shows that day, Mr. Broderick looked tired.
''No, that's all right,'' he said bravely, dragging himself up the stairs by the railing to join a table of ''Producers'' cast members as Mr. McIndoe watched.
Was something wrong? Had he hurt himself?
Mr. McIndoe shook his head. ''No, it's a bit, and I laugh every time,'' he said pleasantly. ''The same thing with Nathan. We sent his dinner to his dressing room tonight between shows and if I called him now and asked, 'How was your dinner,' he'd say, 'Surprisingly good,' which is what he says every time.''
Mr. McIndoe smiled comfortably. ''I know my place,'' he said.
It is a very particular, somewhat peculiar place in the landscape of New York, but Mr. McIndoe (pronounced MAC-indoo), whose restaurant at 258 West 44th Street bears his name, is at the moment the chief baby sitter, best pal, older brother, younger brother, secret keeper, party maker, avid audience, expert diplomat, host with the most on Broadway.
It doesn't hurt that his 160-seat restaurant sits right next door to the St. James Theater, where Nathan Lane and Mr. Broderick have brought the crowds back with a vengeance during these winter months when business usually drops along with the thermometer. It also doesn't hurt that every other theater on the block is booked at the moment: ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' ''Never Gonna Dance,'' ''Golda,'' ''Gypsy,'' and in previews, ''Fiddler on the Roof.''
But Mr. McIndoe's current success goes deeper than location, location, location. Born in a village outside Glasgow, he has worked in restaurants for more than half his 35 years, most recently as a beloved maître d'hôtel at Joe Allen. When he opened Angus McIndoe on Dec. 12, 2001, he faced the very real prospect for its first 18 months that his business would go bankrupt. Not even his roster of starry investors, including Messrs. Lane and Broderick, Mel Brooks, Harvey and Bob Weinstein, even Frank McCourt, the author of ''Angela's Ashes,'' could keep the room filled in those months after 9/11 when tourism dried up. Neither could they stave off the Broadway musicians' strike that followed last spring.
So when the restaurant ''turned a corner,'' as Mr. McIndoe said, last September, he was grateful. ''Two years is not long, I suppose,'' he said. ''Though I expected it to happen within three months of opening.''
On this Wednesday evening at 5:30, the matinee ladies in turtlenecks toting Talbots shopping bags filled a few tables for an early dinner before heading back to the suburbs. At the bar in a full beard sat Alfred Molina, who plays Tevye in ''Fiddler,'' unrecognized, eating a plate of salmon.
Mr. McIndoe stood at the door, facing a stream of people without reservations. With two dining rooms on the ground floor, one on the mezzanine and another with an additional bar on the third, he has the equivalent of four restaurants to fill. Mr. McIndoe kept a canny eye on the book, protecting the customers who had reserved.
Pretheater dining has a very specific purpose, Mr. McIndoe said. ''You want simple food prepared quickly.'' The menu hits all the basics: grilled chicken, hamburgers, macaroni and cheese. A duck salad on the specials menu listed each ingredient. ''The waiters have no time to explain everything; it's easier that way,'' Mr. McIndoe said.
By 6, he had filled every unreserved table. A quick glance in the reservation book for the following night showed a note from a staffer in need of a spelling lesson: ''Becall, Lauren. Requests few stairs.''
''Hi,'' a young man said. ''We're two and we don't have a reservation.''
Mr. McIndoe looked genuinely chagrined. ''I have bad news for you, I just gave the last table away. Another time guys, right?''
They left, trailed by Mr. Molina, who asked Mr. McIndoe to book the third floor for a private cast party.
''I'll call you to talk about the numbers and all that,'' Mr. Molina said.
''Right. All the best, Fred. Cheers!'' Mr. McIndoe called, before turning two more people away.
''Please check your coats with Amanda before you sit down,'' he told diners on their way in. He encourages customers going to ''The Producers'' to leave their coats in the restaurant and collect them at the end of the show. ''When 160 people all get up to leave at the same time, it's crazy,'' he said.
The door opened again.
''Hey, my friend, how are you? Everything O.K.?'' Mr. McIndoe asked, embracing his customer, Lance Leopold. Mr. Leopold, a computer consultant from Dallas, spends three weeks of the month in New York for business, and Mr. McIndoe calls him ''a regular who lives 2,500 miles away.''
Mr. Leopold discovered the restaurant with his wife on New Year's Eve 2001, when it had been open for less than three weeks. ''For me,'' he said, ''this place is my 'Cheers' in New York City.''
An employee from ''The Producers'' came in to use the phone. ''We are so happy, can I tell you how happy I am?'' he exulted about the sell-out business to Mr. McIndoe, who shared his glee. Certainly when Fred Applegate was the star, Mr. McIndoe didn't have a crowd like this. ''No,'' he said gallantly. ''But we had Fred Applegate.''
At 7, a new onslaught of traffic began. ''This is the 'We don't have a reservation, could we just get a burger before curtain' crowd,'' Mr. McIndoe said.
He seated two people at a table where the reservation hadn't turned up, and another couple in the corner. ''That's my brother's friend,'' Mr. McIndoe said. ''The good news is we're packed, because historically whenever my family comes there's no one here. The joke is 'You'll get good service, the place will be empty.' ''
The rush for the coats started at 7:23, and soon after came a lull, which felt like people leaving a party. It grew quiet all at once.
The phone rang and Mr. McIndoe answered it. His tone softened. ''Are you at Nana's house being a good boy?'' he asked. ''I'll see you in the morning, O.K.? I love you.''
That call, which comes every night around 7:30, was from Cameron, Mr. McIndoe's 4-year-old son. ''He has an imaginary restaurant called Cameron McIndoe which serves shrimp and fries,'' Mr. McIndoe said. ''He also has an imaginary friend called Ame, who's a composite of his two favorite waitresses here.''
A manager, George Alvarez, answered the phone. ''I love you, too, Charles; when are you coming in?'' he said. Mr. McIndoe whispered, ''Charles Nelson Reilly.''
By 8 the place had emptied, and Mr. McIndoe went up to the third floor to eat his dinner, which included three Cokes and a cup of coffee with sugar. His work night wouldn't end until 3 a.m.
He is the seventh of eight children, and most of them, in addition to his parents, worked at the local hotel and French restaurant in Eaglesham, where he grew up. One of the dishes on the menu here is a tribute to that part of his childhood.
''Everyone would bring food home from the restaurant,'' Mr. McIndoe recalled, ''and when I looked in the fridge in the morning I would see half a peppered steak, veal cordon bleu, a big lump of Stilton. Our house had great leftovers and we were dirt poor. I would go to fancy people's houses and the leftovers were dull. So here, we always have a really good sharing plate.'' That night's selection included a pheasant pâté, vegetable terrine, Stilton, Brie, barbecued ribs (left over from a party the previous night), peach chutney, smoked salmon and a potato bâtard from Balthazar Bakery.
Mr. McIndoe's dinner was served (he tried two specials: shepherd's pie and swordfish au poivre) and before he ate, he tucked a napkin into his collar, spreading it over his shirt with the exacting care of someone used to having only one.
''Growing up, I probably would have got the pin that said, 'Most likely not to succeed,' '' he said. ''I was working by 12, and my part-time jobs started interfering with school. There was no question of my going to university. When I was 17 or 18 I moved to London and worked at Joe Allen before coming here.'' When he did, he met his wife, Mei Chao, almost immediately.
A benefit of having six older siblings, he said, was learning early how to stand back and admire them -- perfect practice for his larger-than-life theatrical clientele, all of whom actively love each other except when they actively hate each other.
Recently, the restaurant was the setting for intrigue surrounding ''Taboo,'' the troubled musical that Rosie O'Donnell spent $10 million to produce. The New York Post reported all sorts of changes being made to the show -- at Angus McIndoe.
''When it's a negative connotation it concerns me,'' Mr. McIndoe said. ''But when they write about people fixing a show or drowning their sorrows because a show stinks, they're not crazy. They do fix shows here, raise money, have wakes, opening night parties, going away parties. That's what we planned.''
At 10 a waiter let Mr. McIndoe know that Harvey Weinstein was in, finishing up the all-day breakfast, listed on the menu as eggs, bacon, chicken-apple sausage, barbecued beans and a buttermilk biscuit.
Mr. McIndoe pulled on his jacket, and when he got downstairs, the crowd waiting for autographs outside the St. James was visible through the front windows. The frigid weather drove a number inside; though the book showed only three post-theater reservations, 84 people came for supper.
By 11:30 cast members from ''The Boy From Oz,'' ''Gypsy,'' ''42nd Street'' and ''Thoroughly Modern Millie,'' had settled in, most of them on the third floor. ''It's a habit they got into when you could still smoke up there,'' Mr. McIndoe said.
Euan Morton, who plays Boy George in ''Taboo'' and arrived still wearing his makeup, got an especially warm greeting from Mr. McIndoe. ''He's Scottish,'' he said. ''We've become pals.''
Mr. McIndoe surveyed the crowd. ''Not bad for a freezing Wednesday night in January,'' he said. ''Twelve months ago it would have been a miracle.''
So, things are looking up?
He looked grim. ''Here's what I'm worried about now,'' he said. ''Mad cow disease, another terrorist attack and an actor's strike this spring. Every day for a year I thought we'd go under. I had so much debt I didn't know from day to day if I would make it. The people who gave me fourth and fifth chances to get it right? I'm eternally grateful to them. The first year and a half wasn't about being a restaurant at all. It was just keeping it open.''
A few more show people came in, each one stopping to hug Mr. McIndoe, or kiss him. Gay men, straight men, women with legs that reached to their necks.
''The great thing being in this neighborhood so long is you get to know the people,'' he said. ''They say to me, 'How's Cameron,' not 'How's your kid?' I think I eat all that up, don't I?''
A tray filled with bowls of penne went upstairs for the dancers. ''People come here all the time during their show,'' Mr. McIndoe said, ''then years could go by when you don't see them. They've been on the road or had a baby, and then one day they're back.''
A chorus kid waved on his way up the stairs. Mr. McIndoe waved back. ''Everyone just wants to be remembered,'' he said.
