With the pounding beat of the rock song ''Small Town'' rattling the walls, Senator John Edwards seized the moment on Tuesday night that was more than a year in the making.
''We believe in you!'' someone cried out as the room hushed for Mr. Edwards to claim his first victory in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination in the state where he was born 50 years ago.
''It's a long way from that little house in Seneca, S.C., to here tonight,'' Mr. Edwards said, referring to the town where he was born the son of millworker. ''Tonight, you said that the politics of lifting people up beats the politics of tearing people down. And today, we said clearly to the American people that in our country, our America, everything is possible.''
He used his time on national television not to thank a retinue of aides, but to press home his theme of helping Americans struggling to get by.
''Tonight somewhere in America,'' he said, ''a 10-year-old little girl will go to bed hungry, hoping and praying that tomorrow will not be as cold as today, because she doesn't have the coat to keep her warm. She's one of 35 million Americans who live in poverty every single day, unnoticed, unheard. Well tonight, we see her, we hear her, we embrace her. She is part of our family, and we will lift her up.''
Mr. Edwards had reason to exult, to grin and pump his arms and bask in a downpour of red, white and blue balloons. Apart from winning this state, he was locked in a tight three-way race in Oklahoma, which would give him another stake to the claim as the challenger to Senator John Kerry.
But Mr. Edwards did not celebrate long, speaking six minutes before slipping backstage for hugs with his parents, Bobbie and Wallace, and supporters. Pressing for further victories in the South, Mr. Edwards planned to take off for Tennessee, for a campaign event on Wednesday morning in Memphis and an afternoon town-hall-style forum in Virginia.
Seeking to make the most of his success, he and his advisers worked hard to dispel any idea that his victory in his neighboring state was a given. Asked earlier on Tuesday whether Mr. Kerry suffered for ignoring South Carolina, Mr. Edwards was quick to note that Mr. Kerry had advertised heavily here.
''Based on what I see on my television,'' Mr. Edwards said, ''he is not ignoring it. He is spending a lot of money here. He made his announcement for his presidential campaign here in South Carolina. He's got the endorsement of most of the statewide public officials, the best-known public officials. I think we're in a dogfight here.''
Although Mr. Edwards plans to compete Saturday in Michigan, it is in Tennessee and Virginia, with primaries next Tuesday, where his aides consider Mr. Kerry most vulnerable. Victories in those states, the aides said, would help them raise questions about Mr. Kerry's viability throughout the region.
''It would rip the veil of inevitably right off,'' said David Axelrod, a senior adviser to Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards showcased his working-class roots, returning on the eve of the primary to Seneca. His campaign plans to press his up-from-the-boot-straps story against Mr. Kerry, who they privately say comes across as patrician, cut from the same upper-crust cloth as President Bush.
A question is whether Mr. Edwards will be heard. A senior adviser said the campaign's toughest battle was how to fight Mr. Kerry's momentum and delegate count.
''If all the people in other states hear is Kerry, Kerry,'' the adviser said, ''that's a big problem for us.''
Mr. Edwards also has to show contributors that he can stop Mr. Kerry, and he must do that quickly enough to carry into March. Mr. Edwards came out of 2003 with $275,000 on hand and $585,000 in debt, campaign finance reports show.
Public financing, which Howard Dean and Mr. Kerry shunned, offered Mr. Edwards a powerful injection. He was eligible for $3.7 million in matching money in January and February, and the campaign raised $1.3 million from the Iowa caucuses on Jan. 19 through Sunday. ''We're in good shape financially,'' Mr. Edwards told reporters early on Tuesday.
He has scheduled a fund-raiser on Wednesday in New York, and is booked on ''The Late Show'' on CBS-TV, as well.
One challenge is to avoid being pigeonholed as just a regional candidate. Mr. Edwards said Tuesday that his appeal transcended the South.
''We have run a national campaign,'' he told reporters before the polls closed. ''We started in Iowa. I surged and finished second there. I competed in New Hampshire, even though we had three New England candidates in the race. I competed here in South Carolina, Oklahoma, New Mexico, Missouri. This is a national campaign. I'm not walking away from any place. I intend to run a national campaign until I'm the nominee.''
Some Democrats emphasize that the nominee has to be strong across the board, not just in a particular region. The chairwoman of the Wisconsin Democratic Party, Linda Honold, said: ''He certainly needs to pay attention to the entire country. It's important for him to be present in states besides the South.''
Others said, however, that playing to his home region made sense.
''There has to be a Southern strategy for the Democratic Party,'' said Art Torres, chairman of the California Democratic Party, adding that whether Mr. Edwards is on the ticket or not, it has to include a candidate from the South or Southwest.
Mr. Edwards is banking on victories in Tennessee and Virginia heading into contests on Feb. 17 in the Midwest, including Wisconsin, which the campaign sees as friendly turf. ''It's the next big showdown state where we think all the remaining candidates will be,'' Mr. Edwards's spokeswoman, Jennifer Palmieri, said.
Mr. Axelrod said the Tuesday night results would make clearer how difficult the road ahead might be. Much depends on who is in and who is out, he said, alluding to Dr. Dean, Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman. A narrower field, Mr. Edwards's strategists said, will make it easier to draw attention to their man.
Mr. Edwards leaves little doubt that he wants to use his Southern appeal to present himself as a national candidate. Over and over, he reminds voters that no Democrat has won the presidency without winning at least five Southern states.
''I think this South Carolina primary is a head-to-head contest on who could compete in the South, who could win rural voters and who could do well with African-American voters,'' Mr. Edwards told reporters at a college in Clinton.
Fighting bronchitis, Mr. Edwards kept his remarks short.
''The truth is I may be losing my voice, but you haven't lost yours,'' he told the crowd of 80. ''You can go to the polls today and make an enormous difference.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
