EVERY January and September, the course catalogs arrive and the pressure mounts: Improve your Spanish! Your abs! Your relationships! Your knife skills!
New Yorkers of a culinary bent are easy marks -- there's always something to learn in the kitchen. What home cook doesn't itch to master roasted vegetables once and for all, to transform boneless chicken breasts into fascinating new permutations, to sail into the uncharted waters of Asian soups?
Eager home cooks can always find schools and chefs who promise to demystify the French bistro or the Japanese teahouse in one class. Schools like the Institute of Culinary Education offer a chef-for-a-day experience, with professional-grade equipment, teachers in chefs' whites and plenty of hands-on practice. Some programs offer demonstration classes, like those at DeGustibus at Macy's; there, a star chef performs onstage, for students who simply sit back, watch and eat. And some of New York's most popular cooking classes take place in the homes of chefs like Paul Vandewoude (formerly of Tartine and Titou), who have simply transported fans of their restaurants into their own home kitchens.
But having taken five classes at five different schools last semester, I'm convinced that the freshest and most intensely instructive ones are found elsewhere. They are private classes offered by a cadre of young chefs who have opted out of the restaurant industry to teach in students' home kitchens, their business fueled by word of mouth and the Internet. As if planning a party with a caterer, the host gets to determine the menu, invite the guests, send someone out to do the shopping and flop on the sofa while someone else cleans up.
To many home cooks, taking a private cooking class sounds impossibly grand, akin to hiring a personal chef. But it is surprisingly economical, especially if guests help foot the bill. In contrast to some top schools, like Cooking by the Book and the Institute of Culinary Education, where a class with as many as 20 students can cost as much as $130, the typical home class runs about $500 for six people, or $200 for two.
''It's like a dinner party,'' said Marc Horowitz, a commodities trader who was the host of a class in his SoHo loft. ''But you can't help learning something.''
Mr. Horowitz's choice was a crash course in Southeast Asian cooking, taught by Jennifer Herman Clair, a graduate of the institute's professional culinary program. ''I love Thai food,'' he said, ''but didn't know how to start cooking it. And I would never have understood how the flavors are supposed to balance each other -- hot, sweet, sour, salty -- if I hadn't taken a class.''
Gina Lu, who designs jewelry under the name Jemma Lulu, played host to a cooking class in her downtown apartment last month. ''I wanted to choose the menu; you can't do that in a cooking school class,'' Ms. Lu said. ''And I liked the fact that my husband could chip in or just hang out on the couch. I think he may have taken a nap between the entree and the dessert.''
Ms. Lu's class was taught by Jamie Sydney, a New York native who graduated from the French Culinary Institute in 2001. Ms. Sydney soon focused on teaching in-home classes, she said, because she realized that the people who most need cooking lessons are the least likely to take a class. ''When I was in cooking school, I'd go out to restaurants with my friends, and they seemed so intimidated by the most basic food,'' she said. ''We'd be eating roast chicken and someone always said, 'I could never make this.' But of course they can. Anyone, and I mean anyone, can learn to roast a chicken.''
Ms. Lu planned her class by looking over the options on Ms. Sydney's Web site; together they tailored the menu to a six-person dinner, accounting for the guests' dietary prohibitions and preferences. ''I had never cooked with porcini mushrooms,'' Ms. Lu said, ''so we decided to include them in a squash soup. Jamie convinced me to do a potato gratin; I had never made one because I thought it would be a pain to slice the potatoes thin enough. And I did want to make a really good roast chicken.''
When Ms. Sydney arrived, she brought along several kinds of potatoes, plus a professional-size stainless steel mandoline and a handout about the differences among russet, Yukon Gold, purple and fingerling potatoes. In the course of the prep work for the roast chicken, Ms. Lu said, she also learned ''more than I knew there was to know'' about simple, crucial steps that are second nature to professionals -- like browning and salting the chicken before roasting it.
Janice Stanton, a real-estate manager who has taken about 30 classes from Jennifer Herman Clair, started what she calls her remedial education with one-on-one classes, but soon invited friends to attend and now has a class on most Wednesday evenings. ''People always end up clustering in the kitchen at dinner parties anyway,'' Ms. Stanton said, ''so it feels very natural to have a class going on there.''
When I held a class in my apartment, I left the menu up to Ms. Sydney. I took advantage of another service she offers -- sending out invitation cards, something I would never have bothered with for a weeknight dinner party, but it sent a thrill of anticipation through those on my guest list (the menu is on the card).
She built a menu of baby lettuce salad with walnut-crusted rounds of goat cheese and French breakfast radishes, snapper fillets steamed in parchment with shredded leeks, a sauté of artichokes and chanterelles and tarte Tatin. Having arrived early, lugging four huge boxes of utensils and ingredients, she cleared the kitchen counter of its usual clutter of phone messages and mail, and nudged us out of the room while she set up a workstation for each recipe. Fueled by a martini each (not provided by Ms. Sydney; hosts are responsible for wine and other drinks), we began cooking at 6:15.
Though one student's attention kept drifting to the N.F.L. playoffs, Ms. Sydney kept others focused on her hands, which never stopped moving as she talked us through every task. First, she sliced a log of goat cheese into rounds, explaining that the thickness of the rounds and a precise oven temperature would make it possible to heat the cheese without melting it. (Showing a cheflike attention to detail, she had brought an oven thermometer; most home ovens are off by at least 25 degrees.)
As in all cooking classes, there was a fair amount of repetitive scut work (''Remind me never to make this dish,'' one of the artichoke-trimmers said). But the mood grew festive again as each of us folded a fish fillet in parchment paper with leeks, fresh thyme sprigs and golden olive oil, then marked the packet with our initials so that we could compare results later on.
Although each dish was simple in itself, the class did take well over four hours; by 11 p.m., all of us felt overstuffed with food, drink and information. But the next morning, I was able to recall clearly just how Ms. Sydney had taught us to pleat the parchment paper around each fillet of snapper, how high the flames shot up when she sautéed the mushrooms (as she pointed out, ''home cooks tend to be afraid to blast the heat -- but it's the only way to get food to brown the way it's supposed to''), and how surprisingly quick it was to julienne leeks once she sharpened my knives.
SINCE private classes focus closely on a few dishes (the Institute of Culinary Education and New School classes often attempt as many as a dozen recipes), home students have more time to explore not only how, but why a restaurant-roasted chicken might taste different from a home-cooked one. Ms. Clair teaches in-home and school classes, and says she can impart a lot more information at home, simply because guests ask more questions. ''In a school class, you can see that people are intimidated by cooking with strangers,'' she said. ''No one wants to be the idiot who asks the question that everyone else knows the answer to.''
Mr. Horowitz said: ''I can't overemphasize how much more comfortable it is to take a class at home, with just your friends around. Especially for guys.'' Mr. Horowitz added that he was lucky that his girlfriend was willing to clean up afterward: Ms. Clair, like some other teachers, does not include dishes as part of her services.
Another advantage of home classes is that you learn how to cook using your real kitchen, not a fantasy one. ''There's not much point in learning to sear a steak on a professional stove if you live in a studio apartment with an electric stove, and use the pans your mom handed down when you got your first apartment,'' said Dina Cheney, a graduate of the Institute of Culinary Education.
Ms. Clair says that a cook can be taught in any kitchen. ''All of my students tell me the same story beforehand -- that their kitchens are too small, their pots are too old, that they have never used their oven and aren't even sure that it works,'' she said.
Alex Oefeli, a Swiss chef who teaches privately, says his students often cite the opposite problem: a deluxe kitchen that they don't know how to use and therefore avoid as much as possible. Mr. Oefeli, who cooked at Atlas until recently, stumbled upon teaching as an offshoot of his catering business; many chefs who do in-home catering may also consider teaching privately. And many cooking schools will happily arrange private classes by their instructors, in the school's own kitchens. (Expect to pay more than an in-home class would cost.)
Ms. Cheney started teaching immediately after graduating in 1999; Ms. Clair also has little restaurant experience. A more typical cooking-school instructor would be a battle-scarred kitchen veteran, someone who has made thousands of entrees, knows all there is to know about cream sauces, and is ready to pass on his skills to a new generation of professionals. ''I myself am more of a home cook,'' Ms. Clair said. ''And I think that makes me a better teacher for a home cook. Teachers from a restaurant background don't think about how dirty the kitchen is getting, or whether cooking steak au poivre is going to fill your apartment with smoke.''
Ms. Sydney also says that she often ends up providing students with a kitchen consultation, sharpening knives and reorganizing cabinets as the meal progresses, and helping clients to see what tools they do and do not need. Ms. Stanton agrees that learning her way around her own kitchen is what has really kept her cooking, even in between the Wednesday evening classes.
''I had a good-looking kitchen,'' Ms. Stanton said, ''but I never cooked, and Jennifer spotted that immediately. She said in the nicest possible way, 'What kind of person doesn't have a whisk?' I didn't need a whisk to order in Chinese food. Now I have a whisk, and tongs, too.''
With Aprons for Party Favors
THERE are a variety of ways to get a personal cooking class in the New York City area, including the following.
In-Home Classes
JAMIE SYDNEY -- (917) 434-4655, www.dinnerpartychef.com.  DINA CHENEY -- (203) 629-0831, www.cookingbyheart.com.  JENNIFER HERMAN CLAIR -- (718) 783-0048, www.homecookingny.com.  ALEX OEFELI -- (212) 924-0897.
Private Classes at Schools
INSTITUTE OF CULINARY EDUCATION -- 50 West 23rd Street, (212) 847-0770, www.iceculinary.com.  NEW SCHOOL CULINARY PROGRAM -- 131 West 23rd Street, (212) 255-4141.  MIETTE CULINARY STUDIO -- 109 Macdougal Street, (212) 460-9322, www.cookingwithmiette.com.  JEWISH COMMUNITY CENTER COOKING SCHOOL -- 334 Amsterdam Avenue, (646) 505-4418, www.jcckitchen.org.  COOKING BY THE BOOK -- 11 Worth Street, (212) 966-9799, www.cookingbythebook.com.  DISH -- 165 Allen Street, (212) 253-8845, www.dish165.com.
Correction:  February 5, 2004, Thursday  A listing in the Dining section yesterday with an article about in-home cooking classes misstated the phone number of an instructor, Dina Cheney. It is (203) 629-1831.
