So much for good old British self-repression. Stiff upper lips are trembling, cracking and twisting into yowls of pain and anger all over the city's stages this winter. And audiences are leaving theaters looking depleted, disturbed and immensely satisfied. Packed with performances that reach for the high notes, this is the most emotionally electric season in London in years.
The cries of souls lost, dying and doomed have been echoing through everything from the National Theater's thrilling revival of Eugene O'Neill's ''Mourning Becomes Electra'' (starring Helen Mirren at her most commanding) to Martin McDonagh's energizing new work about storytelling and torture in a totalitarian state, a blindingly bright black comedy called ''The Pillowman,'' also at the National.
The most popular movies at the moment may be the same splashy fantasies that are captivating Americans. (''Lord of the Rings'' of course rules.) But the best plays in town and the hardest to get into are anything but escapist.
Even the lumbering cosmic fairy tale ''His Dark Materials,'' adapted by Nicholas Wright from Philip Pullman's trilogy of novels for the National, is nothing like a theme park ride. Directed by Nicholas Hytner and presented as two three-hour productions, the show is dense with religious and social allegory and a haunted awareness of a universe in decay. It is also pervaded by a profound distrust of all forms of authority, appropriate to the age of the Hutton report and the war in Iraq. The fitting response to a world about to crumble? In Stephen Poliakoff's ''Sweet Panic,'' a protracted tease of a drama at the Duke of York's Theater, the answer would seem to be: Embrace the chaos.
Portraying latter-day London as a rabid wonderland, ''Sweet Panic'' systematically eats away at the professional control of its protagonist, a child therapist played by Victoria Hamilton. It's a messy world out there, Mr. Poliakoff suggests; it demands that its inhabitants get in touch with their messier feelings.
If ''Sweet Panic'' itself dissolves into disarray, the same cannot be said of Howard Davies's magnificent reinterpretation of O'Neill's ''Mourning Becomes Electra,'' which keeps its audience on a taut, quivering leash for its more than four hours of stage time. First produced on Broadway in 1931, ''Electra'' has never been a promising candidate for revival. Aside from its sheer bulk, this melodrama of a New England family after the Civil War has the psychological starkness of a playwright in thrall to Freud's most basic teachings. (You know, Sis hates Mom, wants to sleep with Dad, while Little Brother hates Dad and wants to sleep with Mom.)
Yet Mr. Davies, who made sweet music out of ''The Iceman Cometh'' several years ago, sees the abiding power in the play's grandly tormented characters, just as O'Neill saw the eternal fascination of archetypes from Greek mythology and tragedy, which, after all, antedated Freud by a millennium or so. Even as the story exerts the addictive pull of a juicy soap opera, it keeps stirring shadows in corners of your mind.
O'Neill wrote that his ''Electra'' should be ''realistic and not realistic at the same time.'' And it is that difficult balance that Mr. Davies, his ensemble and his brilliant designer, Bob Crowley, capture, conveying both epic sweep and emotional claustrophobia. That the characters are prisoners of their context, as they go through their predetermined courses of crime and self-punishment, doesn't mean that they're robots.
Ms. Mirren as the murderous Christine Mannon and Eve Best and Paul Hilton as her vengeful children turn in performances of precisely controlled excess, combining operatic posture with Method-style introspective tension. Ms. Best is a wonder as her Lavinia is transformed from a tight-lipped Puritan harpy into a man-eating hedonist.
Always leading with her chin, her posture a compound of straight-backed pride and serpentine undulations, Ms. Mirren brings to mind Bette Davis's vintage portraits of fire-breathing neurotics with primly set mouths. This Christine is so vivid that when she leaves the stage for good, her energy remains like a succubus.
One can only hope that the fates will take more pity on theatergoers than they did on the Mannons and allow further life for this ''Electra,'' which ended its sold-out run at the National on Jan. 31.
It's not only the Mannons who have been wrestling with psychosexual demons. In ''After Miss Julie'' at the Donmar Warehouse, Patrick Marber (''Closer'') reinvents Strindberg's dangerous, suicidal heroine as an English debutante from hell in 1945. This shifting of time and place squeezes Strindberg's primal eroticism into the threadbare theatrical corset of English class conflict.
Yet under the astute direction of Michael Grandage, a young actress named Kelly Riley delivers a shockingly naked performance that has made her a favorite (along with Ms. Mirren) for the Olivier Award for best actress. Wearing her aristocratic haughtiness as if it were a hair shirt, this Julie jerks viciously between sensual and social impulses, turning a brief, brutal encounter with her father's valet (the excellent Richard Coyle) into a genuine danse macabre.
The idea of sex as a great and corrosive leveler is given a lighter but equally compelling treatment in ''Play Without Words,'' the choreographer Matthew Bourne's inspired series of variations on the Joseph Losey film ''The Servant,'' which has returned to the National's repertory. Meanwhile, over at Sadler's Wells, the wily Mr. Bourne has turned ''The Nutcracker'' ballet into a sprightly sexual coming-of-age story. (Imagine Laurie's dream ballet in ''Oklahoma!'' set in a sweet shop of the mind.) His participation in the forthcoming West End production of ''Mary Poppins'' promises that there may be spice along with the sugar.
There's genuine heat in, of all things, Peter Hall's revival of Harold Pinter's ''Betrayal'' at the Duchess Theater. While this elliptical drama has been perceived as a chilly analysis of marital infidelity, Sir Peter's production wears its broken heart more accessibly. Much of this has to do with Janie Dee, who lends a humanizing compassion to the woman at the triangle's center. This greater emphasis on her character has been given extracurricular weight by the recent publication of ''The Center of the Bed,'' a memoir by the television host Joan Bakewell, whose relationship with Mr. Pinter inspired ''Betrayal.''
When ''Betrayal'' was first staged, it was dismissed as yet another rueful English excursion into adultery. That it has turned out to wear so exceptionally well, uncovering different layers with each new production, is less a matter of its subject than with Mr. Pinter's powers as a tantalizing storyteller who keeps shifting and blurring perspectives.
That's the art being celebrated in ''The Pillowman,'' the unsettling and exhilarating new play from Mr. McDonagh, best known for his ''Leenane'' series of dramas about rural Ireland. In ''The Pillowman,'' directed by John Crowley, a young writer named Katurian (David Tennant) is being grilled by a police inspector (Jim Broadbent, of the film ''Moulin Rouge'') about the gruesome murders of several children. Their exotic deaths, it seems, closely resemble incidents in Katurian's fiction.
Within the ''Crime and Punishment''-style cat-and-mouse game played by suspect and interrogator, the play unfolds a dizzying series of tales, true and false, ranging from autobiographical fiction (given vibrant onstage life) to perversely motivated lies. By the evening's end everyone has been branded a storyteller of sorts.
Academics could probably have a great time deconstructing ''The Pillowman'' as a wry defense of Mr. McDonagh's body of work. But what makes it so gripping as theater is how narrative art becomes the play's and the character's very life blood.
''Could you beat me up after I've finished this?'' Katurian asks as he scrawls out a confession. ''I'm just to the part about murdering my mother and father.'' Such Scheherazade tactics are useful in staving off torture. Mr. McDonagh's broader point, however, is that while the passionate act lasts only a moment, it can be endlessly resurrected by the properly passionate storyteller.
It's the urgency in the telling, as well as the art, that keeps a tale fresh. That's why ''Mourning Becomes Electra,'' a play that should seem ridiculously dated, still feels so vital. And why ''Betrayal,'' ''Miss Julie'' and ''The Pillowman'' will probably be staged for generations to come, as long as they're presented with the ardor burning through London's theaters this winter.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
