A day before Gov. John G. Rowland was scheduled to give his annual State of the State address, Republican and Democratic lawmakers unveiled their own goals for the coming legislative session, concentrating on ethics reforms inspired by the scandal surrounding Mr. Rowland's administration.
In an annual ritual, leaders of both parties held news conferences and distributed brochures in the Capitol to announce their list of legislative priorities, from taxes to education to prison overcrowding. The governor spent the morning working in his office and the afternoon rehearsing his speech, a spokesman said.
But where Mr. Rowland, a Republican who was elected to a third term in 2002, has said he will say nothing in his address about the ethical lapses that have led to the current impeachment inquiry, the lawmakers will put those issues front and center.
The leaders of the House Democrats and the Senate Republicans headlined their lists of goals on Tuesday with proposals to extend the statute of limitations for ethics violations, increase penalties, and reform bidding processes for state contracts. Those processes figure largely in the House impeachment inquiry and the continuing federal investigation of the governor's administration.
In yet another reminder of Mr. Rowland's difficulties, the state director of homeland security, Vincent J. DeRosa, whose actions are being reviewed in the federal investigation, abruptly announced his retirement on Tuesday. Mr. DeRosa, a friend of the governor and his former driver, said in a statement that he had recently discovered his ownership of a used car business was a violation of state regulations. Because he had been planning to retire on June 1, he chose to keep the dealership and retire effective March 1 instead, he said.
Mr. DeRosa, who has held the homeland security post since August 2001, had owned the dealership for years, but the fact that it conflicts with state guidelines was first reported last week in The New Haven Register.
On Tuesday, Kevin B. Sullivan, the Senate president pro tem, released a statement criticizing Mr. DeRosa for the violation and other matters and calling for an investigation.
Mr. DeRosa is among those who Mr. Rowland has said did free work on the governor's private cottage in Litchfield. In December, Mr. Rowland admitted that he had lied about receiving the free work and gifts, an admission that led legislators to create the House committee that will decide whether to recommend impeachment.
The governor and many legislators have said they will not let the investigations prevent them from pursuing other matters of concern to both parties, including medical malpractice, education and the environment. In his speech on Wednesday, the governor plans to propose a school voucher program and a higher tax on cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, beer and wine, said Dean Pagani, a spokesman. On Tuesday evening the governor met with Republican legislators at the Capitol to brief them on the budget and his address.
But privately, some lawmakers say it will be difficult to stay focused on such issues while the House is running the first impeachment inquiry of a sitting governor in state history. Several senior lawmakers are serving on the impeachment committee, which was formally created last week and has already begun meeting.
The committee has been reviewing impeachment proceedings in other states, and will meet again on Wednesday to interview candidates for the position of legal counsel..
Some lawmakers have also speculated that Mr. Rowland's difficulties could make it easier for the Democrats, who have a majority in both houses, to win passage of their legislative goals.
Those include several items that have failed in the past, including the so-called millionaire tax, which would impose higher marginal tax rates on households earning more than $1 million a year.
