IT has been a tough year for Viacom. It has had to cope with everything from Justin Timberlake's exposing Janet Jackson's breast during the Super Bowl broadcast on CBS to routine problems like the potential spinoff of its Blockbuster chain of video stores.
But its worries do not end there. One of the largest money management firms to own Viacom shares has been quietly selling off much of its stake. Since March 2002, Capital Research and Management, an investment firm that has big stakes in big media companies, has cut its stake in half -- to 47.8 million shares on Sept. 30, 2003, from 97.8 million at the end of March 2002, according to company filings. And Viacom says it believes that Capital's holding may now have fallen to 10 million shares or less. (It has also long owned 8.5 million shares of Viacom's supervoting Class A stock.)
The sell-off is significant because Capital's media investments are overseen by Gordon Crawford, a senior vice president whose moves are watched on Wall Street. Mr. Crawford declined to comment on Capital's investments. For a number of years, Capital was the No.2 investor in Viacom -- after its chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, who owns about 11 percent of the equity -- and Mr. Crawford has a reputation as a long-term investor who will often stay with a stock for years.
Major sales by Capital generally represent either a growing dissatisfaction with management or concerns about underlying changes in the industry, media executives note.
Mr. Crawford's view of Viacom has changed over the last 21 months. In the first nine months of 2003, the most recent period for which data is available, Capital sold about 16 million shares.
Over the last two decades, Capital has held large positions in Disney, Time Warner, the News Corporation and Viacom, among others. Three years ago, when Mr. Crawford was unhappy with the leadership of the Walt Disney Company by Michael D. Eisner, Capital sold 66 million Disney shares. It still has big holdings in Time Warner and News Corporation.
Mr. Crawford has no management issues with Viacom, several analysts said. But he has told them he thinks the stock has become expensive and the company's growth is slowing. Viacom's Class B shares closed yesterday at $40.34, about midway between their 52-week closing high of $48.13 and the low of $33.11.
A large majority of analysts who follow the stock are recommending it, and they generally think Viacom will benefit in 2004 from a pickup in advertising spending. But Mr. Crawford's concerns appear to be about the longer-term prospects for its core business.
In a speech he gave at the Museum of Television and Radio in New York on Oct. 23, he underlined future problems for the television broadcasting and film businesses. Viacom has important assets in both. In television, it owns CBS, UPN and 39 stations. The TV division accounted for 29 percent of its $19.1 billion in revenue in the first nine months of 2003 and more than 27 percent of its $3.7 billion in operating income.
Mr. Crawford said the future growth of broadcast television was in doubt because of the splintering of audiences. He said he believed that in the next several years, TV advertising will be hurt further by digital technology that lets people store programs and skip the ads. And with younger people spending more time on the Internet, Mr. Crawford said, entrepreneurs will create programs that lure them away from television.
Yesterday, Mr. Redstone took issue with that analysis. ''Capital, which has been a longtime supporter of Viacom,'' he said, ''apparently does not believe in the television model or the advertising recovery. Our television model is working sensationally, and we believe that this year will be the best advertising year in history and that Viacom will be the primary beneficiary. ''
As for feature films, which accounted for 14.7 percent of Viacom's revenue and 5.5 percent of its operating income in the first nine months of 2003, Mr. Crawford said the industry had been slow to understand that eventually consumers will be able to download films to their computers so quickly that this will become a more convenient way of viewing them.
He added that even people who choose not to use Kazaa or similar networks for free source material can buy a DVD, purchase software on the Internet to break the encryption on the DVD, and burn multiple copies to sell or give to friends.
Analysts said Mr. Crawford had also become increasingly unhappy that Viacom did not sell its remaining 82 percent stake in Blockbuster several years ago. Viacom sold 18 percent to the public in 1999 and has been trying for several months to sell the rest to a private equity buyer.
So where is Mr. Crawford putting the money that the sale of Viacom shares generated? ''The fastest-growing media companies will have names like Yahoo, Google, InterActiveCorp, eBay and Amazon,'' he said in October.
Market Place
