Cisco Systems, the leading Internet equipment maker, reported fiscal second-quarter earnings on Tuesday that slightly exceeded analysts' expectations and provided further evidence that a slow but steady recovery in the technology industries is under way.
John Chambers, Cisco's chief executive, said in a conference call that ''it was becoming increasingly clear'' that the worldwide economy was improving. ''I continue to be more optimistic than I was going into the last quarter,'' he said.
Sales at Cisco rose 15 percent in the period ended Jan. 24, to $5.4 billion, the highest in three years, from $4.7 billion in the quarter a year earlier and nearly 6 percent above those in the first quarter.
Cisco executives attributed much of the increased sales to orders from telecommunications companies replacing aging network equipment. Growth in Internet-based calling, analysts said, is helping to increase demand for Cisco products. Last month, BCE, Canada's largest telephone company, said it would purchase $154 million in equipment from Cisco to upgrade its network for Internet-based phone calls.
Cisco was also among several American network equipment companies that have recently signed deals to sell products to Chinese telecommunications companies. ''China is a vast consumer of telecommunications infrastructure equipment,'' said Barry Jaruzelski, a telecommunications consultant with Booz Allen Hamilton. ''We're hearing that all over.''
Net income at Cisco fell in the quarter, to $724 million, or 10 cents a share, from $991 million, or 14 cents a share, a year earlier. But excluding an accounting change related to its acquisition of Andiamo Systems, the company said net income was $1.3 billion, or 18 cents a share, surpassing analysts' forecasts by a penny a share.
The market's reaction, however, was not enthusiastic. In regular-session trading before the earnings announcement, Cisco's shares gained 21 cents, to $26.41. But after hours, the shares fell $1.13, or 4.3 percent, to $25.28, suggesting that some investors were disappointed Cisco executives did not express greater optimism about the recovery in technology sales.
''There was no upside to expectations,'' said Eric Suppiger, an analyst with Pacific Growth Equities. ''The stock has shown some pretty sharp increases lately that reflect expectations beyond what the numbers show.''
Paul Sagawa, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, described Cisco's results as ''right down the middle,'' but ''not wildly disappointing.''
The gross profit margin for the quarter was 68.5 percent, compared with 68.7 percent in the quarter a year earlier.
Cisco executives said the company had experienced manufacturing problems, which resulted in some product shipments being delayed until late in the quarter. The difficulty, Mr. Chambers said, had been largely resolved. Still, the disclosure took investors by surprise.
Mr. Jaruzelski called Cisco's financial performance proof that technology spending was indeed improving, however slowly. ''This is good, healthy growth, even though it's not like we used to see,'' he said. ''And it's being done without compromising margins.''
Mr. Chambers said 45 percent of business in the quarter came from the United States, roughly the same as in the 2003 period.
In November, Mr. Chambers told analysts that half the chief executives he had spoken with told him they were optimistic that the global economy was improving. More recently, he said, even more chief executives have been optimistic on that score.
Looking ahead, Cisco executives said they expected revenue this quarter to be 18 percent to 20 percent higher than a year earlier, and 1 percent to 3 percent higher than the second-quarter results. Mr. Chambers described this quarter as typically the company's most challenging one.
He also said the employee head count remained constant in the recent period, as the company tried to reach its goal of $700,000 profit per employee; that figure currently stands at $632,000.
Of Cisco's total revenue for the quarter, 39 percent came from the sales of switches, 26 percent from sales of routers, and 15 percent from sales of Cisco's advanced technology products. Service accounted for 16 percent of revenue.
