Kobe Bryant was very cooperative with police officers investigating an accusation of rape against him last summer, and even affably encouraged them to ''do the best job you can,'' a police detective testified on Tuesday in a pretrial hearing here.
But the testimony was not aimed at helping Mr. Bryant. Rather, prosecutors are hoping to prove that Mr. Bryant spoke freely to the police and even offered additional articles of clothing for testing without the need of a search warrant so that his words and possessions may be used as evidence against him when his trial begins later this year.
His lawyers are seeking to have that evidence thrown out because they say it was illegally and deceptively obtained.
Mr. Bryant, a basketball star with the Los Angeles Lakers, is accused of sexually assaulting a hotel employee on June 30 at a mountain resort near Eagle. Mr. Bryant said the two had consensual sex; the woman, whose name has not been made public, said he forced himself on her in his room.
Tuesday's hearing, on a motion by the defense to suppress evidence, was marked by paradoxes, twists and sometimes even comic turns. Another police officer, who often works undercover and was allowed to testify behind a black screen under the designation ''Detective A,'' described how three officers were dispatched to watch Mr. Bryant at the hotel, near the Vail ski resort. The officers pretended to be guests. Detective A and two other officers, named only as Detective B and Detective C, concocted a ruse to knock on the door of Mr. Bryant's room, pretending to be lost, to see if he was in.
But it seems the officers were more conspicuous than they thought. Later that evening, as they sat in their truck in the parking lot watching the hotel, they were surprised by Mr. Bryant and one of his bodyguards, an off-duty officer with the Los Angeles Police Department, who walked up from behind and asked them what was going on.
''It was quite a confusing moment,'' Detective C told the court. ''He totally caught us off guard.''
But what might have seemed a light moment was also deeply important in assessing the question of whether Mr. Bryant was freely cooperating that night, Mr. Bryant's defense lawyers suggested in their questioning.
One of the detectives who testified after the screens were removed, Dan Loya, said he had intended to secretly record a conversation with Mr. Bryant after the police arrived to join the surveillance team at the hotel early on the morning of July 2. The goal, Detective Loya said, was to obtain Mr. Bryant's cooperation and verbal consent without resorting to a search warrant that had just been signed by a county judge. They also had no intention of arresting him that night and intended to tell Mr. Bryant that right away, he said.
But in the confusion, Detective Loya said, he was not able to turn on the recorder in his front shirt pocket right away.
''I said he was not under arrest and that he was free to leave and that we wanted to speak with him,'' Detective Loya said he told Mr. Bryant in the parking lot. Only then, after that, he said, did he turn away and switch on the recorder.
The result, Mr. Bryant's lawyers suggested, was that Detective Loya had no proof that Mr. Bryant said any such thing.
''Was it part of your plan not to activate the recorder?'' asked Harold A. Haddon, one of Mr. Bryant's lawyers.
''No,'' Mr. Loya answered.
The judge in the case, Terry Ruckriegle of Eagle County District Court, did not rule Tuesday on whether the information obtained that night about Mr. Bryant would be allowed into evidence. Judge Ruckriegle has also yet to rule on another crucial question: whether the defense will be allowed to use information about Mr. Bryant's 19-year-old accuser to challenge the validity of her account that Mr. Bryant forced himself on her in his room. She told police she went voluntarily to his room, where she hugged and kissed Mr. Bryant, but that he then pushed her over a chair and raped her.
Mr. Bryant, 25, faces four years to life in prison, or up to life on probation under a sex-offender treatment program if convicted of felony sexual assault.
At Tuesday's hearing, Mr. Bryant's lawyers returned again and again to what they called the police ''plan'' to obtain information from Mr. Bryant. Under questioning by Mr. Haddon, Detective Loya said that when he and his partner drove to Mr. Bryant's hotel that night, about 24 hours after the incident in his room, they carried neither a written consent form that would allow a search without a warrant nor a written form that would advise him of his legal rights.
''What was the plan?'' Mr. Haddon asked.
''Our plan was to get Mr. Bryant's cooperation and verbal consent,'' Detective Loya responded.
