At the funeral service for Natalie Wood, who drowned in 1981 when she was only 43, the honorary pallbearers included a who's who of Hollywood of the 1960's: Fred Astaire, Rock Hudson, Elia Kazan, Laurence Olivier, Gregory Peck and Frank Sinatra.
''People adored Natalie, but she never really got her due,'' said Gavin Lambert, an author and screenwriter whose well-received biography, ''Natalie Wood: A Life'' (Knopf) has just been published. ''She was an exceptional actress in about a half-dozen movies. But this was never acknowledged, and I'm not sure why.
''The only think I can think of is what George Cukor said about Vivien Leigh, that she was underestimated because of her beauty,'' Mr. Lambert said, seated in his apartment in West Hollywood.
Wood is finally getting new recognition in his biography and a new dramatized television film directed by Peter Bogdanovich.
The book explores her performances in memorable films like ''Rebel Without a Cause,'' ''Splendor in the Grass,'' ''Love With the Proper Stranger'' and ''Inside Daisy Clover,'' which Mr. Lambert adapted from his 1963 novel about a streetwise teenager who becomes a movie star. The television film, ''The Mystery of Natalie Wood,'' explores her sometimes troubled life and career. It will be shown on ABC on March 1. Mr. Bogdanovich said the timing of the biography and the film made a ''strange coincidence,'' especially since Wood's reputation seems to rest heavily, at least among younger filmgoers, on the cloudy circumstances of her death.
Mr. Lambert said her husband, Robert Wagner, cooperated with him, providing details for the first time about the drowning. It was a tense time during their marriage, and Wood, Mr. Wagner and the actor Christopher Walken, who was making a movie, ''Brainstorm,'' with the actress, were on the yacht Splendor off the coast of Catalina. All three had been drinking heavily, Mr. Lambert said, and Wood left the two men, who had been arguing over the direction of her career, to go back to her stateroom. When Mr. Wagner went down half an hour later, Mr. Lambert said, he found her missing and the boat's dinghy gone. A Coast Guard search followed, and she was later found dead floating in the water. Mr. Lambert attributes her death to an accident, as did the coroner's report. Mr. Lambert said that the Wagner family had hoped Mr. Walken would cooperate with the book. But Mr. Lambert said he declined to do so. Alan Nierob, Mr. Wagner's publicist, said Mr. Wagner would have no comment on the book. Mara Buxbaum, Mr. Walken's publicist, also declined to comment.
Mr. Bogdanovich, who said he had met Wood at parties, observed that whatever her personal issues, she was ''much loved'' in Hollywood. He said he interviewed about 20 of her friends or lovers. ''Half of them cried,'' he said.
Wood was, by Mr. Lambert's account, an alternately fragile and strong-willed woman, a daughter of Russian émigrés, whose childhood virtually ended when she was 6 and cast in the 1946 film ''Tomorrow Is Forever.'' From then on she helped support her entire family. Mr. Wagner told Mr. Lambert that her hugely ambitious mother was ''close to certifiable.''
Speaking of Wood, Mr. Bogdanovich said: ''Nobody really knows her story. She was a superb actress, even if many of her pictures weren't so hot. She was overlooked. And given her terrifying stage mother, the fact that Natalie did as much as she did was extraordinary.''
Molly Haskell, the film critic and author, said in a recent telephone interview that Wood was an intriguing symbol of the 1950's and had long been appreciated by film buffs. ''On the surface she was an all-American sweetie pie, an innocent,'' Ms. Haskell said. ''Yet underneath there were always darker threads in some of her performances. She dealt with daring issues like teenage sex and abortion. We think of the 1950's as all-conformist and conservative, but there was a whole lot of subversion going on. She represented that.''
Certainly Wood did not attain the status of Marilyn Monroe or Audrey Hepburn or Ava Gardner. ''Her beauty wasn't as extreme or dazzling or over the top,'' Ms. Haskell said. ''She had charisma but not on that scale,'' she added. ''There was something unobtrusive, unassertive, about her.''
There have been other books about Wood, but Mr. Lambert's biography earned the cooperation of her family and friends, including Mr. Wagner, who was married twice to her. Mr. Lambert, 79, a longtime friend of Wood's, said Mr. Wagner approached him years ago about writing the book after declining interview requests from other authors. It took a few years before Mr. Lambert accepted. ''I adored her,'' he said. ''And I thought it was a terrible shame that she went out in a sort of tabloid headline. But I told him that nothing would be off limits, and there would be no strings. It turned out nothing was off limits, and he was very honest and open and got people to talk to me who I probably wouldn't have had access to otherwise.''
Had Mr. Wagner read the book? ''He warned me he might not read it for some time or even ever,'' Mr. Lambert said. ''This was a terrible trauma in his life, and I don't think he'll ever get totally over it.''
Wood grew up at Warner Brothers and made more than 50 films. She played Maria in ''West Side Story'' (1961), one of her most well-known films, and Louise in ''Gypsy'' (1962). But her reputation rests on movies like ''Rebel Without a Cause'' (1955), ''Splendor in the Grass,'' (1961) and ''Love With the Proper Stranger'' (1963) -- each of which earned her an Oscar nomination -- as well as ''Inside Daisy Clover'' (1965) and ''Bob &amp; Carol &amp; Ted &amp; Alice'' (1969).
Mr. Lambert said Wood had attempted suicide. She had affairs with men including Nicholas Ray, the director of ''Rebel Without a Cause''; the actors Dennis Hopper, Warren Beatty and Steve McQueen; and Jerry Brown, who was then California's secretary of state. She was married three times, first to Mr. Wagner, then to Richard Gregson, a talent agent, and then to Mr. Wagner again. But Mr. Lambert said that at the peak of her career she took several years off to raise her two daughters: Natasha, by her second husband, and Courtney, by Mr. Wagner.
Wood was also realistic about her career options as she outgrew the ingénue roles, Mr. Lambert said. At one point, he relates in his book, she was invited to dinner by Barbara Stanwyck, who seemed ''bitter and lonely.'' Wood told Mr. Lambert she was determined ''never to end up like that.'' In her final years Wood turned to television. In 1976 she starred as Maggie in a television version of ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof'' and in 1979 appeared in a mini-series based on the novel ''From Here to Eternity.''
Had she lived, Mr. Lambert said, she would have turned to the theater and independent film. She had also taken an option on a book about another tragic figure, Zelda Fitzgerald, and wanted to play her.
Mr. Lambert said Wood herself underestimated her talent and impact. He recalled attending the San Francisco International Film Festival, where she was being honored in a double tribute with Jack Nicholson. ''She was really nervous because Nicholson was going on first, and she said he was considered so much more modern than she was,'' Mr. Lambert recalled. ''And she got onstage and talked and got a standing ovation, and they wouldn't let her go. They actually followed her out to the street. She had that quality: she drew people to her.''
