The Ohio Legislature gave final approval on Tuesday to one of the most sweeping bans on same-sex unions in the country, galvanized by court rulings in Canada and Massachusetts that have declared gay marriage to be legal.
The Ohio measure, which also would bar state agencies from giving benefits to both gay and heterosexual domestic partners, would make Ohio the 38th state to prohibit the recognition of same-sex unions. Gov. Bob Taft, a Republican, planned to sign it in the coming week, his office said.
In approving the measure, the Republican-controlled Legislature rejected concerns raised by some of the state's largest corporations and colleges, including Ohio State University, that the ban would hurt the state's business image and undermine their ability to recruit skilled workers.
Supporters of the bill, which passed overwhelmingly in the House but on a closer vote in the Senate, argued that the measure was not meant to be discriminatory, but reflected their conviction -- borne out by some polls -- that most people wanted marriage defined in the traditional sense: as between a man and a woman. That desire has intensified, they said, in the months since courts in Massachusetts and Canada ruled that gays should be allowed to marry.
''These court decisions have added new urgency to the need to pass this bill,'' State Representative William J. Seitz, a Republican from the Cincinnati area and the bill's chief sponsor, said in recent testimony. ''I stress that we are not dealing with a hypothetical problem.''
Groups that monitor the issue said they expected Ohio's to be the first of many state legislative battles this year over gay marriage. At least a dozen states are expected to consider constitutional amendments banning same-sex unions and several are expected to pass, those groups said. Constitutional amendments would provide a more permanent prohibition than state statutes against gay marriage.
On the other side, nearly a dozen legislatures are expected to debate measures that would legalize same-sex civil unions or provide state benefits to same-sex partners.
Conservative legislators across the country are also beginning to press Congress to pass a federal constitutional amendment defining marriage as between a man and a woman.
''The homosexual community has raised the issue and pushed it to the point that it has become a national issue,'' said State Senator William J. Knight, a Republican from Southern California who opposes gay marriage. ''The issue is here to stay, until and unless the federal government addresses it.''
The Ohio bill, modeled on federal legislation approved by Congress in 1996, declares marriage between persons of the same sex to be ''against the strong public policy of this state.'' But it goes beyond the federal act, and most of the so-called defense of marriage acts passed by the states, by denying state benefits to domestic partners of the same or opposite sex.
It also prohibits the state from recognizing any ''public act, record or judicial proceeding'' from any jurisdiction that extends the benefits of marriage to nonmarital unions. The bill's sponsors say the provision is needed to ensure that courts cannot require Ohio to recognize same-sex unions of any type granted by other states, cities or countries.
''It's one of the worst bills we've seen in terms of its reach in discriminating against gay families, both in the private and public sectors,'' said Cheryl Jacques, the president of the Human Rights Campaign, a gay rights group.
Currently, same-sex marriage is not legal in any state. But Canada, Belgium and the Netherlands have expanded their marriage laws to include same-sex couples. And Massachusetts's highest court has ruled that gay couples have the right to marry under the state's Constitution and has ordered the Legislature to make same-sex marriages possible this year. Massachusetts is also considering a constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage.
Vermont recognizes civil unions, which grant many of but not all the legal rights of marriage. California, Hawaii, New Jersey and more than 60 local governments have passed laws granting various rights to unmarried same-sex couples.
Advocates for gay marriage say the sweeping language of Ohio's law could have unintended effects. They contend, for example, that parental rights granted by another state concerning a partner's child would be nullified in Ohio.
They have also said that the bill would encourage litigation against corporations that provide domestic-partner benefits, even though it does not explicitly prohibit such benefits. Some of Ohio's largest corporations, including Procter &amp; Gamble, NCR and Federated Department Stores, offer benefits to domestic partners.
''Although the bill does not prohibit a private-sector employer from providing domestic-partner benefits, there is concern that it may prove to be a vehicle that will allow suits to be brought against employers that do provide them,'' said Linda Woggon, vice president of the Ohio Chamber of Commerce for governmental affairs.
This week, Karen A. Holbrook, the president of Ohio State University, sent a letter to Governor Taft saying that the bill, H.B. 272, would put the college at a ''competitive disadvantage'' in recruiting personnel, because most other Big Ten and ''elite research'' universities provide domestic-partner benefits to employees. Ohio State, which does not provide but has been considering such benefits, would be prohibited by the measure from offering them.
''We are working very hard at Ohio State to create a culture of acceptance, tolerance and dignity in every aspect of our institution, and H.B. 272, as it now stands, will impede our progress,'' Ms. Holbrook wrote.
But the bill's supporters and aides to Governor Taft said such concerns were exaggerated and that private corporations were free to provide any benefits they wanted. They also asserted that the legislation allowed public-employee unions to negotiate domestic-partner benefits through collective bargaining.
''The point we are trying to make in this bill is that when we have used the word spouse in our statutes before, that's really what we meant: one man, one woman,'' Representative Seitz said during final debate on Tuesday.
Groups that monitor the same-sex marriage debate said they expected the biggest fights this year to be over state constitutional amendments. Support for amendments seems strongest in Mississippi, Alabama, Missouri and Oklahoma, those groups said. But heated battles are also expected in Massachusetts, Georgia and Wisconsin, where the Democratic governor vetoed a bill banning same-sex marriages last year.
President Bush has helped fuel the debate, suggesting in his State of the Union address last month that a federal constitutional amendment might be needed to counter judges who have tried to redefine marriage to include gay couples.
''Our nation must defend the sanctity of marriage,'' Mr. Bush said.
Social conservatives said that the president's remarks had galvanized their movement against gay marriage.
Supporters of gay marriage contend the president's speech was part of an election-year strategy to energize the Republican Party's conservative base.
''Religious extremists want to make this the wedge issue of the 2004 election,'' said Timothy Downing, the president of Ohioans for Growth and Equality, a nonprofit group that has lobbied against the bill. ''They want the country to be afraid of gay and lesbian couples to help their candidates and help their fund-raising.''
But there is also evidence that the issue is creating discomfort within the Republican Party, particularly among pro-business moderates. Last week, Governor Taft asked the Legislature to delay final passage of the bill so that it would not overshadow his State of the State address.
In Wisconsin, the Republican sponsor of a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage said many of his Republican colleagues did not want to revisit the issue, which he said caused acrimonious debate last year.
''What will change their minds is when the Massachusetts law legalizing same-sex marriage is enacted,'' said the sponsor, State Senator Scott Fitzgerald, a Republican from the Milwaukee suburbs.
