Texas Tech said Tuesday that it had reprimanded Coach Bob Knight in connection with a heated encounter he had Monday with the university's chancellor, David Smith. But calling the incident a misunderstanding, the university said it would not suspend Knight.
Knight, who coached 19th-ranked Texas Tech to an 83-63 victory over Baylor here Tuesday night, said afterward that he had not instigated the dispute, and he praised the university's president, Jon Whitmore, for his handling of the matter.
Knight received support from the student section at the game. Two female students held a sign reading, ''Coach Knight Be My Valentine,'' and another sign read, ''We Support Coach Bob Knight.'' When the game ended, the crowd cheered Knight as he left the court.
He told reporters afterward that he was at the salad bar at a Lubbock grocery and lunch spot when the chancellor approached him. As Knight recounted it:
''He said: 'Bob, you've really been doing well lately. You've done a very good job lately.'
''I said, 'David, I think that as long as I've been here, for the most part.' ''
Knight said that after he went to fix his salad, the chancellor ''came at me pretty hard, saying: 'You've got issues? What are they?' ''
''Right then is where I think that I was at fault,'' Knight said. ''I should have just shook my head and walked away and said a lot of other things. I didn't. I went on to tell him what one of those issues was. Then it got back and forth a little bit.''
Knight also said, ''I absolutely did not instigate anything.''
He said that ''suspension was a thing that was talked about'' in connection with the encounter and that if he had been suspended, he would have employed ''any means available'' to fight that.
He declined to take questions from reporters.
University officials confirmed earlier that Knight had a disagreement with Smith, but they did not supply details.
The university's athletic director, Gerald Myers, said in a statement Tuesday that ''appropriate personnel action'' had been taken against Knight. He said that ''no suspension is involved, but the action does include a reprimand.''
''This is a misunderstanding and has now been rectified,'' Myers said. ''The matter has been resolved in the best interest of the university.''
Smith said in a statement that ''we look forward to the continuation of what is already a successful season.''
Smith was at Tuesday's game but was not available for questions.
''I regret that the situation turned out the way it did,'' Knight said in a statement released by the university.
''I look forward to finishing this season in a strong fashion, and I am glad the situation is behind me so that I can return to the business of coaching,'' Knight added.
Knight arrived in Lubbock to coach Texas Tech in the spring of 2001 from Indiana, where he had won three national championships and become a Hall of Fame coach. He had been fired by Myles Brand, then the Indiana University president, after a series of incidents in which Knight's temper flared.
Before Knight came to Lubbock, a Texas Tech associate professor of philosophy, Walter Schaller, started a faculty petition against his hiring.
''This certainly is the kind of behavior that we were worried about,'' Schaller said in a telephone interview Tuesday.
Most recently, Knight criticized the crowd at Southern Methodist for being vulgar after Texas Tech lost a game there on Dec. 1. Three weeks later, Knight gave a profanity-laced answer in a television interview with Fran Fraschilla, an ESPN analyst and former coach, when asked about his relationship with his former Indiana player Steve Alford, now the Iowa coach, who was also participating in the program. Texas Tech reprimanded Knight for his language in that interview, and Knight apologized.
Also during his tenure in Lubbock, Knight has kicked in the screen of a television during a halftime tirade and distributed a list of transgressions of one of his former players, like missed practices, at a meeting of Lubbock businessmen.
''How many times can you say I'm sorry?'' Nancy B. Reed, head of the university's faculty senate, said in a telephone interview. ''Publicly, it doesn't ring true anymore. Considering how things go, I doubt very much will come of this.''
She added, ''I think if a faculty member did this, they would be sent for psychiatric evaluation.''
Knight has had a major impact on the Texas Tech basketball program. Season-ticket orders have skyrocketed, ticket prices have risen and Knight's presence has given the university a prime fund-raising mechanism. Knight, meanwhile, refused his $250,000 base salary last season because he was not pleased with his coaching.
As he did at Indiana, Knight has donated generously to the library at Tech.
''There have been a lot of good deeds that have gone unpublicized,'' Schaller said.
Knight, who has 826 coaching victories, took over a 9-19 team two years ago and turned the Red Raiders into a 23-9 club that reached the N.C.A.A. tournament. This could be Knight's best season at Texas Tech, with his team at 17-4.
Many expect Knight, 63, to keep coaching until he breaks the career victory record, which is held by North Carolina's Dean Smith, who won 879 games.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
