CRISP and angry lobster. ''Bronx style'' filet mignon of veal. A cheesecake lollipop tree with bubble-gum whipped cream.
New York culinistas will know immediately that those off-the-wall menu items can be the work of only one man, David Burke, the chef who first gave us swordfish chops and pastrami salmon.
Mr. Burke, recently unleashed from the constraints of corporate chefdom, is now performing his high-wire act twice daily not far from his old stomping grounds at the Park Avenue Cafe. In December he opened David Burke &amp; Donatella with Donatella Arpaia, a lawyer turned restaurateur who owns Bellini. While she keeps things calm and happy in the dining room, he whizzes around the kitchen preparing complex dishes of immense fussiness that really shouldn't work, but do. There are some definite misses -- and let me quickly say that bubble-gum whipped cream is one of them.
But overall, diners here are in for terrific savories, a reasonable and unusual wine list and excellent people-watching.
The restaurant itself, in an Upper East Side town house, is done to a turn. In fact, the all-white front room, its tables filled on the nights of my visits with high-testosterone patrons, would be quite at home in Palm Beach. The main dining room, a few steps down, is fancy and formal, yet stylish. Admiring the crimson hue of the place, one of my guests declared red the new black. All sorts of red, at that: paprika banquettes, Chinese red Roman shades, a spectacular Dale Chihuly-like sculpture over the fireplace made of red glass rods that look like licorice. It is all quite grand.
This is a restaurant where you would expect to see perfectly coiffed, bejeweled women of a certain age with men in double-breasted sports jackets and striped shirts with white collars. Not to mention an astonishing number of paunchy men of a certain age who appeared to be dining with their nieces. And you do. But the Upper East Side is not what it used to be and so the dining room also supports a good number of men in cashmere Kiton sweaters and groups of young women with Prada bags at their feet. They are the new moneyed class.
Still, the attentive staff is better dressed than many of the guests. And each dish, like the décor and the staff, makes a statement. David Burke can't help himself. The restaurant does not simply serve bread; it presents bread, a cross between a parkerhouse roll and a brioche, baked in a copper casserole, its sourdough top studded with thyme and sprinkled with coarse salt and zatar, a Middle Eastern spice blend. It's delicious. The butter, of course, must be decorated, so it comes sprinkled with coarse red salt.
The amuse-bouche, an icy cold Kumamoto oyster with Mr. Burke's tarted-up mignonette sauce of soy, orange and lemon grass, is a perfect prelude.
It takes an entire paragraph to describe one of his dishes, but unlike other chefs who play with their food, Mr. Burke seems to know what he's doing and when his complex combinations work, the depth of flavor in the dish is a joy.
A lobster flan, made with Sauternes, is topped with miniature home fries and lobster meat ragù. This accompanies a shiitake dumpling and a boned leg of quail with a shiitake filling, the quail wrapped in pasta, the drumstick bone serving as a handle. Next to it sits a quail breast, coated in Asian spices with a dusting of dried orange peel. And that's just one dish.
The day-boat sea scallops ''Benedict'' bring out Mr. Burke's whimsical side. The scallops sit on potato pancakes -- stand-ins for English muffins -- topped with sunny-side-up quail eggs, slices of chorizo replacing the ham, with olive tapenade sauce and a little chorizo oil. There's foam, too, a weird last-year touch, this one made with lobster broth.
Foie gras is superbly combined with candied kumquats and grapes that have been poached in Armagnac and port wine and then rolled in cornflakes and fried, the poaching liquid becoming the sauce. Point counterpoint.
A dish of salmon tartare and tuna tartare, which Mr. Burke first made at the River Cafe in Brooklyn, came with caviar and crème fraîche and was unctuously good.
As was the salmon mousse, and the pastrami salmon with rye blini, and the tuna sashimi with a panna cotta of sea urchin. Even a simple market salad had a dash of extra flavor -- crisp potato and bacon. It is all very appealing.
Blue crab ravioli with basil aioli in crab consommé may be one of the chef's simplest dishes but it is suffused with flavor. And all of the pasta dishes show a sure hand, including the cavatelli with wild mushrooms and the ravioli with spinach, though the generous gratings of black truffles really add little to the dishes.
The roast chicken, which has been brined in seaweed water, is moist and tender. The Dover sole is gently cooked, preserving its delicate flavor. And the highly seasoned barbecued squab comes with a corn torte with foie gras. Just right.
When Mr. Burke cooks like this he can play with his food all he wants. But some of his whimsy needs rethinking. Angry lobster has reason to be angry: it's dry and overcooked. The Bronx-style filet mignon of veal looks like a bootjack and is boring.
Suckling pig stuffed with pork sausage and cornbread has far too much going on. And shrimp cooked at the table with a pouring of hot oil have no flavor for all that effort.
The desserts are acceptable if you don't include the cheesecake lollipops with bubble-gum whipped cream or the fruit carpaccio, designed for carb-counters who really don't want dessert.
These dishes aside, Mr. Burke and Ms. Arpaia make you want to come back for more.
And they think of everything. On frigid nights smokers are invited to the ''smoking room,'' a stretched stretch limo -- white, of course -- with the motor running and the heater on, parked right outside the front door.
David Burke &amp; Donatella  ** [rating: two stars]  133 East 61st Street; (212) 813-2121.
ATMOSPHERE -- Warm and civilized.  SOUND LEVEL -- Pleasant buzz.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Blue crab ravioli; lobster flan; market salad; parfait of tuna and salmon tartares; sashimi tuna; day-boat sea scallops; foie gras terrine; pastrami salmon and smoked salmon mousse; Dover sole; garganelli pasta; wild mushroom cavatelli; seaweed-water-soaked roast organic chicken; gingersnap barbecued squab; ginger-rubbed salmon; mustard-crusted tuna.  SERVICE -- Professional, if occasionally over the top.  WINE LIST -- Large, international, generally well priced.  HOURS -- Lunch, Monday to Friday, 11:45 a.m. to 3 p.m.; cold menu 3 to 5 p.m.; dinner, 5 to 11 p.m. Saturday dinner, 5 to 11:30 p.m.; Sunday dinner, 5 to 10 p.m.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers, $10 to $18; entrees, $20 to $36; desserts, $10 to $15; five-course tasting menu, $65.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Dining room is down several stairs.
What the stars mean:
(None) Poor to Satisfactory  * Good  ** Very Good  *** Excellent  **** Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambiance and service with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
ON THE WEB
PAST REVIEWS from the New York Times, with additional capsule reviews by Times critics:
nytimes.com/dining
RESTAURANTS
