AN agency seeking to shake up its lagging operations, Leo Burnett, is poaching a top executive from a competitor sharing that wobbly status, Lowe &amp; Partners. Underlining the significance of the surprising change in leadership: the executive, Tom Bernardin, is in line to become the first outsider ever to lead Burnett in its 69-year history.
Leo Burnett Worldwide in Chicago, part of the Publicis Groupe, said yesterday that it had wooed Mr. Bernardin from Lowe &amp; Partners Worldwide, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, where he had been chief executive for the New York office since last February. Mr. Bernardin is joining Burnett, effective in a week or two, as its No.2 manager behind Linda Wolf, chairwoman and chief executive; he will be chief executive for United States operations and president for worldwide operations.
At Lowe, which is struggling to overcome its own losses of large accounts -- including one, Verizon Wireless, that had been closely identified with Mr. Bernardin -- Mr. Bernardin's successor is coming from inside rather than outside. Susan Cantor, executive vice president, managing director and client services director, is being promoted to president for New York.
One reason Mr. Bernardin is forsaking Lowe for Burnett at this crucial point is that he is being designated the heir apparent to Ms. Wolf, 56, who is to give up her duties to Mr. Bernardin over the next 12 to 18 months. At that time, Mr. Bernardin would become the first leader of Burnett recruited from outside the agency, which since its founding in 1935 has had its share of management shake-ups but was always known for promoting from within.
''Leo would applaud this,'' Ms. Wolf, in a phone interview, said of the founder, who died in 1971. ''He was about progress, never standing still, doing things in new ways.''
''Fresh perspective is good,'' she added. ''This is about ensuring that Burnett is successful not only today but tomorrow as our business changes.''
Ms. Wolf, along with Roger Haupt, president and chief operating officer at Publicis and a former Burnett chief executive, and Maurice Lévy, chairman and chief executive at Publicis in Paris, had been studying how to revitalize Burnett since three senior executives abruptly departed and the agency lost important clients like Delta Air Lines, Philips Electronics, Polaroid and Sara Lee. And a decision by Ms. Wolf to merge a specialist unit of Burnett, known as LB Works, into Burnett USA led to turmoil including the departures of the two highly regarded senior managers of LB Works as well as the loss of a client, Starbucks, which left because of a conflict with a Burnett USA client, McDonald's.
''This is absolutely the right decision,'' Ms. Wolf said of the recruitment of Mr. Bernardin, which was done through the New York executive search company Marcus St. Jean. ''Tom shares the values of Burnett, and because of what he has done outside, he has very relevant experience.''
Mr. Bernardin said he was aware of the daunting challenges often faced by executives who come in to run big agencies. Burnett, which had United States revenue of $379 million in 2002, compared with Lowe's $104 million, according to estimates by Advertising Age, has clients like the Altria Group, the United States Army, Kellogg, McDonald's and Procter &amp; Gamble.
''I am tremendously honored to have this opportunity because nobody has had it before'' at Burnett, Mr. Bernardin said of his outsider status.
''I'm confident of my ability to get into the culture, embrace the culture and move the agency forward,'' he added. Mr. Bernardin will now be assuming some duties of one executive who left Burnett in October, Robert C. Brennan, who had been president under Ms. Wolf and was widely seen as a potential successor to her.
Mr. Bernardin joined Lowe New York just a year ago, when Interpublic merged his previous agency, Bozell in New York, where he had been president and chief executive, into Lowe New York. Two longtime Lowe New York senior executives resigned after Mr. Bernardin was brought in as president; he was promoted to chief executive after they both left.
As Mr. Bernardin leaves Lowe New York, the agency is smarting from the loss of Verizon Wireless, an account that followed Mr. Bernardin and other Bozell executives there after the merger. Verizon Wireless, owned by Verizon Communications and Vodafone, placed its $300 million creative assignment in review last month after expressing some dissatisfaction with new campaign ideas offered by Lowe New York.
When Verizon Wireless began the review, Lowe New York said it would not take part and turned over the responsibility for the account to an Interpublic sibling, McCann-Erickson Worldwide Advertising in New York. McCann-Erickson will now represent Interpublic in the review.
''That was a big blow,'' Gary Goldsmith, chairman and chief creative officer at Lowe New York, said of the loss of Verizon Wireless. But he predicted the agency would recover because of recent account gains like Electrolux and Macy's and the promotion of Ms. Cantor, 36, whom Mr. Goldsmith described as ''a partner who's attached to business, engaged in business, interested in clients.''
Mr. Goldsmith emphatically denied a report this week in a newsletter, The Delaney Report, that he would leave Lowe New York for J. Walter Thompson, part of the WPP Group. ''I'm absolutely not leaving,'' Mr. Goldsmith said.
Both Burnett and Lowe New York made additional executive changes related to the changes they are making at the top. Four executives at Burnett and three at Lowe New York are getting new assignments.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
