HIGHLIGHTS
FRANCE: TIMES OF SAND -- Her full name was Amandine Aurore Lucie Dupin, Baroness Dudevant. But the world knows her as George Sand, left, novelist and feminist. She was born in 1804, and when she grew weary of her marriage and family, she began a career as a writer that earned her enduring fame and the affection of men like Frédéric Chopin and the poet Alfred de Musset. In France the 200th anniversary of her birth is being observed with the Year of George Sand, Agence France-Presse reported. Readings, plays and a postage stamp will be elements of the commemoration, the Culture Ministry said.
ROCK: DAVID BOWIE ROLLS ON -- David Bowie is extending his worldwide ''Reality Tour'' by adding 29 dates in North America, including performances in the New York area on June 4 and 5, Reuters reported. The current leg of the North American tour ends on Saturday in Los Angeles, and after Mr. Bowie performs in Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Singapore and Hong Kong, he is to begin new appearances in the United States and Canada with a date in Philadelphia on March 29.
GRAMMYS: HOMAGE TO THE BEATLES -- The 40th anniversary of the Beatles' first United States television appearance -- on Ed Sullivan's show on Feb. 9, 1964 -- will be commemorated during the Grammy Awards ceremony on Sunday, the BBC reported. Participants in the salute will include the rockers Sting and Dave Matthews, the rhythm-and-blues star Pharrell Williams and the country artist Vince Gill. On the Sullivan show, as an audience estimated at 73 million watched, the Fab Four sang ''I Want to Hold Your Hand,'' ''She Loves You,'' ''All My Loving,'' ''Till There Was You'' and ''I Saw Her Standing There.''
LONDON OPERA: 'NIXON' CANCELED -- The English National Opera has canceled the entire run of ''Nixon in China,'' the opera by John Adams, left, that was to have reopened that company's home, the London Coliseum, after a four-year, $76 million restoration. Reports from the BBC and musicalamerica.com said that the Coliseum was to reopen on Saturday, but on Jan. 12 the opera company's chief executive, Sean Doran, announced a delay until Feb. 21, citing problems in completing construction that proved more extensive than expected. ''Nixon,'' scheduled to play on Feb. 21, 24, 28 and March 4, was to have been joined by Phyllida Lloyd's new production of Wagner's ''Rheingold,'' beginning on Feb. 23. A new date for the reopening of the Coliseum may be announced today.
ART: DISPUTED EL GRECO -- A Greek museum is denying the National Gallery in London the loan of an El Greco painting that was the subject of a lawsuit when exhibited recently at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Fearful that the 16th-century landscape, ''Mount Sinai,'' might be confiscated in London, the Historical Museum of Crete in Heraklion declined to lend the painting to the National Gallery for an exhibition that begins on Feb. 11, the BBC reported. A Swiss citizen, Joram Deutsch, maintains that he is the rightful owner of the painting, which he said was stolen by the Nazis from its Jewish Hungarian owner. After the painting was shown in the Met's El Greco exhibition, which closed on Jan. 11, Mr. Deutsch's lawsuit in New York State Supreme Court to keep the painting in the United States pending further investigation was dismissed in late January. The museum on Crete, where El Greco was born, says it has owned the painting since 1990.
FOOTNOTES
The run of ''Piaf, la Môme de Paris,'' the nostalgic tribute to the singer on view at the Hôtel de Ville, the Paris city hall, has been extended through March. . . . Keith Lockhart, who will celebrate his 10th season as conductor of the Boston Pops this spring, takes the ensemble into Radio City Music Hall for the first time in more than a quarter century for a performance at 8 p.m. Saturday. Joined by the singer Linda Eder, the orchestra will feature Broadway favorites. . . . ''Te Doy Mis Ojos'' (''I Give You My Eyes''), directed by Icíar Bollaín, swept all the major awards, including best film and best director, when the Goyas, Spain's equivalent of the Oscars, were awarded in Madrid on Sunday, the BBC reported. The film tells of a woman's attempt to escape her abusive husband.
