At Friday prayers in Tehran late last month, 150 female members of Iran's volunteer militia chanted ''Death to France'' to protest an anticipated French law banning religious symbols, including Muslim headscarves, from public schools.
The ''hand of Satan'' could be seen in France's decision, a declaration read out at the end of the protest stated.
But Iran has also used carpet diplomacy to show a softer side. Last month, it exhibited 159 hand-knotted, state-of-the-art carpets in Paris to demonstrate the depth and regional diversity of Iran's centuries-old carpet industry.
The exhibition coincided with an official visit by Mohammad Shariatmadari, the minister of commerce, and several dozen Iranian businessmen. So perhaps it should not have been surprising that most of the carpets were both for show and for sale.
''You could spend a month in Iran and not see carpets like this,'' said Mohammad Sadegh Kharazi, Iran's 40-year-old ambassador to France, who claimed that never before in the history of Iran's 25-year Islamic Republic had such a show been organized. ''I bought three of them myself on the first night'' for more than $100,000, he added.
M. R. Behzadian, president of the Tehran Chamber of Commerce, who came to Paris to drum up investment from French corporations, also struggled to stress the artistic. ''Art,'' Mr. Behzadian said, ''is more important than business.''
Carpets remain Iran's top nonoil export (about $600 million a year), according to Commerce Ministry figures. So the exhibition was a welcome showcase for the seven carpet dealers, all approved by the ministry, who participated.
Yet Iran has been struggling without much success to regain its market share in the face of competition from other countries, particularly China, India, Nepal and Pakistan, which have copied traditional Persian designs. Indeed, China's handmade Oriental rug exports to the United States, for example, rose 28 percent in volume from 2001 to 2002, outpacing a gain in exports from Iran.
It was Mr. Kharazi who pulled together the show and sale in Paris. An English speaker with a master's degree in political science from New York University, he has used much of his 16-month tenure here to campaign for both his country's cultural heritage and its business potential.
He dispenses French translations of ''The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam,'' velvet-boxed CD collections of traditional Iranian music and packets of saffron to visitors, even as he boasts that in Europe only Germany outpaces France in the amount of trade with Iran.
But it is Mr. Kharazi's extraordinary pedigree that has helped make him one of the most well placed of Iran's ambassadors worldwide. He is the son of the Ayatollah Mohsen Kharazi, who sits on the influential Assembly of Experts, and the nephew of Iran's foreign minister, Kamal Kharazi.
Even more important in a government where family connections often trump education and diplomatic experience, one of the ambassador's sisters is married to a son of the Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader and the most powerful person in the country.
There's even an Iraq connection. Mr. Kharazi said that his mother's family ''has a link'' with the Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the Iranian-born Shiite cleric who has emerged as the most influential religious figure in Iraq.
Carpet creations in Iran run the gamut from rough picnic coverings woven in wool by tribal women and traditionally placed on the ground at mealtime to densely knotted fine silk carpets that are never walked on and whose colors move with the light.
The centerpiece of the carpet exhibition, which was held at the domed Bourse de Commerce hall in the heart of Paris, was a silk and wool carpet commissioned by the 20th-century monarch Reza Shah and made by Amu Oghli, one of the master carpet weavers of Mashhad who produced many carpets for the king.
The carpet, which was custom-woven for the Iranian Embassy in Paris in 1912 and now belongs to the Ministry of Commerce, was patterned after a 17th-century design from the Safavid dynasty. Its brilliant claret hue was a result of a special dye made from various female scale insects found on a certain Mediterranean oak.
Among the more whimsical creations was a $8,300 modern interpretation of the Paseryk carpet, which was woven in the 5th century B.C. and discovered in the grave of a Scythian prince in Siberia by a group of Russian archeologists in 1949. The original is in the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg.
The exhibition included several modern versions of gabbeh, the geometrically designed tribal rugs made by the Kashkai tribe near Shiraz, as well as a $42,440 8-foot by 10-foot classic silk and wool carpet from the holy city of Qom.
Although independent carpet dealers in Paris who saw the exhibition said that the carpets were priced competitively, only 14 carpets were sold, according to an Iranian official at the embassy. Another 30 carpets were given away as gifts, the official said. (In the first 11 months of 2003, France imported only $11 million worth of Iranian carpets and woven textiles like kilims.)
The American easing of sanctions on Iran in 2000 that lifted the ban on the exportation of items like carpets and caviar did not greatly increase the market in the United States, although Iranian carpet dealers still lavish praise on former Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright for pushing through the measure.
''We presented Mrs. Albright with a small carpet with her portrait woven on it,'' said Razi Miri, managing director of Miri Iranian Rugs, whose family has been in the carpet business in Iran for five generations, and whose carpets were on display in the exhibition. ''Her face looked very natural. She was very happy to receive it.''
