So We Guess You Never Advised Janet
We're a little shook up by the JANET JACKSON thing. The dignified good taste of the Super Bowl halftime show ruined by a vulgar display.
The news business, however, must go on; there must be someone to tell you about new and exciting tabletop design, so over we went on Monday night to Dining by Design, the annual charity dinner sponsored by Elle Décor. The event, held at the Hammerstein Ballroom, featured tables decorated by stars of the design world. DAVID ROCKWELL, in a transparent attempt at pandering, did a table inspired by Page Six. (And what are we, gefilte fish?) Each place setting had a plate with an image of a celebrity: MICHAEL JACKSON; BRITNEY SPEARS; CHER; JENNIFER LOPEZ. KATRINA MARKOFF, the owner of Vosges Haut Chocolat, did not, alas, provide an edible décor. Her design was a loop of the movie ''Chocolat'' played on a big screen.
Guests included MOBY, TED ALLEN and CARSON KRESSLEY of ''Queer Eye'' and SIMON DOONAN, the creative director of Barney's and the author of ''Wacky Chicks: Life Lessons From Fearlessly Inappropriate and Fabulously Eccentric Women.'' Mr. Doonan , in a flowered shirt and deep brown velvet blazer, talked about his stint as a guest judge on ''American's Next Top Model.'' ''I tell the girls that they all look like a bunch of cheap strippers, and if they're going to go on go-sees, they can't dress like pole dancers.'' How do the contestants react to that?
''One of them started crying, but it's the one that cries every week, so I didn't feel that bad,'' Mr. Doonan said. ''I want them to be more ladylike.''
What did Mr. Doonan think of the Janet Jackson/JUSTIN TIMBERLAKE event at the Super Bowl?
''I thought the outfit was great, very cyber,'' he said, of Ms. Jackson. ''There was a kind of a 'Clockwork Orange' thing going on among the dancers. I didn't really understand all the erotic choreography, it was sort of out of place at a sporting event. To me a lot of the choreography suggested'' BLEEP! DELETE! (Would that CBS had our lightning reflexes when it came to matters of appropriate fare for the public, eh? ) We'll just fast forward here to Mr. Doonan's comments on Mr. Timberlake. ''He looked like he'd just come from Eddie Bauer,'' Mr. Doonan complained. ''She was in full high cyber futuristic Matrix gear; he looked like a guidance counselor. It was sort of an odd juxtaposition. The exposing of the BLEEP!, it just seemed a desperate attempt to create a Britney and MADONNA moment.''
Wait Till You See The Paris Hilton
At a viewing party for DONALD TRUMP's show, ''The Apprentice,'' KATHY HILTON, looking as if she had raided her daughter's closet, was wearing a kicky black skirt, knee socks, stilettos and a short shiny jacket.
And Mr. Trump was getting his kicks showing Ms. Hilton a bobbing figure of his favorite real estate developer, STEPHEN ROSS.
(No, no, of course not! That was just a little New York real estate joke. Mr. Trump's favorite developer is, of course, Mr. Trump! That's who the adorable little bobkin was modeled after.)
Then we overheard Mr. Trump say, ''Have her people call me.''
''Shall we go to Palm Beach?'' Ms. Hilton asked Mr. Trump. At the party at Planet Hollywood: Ms. Hilton's husband, RICK HILTON, and Mr. Trump's love interest, MELANIA KNAUSS; Miss Universe 2003, AMELIA VEGA; and SAM SOLOVEY, one of the competitors that Mr. Trump fired on the show.
One would have thought Mr. Solovey, surrounded by stereo calls to give him the ax, to be in self-esteem hell.
But Mr. Solovey, attired in black jacket, black pullover, and accompanied by his fiancée, LORI LEVIN, an upbeat blond elementary school teacher who was wearing a drop-shoulder sweater and a mini, seemed to be holding up well. Then again, the ''Extra'' crew was there.
''How's my man doing over here?'' Mr. Trump said, grabbing Mr. Solovey's shoulder.
Then he tossed out some advice on the art of the marriage deal.
''Did you sign a prenuptial agreement?'' -- and, after the laugh -- ''You know what? I don't think you'll need one with her.''
Like we said, ''Extra'' was there.
with Melena Z. Ryzik, Paula Schwartz and Joe Brescia
Boldface Names
