His eyes were bloodshot and seemed glassy at times, and he sometimes spoke in a monotone. But Eric Lindros had no trouble expressing himself on Tuesday and raising, for the first time, the possibility that he might retire from hockey rather than risk another concussion.
''I certainly want to play hockey,'' Lindros said, as he visited his Rangers teammates for the first time since sustaining the eighth concussion of his career in a game against Washington last Wednesday. ''That being said, it's not for a game or two, because this is getting old and tiresome. It's no fun.''
Lindros, who turns 31 on Feb. 28, has had six of his eight concussions in the last four years, and he seemed to suggest Tuesday that he did not want to return if there was a real risk that another concussion might soon be added to the list.
''As far as playing, it's not something I'll jump into without sound medical advice and opinions,'' he said at the team's practice facility. ''I didn't go to school in this field. But I probably have more knowledge about it than I want to have. You listen to what the experts advise.''
What Lindros's concussion specialist, Dr. Karen Johnston of Montreal, has thus far prescribed is plenty of rest.
''Just to get out of the house is great,'' Lindros said. ''I'm just tired. From what the doctors have said, this is the way it's going to be for a little bit.''
When asked what he could do right now, Lindros said, ''Keep resting, keep sleeping.''
Asked if this concussion differed at all from the previous seven, Lindros said: ''Every case is a little different. All I can say is it's nothing out of the norm.''
Lindros said he was now waiting for the first full step of his recovery, which he characterized as a situation in which there were ''no stumbling blocks,'' he was ''feeling better'' and he could ''fill in a full day with the basic things I normally do.''
And then, Lindros said, ''I can start to work out a little bit and see how my body reacts.''
When asked about any sort of timetable for his recovery, Lindros said: ''All that will come. I've had lots of time, and I'll have much more time to sit and think about things.''
Until last Wednesday, Lindros had not sustained a concussion since Dec. 28, 2001. In that instance, he returned to action one week later. This one will keep Lindros out longer, if not for good.
But an official update on his condition will not be provided until after this weekend's All-Star Game break, according to Glen Sather, the Rangers' president, general manager and coach.
Lindros sustained his most recent concussion when he was leveled by Washington defenseman Jason Doig in open ice. Lindros was bent forward, with his head down, playing the puck, when Doig caught him flush with his left shoulder.
When asked Tuesday what he thought of Doig's hit, Lindros said, ''He nailed me.'' When asked if he thought the hit was dirty, Lindros shook his head no. ''He got me on the shoulder, up top,'' Lindros said.
On Monday, Lindros took a walk outside his Manhattan town house, the first time he had been outside since last Thursday, when he traveled to and from Montreal to be examined by Johnston. On Tuesday, he ventured further.
''I'm just trying to get through a day when I'm not tired,'' Lindros said. ''When that happens, you start implementing more to your day,'' like being active around the house.
''Then you can seriously start looking at any physical act.''
At that point, he said, the next steps would include lifting weights and riding a stationary bicycle.
''Once I'm feeling well, I'll wait a couple of days to see how things react before I start training,'' Lindros said.
Lindros also said he was still planning to go to Madison Square Garden on Wednesday night for the ceremony honoring Mike Richter, the Rangers' career leader in victories by a goaltender. Richter retired in early September because of postconcussion syndrome.
''I'll see Ricky before, be there for the ceremony, then probably head home after that,'' Lindros said.
HOCKEY
