The European Commission on Tuesday ordered the Irish low-fare airline Ryanair to repay around 3 million euros ($3.7 million) in illegal state subsidies to the Charleroi airport in Belgium.
The European transport commissioner, Loyola de Palacio, said at a news conference on Tuesday that Ryanair would have to repay 3 million to 4 million euros to Charleroi, a small airport about an hour's drive from Brussels. She added, however, that around 75 percent of the 15 million euros in state subsidies received by Ryanair were permissible.
At a separate news conference in Brussels, Ryanair's founder and chief executive, Michael O'Leary, described the commission's decision as ''a disaster for consumers and a disaster for publicly owned regional airports like Charleroi.''
Ms. de Palacio said the decision would be of major significance to the future of air transport in the European Union because it would ensure full competition among airlines that operate out of small regional airports.
Ryanair has built a successful business by sharply undercutting larger rivals like British Airways and Lufthansa of Germany on short-haul flights around Europe. One way it has managed to reduced its costs is by flying from small, traffic-starved airports near big cities, rather than from busy national hubs.
In Belgium, it cut a 15-year deal five years ago with Charleroi airport, which is owned by the region of Wallonia.  The arrangement gave Ryanair cheap landing rights and ground handling charges; free pilot training and office space; and contributions to its marketing expenses in return for bringing the airport much-needed business.
Last year, around two million passengers flew from Charleroi on Ryanair flights to destinations like Pisa, Italy, and Malmo, Sweden, and thanks to the Ryanair deal, the airport is starting to make a profit, the airline said.
Mr. O'Leary said that passengers would have to pay higher fares and that Charleroi might lose some of the Ryanair routes. The airline would not be harmed significantly, he said, because only 18 percent of Ryanair flights use publicly owned airports like Charleroi.
Mr. O'Leary told journalists that he would appeal the decision in the European courts in Luxembourg, adding that he expected other no-frills carriers to take similar action.
Calling the European Commission ''the evil empire,'' Mr. O'Leary said that the only ones to benefit from the ruling were the flag-carrier airlines and national airports that were affected by Ryanair's way of doing business.
He predicted that Tuesday's decision would prompt national carriers and airports to complain about other deals involving discount airlines and regional airports.
Brussels Zaventem, Belgium's main airport, set off the commission's investigation by complaining that Ryanair's contract with Charleroi broke state aid rules.
Ms. de Palacio said that Ryanair's 15-year contract would have to be reduced to 5 years because no other carrier out of Charleroi benefited from such a long contract. The commission also said the deal between Ryanair and Charleroi was illegal because the European Union was never formally told of it.
But the most important test the commission applies when examining state aid cases is whether a private investor would have acted in the same way the public authority did, Ms. de Palacio said.
''We asked whether the favorable conditions granted to Ryanair would have been offered by a privately owned airport, and concluded that a private investor wouldn't be in a position to grant the same terms that Charleroi agreed to,'' she said.
Mr. O'Leary dismissed the commission's reasoning, especially the private investor test. ''We have deals with private airports that grant us even better conditions than those we got from Charleroi,'' he said, adding that the privately owned Prestwick airport in Britain, for example, granted Ryanair a 20-year contract.
''Why should the European Commission prevent Charleroi from competing with private airports?'' he asked.
Analysts said that the decision was only a mild setback for Ryanair, and some said that Mr. O'Leary's very public battle with the commission might have mitigated its action.
Joe Gill, an analyst at Goodbody Stockbrokers in Dublin, said the repayment demanded was a far cry from the 10 million euros initially foreseen. ''It's not the worst case scenario by a long shot,'' he said.
John Mattimoe, an analyst at Merrion Capital in Dublin, agreed that the ruling would not cut into Ryanair's financial picture significantly. ''It was never going to be the death knell of the company.'' He added, ''It doesn't fundamentally destabilize the operating model of the company.''
The commission's decision was watched closely by many European airlines, but none supported Ryanair's arguments against the commission. British Airways said in a statement that it agreed that state aid rules ''should be applied to everyone.''
A Lufthansa spokesman, Peter Middleton, declined to comment on the ruling, but he refuted statements by Mr. O'Leary that the German carrier was receiving subsidies from airports including Munich and Leipzig.
Lufthansa and Ryanair have sparred in the courts in the past. The German airline sued Ryanair for claiming in its marketing literature that it flies from Frankfurt, when in fact it flies via a small airport 62 miles from that city.
Many of the other low-cost carriers also distanced themselves from Ryanair's combative stance. The negative impact of the decision has been ''wildly overstated'' by Ryanair, Toby Nicol, a spokesman for the second-ranked easyJet told Reuters.
He added that the ruling would give much needed legal clarity to airlines. ''There's been great uncertainty in the sector,'' he said. ''Airports have been reluctant to strike new arrangements because they don't know whether they are legal or not.''
But to Mr. O'Leary, the situation is simple. ''Are we the good guys? Absolutely. Are the commission the bad guys? They are the evil empire if this is the kind of decision they come up with,'' he said.
Analysts said the fight might not end with Tuesday's ruling. Mr. Gill indicated that Mr. O'Leary would probably continue his fight in the European Parliament and at the national government level. ''He is ultra-aggressive,'' Mr. Gill said.
