Exuberant after declaring victory in the Oklahoma primary, Gen. Wesley K. Clark vowed to carry his campaign for the Democratic nomination to Tennessee, and another Southern showdown with Senator John Edwards of North Carolina.
''As an old soldier from Arkansas, I could not be any prouder of your support in this first election that I have ever won,'' he said to supporters at the Oklahoma City Convention Center.
''The results are in, and we have won,'' General Clark said before departing for Memphis, where he was to resume on Wednesday morning.
His showing in Oklahoma and second-place finishes behind Mr. Kerry in Arizona and New Mexico, where the general spent significant time in the last few days, and in North Dakota, where he has not campaigned since mid-January, gave General Clark what aides said was the legitimacy he needed to carry on.
With only one victory in nine nominating contests so far, however, General Clark, who was raised in Arkansas and now lives there, is by no means assured of being able to maintain a viable candidacy.
After staking his claim to the nomination on his credentials as a Southern alternative first to Howard Dean and then to Mr. Kerry, General Clark managed no better than a fourth-place finish in South Carolina, behind Mr. Edwards, the winner, Mr. Kerry and the Rev. Al Sharpton.
General Clark fared equally poorly in Missouri and in Delaware, neither of which he visited as a candidate, finishing fourth and fifth, respectively.
And despite characterizations of his campaign as a national effort, General Clark has no plans to court voters in Michigan, Washington State or Maine, where primaries or caucuses will be held this weekend. Throughout the day Tuesday, aides to General Clark maintained that a lone victory in Oklahoma would prove his worth as an alternative to Mr. Kerry. They characterized the Oklahoma primary as the first contest where General Clark competed that did not have a ''favorite son'' candidate, saying that Mr. Edwards should have been expected to win in South Carolina and that Mr. Kerry and Dr. Dean, who hail from states neighboring New Hampshire, were always expected to win there.
General Clark did not contest the Iowa caucuses.
The campaign now says that it has enough money to continue at least through the Wisconsin primary on Feb. 17. Next week, it will spend almost all of its time and money in Tennessee, which has its primary next Tuesday, largely bypassing Virginia, which also votes that day, a senior campaign official said.
General Clark opted not to watch the election returns on television. Instead he had dinner in the Renaissance Hotel here with his wife, son, brother-in-law Gene Caulfield, Eli Segal, his campaign chairman, and three senior campaign advisers.
General Clark has said for the last two weeks that he is having ''the time of my life.''
But on Tuesday afternoon his son, Wesley K. Clark II, said of the campaign. ''It's been a really disillusioning experience, you know.''
''We sacrificed a hell of a lot for this country over 34 years,'' he told reporters. ''We lived in a damn trailer when I was a freshman in high school. We always did it because we really believed in this country.''
But, he added, ''you go out and see how politics actually works, it's a dirty business, filled with a lot of people who are pretending to be a lot of things they are not.''
He blamed the press for his father's failure to catch on. ''His stance on the issues or his qualifications for the job haven't been talked about at all,'' Mr. Clark said of his father.
General Clark later told reporters that those thoughts were his son's, not his own. At dinner Tuesday, he repeated his assertions that as an outsider he is uniquely qualified to face President Bush in November. ''I have more executive leadership than anybody in the race,'' he said.
General Clark spent part of every day this week in Oklahoma, where he believed his chances were best of recording his first electoral victory. But after making several trips to South Carolina in the fall and early winter and spending a significant amount of money on television advertising, he did not return to that state in the final four days.
On Tuesday night, he said, ''Oklahoma is O.K. by me.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE GENERAL
