SALTED fish is at least as old as the Egyptians: take salt, fish and hot weather, and some clever person is bound to figure out that the first can help the second survive the third.
Salting cod pulled from the North Atlantic dates back a thousand years, when Basque fishermen ventured as far as Labrador and Greenland. Even earlier, those waters were fished by the Norse, but they did not have access to a lot of salt, and preserved fish by drying it in the wind. Unfortunately for them, it did not keep as well or taste as good as salt cod.
Fishermen in southern Europe salted all sorts of fish. Cod not only lasted longer when salted but it tasted better, as Mark Kurlansky notes in his definitive book, ''Cod'' (Penguin, 1997). Salt cod, often called by the fish's Spanish name, bacalao, or some variation, is still popular, but not because salting is the most efficient way of preserving fish; about a hundred years ago, freezing claimed that honor. Salting completely transforms cod's flavor and texture, allowing all sorts of dishes that are not possible with fresh cod or, for that matter, with anything else. At least not with such character.
In fact, salt cod is as different from fresh as prosciutto is from fresh ham and pickles are from cucumbers. ''To many tastes, even in the modern age of refrigeration,'' Mr. Kurlansky notes, salt cod ''is far superior to the bland white meat of fresh cod.''
One need not choose favorites. But for the modern home cook salt cod is terrific. Refrigerated, it keeps almost indefinitely; some people freeze it, which is overkill, but since almost nothing changes its texture or flavor, it does no harm.
You can buy salt cod in cute little wooden boxes of a pound or so, or in bulk. Some supermarkets sell it, but you can always count on good fish stores. In Manhattan, Citarella sells choice boned salt cod for $7.99 a pound; at Wild Edibles, it's $9.95. In Europe, where salt cod is infinitely more popular than here, it is assigned grades -- usually, thicker is better.
To make a meal of salt cod, a little prep work is necessary. First, soak it overnight in cold water, changing the water a few times. (No, you do not have to get up in the middle of the night to change the water.)
You can hasten this process by poaching the cod in water five minutes, then rinsing it and changing the water, and repeating the process until most of the saltiness has abated. This takes four or five changes of water. How do you know when you have gone too far? Don't worry. If you rinse out too much salt from the fish, you can add salt to the dish you are making.
Whatever route you take, the fish should then be poached covered in water for about 15 minutes, or until reasonably tender. (Salt cod never gets soft.) Once it is poached and drained, you can store it, wrapped and refrigerated, a couple of days.
In recipes like the fritters here, which are popular in Spain and throughout the Caribbean, and for my little salt cod salad, the cooked cod should be shredded. The easiest way to do this is to chop it into small pieces first and then rub it between your fingers.
The fish can also be left whole, as in the tomato sauce here, which is probably the most common of all salt cod dishes and fantastic over pasta or with bread or rice. This dish is even better if you dust the poached salt cod with flour and brown it on both sides in olive oil before putting it in the tomato sauce.
The most familiar preparation to most Americans is brandade de morue, or salt cod mousse. For this, the cooked cod is best pounded with a big mortar and pestle to a very creamy consistency. For busy cooks, the recipe here calls for the job to be done in a food processor, but the texture is not quite the same. Purists willing to use a little muscle power will be rewarded with the best results.
SALT COD FRITTERS (BACALAITOS)  Time: 30 minutes
1 pound boneless salt cod, soaked overnight, drained and poached 15 minutes  1 onion, minced  2 garlic cloves, minced
1/2 teaspoon black pepper or more, or cayenne to taste  1 cup flour  2 eggs
1/2 cup fresh chopped parsley or cilantro  Corn, grape seed, canola or other neutral oil for deep-frying  Lime wedges.
1. Chop salt cod with a knife, and then shred it with your fingers. Combine it with the onion, garlic and pepper in a bowl, and mix well with a wooden spoon. Add flour, and stir a few times; then beat in eggs one at a time. Add about  1/2 cup water, and stir; continue to add water (about  1/4 cup more), until a batter forms -- it should be a bit thicker than pancake batter -- and then stir in the herb.
2. Letting mixture rest, put about 3 inches of oil in a deep saucepan, and turn heat to medium-high; bring to 350 degrees. (A drop of batter will sizzle energetically when oil reaches that temperature.) Gently drop tablespoonfuls of cod mixture into oil, and fry, turning once, until golden brown, about 5 minutes. Work in batches, taking care not to crowd fritters.
3. Drain on paper towels, and serve with lime wedges, or keep in a warm oven until ready to serve.
Yield: 6 to 8 servings.
SALT COD IN TOMATO SAUCE  Time: 30 minutes
2 tablespoons olive oil  3 cloves garlic, lightly smashed  3 anchovies, or to taste  1 28-ounce can whole plum tomatoes, drained and chopped  Salt and ground black pepper to taste  2 tablespoons capers
1/2 cup pitted black or green olives  Crushed red pepper flakes to taste  1 pound boneless salt cod, soaked overnight, drained and poached 15 minutes  Chopped parsley leaves for garnish.
1. Combine oil and garlic in a large skillet, and turn heat to medium. Add anchovies, and cook, stirring occasionally, until garlic is lightly golden and anchovies are broken up, less than 5 minutes. Raise heat to medium-high, and add tomatoes, along with a little salt and pepper. Cook a few minutes, stirring occasionally, until tomatoes liquefy.
2. Add capers, olives, pepper flakes and cod. Cook about 10 minutes, stirring infrequently and gently, until cod is hot. Taste, and adjust seasoning. Garnish, and serve.
Yield: 4 servings.
SALT COD SALAD  Time: 20 minutes
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice, or to taste  2 tablespoons cider vinegar or red wine vinegar
1/3 cup extra virgin olive oil  Salt and pepper  6 to 8 cups salad greens (preferably a mixture), washed, dried and roughly chopped  1 pound boneless salt cod, soaked overnight, drained and poached 15 minutes  1 orange, peeled and segmented  1 tomato, cored and chopped, or a handful of cherry tomatoes cut in half
1/3 cup pitted black olives (preferably oil cured), roughly chopped
1/3 cup chopped fresh parsley.
1. Mix juice, vinegar and oil in a large bowl; whisk until well combined. Season to taste with salt and pepper, and toss in salad greens. Transfer salad to a serving bowl or plate.
2. Chop the salt cod with a knife, and then shred it with your fingers. Toss the cod, orange, tomato, olives and parsley together, and arrange on top of the salad greens. Serve.
Yield: 4 servings.
SALT COD MOUSSE (BRANDADE DE MORUE)  Time: 45 minutes
1 pound boneless salt cod, soaked overnight, drained and poached 15 minutes  2 cloves garlic, peeled, or to taste
2/3 cup extra virgin olive oil
2/3 cup heavy cream or milk  Freshly ground black pepper to taste  Juice of 1 lemon, or to taste
1/8 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg  Salt, if necessary.
1. Place half the cod in a food processor with garlic and 2 tablespoons olive oil. Process, stopping machine to stir down sides once or twice, until as smooth as possible. Add remaining cod, and repeat.
2. Through feed tube, add small amounts of olive oil alternating with small amounts of cream. Continue until mixture becomes smooth, creamy and light. (You may not need all the oil and cream.) Add pepper, some lemon juice and nutmeg. Blend, and taste; mixture may need salt and lemon juice. (To this point, you can prepare dish several hours ahead, or even a day; cover, and refrigerate until ready to eat.)
3. Just before serving, heat brandade very gently in a nonstick saucepan or in a 300-degree oven, covered. Serve with bread, toast or crackers.
Yield: 6 to 8 servings.
THE MINIMALIST
