Japan said last week that it was reviewing how it wants to explore space and added, somewhat vaguely, that it might for the first time consider putting a man up there.
No matter how vague, the mere mention of a manned flight touched upon something profound going on here: After a century and a half of singlemindedly catching up and competing with the West, Japan is asking itself what kind of country it wants to be. Does Japan, in short, want to compete with the world's great powers?
The review resulted from recent failures of Japan's space program, but perhaps Japan was also reacting viscerally to actions taken by the two nations that have most shaped its history. The United States has said it will send astronauts to the Moon and to Mars, reiterating its intention of staying No. 1. And China launched a man into space three months ago, becoming only the third nation to do so, after the former Soviet Union and the United States, and announcing its resolve to become a global power.
How to deal with the rise -- or re-emergence -- of China as a great power will very likely be the biggest foreign policy issue facing Japan over the next generation. For East Asia, it is often pointed out, has never had both a strong China and a strong Japan at the same time.
China, long the center of Asia, fell under foreign domination in the last century and a half. Japan, long content in its relative isolation or as a tributary nation to China, went out into the world, competing against the West and dominating Asia.
But China never lost its sense of being a great power and appears comfortable now in reassuming its traditional role in Asia.
What of Japan then? Let Americans land on Mars or even Venus. Having lost militarily and economically to the Americans, the Japanese have no problem accepting that. But even as Japanese have become less focused on competition and more on their quality of life, there is deep fear and ambivalence about becoming second class to the rising power next door. It is, after all, a country that the Japanese had colonized a mere half a century ago.
Kiichi Miyazawa, a former prime minister, pointed out in an interview that Japan thought of itself as a great power only once in its history, in the decades leading up to World War II, when Japan ruled swaths of Asia and eventually attacked Pearl Harbor. ''Japan wanted to compete, and did it fully,'' Mr. Miyazawa said. ''Only we failed and gave up.''
Not completely, of course, In the 1980's, during the height of the so-called bubble economy and talk of ''Japan as No. 1,'' some businessmen and politicians spoke of teaching lessons to the world. But that talk died down long ago, as Japan's economy ground through a decade-long recession in the 90's.
Many Americans -- reared in a nation whose identity is inseparable from its No. 1 status -- find it hard to grasp why there is not greater unhappiness in Japan, which fell from such heights and has yet to pull itself decisively out of the slump. But Japan has now grown into a mature society that is trying to forge forward with its own standards.
Hidehiko Sekizawa, executive director of the Hakuhodo Institute of Life and Living, conducts a comprehensive survey on attitudes toward life every two years. His findings show that people are focusing on enjoying life and are happy despite the long slump.
There is strong nostalgia nowadays for the Edo Period, the feudal era preceding the last century and a half of rapid change. While the Edo Period had many social problems, people are now remembering it as a time of stability and great cultural vitality.
''People want to return to an era where life was perceived to be more enjoyable,'' Mr. Sekizawa said.
The feeling is noticeably strong among the young. If the icon of the 1980's was the ''salaryman'' who sacrificed his private life for his company, today's icon is the ''freeter'' -- the young Japanese who take odd jobs to make just enough money to enjoy their personal interests or choose their way of life. The stress of competing inside Japan, let alone as part of a country competing against a visibly, and to some, frighteningly, hungry China, is furthest from their minds.
Indeed, ''soothing'' is a key word nowadays. This year's popular car color is a soothing beige. A popular boyfriend is the soothing type, one who will relieve a woman's anxieties. Even Japan's decision to send ground troops to Iraq seems rooted not in an aggressive foreign policy but in a move to dispel worries over a nuclear North Korea and a rising China by cementing ties with the United States.
''Japan has the economic and technological power to put a man into space if it tried, but it doesn't do so,'' said He Zhi, 26, a Chinese graduate student at Kyushu University in Japan. ''Japan gives No. 1 priority to economic advancement, not political advancement.''
Against this backdrop, the prestige game of manned space flights ''is not worthwhile for Japan as a nation,'' Mr. Miyazawa said.
Putting a man into space would require a big increase in Japan's current $1.7 billion space program. But even engineers at the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency are looking inward.
''I'd like an increase in our budget,'' said Hiroshi Sasaki, 40, an engineer. ''But many companies have gone bankrupt around me. It would be difficult to request a doubling or tripling of our budget when there are people being laid off around us.''
The council reviewing Japan's space program is expected to present a new plan this summer. The decision should yield a clear indication of what Japan wants to be -- and what Asia might become -- in the decades ahead.
The annual New Year's Eve ''Red and White Song Contest'' television show provided a clue, though. SMAP, perhaps Japan's most famous pop group, closed the show with last year's best-selling song, ''Only One Flower in the World.'' The song was popular among antiwar demonstrators, but more than anything else it struck a chord here by asking, ''Why do we want to be No. 1 when each of us is different?''
Small flowers, big flowers, none of them are alike
So it's O.K. not to be No. 1
Every one of them is the only one.
LETTER FROM ASIA
