Armed with a proposal that ran just two and a half pages, John F. Welch Jr., the former chairman of General Electric, sold the world rights yesterday for a how-to business manual to HarperCollins, a unit of the News Corporation, for an estimated $4 million.
The book, which will be called ''Winning,'' did not quite fetch the advance of ''Jack: Straight From the Gut,'' which he sold in 2000 without any written proposal for an extraordinary advance of $7.1 million. But the $4 million HarperCollins is said to be paying is still a hefty sum for a business book, or any book for that matter.
Suzy Wetlaufer, Mr. Welch's fiancée and a former editor of The Harvard Business Review, will help him write the book. ''We have a lot going on,'' Mr. Welch, 68, said. ''We've got my greasy fingernails and her brains.''
Ms. Wetlaufer and Mr. Welch became romantically involved when she interviewed him for the review, a development that resulted in Ms. Wetlaufer's resignation as editor. Their relationship became an issue in his subsequent divorce. The two were engaged recently and plan to marry before the book comes out early next year.
''Winning'' grew out of Mr. Welch's extensive post-retirement experience on the lecture circuit, he said. ''I've been talking to armies of people,'' Mr. Welch said in a telephone interview from his home in Boston. ''And I realized that I had answers to questions about managing that people at lower levels could really use.''
Ms. Wetlaufer said in a telephone interview that the book would be full of practical business advice, divided into three sections: working within an organization, dealing with competitors and handling matters of life and career.
When Mr. Welch got $7.1 million for his memoirs in 2000, with Time Warner Trade Publishing winning a frenzied bidding war with rivals including HarperCollins, the Doubleday unit of Bertelsmann and the Simon &amp; Schuster unit of Viacom, the price was one of the highest for a work of nonfiction. Since then Bill Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton have each sold books for larger amounts.
Sales of ''Straight From the Gut'' were, however, somewhat disappointing, industry executives said, partly because it went on sale on Sept. 11, 2001. (Time Warner executives have said the book was profitable.) Still, HarperCollins is willing to bet a hefty advance that Mr. Welch's imprimatur is powerful enough to propel sales of a business how-to book.
''This is the book Jack was born to write,'' said Jane Friedman, president and chief executive of HarperCollins. ''This is the one, as a businessperson, that I will follow word for word.''
While Ms. Friedman declined to divulge the price tag for the book, she said she expected the deal to be profitable for HarperCollins because Mr. Welch is much admired around the world. She said the book would be sought-after reading for high school and college students.
''Young people grow up today wanting to be a policeman, a fireman, a C.E.O.,'' Ms. Friedman said. ''Jack can teach to all of that.''
But Mr. Welch's reputation may not be as golden as it was in 2000, when he was preparing to step down from G.E. after 20 years. In that time, he took a company with a market capitalization of about $12 billion and turned it into one of the world's largest and most admired companies, with a market value of about $500 billion.
Mr. Welch has had to deal with revelations from his divorce case, including the details of the retirement perks G.E. agreed to provide him, like floor-level seats to New York Knicks games and all costs associated with a $15 million Manhattan apartment, including food, wine and laundry. (Mr. Welch defended the benefits, saying G.E. was getting a bargain, but he eventually agreed to pay for some costs himself, including those for the apartment.) Meanwhile, corporate scandals in the last few years have soured the public's opinion of chief executives.
But Mr. Welch doubted that any of the bad publicity, which he attributed to the brinkmanship tactics of divorce lawyers, had damaged his credibility. ''I talk about ethics all the time,'' he said. ''I'm comfortable in my own skin, and I think people respect that.''
