Coming into Wednesday's national signing day, Brian Johnson continues to worry about his potential college choices. A senior tight end at Miami Northwestern High School, Johnson wants to go to a college that can give him a taste of the world beyond Miami yet is close enough for an occasional trip home.
''I'm thinking about majoring in business, but I don't know,'' he said, fingering a thin attempt at a mustache. ''Maybe English, because I enjoy writing poetry, sonnets. Academics are important.''
A few colleges seem like good fits. Now he needs to let them know of his interest. And once informed, the colleges -- more specifically the coaches of their football teams -- must return the attraction.
It would help if he were a better player. He is good. Good enough to start for a state football power. But his stats are merely mortal. Although he stands 6 feet 2 inches, he is about four inches shorter than most players at his position. His time of 4.7 seconds in the 40-yard dash is nothing special. While some of his teammates have been enjoying the blue-chip college tour, eating lobster tails and going to clubs with attractive women, Johnson, 18, belongs to a second wave of athletes gearing up for their own campus explorations.
''Recruiting does not end on signing day,'' said Steve Kessman of A-1 Sports Connection, an online recruiting service based in California. ''For a lot of people, that's just when it starts.''
Signing day is a holiday at Northwestern High, the winner of multiple Florida state football championships. For the school's top athletes, the yearlong recruiting bacchanalia ends on Wednesday in the school library. Cornerback Trevor Ford, linebacker Romeo Davis and others will sit at tables facing banks of television cameras and commit to attend Florida State, Auburn and other football powers. Wearing hats advertising their new colleges, they will hug their coaches and grant interviews to local reporters.
''It's always a big deal around here,'' Northwestern Coach Roland Smith said. ''We're known for having good student-athletes at our school. Every year, year in and year out, big-time colleges come to our program. So we get excited.''
While the attention was merited for a Northwestern student like Antonio Bryant, who won the Biletnikoff Award as the nation's top receiver at Pittsburgh and now plays for the Dallas Cowboys, little limelight shines on lesser talents. The highlights of Johnson's recruitment so far have been limited to conversations with coaches from Rhode Island, Indiana University and some National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics programs in South Dakota he had never heard of.
''Sometimes in football you can tell by your talent what colleges will want you,'' Johnson said. ''Some players know that with their size and speed, they can go to this school or that one. I don't have too much speed. I mean, I have speed, but it's not as fast as other kids. I'm not as big as other kids, so the big schools, they like them better.''
Johnson's conservative assessment of his skills has flavored the level of colleges he is considering. South Florida in Tampa is probably his first choice, though he does not know if that is realistic. After that maybe a couple of Division II programs in Georgia: Albany State and Valdosta State. There is a possibility of a small college in Jacksonville, too.
''I just want to get this boy into college somewhere,'' his father, also named Brian, said. ''I don't care where he goes, really. Just as long as it's got the word university in there some place.''
College coaches are prohibited from discussing potential recruits like Johnson. Shawn Bostick, the Valdosta State assistant head coach, said 80 percent of his team's recruiting class is cemented by signing day, though he admits his staff stays alert for unclaimed talent. Bostick prefers to deal with high school head coaches, rather than with eager students or parents.
''Coaches generally don't like to push a kid they do not feel can really play,'' he said. ''I don't know a parent around who doesn't feel their son is the best.''
Such attitudes are unfortunate for Johnson, whose lead publicist is his father. His father dropped out of community college after one semester, in what he now says was a bullheaded and stupid move. To help support his family, he works two full-time jobs and also serves as a wide receivers coach of the Magic City Bulls, a start-up semipro team.
He is so eager for his son to go to college that he spends the little free time he has scouring the Internet for colleges that might be interested in a tight end with experience against the best talent in the country. He fills out questionnaires for his son, sending e-mail messages back to the coaching staffs at places like Albany State and Eastern Kentucky.
''It's a taxing situation, I'll admit,'' his father said.
J. B. Hurt is the running backs coach and recruiting coordinator for Eastern Kentucky, which has a Division I-AA program with several Miami-area players on its roster. ''We like to be on the front end of things as best we can and have as many people signed and committed to coming here,'' he said. ''In a sense, though, there are always people left over, and finding them always goes on after the signing day.''
Coaches from colleges like Eastern Kentucky often attend recruiting combines sponsored by local high schools. At one combine last month, Johnson ran the vertical, the shuttle, the standing broad jump and other basic drills coaches like to hear about. His high school will play host to its own recruitment clinic later this month.
''We get colleges signing some of our kids on the spot,'' said Louie Bing Jr., the organizer of the April clinic. ''The top-ranked kids are gone, but it's a chance for smaller schools to get at other kids a rung below them, ones who may go on to one day become a No. 1 draft pick in the N.F.L.''
Some more proactive athletes and their parents invest in online recruiting advertisements. For fees from $50 to $700, Kessman of A-1 Sports Connection sends a DVD of highlights and relevant information to every college in America that participates in the athlete's sport, whatever the division.
''There are hundreds and hundreds of scholarships out there,'' Kessman said. ''Division I, Division II. N.A.I.A. schools give out very good scholarships. Division III schools don't give out athletic scholarships, but they often award academic scholarships to student-athletes. It's a different scenario where you've got to keep your grades up, but it's a scholarship nonetheless.'
But Johnson is not spending money on services like Kessman's. His resources are used for Saturday study sessions in which he is trying to raise his SAT score. Other dollars are funneled into fees for the matchmaking player clinics. He feels if he continues to work hard, attend the camps and maybe lowers his time a little in the 40-yard dash, he may get some college to notice him.
''I just got to go to college,'' Johnson said. ''I'd like to play in the N.F.L., if that ever worked out and my talent could take me there. But without that, I still need to go to college if I want to better myself. You can't settle for a high school diploma now. You've got to go to college.''
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
