After a year away from track and field while on maternity leave, Marion Jones returns to competition in the 60 meters on Friday night at the Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden.
As the Summer Olympics in Athens approach -- along with another potential attempt at five gold medals -- Jones, 28, is seeking to restore her speed and, in a sense, her credibility.
There has been no evidence that she has taken performance-enhancing drugs, and she has not been accused of it, but she stars in a sport where the use of illicit substances is believed by many to be epidemic. Her affiliation with Ben Johnson's former coach last winter and her connection to a Bay Area laboratory that has been the center of an investigation into the steroid THG have raised questions about her decision-making and the legitimacy of her performances.
In a telephone conference call yesterday, Jones acknowledged that she had been on the periphery of a number of scandals, but said, ''I don't believe in guilt by association in the least.''
She said she did not use performance-enhancing drugs. ''I can't control everyone's opinion,'' she said. ''I can only go out and run fast and continue to express that I'm for drug-free sport and always will be.''
Even as Jones won three gold medals at the 2000 Sydney Olympics, her achievements were tempered by the revelation that her husband at the time, the shot-putter C. J. Hunter, tested positive for the steroid nandrolone before the Games began. They have since divorced.
In a sport where the atmosphere is poisoned and every outstanding performance brings immediate suspicion, track officials and other experts in the sport have said that Jones has made decisions that have not served her well.
''Whatever all-American girl image she had, none of them have it anymore,'' said Dr. Charles Yesalis, a Penn State professor and an expert on steroids. Speaking of track and field in general, he said, ''Tell me which rose has the bloom yet to come off of.''
Jones has served as an ambassador for her sport with her graciousness, intelligence and outstanding achievement, said Dr. Steven Ungerleider, a psychologist who has worked with a number of Olympic athletes and who wrote the book ''Faust's Gold'' about East Germany's doping program.
''I think she's a very decent person,'' Ungerleider said. ''Having said that, I'm a bit saddened because she's made some very bad decisions. We all have to be real careful who we associate with. We are entering a new threshold of integrity, where it is no longer sufficient for an athlete to sign a disclosure form saying that he or she is drug free. Athletes at the elite level have to take complete responsibility for their behavior.''
Last November, Jones and her companion, the sprinter Tim Montgomery, testified before a federal grand jury investigating Balco, a nutritional-supplement company. Drug-testing officials have accused the lab of being a source of THG, or tetrahydrogestrinone. The lab's owner, Victor Conte, has denied the charge.
Jones said she met Conte a number of years ago and had a very limited relationship with him. (He traveled to Sydney in 2000 to defend Hunter, Jones's former husband, saying that the nandrolone came from contaminated nutritional supplements, not from an attempt to cheat.)
Contrary to published reports, Jones said she had no relationship with the Balco lab, had never been a member of ZMA, a track club affiliated with Balco, and had never used the company's supplements.
''Have I ever taken THG? No,'' Jones said.
Later, she added, ''I've never used anything from that company.''
Jones and every other athlete in elite sports -- track and field in particular -- find themselves in an awkward position. Because drug testing has loopholes and no tests exist for some drugs that are believed to be widely used, like human growth hormone, those who are not using illicit substances cannot prove their innocence.
''I still think you have to believe people are innocent until they are proved guilty,'' said Dr. Gary Wadler, a professor of medicine at New York University and an expert on performance-enhancing drugs. ''I can think of nothing worse for an athlete who has devoted a lifetime to the pursuit of excellence, at great sacrifice, and to have someone point the finger and say, 'The only way you got there was by cheating.' Unfortunately, those who set records are viewed through suspect glasses.''
Yesterday, Jones noted that she was a young girl during the 1988 Summer Olympics, when the sprinter Ben Johnson was stripped of his gold medal in the 100 meters after testing positive for steroids. His coach, Charlie Francis, later admitted facilitating the steroid use. When Jones and Montgomery began training with Francis last winter, the Johnson scandal never crossed her mind, she said. She has said that she sought out Francis because of his technical skill as a coach. Their affiliation ended last February after concern was expressed by meet promoters and track's world governing body.
Yesalis, the Penn State professor, said he would not criticize the Jones-Francis relationship because he considered Francis a superb coach and more forthright about drugs than sports officials were. Others have been less understanding. Michael Johnson, the retired Olympic champion sprinter, said in an interview last summer that the relationship with Francis was ''very damaging for Marion.''
''When you are the leader of the sport, you are expected to conduct yourself in a way that helps the sport,'' Johnson said of Jones at the national track and field championships.
Yesterday, Jones answered all questions but preferred to speak about her son, Tim Montgomery Jr., born last June, and her refined form in the long jump. After a long layoff, she hungers for competition. She is not concerned about clearing the air, she said, only running and leaping through it more expertly than anyone else.
''People who have really followed my career from the time I was 7 years old until now can see my steady progression and see the type of person and athlete that I am,'' Jones said.
TRACK AND FIELD
