The Young Concert Artists organization, which has been auditioning and presenting emerging performers since 1961, has an excellent record of identifying exceptional talent. But Music by YCA Composers, a short yet exciting program on Monday night at Weill Recital Hall, offered strong evidence that this organization is also doing well at the harder task of singling out promising young composers, who must try to fashion a personal voice from a plethora of influences.
Young Concert Artists has had a program for composers in residence since 1994. This concert was the first in which it presented recent works by its current group, four in all, on one program, performed by past or current Young Concert Artists winners. You often hear concertgoers who are dubious about contemporary music wondering, Where are the new composers? Here were four -- two in their late 20's and two just past 30 -- well worth paying attention to.
The title of Kenji Bunch's ''Three American Folk Hymn Settings'' for two violins is somewhat misleading. The work is not just a setting of three pensively lovely hymns, but a nine-minute continuous fantasia on the tunes.
Mr. Bunch allows the melancholic simplicity of the hymns to come through, even while elements are transformed and varied in harmonically pungent and constantly surprisingly ways. At times the austere modal quality of the harmony harks back to Renaissance music; that is, until the performers, like country fiddlers, bend the melodic lines with blue notes. The brilliant and energetic performers -- Timothy Fain and Nicolas Kendall -- relished this dazzling and challenging work.
The first assignment that Daniel Kellogg, the next composer presented, was given when he started taking composition lessons with Ned Rorem in 1996 was to compose a series of short duets for a wind instrument of his choice. ''Conversations'' for two B-flat clarinets was a result. Though this 11-minute work is officially a set of nine miniatures, there is nothing small-scale about the music's ingenuity. The clarinets engage in chatty, impish and argumentative dialogues. Mr. Kellogg is not afraid to let his music recall Stravinsky, Poulenc, Messiaen, Benny Goodman or whatever, trusting that his distinctive ear and fresh imagination will come through, as it did in this arresting performance by Alexander Fiterstein and Todd Palmer.
Works for solo violin can't help recalling the solo violin partitas and sonatas of Bach. So in ''Arches'' Kevin Puts embraced the inevitable and went further, writing an apotheosis of a Bach solo violin work. It begins with rigorously Bachian arpeggios and thematic excursions, but quickly picks up steam and goes crazy, like Bach at warp speed. The onrushing music does take time out for two ruminative episodes, but eventually climaxes in a hellbent finale of astounding difficulty. Chee-Yun gave a breathtakingly virtuosic account of this smart showpiece.
Mason Bates's ''String Band'' pays homage to old-time country string bands. Though you catch evocations of fiddles, mandolins and banjos, the work is scored for piano trio, here the excellent Claremont Trio (Emily Bruskin, violin; Julia Bruskin, cello; Donna Kwong, piano). Mr. Bates ingeniously suggests the twangy sounds of country music by having selected strings on the piano altered with inserted screws and metal pieces à la John Cage.
Before the performance Ms. Bruskin, the cellist, told the audience that her trio had given the premiere of this work last season on the same stage, with Robert Harth, the director of Carnegie Hall, in the audience. She then thanked Mr. Harth, who died on Friday, for including them so warmly in the Carnegie Hall family. Their vibrant and colorful performance was the best tribute imaginable.
MUSIC REVIEW
