The debate over who bears responsibility for the transfer of Pakistan's nuclear technology to other countries intensified Tuesday, with surrogates for the country's leading nuclear scientist and President Pervez Musharraf denying charges of impropriety.
The scientist, Abdul Qadeer Khan, the founder of Pakistan's nuclear program, denied telling a government inquiry that he had given nuclear technology to Iran, North Korea and Libya without government permission, a leading politician said Tuesday.
At the same time, Pakistani media accounts, citing both a senior investigator and a friend of the scientist, asserted that Dr. Khan had told investigators that General Musharraf had known that the nuclear technology was going to North Korea.
Government officials vehemently denied that the general had known about or approved of any transfer of technology to North Korea or any other country. ''That's not true,'' said a senior official who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''Of course not. Of course not.''
In a series of disclosures in the past two weeks, Pakistani government and intelligence officials, speaking anonymously, have issued to the media various accounts assailing Dr. Khan as a corrupt rogue scientist who used German, Dutch and Sri Lankan middlemen to sell or share nuclear technology with Iran, North Korea and Libya from 1989 to 2000.
Dr. Khan and his allies, including secular and Islamist political parties, have responded with allegations that the country's powerful army approved of the transfers. Their latest statement, first reported in The Washington Post on Tuesday, included the assertion, reputedly from Dr. Khan, that General Musharraf knew of nuclear transfers to North Korea.
The Post also reported that a senior investigator and a friend of Dr. Khan said the scientist had told investigators that Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg, the army chief from 1988 to 1991, had known that Dr. Khan was assisting the Pakistani nuclear transfers. The account said the scientist had also told investigators that General Musharraf and Gen. Jehangir Karamat, the army chief from 1996 to 1998, had known of and approved the barter of nuclear technology for North Korean ballistic missile technology.
In interviews, General Beg has repeatedly denied ever approving nuclear transfers to Iran. General Karamat declined Tuesday to comment on the report. In an interview in November, he said no transfers had occurred.
American officials have said they believe that Pakistani nuclear technology has been transferred to Iran, Libya and North Korea. They have said Pakistani technology arrived in North Korea as late as mid-2002, and in Libya as late as last fall.
General Musharraf seized power in a bloodless coup in 1999, meaning that the reported transfers occurred at least four years into his rule. Pakistani officials have dismissed the American accounts of recent transfers and said tight controls the general placed on the nuclear program in early 2002 halted Dr. Khan's transfers.
Any revelation that General Musharraf supported transfers would put both American and Pakistani officials in a politically awkward and dangerous position. Since he reversed Pakistan's support for the Taliban after the September 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, the general has been hailed by the Bush administration as a firm ally in the campaign against terrorism.
But critics in Congress have said the general is not doing enough to crack down on militancy in Pakistan and restore full democracy in the country. Links to nuclear transfers could only intensify that criticism.
