''I DON'T think we eat enough soup here in the States,'' M. F. K. Fisher once lamented.
Jackie Bergman has gone to unusual lengths to take care of that problem. Her tiny takeout store, Farm Country Soup, sells more than 50 varieties of soup. But the shop, behind an 18th-century buggy whip factory here, is 15 minutes by car from the nearest sizable town, Great Barrington.
So every Friday, Ms. Bergman delivers soup to ''ports,'' the porches and garages of devoted customers who do not mind if other soup lovers roam their property.
''I call them 'soup Fridays,' '' said Tanya Tedder of Salisbury, Conn., who picks up her soup at a port there, at a white Federal-style house on Main Street. ''I go anytime, and on the porch is a blue cooler with my soup and an envelope for my check.''
Ms. Bergman, a former nurse and restaurateur, spreads the word of her inspirations with Soupnews, an e-mail newsletter. Soupnews began two years ago when Ms. Bergman received an e-mail message with the subject line ''soupnews?'' The writer asked about soups Ms. Bergman had made famous at Farm Country Cafe, a restaurant in Millerton, N.Y., that closed in 1998. Ms. Bergman hit reply, removed the question from the subject line and told the writer about Farm Country Soup. That e-mail traveled, chain-letter-style, and soon, Soupnews stirred a soup appreciation movement in the Berkshires. As orders streamed in, a friend offered an empty refrigerator at her office as the first soup port.
And Soupnews soon morphed from a verbose menu into something more like a J. Peterman catalog of soups. ''Suddenly, I became expressive,'' Ms. Bergman said.
She wrote subtexts for each selection -- yellow split pea is ''soup to embrace the moment''; Berkshire borscht: ''soup to connect with our roots.'' She describes the farmers she works with, and she shares community food news. She weaves personal impressions into her menus. In one issue, she wrote of the pleasure of finding a secret patch of wild herbs; in another, the memory of a simple summer meal.
The ports and the newsletter embody Ms. Bergman's slogan: ''connecting people, food and land.''
Back in her kitchen, she whirls a hand-held immersion blender (which could pass for a weed-trimmer) around a gigantic pot of roasted tomato purée, made with rosemary, orange zest, garlic and local Rawson Brook Farm chèvre.
''It's nourishment on all levels,'' she said.
Farm Country Soup is $9 a quart at the Buggy Whip Factory on Main Street in Southfield, Mass.; farmcountrysoup@aol.com or (413) 229-0220. Limited selections are available at specialty food stores in the Berkshires and the Hudson Valley, and delivery is available.
AT THE NATION'S TABLE
