Just in the nick of time, John Edwards kept the race for the Democratic nomination alive last night, winning in his native South and buying himself -- and perhaps Howard Dean -- one last chance to see if John Kerry can be forced into a two- or three-man fight for delegates in a huge wave of primaries over the coming month.
It will not be easy.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark declared victory in a virtual draw with Mr. Edwards in Oklahoma, where General Clark had invested enormous effort. But for the third week in a row, Mr. Kerry finished far better off than any of his rivals, winning richer victories in Missouri, a big battleground state in November, and in Arizona, where he ran strongly among Latino voters, an important constituency. No candidate in modern times has passed so many early tests and lost the nomination.
Mr. Edwards and to a lesser extent Dr. Dean and General Clark now have small and shrinking windows to present themselves as not only plausible but also preferable alternatives to Mr. Kerry, who has built up such a head of steam since his victories in Iowa and New Hampshire.
For Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, last night was the end of the road.
General Clark, who had once hoped to do well in South Carolina, came in fourth there, behind the Rev. Al Sharpton. But he won virtually the same number of delegates in Oklahoma as Mr. Edwards, and so he, too, can claim enough support to keep fighting.
All the remaining candidates, including Mr. Kerry, face distinct challenges, now that the race has moved squarely to the national stage.
''I think the big problem for Edwards is island-hopping is over, and you've got to get right to the fight,'' said Bill Carrick, a South Carolina native who was a senior adviser to Representative Richard A. Gephardt until Mr. Gephardt dropped out of the race. ''Tonight you have to make the transition from focus on individual primaries to the actual delegate count, so he's going to have to take Kerry on in places as they come, instead of picking and choosing.''
Indeed, Mr. Edwards's best showings have come in Iowa and South Carolina, where he spent months and money introducing himself to voters and winning them over with his relentlessly upbeat message. But he has so far mostly shied from the big states where general elections are won -- Missouri last night and Michigan this weekend. Though he vowed last night to fight in Michigan, he is pinning his real hopes on Tennessee and Virginia next Tuesday.
If he is to pose a serious challenge to Mr. Kerry, Mr. Edwards will have to move much more quickly, and more sharply, to distinguish himself as the fresh face, and a man qualified to be president. He has already begun to try, by attacking Mr. Kerry's long service in Washington and contributions from lobbyists, but he is strapped for cash -- and time.
For Dr. Dean, whose early effort to create an aura of invincibility collapsed so completely that he chose not to compete really in any of last night's contests, the only hope is to exploit the continued unsettled state of the race and stand and fight in places like Wisconsin, on Feb. 17, or New York and California, on March 2.
Dr. Dean called himself the Energizer Bunny last night, but even the best batteries die without recharging.
''Having a muddled race for him for as long as possible is good for him, because he's going to fight a World War I-style ground war of attrition,'' said Douglas Sosnik, who was a top political aide to Bill Clinton. ''He needs time, and he needs to rack up some delegate numbers.''
For Mr. Kerry, now more than ever the undisputed front-runner, the challenge is to avoid head-to-head conflicts with rivals who will now attack him and only him, and who may be able to pick up convention delegates awarded based on their proportion of the vote in state after state, even without winning. He must make his eventual nomination appear inevitable, without alienating Democrats by seeming to claim the crown before voters in big, important states weigh in.
''If you get somebody who's going to be able to stay in and nip at your heels, he may be picking up delegates right along,'' said John Reilly, who was a senior aide to Walter F. Mondale in 1984, when Mr. Mondale won more primaries than Gary Hart through a long winter and spring but still did not clinch the nomination until after the California primary, which he actually lost to Mr. Hart.
The electoral calendar is much more compressed this year, and California votes in March, not June. That favors Mr. Kerry. So, Mr. Reilly said, does another reality that kicks in once the earliest primaries are over: ''Everything changes, the whole operation, and what began to show was whether you had organization in enough places. Gary didn't, and we did.''
In recent days, Mr. Kerry has racked up a lot of endorsements from labor unions and state elected officials. He has the most money, and a staff that is steadily leapfrogging to the next contest. Already, his chartered Boeing 737 campaign plane has custom red, white and blue silk-screened covers on the headrests that read simply ''John Kerry President,'' without so much as a ''for.''
Over the last year, Mr. Kerry has shown himself to be a more appealing underdog than he is an overlord. Already this week, he seemed to be a bit nervous, and irritated, about Mr. Edwards's efforts to fight on, telling a South Carolina television station that Mr. Edwards lacked the experience to lead the nation in perilous times. And he told one of his aides that Mr. Edwards would not be able to win his home state, North Carolina, much less the whole South.
For his part, Mr. Edwards seems almost as eager to contrast his humble origins with Mr. Kerry's patrician, Ivy League background as with Mr. Bush's. With his winning trial lawyer's demeanor and talents on the stump, Mr. Edwards might yet mount a strong populist challenge to Mr. Kerry's cooler, less emotional approach.
But Mr. Kerry once again ran strong among virtually all the crucial demographic groups that make up the Democratic base: women, the elderly, unions, blacks and Latinos. Again and again yesterday, voters said they saw him as the candidate best able to take on Mr. Bush.
Anthony Giddens, a manager of a Bojangles Restaurant in Columbia, S.C., was torn between Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards but decided. ''I think Kerry is more electable because of his military service and voting record,'' Mr. Giddens said.
At a time when the president's own poll ratings are slipping, and Democrats are angry, that is no small claim.
''I think the baling wire that's going to hold the base together in this election,'' Mr. Sosnik, the former Clinton aide, said, ''is antipathy to Bush.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: NEWS ANALYSIS
