If there were an Emmy for most memorable cameo performance, surely Janet Jackson's right breast would waltz away with this year's top honors.
But it's unclear whether Ms. Jackson's malfunctioning wardrobe during her halftime performance at the Super Bowl on Sunday will help her to generate sales come March 30, when ''Damita Jo,'' her eighth album, is scheduled to hit the stores. ''I don't think it will ultimately hurt Janet if her new music is good,'' said Erik Parker, the music editor of Vibe. ''But if the record doesn't sell well, at this stage in her career, it could prove to be a death knell.''
There is no doubt that Virgin Records, Ms. Jackson's label, is hoping to capitalize on the tempest. Her new single, ''Just a Little While,'' has been rushed to radio stations.
Ms. Jackson's previous effort, ''All For You,'' was released three years ago, practically an eternity in today's music industry. Although the album went on to sell three million copies, her star has waned in recent years, as younger singers like Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera and not-so-much-younger ones like Jennifer Lopez have gathered millions of fans.
Dusting off oldies like ''Rhythm Nation'' for her Sunday evening comeback did not help squelch suggestions that Ms. Jackson, once a trendsetter, is now struggling to keep up. ''To perform that song suggests that she has some catching up to do,'' Mr. Parker said. He dismissed the idea that the incident was an accident. ''Of course it was a publicity stunt,'' he said. ''Things like this generate excitement around her next release. Even if the music is not good, there will be interest.''
Some critics have suggested that now more than ever, aging pop stars like Ms. Jackson, 37, and Madonna, 45, are desperate to generate publicity because it's no longer a given that their albums will soar to the top of the charts. Madonna, who has always courted controversy in the mass media by displays of sexual experimentation, was recently criticized for trying too hard when she arranged a stagey kiss with Ms. Spears at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards.
Ms. Jackson is now being equally criticized for the stunt at the Super Bowl, in which her partner in the final song of her set, Justin Timberlake, tore off a piece of her costume to reveal a naked breast adorned with a silver nipple ring in the shape of as star.
The episode came at a time when Ms. Jackson ''finds herself at a difficult place in her career,'' said Joe Levy, the music editor of Rolling Stone. ''It's has been nearly 18 years since 'Control,' her breakthrough record, and her original fans have now grown up and started families of their own,'' Mr. Levy said. Today's audience, he added, is a fickle one, ''largely interested in music made by and for teenagers.''
At www.janet-xone.com, a Janet Jackson fan Web site, message boards were flooded with responses from viewers who saw the halftime show. ''I'm sorry, people, but she needs to spend at least a year in jail for that stunt,'' wrote one person, identified as a parent, who drew a comparison to Michael Jackson's legal troubles. ''You don't do something that irresponsible when you know 140 million people will be watching. She is just like her brother and has no respect for kids.''
Another fan writing to the Web site, identified only as Ashley22, was also decidedly unimpressed. ''It had to be the worst halftime show I've ever seen. Janet wasn't even singing and everyone could tell,'' Ashley wrote. But most visiting the site defended Ms. Jackson's right to bare more than arms. ''Yes, it was intended,'' wrote frenchie2004, ''and it was awesome.''
To be sure, Super Bowl evening was not the first time Ms. Jackson's breasts have been given top billing. In 1993 she posed topless for the cover of Rolling Stone. Then, her nipples were obscured by a pair of male hands, not a silver broach. Historically, she has always vacillated between shy, retiring girl next door and sexually adventurous vamp. Night after night, during her sold-out All for You tour, she plucked a lucky man from the audience and gave him a lap dance while she sang. In recent years her lyrics have grown more and more provocative, with Ms. Jackson discussing everything from masturbation to bisexuality.
As a child actress, she appeared on sitcoms like ''Diff'rent Strokes'' and ''Good Times.'' Her musical career began in 1982, with the release of ''Janet Jackson,'' but it was not until four years later that she hit it big with ''Control,'' which established her as a star, ready to command her own destiny. ''Let's Wait Awhile,'' one of the album's biggest hits, encouraged sexual abstinence. ''Let's wait awhile before we go too far,'' the chorus went.
On the follow-up album, ''Rhythm Nation 1814,'' Ms. Jackson, done up in black military-inspired garb, was eager to rail against societal ills like racism and domestic abuse. The 1993 album ''Janet,'' the highest-selling release of her career, sold 6.9 million copies and boasted four No. 1 singles. But by 1997, with the release of ''Velvet Rope,'' her poorest selling album to date, Good Janet appeared to have been left bound and gagged in a closet while Bad Janet had come out to play. ''The title 'Velvet Rope' referred to light S&amp;M play,'' Mr. Levy said. ''When she did interviews, she often talked about the way pain and pleasure were mixed in both sexual and romantic relationships.''
The question now, said Gail Mitchell, the R&amp;B editor at Billboard, is ''What will Janet do next?''
Correction:  February 21, 2004, Saturday  An article in The Arts on Feb. 4 about whether Janet Jackson would be able to capitalize on the publicity from her appearance in the Super Bowl halftime show misstated the number of No. 1 singles that came from her 1993 album ''Janet.'' It was two, not four.
