Ariel Sharon uprooted Ayana Yogev from the Jewish settlement where she was born, and now Mr. Sharon is threatening to oust her from the Gaza Strip settlement where she has started a family of her own.
Mr. Sharon, Israel's prime minister, has been known for years as the master builder of Jewish settlements. But here at the southern end of Gaza, many remember Mr. Sharon as the defense minister who supervised the dismantling of the large settlement of Yamit in the Sinai Peninsula in 1982, as part of a peace treaty with Egypt.
Some of those same settlers were shaking their heads over Mr. Sharon's statement on Monday that he was considering removing nearly all Jewish settlers in Gaza.
''We never thought that Yamit would go,'' said Ms. Yogev of her birthplace. She was less than a year old when it was evacuated.
Her family was then among the first to settle in Atzmona, where she was raised and where her parents still live. Ms. Yogev, 22, has a 1-year-old son and another child on the way.
''There's no way we will walk out of here on our own,'' said Ms. Yogev's husband, Amichai, as the couple entertained their son in a playground on a mild winter day.
Israel has expanded its settlement population in Gaza and the West Bank for two decades despite the fierce Palestinian opposition.
Mr. Sharon's announcement brought a rare round of qualified applause from the Palestinians. Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei called it ''good news.'' But Palestinians emphasized that such a move would be only one of many they were demanding of Israel.
The Gaza settlements have 7,500 Jewish residents, compared with about 230,000 settlers in the West Bank. During the past three years of fighting, Palestinians have attacked settlers almost daily in both territories, and are seeking all of Gaza and the West Bank for a future state.
Atzmona is part of the main cluster of Gaza settlements in the southern corner of the strip, along the Mediterranean Sea. They resemble small, American-style subdivisions, with whitewashed houses and red-tile roofs, built on the coastal sand dunes and surrounded by electronic fences and soldiers.
The settler economy is based on agriculture, which depends heavily on Palestinian workers from the neighboring villages.
By day, Palestinian laborers tend to row after row of greenhouses that produce some of the highest quality fruit and vegetables in Israel. By night, Palestinian militants lob mortars into the settlements and snipe at Israeli cars along the road leading in and out of the communities.
There are constant reminders of this bizarre relationship, based on mutual economic dependence and unrelieved hostility.
On Tuesday, young men played volleyball in the sand at the Jewish seminary here, where a Palestinian attacker carried out a suicidal rampage in March 2002, killing five students before he was killed himself.
Overhead, Israeli warplanes roared through the sky on their daily training runs along the coast.
Driving through the Gaza settlements in the middle of the day, a visitor could easily get the impression that the settlements are already being evacuated. Here in Atzmona, one of the larger Gaza settlements, the community office building and the main grocery store are closed at 2:30 in the afternoon.
The streets are largely deserted, except for a few children on bicycles and others playing soccer in the schoolyard.
The settlements are populated mostly by young couples, with the schools and agriculture providing many of the jobs, while others commute to Israeli towns for work.
Many residents say they are here because of the close-knit community atmosphere. But the isolation can feel restrictive to children.
Yaffa Hadad, 44, has lived for 18 years in the small settlement of Rafieh Yam, where she and her husband have four children.
Palestinian gunfire is a daily event. Her husband is the community's security officer, and so has to respond to shooting incidents around the clock. Still, she said, ''I like it here, and we plan to stay.''
But then her 12-year-old son, Omre, chimed in. ''I prefer a city like Jerusalem,'' he said. ''There are so many things to do there.''
Omre takes an armored bus to school each day, escorted by soldiers. He is free to roam his neighborhood, but it consists of just a few streets and about 20 houses, several of them deserted. The beach is within walking distance, yet he cannot stray beyond the settlement gates.
