Ricin is not on any expert's top 10 list of terrorist poisons to worry about, but its mere presence in powdered form in a Senate mailroom was enough to close several Senate buildings yesterday. The incident was a sobering reminder that even after more than two years of relative quiet on the domestic security front, we remain vulnerable to any extremist who chooses to disrupt the nation's daily routine with a toxic powder.
Ricin is listed as a Category B bioterrorism agent in the federal government's official rankings, a classification that means, among other things, it causes only moderate rates of illness and death, not mass casualties. It is perhaps most effective when aimed at an individual, as when Bulgarian agents assassinated a dissident in London in 1978 by injecting a ricin pellet under his skin. Ricin is not generally deemed a useful military weapon. It does not spread from person to person or multiply within the body. It is essentially a poison that can kill if enough is inhaled, ingested or injected.
What makes ricin potentially attractive to terrorists and other extremists is its availability -- it is found in castor beans, which are used to make castor oil around the world -- and the ease of extracting it. Crude recipes can be found on the Internet. There is no antidote to treat ricin poisoning, no vaccine to prevent it and no reliable diagnostic test to determine whether ricin is in a person's biological fluids. In recent years various radicals or extremist groups have been caught with ricin or castor beans in their possession. Al Qaeda was said to possess quantities of ricin, and Iraq, according to the weapons inspector David Kay, was continuing to work on ricin, although United Nations inspectors found no actual weaponization of the poison.
The government's response to the incident looks reasonable at first blush. An alert employee reported the powder, the room was isolated, and individuals nearby were examined. A fuller investigation may determine whether there are holes in the Senate's defenses, but many experts consider it impractical to defend against every moderate threat at all possible entry points. The best response may well be prompt detection of any illnesses and intensive care treatment for anyone made sick.
