A former trader at Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce was charged with larceny and securities fraud yesterday, accused of financing illegal mutual fund trades.
The trader, Paul A. Flynn, of Larchmont, N.Y., is the latest in a growing list of Wall Street traders to face charges by the New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, as part of an investigation into mutual fund trading.
The criminal charge was jointly announced with a civil enforcement action by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The S.E.C. is seeking a fine and disgorgement of profits and possibly a permanent ban from the industry for Mr. Flynn.
As the investigation into fund trading widened, two mutual fund managers separately said yesterday that they had set aside money to cover legal and restitution costs. Federated Investors said it would pay $7.6 million to compensate shareholders for improper trades. Another company, Amvescap, said it would take a charge to cover the cost of regulators' inquiries into its Invesco Funds and AIM Investments divisions.
The actions are the first by regulators related to financings by banks of mutual fund trades made by hedge funds. The S.E.C. and Mr. Spitzer's office acknowledged last month that they were looking at the role of banks in such trades.
''We are committed to punishing, not just those who engaged in the trading, but also those who facilitated it,'' Stephen M. Cutler, director for enforcement at the commission, said in a statement yesterday.
Mr. Spitzer said in an interview that the case against Mr. Flynn was ''the first of several'' to result from the regulators' inquiry into financing of illegal mutual fund trades.
According to the attorney general, Mr. Flynn, 46, financed trades on behalf of two hedge funds, Canary Capital Partners and Samaritan Asset Management, that were completed after the market had closed but at an earlier price. The practice, known as late-day trading, is illegal.
People briefed on the investigation have previously said that Mr. Flynn and other executives at C.I.B.C. arranged more than $1 billion in financings for trades in mutual funds by hedge funds. The financings were arranged from 2001 to 2003, the S.E.C. said.
The trades in the hedge funds were processed through Security Trust, an intermediary in the processing of mutual fund trades. Security Trust, which federal regulators ordered shut in November, facilitated hundreds of illegal trades by Canary Capital, regulators said.
Mr. Flynn, a managing director in the bank's New York office, was aware that Security Trust was processing the hedge funds' trades after hours, the S.E.C. and the attorney general said yesterday. Mr. Flynn was asked to leave the bank in December.
An internal memorandum written by Mr. Flynn in October 2001, described various ways that Security Trust concealed illegal trades made by the hedge funds that C.I.B.C. financed. These included disguising the orders as being made by retirement or pension plans, or setting up multiple accounts on behalf of each hedge fund, according to excerpts from the memo quoted by both the commission and Mr. Spitzer. Security Trust allowed C.I.B.C. clients to trade as late as midnight and obtain the 4 p.m. closing price, Mr. Spitzer said.
Mutual funds that were illegally traded include the MFS Emerging Growth Fund and the Artisan International Fund, he said.
A spokesman for Canary declined to comment. A representative of Samaritan did not return calls. A representative of Security Trust said he could not comment because he had not seen the regulators' filings.
Mr. Flynn, who was arrested yesterday morning up the block from his home in Westchester, did not return calls, and his lawyer, David Gendelman, declined to comment. Mr. Flynn pleaded not guilty in New York City Criminal Court and bail was set at $750,000. A spokesman for C.I.B.C. said the bank continued to cooperate with regulators but declined to comment further.
Mr. Spitzer said that ''discussions continue with the bank on many fronts.''
A person briefed on the investigation said that it was likely the bank would reach a civil settlement with the regulators. Regulators could still take action against current or former employees at the bank, the person said.
Federated Investors, which had previously acknowledged improper trading in its mutual funds, said yesterday that it would set up a fund to reimburse shareholders harmed by the trading. The company will take $20 million in charges to cover the restitution as well as other costs associated with the company's review of trading in its funds.
Federated had previously acknowledged that employees had processed trades after hours for one hedge fund, Veras Partners. The company also acknowledged market timing arrangements with Canary Capital. Market timing, which refers to rapid trading in and out of hedge funds, is not necessarily illegal, although regulators have criticized fund mangers that permitted the practice even though their prospectuses implied that they discouraged the activity.
Federated said yesterday that it had subsequently found that two portfolio managers had made $760,000 worth of trades in and out of its funds through the company 401(k) plan. Federated is establishing policies to prevent short-term trading by employees, the company said, and is sanctioning the managers involved. A spokesman for the company declined to identify the managers.
Amvescap, whose Invesco Funds Group division was sued by regulators in December, said yesterday that it would take a $40 million charge in the fourth quarter to cover the cost of investigations.
The S.E.C. and the attorney general accused Invesco and its chief executive of allowing certain investors to trade rapidly in and out of its funds. After first saying that it would contest the charges, Invesco said last month that it was working with regulators to reach a settlement.
