President Bush pressed Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, on Tuesday to have his aides mediate among quarreling factions in Iraq and forge a consensus behind a plan that would allow the transfer of sovereignty to a government in Baghdad by June 30, administration officials said.
They said that without rapid progress on the political issues, the White House might agree to postpone Iraqi self-rule, but several officials said such a step would be a ''last resort.''
Mr. Annan has been given a dozen options for the transfer of sovereignty, the officials said, ranging from holding direct elections before June 30 to overhauling radically the unwieldy caucus system that is supposed to choose a new national assembly by that date.
The Bush administration had previously frozen the United Nations out of the transition process in Iraq.
After the meeting, Mr. Annan said the United Nations team heading soon to Iraq to assess the possibility of direct elections would expand its agenda.
''We are going to go there to help the Iraqis, to help them establish a government that is Iraqi, a government that will work with them to assure their future, in terms of political and economic destiny,'' he said. He said he thought that the United Nations had ''a chance to help break the impasse which exists at the moment, and move forward.''
The administration's plans for Iraq have been stymied by Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani's rejection of the proposed caucuses and by divisions within the Iraqi Governing Council.
''We are trying to put this issue in Kofi Annan's lap and let him run with it,'' one official said. ''There's still very much the intention to stick with the date of June 30. But there's a lot of pressure on Kofi Annan to come up with the right solution.''
Mr. Annan, for his part, has not wanted to become involved without wielding substantial authority.
The administration seems willing to allow that. Officials said Mr. Annan would have wide latitude to present Washington with a plan for Iraq's future governance -- including a schedule for elections later this year -- and that if he can demonstrate that it has broad backing in Iraq, the administration would have little choice but to go along. Some administration officials are now even saying it is possible for the United Nations to take the lead role in guiding the Iraqi political process after the return of self-rule.
But other officials warned that Vice President Dick Cheney and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld were still likely to oppose giving the United Nations virtual supervisory control over the political future of Iraq, out of fear that such a step might result in constraints on American forces.
Mr. Bush and Mr. Annan met with Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and other top officials to discuss a range of possibilities for the future of Iraq.
Aides to Mr. Annan and top American officials say the situation pulls the secretary general in several directions. Mr. Annan, they say, does not want to be seen as an American proxy, but he is determined to do what is necessary to help Iraq create a viable government. Still, they say, he is extremely reluctant to return the United Nations to a highly visible role in the country that could make it the target of attacks. A suicide bombing at the United Nations' Baghdad base in August killed the mission chief, Sergio Vieira de Mello, and 21 other people.
''This is not an issue of anyone wanting the U.N. to take over Iraq,'' a United Nations official said. ''But the secretary general is very keen on this whole process succeeding. They have to get the mechanics right, because if Iraqis can agree on the mechanics, there's a better chance of all Iraqis accepting the results.''
Ayatollah Sistani has refused to meet with any American mediator, including L. Paul Bremer III, Iraq's civilian administrator. Some administration officials said Mr. Bremer was relieved at the prospect that the United Nations might be able to improve communications with the ayatollah and his fellow Shiites, who respect him above all other clerics.
''The American attitude is much more open to the United Nations than it used to be,'' said a European diplomat familiar with the negotiations over Iraq. ''It's not just a 'vital' role any more.''
But many experts on Iraq say Mr. Annan may have as much difficulty in forging consensus as Mr. Bremer has had.
The Iraqi Governing Council has had trouble reaching agreement within itself, and also in dealing with the ayatollah, who wants direct elections before June 30 to choose the transitional government that will write a permanent Iraqi constitution.
The Bush administration insists that elections on that time frame are impractical. But some officials say there is also fear at the Defense Department that a sweeping victory by Shiites will deepen the problems American forces have had in suppressing the insurgency in Sunni areas.
''There is a building inclination in the administration to give this problem to the United Nations, if the U.N. will take it,'' said Reuel Marc Gerecht, a former C.I.A. specialist on the Middle East and a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. ''But I don't think it's going to work. I don't think Sistani is going to play ball.''
The administration official said the hope was for the United Nations to play a role that Lakhdar Brahimi, the special United Nations envoy for Afghanistan, played in that country with Zalmay Khalilzad, a former White House official who is now ambassador in Kabul. Together, they called for a grand council, or loya jirga, to choose an interim authority to preside over the writing of a constitution, which has been adopted, and also to plan for elections, which are due in June.
Two United Nations specialists have already gone to Iraq to assess the security situation. The election advisers are to leave for Iraq this week and could report back in a week or two, officials said.
The current plan for choosing a government to take office after June 30 calls for a series of caucuses in Iraq's 18 provinces. The caucus participants are to be carefully chosen by provincial councils and other bodies supervised by the United States and its handpicked Iraqi leadership.
Because of the American control, the process is regarded by many Shiites as potentially limiting their ability to gain control of Iraq's government.
The alternatives discussed with Mr. Annan included simplifying the caucuses, opening them up to many more participants, and making participants cast ballots so the process looks more like direct elections.
''There are more than a dozen different possibilities that have been floated at one time or another,'' an administration official said. ''The United Nations is as aware of them as we are. They have to go out to Iraq and say: What's going to work on the ground? What do they think can achieve the goal of an Iraqi government that is respected by the Iraqi people?''
