It is good to see Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill back in the business of piling up big chunks of quartz. Stone was never this firm's strength. Ten Columbus Circle does ample penance for the opaque minerals Skidmore deployed so extravagantly during its neo-Art Deco phase. There's some flame-pattern gray granite at the building's base, but it's there mainly for contrast with the giant cluster of glass crystals, which appears to have been quarried from the sky.
Designed by David Childs, with Mustafa K. Abadan as lead partner, the building has great glamour. It is far more romantic than the Jazz Age tributes conceived by Mr. Childs in his wanton postmodern youth. With 10 Columbus, the mood is modern noir. The two towers are worthy descendants of Radio City. The building draws us into the city of long shadows, relieved here and there by silver glints.
If you're of a certain antiquity, you may recall a protest that was held in the 1980's against the shadows that an earlier version of this building would have cast on Central Park. (In a gesture that Christo might have dreamed up in collaboration with Gene Kelly, the protesters carried open umbrellas.) Mr. Childs's response to the demonstration is somewhat perverse. As realized, the two towers of 10 Columbus Circle have taken the form of shadows themselves: they resemble the oblique, cinematic oblong forms cast over the cityscape in black-and-white movies of the 1940's and 50's. Now we've got four shadows for the price of two.
There are sound contextual reasons for it. The parallelogram shape of the towers derives from the angle of Broadway's intersection with the orthogonal street grid of Manhattan. The towers thus appear to be extruded out of irregularities in the existing urban fabric. This reverses the figure-ground relationship of the 1980's design, which imposed the hulking towers symmetrically on axis with Central Park West. In that form, the composition resembled the Colossi of Memnon at Luxor. The design's Art Deco trim heightened the anachronistic Egyptian Revival effect.
The realized building remains Egyptian in scale (the towers could have gone higher), while the plain geometric forms hark back to the architect and pharaoh Amenhotep. You will notice an echo in the pyramid-shaped pilasters used by Philip Johnson for the Trump International Hotel and Condominiums across the street. You will also notice Mr. Trump's signs advising prospective tenants at 10 Columbus that his own building will ruin their views. What apprentice thought up that self-defeating campaign? (''You're fired!'') Mr. Johnson's design isn't that bad.
Ten Columbus is a balancing act. Besides negotiating the angles introduced by Broadway, the design squares the circle, with street grid around it. The base is composed of overlapping grids, which create an impression of an arcade in two dimensions. The overlap technique derives from the temple fronts Palladio superimposed on the facades of his 16th-century churches. At the roofline of the base, a curving course of angled glass panels serves the function of pediment and frieze.
The classical elements and proportions reach back to Columbus Circle's roots in the City Beautiful movement of the turn of the last century, a legacy marked by the statue of Columbus atop his column and by the Maine Memorial at the southwest entrance to Central Park. Mr. Childs had this background in mind when designing the first version. One of the follies of that period was the notion that architects should resume the City Beautiful project, effectively wiping out the Modernist ''rejection of history'' that had aborted it.
What was lost sight of then was the degree to which the beauty of New York City derives from heterogeneity. Diversity is its history, too, a saga of which the City Beautiful vision is one chapter among many. Ten Columbus folds that chapter into its forms, along with Art Deco and International Style. In formal terms, the result may not be an architectural breakthrough. But the building adds its own synthetic DNA to the circle's rich, eclectic mix.
Jazz at Lincoln Center, a performance and rehearsal space designed by Rafael Vinoly, will occupy the top portion of the grand portal that occupies the center of the base, on axis with Central Park South. I'm inclined to see the architecture above the base as crystallized jazz. This is where the design fully expresses its urban ambitions, particularly in the flaring gem-cut setbacks that mediate between the base and the towers.
This is scenographic, not architectonic design. Gordon Bunshaft, the glass master of Skidmore's International Style phase, might well have disapproved. It is the ghost of another architect, Wallace K. Harrison, that hovers benignly over this design.
The architect of the Trylon and Perisphere at the 1939 World's Fair, a collaborator on Rockefeller Center, the United Nations headquarters and Lincoln Center, and not least the designer of Time Inc.'s previous headquarters on Avenue of the Americas, Harrison was perhaps the most gifted iconographer in mid-20th-century New York.
Instead of mimicking a tradition, 10 Columbus perpetuates one. Mr. Childs had hoped to use a brighter shade of glass, one that was pale white in effect. This would have produced a different aesthetic but not necessarily a better one. The darkness of mood will remind some spectators of Black Rock, the CBS headquarters on 52nd Street designed by Eero Saarinen. That building, too, was criticized for emphasizing iconography over structural expression.
Opinion will be divided over the mall of shops and restaurants that occupies the base of 10 Columbus. To appreciate this place, it probably helps to be a surrealist like Walter Benjamin. Chronicler of the shopping arcades that preceded department stores, most notably in Paris, Benjamin saw such places as the dream labyrinths of the industrial age. Some atmospheres require a haze: if it weren't for New York's smoking laws, the restaurant arcade at 10 Columbus would be an apparition. So, wear shades or squint.
No one has done more than Rem Koolhaas to quicken our appreciation for the surreal density of Manhattan. The multiple uses of 10 Columbus -- corporate headquarters, performing arts complex, condos, a hotel, restaurants and shops -- are very much in the spirit of Mr. Koolhaas, as is the semblance of Harrison. But invoking Mr. Koolhaas here is double-edged. If the reference helps to reveal the contemporaneity of 10 Columbus, it also reminds us of the distance that still separates New York from the most inspired architecture of our day.
I see no reason why Mr. Childs shouldn't step into Harrison's shoes. Though over 60, he is still the most promising young architect in New York. For years he handicapped himself with the doctrine of appropriateness, a dogma in place of a conviction. There may be no such thing as progress in the history of architecture, but in the development of individual architects and cities the concept still holds. That is what 10 Columbus proves.
Harrison himself was less appreciated in his own time than he has come to be in ours. His theatricality was held against him. In the case of Mr. Childs, the reverse appears to be true. When he turns up the footlights and lets drama come to the fore, as he has here, an imagination lights up.
