It seemed like the perfect breakout plan: armed with fake guard uniforms, two handguns and a dog-eared copy of an acclaimed book about life as a prison guard at Sing Sing, two convicted violent felons would walk out of prison. They had friends on the outside willing to smuggle in supplies, and an ally on the inside, a prison guard, who gave them crucial logistical information about the inner workings of Sing Sing.
Instead, Nicholas Zimmerman, 27, who is serving a 15-year sentence on a weapons charge, and his jailhouse friend Steven Finley, 26, could now face at least four years more prison time on top of their current sentences after being charged on Tuesday. Westchester County investigators told of an elaborate plan to free the two men last spring involving at least seven people, including three of Mr. Zimmerman's girl-friends, one of whom was a guard at Sing Sing, and two men the women hired to help free Mr. Zimmerman and Mr. Finley.
The two men were charged with attempting to escape and their confederates have been charged with various crimes such as accepting bribes and attempting to aid the escape. ''You've got an orchestrated, professional attempt to get two chronic felons out of Sing Sing,'' the Westchester district attorney, Jeanine F. Pirro, said at a news conference.
But a series of mishaps -- a panic attack, a suspicious-looking badge and a run-in with an astute police officer -- derailed three attempts and ultimately led investigators to unravel the elaborate plot, Ms. Pirro said.
Mr. Zimmerman, a rapper from Queens who recorded songs under the name Puzz Pacino, hatched the plan to escape last year with a guard he met in Sing Sing named Quangtrice Wilson, according to investigators.
The two struck up a friendship that blossomed into romance, investigators said, and Ms. Wilson agreed to give one of Mr. Zimmerman's girlfriends on the outside extensive information about the prison, including the layout of its buildings, its security procedures and most important, a digital copy of her identification card.
She also gave Mr. Zimmerman a cellphone to make calls to arrange the escape plan, Ms. Pirro said.
Ms. Wilson passed along logistical information to another of Mr. Zimmerman's girlfriends, Jatanya Belnavis, investigators said, and was paid several thousand dollars in bribes over several months. Ms. Belnavis in turn hired two men, Barry Alexander and Tony Dubose, both of Brooklyn, to help with the breakout, Ms. Pirro said. The two men were to receive $5,000 to start and $15,000 if the breakout was successful, she said.
Armed with digital copies of Ms. Wilson's identification card on which they superimposed new pictures, the plotters bought prison guard badges at a supply store and official-looking uniforms. Everyone involved was assigned to read the book, ''New Jack,'' a first-person account of life as a prison guard at Sing Sing written by Ted Conover, a journalist who worked undercover as a guard for a year, Ms. Pirro said.
On April 24, Ms. Belnavis and a man whom investigators did not identify put on wigs and fake uniforms and walked into Sing Sing with a bag stuffed with two uniforms, badges and identification cards, Ms. Pirro said. They also carried two loaded weapons: 9-millimeter and .38-caliber handguns, Ms. Pirro said. But they aborted the plan when Ms. Belnavis started hyperventilating after they reached the second floor.
On May 6, the plotters tried again, Ms. Pirro said, planning to arrive at shift change dressed as guards, using the swarm of hundreds of officers going in and out of the prison as cover. But Ms. Belnavis, Mr. Alexander and perhaps other accomplices arrived too late and again canceled their plans.
The next day, Mr. Alexander and Mr. Dubose went back to the prison in Ossining, N.Y., planning to try again. Mr. Dubose tried to enter with his fake ID card, but an officer at the gate noticed that the blue seal on his badge was raised, not flat like those of most officers, investigators said. Mr. Dubose told the officer that he was a transfer from another prison, but the officer was skeptical and sent him to the warden's office, Ms. Pirro said.
The warden demanded to see his transfer papers. Mr. Dubose asked to use the restroom. He slipped past the guard who had first stopped him by telling her he was going to get his transfer papers, then fled the prison, Ms. Pirro said. But he had left behind his fake ID card, issued under the name Anthony White, in the warden's office, an oversight that would unravel the plot.
Officials at Sing Sing immediately put the prison on lockdown and counted the inmates, but no one was missing. The State Police began an investigation, trying to determine who Anthony White was and why he had disappeared.
The crucial clue came the next day. On May 7, before Mr. Dubose tried to get into Sing Sing, an Ossining police officer, Donald Farrell, had stopped Mr. Dubose and Mr. Alexander as they moved a motorcycle that investigators said they planned to leave for the escaping prisoners near the prison. Because they were acting strangely near the prison, Officer Farrell had questioned them and looked up their driving records.
The next day, when Officer Farrell heard about the incident at Sing Sing, he told the State Police about the two men he had encountered the previous morning. Armed with the picture on the fake prison ID, investigators discovered that the Anthony White on the guard ID and the Tony Dubose whom Officer Farrell had stopped were the same person.
Mr. Zimmerman and Mr. Finley were transferred to different prisons upstate, Ms. Pirro said, and have been charged with attempted escape. The district attorney said their alleged helpers, including Ms. Wilson, 31, the guard, face a variety of felony charges, and more people could be charged when the case is presented to a grand jury.
Ron Kuby, the lawyer who represented Mr. Zimmerman in an unsuccessful attempt to appeal his weapons conviction, said: ''Mr. Zimmerman would not seek to escape from prison. That is why he has lawyers.''
