Lifetime manages tonight to bring to the screen the tenacious spirit of Reader's Digest, with a movie based on an article from that proud magazine.
''Gracie's Choice'' is a pastel-colored drama about sobriety, initiative and responsibility set in Washington State. One of several fair-skinned children of a vain, stoned welfare mother named Rowena (Anne Heche), the teen-aged Gracie (Kristen Bell) finds she must choose between starting her own exciting life with a boyfriend and cleaning up her mother's life by taking custody of her young sister and brothers and raising them herself.
Ms. Heche gets Rowena's foxy seductions just right, as she manipulates everyone around her -- boyfriends, children, Gracie and her own mother (Diane Ladd) -- to get her drugs and her good time. Limber, trashy, an aggressive free-spirit, Rowena does make living fun when she's around, promising her kids wild horses in Wyoming if they stick by her through her tantrums, her bad romances and her spells in prison.
But Gracie, as she matures, doesn't buy the addict's come-ons, and she begins steadily to deafen herself to the siren song of every kind of romance. She determines instead to give her young siblings a safe life, with the help of her pious grandmother, even if she has to forfeit her own fantasies of success.
The grandmother is more vulnerable to Rowena's charm than Gracie is, however, and soon she's bankrolling her daughter's depraved lifestyle rather than helping Gracie with the family.
This embattled love triangle among three generations of women gets interesting, even sexual. At one point Rowena straddles Gracie as if to rape her. Another time Rowena rapturously embraces her mother while shooting smug looks at Gracie, who by now disdains mush.
Ms. Bell, who started on Broadway, is too pretty as Gracie, and her hair here is excessively styled. (Dark roots wouldn't have been out of place on at least one of these towheaded women.) But Ms. Bell doesn't look trivial, and the hard set of her jaw, together with her broad shoulders, lend her moral power. As teachers, social workers and judges come to recognize Gracie's capacity for old-fashioned self-sacrifice, the movie's fable falls into place. The bright, upright girl must win over the forces of evil, chaos and good-time moms.
As Rowena is sidelined, then, Gracie gets a data-entry job. She reads. She get her own place, hangs pictures on the walls and folds her hand towels into little fans. She refuses cigarettes and makes a priority of nutrition. In short, in making the best of a bad time, she becomes a Reader's Digest exemplar, an embodiment of that magazine's heartbreakingly sensible counterpoint to the amusing and dangerous American dream.
GRACIE'S CHOICE  Lifetime, tonight at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time
Directed by Peter Werner; produced by Randy Sutter; written by Joyce Eliason, based in part on an article by Rena Dictor LeBlanc. Produced by von Zerneck-Sertner Films for Lifetime Television.
WITH: Anne Heche (Rowena Larson), Diane Ladd (Grandma Lou) and Kristen Bell (Gracie Thompson).
TELEVISION REVIEW
