Every year Frank Romano has trouble hiring enough workers to fill the vacancies at his nursing home chain in Massachusetts, from $60,000-a-year nurses to $8-an-hour kitchen and laundry workers.
Not only are there not enough American-trained nurses available, said Mr. Romano, who hires 300 new workers a year, but hardly any Americans are willing to take the lowly, sweaty jobs in a nursing home's kitchen or laundry.
Mr. Romano has long savored one solution for such hiring woes: the federal government should make it easier to bring in workers from abroad.
Not surprisingly, he joined executives in many industries, including hotels, restaurants, hospitals, construction and agriculture, to applaud President Bush's new proposals to revamp immigration policy and to make it easier to hire foreign workers.
''Americans just don't want to take a lower-paying, entry-level job,'' said Mr. Romano, founder and owner of the Essex Group, a chain of 15 nursing homes and assisted-living facilities, based in Rowley, Mass. ''They will not apply for it. Last year, I had to spend close to $300,000 on help-wanted ads because it was such a struggle to find people to do the jobs we need done.''
Mr. Bush's proposals would give renewable three-year visas to illegal immigrants already working in the United States as well as to foreign applicants who are newly hired for jobs here. But many unions and immigrant advocacy groups have denounced the plan, saying it would create a permanent, exploitable second-tier of workers who would never have the opportunity for permanent residency and full citizenship.
Mr. Bush's plan is an outline, and Congress is expected to add specifics when it takes up new immigration legislation. Under the plan, businesses would have to show that no Americans want the jobs available before they bring in temporary workers from abroad. Business wants that test to be minimal, with many embracing a White House proposal that businesses be allowed to hire foreigners if no Americans respond to job postings on Web sites.
But organized labor and some Congressional Democrats want businesses to satisfy strict criteria before hiring from abroad. One fear, for example, is that a business that now pays American construction laborers $11 an hour will say that it henceforth needs laborers at $6 an hour, knowing that hardly any Americans would take arduous jobs paying so little.
As a result, some labor unions say they want a wage floor incorporated into the immigration reforms.
''If you don't have these protections, you're going to have a race to the bottom,'' said Frank Sharry, executive director of the National Immigration Forum, a liberal group that seeks to ease immigration rules. ''You'll have $12-an-hour hotel workers undermined by the $7-an-hour temporary workers from overseas.''
Like many other executives, Mr. Romano said he was not backing Mr. Bush's proposals in the hope of hiring immigrants at rock bottom levels, like the $5.15-an-hour federal minimum wage.
''We pay anywhere from $8 to $11 for entry-level jobs, and we provide health insurance, too,'' Mr. Romano said.
But labor and immigrant groups say many employers will pay the minimum wage with minimal benefits. They say Mr. Bush's proposal will leave immigrants in a weak position because their visas will be tied to their employer. If they get fired, perhaps for complaining that their employer is not paying them at least minimum wage or time-and-a-half for overtime, they could face deportation.
''As presented so far, it appears the Bush proposal protects the often abusive behavior of employers who hire undocumented workers, but leaves the workers themselves vulnerable and beholden to those employers for the right to stay here,'' said Terence O'Sullivan, president of the Laborers' International Union of North America.
In presenting his proposals on Wednesday, Mr. Bush said his plan would take illegal immigrant workers out of the shadows and would, by giving them temporary visas, make them less vulnerable and better able to assert their rights. His proposal, business executives say, is not geared so much for small businesses that have a handful of illegal immigrant workers and often pay very low wages, but for larger businesses like hotels and nursing homes that need dozens or hundreds of new workers each year.
Xavier Teixido, who runs Harry's Savoy Grill and Harry's Seafood Grill in Wilmington, Del., applauded the president's proposal, saying that existing guest-worker programs hardly helped him. Those programs are more for farmers or high-tech companies and often require a lengthy application process.
Last October, Mr. Teixido opened his seafood grill and had trouble hiring the 50 workers he needed. ''We're in an industry that is creating a lot of jobs, creating them faster than we have the ability to fill them,'' he said.
Finding enough workers is so hard that his two restaurants have a full-time recruiter and human resources director. That director, Nicole Micolucci, said Mr. Bush's proposal would help. ''There is need for a larger applicant pool, and I think expanding the applicant pool for all industries would benefit everyone,'' Ms. Micolucci said.
For unions and some immigrant groups, there is a fear that Mr. Bush's plan would depress wages.
''He's talking about creating a class of workers, potentially a permanent class of workers, who are more vulnerable and less protected than the rest of the work force,'' said Cecilia Muñoz, vice president for policy at the National Council of La Raza, a Hispanic advocacy organization. ''That's bad for them, and it's clearly bad for the rest of the U.S. work force. It will undercut the wages and working conditions for the permanent work force.''
The Bush administration as well as many economists and business executives say the difficulties in finding enough workers for various industries is hurting the economy.
''Right now, we are facing a labor shortage which has the effect of depressing economic growth and job growth,'' said Randel Johnson, vice president for labor, immigration and employee benefits at the United States Chamber of Commerce. ''When the economy grows more, that will have a beneficial effect on American workers.''
