A cigarette smoldered on a sofa, igniting a fire yesterday morning that took the life of a 76-year-old woman and injured nine others at a Harlem building, five hours after a man died in Brooklyn from a fire he had started to stay warm, Fire Department officials said.
Firefighters found both victims dead at the scene, said officials, who did not release their names. The Manhattan woman, whom neighbors identified as Alberta Blackwell, lived on the first floor of 157 West 111th Street. In the Brooklyn fire, the victim, who officials said was homeless, started the fire in an abandoned warehouse at 886 Dahill Road in Borough Park shortly after 3 a.m., they said.
People watched in horror as children and other tenants of the five-story building on 111th Street scrambled down the fire escape shortly after 8 a.m., engulfed in black smoke, some of them jumping the last 12 feet to the ground. It was 7 degrees outside, and many were barefoot, wearing only pajamas.
''People were yelling 'Hurry up! Hurry up!' so I just jumped,'' said Christopher Jean, 12, who dislocated his ankle, though someone on the ground helped break his fall. ''Smoke was in my eyes.''
Filled with flooded water, soot and broken glass, the 10-unit building was evacuated indefinitely, displacing at least 19 people, including four children, said a spokeswoman for the American Red Cross in Greater New York.
Two people were given immediate shelter and the others stayed with friends or relatives, the spokeswoman said.
An unattended cigarette also caused a third fire yesterday, at 798 New Lots Avenue in Brooklyn, injuring two people, who were treated for smoke inhalation, said a Fire Department spokesman, Paul Iannizzotto.
All three fires were still under investigation yesterday evening, he said.
The Harlem fire started in apartment 1W, where Ms. Blackwell lived with her companion, identified by the building's owners and residents as James Bugg. Fire Department officials did not release details about the cause of the fire or who had been smoking or why the cigarette was unattended.
Sometime after 8 a.m., neighbors said, they heard a popping noise and smelled smoke. ''It sounded like the crackling of a fire,'' said Dawn Ziegler, 38, who lives on the third floor of a building across the street, at 1809 Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard.
Mrs. Ziegler and other neighbors said they peered out their windows and saw flames licking the southwest side of the red brick building. ''The flames were jumping out the windows,'' said Jesse Reed, 70, who lives on the first floor of 1809 Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard.
Residents on the upper floors of the 111th Street building awoke to the smell of smoke and the sound of people yelling ''Fire! Fire!''
On the fourth floor, Marc Jeanty alerted his parents, sister and two other relatives. The hallway was full of smoke, he said. The only way out of his apartment was through the kitchen window, onto the metal fire escape, but the window kept slamming down, he said.
''I had to hold it so everyone could get out,'' said Mr. Jeanty, 18. ''That's my family. I have to do that.''
One floor below, Jose Nunez, 18, grabbed his 2-year-old niece and climbed out the window, with his 58-year-old mother, Argentina Nunez following him. ''I don't know how I got down it,'' Mrs. Nunez said.
The first 911 call came in at 8:23 a.m., and firefighters arrived three minutes later. The flames quickly spread to the second floor. Some 125 firefighters were summoned to the scene. The fire was brought under control at 9:23 a.m., officials said.
Three firefighters were treated for minor injuries. Six of the building's residents were treated for minor injuries, including burns and smoke inhalation.
As residents climbed down the fire escape, Mr. Bugg, Ms. Blackwell's companion, sat on the steps staring at his apartment, several witnesses said. A neighbor moved him to a nearby car, which he leaned against. ''He was just leaning there on the car in a daze, and he seemed to motion to go back in the flaming building to get his wife,'' Mrs. Ziegler said.
Mr. Bugg was among the six residents treated for minor injuries. He and Ms. Blackwell were well known in the neighborhood as a quiet and courteous couple who kept to themselves.
Two of the building's owners, Joan Humphreys and William Alicea, arrived in the early afternoon, frantically questioning the police officers stationed outside the building.
Mr. Alicea had heard about the fire from a tenant but did not know about Ms. Blackwell's death. When the officer told him and Ms. Humphreys, they both cried.
''I'm really upset that one of the tenants passed away,'' Mr. Alicea said after he and Ms. Humphreys surveyed the wreckage. ''We'll do whatever it takes to take care of the people in the building.''
Residents roamed in and out of the smoke-stained building, stepping over glass and broken boards to retrieve valuables. In Ms. Blackwell's apartment, a broken pipe spewed water onto the blackened floor. The couple's belongings had been reduced to piles of debris -- half-burned bills, personal letters, a Bible that had managed to remain intact.
Marie Paul Jeanty, 21, helped her relatives on the fourth floor carry nylon sacks filled with clothes and the few valuables they could salvage before leaving -- a computer, some documents, a torn painting.
''It's horrible,'' Ms. Jeanty said. ''There's no other place like home. Even when you have family to live with, it's not the same thing.''
