When the director Gary Ross earned a nomination last week from the Directors Guild of America for last summer's ''Seabiscuit,'' many in Hollywood were more than a little surprised. Aside from television and newspaper advertisements announcing the release of the movie's new DVD, ''Seabiscuit'' had been largely exempt from the pre-Oscar buzz surrounding many other big-studio contenders like ''Master and Commander, ''Cold Mountain'' and the final chapter of ''The Lord of the Rings.''
But ''Seabiscuit,'' released by Universal Pictures, has been promoted as aggressively as anything now in theaters this awards season. Film industry analysts said the movie had been advertised heavily in trade publications like Variety and The Hollywood Reporter.
Every studio hypes their movies this time of year hoping to turn a nomination into box office gold. But to many people here even those ads are considerable, not to mention costly, given that audiences and Oscar voters alike are already well versed in the ''Seabiscuit'' story. Still, it seems Universal is leaving nothing to chance, especially given that Oscar nomination ballots are due in a week.
''One of the things you have to deal with is reacquainting the academy awards voters as well as other guild voters with the film,'' said Robert Friedman, vice chairman at Paramount Pictures. There is no question they are trying to make it current and it is part of an academy campaign.''
Of course no awards campaign is cheap. The bare minimum a studio can expect to spend is $500,000 to promote a film, say industry executives. But for a potential best picture winner, a studio can spend more than $4 million.
Universal executives declined to comment on how much they were spending to promote Seabiscuit. One competitor said that according to advertising rates, the studio had taken out trade magazine ads with a face value of more than $2 million already. But the dollar amount paid by the studio is likely to be lower than that because of discounts, although still significant. Marc Shmuger, vice chairman of Universal Pictures, said the film's academy campaign coincided with the DVD's December release to give both initiatives maximum exposure. (Universal used a similar approach with the 2000 film ''Erin Brockovich,'' which was nominated for five Oscars and won one.) Six million units of ''Seabiscuit'' have been sold, Mr. Shmuger said, with DVD revenues expected to outstrip the movie's $120 million domestic theatrical take. ''This movie is a current release,'' he said. As for its Oscar chances, he added, ''We want this movie to be in the running and it deserves to be.''
''Seabiscuit's'' feel-good theme struck a nerve with critics and moviegoers alike. ''The whole purpose of an ad campaign is for people to recollect why they loved the film,'' said the Oscar historian Damien Bona.
No awards season is complete without a conspiracy, real or imagined. In this case Anthony Minghella was projected early on to earn a Directors Guild nod for Miramax's ''Cold Mountain,'' particularly after he garnered a Golden Globe nomination for best director last month. But Mr. Minghella did not get one.
Whatever the reason, the nod from the Directors Guild and another from the Producers Guild of America last week has surely given ''Seabiscuit'' a momentum few expected.
''The fact that the movie is remembered this long after its release may be surprising to some people who may have written it off,'' said Mr. Ross, the director. ''But these are people with independent judgments,'' he said, referring to guild members. ''I don't think you can make someone like a movie they don't.''
Or as one person involved in ''Seabiscuit'' succinctly put it, ''If the worst thing critics can say is that we have too many ads, I'm thrilled.''
