The editorial page of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, traditionally one of the more liberal in the country, has been missing one of its distinctive elements in recent weeks, since its editorial cartoonist quit after one request too many to make his illustrated barbs a more bipartisan affair.
John Sherffius, The Post-Dispatch's editorial cartoonist since 1998, resigned last month, the culmination of disagreements with Ellen Soeteber, the editor of the newspaper, over what she viewed as excessive criticism of President Bush and Republicans, according to senior staff members.
The catalyst for his resignation: a cartoon about the appropriations bill passed last month by the House. Mr. Sherffius's original drawing, which he delivered on Dec. 9, featured Republican elephants partying. One elephant rode a pig representing pork-barrel projects. The caption read, ''The party of fiscal discipline.''
William Freivogel, deputy editor of the editorial page, asked Mr. Sherffius why there were no donkeys. Mr. Sherffius said he did not include donkeys in the cartoon because Republican projects received most of the funds, citing an article in The Los Angeles Times. That explanation satisfied Mr. Freivogel.
At the request of Christine A. Bertelson, the editor of the editorial page, Mr. Sherffius redrew the pig, transforming it into a donkey. but Ms. Bertelson said the donkey looked too forlorn for the celebration. The discussion ended up in Ms. Soeteber's office. That was when she said the cartoon was ''too one-sided,'' according to people with knowledge of the conversation.
Ms. Soeteber told Mr. Sherffius that if he were not willing to take more direction, he should look elsewhere for his future, according to senior newsroom staff members. Ms. Soebeter denied saying that.
Mr. Sherffius redrew the cartoon again, which ran the next day, and resigned. ''Editors ask for changes all the time,'' Mr. Sherffius said. ''That's fine. It's part of the process. Sometimes I agree and sometimes I don't. I felt this was a little different.''
There is no industry standard over how much freedom an editorial cartoonist should have, in part because they are so few in number. Only about 100 cartoonists work full-time in the United States and their independence varies.
Mr. Sherffius was hired in 1998 by the editor then, Cole Campbell, and Ms. Bertelson after he was recommended by a panel of Pulitzer Prize-winning cartoonists, including Mike Peters, who was born and raised in St. Louis. ''We certainly knew what we were getting in John and that's what we wanted,'' Ms. Bertelson said. Mr. Campbell never interfered with the six cartoons a week that Mr. Sherffius drew with one exception. He held up running one cartoon until there was an editorial to accompany it, according to a senior member of the newsroom.
Ms. Soeteber said her perspective on the role of the editorial page is based on the Pulitzer platform written by Joseph Pulitzer, the newspaper's founder, upon his retirement in 1907 and carved into marble in the lobby of The Post-Dispatch.
''I take very seriously the words that we will be 'drastically independent' of any political party,'' she said. ''The platform commands us to be nonpartisan. We are the only daily in St. Louis,'' she added, ''so we have an important role to play in the leadership of the region.'' (The Post-Dispatch's major daily competitor, The St. Louis Globe-Democrat, ceased publication in 1986.)
When asked why she accepted his resignation, Ms. Soeteber said: ''He seemed to have his mind made up. It was wholly his decision.''
Mr. Sherffius is now freelancing editorial cartoons three days a week for his former newspaper, The Ventura County Star in California, while he is job-hunting. The Post-Dispatch is running syndicated cartoons on its editorial page.
