The Democratic presidential contenders grappled on Sunday night with issues of race, taxes and national security in their final debate before next week's Iowa caucuses, getting in sharp jabs at one another on some of the most delicate questions in American politics.
Scrambling to sway undecided voters in the final days of the first presidential contest of 2004, eight of the nine candidates used a forum intended to address issues of special concern to blacks and Latinos to highlight their broad collective differences with Republicans. But under prodding from the two black candidates, they also squared off with one another.
As he has for months, Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, drew most of the fire from his rivals, on issues like the Confederate battle flag and taxes. Polls show that he and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri are locked in a tight race for first place in the precinct caucuses here on Jan. 19.
Dr. Dean faced pointed questioning about his recent and still largely undefined promise to cut payroll taxes, with Mr. Gephardt suggesting that such a plan could weaken the Social Security system. Dr. Dean replied that he would ensure that any cut in payroll taxes would not touch the Social Security trust fund.
In one of the sharper exchanges of the whole campaign season, the Rev. Al Sharpton confronted Dr. Dean with what Mr. Sharpton described as the lack of minority officials in senior positions in Dr. Dean's administration as governor.
''Do you have a senior member of your cabinet that was black or brown?'' Mr. Sharpton demanded, after Dr. Dean had earlier suggested that hiring more minorities was a key to racial understanding in America.
''We had a senior member of my staff on my fifth floor,'' Dr. Dean responded elliptically, in an apparent reference to the executive offices in Vermont.
''No, your cabinet!'' Mr. Sharpton said. Dr. Dean responded quietly: ''No, we did not.''
''Then you need to let me talk to you about race in this country,'' Mr. Sharpton said.
Dr. Dean responded, moments later, ''I will take a back seat to no one in my commitment to civil rights in America.''
At another point, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina lectured Dr. Dean on Southern sensibilities. Dr. Dean had just apologized again for saying last fall that he wanted to be ''the candidate for guys with Confederate flags'' in their pickup trucks. He declared that the flag ''is a painful symbol to African-Americans.''
Mr. Edwards countered that the flag was offensive ''to all Americans.''
The debate revealed no major new differences among the candidates, and for the most part allowed them to use their last joint televised appearance to restate the themes most of them have been sounding in the state for more than a year. But the strains of relentless campaigning were evident in their hoarse voices, sagging faces and short tempers.
Carol Moseley Braun, unfailingly cool and cordial in past debates, seemed roused by the bickering over race. Ms. Braun pivoted off Mr. Sharpton's exchange with Dr. Dean to ask why Mr. Gephardt, as House Democratic leader, had not pressed harder to protect affirmative action programs. And she demanded to know how Mr. Edwards could vote regularly with President Bush in Congress, yet attack Dr. Dean so readily.
''You voted for the Patriot Act,'' she said. ''You voted to deploy the missile defense system. And yet you stand up here and call Howard a hypocrite. This is not right.''
Ms. Braun was just as blunt with Mr. Sharpton, with whom she has long had a tense relationship, suggesting that he was stirring racial divisions before a national television audience.
''It's time for us to talk about what are you going to do to bring people together because people cannot afford a racial screaming match,'' she said. ''We have to come together. We have to come together as one nation to get past these problems.''
Mr. Edwards disputed the details of Ms. Braun's charge, saying, ''Well, Carol, that was a great speech, but what you just said is not right.'' And Mr. Sharpton defended his decision to assail Dr. Dean's record on civil rights, declaring: ''I want him to be accountable, since he brought up race. That's not racial hysteria. That is accountability.''
The combined black and Hispanic population of Iowa in the 2000 census was roughly 5 percent of the state's total populace, meaning that from the candidates' viewpoint, parts of this debate were aimed as much at voters in South Carolina, which votes on Feb. 3, as at caucus-goers here.
The Iowa Black and Brown Forum, founded to represent the interests of blacks and Latinos, has been a feature of the Iowa caucuses for 20 years, and Sunday's encounter was its fifth presidential debate since 1984. This year's caucuses coincide with Martin Luther King's Birthday, and the debate was intended to address issues of particular concern to minorities.
The session started quietly, with candidates apparently trying to emphasize their positive attributes in the final week of the Iowa race. But the moderator's first question challenged Dr. Dean to explain his four-year-old criticisms of the Iowa caucuses as favoring special interests, and the debate turned progressively raucous and was filled with difficult moments for the candidates.
Dr. Dean said, ''I frankly think people are a little tired of having debates about who said what 4 years ago, or who said what 6 years ago, or 8 years ago, or 10 years ago.'' He went on to praise Iowa and New Hampshire for giving ''candidates like me'' a chance.
After the debate, Dr. Dean was the only candidate who did not appear to discuss his performance with reporters, and his campaign manager, Joe Trippi, uncharacteristically cut short an exchange with journalists eager to get his post-debate take.
In the debate, when it was time for Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut to ask a question of his opponents, he offered a long comment on tax policy that finally trailed off as a moderator, Lester Holt of MSNBC, tried to push him to come to a point. The event was broadcast by MSNBC and hosted by Mr. Holt and Maria Celeste Arraras of the Spanish-language network Telemundo.
When it was Dr. Dean's turn to ask a question, he attempted to address it not to an opponent, but to a member of the audience, until the moderator told him that violated the rules, as the audience snickered.
Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts sought, in response to a question from an audience member, to walk from behind the lectern and toward the audience until he realized that he had walked into shadows because the front of the stage was not lighted.
But Mr. Kerry distilled some of the evening's sharpest criticism against Mr. Bush, dismissing the nation's current economic situation as a ''Bush-league recovery.''
He added: ''This recovery is a recovery for those people who have stock. It's a recovery for those people who are able to walk away with the highest salaries.'' And he said that ''those people who run around this country talking about compassionate conservatism have shown compassion only for conservatives and the wealthiest people in the country.'' That led Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio to say: ''The economists who are talking about recovering are the same economists who believe that a certain amount of unemployment is necessary to a functioning economy. Easy for them to say. They have jobs.''
But if the candidates were united in their view of the Republican in the White House, they nevertheless continued to outline differences among themselves. Only Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who has chosen not to compete in Iowa, did not attend.
Mr. Gephardt tried to raise doubts about Dr. Dean's emerging position on the potential for a payroll tax reduction, saying ''my worry is that it would undermine Social Security.'' But Dr. Dean said if he did eventually propose such a cut, ''it will come out of the general fund in the form of a tax credit. We will not touch Social Security.''
At another point, one of the questioners asked if any of the presidential candidates had hired an illegal immigrant. Not a single candidate raised a hand, and all appeared stunned at the question.
Mr. Kerry said that any noncitizen who served in the military should automatically become a naturalized citizen and criticized Dr. Dean for suggesting in an earlier answer that that should not be the case.
Dr. Dean said he supported the philosophy behind the idea but was concerned that young Hispanics would enlist in the military as a route to winning citizenship. ''The concern I have is I don't want Hispanic kids choosing to go to Iraq in order simply to gain citizenship,'' he said.
After Mr. Kucinich questioned how Dr. Dean could balance the budget without cutting Pentagon spending, Dr. Dean replied that he would re-order military priorities. He said he would not build a missile defense system or tactical battlefield nuclear weapons, but instead would focus on other needs like expanding Special Operations Forces.
''This president is not keeping us safe,'' Dr. Dean said.
Mr. Kucinich, who has often delivered some of the biggest laugh lines at the debates, produced another one early in the debate in response to a question about the emphasis he would place on the space program if elected. ''You know, first of all, I've been wondering why the president would, while we're still in Iraq, talk about going to the moon and going to Mars,'' he said. ''Maybe he's looking for the weapons of mass destruction still.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE DEBATE  Correction:  January 15, 2004, Thursday  A front-page article on Monday about the final debate among Democratic presidential candidates before the Iowa caucuses next week, referred imprecisely to Howard Dean's contacts with reporters afterward. While he did not join other candidates taking questions, he indeed spoke with one reporter, for the MSNBC program ''Hardball With Chris Matthews,'' who stopped him in a hallway as he departed.
