Joseph Sulle, 61, doesn't like to lie. But he has told some white lies trying to shield his family from the problems that led him and his wife to be evicted from their home last year and spend three nights sleeping in their car.
When he was fired as a supervisor of security guards shortly before Thanksgiving 2002, he waited until after the holiday to tell his wife, Helen, and their two daughters that it was not a vacation that was keeping him at home.
When he and his wife were evicted from their apartment last November, he told his younger daughter, who was away at college, that they were staying in a motel because of renovation work.
And when Mr. and Mrs. Sulle pulled into a gas station near Co-Op City in the Bronx after having been reduced to living in their car, he asked an employee there if they could sleep in the station's lot because they were lost.
For Mr. Sulle, these were circumstances hard to imagine. ''We're not criminals, we're taxpayers,'' he said.
The Sulles had lived in the same Bronx apartment for eight years and had been paying for college for their daughters.
Their problems began in April 2002, when Mrs. Sulle, 60, who works as a housing and benefits specialist for Sanctuary for Families, a service for domestic violence victims, reinjured her back. She had undergone three operations on the back since a fall at another job a decade earlier.
The new injury kept her in pain, but she continued to go to work until August, when the condition worsened. Mr. Sulle said he lost his job because he sometimes got to work 10 or 20 minutes late because of the time spent caring for his wife in the mornings.
''But as a supervisor you've got to be there before everybody,'' he said. ''I just couldn't walk out of here and leave her un-taken care of.''
Mr. Sulle, who has a degree in industrial engineering, has applied for many jobs and had several interviews, but he suspects that his age has worked against him.
Mrs. Sulle returned to work in December 2002. Mr. Sulle received weekly unemployment checks of $308 for two months, but after that the family relied on the $927 paycheck Mrs. Sulle received every two weeks.
Mrs. Sulle received her pay throughout her illness, but, without Mr. Sulle's income, the family had trouble making ends meet. They missed their $975 April rent payment.
''The landlord was great because he gave us ample time to come up with the money we owed him,'' Mr. Sulle said. ''I told him our situation; he went along with us hoping I would go back to work.''
In May, when it came time to come up with a portion of the $8,000 they pay each year toward their younger daughter's tuition at a private college in New York State, the Sulles had to choose between rent and education. They sent a check to the college, and fell further behind on rent.
They made a rent payment in June, but they received another blow in August, when they found out that they would not be reimbursed for $3,000 in repairs made to their car after an accident in which it was hit by an uninsured driver.
By September, eviction proceedings had begun, and Mr. Sulle asked the Human Resource Administration for help in paying the rent. The agency told Mr. Sulle that if he could come up with half the money he owed, it would lend him the rest.
Mr. Sulle then asked for help from the Community Service Society, one of the seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. Anna Auleley, a case worker at the organization, helped him obtain $1,050 in Neediest Cases funding. She also put him in touch with other organizations, including the Citizens Assistance Bureau and the Coalition for the Homeless, which supplied the remaining money.
Mr. Sulle said that on Nov. 10, the deadline that had been set for the amount owed to be paid, a judge told him that the check from Human Resource Administration had not arrived and that he would be evicted.
On the morning of Nov. 12, Mr. Sulle left to get a newspaper for his job search. When he returned, the city marshall and the landlord were changing the locks on his apartment.
Mr. Sulle went straight to Ms. Auleley's office.
''He came to my door,'' she said. ''I knew something was wrong because when he walked in, he was another person.''
She calmed him and had him to call his wife. Then she obtained additional Neediest Cases money, bringing the total to about $2,000, to help them get back into their apartment.
The Sulles went to a motel in the Bronx. When that money ran out, the couple spent three nights sleeping in their car.
By Nov. 21, the Human Resource Administration check had come through and they were allowed to return to their apartment.
All their problems have not disappeared, but for now, they are back in their apartment. Mr. Sulle has had a followup interview with a security company, and is hopeful he will soon be offered a job.
And for now, at least, Mr. Sulle has no need for more of those little white lies.
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $6,688,556.64  Recorded Thursday: 13,321.00
Total: $6,701,877.64  Last year to date: $7,157,040.35
