Fakri Abdullah al-Qaisi says the vision came to him as it does with all prophets: in communion with God, atop a holy mountain. God's message, he said, was to unite the Sunni Muslims of Iraq.
That was in February, outside Mecca, at the barren Mount Arafat.
Mr. Qaisi returned to Iraq in June, and now has begun to realize his calling. He has brought together 85 leaders of Sunni groups from across the country -- groups often at odds with one other -- to form the State Council for the Sunnis, the first unified political voice for Iraqi Sunnis opposed to American rule.
Since the council first met on Dec. 25, it has demanded the release of more than 70 Sunni clerics detained by the Americans. Muhammad Ahmed al-Rashid, a senior member of the council and of the Muslim Brotherhood here, a highly political sect, has condemned the foreign occupation in long interviews with Al Jazeera, the Arab network.
From Ramadi to Tikrit, from Samarra to Baquba, towns in the so-called Sunni Triangle north and west of Baghdad chafe under the occupation, and insurgents there continue to mount deadly attacks against allied soldiers. The Sunni Arabs were put in power by British colonialists and by Saddam Hussein, himself a Sunni, and people in the area fear the installation of a government dominated by Shiite Muslims, who make up 60 to 70 percent of the population but who have never been given ruling authority in modern times.
In a sign that the council is emerging as a political leader, the two Sunni Islamic parties on the Iraqi Governing Council have joined Mr. Qaisi's group. At a meeting on Wednesday, the Sunni council decided to increase the number of representatives from those parties to five each from three each.
In interviews, the two Governing Council representatives from the parties said there was a need for a unified Sunni voice, and one of them, Mohsen Abdul Hameed of the Iraqi Islamic Party, said, ''The Sunnis in Iraq think their role has been marginalized.''
Mr. Qaisi, a dentist by training, gave a much blunter assessment. ''Our country has been invaded, and all rights of the Sunni people have been affected,'' he said in an office in the Ibn Taimiya Mosque, a stronghold of the conservative Salafiya branch of Sunni Islam. ''Their mosques have been destroyed, along with their houses, and Sunnis have been killed. Only the Sunnis are oppressed by the American invasion.''
American soldiers have recently raided prominent mosques, alienating many Sunnis, with protesters at rallies calling for jihad. The most inflammatory incident took place on Jan. 1, when soldiers broke up a meeting at the Ibn Taimiya Mosque and arrested 32 people, including Imam Mahdi al-Sumaydai, the mosque's senior cleric.
Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt, an American military spokesman, said soldiers had found explosives, Kalashnikov rifles, boxes of bullets, mortars, rocket-propelled grenade launchers and other weapons.
Military officials showed reporters a videotape of the soldiers carting away weapons, but Mr. Qaisi and the imams at the mosque denied the existence of a cache. Such a discovery could indicate a link between senior members of the new Sunni council and Iraqis engaged in the armed resistance.
The State Council for the Sunnis used the raid as the basis for one of its first ultimatums. ''We particularly denounce the raid on the Ibn Taimiya Mosque and in general on the other Sunni mosques,'' the statement said. ''We ask for the occupation forces to stop this upsetting and insulting process if they want to avoid bad consequences.''
Mr. Qaisi shook his head when asked whether the statement implied violence. Instead, he said, it meant public opinion would move against the Americans.
Since Mr. Hussein fell from power, no political group has emerged as the voice of the insurgency. But it is only a matter of time, terrorism experts say. ''Typically it's the armed wing that gets traction,'' said Bruce Hoffman, a terrorism expert at the RAND Corporation. ''Once they've gotten that publicity, they develop a political wing that's a more acceptable face.''
Mr. Qaisi is quick to deny any connection between guerrilla fighters and his council. He said that the council was the voice of the ''opposition,'' not the ''resistance,'' and that his members wanted to engage in peaceful discourse with the occupiers. At the same time, he said, the council has members from virulently anti-American parts of Iraq like Falluja and Tikrit. ''When the resistance sees the Sunnis getting their rights,'' he said, ''they'll calm down, and their activities will stop.''
Many of the members are clerics, and about 40 percent come from outside Baghdad, Mr. Qaisi said. The council is expected to expand to 140 members, he added, and will choose permanent leaders from each of the main branches or groups of Sunni Islam in Iraq -- Salafiya, Sufism and Muslim Brotherhood.
Hatred between the hard-line Salafis and the mystical Sufis has often boiled over into armed conflict over the centuries, with the Salafis accusing the Sufis of introducing alien concepts into Islam. The Muslim Brotherhood in Iraq went underground in the early 1970's when Mr. Hussein began jailing its leaders and has resurfaced only recently.
The council leadership plays down suggestions that politically uniting the Sunnis brings Iraq closer to religious conflict. ''This is about politics, not about religion,'' said Mahmood al-Mashhadany, a spokesman for the council's Salafiya branch.
On a recent afternoon, leaders from the three branches prayed at the sprawling Umm al Qura Mosque before meeting to select a 13-member interim leadership committee.
Previously known as the Mother of All Battles Mosque, it was ordered built by Mr. Hussein in honor of the first Persian Gulf war in 1991, complete with minarets resembling Scud missiles and the barrels of AK-47's.
But Mr. Qaisi said he and other council members were not supporters of Mr. Hussein. Many were arrested under his rule and were tortured in the Abu Ghraib prison, he said. There, in the 1980's, Salafi leaders organized hundreds of cells that would carry on the religious struggle, come what may, he said.
That struggle continues today, he added, but against a different oppressor.
''We know that American people like freedom and respect human rights,'' Mr. Qaisi said. ''We thought that America gave many benefits to humanity this century.
''But American soldiers have made big mistakes here in Iraq. There are foolish men in America, men with no culture or education. It's like we had a dream of America, and we woke up from this dream.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: IRAQI FACTIONS
