THE MAN IN MY BASEMENT  A Novel  By Walter Mosley  249 pages. Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.
Walter Mosley's anomalous new novel begins with a sharp little jolt. In a lean, neat, vaguely ominous first sentence, Mr. Mosley, author of the Easy Rawlins detective stories, establishes that this time his idea of mystery will be more unsettling than usual.
Those opening words are as follows: '' 'Mr. Blakey?' the small white man asked.'' With this cryptic line, charged as it is with implicit tension about race and power, ''The Man in My Basement'' begins its strange, unexpected journey.
Mr. Blakey is Charles Dodd-Blakey, and he lives on eastern Long Island, outside New York City. His family has been there for generations, and Charles still occupies his grandparents' home. It is at this house that a Mr. Anniston Bennet of Greenwich, Conn., ''with eyes as blue as you please,'' materializes one day, asking if he can rent the Blakey basement.
''We didn't take in white boarders in my part of the Sag Harbor,'' observes Charles, who is keenly attuned to the exact skin color of everyone in this story. On the other hand, no previous member of the Blakey family seems to have failed quite as spectacularly as Charles has. Recently he has been fired from his job as a bank teller under a cloud of suspicions about embezzlement. This will not make it easy for him to find another job. ''Thirty-three years old and you don't even have two nickels to rub together,'' an aunt scolds him. ''What would your mother say?''
Charles answers: ''My mother is dead. Maybe you could leave her alone.''
In other words, Charles has reasons to be amenable to Anniston Bennet's offer once he begins to take it seriously. For one thing, it is the only offer he has. For another, his cleanup of the house and basement yields 51 empty liquor bottles, and the proceeds from those empties are what Charles has to live on. So the eerie white guy (''his blue eyes were a perpetual shock, but there was no wonder or magic in the rest of his face'') who offers an outlandishly high bid for the basement becomes impossible to resist.
The reader will be drawn along by sheer puzzlement at first: what does Bennet actually want? Without spoiling the story's suspense, it is safe to reveal that he seeks a very particular form of refuge, and that he has not chosen the Blakey house at random. Though he knows precious little about it, Charles has a distinguished heritage that emerges during this book's tug of war. Yet he has been content to go through life as an affable loser:
''Even my best friends simply accepted what they saw. The cardplayer with a sharp tongue who couldn't back up half the things he said. The petty thief, the man across the street, dead Samuel's son. I might as well have been a tree at the end of the block. People saw me well enough to walk around, but that was just about it.''
''The Man in My Basement'' walks a thin line past obvious pitfalls. As the battle of nerves between Charles and his tenant escalates, the book risks falling into pure gamesmanship. It also courts allegory, since Bennet begins to emerge as a symbolic figure of menace. ''With a word from me, your life could end,'' he will eventually tell Charles. ''Maybe just with a gesture. A sentence could level a city block or blow a jetliner out of the sky. A dream could destroy Philadelphia. A disagreement could throw western Africa into famine for five years. You see it every day on TV, but no one listens. People like me move around, but no one knows our names.''
To his great credit, though, Mr. Mosley makes this such a lucid, sinuous book that its big issues are handled with idiosyncratic grace. Neither Charles nor his well-heeled boarder is allowed to become a stick figure or a metaphor; both are drawn with compelling immediacy and described with impressive precision. And Charles is not forced through one of those eye-opening, transformative experiences that lesser writers hold so dear. At the end of this story he has learned a great deal about the world and about himself. He has undergone an awakening, but he is still ''doing very little to make life grand.''
In this successful and intriguing departure from his usual work, Mr. Mosley creates a substantial subplot about heritage and history. Among the secrets held by the Blakey house is a trio of African masks that seem to summon Charles' family history and that will eventually be treated as treasures.
Because Mr. Mosley remains a zesty and warmblooded popular writer, he manages to produce a beautiful female curator who arrives to examine the Blakey antiques and sticks around for other reasons. There are other women in this story as well, described with life-affirming gusto. Only Charles's brief fling with a rich, feckless white woman from a horsy set seems tacked onto the book without much reason.
''The Man in My Basement'' rises to a level of stirring outrage as Bennet begins to tip his political hand. ''The pang of nationalism can make a man as blind and dense as a stone,'' he tells Charles, in one of the book's most stinging moments. ''He will cut off his own arm, kill his children, for a flag and a 10-cent song.''
In the end this audacious novel is about facing up to such brutal realities. But it is also about seeking refuge. And when Bennet decides to hole up in the Blakey basement with ''The Alexandria Quartet,'' ''Moby-Dick,'' Huck Finn, T. S. Eliot and Thomas Pynchon, it's not hard to empathize. Although Bennet willfully cuts himself off from current events, he says, ''I know about the Renaissance as if it happened this morning.''
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
