As Oklahoma forward Johnnie Gilbert's dunk ricocheted off the back rim, Sooners Coach Kelvin Sampson screamed in disbelief.
As a Connecticut fast break whizzed by him, Sampson took out his anger by kicking an advertisement in front of the Gampel Pavilion scorers' table. Connecticut center Emeka Okafor finished the break with a two-handed dunk, sending the crowd of 10,167 into a frenzy.
In No. 1 UConn's 86-59 victory over No. 6 Oklahoma on Sunday, that scene was telling, as the Huskies sped past the Sooners, who looked on helplessly.
''It'd take me a while to think of a game where we played too much better that,'' Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun said. ''It really would. It certainly wasn't this year.''
After struggling for a 1-point victory at Rutgers on Tuesday, Connecticut (13-1) tightened its grip on the country's top ranking by mowing over the Sooners (10-1) with a stifling man-to-man defense and an overwhelming fast break.
Okafor's 21 points, 10 rebounds and 9 blocked shots led the Huskies, who had five players score in double digits and held Oklahoma to 27.4 percent shooting from the field.
''You don't have to go far out on a limb to say that team can win the national title,'' Sampson said.
The black scuff marks that Sampson's loafer left on the white advertisement in front of the scorers' table was the only mark Oklahoma made. With a chance to solidify its top-10 ranking and gain momentum heading into the Big 12 Conference schedule, Oklahoma fell flat.
The Sooners, who were led by the freshman point guard Drew Lavender's 22 points, missed 23 of their first 27 shots. By the time that run ended, the Sooners trailed by 28-10 and never threatened to get back in the game. At one point, Oklahoma trailed by 40 points. The 27-point loss was Sampson's second worst at Oklahoma.
''We got a little spooked,'' Sampson said, ''and it got away from us.''
Credit much of that to Okafor, who ran the break with aplomb and used his bouncy 6-foot-10 frame to control the paint. Okafor's 21 points came on 10-of-14 shooting and included a variety of hooks, dunks and turnaround jumpers.
Okafor's most impressive play came with just over five minutes remaining in the second half when the 6-10 Oklahoma center Jabahri Brown leapt to dunk the ball from close range and Okafor rejected him cleanly.
Brown's final statistics testified to Okafor's dominance. Brown, a senior, finished with 1 point, 4 rebounds and 5 turnovers. He missed all six shots he attempted.
''Okafor is the star, and he doesn't play like it,'' Sampson said. ''He plays every game like it is his last game, and I respect that.''
Earlier in the season, Connecticut played inconsistently at home in Preseason National Invitation Tournament games against Yale and Nevada before losing to Georgia Tech at Madison Square Garden.
Since that loss, the Huskies have won 10 consecutive games. But none were more impressive than Sunday's.
''We wanted to show everyone we belong where we're ranked,'' Okafor said, ''and that we've come a long way.''
The biggest difference for Connecticut has been the addition of the freshman forward Charlie Villanueva, who was held out while the N.C.A.A. investigated his eligibility. Villanueva handles the ball and shoots with the proficiency of a guard.
Villanueva made two 3-pointers Sunday, grabbed 7 rebounds and finished with 11 points in 21 minutes.
Sampson said that Villanueva, who is scoring 15.1 points a game, gives the Huskies a third offensive threat to go with Okafor and Ben Gordon (11 points, 7 assists).
Oklahoma's biggest offensive weapons were shut down Sunday. The Sooners' leading scorer, the sophomore guard De'Angelo Alexander, shot 2 of 9 from the field and finished with 6 points. Although Lavender finished with 22 points, 11 came in the game's final three minutes, with the outcome long decided. Taliek Brown, Connecticut's 6-1 point guard, outmuscled the 5-7 Lavender, neutralizing his quickness.
''Let's face it, Connecticut is better than we are,'' Sampson said. ''If we won this game, it would have been a huge upset, but I expect us to compete better than we did.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
