A half-dozen golfers gathered outside the Dyker Beach Golf Course in Brooklyn yesterday morning. Conditions were not ideal, considering it was still dark and the radio was reporting a temperature of 8 degrees at Central Park.
But the men of the Shoreview Golf Club eagerly changed into their golf shoes, sipped their coffee and stared out at the nearby dog run. They did not seem to be fazed by -- or even to notice -- the fact that many dogs were wearing sweaters heavier than their own sweatshirts and windbreakers.
The roughly 100 members of the club, founded in 1930, play Sunday mornings year-round, and a few die-hards take pride in playing all winter, regardless of weather.
One golfer, Phil Buencamino, 50, looked at his car thermometer and said optimistically, ''Wait, I've got 10 degrees now.''
Inside the clubhouse, Chris Grossbach, the club's assistant general manager, pulled a seat up to a wood-burning stove, flipped on the television and pronounced the golfers ''nuts, totally nuts.'' But they called him the crazy one for not taking advantage of an empty golf course on a sunny day.
On the first tee, Terry Byrne, 49, declared, ''This ain't crazy, this is healthy. Come on, breathe that nice, crisp New York City air.''
Greg Martucci, 50, rummaged for a ball in his golf bag and pulled out a plastic bottle.
''Anyone want sunscreen?'' he quipped.
Mr. Martucci, who owns a newspaper distribution company, explained that some members have spent the winter golfing in Florida. ''Wimps,'' he chortled, exhaling a cloud of white vapor. ''Bunch of wimps.''
Mr. Byrne teamed with Sal Sclafani, 65, who owns a pipe-welding business. Mr. Martucci chose Mr. Buencamino, a retired sanitation supervisor. The men call their regular Sunday golf game the Winter Tour, but it's really just a chance to compete, razz each other and bet on everything that moves.
In conventional golf, good shots land softly on the green like darts; in winter golf, a bump-and-run style is used on the hard ground. But yesterday, it was like playing golf on the moon. The balls seemed to bounce endlessly along the rock-hard fairways.
Each shot had two parts: the usual airborne phase and then the long, bouncing, rolling journey over the hard ground. Grounders rolled up near the hole, and pretty, soaring shots landed next to the flagstick but bounded way past it. The Shoreview golfers aimed for 30 to 40 yards in front of their target, and let the ball bounce to the hole.
Mr. Byrne, a master of the method, wound up 1-under-par after nine holes.
Golf balls were frozen solid and had all the zip of a rock. Any shot not hit cleanly off the ground sent stinging shock waves up the men's arms. On the third hole, Mr. Byrne smacked his drive and wound up cracking the ball nearly in half. The golfers smoked cigars and wore gloves between shots.
Even sticking the tee into the ground was impossible. It was frozen solid. Some golfers suggested use pre-existing holes. Others advocated a twist-and-push technique or squeezing the tee between grass clumps. Mr. Byrne left nothing to chance: He carried a hammer and an awl to punch a hole in the ground.
Dyker attracts winter golfers because the putting greens are kept open all year long and because less snow accumulates in its location near New York Harbor.
''In the summer, it's crowded, but in the winter it's our own personal course,'' said Jim Damone, 46, a Wall Street executive with a 15 handicap. ''Guys pay $200,000 in country club fees and don't even get that.''
He stood outside the clubhouse and saw some Shoreview members teeing off. ''I can't believe it,'' he said. ''It's 10 degrees out here and there's a wait on the first tee.''
It was Brooklyn, after all, where the gentlemanly edicts of golf etiquette do not always apply. On the third green, Mr. Martucci surveyed his putt, plumbing the line by holding his putter up to his eye.
''Look, he's lining it up,'' taunted Mr. Sclafani, who wore work boots, jeans and a hooded sweatshirt. ''Like he doesn't play this green six days a week.''
The match was getting tight and Mr. Byrne, a plumbing supervisor for the city's Housing Authority, disrupted Mr. Martucci's putt on one hole by coughing loudly during the stroke. Mr. Martucci returned the favor on the next green by faking a sneeze during Mr. Byrne's stroke and then rooting against his ensuing tee shot.
''Hit the tree, hit it,'' Mr. Martucci yelled at Mr. Byrne's errant drive.
After the round, Mr. Byrne said he had to quit, to repair exploded pipes at a friend's house.
''Come on, what's more important?'' Mr. Sclafani said, and the two headed back to the course.
