The Nasdaq stock market will announce today that a number of blue-chip companies on the New York Stock Exchange, including Charles Schwab and Hewlett-Packard, have decided to dual-list their shares on Nasdaq and the Big Board, several people briefed on the matter said yesterday.
The dual listings are the fruit of an aggressive campaign by Nasdaq and Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest mutual fund company, to chip away at the New York exchange's dominant market position in the wake of a series of trading and governance scandals.
While these companies will maintain their primary listing at the Big Board, that they are acceding to Nasdaq's blandishments underscores the degree to which the continuing controversy over the pay package awarded to Richard A. Grasso, the New York exchange's former chairman, has allowed electronic competitors to make competitive inroads.
Several former stock exchange directors have cited the controversy over Mr. Grasso's pay as a contributing factor to the dual listings.
Other companies contacted by Nasdaq include Pfizer and the American International Group. Spokesmen for both companies said they were considering the merits of a dual listing.
Nasdaq, Hewlett-Packard and Schwab declined to comment. A spokesman for Fidelity said it supported the Nasdaq effort. The Wall Street Journal first reported the dual-listing developments last week.
Still, the publicity boon to Nasdaq notwithstanding, the dual listings are unlikely to result in an immediate migration of trading from the Big Board to Nasdaq, experts say.
The New York Stock Exchange controls 80 percent of the United States market in its listed shares, with Nasdaq handling 10 percent to 13 percent. There is no indication yet that the dual listings will result in companies' abandoning the Big Board, with trading thinner in these stocks at Nasdaq.
''The enemies of the exchange smell blood in the water,'' said Matt Andresen, head of global trading at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company. ''But while dual listing is a departure from precedent, it does not affect liquidity on the exchange.''
Among the stock exchange's most vocal critics has been Fidelity. As one the exchange's largest customers -- its trades can represent as much as 5 percent of daily volume -- its views carry significant weight.
Fidelity executives have long complained to the stock exchange that its trading model, which relies on a network of specialist traders to help investors arrive at the best possible price for a stock, is flawed and hinders its ability to trade quickly and with anonymity. They have been active supporters of the electronic commercial networks, hailing these as speedier and more efficient ways of trading stocks than the New York Stock Exchange's.
Nasdaq, the traditional home of technology companies, has for years been a vigorous competitor of the Big Board. During the leadership of Mr. Grasso, who was probably the most successful salesman in the exchange's history, the New York exchange fended off attempts by Nasdaq to persuade companies listing on it to defect to Nasdaq. Aside from offering the cachet of being listed on the world's most prominent exchange, Mr. Grasso could also promise greater ease in trading stocks.
But Mr. Grasso's ignominious departure, as well as accusations that New York Stock Exchange specialist firms violated exchange rules by trading ahead of customers for their own advantage, has given impetus to Nasdaq and other electronic competitors -- spurred on by Fidelity -- to promote their electronic trading system as a viable alternative to the Big Board.
In many ways, the decision by John S. Reed, the interim chairman, to hire John A. Thain, the president of Goldman Sachs, to be chief executive at the exchange, was an attempt to defuse the New York Stock Exchange's critics in this regard.
At Goldman, Mr. Thain was an active participant in, as well as a proponent of, the firm's aggressive investment program in a wide range of electronic trading platforms that aimed to compete with the Big Board.
While some of the companies considering a dual listing, like the American International Group, have been outspoken critics of the Big Board's specialist system, executives at the other companies have said that their decision was driven more by a desire to heighten their status on Nasdaq as well as to spur the New York exchange to become more technologically innovative in coming years.
For Hewlett-Packard, the decision is a logical one. As one of the nation's oldest technology companies, up to 30 percent of its shares already trade on the Big Board. By getting a dual listing, it will receive the benefit of added investor exposure from Nasdaq.
Still, Catherine Kinney, a co-president of the New York Stock Exchange, said: ''We don't understand what the benefit is to these companies. These companies have an excellent market on the N.Y.S.E. and get the best price 93 percent of the time.''
