Brett Favre looked over his left shoulder and walked to the sideline Sunday, staring at the spot where his final throw drifted like a balloon and fell into the hands of Philadelphia Eagles safety Brian Dawkins.
It was a bad throw, even for a gambler like Favre, and he could not take it back after Dawkins skipped downfield and returned the interception 35 yards, carrying momentum and all of the magic that had belonged to Favre and the Green Bay Packers.
After Dawkins was finally felled at the Packers' 34-yard line, Eagles quarterback Donovan McNabb moved his team into position, and David Akers converted a 31-yard field goal to lift the Eagles to a 20-17 overtime victory against the Packers at Lincoln Financial Field in a National Football Conference divisional playoff.
The victory propelled the Eagles to the N.F.C. championship game next Sunday, when they will be host to the Carolina Panthers.
''All I saw was the ball coming down,'' said Dawkins, who dropped into coverage while eight of his teammates pressured Favre into an awkward throw toward Javon Walker. ''A blitz was the right call at that time.''
For Favre, who had become a sentimental favorite after his father, Irvin, died unexpectedly on Dec. 21, the defeat ended a run of inspired football. He did not speak to reporters after the game.
''They said destiny,'' Packers safety Darren Sharper said of Green Bay's dash to the playoffs, ''but on the other side of the field is a team trying to knock you off, and that's what they did today.''
On a night with temperatures in the 20's, McNabb rescued his team from a 14-0 deficit to send the Eagles to their third straight appearance in the N.F.C. championship game. In the Eagles' two previous trips, they have fallen short of the Super Bowl.
McNabb finished with 21 completions in 39 attempts for 248 yards and 2 touchdowns. He rushed for 105 yards, breaking the single-game postseason rushing record for a quarterback, set by Otto Graham on Dec. 24, 1950.
McNabb also carved out a comeback in a style of the game's great quarterbacks, making all of the plays he needed as time dwindled.
With the Eagles trailing, 17-14, McNabb faced unyielding pressure, including a fourth-and-26 from the Eagles' 26 with 1 minute 12 seconds left in the fourth quarter.
In the huddle, Eagles running back Duce Staley spoke to himself. ''You have to believe,'' Staley said. ''Even now, you have to believe.''
At the line of scrimmage, McNabb dropped back and fired a strike over the middle to receiver Freddie Mitchell, a completion that went for 28 yards and saved the Eagles.
''It was a great play by Freddie,'' McNabb said. ''That really shows the determination, the heart, the drive that we have.''
McNabb, who misfired on six of his first seven pass attempts, showed the instinct to persevere. After the completion to Mitchell, McNabb slowly moved his team deeper into Green Bay territory with a 3-yard run and a 10-yard pass to Todd Pinkston, the ball finally resting on the Packers' 19-yard line.
With 10 seconds left in regulation, Akers, who had missed a 33-yard attempt earlier, converted a 37-yard field goal to send the game into overtime.
The Packers had several chances to silence the Eagles in regulation, but they failed to cash in on huge contributions from Ahman Green (25 carries, 156 yards) and receiver Robert Ferguson (4 catches, 65 yards, 2 touchdowns).
In the second quarter, Green Bay drove to the Eagles' 1 and settled for nothing when Green was stopped after he tripped over the leg of Packers guard Mike Wahle. The miscue kept Philadelphia within striking distance, down by only 14-7.
''We made a fourth-and-1 against Tampa and Philly this year,'' Packers Coach Mike Sherman said. ''I felt confident about our offensive line, the way they blocked this year, and our back, who I think is one of the best ones in football.''
The Packers also faced a fourth-and-1 at the Eagles' 41 with 2:30 left in the game, but Sherman chose to punt, setting the stage for McNabb's rally.
After an inconsistent first half, McNabb changed tactics and used his legs to make plays to cut into Green Bay's lead. If Eagles receivers were covered, McNabb squeezed the football and ran, gaining yards at double-digit clips.
His best footwork ended in a pass, when he avoided two Green Bay defensive linemen and fired a 12-yard touchdown pass to Pinkston in the corner of the end zone, tying the score at 14-14 on the first play of the fourth quarter.
The leadership was reminiscent of the best moments of Favre's career, and for a time, Favre was up to the task. He finished 15 for 28 for 180 yards, 2 touchdowns and an interception.
The Packers' defense created the first turnover when cornerback Mike McKenzie chased down McNabb, who was sprinting to his left. McKenzie grabbed McNabb's legs and he stumbled, losing his balance and dropping the football. Packers linebacker Nick Barnett recovered on the Eagles' 40.
Favre, sensing the moment, pounced. On first-and-10, he dropped back to pass as Ferguson ran a deep post pattern against cornerback Sheldon Brown, who replaced the veteran Troy Vincent, who sat out with a strained hip flexor. Favre threw a dart over Brown's head to Ferguson for a touchdown that staked Green Bay to a 7-0 lead.
McNabb tried to atone on Philadelphia's next drive, bursting through the line of scrimmage for a 41-yard run to the Green Bay 15, but the Eagles faltered again when Akers missed a field-goal attempt.
Instead of booing or ripping the seats out of the hinges, the usually demonstrative Eagles fans sat on their hands for much of the night, searching for warmth or comfort until it was safe to scream.
Soon enough, there was renewed vigor on the Eagles' sideline as McNabb carried Philadelphia, the city and the team, past Green Bay and Favre.
''This one is for Donovan McNabb,'' Mitchell said. ''Every game, he brings something new.''
PRO FOOTBALL
