When two dozen executives from Verizon Communications and Nortel Networks uncorked the Champagne at Ristorante DeGrezia on East 50th Street in Manhattan last Wednesday evening, they were celebrating much more than a new equipment contract.
By granting Nortel an exclusive 18-month deal to supply the equipment that sends phone calls as digital data like that used over the Internet, Verizon, the nation's biggest phone company, had given a huge lift to a technology that some industry executives say could be the most important development in public telecommunications networks since analog switches made way for digital equipment two decades ago.
Neither company would affix a dollar amount to the deal, but Verizon has said that if demand warrants, it will spend up to $2 billion by the end of next year updating its network with Internet-based technology.
Nortel, despite being a longtime leader in marketing telephone network equipment, has had little to celebrate in the last three years. During the industry's protracted slump, it has shed two-thirds of its staff, reducing its work force to 36,000, and vacated dozens of plants and offices. Little more than a year ago, its stock languishing at less than a dollar, Nortel was in danger of being delisted from the New York and Toronto exchanges.
By last Friday, Nortel's stock had climbed to $6.15, up more than 29 percent since the Verizon deal was announced two days earlier.
''It's pretty exciting news for both parties,'' said Blaik Kirby, a senior vice president at Adventis, a consulting firm in Boston. ''It will certainly spur the equipment market.''
So far, most of the equipment sold for Internet-based phone communications has been to big corporate users. And the extent to which Verizon or other big carriers will actually back up their visions with money depends on how quickly customers embrace Internet-based telephone services.
With this vote of confidence by Verizon, Mr. Kirby predicted that other phone companies would accelerate their plans for the new technology, known as voice over Internet protocol, or VoIP.
Even some of the other three dozen equipment suppliers that compete for Verizon's business found some consolation in the Internet phone deal. ''Nortel is in first with Verizon, and we acknowledge that,'' said Richard Muldoon, a spokesman for Lucent Technologies, the manufacturer based in Murray Hill, N.J., whose switches make up more than half of Verizon's existing digital network. Like Nortel, Lucent has been battered by the telecommunications slump.
Mr. Muldoon says he sees plenty of opportunities ahead in the Internet phone business because the new technology ''is just beginning to shape itself, and it will be many years before it plays itself out.''
Susan Spradley, the president of Nortel's wireline network unit, added that, for the first time since digital telephone switches replaced analog ones in the 1980's, ''this is an opportunity to remap the share of different competitors in the market.''
If all goes to plan, Internet switching technology will enable phone companies and cable operators to use their own networks and Internet ''backbone'' networks as conduits for a host of new voice, data and video services. ''Instead of leaving voice mail, we'll be leaving video mail,'' said Mark A. Wegleitner, Verizon's chief technology officer, citing one example of the applications Verizon envisions.
''We are convinced that this technology is ready,'' Mr. Wegleitner said.
The technology breaks voice conversations into small packets of data, which are dispersed over any number of possible routes, mixed with other people's data transmissions, and then sorted out at the receiving end. The approach is considered much more efficient than the conventional telephone network, which routes calls via circuit switches. A single phone call ties up an entire network circuit. Moreover, packet-switching gear takes up less space than circuit switches, potentially allowing phone companies to use fewer and smaller central switching offices.
Michael O'Hara, vice president for marketing at Sonus Networks, an equipment supplier based in Westford, Mass., estimated that installing a packet-switching network could be done for about a third the cost of a circuit switching system, and that operating savings could be 50 percent to 60 percent.
So far, many phone companies have expressed interest in the technology but have held off placing substantial orders while they size up their competitors' intentions. Some analysts and customers have also questioned whether the quality of packet-based telephone signals yet matches that of existing phone service.
AT&amp;T, the long-distance carrier, has said that it plans to use Internet technology as a way to compete more effectively for local telephone customers. And Time Warner Cable, which signed a deal with Sprint and MCI last month to help it offer Internet-based phone service to its customers, is but one of several cable companies pursuing the technology.
But most carriers so far have committed themselves only to relatively modest projects. Qwest Communications, a big regional phone company, has started an Internet-based telephone service in Minnesota; Sprint has a similar pilot project in Kansas. Among cable operators, Cox Digital Telephone, an arm of Cox Communications, is starting its first test of Internet-based phone service in Roanoke, Va.
''Everyone accepts that VoIP is going to be the future in the same way as everyone accepts that optical fiber is the best way to carry traffic,'' said Mr. O'Hara at Sonus, whose customers include Qwest, AT&amp;T, Global Crossing and Deutsche Telekom.
But echoing many others in the industry, Mr. O'Hara said that ''the question is timing.''
The Synergy Research Group, in Phoenix, estimates that the market for voice over Internet protocol equipment grew about 23 percent in 2003, to $589 million. The biggest suppliers so far have included Nortel, Lucent, Sonus and Cisco Systems. The bulk of Cisco's orders have come from the corporate sector, while all Sonus's business is with carriers. Germany's Siemens has won sizable orders from big suppliers to European carriers.
But for carriers, ''you'd have to view Nortel as the overall market leader right now,'' said Jon Arnold, an Internet switching specialist at Frost &amp; Sullivan, a consulting firm in Toronto. He cited Nortel's broad range of hardware, its extensive multimedia applications and a massive installed base of digital switches. ''No other vendor can offer that full suite,'' Mr. Arnold said.
Mr. Wegleitner said Verizon was also swayed by Nortel's ''good migration strategy'' from circuit to packet switches.
Although Nortel has deals with MCI and Sprint, Ms. Spradley said the Verizon deal was especially significant because ''they want to do the full gamut of services, from enterprise to long distance to local offices.''
Nortel owes its comeback at least in part to a policy, even during its long slump, to keep spending close to 20 percent of revenues on research and development, even as it was cutting back on almost every other part of its business. ''They learnt the lesson that you can't skimp on R.&amp;D. in a downturn,'' said Michael Urlocker, an analyst at UBS Securities in Canada. Internet switching, in Mr. Urlocker's view, ''is delivering the right-angle turn that this company needed.''
Nortel added another component to its Internet network products last week with an agreement to sell and install routers made by Avici Systems of North Billerica, Mass. Routers are crucial components of a packet-switching network. Nortel already has a small equity stake in Avici; under the latest deal, it can buy an additional 6.7 percent in the company.
According to Mr. Wegleitner, the rate of introduction for the new Internet-based technology depends on ''a few moving parts'' -- including the response from large business customers and the rate at which existing circuit switching technology is replaced. Ms. Spradley agreed that ''it's hard to quantify what the deployment ramp will be.''
Such reticence reflects a lingering uncertainty on just how much enthusiasm users will show for the unfolding array of Internet-based services.
Mr. Arnold at Frost &amp; Sullivan predicts that total spending on Internet switching equipment will grow almost eightfold over the next four years. But even he sounded a note of caution: ''It all depends on demand. If business and residential customers don't take up VoIP, you'll see these guys go quiet.''
TECHNOLOGY
