The swath of frigid air that swept across the New York region and New England this weekend retreated toward Canada yesterday like a receding glacier, giving numb, chapped residents a brief respite from record-breaking low temperatures.
But weather forecasters warned that the sharp cold, like some meteorological MacArthur, would return. And with a vengeance. Tomorrow night, a cold air mass the size of a subcontinent will surge back over New York, dropping temperatures back to the single digits and bringing heavy winds and as much as six inches of snow on Wednesday night and Thursday morning.
''It's almost like a seesaw pattern,'' said Todd Miner, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University. ''We're going to be getting into generally milder trends, and then it's going to get colder. Enjoy the next two days. Early Thursday could be a pretty nasty time.''
Across Manhattan yesterday afternoon, temperatures crested at a blissful-by-comparison high of 25 degrees, though by late last night a light snow was falling throughout New York City and the surrounding counties -- as far north as Albany and as far south as central New Jersey. It was not expected to amount to much more than an inch by this morning, according to Mike Ekster, a meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Upton, N.Y.
New Yorkers and city services seemed to have adapted to the cold spell. Calls to the city's 311 service line dropped, complaints about heating and hot-water problems were down, and the number of hypothermia calls to 911 had dropped so low that one firefighter murmured, ''Wow,'' when he checked the numbers yesterday afternoon.
A 15-year-old even went swimming in the Hudson River.
But as the city slogged on yesterday, at least one death in the Northeast had been blamed on the cold. In Philadelphia, where temperatures dropped to 4 degrees, an unidentified man was found dead inside a home without heat, The Associated Press reported. Police departments across the region did not report any other deaths caused directly by the cold.
Temperatures across New York State and the Northeast edged higher yesterday. In Boston, where temperatures dropped to a record low of 3 below zero on Saturday, the weather was a more tolerable 23 degrees. In Saranac Lake, N.Y., which recorded Saturday's regional low of 35 below zero, the temperatures rose to 15 degrees, Mr. Miner said.
''It's a heat wave,'' he said.
The coldest spot in the Northeast was Caribou, Me., where the temperatures remained at zero, Mr. Miner said. Scott Theriault, manager of the Gathering, a restaurant in Caribou, said people in town were accustomed to the unforgiving cold, but the weather packed a punch nonetheless.
''I went outside last night to smoke a cigarette, and I got frostbite on my face,'' Mr. Theriault said.
The cold continued to delay trains in New York State and the Northeast for as long as four hours, Amtrak officials said, as workers struggled with frozen hoses and iced-over equipment. But Vernae Graham, an Amtrak spokeswoman, said there were no trains canceled yesterday, compared with four on Saturday.
The cold did not hinder air traffic at La Guardia or Kennedy Airports, Port Authority officials said.
Workers from the New York City Department of Homeless Services continued trolling the city in vans to coax homeless people from the streets into shelters, and Jim Anderson, a spokesman for the department, said the city expected to shelter about 8,500 single adults last night, as it had the night before.
The number of cold-related ambulance calls in the city dropped, from 41 on Saturday to about a dozen as of yesterday afternoon. Firefighter Paul Iannizzotto, a Fire Department spokesman, said calls tend to spike just after a cold snap, and then fall off. ''We haven't had many today,'' he said. ''Basically, all of those people are inside.''
On Saturday, the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development received a record 5,142 calls from people complaining about problems with the heating or hot water in their buildings, said Carol Abrams, a department spokeswoman. As of 9:30 last night, that number stood at 3,843. The average number of calls on a winter day is 1,500, according to the department.
The city's 311 service line, which received 21,543 calls on Saturday, had handled just under 13,000 calls as of 8 last night, said Jonathan Werbell, a spokesman for the mayor.
Throughout New York, people once again wrapped themselves in fur and wool, walked with stiff legs and hunched shoulders, and dashed to the other side of the street to stroll through sun, rather than shadow. But some, like Maury Rubin, the chef and owner of the City Bakery on West 18th Street, said the freezing temperatures were a boon to the hot-cocoa trade.
Mr. Rubin said he sold about 1,300 10-ounce cups of cocoa on Saturday (a record). Yesterday, he stood beside a giant silver soup tureen and watched his customers tip the cocoa down their frozen gullets.
''In weather like this, people come in like they're on a mission,'' he said.
At a newspaper stand in Union Square, a red sponge was a testament to the weather's power to disrupt the smallest corners of life. Normally, the Uddin brothers, Nizam and Salah, who operate the stand, wet their fingers on the sponge to flip through dollar bills. Yesterday, the sponge was frozen.
Frozen, too, was 15-year-old Paul Apostolakis, who stripped down to his bathing suit and plunged into the Hudson River off Battery Park to retrieve a crucifix, part of his Greek Orthodox church's annual celebration of the Epiphany. Normally, four or five men from 20 to 60 years old jump into the river to retrieve the cross, but yesterday, Paul was the only volunteer. He smeared himself with petroleum jelly, and in he went.
''I wanted to wear a wet suit, but I haven't gotten one yet,'' said Paul, a diver at Fort Hamilton High School in Brooklyn.
He emerged from the icy water shivering but grinning, the recipient of, according to tradition, a year's good luck and kisses and hugs from the ladies in fur coats who stood at the pier. ''God bless him,'' said one. ''That's nice. That's nice.''
