Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel said Sunday that he saw no risk that Palestinians could undermine Israel's Jewish identity by gaining a demographic majority, dismissing a reason pressed by some members of his Likud faction for a swift exit from some of the occupied territories.
''I don't see any demographic danger,'' Mr. Sharon said.
Speaking at a news conference with foreign correspondents here, Mr. Sharon also said Israel is willing to resume peace negotiations with Syria, provided that Syria halted all support for terrorism and droppped any conditions of its own for talks.
Negotiations between the sides collapsed in 2000. Syria has recently renewed overtures for talks it first made, without success, last spring.
Mr. Sharon said Syria had continued to sponsor Hezbollah, a Lebanese group that is on the State Department's list of terrorist organizations.
''I believe that what should be done is that Syria should stop the help and support for terrorist agents, and if that happens I believe Israel will be ready,'' he said.
He said that in seeking talks, Syria might merely be trying to escape American pressure in the aftermath of the Iraq war.
While defending Israel's decades-old policy of settling Jews in the occupied territories of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, Mr. Sharon restated his intention to eventually move some of those settlements. As he met with the journalists in Jerusalem, tens of thousands of settlers and their supporters, including ministers in Mr. Sharon's government, gathered to protest in Tel Aviv.
Effi Eitam, the minister of housing and leader of the National Religious Party, told the crowd that he heard ''sounds of weakness'' from the prime minister.
Mr. Sharon said he did not know who was joining in the demonstration. ''Israel is a democracy,'' he said. ''Things are decided not by demonstrators, but by the government.''
An architect of the settlement movement, Mr. Sharon said he understood the concerns of the demonstrators, but added, ''I believe that in order to make peace, Israel will not be able to hold all the Jewish communities.''
Like Israeli doves, some Likud leaders have argued recently that Israel must abandon some of the occupied territory of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, or risk losing a Jewish majority between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea.
Ehud Olmert, the vice prime minister and a Likud leader, stunned his faction last month by telling an Israeli newspaper that Israel risked being seen as an apartheid state. ''I shudder to think that liberal Jewish organizations that shouldered the burden of the struggle against apartheid in South Africa will lead the struggle against us,'' he said.
His comments were widely seen as a trial balloon for Mr. Sharon. The concern for preserving a Jewish majority, long raised by Israel's left, has tended to be framed in moral terms -- that a minority should not rule over a majority, regardless of political rights.
But Mr. Sharon framed the question in practical political terms, saying that Israel could not lose its Jewish majority because it had no plans to annex the occupied territories or to grant Israeli citizenship to Palestinians.
''There is no reason to worry about that,'' he said.
He also said the government was making a major effort to bring more Jews to Israel.
Ahmed Qurei, the Palestinian prime minister, warned Israel on Thursday that Palestinians might demand citizenship rights in a single Jewish-Arab state if Mr. Sharon proceeded with a threat of his own, to impose an Israeli resolution of the conflict if negotiations failed.
But Israeli officials, and some Palestinian officials, have played down that remark, noting that seeking rights as Israelis would be very unpopular among Palestinians.
Mr. Sharon has said his plan, which would include a withdrawal from at least some of the West Bank and Gaza, would leave the Palestinians with less territory than they could gain through negotiations. He has not revealed what areas or Israeli settlements might be vacated.
In the past, Mr. Sharon has criticized the occupation in moral terms, calling it bad for Israel and the Palestinians. ''Holding 3.5 million Palestinians under occupation is a bad thing for Israel, for the Palestinians and for the Israeli economy,'' he said last May.
On Sunday, Mr. Sharon repeatedly stated his overall support, despite some reservations, for the so-called road map, the peace initiative favored by the Bush administration. He said he would proceed with his plan for unilateral separation only if peace efforts fail.
Palestinian officials say they believe that Mr. Sharon's goal is to give up limited areas with large numbers of Palestinians -- the big cities -- to blunt the demographic threat while retaining as much land as possible.
In the West Bank on Sunday, Israeli soldiers shot and killed an 18-year-old Palestinian man. The circumstances were disputed.
The Israeli Army said soldiers in the village of Beita, near Nablus, came under attack with rocks and shot a man who was lighting a homemade gasoline bomb. Palestinians said the young man was sitting on his balcony, studying for an exam.
In another incident on Sunday, a Palestinian suicide bomber blew himself apart in the West Bank, injuring no one else, after spotting an Israeli patrol, the army said.
