If you thought after watching the preview episode of ''The Apprentice'' last Thursday that there could not be enough oxygen in the boardroom for a boldfaced self-promoter apart from the series star, Donald J. Trump, think again.
In an episode to be shown on Thursday, another Donald competes for screen time, in the form of Donny (as he has been known since childhood) Deutsch, chairman and chief executive at the Deutsch advertising agency in New York, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
''Yes, Donny and Donald are both guys who are very sure of themselves,'' said Mark Burnett, who created the reality hit show ''Survivor'' as well as ''The Apprentice.''
''It's Trump being Trump and Donny Deutsch doing what he does,'' Mr. Burnett said. ''That's great for television. You don't want a wallflower.''
Certainly, in media ubiquity Mr. Deutsch could be considered the Mr. Trump of Madison Avenue. He is the host of a talk show on CNBC, the NBC cable sibling, ''The Big Idea with Donny Deutsch;'' is an investor in Deutsch Open City Films, a movie production company; and was part of a well-publicized but ultimately losing bid for New York magazine
''The Apprentice'' presents a contest among 16 would-be tycoons to win a one-year, $250,000 job working for the Trump organization. The contestants, divided into two teams as on ''Survivor,'' vie to triumph in a series of challenges, which include selling lemonade on the streets of Manhattan and producing a rock concert. The task in the coming episode is to create in 48 hours an ad campaign for Marquis Jet, which subleases flight time on personal aircraft.
Early in the episode, Mr. Trump is shown arriving at the Deutsch office in Chelsea, meeting Mr. Deutsch and watching Mr. Deutsch brief the teams on their task. The two men exchange plenty of pleasantries and pufferies. Later, Mr. Deutsch and two managing partners, Peter Gardiner and Linda Sawyer, pick the winning team, then share the decision by speakerphone with Mr. Trump, who accepts the recommendation.
Mr. Deutsch said he and Mr. Trump ''really didn't know each other very well, but we felt like old friends.''
''We both went into our fathers' businesses,'' he added, laughing, ''and my profile, some could say, from a distance, is the same'' as Mr. Trump's.
Mr. Trump, asked if he saw similarities between his reputation and Mr. Deutsch's as supremely assertive and self-confident, replied, ''You're trying to be nice as you say that.''
He and Mr. Deutsch ''hit it off very well,'' Mr. Trump said, joking that their shared given name helped. ''It was romance at first sight.''
STUART ELLIOTT
Media Talk
