How can he hang on?
With opinion polls showing more than half the residents of Connecticut calling for his resignation, prosecutors focusing on his personal finances as part of a federal corruption investigation and lawmakers weighing impeachment proceedings, Gov. John G. Rowland knows that he has lost control of many things that will decide his fate.
But for a combination of reasons, ranging from the personal and political to the legal and financial, friends and aides say, Mr. Rowland, a Republican, has no intention of stepping down. Their comments and an examination of issues affecting the governor's future reveal a man driven by intense pride, a belief that he has done nothing illegal and an excruciating combination of pressures that might make the pain of resigning worse than the agony of hanging on.
''He is a man that knows that his life has been changed forever,'' said Mr. Rowland's budget director, Marc S. Ryan. But now that he has asked for forgiveness, the governor is determined to show that he can still lead, Mr. Ryan said.
It will be a difficult task, according to political observers and those close to Mr. Rowland.
A growing number of lawmakers, even within his own party, are saying they have lost confidence in him.
Already, 5 of the state's 15 Republican senators have called for Mr. Rowland to resign. One day after Democrats in the House called for a special committee to decide whether to move forward with impeachment proceedings, their Republican counterparts agreed, bringing the prospect of a drawn-out legislative inquiry and impeachment hearings closer to reality. And yesterday, Senate Republicans said they unanimously supported forming an investigative committee.
The governor's legal situation has also grown more precarious. Mr. Rowland is the first sitting governor in Connecticut to be served with a subpoena for personal records, as part of a vast federal corruption investigation.
Through all of this, Mr. Rowland has remained largely out of sight, with the exception of an emotional apology televised live across the state last Wednesday night. ''I have lived my own personal nightmare,'' Mr. Rowland said. ''I ask for your forgiveness, perhaps your understanding and even your patience.''
Hoping the Crisis Will Fade
Patience, and more generally, time, are critical elements in Mr. Rowland's survival strategy, top aides say. The hope, according to these aides, is that if people take the time to step back from the daily developments and look at the larger picture, they will realize that Mr. Rowland has not been accused of criminal wrongdoing and that what he has admitted to does not amount to a reason to throw him out of office.
Mr. Rowland's administration has been wrapped up in corruption investigations since 1999, when Paul J. Silvester, a former state treasurer who was appointed by Mr. Rowland, pleaded guilty to racketeering and money-laundering charges. But nothing implicated Mr. Rowland's office directly until last year, when his former deputy chief of staff, Lawrence E. Alibozek, pleaded guilty to accepting cash and gold bribes for steering state contracts.
But Mr. Rowland's poll numbers remained strong.
It was not until a news conference on Dec. 2, when Mr. Rowland insisted that he had not taken gifts or had free work on his private cottage done by many of the same people now at the center of the federal corruption investigation, that things began to unravel.
Mr. Rowland has described that day as the worst of his life.
It was bitingly cold and roads across the state were iced over, which almost led the governor to cancel his appearance in Waterbury, his hometown, according to an aide. There had been a discussion among staff members of whether Mr. Rowland should answer questions about the cottage, which was just coming under the scrutiny of investigators. When it was clear that Mr. Rowland was going to speak about the matter, one aide advised him to be very careful that what he said was true.
On a yellow legal pad, Mr. Rowland divided a page in half and labeled one side ''truth'' and the other ''fiction,'' according to an aide who saw the list. At the time, even the most minor details about what had been done at the cottage were being reported, so the list was equally detailed.
For instance, in the fiction column, Mr. Rowland listed news reports about ''handmade'' cabinets. In the truth category, he wrote that they were from Home Depot, the aide said.
However, that was among the first details to be questioned after the news conference. The cabinetmaker told reporters the same day that his work was most definitely not from Home Depot. Mr. Rowland was also questioned about his hot tub, which he said he bought at a store in Torrington. That response also proved false; it was a gift from an aide.
Ten days later, Mr. Rowland admitted that he had lied, and his office provided details of who had worked on or helped outfit the cottage. The list of those involved was startling because so many of the people were involved in the federal corruption investigation, law enforcement officials said.
As it had done with bad news in the past, the governor's office released his admission late on a Friday afternoon, and Rowland aides seemed hopeful that perhaps the issue would fade away.
That has not happened. Instead, two recent polls of registered voters, by the University of Connecticut and Quinnipiac University, showed that more than 50 percent of respondents thought Mr. Rowland should resign. In the Quinnipiac poll, which had a margin of error of plus or minus 3.1 percentage points, only 13 percent of respondents said they found him honest and trustworthy.
A Need of Income
Amid growing pressure on Mr. Rowland to resign, there are various reasons he chooses to stay, according to friends and aides.
A longtime friend of Mr. Rowland's, who spoke only on the condition of anonymity, said the governor is hobbled by his personal financial situation, which is likely to worsen as a result of the criminal investigation. With his viability as a candidate for higher office in shreds, the friend said, now even the once-reliable prospect of a comfortable job outside government seems in doubt.
''A million dollars, easy, that he could have made from corporate directorships, consulting gigs, speaking fees -- all of that is now off the table because of this,'' the friend said. ''He can't afford to leave.''
Mr. Rowland, 46, was earning about $225,000 a year as a consultant at the time of his divorce in 1994. But after he was elected governor the same year, his former wife, Deborah, agreed to defer tens of thousands of dollars in alimony payments until he left office, according to close associates of both Mr. Rowland and his ex-wife. The governor's salary in Connecticut, now $150,000 a year, was $78,000 at that time.
''He will have to make hundreds of thousands of dollars a year to dig himself out of the hole he is in,'' another friend said.
Mr. Rowland and his second wife, Patricia, are not wealthy, at least by the standards of others who have occupied Connecticut's highest elected offices.
On his annual statements of financial interest, the governor lists a handful of stocks, mutual funds and bank accounts that he shares with his wife. They have no house of their own, except the weekend cottage, which they bought in 1997 for $110,000. The Rowlands live in the executive residence in Hartford and vacation on Block Island, where Mr. Rowland's mother owns a house.
It has been when Mr. Rowland has accepted vacation stays at expensive homes owned by business executives, and allowed contractors and aides to renovate his cottage -- that he has fallen into trouble. Some friends insist that these instances reflect what they say is the governor's longstanding lack of interest in the details of his own finances rather than evidence of corruption.
The aide who described the truth-and-fiction list pointed to Mr. Rowland's yellow legal pad as evidence that the governor was out of touch with the work that was being done at the cottage, who was doing it and who was paying for it.
Another friend, who has known Mr. Rowland since high school and who also would speak only if not publicly identified, said: ''I truly believe that this was not a case of him walking around with his hand out. This is John being stupid with money. For a smart guy, he's never been careful that way.''
The belief that there was no criminal intent in Mr. Rowland's acceptance of favors, this friend said, also fuels the governor's steadfast refusal to step down. ''He honestly, deeply believes,'' the friend said, ''that he did nothing worthy of resignation.''
Legal Issues Could Play Role
While Mr. Rowland may not think that what he has done wrong merits the political equivalent of capital punishment, it is likely that both he and his lawyers have considered the legal ramifications of a resignation.
As the subpoena for his personal records dating to 1995 indicates, Mr. Rowland is clearly in the crosshairs of federal prosecutors.
Whether he resigns from office might have little effect on what charges he would face, if he is charged at all, but it could factor into a plea deal.
''I think this is one of those intangibles that is always in the back of everyone's mind,'' said Michael R. Sklaire, who was part of the team of federal prosecutors that persuaded a jury to convict Joseph P. Ganim, then the mayor of Bridgeport, on corruption charges last year.
''If someone is going to plead guilty and resign, that may factor into having him plead to lesser charges,'' said Mr. Sklaire, who is now in private practice. ''If someone's resigning spares constituents a long impeachment process, these are factors they would consider.''
But resigning could also prove something of a double-edged sword, Mr. Sklaire said. ''By resigning, he's out of the public view,'' Mr. Sklaire said. ''There's less pressure to wrap up the case quickly or bring charges.''
Stanley A. Twardy Jr., a former United States attorney for Connecticut who worked as chief of staff for Mr. Rowland's predecessor, Gov. Lowell P. Weicker Jr., said he did not think Mr. Rowland's legal prospects would change much even if he resigned.
Like so many outside Mr. Rowland's inner circle, Mr. Twardy wondered how the governor could withstand the pressure he is under.
''I would not rule out him stepping down,'' he said. ''Am I telling you he is going to? There are lots of reasons for him not to. But if his support dwindles to the point where he has lost his own party and core supporters, he may not have a choice. And every day we are seeing things closer to that.''
Humbled While Hanging On
Those close to Mr. Rowland say it is not in his nature to quit.
Even his opponents see Mr. Rowland as a fighter.
''This guy is a Waterbury street fighter, and this guy is going to hang on until the last fingernail,'' said State Representative James A. Amann, a Democrat from Milford and the House majority leader. He pointed to recent meetings Mr. Rowland has held with lawmakers from both parties at the governor's residence. ''Patty is serving cookies,'' Mr. Amann said. ''He's got the fireplace going and the dog at his right-hand side. He's a charming guy. He's a funny guy, and he is going to use that personality to buy him time. He's pulling out every chit he has.''
One aide says Mr. Rowland finds solace when he thinks of what President Bill Clinton went through.
But, this aide and others said that while Mr. Rowland once walked with the bravado of a lifelong politician used to winning and getting his way, he no longer jokes the way he used to and has spent the last several weeks talking into the wee hours about how he got to this moment and where he goes from here.
The Senate minority leader, Louis C. DeLuca, who has known Mr. Rowland since the governor was a state representative more than 20 years ago, said that he has never seen Mr. Rowland as down as he is now.
Mr. DeLuca said he did not think Mr. Rowland should resign, at least not until the federal corruption investigation plays out. But whatever happens next, he said, Mr. Rowland is a different man.
''The swagger,'' he said, ''is gone.''
