Timothy A. Franklin, the new editor of The Baltimore Sun, has shown quite a knack for making news in the process of publishing it.
As the new editor of The Orlando Sentinel in 2001, he successfully challenged the family of the race car driver Dale Earnhardt, who was fatally injured in the Daytona 500, to gain access to his autopsy photographs -- a quest that drew more than 10,000 e-mail messages from angry fans.
A year earlier, when he was briefly the editor of The Indianapolis Star, Mr. Franklin earned the enmity of much of his home state by publishing scoops that described the Indiana University basketball coach Bob Knight threatening the athletic director and pitching a vase near Mr. Knight's secretary, articles that preceded the coach's firing.
Last week, Mr. Franklin, 43, was in the news again, when the publisher of The Sun dismissed William K. Marimow as the newspaper's editor and immediately replaced him with Mr. Franklin. Some of those in the newsroom who expressed respect for Mr. Marimow said they suspected that their new boss was an acquiescent bean counter sent to do the bidding of the Tribune Company, the parent of The Sun and The Sentinel.
But Tribune's reasoning, like the characterizations of Mr. Franklin, is more complicated, having as much if not more to do with matters of corporate culture as the bottom line, Tribune executives said.
Money, of course, was a factor. Mr. Franklin, who has worked at Tribune for all but 11 months since he graduated from Indiana University in 1982, is arriving as the company strives to raise profit margins at The Sun and the six other newspapers it acquired from Times Mirror in 2000 to the levels of the older Tribune newspapers. In Mr. Franklin, a former associate managing editor for business news at The Chicago Tribune, the company has an editor who could perhaps be more easily persuaded to explore further savings in the newsroom than Mr. Marimow, who had worked at The Sun for 10 years and clashed with Denise E. Palmer, the newspaper's publisher since September 2002.
But Tribune also is looking to Mr. Franklin to change The Sun's journalistic culture. The company has been encouraging its 13 daily newspapers -- particularly those like The Sun that still think of themselves as part of the more independent Times Mirror family -- to draw on its collective resources to fill more of their pages with articles provided by their sister newspapers. In Orlando, Mr. Franklin was a champion of such sharing. Mr. Marimow, meanwhile, often balked, several Tribune managers said.
''It would be a silly caricature to see this in the context of 'meany' headquarters imposing its cost-cutting agenda on a recalcitrant subsidiary,'' said James Warren, a deputy managing editor of The Chicago Tribune. ''This is more about the personality of the now-former editor and his relationship with both his boss and headquarters.''
Mr. Warren added: ''There is a sincere corporate desire to have the editorial departments of these newspapers cooperate, when feasible, in thoughtful ways. The sense one received from Baltimore was that it had just dug in its heels and felt requests to share were often tantamount to some abdication of its independence.''
In tallying what they lost in Mr. Marimow, 56, Sun staff members cited, among other assets, the Pulitzer Prize he won as an investigative reporter at The Philadelphia Inquirer (and another that he shared when there), and the three Pulitzers that The Sun won in his tenure as a senior editor.
While Mr. Franklin has brought no Pulitzer Prizes with him, his new staff members are learning that he has his own story to tell.
Raised in Mooresville, Ind., by his mother, a beautician, and father, a factory worker who later was the town manager, Mr. Franklin first worked as a reporter at 16, as a sportswriter on the local weekly.
For a semester at Indiana University he was editor of The Indiana Daily Student, where, he says, he learned the value of pouring resources into big stories, publishing a series on the dangers of the university's chemistry laboratories.
By early 2000, having been The Chicago Tribune's sports editor and business editor, Mr. Franklin said he grew restless to edit a metropolitan daily. When he was offered the editorship of The Indianapolis Star, which had an average daily circulation of 250,000, Mr. Franklin decided to leave The Tribune.
In his early months at The Star, Mr. Franklin said, he spent generously, announcing the opening of a bureau in Detroit on his first day, and planning to open others. After a videotape surfaced of Mr. Knight, a boyhood hero, apparently choking a player, Mr. Franklin assigned three reporters full time to the story.
''I knew the credibility of the paper hinged on us getting to the truth of Knight's behavior,'' he said.
In late 2000, after The Star was sold by Central Newspapers Inc. to Gannett, Mr. Franklin accepted an offer to return to Tribune Company to edit The Sentinel, which then had a circulation of 260,000.
Mr. Franklin drew immediate, national attention for his pursuit of the Earnhardt autopsy photos, which he sought not for publication but to be examined by an independent expert who might determine how the driver died.
During his three years in Orlando, the newsroom had no substantial budget cuts, said Kathy Waltz, The Sentinel's publisher. Indeed, the paper's newsroom staff remained relatively stable (about 350) and its news hole grew, she said. Last fall, Mr. Franklin actually cost the paper money -- an estimated $700,000 in canceled advertisements -- after The Sentinel published a series critical of the practices of local house builders. (At The Sun, by contrast, the newsroom population shrank by 29, to 422 during Mr. Marimow's three years as editor. )
Ms. Palmer, the Baltimore publisher, said little last week about what had soured her on Mr. Marimow. (A lack of ''chemistry'' was her principal complaint.) Nor did she elaborate on why she had selected Mr. Franklin to run the journalistic operations of The Sun (which has an average weekday and Saturday circulation of 277,000), beyond recounting his résumé.
But several senior Tribune executives said that Mr. Franklin was seen as much more of a team player than Mr. Marimow. When Tribune sought last year to begin a weekly, four-page supplement on personal finance that would draw content from all of its newspapers, Mr. Marimow initially expressed stiff resistance, citing The Sun's desire to be unique, two Tribune executives said.
Asked about such disputes, Mr. Marimow declined to comment.
Mr. Franklin has also shown his eagerness to help the parent company in other areas. In the midst of a protracted labor dispute at The Sun last year, Mr. Franklin, who had worked with Ms. Palmer at The Chicago Tribune in the 1990's, permitted one of The Sentinel's copy editors, who are not represented by a union, to go to Baltimore to be trained in the event of a strike. Had there been a strike, he said last week, he was prepared to send three or four others. The issue of replacement workers coming from elsewhere in Tribune stirred fierce emotions in The Sun newsroom.
Howard Tyner, a former editor of The Chicago Tribune who retired last week as vice president/editorial of Tribune Company, said a factor in Mr. Marimow's departure was the struggle to make the culture of Times Mirror more like that of the Tribune Company.
''While Tribune is far from trying to be a company that interferes with daily operations or wants to produce generic newspapers, it is not a company that says to the business units, 'You do what you want to do,''' he said. ''Times Mirror did.''
Indeed, the different approaches of the newspaper divisions of the two companies can be illustrated by their respective cash flow margins on the eve of the merger. Times Mirror, whose newspapers included The Los Angeles Times and Newsday, had earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization of 24.5 percent; the corresponding figure at Tribune, which also owned The Sun-Sentinel in southern Florida was 28.4 percent, according to figures compiled by Merrill Lynch. (Gannett's earnings, by comparison, were 33.1 percent.)
Though the slumping advertising market has pulled down the cash-flow margins of other newspaper companies -- Merrill Lynch estimates that Gannett's was 31.8 percent last year -- Tribune (26.3 percent), continues to be weighed down partly by its Times Mirror properties, said Lauren Rich Fine, a Merrill Lynch analyst.
Stephanie Shapiro, a features writer at The Sun who has worked there nearly 20 years, said she worries that the Tribune Company would seek additional savings by pooling more copy.
''I fear that they want to put their brand on every single newspaper they own,'' she said, ''and somehow rob those newspapers of their regional identity.''
Yet, while Mr. Franklin has said little about his plans for The Sun -- he was only offered the job over the Christmas holidays and has said he will spend his first month reading and listening -- Ms. Shapiro is not among those pining for Mr. Marimow, whom she said was too focused on hard news.
Jay Hancock, a financial columnist at The Sun who said he considered Mr. Marimow's dismissal ''devastating,'' said he would nonetheless give Mr. Franklin the benefit of the doubt, with one caveat.
''I think he needs to let us mourn for a few weeks,'' Mr. Hancock said, ''and let us get used to the idea of a new guy.''
Correction:  January 16, 2004, Friday  An article in Business Day on Monday about Timothy A. Franklin, the new editor of The Baltimore Sun, misstated the decline in the size of the paper's newsroom staff during the three-year tenure of his predecessor. It fell by about 15, not by 29 -- to about 385, not 422.
