The sound of silence is not usually heard from Silvio Berlusconi, Italy's voluble and combative prime minister.
But aside from a news conference early on, Mr. Berlusconi has kept a low profile as the Parmalat financial scandal dominated the news in Italy and rippled across world financial markets. He has largely left the matter to his economics minister, Giulio Tremonti, to address.
His usual opponents are filling the auditory void. They accuse him of avoiding potentially unpleasant comparisons to the business empire he founded. The billionaire Mr. Berlusconi has had his share of financial intrigue and investigations -- though never involving Parmalat -- and his critics suggest that he would strive to keep himself as far as possible from bad financial news.
''Italy is suffering now, because Parmalat reveals a baseness of ethics in the country,'' said Senator Antonio Di Pietro, an opponent of Mr. Berlusconi's and a former prosecutor who rose to national prominence in a 1990's corruption scandal.
''Berlusconi is the emblem of the Italian anomaly, of all the conflicts of interest,'' Mr. Di Pietro said in an interview. ''We never know if he is acting in his interest or the country's.''
Parmalat is beginning to reorganize after reporting that billions of dollars of its listed assets do not exist, and at least nine people have been arrested. It is a blow to Italian pride, shaking Italy's eighth-largest company, and it is being called Europe's biggest financial scandal.
Now Italians are beginning to assess the scandal's political afterlife. So far the scandal has provided grist for the battle between governing and opposition parties, and has become a source of tension within Mr. Berlusconi's coalition.
The matter comes at a crucial time for the coalition, a patchwork dominated by three leading parties: Mr. Berlusconi's Forza Italia, the right-wing National Alliance and the federalist-minded Northern League.
The coalition is expected this month to consider readjusting its policies and reapportioning power among the sometimes competing parties in the government.
In the spring, it faces important voter tests in European and local elections. Decisions were put off to avoid embarrassing squabbles while Italy held the rotating presidency of the European Union in the last half of 2003, said Renato Mannheimer, a political scientist at the University of Milan-Bicocca.
Mr. Berlusconi ''must be very, very careful now because this is the month of decisions,'' Professor Mannheimer said. The center-right government and the opposition parties are about evenly divided in opinion polls.
Those around Mr. Berlusconi say he is just being prudent when the potential for job losses, sensitive market and economic decisions and continuing criminal investigations are at stake.
''He doesn't talk much, but it doesn't mean that he and the government are not acting,'' a government official said. ''What we are doing is to enforce the system of controls and sanctions, so that in the future these things won't happen again.''
After the first Parmalat disclosures, Mr. Berlusconi held a news conference and said the government would strive to keep the group operating and help save jobs; it employs 36,000 people worldwide, but only 4,000 of them are in Italy. He also pledged to overhaul the regulatory framework.
The government quickly passed a bankruptcy law to give Parmalat breathing room from creditors. The European Commission is reviewing the law. That establishes an interesting subplot.
The president of the European Commission is Romano Prodi, a former Italian prime minister who has been a political nemesis for Mr. Berlusconi and may run against him in two years. European Commission officials, however, said it was unlikely that Mr. Prodi would use the Parmalat affair to go after Mr. Berlusconi.
Luigi Casero, a member of Parliament for Mr. Berlusconi's party and its chief of economic policy, acknowledged that the scandal was a ''huge case'' and threatened investor trust in Italy's markets. He pointed out that the government said it planned to strengthen the regulatory authorities.
Under a plan proposed by Mr. Tremonti, the economics minister, a new ''superauthority'' would combine oversight of the markets, insurance industry and pension funds, as well as taking away some oversight powers from the Bank of Italy.
The proposal has become part of the feud between Mr. Tremonti and the Bank of Italy's governor, Antonio Fazio, who has come under fire from the governing parties.
Last week, Marcello Pera, the president of the Senate, gave an interview with the business newspaper Il Sole-24 Ore and implied that the Bank of Italy had forewarning of who was responsible for Parmalat's collapse and should have done something.
Mr. Fazio's response was, ''Pera who?'' according to news agencies.
While some members of Mr. Berlusconi's coalition took the remark as an extreme slap at the dignity of the Senate, others have been lining up with Mr. Fazio, causing further tensions in the majority alliance.
One reason for Mr. Berlusconi's relative quiet, opponents say, could be his own position as a business mogul who has faced charges of accounting irregularities and conflict of interest. Mr. Berlusconi's companies have broad media holdings, and as head of the government, he influences or indirectly controls six of Italy's seven national television channels.
He has been fending off accusations that a new law his government passed last month favors his media interests. An unusual refusal by the president, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, to sign the law bolstered those accusers.
In addition, Mr. Berlusconi's government has decriminalized accounting fraud in the wake of investigations of his own companies on those grounds. In the future, such fraud is to be punished administratively.
The government official dismissed comparisons between the Parmalat scandal and Mr. Berlusconi as ''nonsense,'' and noted that the supposed Parmalat bookkeeping fictions would have occurred long before the accounting law passed.
''Berlusconi as a businessman doesn't have anything to do with Berlusconi as prime minister,'' he said.
Enrico Letta, a member of the center-left opposition in Parliament, said Mr. Berlusconi's silence was part of a design to avoid the negative. ''He only talks when things are going well,'' Mr. Letta said.
''Certainly, Berlusconi's weakening of some legislation doesn't help the situation,'' he said, referring to the false accounting law. ''But you can't say this scandal is the fault of who governed before or who governs now.''
Mr. Letta suggested that the seriousness of the situation could even pull the two sides together.
Another question is the effect of the simmering anger of small investors who lost money and feel duped by a multinational company that presented itself as financially healthy thanks to invented assets. Professor Mannheimer wonders whether that anger will transfer to the government.
''We already were in the mood of lack of trust,'' he said. ''This has increased the lack of trust.''
For weeks now, comparisons have been drawn to the earthquake of scandal of the 1990's that brought down Italy's governing parties and scores of prominent businessmen. Again, prosecutors are being depicted as heroes tilting at the powerful. The corruption is the same, said Mr. Di Pietro, the Berlusconi critic. But today, he added, ''it is even more serious because this scandal involves the everyday citizen.''
