If anyone had told him that his Green Bay Packers would lose a playoff game after they committed no turnovers in regulation and paved 156 rushing yards for Ahman Green, Coach Mike Sherman said, ''I would find that hard to believe.''
And yet it happened Sunday in a crushing 20-17 overtime defeat to a Philadelphia team that had been pummeled early and left on the ropes with a 14-0 deficit. Devastating was the word that Sherman used to describe his team's failure.
A decision by Sherman to punt on fourth-and-1 late in the fourth quarter, instead of attempting a first down, will be debated all winter in Green Bay taprooms. The sting will not go away anytime soon. Not even the most suspect bratwurst could cause this kind of heartburn.
With 2 minutes 30 seconds remaining in the fourth quarter, and the Packers holding a 17-14 lead, Green Bay faced fourth down and about 18 inches for a first down. Last week, in a wild-card victory over Seattle, the Packers twice ran on fourth-and-1 and were successful both times. On Sunday, a first down likely would have salted the game away for Green Bay.
Already on this drive, the Packers had run for first downs on third-and-1 and third-and-2. The Eagles had struggled against the run this season as a number of defensive linemen and Carlos Emmons, Philadelphia's top linebacker, were lost to injury. Green had run up 192 yards on the Eagles during the regular season, and he had pummeled them again Sunday. Sherman, however, chose to punt.
His reasoning was this: The Eagles had used a timeout before the play, leaving them with one fewer timeout during their upcoming two-minute drill. Plus, Philadelphia had shuttled some of its beefier defensive linemen into the game, which might make a running play risky. A punt could pin the Eagles deep in their own territory with time running out.
Quarterback Brett Favre tried to draw the defense offsides, stepping away from center, but Philadelphia stayed put. After a delay-of-game penalty, Green Bay retreated to punt. But Josh Bidwell made a fundamental error, kicking the ball into the end zone, giving the Eagles the ball at their 20-yard line. Philadelphia then drove downfield behind quarterback Donovan McNabb, sending the game into overtime at 17-17 on a 37-yard field goal by David Akers.
In overtime, Akers won the game with another field goal, and Sherman was left to explain his decision to punt on fourth-and-1. He insisted he made the right call.
''They used a timeout, which I thought would be instrumental in the two-minute'' drill, Sherman said. ''They put some big people into the game. I was thinking, 'If we could pin them down . . . ''
The problem was, the Eagles were not pinned down. Even so, Green Bay still had a chance to put the game away in the final moments of regulation. Philadelphia faced fourth-and-26 on its own 26-yard line and seemed to be down to one desperate moment.
Green Bay sacked McNabb eight times Sunday, and pressured him relentlessly in the second half. But the Packers dropped into prevent coverage this time, and McNabb found Freddie Mitchell in an open seam for 28 yards and a first down. Sherman seemed upset that defensive backs Bhawoh Jue and Darren Sharper were not more forceful in closing on Mitchell.
''You think you'd win on fourth-and-26, but we didn't get that done,'' Sherman said.
Later, the Eagles said they wondered whether Green Bay's inability to score on fourth-and-goal from the 1-yard line with two minutes left in the first half influenced Sherman's judgment in the fourth quarter. On that earlier play, Green ran into his teammate, the pulling guard Mike Wahle, on a slow-developing play, and was stopped short of the goal line.
Sherman said the earlier play had no influence on his later decision. The Eagles thought otherwise.
''I think it made them wonder,'' defensive tackle Darwin Walker said. ''They hesitated.''
PRO FOOTBALL
