The Atlantic Coast Conference will probably have to wait another year to cash in on its expansion.
The N.C.A.A. Division I Management Council voted not to submit a proposal to the National Collegiate Athletic Association board to allow the A.C.C. to stage a championship football game in 2004.
The council voted Sunday at the association's annual convention.
Current rules allow for a championship game when a conference has 12 teams. The A.C.C. will have 11 teams when Miami and Virginia Tech join the conference next season.
An A.C.C. title game was expected to generate about $8 million. The Southeastern Conference has a championship game, and revenue from that game has been estimated as high as $12 million.
Revenue from the Big 12 title game has been estimated at $8 million.
Boston College will become the 12th member of the A.C.C. in 2005, and the conference will then be able to stage a title game.
''It is not just a matter of money,'' said Bernadette McGlade, an associate commissioner of the A.C.C., who is a member of the Division I Management Council. ''It's about the championship experience for the student-athletes. That's what we're all about.''
McGlade said that 7 or 8 of the 23 Division I-A members who voted were in favor of the A.C.C. proposal. Three A.C.C. representatives voted.
The N.C.A.A. board could vote at its meeting Monday to revive the A.C.C.'s proposal, but that is not considered likely.
''We're at 12, they are going to be at 12 eventually; people felt there was no need to make a change,'' said Mike Slive, the commissioner of the Southeastern Conference. ''There was no substantial discussion about this.''
The A.C.C. ignited a fierce debate in college athletics last year when the presidents of its colleges voted to expand, inviting some members of the Big East. The A.C.C. was criticized when it invited Miami and Virginia Tech to join the conference for the 2004 season. Four Big East members filed a lawsuit claiming the A.C.C. conspired with Miami to weaken the Big East; it was eventually dismissed. A second suit was filed in October, after Boston College said it would join the A.C.C.; it is still pending.
FOOTBALL
