The subtitle of ''The Fog of War,'' Errol Morris's new documentary, is ''Eleven Lessons From the Life of Robert McNamara.'' These lessons -- in statecraft, in military strategy and not least in the management of public perception -- are extracted from Mr. McNamara's own words and derived from his experiences as a World War II military strategist, as an executive in the Ford Motor Company and as secretary of defense in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations.
Although they are drawn from specific historical events -- the firebombing of Tokyo during World War II, the introduction of seat belts into Ford automobiles and above all the Vietnam War -- Mr. McNamara's lessons, when boiled down and flashed onto the screen, have a decidedly abstract quality.
They echo the potted wisdom of management-speak (''Maximize efficiency''), self-improvement (''There's something beyond one's self'') and the philosophical subdisciplines of epistemology (''Belief and seeing are both often wrong'') and ethics (''In order to do good you may have to engage in evil'').
How much Mr. McNamara himself has learned over the years is one of the questions Mr. Morris's dense, ambiguous film raises. Other more topical and therefore more unsettling questions are how, and by whom, the example of Mr. McNamara's career should be studied.
It is hard to watch Mr. McNamara, with his combed-back hair and blunt, didactic manner, without thinking of the man who currently holds his old government job, Donald H. Rumsfeld. What might Mr. Rumsfeld and the other architects of the war in Iraq learn from Mr. McNamara's retrospective view of his own strategic, moral and political mistakes that, in the course of his on-camera interviews with Mr. Morris, he seems both to acknowledge and to minimize?
Such a question of course leads into the dangerous quagmire of historical analogy, a path also opened by the rerelease Friday of ''The Battle of Algiers,'' Gillo Pontecorvo's astonishing cinéma-vérité representation of the Algerian uprising against French colonial rule in the late 1950's. Mr. Pontecorvo's film, announced in the opening credits as the first cinematic production of newly independent Algeria, won the Golden Lion at the 1966 Venice Film Festival, and part of its legend is that in the years that followed it was used, around the world, as a training film by both urban guerrilla movements and the national armies trying to suppress them.
It was also, last summer, shown at the Pentagon -- not presumably to instruct today's military planners and policy makers in the finer points of black-and-white cinematography or to delight them with Ennio Morricone's plangent, pulse-accelerating score, but rather so they might learn something from watching the earlier efforts of a Western power to deal with terrorism in an Arab capital.
How much the events reconstructed in ''The Battle of Algiers'' resemble the current situation in Baghdad is of course open to dispute. Recently in The New Yorker Philip Gourevitch laid out some of the parallels, while Christopher Hitchens, in Slate, underlined the differences. Similar arguments about the aptness of invoking Vietnam are likely to grow in frequency and volume as Mr. Morris's film reaches a wider audience. Such arguments are likely to be heard in theater lobbies wherever either of these movies is showing.
As Stuart Klawans recently pointed out in the Arts &amp; Leisure section of this newspaper, the main reason to see ''The Battle of Algiers,'' the Pentagon notwithstanding, is that it is a great movie. Which it surely is: among other things, a political thriller of unmatched realism and a combat picture remorseless in its clarity and arresting in its evenhandedness. And while ''The Fog of War'' is less dramatic, it also offers a bravura display of documentary technique and can stand, like Mr. Morris's other films, as an elusive, engrossing character study. But these very qualities -- the inescapable feeling, watching these movies, that what you are seeing is the truth -- make the suspicion of these films' contemporary relevance, if anything, all the more acute.
The cellular structure of the National Liberation Front in ''The Battle of Algiers'' -- which operates through a network of small groups, rather than through a vertical chain of command -- stands as a template for modern terrorist organizations. The group's tactics escalate from the shooting of policemen to the bombing of cafes and other public places with the intent of killing civilians and terrorizing the city's large French population.
To combat the Front, French paratroopers, led by the charismatic, forthright Colonel Mathieu (who insouciantly names his campaign to flush guerrilla commandos out of the Casbah Operation Champagne), dispense with the niceties of legality and human rights, resorting to torture, mass arrests and the blowing up of houses. As they pursue the Front's operatives, they also try to pry the organization apart from the general population, handing out bread and candy in the streets of the Casbah and appealing, by loudspeaker, for calm and good will.
One lesson in ''The Fog of War'' is, Empathize with your enemy, and one of the most astonishing things about ''The Battle of Algiers'' is how thoroughly it lives up to that maxim. Colonel Mathieu is quick to express his respect for the political commitment and tactical aplomb of his adversaries, and the film itself -- one of whose stars and producers was Saadi Yacef, a prominent guerrilla (now a member of the Algerian Senate) -- responds in kind. It registers the cruelty of both sides, with scenes of torture and close-ups of ordinary French Algerians, including a toddler with an ice cream cone, moments before they are blown up by a bomb hidden in a woman's handbag.
It also suggests that both sides were defeated, and both victorious. The film's main dramatic arc concludes with Colonel Mathieu successfully crushing the Front in Algiers. The ultimate departure of the French, after an apparently spontaneous eruption of civil disobedience nearly two years later, almost seems like an epilogue.
And this is perhaps the film's most valuable lesson: that history keeps moving, often in treacherous and unpredictable ways, turning victory into defeat and vindication into catastrophe. French military power ultimately proved powerless to contain the Algerian drive for self-determination, and the French citizenry was ultimately unwilling to countenance the brutality committed in the name of their republic.
Something similar happened in Vietnam, after Mr. McNamara had moved on to the World Bank. History, it seemed, was, as an arrested militant declares at a news conference in ''The Battle of Algiers,'' on the side of those waging wars of national liberation. But the history did not end when the movies do, and what they offer most powerfully are not historical analogies but intimations of historical continuity.
The slide of the Front and other secular, nationalist, post-colonial governments -- in the Arab world and elsewhere -- into authoritarianism and corruption did much to speed the growth of Islamic fundamentalism, which plunged Algeria into a nightmare of brutality in the 1990's. The war in Vietnam turned out to be a lost battle in a war that the United States ultimately won, as suggested by the glimpse, in a clip of present-day Vietnam, of a KFC franchise. The present, in other words, is not a remake but a sequel.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
