TONY DUNGY smiled yesterday when the inevitable question about defense came up after the Colts' 38-31 victory over the Chiefs: How does a coach with a reputation for defense feel about 69 points?
Dungy felt pretty good. His defense gave up 31 points, but his offense scored 38. For now, that will work.
''The defense is not where we want it to be,'' Dungy said. But the Colts' offense, which scored 41 points last week, is exactly where Dungy wants it to be.
Despite a 24-year background in defense -- as a player and as a coach -- Dungy has quickly learned to like offense. Who wouldn't with a quarterback like Peyton Manning?
But there's more to Dungy's satisfaction than simply gritting his teeth, riding a hot horse and longing for the day defense rules. Dungy truly enjoys Manning because Manning is the quarterback in Dungy's soul.
Here's what people don't know, or have forgotten, about Tony Dungy. When you look past all of the impressive defensive credentials in his biography -- a defensive back as a player, a defensive backs coach in college and in the National Football League, a defensive coordinator in the N.F.L. and a coach with a defensive temperament at Tampa Bay -- when you look past all that, you'll find that Dungy is a quarterback. He's a defender at heart, but a quarterback in his soul.
Dungy was a star quarterback at Parkside High in Jackson, Mich., and became a four-year starter at the University of Minnesota. As a junior, he set a single-season team record for touchdown passes and led the Big Ten and was ranked fifth nationally in total offense and passing.
So what happened?
Nothing. He wasn't drafted. In 1977, there was not a huge market for black quarterbacks.
''I was happy I got a chance to play, but I always felt, especially when I was in the league a year or two and got to feel out the quarterbacks, that I could have played,'' Dungy said.
If Dungy were coming out of college today, he probably would be drafted. His running skills and athleticism would be welcomed, not shunned.
He signed with Pittsburgh as a free agent and was quickly switched to wide receiver, then to safety. He had one fling with glory: in a game in his rookie year, with both Terry Bradshaw and his backup injured, Dungy played quarterback. He completed 3 of 8 passes for 43 yards and ran 3 times for 8 yards. He intercepted a pass and threw an interception.
Dungy was an N.F.L. player from 1977 to 1979. He jumped on the coaching carousel, first at the University of Minnesota, then with the Steelers, the Chiefs and the Vikings before taking over the Buccaneers.
His roots are still at quarterback. Yesterday I asked him when he stopped thinking like a quarterback. ''I never have,'' he said.
The best insight into Dungy comes from Tom Moore, the Colts' offensive coordinator.
Moore has known Dungy as long as anyone in football -- since 1973, when Dungy was an 18-year-old freshman at Minnesota and Moore was his backfield coach. Moore was Minnesota's offensive coordinator in Dungy's junior and senior seasons, when the Gophers ran the same no-huddle offense that the Colts run today.
''Tony was very, very, very smart and was a student of the game as a player,'' Moore said. ''Tony was the 1973 Peyton Manning -- from his work ethic, his film study. Back in '73, he was just like Peyton is now.''
After Dungy was fired by Tampa Bay, Moore called him and said the Colts -- especially Manning -- would be a great fit. ''He said, 'I got a guy who's just like you; he studies like you do, he thinks like you do,' '' Dungy said.
Now New England looms. With a victory, the Colts' franchise would reach the Super Bowl for the first time in 33 seasons. Dungy would be the first black head coach to appear in football's biggest game. He has been in the N.F.L. long enough to appreciate the milestone.
''You really don't think about that until you reach the championship game,'' he said. ''It's in the back of your mind, but we had to win against Denver, then we got to win here. Now you go in saying, 'Hey, we're one game away -- it's something that hasn't been done before.'
''To be honest,'' Dungy said, ''I would think about Lionel Taylor, Sherman Lewis and Jimmy Ray and guys that could have coached in the Super Bowl, but never got the opportunity. That's why I hope I get there, because it'll be a tribute to those guys if we do.''
There's a lot of football to play before we talk sociology. Next Sunday, the Colts have to play the hottest team in football in chilly New England. The Colts' offense is cranked up and Dungy is not apologizing. His defense leaks points here and there, but his offense generates points in droves.
''I enjoy the offensive side,'' Dungy said yesterday. ''I like when our offense is moving the ball. I like the things we're doing.''
That's because there's still a quarterback in Dungy's soul.
Sports of The Times
