The river that passes through this North Central Florida town is the Suwannee, not the Swanee, as Stephen Foster called it in his famous song. On its banks here is a memorial park that celebrates Stephen Foster Day every January, one of the few occasions when White Springs, population 813, can count on more than a trickle of visitors.
On Sunday, about 100 Foster fans gathered in the memorial's bell tower -- the world's largest carillon system by quantity of bells, the park claims -- for a concert. They heard not just the chestnuts, like ''Beautiful Dreamer,''  ''Camptown Races'' and ''Oh! Susanna,'' but lesser-known songs like Foster's first, ''Open Thy Lattice Love.''
If it sounds excessive, consider that for nearly 70 years, the residents of White Springs and the rest of Florida have had Foster's river tune -- ''Old Folks at Home,'' better known as ''Way Down Upon the Swanee River'' -- as their state song.
All this for a guy who never caught a glimpse of Florida, much less the river whose name he butchered?
The state, forever savvy at marketing itself, has always thought the renown Foster brought its river made up for his transgressions.
''I've traveled all over the world and people might not know where White Springs is,'' said Johnny Bullard, who grew up here and is active at the memorial, Stephen Foster Folk Culture Center State Park. ''But 9 out of 10 know that song when you play it on the piano. I don't know of a single other song Florida could adopt that would have the same worldwide recognition.''
Mr. Bullard, an elementary school principal and timber farmer, sang ''Hard Times Come Again No More'' at the concert.
The last White Springs resident who can play the carillon -- the others have died or their arthritis has gotten too bad -- performed. So did the musician who runs the center's banjo camps and the young woman who won last year's ''Jeanie With the Light Brown Hair'' singing competition, named for another Foster song.
It was a glorious moment for Foster lovers here, but while Florida embraced ''Old Folks at Home'' as a promotional tool in the 19th century, its relationship with the song has grown more complex with time. The fact that Foster never visited is among a litany of complaints voiced by Floridians who have proposed finding a new state song over the years -- and one of the more minor ones, at that.
Many have said the song is racially offensive. Foster wrote the lyrics in 1851 in what he imagined to be slave dialect, in the voice of a black man longing to return to his family on ''de old plantation.''
''The language is awkward,'' said Kathryn Haines, associate director of the Stephen Foster Memorial at the University of Pittsburgh, near where Foster grew up. ''But at heart, it's about nostalgia for a distant home and being separated from one's family.''
Other complaints have focused on the melancholy timbre of ''Old Folks,'' a sharp contrast with the sun-splashed, paradisiacal image Florida likes to put forth. When Senator Bob Graham was governor in the 1980's, he discussed adding a second state song that was more upbeat, one that praised more of Florida than a single river.
''Florida is sunshine, waterways and sand,'' went the lyrics of a song by a Miami composer that Mr. Graham suggested. ''Florida's a special kind of promised land.''
(Florida's first state song, traded for ''Old Folks,'' was equally bubbly, praising ''thy gardens and thy phosphate mines.'')
A former state representative, Willy Logan, called for dumping ''Old Folks'' as the state song in 1997 on the ground that it was racist, but his campaign went nowhere.
The state did, however, sanitize the original lyrics years ago, substituting ''brothers'' or ''dear ones'' for ''darkeys,'' among other things. A sanitized version was sung at Gov. Jeb Bush's second inauguration last year, according to The Tallahassee Democrat, with ''still longing for the old plantation'' becoming ''still longing for my old connection.''
Mr. Bush and the Legislature slashed the budget of the Foster center, said Martha Nelson, a Florida State Parks specialist here, and it now ekes out an existence with a staff of 17. ''Stephen Foster is not a big moneymaker in the parks system,'' Ms. Nelson said.
It is probably not the existence envisioned for this place in the 1930's, when Josiah Lilly, an ardent Foster fan whose family founded the Lilly pharmaceutical company, decided that Florida should have a Foster memorial on the Suwannee's banks. The Florida Federation of Music Clubs helped plan the park, and construction started after World War II.
These days the park's biggest event, a folk festival in May, has little to do with Stephen Foster. Many of the 65,000 annual visitors come for the festival or for old-time demonstrations like cane grinding and wheat threshing, not to gaze into the Foster dioramas or hear the bells chime ''doo-dah.''
''We get tour groups, retiree groups, church groups,'' Ms. Nelson said. ''We get visitors from Japan, because they all learn about Stephen Foster's music in school.''
In the Foster museum, visitors can see the desk at which Foster apparently wrote ''Swanee River'' and a copy of his original lyrics. He asked his brother to help come up with a catchy name for the river in his song. His brother first suggested the Yazoo, a river in Mississippi, then the Pee Dee, in the Carolinas.
''Oh, pshaw,'' Foster said in response to the latter idea, according to a placard on the desk here. ''I won't have that.''
Finally, the placard says, Foster's brother consulted an atlas and found the Suwannee, to which Foster exclaimed, ''That's it exactly!'' The lyrics here have ''Pedee'' crossed out and ''Swanee'' written over it -- a twist of fate without which ''we probably wouldn't be here today,'' one speaker said.
Another speaker described Foster's death in 1864, when he was 37 and staying at a hotel on the Bowery in New York City. According to the Foster Memorial in Pittsburgh, a feverish Foster fell and cut his neck on a wash basin or chamber pot. After he died, 140 years ago this Tuesday, his relatives found what was perhaps the first line of a new song: ''Dear friends, gentle hearts.'' He had written more than 200 songs.
Mr. Bullard, the school principal, said that while few people came here specifically to learn about Stephen Foster now, more people than ever came to appreciate the wandering brown river, 250 miles long, that he immortalized. He said many old-time Floridians still had ''Old Folks'' played at their funerals, ''as they're wheeling the casket out.''
Jerry Fernandez, who lingered until it was time to switch off the twinkling lights and mechanized steamboats and banjo players in the dioramas for another night, said he had learned the state song as a third grader in South Florida in the 40's and had loved it ever since.
''The people in my generation were very proud of it,'' said Mr. Fernandez, who drove two hours for Stephen Foster Day. ''The people in this generation, I don't know where they come from, but they have no sense of the history of this place. The Florida I grew up in.''
Correction:  January 29, 2004, Thursday  An article on Jan. 12 about the Stephen Foster Folk Culture Center State Park in White Springs, Fla., included an erroneous figure supplied by the center for its staff size. It has 15 members, not 17. The article also misstated the timing of budget cuts cited by a state parks specialist, Martha Nelson. They occurred before the administration of Gov. Jeb Bush, as well as during his tenure.
