Turnover is so uncommon here that legislators are as likely to die in office as to be voted out. So when some county officials threatened last week to see some lawmakers defeated this year at the polls, it was an attack on a way of life that legislators have almost come to see as a perk of the job -- an entitlement, practically, to be re-elected until the political will or ability to breathe runs out, whichever comes first.
As of 2002, according to figures compiled by the National Conference of State Legislatures, state lawmakers around the country had won about 92 percent of their re-election bids over the previous two decades. In New York, the figure was more than 98 percent.
''We call it the incumbency protection acts,'' said Blair Horner, the legislative director of the New York Public Interest Research Group.
Mr. Horner estimated that ''nearly half'' of all 211 sitting legislators had been in their current positions for 10 years or more. In the Senate, John J. Marchi, a Republican, has been in office since 1957, and in the Assembly, Richard N. Gottfried, a Democrat, took office in 1971.
County officials, however, are threatening to challenge some incumbents to protest a rise in Medicaid costs that they say has made it hard for them to govern, and has left them with the political headache of having to raise local taxes just to cover the costs of paying for health care for their counties' poor.
Medicaid is a federal and state health insurance program for the poor. Last week, in public events around the state, some officials said they would go as far as to try to unseat specific state lawmakers from their counties in an effort to bring in senators and Assembly members who would be sympathetic to their cause.
''No one with any political power has ever challenged the status quo like this before,'' Mr. Horner said.
Many of these county officials think that politically speaking, they must kill or be killed.
''We cannot handle the property tax burden that is being forced upon us by Medicaid, and we will do whatever it takes to get Medicaid reform,'' said Thomas R. Suozzi, the Democratic Nassau County executive, who is leading the charge. ''Some people, like myself, have said, 'I am going to take it to the next step, politically, if we don't get Medicaid reform.' ''
In taking on the Republicans, who have controlled the Senate for about a quarter-century, and the Democrats, who have ruled the Assembly for a like period, the county officials are assailing a political fortress that has proved almost impregnable.
In the last 22 years, only 30 incumbents have lost in about 2,300 general elections. Every decade, each majority redraws the district lines in an act of self-protection and then gives the other house's similarly gerrymandered districts a wink and a nod. The legislative leaders also command enormous war chests that they use to protect incumbents.
Some county executives, however, notably Mr. Suozzi, seem to believe that Albany's entrenched power structure has a soft underbelly; that for too long state officials have been able to get away with pushing costs onto local taxpayers and not getting the blame for it.
Many of these local politicians believe that if they can ''connect the dots,'' as Mr. Suozzi said, linking Albany's incumbents to rising property taxes, they or the voters could indeed oust their counterparts at the state level.
Indeed, one secret of Albany's incumbency protection syndrome is that most voters blame their local governments for their problems rather than distant Albany -- that Albany lawmakers can get away with much because no one is paying attention.
For instance, while New York City is a creature of the state, much of what a city mayor can or cannot do depends on legislative action. Yet the typical New York City resident holds the mayor accountable for the quality of life in the city. It has been a hard sell for county officials, as well, to inform their constituents that Albany orders the Medicaid costs they must pay.
Albany officials are not exactly shaking with fear.
''I don't see their threats as serious threats at all,'' said Joseph L. Bruno, a Republican and the majority leader of the State Senate. ''I think a lot of it is rhetoric, it's posturing, it's flexing their muscles for their own constituency, it's rattling in a threatening way. That's how I see it.
''Now, that's not to say that we don't have a situation out there that has to be addressed. We're addressing it, and we're going to ask them not to just rattle the cage but to be constructive and productive.''
Sheldon Silver, a Democrat and the Assembly speaker, also brushed off the threatened movement against incumbents. While he said Mr. Suozzi was a friend, he added, ''He's also a very ambitious individual.'' Referring to Medicaid, he said, ''If they are talking about changing the program, or lessening it, well, I am still waiting for them to give us a list of items they think should be cut from the program.''
He also contended that any attack by local officials on Assembly Democrats would be unjustified because, he said, the conference has long supported having the state take over some of the most expensive Medicaid programs. The conference, however, has been blocked by the governor, he said.
''Their position,'' Mr. Silver said of the local officials, ''is no different than our position.''
Still, the incumbency issue in Albany is ripe for attention. In a November report, ''Reform in New York: The Budget, the Legislature and the Governance Process,'' Gerald Benjamin, a political scientist who is the dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the State University of New York in New Paltz, argued that it was one reason that Albany was locked in dysfunction, with a late budget 19 years in a row, legislation like reform of the Rockefeller drug laws lingering without movement for years, and matters involving ethics and lobbyists and other good government initiatives remaining on back burners.
Mr. Horner said he thought the legislators were vulnerable to the notion of challenges, which for now remains merely a threat.
''Anytime a powerful county executive targets a state legislator,'' Mr. Horner said, ''the legislator is going to be nervous, and what Suozzi is saying is, 'Desperate times requires desperate measures.' And this is a real roll of the political dice, because now he has to deliver. Either the Legislature will deliver or he will have to deliver.''
News Analysis
