The maxim ''for the love of the game'' may be shopworn in these days of multimillion-dollar player salaries in baseball, football, basketball and hockey. For many of the players in Major League Soccer, however, it is often more about love than money.
The league's players union, which is engaged in negotiations for its first collective-bargaining agreement with the nine-year-old league, recently distributed a list to its members of salary figures for the 2004 season. The list includes figures for 162 players and was leaked to Soccer America, a weekly magazine based in California, which published it last week. In the past, M.L.S. has been scrupulous in guarding salary figures, declining to discuss innocuous details like who was a free agent or the length of specific contracts.
''Nobody at the league is happy about this,'' said Mark Noonan, the league's executive vice president. ''There are a lot of people out there without integrity. Obviously, the players thought they had to share this.''
For years, it had been assumed that the league's eight teams operated under a strict salary cap, with maximum salaries set at $280,000 and minimums at $25,000. The facts are quite different. As a single-entity operation, where the league negotiates and owns all player contracts, exceptions are quite common.
According to the list, 14-year-old Freddy Adu, who will be the first selection in the league's draft Friday in Charlotte, N.C., is the highest-paid player, due to make $500,000 this year with D.C. United. What is more sobering is the large number of young, mostly American players who earn less than $50,000 a year. In all, the average salary is $80,862, with a decidedly middle-class median of $52,250. D.C. United has the highest payroll over all, at $2.75 million; Dallas has the lowest, at $741,515.
''Everyone I've spoken to was shocked the numbers were released,'' said Alecko Eskandarian, last year's top draft pick by D.C. United, who is training with the United States Olympic team in California. ''Some of the veterans are probably shaking their heads wondering how a guy who hasn't played a single game yet can be paid so much. But for me, I wish they would do it for more young guys.''
Eskandarian signed a two-year deal with a two-year option that belongs to the league, and he is guaranteed $80,000 this year. Playing at home with a chance to make the Olympic and national teams meant more than signing for more money with a club like Sporting Lisbon in Portugal, which had offered him a contract.
Of the 15 MetroStars players on the list, 9 make less than $50,000. Craig Ziadie, who plays internationally for Jamaica, is listed at $27,783. Mike Magee, 19, a rookie last season, is guaranteed $26,450 in 2004 while Eddie Gaven, a 17-year-old striker from Hamilton, N.J., will make $78,000 this season.
The reason for the disparity is that Magee had unsuccessful tryouts with several European clubs before last year's draft, and M.L.S. became his only opportunity to play professionally. Eddie Pope, a league and United States national team veteran, is the club's highest-paid player at $350,331.
''I'm not bothered by the list having been released,'' said Chris Armas, 31, a midfielder for Chicago, who recently re-signed with the league for a guaranteed $325,000 and incentives. ''Other sports publish the numbers so the players can see what other guys are making in comparison and use it in negotiations.''
Armas, whose M.L.S. contract expired at the end of 2003, could have gone overseas but decided against it.
''I'm a family guy; M.L.S. has been tremendous for me and my family,'' he said. ''I pondered it, but the league came through with a great offer.''
Armas is a veteran of the United States national team, and the league has gone to great lengths to retain those players. For example, it signed Brian McBride of Columbus, who had a successful stint with Everton in England last winter, to a $341,250 deal. Likewise, Josh Wolff of Kansas City, who was injured much of last season, ''had great timing,'' according to Noonan, when he signed a contract that will pay him $418,571 this year. Earnie Stewart, who underachieved last season with D.C. United, returned to the United States after having played in the Netherlands and will make $285,000 this year.
''Josh signed his deal a couple of years ago before he blew out his knee,'' said MetroStars midfielder Mark Lisi, who is due to make $69,692 this year. ''In the past, Stewart has been a big-time player for the national team. Is it fair? I really can't say.''
At the opposite end of the pay scale are the league's developmental players, who do not count against teams' budgets or rosters and generally make about $850 a month. That makes it hard to make ends meet in places like the New York metropolitan area, Chicago, Los Angeles, or San Jose, Calif.
''You have to have other sources of income,'' Armas said. ''You can pick up a couple of hundred dollars a week coaching and doing clinics. But, hey, who wants to do that when you have to train every day and play games? When I came into the league with Los Angeles, I had to share an apartment with a couple of guys.''
A player who might be considered a bargain is Carlos Ruiz of Los Angeles. Although he is guaranteed only $50,000 this year, Ruiz is also being paid by his former club in Guatemala, Municipal, which would share any fee with M.L.S. if Ruiz, a striker, is transferred abroad.
Jeff Moore played for the MetroStars several years ago as a developmental player. He commuted two hours each way from his parents' home in South Jersey to training until a teammate, Clint Mathis, offered to let him stay in his apartment. One union official said a player had to borrow money from his parents after earning a red card (ejection) and being fined by the league.
''Look, the league is young,'' Armas said. ''Things are getting better every year. For me, at least, this is not a bad place to be.''
SOCCER
