Now that Michael Arad and Peter Walker have been chosen as the designers of the World Trade Center memorial site, they are working intently to design it.
They met last week at Mr. Walker's office in Berkeley, Calif., and this weekend at Studio Daniel Libeskind on Rector Street, three blocks from ground zero. They are trying to mesh Mr. Arad's arrestingly stark vision for the site with Mr. Walker's distinctive landscaping and Mr. Libeskind's master plan for the entire trade center site.
Contrary to Mr. Arad's earliest concept, the memorial site will be landscaped. The slurry wall around the trade center's foundation will be exposed below ground level. Cultural buildings will be constructed, following the Libeskind plan, but they will not bridge the space over the north tower footprint or cantilever over the south tower footprint, as Mr. Libeskind had proposed.
''The site plan will need to be adjusted in order to incorporate an appropriate and fitting memorial,'' said Kevin M. Rampe, president of the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation, which ran the memorial competition. ''We said from the beginning -- and I think the selection by the jury shows that we didn't just say it, we meant it -- that the memorial is the centerpiece.''
Perhaps the most important new element will be the provision of access to the base of the tower outlines, which are still marked by remnants of column footings. ''We have promised -- and we will keep that promise -- access to bedrock at both footprints,'' Mr. Rampe said on Friday.
Exactly how the memorial will be adjusted to the master plan, and the master plan to the memorial, is now being decided. The architects have until Wednesday, when the development corporation hopes to unveil the latest design for the memorial.
''It's going well,'' Mr. Libeskind said yesterday morning. ''I think you'll see a very good resolution, an adjustment, a dynamic development of the site.''
''But it wasn't easy,'' he added.
Mr. Libeskind knows something about difficult architectural alliances, having just collaborated with David M. Childs of Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill on the design of Freedom Tower, which is to rise north of the memorial.
Mr. Arad, an architect for the New York City Housing Authority, entered the competition on his own. Mr. Walker's work at the Nasher Sculpture Center in Dallas was shown to Mr. Arad and the other finalists by Anita Contini, a vice president of the development corporation and director of its memorial program.
It is understood that jurors insisted that Mr. Arad be joined by an experienced landscape architect, but because Mr. Arad has not spoken publicly about his design, it is not clear why he chose Mr. Walker as his partner.
To ensure that the jurors' wishes were followed, the corporation imposed several conditions on Mr. Arad before announcing Tuesday that his plan, Reflecting Absence, had won the competition. Among them was that Mr. Walker's role would be as a full member of the design team.
Mr. Arad had to agree that he would not control where the cultural buildings would be placed, state officials said. The memorial site -- bounded by Fulton, Greenwich, Liberty and West Streets -- is to contain about 300,000 square of feet of space for a museum and an interpretive center.
Originally, Mr. Arad called for no cultural buildings on the memorial site, which he envisioned at street level except for two 30-foot depressions, with pools and water cascades inside, marking the areas once occupied by the twin towers.
''This large open field should be punctuated only by the footprints of the two memorial pools,'' he wrote, ''while other buildings that are associated with commemorating the events of Sept. 11, such as a museum or visitor center, can be placed across the street.'' Mr. Arad said the memorial site would serve both as sacred ground and as a large plaza and public amenity.
By the time of his public presentation in November, he had added a building along West Street. That proposal, it turns out, was not regarded seriously by state officials.
Mr. Libeskind's concept of bridging the tower outlines has also been abandoned. ''I myself, when I began to hear the families and other people speaking about footprints being open to the sky, had reservations about whether I should have buildings over the footprints,'' Mr. Libeskind said.
To win designation, Mr. Arad also ceded control over infrastructure elements like the location of a truck ramp, state officials said.
''We wanted to be very clear about the structure of the relationship and the corresponding responsibilities of the parties,'' Mr. Rampe said. He met Mr. Arad on Tuesday with Ms. Contini and Matthew Higgins, chief operating officer of the corporation, while the city awaited news of a winner.
There was no time after their meeting to prepare models and renderings reflecting the revisions. So Mr. Arad and Mr. Walker were announced as the winning designers even though there was not yet a winning design.
That raised concerns among neighborhood leaders, the relatives of those who were killed on Sept. 11, 2001, and private planning groups like the Civic Alliance to Rebuild Downtown New York and New York New Visions, which emphasized the importance of the slurry wall and placing cultural buildings near Fulton and Greenwich Streets, as a kind of buffer for the memorial.
''The Libeskind plan is not a cafeteria, where you can select this thing but not that thing,'' said Robert D. Yaro, president of the Regional Plan Association, a member of the civic alliance. ''It's an inspiring concept, and every time we nibble away a piece of it, we undercut the integrity of the whole thing.''
The speed of the process is also causing unease. ''I'd personally hate to think that the team has less than a week to figure everything out,'' said Madelyn Wils, chairwoman of the Lower Manhattan community board. ''Hopefully, the L.M.D.C. will be clear that this is the design, but the details will evolve.''
