NBC, after some half-hearted negotiations to drive down the price of another season of ''Frasier,'' is expected to announce today that the hit comedy will end its 11-season run in May, network executives said.
Unlike another longtime NBC comedy hit, ''Friends,'' which is going through its final season amid enormous fanfare and publicity, ''Frasier'' seems to be going gently (and quietly) into that good night of reruns. NBC had been holding back on making the final call, apparently to see if some deal could be worked out that might bring ''Frasier'' back for one last season.
But the show itself, and the studio that has produced it, Paramount, seemed to have no such hopes. In a move that many NBC executives were not aware of, the studio and the show's producers sent invitations two weeks ago to reporters who cover television to come to a ''Goodbye Seattle'' lunch in Hollywood today to celebrate the show's farewell.
At the time, NBC executives were still in discussions with the show's star, Kelsey Grammer, executives close to those negotiations said. Mr. Grammer, who is paid about $2 million an episode, would have had to agree to a significant pay cut -- as would most of the rest of the cast and its creative team -- for the show to have returned. NBC was paying more than $5 million an episode -- and losing a lot of money on the show.
That was because ratings for ''Frasier'' have declined sharply. Last season through December, ''Frasier'' was averaging 14.8 million viewers a week and had a 5.9 rating among the 18-to-49-year-old viewers NBC most cares about. This season, ''Frasier'' is averaging only 11.1 million viewers and its 18-49 rating has slid to a 4.1.
Still, the show was a strong performer on Tuesday night for NBC, a unit of the General Electric Company, that will be hard to replace. For several years the network has had little or nothing else successful on Tuesday but ''Frasier,'' with new shows like ''Happy Family'' performing poorly.
Losing ''Friends'' and ''Frasier'' in the same season will mean significant change for the NBC prime-time schedule, but NBC will not be alone.
Other comedies that have dominated much of television for the last decade are nearing their ends. ''Sex and the City,'' for example, is finishing its six-season run on HBO, while ''Everybody Loves Raymond'' on CBS, which premiered in September 1996, is also in its final season unless CBS can persuade its star, Ray Romano, to continue.
BILL CARTER
Media Talk
