He is affectionately known in St. Louis as Mad Mike, and Mike Martz has no doubt earned that nickname as offensive coordinator and now head coach of the Rams. Martz is the gambler, the coach who never saw a fourth down that was not worth going for, the former offensive coordinator who called for a long pass in the waning minutes of the 2000 Super Bowl and won a ring because of it.
The Rams' trifecta of running back Marshall Faulk and wide receivers Torry Holt and Isaac Bruce always made it a safe bet to gamble on that kind of offensive talent. Few teams can match it, and fewer still can defend against it.
That is why there is so much hand-wringing and second-guessing going on in St. Louis, a day after the Rams were stunned by the Carolina Panthers, 29-23, in double overtime Saturday in their National Football Conference divisional playoff game at the Edward Jones Dome.
Headlines in The St. Louis Post-Dispatch were finger-pointing daggers aimed at the coach -- ''Martz forgets himself and lets game get away'' and ''Disappointed fans air gripes after lost dream.''
That is because Martz decided, for once, to play it safe. By doing so, he wound up taking the biggest gamble of all. This time, Martz lost.
The beginning of the end began after the Panthers took a seemingly comfortable 23-12 lead in the fourth quarter. The Rams rallied in the final minutes, Faulk scoring on a 1-yard run with 2 minutes 39 seconds left in regulation. St. Louis closed it to 23-20 on a successful 2-point conversion.
When Jeff Wilkins recovered his own onside kick moments later, the Rams had the ball and only 58 yards and two minutes to go for the winning touchdown. Until Martz decided not to go for it.
With 42 seconds left, Faulk rushed for 4 yards to move the ball to the Carolina 15. There was time for two shots at the end zone from there, at least two chances to win the game with drama and flair and be done with the Panthers before overtime.
Instead, Martz chose to run down the clock until there were three seconds remaining in regulation. Wilkins kicked a 33-yard field goal to tie the score at 23-23 and send the game into overtime.
Martz defended the decision, recalling a game against the Dallas Cowboys in 2002 in which the Rams tried to go for the victory late in regulation, only to have quarterback Jamie Martin sacked. That pushed a field-goal attempt back and Wilkins wound up missing a 49-yarder. The Cowboys won, 13-10, on a field goal as time ran out.
Before Saturday, that had been the Rams' last loss at home.
''I learned from that Cowboy game a year ago,'' Martz told The Post-Dispatch, ''taking that shot -- how devastated these players were when it backfired. We took a shot and got sacked, and it took us out of decent field-goal range. And our guys didn't have the chance to keep playing. I wasn't going to take a chance on that happening again. I had all the confidence in the world in these players that we would win in overtime.''
But perhaps one or two passes would have been the safer choice against the Panthers. By taking the game to overtime, Martz took two gambles. First, he forced his sometimes brilliant, sometimes awful quarterback, Marc Bulger, back on the field for another quarter. And Bulger, who had thrown two interceptions in the fourth quarter before rallying the team, wound up throwing another interception late in the first overtime against a team that had proven seven times during this season that it could win a game on the final drive.
Instead of possibly putting away the Panthers in regulation, Martz forced his already beaten defense to try to stop Carolina in overtime. That was gamble No. 2. The Panthers had accumulated 385 yards against the Rams, including 222 yards rushing, through four quarters. When the starting tailback Stephen Davis was injured after gaining 86 yards on 6 carries, DeShaun Foster came on and rushed for 95 yards on 21 carries.
In overtime, Panthers quarterback Jake Delhomme was 5 of 8 for 136 yards. And when Bulger was intercepted by Carolina cornerback Ricky Manning Jr., that led to Delhomme's 69-yard touchdown throw to wide receiver Steve Smith to end the game on the first play of the second overtime.
It was a defensive effort so lacking that there was speculation that Lovie Smith, the Rams' assistant head coach and defensive coordinator, might have lost a potential head-coaching job after his team gave up 485 yards against the Panthers. Smith interviewed for numerous positions around the N.F.L. last week.
Regardless, this will be an off-season of change for the Rams. Bulger, roundly booed during Saturday's game, is a restricted free agent and will earn more than the $375,000 he collected this season as the starter ahead of Kurt Warner. There is also speculation that Warner could be traded.
Beyond that, there are key decisions to be made among a number of high-profile unrestricted free agents, including offensive linemen Orlando Pace and Adam Timmerman, and defensive end Grant Wistrom.
''That's the nature of the business,'' Faulk said. ''You've got to understand it and you've got to savor certain moments and you've got to take advantage of opportunities that you have because you never know if you're going to be in that situation again with those same guys.
''I've been here, this is my fifth year. Since '99, we haven't had the same team. I think we have 11 guys on the team since '99. It's that kind of business. So you accept it.''
PRO FOOTBALL
