Like all football coaches, Bill Belichick of the Patriots dwells on integrating the offense, the defense and the special teams units into a seamless operation. In most post-mortems, at least one segment has gone awry.
But on Sunday, when Belichick watched the tape of the Patriots' 17-14 victory over the Titans in a divisional playoff game, he saw one passage that offered a clinic in the ideal incorporation of every phase of the game -- and it propelled the Patriots to their 13th consecutive victory.
The Patriots will play host to the Indianapolis Colts in the American Football Conference championship game on Sunday because, with the game still in doubt, their defense began the first pull in a protracted tug of war over field position. The battle ended with the Patriots' offense moving in close enough for Adam Vinatieri to kick the team into the next round.
''That was an example of all of it working together,'' Belichick said Sunday. ''Taking a bad field-position situation, changing it, maintaining it on defense, then on the kicking game, converting it. It wasn't one play. It was a multiple number of plays.''
The Titans had just scored their game-tying touchdown with 4 minutes 14 seconds remaining in the third quarter.
Two minutes later, the Patriots' Daniel Graham fumbled after catching a Tom Brady pass. Now, with 2:06 left in the third and the Titans starting at their 47-yard line, the game seemed to hinge on what the Patriots could do on this drive.
The Titans received a strong sign of what was to come when they called for a double pass: a lateral to tight end Frank Wycheck on the right side, then a potential screen to Drew Bennett.
Bennett was open, but the Patriots had seen the play before and Willie McGinest read it the entire way. He hit Wycheck for a 10-yard loss. The momentum had been stalled, and two plays later, the Titans had to punt.
''We were 90 percent sure we were going to get the bubble screen-pass off that set,'' linebacker Mike Vrabel said. ''We got it the first game. They ran the same motion they ran before. They ran the pass off it and Willie made a great play on it.''
The Titans' punt pinned the Patriots at their 5-yard line. A defensive stand by Tennessee would have put the Titans in outstanding field position again. Tennessee had allowed the Patriots to run just 19 offensive plays after they took a 14-7 lead early in the second quarter.
The Patriots decided to alter their offensive rhythm, running a no-huddle offense. It worked, to a degree. The Titans surprised the Patriots by not blitzing once in the game, and Brady, operating out of the shotgun, completed 4 of 7 passes and ran twice in moving the Patriots to Tennessee's 39-yard line.
The drive, which took nearly five minutes, stalled there, but it went far enough to allow Patriots punter Ken Walter to put Tennessee on its 7-yard line.
It was back in the hands of the defense again. The Titans' offense had held the ball for 20:54 in the second and third quarters. On occasion, the Patriots' defenders seemed confused by what they saw Saturday night, pointing to one another to indicate where they should line up. On Sunday, Belichick conceded that the Titans had given them some different formations than they had seen, and that the Patriots' defense struggled to communicate above the din of the home crowd. On the first four plays of the drive, the Titans ran.
Then McGinest, who sniffled throughout his postgame interview, the result of a lingering cold, made a big play. On second-and-8 from the Tennessee 20, McGinest sacked Steve McNair for a 3-yard loss, his second sack of the game.
One of the few trouble spots for the Patriots on Saturday was third-down defense. The Titans converted on 54 percent of their third-down chances. But on third-and-11, McNair threw incomplete. The punt from the 17-yard line went only to the Titans' 49 and was returned 9 yards. It was the only time in the game either team began a drive in the opponent's territory.
''We love stopping teams and giving our offense opportunities,'' said McGinest, who was added to the Pro Bowl roster over the weekend. ''We know if we do it enough times they're going to take advantage of it. There's been very few games that we've put it all together: offense, defense, special teams. We know that we're a pretty good football team if we can put everything together.''
Finally, 10 minutes after the Titans started a drive near midfield, the Patriots nudged their way back into good field position. They moved just 13 yards on their next seven plays, but it was enough. Vinatieri was sent in to kick a 46-yard field goal. There was little question at that point in the game that the Patriots would kick.
''In a 14-14 game, you've got to ask yourself, how many more times are you going to get it down there?'' Belichick said.
PRO FOOTBALL
