For the last few years the music industry has been urging consumers to boycott bootlegs and buy official releases instead. But what about those CD's that fall somewhere in between?
No hip-hop fan who wants to stay current can afford to ignore mixtapes: gray-market compilations (on CD's these days, despite the name) full of freestyles, remixes, unreleased tracks and sneak previews of forthcoming albums. In the wake of 50 Cent's mixtape-fueled rise to the top, record labels have learned to love mixtapes (or at least live with them), and rappers know that being included on them can help keep hard-core fans interested.
On Wednesday night an unnamed Manhattan nightclub is to be host of the Eighth Annual Mixtape Awards, an invitation-only ceremony honoring winners in 23 categories, from best Dirty South mixtape D.J. to best graphics on a mixtape. (You can vote at www.themixtapeawards.com.)
Here are three recent mixtapes from noteworthy nominees. (You can buy these discs by visiting your local hip-hop shop, street-corner vendor or flea market. Most are also available online -- you can try www  .nycphatmixtapes.com or www.bestmixtapes.com -- but where's the fun in that?)
'SWAT: Global Mixtape Strike Team'  DJ Whoo Kid
DJ Whoo Kid, nominated for best mixtape D.J., is known for his association with 50 Cent, and his mixtapes use gunshot sounds to mark the transition from one track to the next. His latest release, ''SWAT,'' starts with Lloyd Banks, from 50 Cent's group G-Unit, who sets the right tone with a menacing freestyle over the beat from ''Who Shot Ya?'' by the Notorious B.I.G.
Like many current mixtapes, this one includes an unreleased Eminem track called ''Bully,'' in which he taunts Ja Rule and his foes at the magazine The Source. On the track, which seems to have been recorded about a year ago, Eminem makes his vituperative rhymes sound funnier by singing them, not rapping them, and at one point he delivers a mock psychological profile of an adversary: ''His jealousy and envy, it just whirls him in a frenzy, as he turns on MTV and sees my face/He don't exist in this world, so he just twists and he twirls, spirals and spins till he hurls himself into rage.''
This CD also includes an infectious, lackadaisical freestyle from Snoop Dogg and Juvenile, a couple of short and sharp Jay-Z verses and a remix of Ludacris's ''Blow It Out,'' featuring new rhymes from 50 Cent. But perhaps the best remix here is a raucous new version of ''The Setup,'' by Eminem's protégé Obie Trice, with help from Nate Dogg. It's a song about deceitful women, and the last word goes to Jadakiss, the appealing Yonkers rapper whose scratchy voice sounds like an anti-smoking ad. Jadakiss starts off with gleeful misogyny, telling his partners in crime, ''It's a dirty game/And Rule No. 1, you never spend clean money on a dirty dame.'' But the more he rhymes, the more slyly affectionate he sounds, as if he can't help but admire a woman who is almost as devious as he is.
'Vlad the Butcher'  DJ Vlad
DJ Vlad, nominated for best new mixtape D.J., put out some of 2003's best and most meticulous mixtapes, including ''Rap Phenomenon II,'' an imaginative tribute to Tupac Shakur (compiled by DJ Vlad, Dirty Harry and DJ Green Lantern) that stitched together new songs out of old Shakur vocals, recent beats and new rhymes from like-minded rappers.
DJ Vlad's most recent mixtape, ''Vlad the Butcher,'' is full of clever hip-hop hybrids, including some that sound even better than the originals. He improves 50 Cent's ''P.I.M.P.'' by adding a smooth Carl Thomas chorus (it comes from ''The World Is Filled . . . ,'' a song by the Notorious B.I.G.) and some slick rhymes from the underrated Houston rapper Bun B.
By mixing and matching, DJ Vlad makes familiar tracks sound new again: Jay-Z's ''Moment of Clarity'' is enhanced with rhymes from Shakur, the Notorious B.I.G.'s ''Everyday Struggle'' is reborn over an old Jay-Z beat and Ludacris's ''Stand Up'' gets a old-fashioned funk makeover.
One of the highlights, though, isn't a song at all; it's a brief interlude from Eminem, who does a spot-on impression of Funkmaster Flex interviewing hip-hop stars. Eminem's slurred, unintelligible impression of 50 Cent is almost better than the real thing.
'R&amp;B Life No. 15'  Action Pac
Action Pac, also nominated for best mixtape D.J., is one of the few top hip-hop mixtape D.J.'s who takes R&amp;B seriously. His latest, ''R&amp;B Life No. 15,'' is mainly given over to hip-hop remixes of R&amp;B hits.
This is a pretty straightforward way to make a mixtape, but it works. The CD starts with Usher's new single, ''Yeah!!!,'' in which Usher, a former teenage pop star, collaborates with Lil Jon and Ludacris, who expounds on his seduction strategy: ''Forget about game, I'm-a spit the truth/I won't stop till I get 'em in their birthday suits.''
Elsewhere Beyoncé's ''Me, Myself and I'' gets an appealing new beat and a logorrheic new verse from Grafh, an emerging rapper with a charming disdain for the laws of meter. And if you keep listening almost to the end, you will be rewarded by ''Baby I'm Yours (Remix),'' in which R. Kelly sings circles around Jennifer Lopez.
New CD's
