The police said it began as the horrific vision of a troubled teenager planning to burn himself to death.
But the result was worse: two women killed in the fire, several other people injured, a 20-year-old soldier rushing home from Iraq to bury his wife, and the youth charged with arson and two counts of murder.
Such was the chilling sequence that ended yesterday with the arrest of Hasan Mohammad, 15, in the fire at a three-story apartment building in the Bronx on Dec. 30. Mr. Mohammad will be charged as an adult, said Steven Reed, a spokesman for the Bronx district attorney, Robert T. Johnson.
The authorities said Mr. Mohammad had been found leaving the scene of the early morning blaze, at 1437 Glover Street in Parkchester. He was badly burned on his face and hands, and told investigators that he had been walking by, on his way to mosque for prayers, and had raced into the burning building to try to save its occupants.
But that story seemed suspicious, investigators said, particularly because the youth smelled of gasoline.
Before his arrest yesterday, the police said, Mr. Mohammad was interviewed at least twice by detectives and ultimately admitted setting the fire. According to his account, they said, his motive was to provide a cover for his suicide, making it seem as if he was not responsible for taking his life.
But as flames burst around him, they said, Mr. Mohammad lost his nerve and ran.
The fire, which was immediately called suspicious by the police and fire officials, killed Maria Cruz, 20, and her mother, Brenda Casanova, 41. They were declared dead on arrival at nearby hospitals.
Others in the building jumped from windows to escape the blaze or suffered severe smoke inhalation. A 2-year-old boy and a 17-year-old male who was acquainted with Mr. Mohammad were the most critically injured. Both were hospitalized for smoke inhalation.
As soon as Ms. Cruz's husband, Roberto Cruz, a United States Army infantryman stationed in Iraq, learned of the death of his wife and his mother-in-law, he flew home and attended their joint funeral on Saturday at St. Raymond's Church in the Bronx.
The blaze was deemed especially suspicious because a month earlier, the police and fire investigators responded to calls from the same building and found gasoline poured, but not ignited, in a stairwell.
But the police said yesterday that they did not believe that Mr. Mohammad, who lives at 1437 Doris Street, a block from the Glover Street building, was responsible for the earlier incident. They said he was aware of it, however, when he devised his plan and picked the building as his arson target because it had already been identified as a place that might be burned down.
One police official, speaking on the condition that he not be identified, said Mr. Mohammad claimed that he had set the fire in an effort to take his own life, but that he wanted to conceal his suicide because he and his family were devout Muslims.
It was unclear how Mr. Mohammad expected anyone to explain why he was inside the Glover Street building shortly before 7 a.m., when the fire started. But acquaintances on the block said Mr. Mohammad was a friend of Ms. Casanova's son, Carlos, 17, and had visited him often at the Casanova apartment.
Police officials originally speculated that Mr. Mohammad may have set the fire with the intent of injuring or killing Carlos Casanova.
After hearing of the youth's arrest, people in the neighborhood said last night that they found his account of a suicide attempt hard to believe.
Michelle Reyes, 21, a nursing student at Bronx Community College who lives on the same block as the building that burned, described Mr. Mohammad as quiet and at times distant. ''I don't believe he was trying to kill himself,'' she said. ''Why would he kill himself in a friend's house?''
Edgar Santana, 25, a graduate student at Fordham University who lives opposite the Glover Street building and who ran in on the morning of the blaze to help people get out, said yesterday that he was saddened and bewildered by what Mr. Mohammad had told the police.
''Everybody in the world has issues,'' he said. ''This is just a kid, and whatever drove him to do it is a puzzle.''
He said his heart went out, in particular, to Ms. Cruz's husband.
''I feel very bad for him,'' he said. ''There he is, over there serving his country, and he has to come home to bury his wife.''
