Following are excerpts from statements by the Democratic presidential candidates at a debate in Des Moines last night, as recorded by Federal News Service Inc.:
JOHN KERRY  On the economy
I think it's a Bush-league recovery. It's a recovery for the people in the corporate boardroom. It's a recovery for corporations to some degree, by compacting, by increasing productivity. But as you go across America it's not a recovery.
JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN  On racism
The question of racism in America that you addressed is very much on the ballot this November, and the reality is that a president shows his priorities by where he puts his money. This president has put hundreds of billions of dollars in the pockets of the wealthiest Americans who don't need it. And, as a result, he hasn't had the money to invest in our health care system and our education system, which are unequal.
HOWARD DEAN  On the Confederate battle flag
Let me just say, the Confederate flag is a painful symbol to African-Americans in this country because of what it represented. But what we have in common with people who drive pickup trucks and so-called Nascar dads is that everybody needs a job. The Republicans divide us by race. They've done so since 1968 in Richard Nixon's Southern strategy. When we campaign, we've got to talk. They say ''race'' in the South or anyplace in America, we've got to say ''jobs,'' because everybody needs a job.
JOHN EDWARDS  On the Confederate battle flag
I'd like to say several things. Number one, the Confederate flag is not just a symbol of hatred and a divisive symbol to African-Americans. It's exactly the same thing it should be -- the same thing to all Americans. And I was about to say, before Reverend Sharpton said it, this is not just about talk. This is about doing something. . . . This is about creating real equality.
THE REV. AL SHARPTON  On Howard Dean's record
You keep talking about race. In the State of Vermont, where you were governor, '97, '99, 2001, not one black or brown held a senior policy position -- not one. You yourself said we must do something about it. Nothing was done. Can you explain, since now you want to convene everyone and talk about race?
RICHARD A. GEPHARDT  On financial security
On this question of access to capital, I think this is the key question in helping minorities be able to have the same opportunity as everyone else. One of my proposals that I'm very interested in is changing the percentage of federal contracts that go to minority contracts from 5 to 10 percent. This would do more to get capital into minority contractors and give people the opportunity they need.
CAROL MOSELEY BRAUN  On opportunity
One of the issues has to do with the private sector and creating jobs. And when you consider that Latino women make 53 cents on the dollar, African-American women make 68 cents on the dollar, and white women make 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes, the disparities are very clear, both as to race and gender. I think the answer lies in providing capital for the development of jobs, and businesses in communities where people live.
DENNIS J. KUCINICH  On the space policy
First of all, I've been wondering why the president would, while we're still in Iraq, talk about going to the Moon and going to Mars. Maybe he's looking for the weapons of mass destruction still. And so, I think thy will be done on Earth as it is in heaven, and I think that our work has to be done here on Earth. But we also have to keep in mind that there's tremendous spin-off technologies.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
