People watching the online music industry say two things about that digital marketplace: business is booming, and the business stinks. Dozens of companies have opened online music stores, drawn by the promise of riches if even a fraction of the tens of millions of people illegally downloading songs turn to legitimate services. But profits in selling songs are slim at best, and the industry is already too crowded.
''There are about three times as many music stores as there need to be,'' said Josh Bernoff, an analyst with Forrester Research.
And more all the time. Last week at the annual Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Sony and RealNetworks announced new stores, and other companies announced new services or marketing campaigns. Two companies have emerged as the early stars: Apple Computer, with its iTunes Music Store and its envy-inducing iPod digital music players and RealNetworks, which offers a subscription music service, Rhapsody, and a new online music store. The chief executives of the companies, Steven P. Jobs of Apple and Rob Glaser of RealNetworks, speak in combative terms about the competition. But there is one thing they agree on: creating online music stores, with their high start-up costs and low profit margins, is not for the faint of heart.
''The fixed costs of building this stuff out from scratch are high,'' Mr. Glaser said.
''It's not easy to do this well,'' Mr. Jobs said. ''How,'' he asked, will other companies ''justify investing R.&amp;D. into something where there is no money to be made?''
Still, high-tech companies fear being left behind, and the market for digital music is sure to grow. Apple alone has sold more than 30 million songs last year. It sold 730,000 of its iPods in the last quarter of 2003, reaching more than 30 percent of the market, according to the company.
Over all, consumers bought 3.5 million MP3 music players last year, according to Jupiter Research, and its analysts expect that number to grow 50 percent a year.
To serve the music downloading market, dozens of online stores are hoping to ride the wave. Some are independent, but many are sponsored by the biggest names in technology and retailing like Dell, Hewlett-Packard, Microsoft and Wal-Mart.
The expectation of online stores is that legitimate downloading will grow rapidly with the spread of high-speed Internet access and intensive marketing efforts.
Apple and Pepsi have announced a program to give away 100 million songs from Feb. 1 to March 31 through offers inside bottle caps. RealNetworks, linking up with a different kind of beverage, announced a partnership with Heineken USA that gives consumers two free songs per 12-pack and the first downloaded song for a dime.
The owner of Napster, once the most infamous name in copyright infringement, is trying to rebuild its name. Last week the parent company, Roxio, announced a deal with Target stores to sell packages that include the Napster software with prepaid cards for starting an online account, codes for a few free songs, along with burnable compact discs bearing the Napster logo.
In such a competitive and jumbled marketplace, who will win? Industry analysts are skeptical of those companies that only sell songs online. ''We don't see online music sales as a sustainable standalone business,'' said Joe Wilcox, a senior analyst with Jupiter Research. ''Many companies will find that digital music will remain a loss leader best thought of in the context of driving sales of core products and services.''
Hardware manufacturers are trying to apply the lessons of Apple by combining the low-profit-margin business of selling songs with the higher profit margin business of selling the music players to go with them. That kind of thinking favors companies like Dell, which is selling its Digital Jukebox, and Sony, which once owned the portable music business with the Walkman, but stumbled as companies like Apple jumped into digital music. The company has said that it will create an online service this spring that will work seamlessly with its players. The new service, called Connect, will allow customers to pay for songs with frequent-flier miles from United Airlines.
While many companies want to be in the game, some think it is smarter to buy into an existing store than to build one. Dell has worked with Musicmatch to offer music that works with its new portable device. And Hewlett-Packard surprised the industry last week when it announced that it would not build a store, but would send customers to Apple's iTunes store and sell Apple's iPod players under its trademark, a move that gives Apple a bigger potential market and might help it avoid becoming the Betamax of audio technology, a highly regarded technology that failed in the marketplace.
Other companies are hoping that they can develop a business selling turn-key online stores. Loudeye, which provides audio sampling services to companies like Amazon.com so that customers can listen to a snippet of a CD before they buy, now sells a packaged music store that other companies can purchase and slap their names onto.
Jeff Cavins, the chief executive of Loudeye, compared the online music market and the California gold rush. In his new venture, which is a partnership with Microsoft, he said, ''We're the company selling all the picks and shovels to the gold miners.''
Those companies without music players to sell could find themselves in a difficult position, industry analysts said. Wal-Mart has the market clout to wrestle lower licensing fees out of the recording companies, which could help to explain why the company is offering its songs at 88 cents. And Wal-Mart, unlike Apple and other computer makers, has made an art form of succeeding while making mere pennies on every sale.
Mr. Bernoff, the Forrester analyst, called Wal-Mart ''the company that will have the most difficulty'' because price alone will not drive sales. ''There is not a business in selling individual songs, cheap,'' he said. ''There is a business in creating a full, wraparound musical experience for people -- especially if you end up selling devices as well.''
That, he said, will be worth more to consumers than the 11-cent per-song difference between Wal-Mart and Apple.
Mike McGuire, an analyst with GartnerG2, said that Wal-Mart received a slight bounce ''in terms of name recognition'' in the online music bazaar, but that the young people the market would rely on ''might not move over to take advantage of the Wal-Mart brand.''
Yet hardware sellers have no clear advantage for selling songs from their online stores, Mr. McGuire said. Dell has great strength and expertise in online sales, but ''I don't know if that brand is going to extend well into online music.''
Subscription services like Rhapsody from RealNetworks show a potentially stable revenue source and more than 350,000 people now have subscriptions. But some analysts wonder whether the subscription model will last since customers are essentially renting, not buying, music. Rhapsody allows subscribers to download permanent copies of about 80 percent of the songs in its service, but charges 79 cents a track on top of the monthly subscription price of about $10. Last week RealNetworks introduced a no-subscription music download store.
Yet Mr. Wilcox of Jupiter said that the Rhapsody strategy might, in fact, have advantages of its own. ''While more people are expected to buy songs than subscribe for them, we expect that the subscription model will be more profitable,'' he said.
In the short term, there will be confusion, Mr. Wilcox said. ''Think about what consumers are used to. CD's can be played anywhere. That's not true in the online world.''
For now, the situation looks eerily familiar to experts who have watched high technology's boom and bust cycles. ''Are we going to see people fall by the wayside because of the fabulous invisible hand?'' asked Mr. McGuire, the analyst from GartnerG2. ''Yup. It's going to spank a lot of them.''
Mr. Bernoff, the Forrester analyst, also said that he sees a bubble in the making. But he warned against taking an overly broad message from the inevitable failure of some businesses, ''just as the dot-com bubble couldn't cancel the fact that the Internet did, in fact, change the way a lot of people behaved.'' No matter what happens in the music demolition derby, ''The Internet will change how people deal with music,'' he said. ''This is fundamental change.''
