HIGHLIGHTS
RAY CHARLES: COMING BACK -- The soul singer Ray Charles, left, 73, out of action since July when acute discomfort forced him to undergo surgery to replace his left hip, plans to return to performing on March 2 at Lincoln Center, and he couldn't be happier. ''Music and performing are in my blood,'' he said in a statement reported by The Associated Press. ''I need them like oxygen.'' Jerry Digney, a spokesman, said Mr. Charles was undergoing therapy at his home in Beverly Hills and recording an album of duets with performers like Norah Jones, James Taylor, Bonnie Raitt and Willie Nelson.
OZZY: FOR NOW, THE MUSIC STOPS -- Citing a need for more time to recover from injuries sustained last month in an all-terrain-vehicle accident, Ozzy Osbourne has canceled a 20-date tour of Britain scheduled to begin on Feb. 15 in London, The Associated Press reported. ''I am deeply disappointed, but it's out of my control,'' Mr. Osbourne, the former frontman for Black Sabbath and current reality show star, said in a statement. ''Right now I need to concentrate on my recovery, and unfortunately this is something I cannot rush.'' Mr. Osbourne, 55, broke his collarbone, eight ribs and a neck vertebra when the 600-pound vehicle flipped and landed atop him on his estate in England on Dec. 8.
BOSTON: NEW HAT FOR HAITINK -- Bernard Haitink, who first conducted the Boston Symphony Orchestra in 1971 and has been its principal guest conductor since 1995, has accepted a new position and title created for him: conductor emeritus. Mark Volpe, managing director of the orchestra, said the title gives Mr. Haitink ''an open invitation to appear with the orchestra whenever he is willing and able.'' Now the chief conductor and music director of the Dresden Staatskapelle, Mr. Haitink, who turns 75 on March 4, has already accepted a two-week engagement in the 2005-6 season and will join the Boston Symphony's masthead next fall with its new music director, James Levine, and its music director laureate, Seiji Ozawa. Mr. Volpe told The Boston Globe: ''Maestro Haitink made it very clear that he wanted to relinquish the title of principal guest conductor because of the obligations that he feels it entails. He was a good sport and kept the title for two seasons beyond what he had initially agreed to, in order to help us out in the interim period between Seiji Ozawa and James Levine.''
BERLIN: MORE ABOUT MARILYN -- More than 100 previously unpublished photographs of Marilyn Monroe, taken by Sam Shaw, who took the famous picture of the actress trying to push down her white dress over a subway grating while filming ''The Seven Year Itch,'' will be seen in a new book to be issued in Berlin on Jan. 30. ''Of the roughly 160 photos shown in the book, only 40 are known,'' said Claudia Lardon of Lardon Media, which will publish the book, ''Marilyn Monroe -- The New York Years.'' The photographs, including the one above, were taken from 1954 to 1957, Agence France-Presse reported. The book is to be published in English and include some quotations from Monroe and captions but little text, the publishers said.
CANADA: SUPPORTING CULTURE -- The Canadian government spent $217 on culture for each citizen in fiscal 2001-2, an increase of $13 from the previous year. The increase, the fourth in four years, was also part of the biggest rise in government spending on culture in Canada in a decade. According to figures released by Statistics Canada, the national statistics agency, and reported by Canadian Press, government spending passed $3 billion for the first time, climbing to $3.2 billion, an increase of 8.9 percent from the total in 2000-1. The federal outlay, combined with provincial and municipal spending on everything from libraries to the performing arts, totaled $6.8 billion.
FOOTNOTES
Reading tales by Eudora Welty, T. Coraghessan Boyle and Zora Neale Hurston in the 200th presentation of Selected Shorts, the actors René Auberjonois, Barbara Barrie and Karen Kandel will usher in the 20th season of the series at 6:30 p.m. Wednesday at Symphony Space. Championing classic and new short stories and running through June 9, the 13 Wednesday night readings will present works by writers like Chekhov, Isaac Bashevis Singer, Edwidge Danticat and E. L. Doctorow read by performers like Jane Curtin, Liev Schreiber, B. D. Wong, Sigourney Weaver, Leonard Nimoy, James Naughton and William Hurt. . . . Goldie Hawn is a grandma. Her daughter, the actress Kate Hudson, 24, gave birth last week to an 8 pound 11 ounce boy, Ryder Russell Robinson, Reuters reported. The father is Ms. Hudson's husband, Chris Robinson, 37, formerly of the rock band the Black Crowes.
