SKIING  Miller Ends Slalom Slump
Bode Miller showed some of his old power yesterday, finishing third in a World Cup slalom race in Chamonix, France, that was won by Giorgio Rocca of Italy. Pierrick Bourgeat of France was second.
Until yesterday, Miller had not scored in a slalom since last February, when he was sixth in South Korea. He had failed to finish many slaloms, struggling with equipment and execution. He won the season's opening combined race, with his times from Saturday's downhill added to those from yesterday's slalom. He was 34th in the downhill. Miller was the combined champion in 2003. (AP)
PRO FOOTBALL  Oakland to Interview Payton
The Raiders will interview Sean Payton, the Dallas Cowboys' assistant head coach and quarterbacks coach, for their head coaching vacancy. The Raiders interviewed Dennis Green before he took the job with the Arizona Cardinals, and they also spoke last week to Greg Knapp, the San Francisco 49ers' offensive coordinator. (AP)
L.S.U.'S CLAYTON TO ENTER DRAFT -- Louisiana State receiver Michael Clayton will skip his senior year and enter the draft. He is the only player in team history to have three straight 700-yard receiving seasons. (Bloomberg News)
TENNIS  Rusedski Wins After Positive Drug Test
Greg Rusedski beat Juan Ignacio Chela, 7-6 (7-1), 7-6 (7-5), yesterday in the first round of the Adidas International in Sydney, Australia. On Friday, Rusedski, 30, admitted that he had tested positive for a low level of nandrolone, a banned steroid, in July. He has denied taking performance-enhancing drugs and has a hearing Feb. 9 in Montreal. (Bloomberg News)
CLIJSTERS AILING -- Kim Clijsters said yesterday that the ankle injury that forced her out of last week's Hopman Cup would never heal and might eventually require surgery. (Reuters)
MOYA WINS TOURNAMENT IN INDIA -- The top-seeded Carlos Moya won the Tata Open in Madras, India, defeating the defending champion, Paradorn Srichaphan of Thailand, 6-4, 3-6, 7-6 (5). (AP)
MAURESMO CRITICAL OF SEEDING -- Amélie Mauresmo has slammed Australian Open officials for elevating Venus Williams to third in the tournament seeding despite her lower ranking. Williams, who is ranked No. 11, was seeded third after her sister Serena pulled out with an injury. Mauresmo, ranked No. 4, had expected to be seeded third. (Reuters)
