For Stuart Appleby, what looked like a Hawaiian breeze turned into an interesting finish.
In the most significant achievement of his career, Appleby built a six-stroke lead at the turn Sunday and held off a charging Vijay Singh for a one-stroke victory at the Mercedes Championships.
Appleby's victory kicked off the 2004 PGA Tour season with a twist. Never mind that Singh, Tiger Woods, Davis Love III, Ernie Els and other Tour heavyweights were in this 30-player event. Appleby outplayed them all, winning $1.06 million and a new Mercedes-Benz.
Not a bad way to start the year, and not a bad way for Appleby to take his game to another level.
''What it does is confirm that what I'm doing on the golf course is working,'' said Appleby, a 32-year-old native of Australia.
It was the fifth Tour victory of Appleby's career, but he had never beaten a field like this. And Singh made Appleby earn it, making birdies at Nos. 14, 15 and 16 to put pressure on Appleby down the stretch.
Appleby finished at 22 under par for a 270 total. Singh was a stroke back and Darren Clarke finished third, at 275. Tiger Woods, who never mounted a serious challenge, finished tied for fourth with Retief Goosen, seven strokes behind.
Beginning the final round with a two-stroke lead, Appleby led by a commanding six strokes as he reached the 10th tee, and it was easy to picture someone handing him the keys to the Mercedes. But not so fast. Singh won the money title last year for a reason, and surrender is not in his nature.
Even after Appleby bogeyed No. 12, he still led by five strokes as he reached No. 14, before Singh finally began to put pressure on him.
Starting his charge, Singh made a 12-footer for birdie at No. 14, a 9-footer for birdie at No. 15 and a 20-footer for birdie at No. 16. After Singh finished at No. 16, Appleby had a chance to answer, but he missed a 9-foot birdie attempt. That left Singh just two strokes behind as they headed for the 17th tee.
''I did believe that Vijay was never going to go away,'' Appleby said. ''To the benefit of me, he ran out of holes.''
After Appleby settled for par at No. 17, Singh had a chance to close to one, but he needed to make a 16-footer for birdie. His attempt tailed to the left near the cup, leaving Appleby with a two-stroke cushion as they reached the par-5 final hole. After Singh barely missed a 96-foot putt for eagle, Appleby secured the victory with his par. Singh tapped in for birdie and finished one stroke behind.
''I had a lot of chances,'' Singh said. ''Stuart played really well. He made the putts when he needed to and he deserved to win. I'm not disappointed finishing second. I'm just disappointed not winning.''
Singh had hoped to begin the year making a statement with a victory, but his charge came too late. He did not make a birdie until the ninth hole, and by that time, Appleby was pulling away. Singh's putting, perhaps the only inconsistent part of his repertory, was shaky early. He missed a 6-footer for birdie at No. 6 and a 6-footer for par at No. 8, which could have kept him closer.
Singh helped Appleby early, when Singh three-putted for bogey at the second hole and fell three strokes behind. Appleby went four strokes ahead by making a 14-footer for birdie at No. 4, and on the next hole, he went five strokes up by making a 6-footer for birdie at No. 5.
Appleby was in command, and he did not let up. Continuing the strong putting he displayed all week, he poured in a 24-footer for birdie at No. 7, and what was expected to be an intense battle was turning into a possible rout.
This was the breeziest day of the tournament, and the toughest day for scoring, but with his comfortable lead, Appleby could play conservatively and not worry about firing at flags. Singh, however, continued to grind. Appleby gave back a stroke at No. 12 with a bogey, then Singh's late charge made things interesting.
In his last nine Tour starts, Singh has finished no worse than sixth. With a career-high four victories last year, Singh has risen to No. 2 in the world ranking. He has given early notice that he will not be resting on his laurels.
Appleby will try to continue his winning ways at the Sony Open in Hawaii, which begins Thursday. Michelle Wie, a 14-year-old prodigy, will be making her PGA Tour debut, playing on a sponsor exemption. But Sunday belonged to Appleby, who started 2004 in impressive fashion.
CHIP SHOTS
The defending champion, ERNIE ELS, had a disappointing week, finishing in a tie for 21st. The reigning Masters champion, MIKE WEIR, was also off his game, tying for 24th. Last year's British Open champion, BEN CURTIS, finished last at five over. . . . With his tie for fourth, TIGER WOODS crossed the $40 million mark in career earnings. ''That's not too bad,'' Woods said. ''I love inflation.'' Woods is not expected to play again until the Buick Invitational, from Feb. 12 to Feb. 15. ''I'm taking my off-season right now, so you won't see me for a while,'' he said.
GOLF
