A new power struggle engulfed Iran's government on Sunday when a hard-line Islamic religious authority disqualified half the 8,200 candidates in parliamentary elections next month, provoking outrage among reformers who accused their conservative rivals of trying to steal the vote.
Rejected candidates included a brother of the reform-minded president, Mohammad Khatami. More than 80 current members of the 290-seat Parliament were rejected, including two prominent feminists, two deputy speakers and six leaders of important parliamentary commissions. Many had been outspoken critics of Iran's strict Islamic religious political system and its treatment of dissenters and diverse views.
The religious authority, the 12-member Guardian Council, had disqualified some candidates in previous elections and had blocked many reform bills passed by Parliament in recent years. But the number of disqualifications for the Feb. 20 elections represented the most drastic action the council has taken against reformers in the country's parliamentary history.
Nearly 60 reformist members of Parliament held a sit-in at Parliament on Sunday to protest the action. Ali Shakourirad, a lawmaker on the disqualified list, told reporters that the group intended to continue the sit-in until the disqualifications were reversed. If not, he said, ''we will take further steps in our protest.''
The Iranian Student News Agency reported that governors general around the country had said in a letter to President Khatami that they would resign if the disqualification of candidates was not reversed. ''Clearly if there are no results within a week, governor generals see no reason to continue their jobs in conditions in which they cannot provide free elections, which is one of the fundamental rights of citizens,'' the news agency quoted them as saying.
President Khatami urged supporters to react calmly, but he was clearly angered by what outside political analysts called a brazen effort by religious conservatives to neutralize Iran's reform movement.
''There are legal means to react to this problem, and I hope these legal means will solve the problem,'' President Khatami told reporters after a cabinet meeting.
''We must not do anything to cause tension but we have the right to say what we have to say and to protest,'' he said. ''One political faction must not consider its right more than what it deserves, and it should not eliminate another faction in order to win in elections.''
Mohsen Mirdamadi, head of Parliament's National Security and Foreign Policy Committee, who was among those disqualified, told the Islamic Republic News Agency that the Guardian Council's move was a ''bloodless coup.'' He said President Khatami's younger brother, Mohammad Reza Khatami, and some others were disqualified because the council had concluded they did not support the rule of the supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
The ayatollah has the power to change the Guardian Council's decision. It remained unclear late Sunday whether President Khatami would appeal directly to him or take some intermediate action first.
Other rejected candidates included six from the ethnic Kurdish region of Iranian Kurdistan. Jalal Jalali, a parliamentarian from Sanandaj, in the center of that region, was quoted by the Etemad newspaper as saying Kurds would boycott the elections if their candidates could not run.
The six clerics of the Guardian Council are picked by Ayatollah Khamenei. The council is responsible for vetting election candidates and approving Parliament's laws to make sure they are compatible with Islamic law and the Constitution.
There was no public explanation by the council for its decisions on each of the disqualified candidates. But Iranian newspapers reported Sunday that a majority of disqualifications were made because the candidates opposed Iran's religious government or were members of illegal opposition groups. The newspapers said some were disqualified because they had criminal records.
The election had been seen as a test of the public's attitude toward the reform movement in Iran. The council's disqualification actions could lead to voter apathy, some political commentators said.
''We must not forget the fact that the Islamic Republic has received its legitimacy in the past 25 years from voters' turnout in elections, and if people refrain from voting this time the system's 25-year-old legitimacy would be questioned,'' wrote a journalist, Badrolsadat Mofidi, in the Shargh newspaper on Sunday.
