Health officials here said they had been notified of a third suspected case of severe acute respiratory syndrome in China's adjacent Guangdong Province and were making inquiries on Monday about a possible fourth case. They expressed growing worry over the weekend about the possibility of another outbreak here.
The third case involves a 35-year-old man with no recent history of travel to Hong Kong and no apparent contact with wild animals -- the suspected source of some cases -- said Dr. Thomas Tsang, a community medicine consultant for the Hong Kong Department of Health. Dr. Tsang said that while Guangdong officials had notified Hong Kong, as required under recent cooperation agreements, few details had been provided, such as whether the man had traveled anywhere other than Hong Kong. A Guangdong provincial official, commenting on that case, said it was only suspected, not confirmed.
Chinese-language news media in Hong Kong reported Monday morning that while the first three suspected or confirmed cases had been in Guangzhou, 80 miles north, a fourth case had just been discovered in Shenzhen on Hong Kong's border. A spokesman for the Hong Kong Department of Health said the agency was asking mainland authorities for information about the possibility of a Shenzhen case. The Guangdong official said she had no information about that.
Roy Wadia, a spokesman for the World Health Organization, said Sunday evening that China's Ministry of Health in Beijing believed that the tests on the 35-year-old man were not yet conclusive.
Provincial officials have been coordinating their epidemiological and scientific work with Hong Kong officials closely, with the result that the Hong Kong government has repeatedly released information before it becomes public on the mainland.
Guangdong Province has already confirmed SARS in one case, a 32-year-old television producer released from the hospital last Thursday, and has identified another suspected case, a 20-year-old waitress at a restaurant that served wild animal meat. After doctors here and in Guangdong identified SARS-like corona viruses in most of the civet cats that they tested in the province's wild animal markets a week ago, provincial officials ordered the slaughter of thousands of civets, which are relatives of the mongoose.
Dr. Yeoh Eng-kiong, Hong Kong's secretary of health, welfare and food, said Saturday that the next three weeks represented a ''high-risk period'' in which the extent of SARS in Guangdong Province would be unclear and in which it would be crucial but difficult to prevent the spread of the disease here. Hong Kong abuts Guangdong Province and serves as the region's financial and commercial capital. ''This is a very sensitive period for us in Hong Kong because this is a period where there may be some of these corona viruses that may possibly come to Hong Kong,'' Dr. Yeoh warned.
A series of global disease outbreaks during the past century, including SARS last spring and the Hong Kong flu epidemic in the late 1960's, have started in the crowded towns and cities of Guangdong Province, spread to Hong Kong and then gone quickly around the world.
On Sunday morning, W.H.O. investigators visited the apartment block where the 32-year-old television producer lived before his illness and examined the staircases, ventilation system and sanitation system, taking samples, Mr. Wadia said.
Dr. Guan Yi, a Hong Kong University microbiologist working with Chinese scientists on the latest SARS cases, said at a news conference here on Jan. 5 that the corona virus believed to cause SARS had evolved since last spring. The strain of the virus that has showed up in civet cats and in the first confirmed human case of SARS in southeastern China this winter has more genes commonly found in human viruses and fewer genes commonly found in animal viruses than the strain of the SARS virus that infected thousands last spring, he said.
Other viruses, including influenza, sometimes become more infectious in people when they have more genes associated with human diseases. But Dr. Guan saidit was too soon to conclude whether the new strain in southeastern China this winter is more or less infectious than the previous one.
