IT is known for the Liberty Bell, for the signing of the Declaration of Independence, for Ben Franklin and his kite. All that is historic and nice, but in Philadelphia, it is old stuff that happened more than 200 years ago. Much more important to people in Philadelphia is something else that would really be historic, something they hope to see for themselves -- the Super Bowl trophy.
The Eagles have never won it. They went to the Super Bowl after the 1980 season, but lost to the Oakland Raiders. Lost badly, 27-10.
''There's a certain level of frustration,'' said ESPN's Ron Jaworski, who was the quarterback on the 1980 team. ''Last year, the stars seemed to be aligned to get back to the Super Bowl. In the N.F.C. championship game, the Eagles had the home field, in the Tampa Bay Bucs they were playing a team they had beaten four straight times, and it was cold and windy, hardly Florida weather. But they let that slip away.''
The Buccaneers won, 27-10, then, to add to Philadelphia's pain, the Buccaneers upset the Oakland Raiders, 48-21, in the Super Bowl.
But the City of Brotherly Love is again the City of Hope. In a 20-17 comeback triumph over the Green Bay Packers in overtime yesterday, the Eagles advanced to the National Football Conference championship game for the third consecutive year. They will go against the Carolina Panthers here next Sunday with a trip to Super Bowl XXXVIII at stake.
Philadelphia's dream is alive, kept breathing by the pass that will be part of Donovan McNabb's résumé for the rest of his career.
Trailing, 17-14, with about a minute left in regulation, the Eagles were desperate. In a fourth-and-26 at the Eagles' 26-yard line, McNabb retreated and flung the ball down the middle toward midfield, where wide receiver Freddie Mitchell leaped and snatched it for a 28-yard gain and a first down at the Packers' 46. ''What a great job Freddie did on that catch and for Donovan trusting him and shooting it in there,'' Eagles Coach Andy Reid said. ''Donovan can go in different directions with it, but Freddie could potentially be No. 1 according to the coverage, so it worked out that way.''
As the final minute ticked away, McNabb found Mitchell again for 9 yards, then McNabb's 3-yard scramble and his 10-yard dart to wide receiver Todd Pinkston positioned David Akers for his tying 37-yard field goal with 5 seconds remaining.
In the overtime, Eagles strong safety Brian Dawkins's interception of Brett Favre, the game's only interception, helped to position Akers for his winning 31-yard field goal.
Just as McNabb's season continued, Favre's theater closed after a four-game run. After his 58-year-old father, Irvin, died of a heart attack or a stroke while driving to his Kiln, Miss., home on the night of Dec. 21, Favre had been dazzling in late-season victories over Oakland and Denver, and in an overtime triumph over Seattle in a wild-card game last week. But after Favre's two touchdown passes provided a quick 14-0 lead yesterday, the Eagles' defense smothered him.
More than any other play, McNabb's pass to Mitchell in that fourth-and-26 situation haunted the Packers. ''We were trying to be very cautious and play it very easy, and that's what hurt us,'' Packers cornerback Mike McKenzie said. ''I mean, I was thinking Super Bowl, going to the N.F.C. championship. The fate of this football team was in our hands, and we couldn't seal it.''
Instead, the Eagles are going to the N.F.C. championship game and, if they win next Sunday, to the Super Bowl in Houston on Feb. 1.
The Eagles have not been the N.F.L. champions since 1960. In their 17-13 victory over the Packers that year, time expired with linebacker Chuck Bednarik sitting on Packer fullback Jim Taylor at the 8-yard line. In the 2001 and 2002 seasons, the Eagles lost the N.F.C. title game -- two years ago in St. Louis, 29-24, and a year ago to the Buccaneers in what was their last game at Veterans Stadium.
Of the 12 N.F.L. franchises before 1960 (when the expansion Dallas Cowboys arrived), the Eagles have endured the third-longest drought without the league title.
The Cardinals, who have hitch-hiked from Chicago to St. Louis to Arizona, have not won the championship since 1947. The Detroit Lions haven't won since 1957.
In the pre-Super Bowl era, the Eagles, who have been in the league since 1933, won the title only three times -- in 1948 over the Chicago Cardinals, 7-0, as Steve Van Buren scored the only touchdown in a snowstorm at old Shibe Park; in 1949 over the Los Angeles Rams, 14-0, at the L.A. Coliseum; and in 1960 when Bednarik emerged as pro football's last every-down two-way player, a center on offense and a linebacker on defense.
What Bednarik did in the last few seconds of that game are burned into every longtime Eagles fan's memory.
''Bart Starr had nobody open in the end zone,'' Bednarik said Friday on the telephone, ''so he threw a screen pass to Taylor, who swung out toward the sideline. If he gets by me, he scores and we lose, but I tackle him. He's squirming to get up, but I stay on top of him so he can't get up. I'm watching the clock -- five, four, three, two, one. When the gun goes off, I tell him, 'You can get up now, this game is over.' ''
When yesterday's game was over, McNabb's fourth-and-26 pass to Mitchell was burned into every Eagles fan's memory. And the Eagles had another opportunity to get to the Super Bowl.
Sports of The Times
