Jassen Cullimore scored 2 minutes 3 seconds into overtime to give the Tampa Bay Lightning a 2-1 victory over the Rangers at a strangely lifeless Madison Square Garden last night.
Rangers center Bobby Holik said the seeds of the defeat could be found in the first period.
Forget for a moment, Holik said, all the talk of the defensive systems the Rangers have tried to put in place this season.
''We spend way too much time and energy in our own end,'' Holik said, referring to a recurring problem. ''That's why we are where we are.''
The Rangers (17-16-5-4) are battling for the eighth and final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference.
They salvaged a point because of the play of goaltender Mike Dunham, who made 37 saves, several of them spectacular.
Since he began working last week on getting back to fundamentals with the Rangers' roving goaltending consultant, Sam St. Laurent, Dunham has shown improvement over his last three starts.
''It's an ongoing process,'' said Dunham, who has been plagued by inconsistency over the last two months.
The Rangers came into last night's game as the most penalized of the 30 teams in the National Hockey League, averaging 19.1 penalty minutes a game.
Against Tampa Bay, the Rangers were penalized 10 times for 23 minutes and allowed the Lightning to go on seven power plays.
But the Lightning, which came into the game tied for 25th in the league in power-play efficiency, could not score on any of the power plays, including a two-man advantage for 1:09 midway through the first period.
Tampa Bay had four power plays in the first period, but Rangers Coach Glen Sather argued that it could have been more.
At 18:07, while Chris Simon was either angry at being cleanly checked into the boards, slashed at, or having something said to him (he would not say), he cross-checked Ruslan Fedotenko in the back, in the back of the head, then punched Fedotenko repeatedly while he was on the ice.
Simon was assessed two two-minute minor penalties, one for roughing, one for cross-checking.
''That's why I gave him one shift in the third period,'' Sather said. ''You can't do that. Fedotenko hit him clean and he retaliates. He's lucky he only got four minutes. It could have cost us the hockey game.''
Simon also served a five-minute penalty for fighting with Chris Dingman, who was losing the fight before he bulled Simon head-over-heels over the boards.
''No matter what, I can't react like that,'' Simon said, referring to his incident with Fedotenko, which the league office is likely to review.
Of his hit on Simon, Fedotenko said: ''I guess it was too hard for him. That should be a suspension for sure. It's a good thing I didn't get hurt.''
SLAP SHOTS
ALEKSEI KOVALEV opened the scoring at 4:06 of the first period, when he whistled a wrist shot past Tampa Bay goaltender JOHN GRAHAME. DAN BOYLE scored at 6:37 of the first period for the Lightning. . . . DAN BLACKBURN, the Rangers' 20-year-old goaltender, had the nerve damage in his left shoulder re-examined Friday. There has been a slight improvement. But he acknowledged the strong possibility that he would not play this season.
HOCKEY
