Whether crossing his wrists, slapping his legs or hitching his pants before the snap, Peyton Manning used his bevy of signals to serve as instruction to his teammates.
''There are some dummy checks in there,'' Colts receiver Brandon Stokley said. ''But most of it means something.''
Manning said, ''Yeah, we're pretty busy at the line of scrimmage.''
In a divisional playoff game Sunday against the Kansas City Chiefs, the Colts' offense was busy all over the field. Manning and his offense found no Chiefs defender they feared, no Chiefs defensive scheme they could not shred. The Colts sliced the Chiefs' defense early, then left it splattered across the field late in a 38-31 victory before a stunned crowd of 79,159 at Arrowhead Stadium.
Indianapolis (14-4) plays at New England (15-2) in the American Football Conference championship game on Sunday.
The Colts' offense versus the Chiefs' defense was the story of this game. The Colts' offense could do little wrong and the Chiefs' defense could do little right. The Colts had eight possessions in the game and they went this way: Touchdown, touchdown, touchdown, end of half, field goal, touchdown, touchdown and turnover on downs with eight seconds left. It was a mismatch that the Colts exploited to incredible heights, like pricking at an open wound despite seeing red.
In this case, plenty of Chiefs red.
The stadium was a colorful collage of Chiefs red and Colts white and blue, but the aftermath was stark and dark for the Chiefs.
''It was very embarrassing,'' Chiefs cornerback Eric Warfield said. ''Hearing our fans start to boo us and not being able to stop them was disgraceful. They really hurt us on third down.''
And first down, and second down, and . . .
''It looked like Marvin and me and Edgerrin were doing everything, but those guys up front did the job,'' Manning said of receiver Marvin Harrison (98 receiving yards), running back Edgerrin James (125 rushing yards and 2 touchdowns) and his offensive line. Manning did plenty: 22 of 30 passing for 304 yards and 3 touchdowns.
''He is the master,'' Chiefs defensive end Eric Hicks said. ''It's obvious why he's the co-M.V.P. of the league. That was an amazing performance.''
Manning's maniacal hand gestures and other signals before the snap worked to perfection at a noisy stadium filled with the largest crowd for a Chiefs home playoff game.
''Peyton is just playing phenomenal,'' Colts Coach Tony Dungy said. ''He's making the checks, putting us in the right plays and making the clutch third-down plays. He's just been fantastic the last two weeks. We're excited about going back to New England.''
Actually, the Colts played the Patriots in Indianapolis on Nov. 30 and lost, 38-34. Chiefs Coach Dick Vermeil was asked if there was a defense that could stop the Colts.
''I'm sure there are,'' Vermeil said. ''Maybe they're going to see one next week, I don't know. Going to New England is no easy place to play. But you go on the road and do what Tony's team did today to a team that has won 13 straight at home -- they've done a good job.''
Rather than looking comfortable at home with their impressive 13-game winning streak here, rested after a first-round playoff bye and a 13-3 season, the Chiefs looked sapped on defense. Their offense produced plenty but dropped enough passes throughout, missed a first-half field goal and lost a fumble in the opening minutes of the third quarter that kept them from matching the Colts' offense.
Consider that Chiefs running back Priest Holmes rushed for 176 yards and 2 touchdowns, that quarterback Trent Green threw for 212 yards and a touchdown, that the offensive line did not allow a sack, that the Chiefs gained 408 yards on offene and outscored the Colts, 21-17, in the second half. Chiefs kick returner Dante Hall added a dizzying 92-yard kickoff return for a touchdown in the third quarter.
But the Colts' offense was better. It was spurred by a sparkling 8 of 11 on third-down conversions; the Chiefs were only 5 of 11.
''We know we have some flaws on defense, just like the Colts understand they have some flaws,'' Vermeil said. ''They're going on and we're not. We are aware that we have some problems -- all year -- but not as many problems as we had today.''
A 17-play drive capped by Holmes's 1-yard run made it 38-31 with 4 minutes 22 seconds left, and nearly everyone at the stadium expected that the Chiefs would try an onside kick. Surely they would not give the ball back to the Colts and hope for a stop, but that is exactly what they did.
The Colts took the ball at their 33 after the kickoff and moved it the way they had all game. They would run eight plays and leave only eight seconds remaining before giving the ball back to the Chiefs. A 13-yard pass to Holmes ended the game.
Vermeil was asked why he did not try an onside kick.
''We thought we'd get the ball back,'' he said. ''Hey, you never know. I did what I thought was right at the time.''
With that defense? No chance.
''Actually, with four minutes on the clock, I felt this would be the drive that the defense would stop them,'' Holmes said. ''Unfortunately, the Colts did a wonderful job checking out of certain plays and making sure that they were reading our safeties. Peyton Manning showed why he is still in the playoffs.''
And, after a five-touchdown-pass performance against Denver in the first round of the playoffs last week, Manning remained hot.
''The game got on the kind of pace where we knew if we could get a couple of stops, we could win the game because they weren't really going to stop us,'' Stokley said.
James said: ''Everybody played their part. Everybody showed up. We had like a one-two punch going.''
And the Chiefs' defense had the bruises afterward to show it.
FOOTBALL
