Those who make bridge the focus of their lives usually concentrate on one aspect of the game. They are tournament players, rubber-bridge players, teachers, writers, directors or administrators. A few wear many hats, and the largest collection of headgear seems to be owned by Barry Rigal of Manhattan.
He writes books, magazine articles and, under another name, a newspaper column. He selects the deals that are candidates for the year's best. He heads the Appeals Committee at national Championships. He is a regular Vugraph commentator at world championships. He edits the daily bulletins at junior camps. He competes successfully in tournaments at every level, sometimes with his wife, Sue Picus, a reigning world champion. And when he has nothing else to do, he plays money bridge at the Regency Club in Manhattan.
Wearing the last of these hats, he sat South on this deal and made an impertinent bid. When his opponents were about to come to rest in three spades, he ventured four hearts. He knew that his opponents had limited values, since East had not opened the bidding, and West had a weak two-bid, so North was marked with strength. Rigal did not know his opponents could make four spades. (If trumps are led, the declarer can develop a second club trick with his jack-10 combination.) He did not know he was running into a foul heart break. If he had known either of those things, he would have held his peace. As it was, he was in four hearts, and East was cautious in refraining from doubling.
Rigal ruffed the second spade lead, crossed to the diamond queen and called for the heart 10. This was covered by the jack and queen, revealing the bad split. On the surface the situation was hopeless, but with his good heart spots South saw that he had a fair chance. He knew the major-suit distribution, and he hoped that East held minor-suit doubletons including the club ace.
He therefore crossed to the diamond king and led the club six. East could have defended successfully by snatching his ace and leading a third round of spades. But that was very difficult to see, and he made the normal play of the club nine. South won with the king and ducked a club. This forced East to win in this tricky position:
If East had exited a trump, South would have won cheaply and led a diamond to the ace effectively. So East tried a spade. The declarer threw his club deuce, ruffed in the dummy and led the club queen. East ruffed and was overruffed. A diamond to the dummy was ruffed by East, who was helpless. He led his last spade and dummy ruffed. That left East's king-eight of hearts trapped under South's ace-nine in a coup position.
Rigal had a deal worth writing about, so he collected his money and departed in search of one his other hats.
The Tri-State Regional Championships will be played this week at the Hilton Rye Town in Rye Brook, N.Y. This is the schedule of major events:
Tomorrow: Bracketed Knockout Teams, 7:30 p.m. and continues
Wednesday: Stratified Senior Pairs, 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.
Stratified Open and Women's Pairs, 1 p.m. and 7:30 p.m.
Thursday: Stratified Senior Pairs, 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.
Fast Pairs, 1 p.m. and 4 p.m.
Bracketed Knockout Teams, 1 p.m. and continues
Stratified Open Swiss Teams, 1 p.m. and 7:30 p.m.
Friday: Bracketed Compact Knockout Teams, 9 a.m. and continues
Stratified Senior Pairs, 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.
Stratified Open Pairs, 1 p.m. and 7:30 p.m.
Bracketed Knockout Teams, 7:30 p.m. and continues
Saturday: Stratified Senior Pairs, 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.
Stratiflighted Open Pairs, 1 p.m. and 7:30 p.m.
Sunday: Stratiflighted Swiss Teams and Stratified Senior Swiss Teams, 10:30 a.m. and 5 p.m.
Monday: Stratified Open and Senior Pairs, 10:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.
Bracketed Compact Knockout Teams, 10:30 a.m. and continues
One-session open and newplicate games throughout.
BRIDGE
