THE National Football League will roll out a Chinese-language version of its Web site this month in yet another move by American entertainment and media organizations to capitalize on overseas Internet audiences.
The new N.F.L. site, which the league plans to announce this week, will offer all the usual NFL.com fare, but with the text translated to Mandarin Chinese. The Web site will feature commentary from Chad Lewis, a Philadelphia Eagles tight end who speaks Mandarin as a result of a two-year stint as a Mormon missionary in Taiwan in his early 20's.
The N.F.L.'s move is in the vanguard as Web publishers respond to an expanding audience overseas. As Internet use grows rapidly abroad, people in other countries who can read English have been gravitating to the bigger American Web sites for news, games and entertainment. For example, Washingtonpost.com, which is almost exclusively in English and makes no extensive effort to attract overseas readers, has nonetheless built a significant foreign readership -- about 1.5 million of its 8.5 million monthly visitors. Some of the site's advertisers now aim specifically at the international audience.
But for some overseas markets, especially those like China that have the greatest financial potential, some American organizations are creating foreign-language versions of their sites. The National Basketball Association, for example, now has nine versions of NBA.com aimed at foreign markets -- including Brazil, China and Taiwan -- in native languages. The league is partially responding to the significant rise of international players in the N.B.A., including China's Yao Ming, who plays center for the Houston Rockets.
And the Walt Disney Internet Group has nearly two dozen individual-country Web sites, which the company says became profitable for the first time last year. Disney's Web sites include ABC.com, ESPN.com and Movies.com. Foreign users now represent 42 percent of the audience for the group's sites, according to comScore Media Metrix, a research firm.
A Disney spokeswoman said that the company's most recent focus had been on offering video games, music and educational material for foreign broadband users through its Disney Connection service, which it introduced last year in Brazil, Japan and Spain. The company also plans within a few months to offer its international audiences Toontown, a multiplayer online game introduced in the United States last year.
Some analysts caution that for Web publishers, an overseas outreach, which often requires foreign-based advertising sales staff and offices, involves investments with little certainty of profit.
''It's absolutely wise to look at these markets,'' said Denise Garcia, an analyst with Gartner, a consulting firm. But she added that ''the growth will be slower than we've seen in the U.S. for dial-up users, and certainly slower than we've seen for broadband,'' the industry term for high-speed Internet connections.
Certainly, though, China has had comparatively brisk Internet growth. The China Internet Network Information Center, a Chinese government agency, said the nation had 68 million Internet users as of mid-2003, the latest date with statistics available. That figure was an increase of 15 percent in six months.
By contrast, there will be 199 million Internet subscribers in North America by year's end, an 8.5 percent rise from 2003. As for high-speed access, Gartner predicts that 29 percent of American households will have broadband by year's end, compared with less than 10 percent in China.
The lag in broadband in many overseas countries poses a business challenge to American Web publishers hoping to make money from foreign audiences, in Ms. Garcia's view, because ''broadband is where the real potential lies, in selling services and advertising.''
But the N.F.L. is not taking a big financial risk with its Chinese-language Web site, said Chris Russo, the N.F.L.'s senior vice president for new media and publishing, because the league is relying on an as-yet undisclosed Chinese company to produce the site. Another Chinese company, Zou Marketing, is helping the site sell sponsorships.
That structure is generally consistent with the N.F.L.'s other international Internet operations, which include sites in Canada, Japan and Europe (for the N.F.L.'s six-team European league). Over all, Mr. Russo estimated that nearly 25 percent of the N.F.L.'s Internet visitors were from foreign nations. Of the 13 million people who visited the American site, NFL.com, in November, 10 percent were from outside the United States, he said.
The National Basketball Association has been equally aggressive in catering to international visitors online, but it has used a slightly different approach.
Brenda Spoonemore, vice president for interactive services at the N.B.A.'s entertainment division, said that 53 percent of the N.B.A.'s roughly six million Internet users last month were outside the United States.
Of the league's nine foreign-language sites, NBA.com/China and NBA.com/Taiwan are produced by portals in those two countries, and the N.B.A. collects an undisclosed share of the sites' revenues. For the other seven sites -- in Australia, Brazil, Britain, France, Germany, Mexico and Spain -- N.B.A. employees in those countries translate articles or write original material.
Aside from advertisements -- most often to companies like Motorola, Red Bull and Reebok that are intent on reaching foreign markets -- the N.B.A. is selling an increasing amount of so-called premium content, Ms. Spoonemore said.
In some cases, the content involves consumers logging on from foreign countries to listen to live audio of games or watch video highlights. But substantial revenues can also come indirectly. Some wireless phone companies in Asia, for example, pay the N.B.A. for scores and game images, then provide those as paid premiums to their subscribers.
Ms. Spoonemore would not say whether the league's international Internet efforts had achieved a profit yet. But the N.B.A., she said, is ''very pleased with where we are.''
Nonsports American Web publishers typically take a more gingerly approach to cultivating their foreign audiences. The news mix at Washingtonpost.com takes on a more global flavor in the overnight hours, when international readers frequent the site, said Don Marshall, a Washingtonpost.com spokesman.
But aside from a Latin American politics column published in Spanish, the site does little to cater to international readers and has been modest about marketing itself abroad. The Daily Yomiuri, the online version of one of Japan's major newspapers, and The Wall Street Journal's international edition promote Washingtonpost.com in their pages in exchange for similar promotions on The Post's Web site.
Even so, the demographics of the site's foreign readers are particularly compelling to advertisers, said Eric Koefoot, vice president for sales at Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive, a division of The Washington Post Company.
Surveys indicate that about 70 percent of the Web site's overseas readers are executives and that nearly 40 percent of foreign readers live in households with incomes higher than 90 percent of their countrymen's household incomes.
The company does not disclose its online advertising sales, but Mr. Koefoot said that about three dozen advertisers regularly market to Washingtonpost.com's international readers, including British Airways, Nokia and Royal Dutch/Shell.
''We're extremely pleased with our results, and we're just warming up,'' he said.
Among the major American Web portals, analysts said that Yahoo has been the most aggressive in pursuing an international strategy, although both America Online and MSN from Microsoft have built extensive foreign operations.
In the third quarter of 2003, Yahoo said, 60 percent of its 230 million monthly visitors came from outside the United States, generating about 17 percent of the company's revenue from advertising and other services.
Those numbers could rise in Yahoo's fourth-quarter results, to be announced this week, as a result of a global rebound in online advertising that began early last year in the United States and has slowly spread to other countries.
Yahoo's paid services, including e-mail storage, auctions and personals, are also gaining strength with international audiences as consumer resistance to paid content begins to ease.
Paid search advertising -- in which marketers bid to have their ads prominently appear when users type in certain search terms -- also figures prominently in Yahoo's international plans, a Yahoo spokesman, Scott Morris, said.
Analysts expect increasing competition among foreign marketers to advertise near search results for terms like ''Fluglinienkarten'' or ''billets d'avion,'' just as American marketers have for the phrase ''airline tickets.''
Noting Yahoo's $1.6 billion purchase last year of Overture, a company that handles paid search advertising, Mr. Morris said: ''Paid search is just starting to take off globally. So this acquisition wasn't just part of our strategy for search, it was important for our international strategy as well.''
E-Commerce Report  Correction:  January 13, 2004, Tuesday  The E-Commerce Report column in Business Day yesterday, about American companies' use of foreign-language Web sites, referred incorrectly to those directed by the National Basketball Association toward overseas or non-English-speaking audiences. Eight are aimed at Brazil, Britain, Canada, China, France, Germany, Japan and Taiwan. A ninth is aimed at Spanish-speaking users of the Internet in the United States, Mexico and Spain. There is no site aimed at Australia, nor are there individual sites for Mexico and Spain.
Because of an editing error, the column also misstated the title of an N.B.A. executive, Brenda Spoonemore. She is senior vice president for interactive services at the entertainment division, not a vice president.
