WHAT makes humans human, argued the travel writer Bruce Chatwin in books like ''The Songlines'' and ''In Patagonia,'' is not the use of tools or the building of cities, but nomadism. The trait that distinguishes us from other beings, he theorized, was that we keep moving.
For designers and auto enthusiasts, the importance of concept cars lies in precisely this human restlessness. That is why Chevrolet's Nomad may prove to be the most significant concept car at this year's winter auto shows. The Nomad design team was led by Simon Cox, the director of General Motors' advanced design studio in Britain. Dale Brewer did the exterior and Jose Gonzalez the interior. In its 2004 dream-car version, the Nomad presents an international vision of an American classic.
This year's two-door sport wagon is actually the third Nomad concept car. The first was one of the original dream cars, a Corvette turned into a two-door station wagon in 1953, when the Corvette was a newborn, and shown at G.M.'s Motorama in 1954. The Motoramas were G.M.'s corporate auto shows in the 50's. They opened each year at the Waldorf-Astoria in Manhattan and then toured the country like the Ice Capades or the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey circus. Before dream cars came to auto shows, they came to the Motorama and two million people saw them each year.
That first Nomad inspired Chevrolet's production Bel Air Nomad, a much larger two-door wagon made from 1955 to 1957. It also inspired the second Nomad, shown in Detroit in 1999, and now a third.
''It's not a retro vehicle,'' Mr. Cox said of the latest Nomad. Instead, he argues, the ice blue metallic sports car turned wagon aims to evoke the spirit of the 1954 Chevy Nomad concept vehicle, with round headlamps, gently curving fenders, a 50's Corvette grille and a forward-sloping midroof pillar. The current Nomad show car has a removable rear roof panel and a sliding cargo floor. Chrome strips on the tailgate evoke similar trim on the production Nomad and on the 1954 show car. The dash features a fan-shaped instrument cluster and a row of bright blue round dials. Chevrolet calls it a ''sophisticated, urban character'' like ''a blue martini bar.''
This year's Nomad turned out to be even more of a hit with early showgoers than Mr. Cox had anticipated. At a designers' party on Tuesday night, he was ebullient about the prospects that it would actually be built.
For other designers and for auto enthusiasts, the risks inherent in showing concepts always contain what Hollywood would call a backstory. Sometimes that backstory is the innovative defiance of a company under fire. The original Dodge Viper was an example of this, and some would see this year's Chrysler ME Four-Twelve as another.
Or a concept might be a response to an earlier vehicle, as at the 2002 Detroit show, when Ford's vice president for design, J Mays, rolled out the GT40 concept, which was inspired by the Le Mans racer of Ford's storied victories of the 1960's. Mr. Mays was also implicitly responding to his predecessor: in 1995 Jack Telnack offered up his own take on the GT40, the GT90, which was never produced but lives today in model collections and in video games.
Or a concept might be a response to the competition. In the case of the Nomad, it could be G.M.'s effort to redeem its failures of the past. Not that the company necessarily sees it that way: the Nomad, we are told in the press material, is all about ''demonstrating the versatility of the Kappa architecture,'' the new rear-wheel-drive platform it shares with the production version of the Pontiac Solstice and the Saturn Curve.
But the real story of the Nomad is that of a perfect storm: the last Nomad concept arrived at the Detroit show in 1999, in the midst of a great blizzard. While many journalists and would-be showgoers were trapped in airplanes on the runway, or inside the terminal at Detroit Metropolitan Airport, napping under donated blankets reading ''Property of Wayne County Jail,'' those who had made it through were treated to the unveiling of four G.M. concepts. One was the Nomad. Another was the jaw-droppingly ugly Pontiac Aztek. G.M. would go on to produce the Aztek, but given a choice, virtually everyone at the show would have chosen to build the Nomad instead. That day, witnesses saw a giant corporation making a giant mistake.
In this context, showing a new Nomad is courageous; it can only seem an effort at redemption. The new Nomad also reminds us of the purpose of concept cars. There is nothing quite like the concept car in any other business -- fashion designers' runway flights of fancy or politicians' trial balloons included.
The exterior of the 1999 Nomad was drawn by Christos Roustemis, a young designer who learned the shapes of Detroit cars by hand; he spent his childhood drying them off at the family car wash. ''If you put the Blazer and a Corvette in a blender, the Nomad is what you would wind up with,'' Mr. Roustemis said in 1999, but he was not doing himself justice. The Nomad then was teal green, sleek and exciting.
That 1999 Nomad suggested a response to the PT Cruiser; the 2004 edition answers the Mini Cooper, BMW's retro nod to the iconic little British car of the 1960's. Mr. Cox said he hoped the Nomad would evoke the same sort of personal affection and clubby bond among owners as the Mini. It took courage to do a new Nomad. It's always easier to ignore the past rather than learn from the mistakes made. And the new concept inevitably invites comparisons to the old, not necessarily to the favor of the new. The 2004 Nomad is chunkier than the 1999. Its front recalls the grille of the 1954 Nomad a bit too literally. ''The 1999 Nomad concept was right for the time,'' Mr. Cox added. ''This one has a totally different feeling. If I had done it five years ago it would have been very different.''
There was a real idea behind that first Nomad, one of the first vehicles to explicitly combine the concepts of sport and utility -- with repercussions we are still feeling. But the whole point of concepts is that there can be as many potential Nomads as there are designers -- and journeys. As the travel author Bruce Chatwin wrote, ''All our activities are linked to the idea of journeys.''
Automobiles are such culturally powerful objects because they foretell potential journeys. While most travel in real vehicles is mundane and repetitive, concept cars suggest adventures. Dream cars should carry us on our dream journeys.
Nomads survive because they have an ''irreverent and timeless vitality,'' Mr. Chatwin wrote of human wanderers. Civilized man has grown too sedentary. But only real trips bring real adventure and the nomad's willingness to take risks brings discovery. What a concept.
Design Notebook
