Stymied by the domestic airlines in trying to test a massive new computer system meant to identify people who are risks to civil aviation, the government is thinking of using data collected by European airlines instead, an official said on Sunday night.
The agency responsible for the new system, the Transportation Security Adminstration, wants to test the system, the Computerized Assisted Passenger PreScreening System, which would evaluate information on everyone seeking to board a domestic flight.
The government is moving ahead with the system despite objections from privacy experts and uncooperative airlines, and hopes to have it in place by this summer. Plans to begin the program this year were reported Sunday in The Washington Post.
Last year, the agency asked for an airline to volunteer information on its passengers for use in testing. Jet Blue agreed last summer to provide data for testing but backed out after complaints about its decision. The airline industry officials suggested that the government should order the airlines to comply.
In December, however, the Department of Homeland Security struck an agreement with the European Union on what passenger information would have to be submitted by airlines flying to the United States from Europe. The information is transmitted shortly after take-off.
A spokesman for the Transportation Security Administration, Nico Melendez, said on Sunday that the agreement permitted his agency to use that data for testing the prescreening system.
Last year, the government proposed the new system, which would replace an older version that uses less information.
The new system would call for airlines to provide each passenger's name, home address, phone number and date of birth. Under this proposal, which was disclosed last year, a contractor for the Transportation Security Administration would take the passenger data and compare it to commercial databases.
The contractor would then give each passenger a score, similar to a credit score for a loan, that would estimate the relative security risk.
