A new year, a new centenary. Scarcely have we finished with Hector Berlioz and Hugo Wolf, honored in 2003, than it is time to start looking at Antonin Dvorak, who died in 1904. The first event in this Dvorak year is the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra's annual wintertime festival, which focuses on a single composer or theme. (Last year it was ''American Roots.'') The orchestra began its three-week examination of Dvorak with, first, a chamber performance and DVD presentation on Wednesday and, on Friday night, an orchestral concert offering 2 of his 10 ''Legends'' (Op. 59) as well as the Cello Concerto and the Seventh Symphony, at Prudential Hall of the New Jersey Performing Arts Center here.
Dvorak is a good subject for this kind of treatment: his music is big, attractive, accomplished and accessible, and while it is not exactly outside the standard repertory, it does not always get the respect it deserves. Dvorak is also a specialty of the festival's mastermind, Joseph Horowitz, whose young-adult book ''Dvorak in America: In Search of the New World'' is being used in school outreach programs in tandem with the event, which every year has a strong didactic component. A particular focus, therefore, is the time Dvorak spent in the United States, from 1892 to 1895, when he led the National Conservatory of Music in New York (his students included Will Marion Cook, later a mentor to Duke Ellington); traveled the country and explored American folk music, particularly African-American music; and composed, among other things, the Cello Concerto and the ''New World'' Symphony. That symphony will be performed in the festival's final concerts (Jan. 22-25).
But the Seventh, written while Dvorak was still in Europe, is a wonderful piece of music that shows his own style clearly emerging. Anne Manson, the conductor on Friday, gave it a thoughtful, never overdone performance. She began in a subdued fashion with the ''Legends,'' in which she did not sound quite assured, as if not yet warmed up. Her beat seemed blurred; the orchestra's coordination, approximate.
In the Seventh, however, the large scale of Ms. Manson's beat was reflected in larger, more assured playing. She approached the music with a kind of tact, respecting its intensity but holding back the real climaxes until the finale; even the winds, not always this orchestra's strong point, responded to her.
The New Jersey Symphony has been doing a wonderful job of motivating its players, most recently by acquiring a major collection of valuable Cremona violins for their use, so that half the string sections are playing on Stradivariuses and Guarneris. But in having its principal cellist, Jonathan Spitz, as soloist in the extremely demanding Cello Concerto, the orchestra went a step too far.
Mr. Spitz, even on a Stradivarius, is simply not up to the standards of an instrumental soloist with even a second-tier orchestra. Ms. Manson could not do much in terms of coordinating his muddy performance with the ensemble, and therefore the American segment was the least compelling part of the evening.
MUSIC REVIEW
