At a meeting of Democrats in Parkersburg, Iowa, Senator John Edwards is listening closely as a woman describes her struggle to afford a nursing home for her ailing mother. ''I want somebody who really knows what it is like to struggle,'' she says at last.
Mr. Edwards draws closer to her, fixing her in his steel-blue gaze, his face earnest and sympathetic. ''Well, I don't know it anymore, but I did know it growing up,'' he says. ''You don't forget where you come from. You never forget.''
Senator Edwards's campaign for president, which won the coveted endorsement of The Des Moines Register yesterday, hinges on the notion that he has not forgotten where he comes from. He usually arrives at his events to the blaring sound of John Cougar Mellencamp singing ''I was born in a small town.'' And it never takes him long to tell his audience he was reared by working-class parents in mill towns of the Carolinas and was the first in his family to go to college.
When Democrats ask him on the trail why they should choose a one-term senator who has spent most of his life as a trial lawyer rather than a candidate with more government experience, he says his roots give him an understanding of working folks' problems that career politicians lack. Working-class voters are the ones he believes President Bush has abandoned, and he asserts that they will trust John Edwards, just as North Carolina juries have trusted John Edwards in a dozen big cases.
''This president is shifting the tax burden from wealth to work and the working class,'' he railed at a forum in Des Moines. ''I want this president to explain to middle-class working families why a millionaire sitting by a swimming pool getting a financial statement each month to see how much money he made is paying a lower tax rate than a secretary, than a firefighter, than a schoolteacher. This is not our America.''
Yet the senator, having made a fortune in personal-injury law over the past two decades, is really more like the poolside millionaire than the schoolteacher, at least on the surface. He won his first and only race, for the United States Senate in 1998, with more than $6 million of his own money. Even though he may well be out of office within a year, he bought a second town house in Washington for $3.8 million a year ago because his wife found the first one unsuitable for their children.
Mr. Edwards is a strange political animal: a multimillionaire who harbors a laborer's anger; a man with an expensive haircut who wears a cheap digital watch and worn-down shoes; the owner of four houses who employs a live-in nanny and a housekeeper but still celebrates his wedding anniversaries at Wendy's because that was what he and his wife did when first married.
Perhaps more than any other candidate, he is running on the strength of his biography, portraying his rise in the courtrooms of North Carolina not merely as a climb up the social ladder but as a struggle to help working people like those he knew growing up. ''The cause of my whole life is the cause of working people,'' he said.
His speeches often sound as though they could come from a union leader. He derides President Bush as an elitist and a ''phony'' who cares about nothing but protecting the wealthy. He likes to end his stump speech with the declaration, ''I believe in an America where the family you are born into does not control your destiny.''
Mr. Edwards and his team see a clear path to the nomination for a handsome populist with a Carolina drawl. They hope to do better than most political pundits expect in Iowa and New Hampshire, pulling out a third-place finish in each state, then trounce the competition in South Carolina, the senator's native state. If Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts are crippled by losses in the first two contests, Mr. Edwards could become a middle-of-the-road Southern alternative to Howard Dean.
He is drawing bigger crowds, and even officials in the other campaigns say his sunny rhetoric about America's future and his refusal to sling mud have given him a boost. In New Hampshire, he continues to struggle at the middle of the pack, but a good showing in Iowa might lift his chances. In South Carolina, polls suggest he can win, though many voters are undecided.
An Egalitarian Code
Mr. Edwards could be described as driven by a belief system learned from his father, who retired as a midlevel manager in the Milliken &amp; Company textile mill in the tiny town of Robbins, N.C. It is a strict egalitarian code, founded on a distrust of big business and a simmering indignation at perceived injustices faced by working people in America.
''He grew up a poor mill kid with wonderful parents but still with the deck stacked against him,'' said Richard Leonard, a federal judge in Raleigh, N.C., who is one of the senator's oldest and closest friends. ''His overriding theory is to have a country where you put the starting point closer to the same place.''
Espousing these populist views, Senator Edwards, who is 50 but looks much younger, was considered a hot prospect in Washington two years ago -- a kind of Bill Clinton in the making. But these days, with the country jittery over war and the economy, he must convince voters that he is more than a handsome face.
One Democratic senator close to Mr. Edwards, speaking on the condition of anonymity, put it another way: ''This may not be the kind of year for someone who is new and emerging on the scene when the country is at war. The bar of gravitas gets raised.''
Still, Mr. Edwards says he has no doubts and has even gambled his short and not yet particularly memorable political career on the race, giving up a Senate seat he might have used as a platform to run in the future.
As for the gulf between his background and the ruling elite into which the president was born, the senator insists he harbors no ill feelings. But in the next breath, he allows as how ''it's much harder than when I was growing up for people from my kind of background to do what I've done.''
''Sometimes it feels like the field is tilted.''
Beyond a five-year Senate career in which his biggest legislative accomplishment was a bipartisan health care bill that never passed the House, Mr. Edwards's main victories have been in the courtroom.
He represented many sympathetic plaintiffs, among them some horribly crippled children. He became rich doing it, racking up more than $175 million for his clients from 1985 to 1997 and amassing a personal fortune of at least $38 million, according to North Carolina Lawyers Weekly.
At the same time, he did little or no pro bono work. Nor did he pursue public-interest lawsuits. While he speaks passionately about civil rights and the bravery of civil rights leaders, for instance, he has never used his legal skills to fight against discrimination through the courts.
Neither was he active in politics for the first 44 years of his life, except for the occasional donation to a Democratic candidate. He never ran for office or worked on a campaign. Indeed, before he burst onto the political scene in 1998, he did not even vote in several local elections, because, he says, he was too busy with his legal work.
All that changed in April 1996, when his 16-year-old son, Wade, was killed in a traffic accident while driving to the beach with a friend in a Jeep his parents had given him. A month earlier, Wade had been invited to the White House as a finalist in a Voice of America essay contest. He had written about voting with his father on Election Day: ''There is no place in America where equality means as much as in the voting booth.''
The death shattered the life Mr. Edwards and his wife, Elizabeth Anania Edwards, also a lawyer, had built. Mr. Edwards stopped practicing for six months, rediscovered his Christian faith and secluded himself with his wife and daughter. ''Nothing in my life has ever hit me and stripped everything away like my son's death,'' he wrote in his legal autobiography, ''Four Trials.''
Over the next year, he and his wife established an after-school program, a scholarship and a nonprofit foundation in their son's name. Mrs. Edwards gave up law to become a full-time mother again. She had two more babies in her late 40's and early 50's, undergoing hormone therapy to make it possible.
Mr. Edwards emerged from seclusion to throw himself into politics and public life with a vengeance. Although he had toyed with running for office since the early 1990's, several family friends said, Wade's death pushed him into the public fray. He tried only two more cases.
When campaigning, he avoids talking about his son's death. He does not want his son to be remembered only as the catalyst that propelled him into the Senate, his aides say. When he does broach the subject, he seems to tap into a well of grief. On ''Good Morning America'' in late November, he choked up as he read from his book, ''Wade is who I am.''
He wears a pin on his lapel that his son earned in the Outward Bound mountaineering program a year before he died. ''It's something he carries with him,'' said one family friend, Bonnie Weyher. ''He wants to do it for Wade.''
On the campaign trail, Mr. Edwards is indefatigably charming. He enters rooms with a big grin and locks eyes with everyone he shakes hands with. He calls people Sir and Ma'am and seems genuinely pained when he cannot agree with them.
He often breaks into a hearty laugh when someone throws him a curveball. A man in Concord, N.H., for instance, wanted to know what Senator Edwards thought about legalizing industrial hemp to create jobs.
''Boy I didn't see that one coming,'' he said, dissolving in guffaws. ''I have not thought about that as a solution to the problem.''
The senator is not a powerful orator, but he does well in small groups, where he can address the audience almost as if they were a jury, speaking off the cuff in simple language and ticking off points on his fingers.
''John is not good when he's scripted,'' one top aide said. ''The best lines that have come out of this campaign have been his and have been spontaneous.''
A Capacity for Bluntness
At times he can be blunt. Two young lesbians at the University of New Hampshire challenged him on why he does not support marriage for gay couples, a stance that might seem at odds with his support for affirmative action and civil rights generally. ''I don't think America's ready for that,'' the senator replied. ''It's very simple.''
He paused, seeing the crestfallen looks on their faces. ''It is heartbreaking,'' he said. ''There is no question about that.''
Other times, however, he can be a master of lawyerly flourishes. In Oklahoma, when he was asked whether he supported tort reform, shorthand for capping the jury awards for pain and suffering, he pretended the questioner had raised the possibility of getting rid of juries. That gave him an entree to his favorite theme.
''I think people who don't like the jury system are people who hate the idea that everybody is treated exactly the same inside a courtroom, no matter who you are or who your family is or what kind of power you have outside the courtroom,'' he said.
In a similar way, he has rebutted the accusation that he is overly ambitious, arguing that it would have been better for his political career if he had waited awhile before running for president.
Asked why he has chanced his entire political future on a presidential race that he could well lose, he smiles. He says he does not mind going back to practicing law. ''Remember I'm not a career politician,'' he said.
Mr. Edwards's closest aides insist that his small-town perspective is no act. At staff meetings in the Senate, he often asks what people in his hometown would think about a proposal. He makes it a point to know the names of all the elevator operators, guards and other low-level employees in the Senate.
Generally, staff members say, he plays down their worries about the political consequences of his actions. ''That's all just Washington noise,'' he is fond of saying.
Senator Edwards's anti-elitist attitude has crept into his exchanges with Dr. Dean, a son of a well-do-to Manhattan family. Senator Edwards pounced on Dr. Dean for patronizing Southerners after he said the Democrats should steer away from social issues like abortion and gun control in the South and stick to economic issues.
''I do believe that it's important for us as a party not to look down on anybody, not to stereotype those in different parts of the country,'' he said in early December in Oklahoma. ''We can't be a party of elitism.''
For advice, Mr. Edwards relies most heavily on several Clinton veterans: his chief of staff, Miles Lackey, a former staff member at the National Security Council; his policy director, Robert Gordon; as well as Samuel R. Berger, Hugh Shelton, Richard C. Holbrooke and Mr. Clinton himself.
Whatever his inner motivation, Mr. Edwards rocked his state's political establishment in 1998 by coming from nowhere to defeat Senator Lauch Faircloth, a conservative Democrat-turned-Republican, in his first stab at public office.
From the start he was seen as a rising star in the Senate. And because of his trial skills, Senate leaders chose him in early 1999 to depose key witnesses and deliver the closing arguments for the defense in the impeachment trial of President Clinton. His sharp performance made him a celebrity among the nation's top Democrats.
''I felt toward John the way 10-year veterans on the Yankees must have felt when Mickey Mantle walked on the field for the first time,'' said Bob Kerrey, the former senator.
So impressive were his first two years in office that Al Gore was said to have considered him seriously for vice president. The buzz about him grew. People magazine named him the sexiest politician in America. Long profiles in other magazines compared him to Mr. Clinton and pondered whether he could be the Democratic Party's savior. ''Is John Edwards the next Bubba?'' read a headline in GQ. Riding this wave of hype, he began mulling over a run for president almost as soon as the 2000 election was over, his political allies said.
John Edwards was the first child of Wallace Edwards and Bobbie Wade, two teenagers from working-class homes with no prospect of anything better than a job in the local Utica textile mill in Seneca, S.C. They took him home to a three-room company-owned house attached to the mill, where his father made $35 a week on the night shift. His parents worked separate shifts to make ends meet and pay for medical bills.
Wallace Edwards, family friends say, hates condescension and treats everyone with an unfailing respect. He often used to say he could tell if a man was ''talking down to him'' within two minutes. His son appears to have inherited both traits, friends said.
''Johnny has always had a tremendous sense of equity,'' said one his oldest friends, the Rev. John L. Frye. ''Even from when he was a boy he was interested in fair play and how things went for the little guy.''
An Arena in the Courtroom
Raised a strict Baptist, John showed little sign in college that he would become a politician. He skipped most anti-Vietnam protests, and missed being drafted because he drew a high lottery number and the war ended before he was called up.
''John was very conservative,'' said his college roommate, Bill Garner, a textile company executive. ''I had long hair and a beard and was into the antiwar marches and stuff, but John never participated in that.''
He graduated with honors in three years and was accepted to law school at the University of North Carolina, where he met his future wife, Elizabeth, in torts class. It was Miss Anania, a well-read and vivacious liberal Democrat, who exerted the most influence on his political thinking in college, and she continues to be his closest political adviser today, friends said. They married in 1977, a week after passing the bar together.
His first big success came in 1985, when he won a $3.7 million verdict for an alcoholic who was given an overdose of the drug Antabuse at an Asheville Hospital. The next year, he won a $6.5 million verdict on behalf of a 6-year-old girl who had suffered brain damage at birth. In his summation, he stunned onlookers by saying he felt the infant speaking through him to the jurors. It was a risky move, but he pulled it off.
''What makes him unique is that he has a great deal of charisma in front of the jury,'' said Bob Clay, a defense lawyer who has faced Mr. Edwards dozens of times. ''He starts wooing the jury the minute he walks in the courtroom.''
More than a third of the cases he handled in the 1990's were on behalf of injured newborns, according to Lawyers Weekly.
One of the last he tried was in early 1997, when he won a $25 million award for a small girl, Valerie Lakey, who had part of her intestines sucked out when a swimming pool drain cover came loose and she was trapped by the escaping water. Just before the case went to the jury, Mr. Edwards turned down a $17.5 million settlement offer from the maker of the drain cover. The case prompted the Legislature to pass a law regulating such products.
''I would never have put myself mind, body and soul the way I did in these cases for money,'' he said. ''There are very few people in the world who would. They had to be personal. That's what it's about.''
Inside Mr. Edwards lurks a fierce competitor, his friends say. It takes nerve to turn down a settlement offer of $17.5 million. His quest for the White House is a gamble on a grander scale; he has said he will not seek re-election to the Senate.
''This man is not bedeviled by lack of confidence or lack of will,'' said a political mentor, James B. Hunt, the former North Carolina governor.
Judge Leonard recalls how Mr. Edwards could not take up jogging without becoming a marathoner, and how he climbed Mount Kilimanjaro in 1995 despite crippling altitude sickness and a fear of heights.
One cannot escape the impression that Mr. Edwards considers the presidential race another case to be tried and won, this time before a jury of millions. He is itching to engage President Bush in a one-on-one debate, and when he talks about the possibility, his public mask slips a bit. A schoolyard machismo flashes.
''If I can be on a stage with George Bush in a debate in 2004, with my background, what I've spent my life doing, wouldn't you love to see it?'' he told voters in Merrimack, N.H., in September, laughing hard. ''I can beat this guy. I can beat this guy.''
Challenging Bush
This is the last article in a series examining the lives and careers of the candidates seeking the Democratic presidential nomination. In addition, an audio slide show is online at nytimes.com/campaigns.
Challenging Bush
