Vladimir Guerrero was preparing to become an Anaheim Angel yesterday, flying to Southern California for one final checkup on his back before cementing a five-year contract worth about $70 million, a person involved in the negotiations said.
With their interest unknown until late Saturday, the Angels outbid the Baltimore Orioles and squashed the Mets' relatively modest proposal to land Guerrero, an outfielder and the top free agent on the market, whose availability had dragged well into January.
''He'll be coming in for a physical, possibly tomorrow,'' Angels General Manager Bill Stoneman said in a telephone interview yesterday. Stoneman would not confirm an agreement or discuss the Angels' late entry into negotiations.
After going 77-85 and missing the playoffs last season, the Angels have made bold moves to return to the World Series, which they won in 2002. Under the direction of their new owner, Arturo Moreno, the Angels have added pitchers Bartolo Colón and Kelvim Escobar and outfielder Jose Guillen. Last month, after Colón signed a four-year, $51 million deal, Stoneman said that ''conservatively, we're not finished yet.''
Meanwhile, the Mets' offer stirred up interest among their fans, who turned to sports radio and the Internet to push for Guerrero, a former Expo, to come to New York. Resorting to damage control Saturday night, the Mets took the unusual step of holding a conference call to announce that they had not signed a player.
General Manager Jim Duquette and Arn Tellem, one of Guerrero's agents, praised the Mets' five-year, $71 million offer, although only three years and $30 million were guaranteed. After teasing their fans, the Mets might be asking themselves whether they would have been better off staying out of the Guerrero bidding.
''Not at all,'' Fred Wilpon, the Mets' principal owner, said by telephone yesterday. ''I think that we did for the organization what we thought was correct. We offered a very lucrative deal for Vladi that, had he accepted that offer and stayed healthy and stayed in the lineup, he would've made $71 million.''
Duquette said Tellem told him that had the Angels not emerged with a serious offer, the Mets' proposal would have received substantial consideration. But the Mets never really negotiated with Guerrero. Their offer to him amounted to a pay cut, and Wilpon said the Mets awaited a response that never came.
The Mets said they did not guarantee more money for Guerrero because of medical reports on the herniated disk that cost him seven weeks last season. Although Guerrero never had surgery and returned to hit well -- back injuries robbed Don Mattingly, Edgardo Alfonzo and others of their power -- the Mets and their doctors felt there was risk of injury.
Guerrero already had an offer from the Orioles, but their proposal for a five-year deal was loaded with deferred money that would have made the contract worth about $60 million. Guerrero's agents told the Mets that he would feel comfortable playing in New York, contrary to earlier information the team had received.
One person in baseball with knowledge of the Mets' offer said Saturday that it was ''too little, too late,'' a recurring theme for the team.
Three winters ago, Mike Mussina turned down the Mets' six-year, $87.5 million offer to sign with the Yankees for $1 million more and the comfort of remaining in the American League. Last off-season, they made a late bid for outfielder Hideki Matsui, telling him they could offer $6 million a year for three years but could not match the Yankees' three-year, $21 million offer. Matsui signed with the Yankees.
Guerrero, Mussina and Matsui share Tellem as a agent, and despite having lost out on all three players, Duquette said Saturday, ''that didn't play into our minds at all.'' The Mets did sign shortstop Kazuo Matsui, another Tellem client, last month, and Tellem had praise for the Mets' offer to Guerrero.
''I don't believe the agents used us,'' Wilpon said yesterday. ''I think, frankly, we were a lot closer before the other team came in. Up to that point, we thought we had a reasonable shot.''
Tellem said Saturday night that his request for the Mets to make an offer to Guerrero was intended to give his client as many options as possible and not meant to nudge another team into action.
''We didn't need the Mets to do anything,'' Tellem said.
BASEBALL
