A half-hour into the rollicking Sunday service at Antioch Baptist Church in Waterloo, the time came for visitor introductions. Typically, about five people take the wireless microphone to say a few words. But on this Sunday, eight days before the Iowa caucuses, Antioch's cup runneth over.
''Good morning, and God bless all of you,'' said Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio, who joined Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, clapping and swaying with the congregation of about 100. With Mr. Kucinich were 15 supporters and campaign workers, all praising God and their candidate, mostly in that order.
''Peace and blessing to you all,'' said Nate Wilks, all but offering to escort voters to the caucuses.
Dr. Dean, who has lately been trying to inject religion into his campaign, was, for once, overshadowed by Mr. Kucinich, having lined up only a handful of supporters for the guest-introduction time. While Dr. Dean has had African-American churches on his itinerary many recent Sundays, this one was unusual for taking up two hours on his schedule and offering him not even two minutes of speaking time. At his turn, Dr. Dean praised the choir, not the Lord.
''If Dennis Kucinich doesn't win the White House, I hope I do, and if I do, I'm going to bring the choir with me to Washington, D.C.,'' he said. ''You are unbelievable.''
Later, Dr. Dean flashed his much-talked-about temper at a town-hall-style forum here in a sharp exchange with a 67-year-old retiree, Dale Ungerer. Mr. Ungerer, who said he was a registered Republican but had sometimes voted for Democrats, challenged Dr. Dean to ''please tone down the garbage, the mean-mouthing of tearing down your neighbor and being so pompous,'' questioning why the candidate spent so much time bashing President Bush.
Dr. Dean declared, ''George Bush is not my neighbor.'' As Mr. Ungerer, stood up, Dr. Dean said, ''You sit down. You've had your say, and now I'm going to have my say.''
''I love my neighbor, but I want that neighbor back in Crawford, Tex., where he belongs,'' Dr. Dean said. ''The president is always my president but the president is not my neighbor if he takes 500,000 kids off their health care benefits.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: IOWA  Correction:  January 16, 2004, Friday  An article on Monday about Howard Dean's campaigning in Iowa misstated the age of a man at a forum in Oelwein who questioned Dr. Dean about his treatment of President Bush. The man, Dale Ungerer, is 66, not 67.
