These guys are as loose as a pair of all-night jammers in a jazz club, trading licks at 3 in the morning. Sure, they've done their numbers hundreds of times before. But they understand that if you're talented enough, you can always make an old song sound new. Especially if you've got the right partner and an audience predisposed to cherish every move you make.
Nathan Lane and Matthew Broderick, the once and current stars of the Broadway musical ''The Producers,'' are a shade cooler than when they created their roles two and a half years ago. Granted, they're burning energy on a solar level as they resume their former parts, Max Bialystock (Mr. Lane), the gloriously greedy showman, and Leo Bloom (Mr. Broderick), Max's timid accomplice in fraud.
Yet while they play their characters impeccably, they also play around with them, goofing on them in sly, easygoing ways that never tear at the show's glossy fabric. If you saw ''The Producers'' when it opened in the spring of 2001, when it won a record 12 Tony Awards, you might argue that the timing isn't as sharp or the focus as intense as it was. But Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick radiate the irresistible confidence of men who know the whole world believes that nobody does their jobs better than they do.
All evidence to date has confirmed this assumption. The producers of ''The Producers,'' Mel Brooks's volcanically fizzy stage adaptation of his shaggy satiric film, have been notoriously hard pressed to find replacements for Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick. And a show that had promised to pack the St. James Theater for years started to slip at the box office soon after its original stars left in March 2002.
Theatergoers who stayed away weren't just being brand-name snobs. Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick gave ''The Producers'' a bright red valentine of a heart that it just didn't have on the subsequent occasions that I visited the show. The production still gleamed with Susan Stroman's crackerjack staging and choreography and with Mr. Brooks's lovably vulgar pastiche songs. But you had felt that Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick were the life-giving engine of this Rube Goldberg contraption of a musical. Their dutiful successors registered principally as well-oiled cogs in the flashy machinery.
So now Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick are dancing through their well-worn paces to the tune of $100,000 a week and breaking box-office records in a largely sold-out engagement, which ends April 4.
A movie version of the show (to be directed by Ms. Stroman) is just around the corner for them. And they are being courted for a revival of Neil Simon's ''Odd Couple.'' Ain't life sweet for the boys playing Max and Leo?
Let it be said, though, that Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick seemed more than willing to share the taste of honey with their audience on Friday night, despite Mr. Lane's having a slight rasp in his voice, appropriate to the season of colds and flu. ''The Producers'' is above all a celebration of theater, wallowing happily in every showbiz cliché it sends up. And Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick have the air of revelers who are deliciously tipsy from the very success that their characters aspire to.
They come across as more relaxed, more supple. This means that Mr. Broderick has scaled up the inhibited Leo a bit, while Mr. Lane -- who has the kind of face that appears to be mugging even in repose -- doesn't push to convey Max's outlandishness. Mr. Lane's (relative) understatement lends a newly affecting urgency to his 11 o'clock number, ''Betrayed,'' in which Max recapitulates the entire show, without sacrificing its punch.
There's a sweet, melting quality in both men's gestures and grimaces, and their comfort with each other embraces the audience. No one on Broadway right now matches them for symbiotic teamwork. Their closest rivals, as a matter of fact, are on the same stage. That's the magnificent Gary Beach and Roger Bart, back in their original roles as the cross-dressing director Roger DeBris and his sibilant companion, Carmen Ghia.
All the principal performers show a greater, giddy fluency in body language that rivals that of the dancers in Twyla Tharp's ''Movin' Out.'' Consider Mr. Bart's delirious swivel-hipped walk; Mr. Beach's ability to stand in a perfect, exquisite S shape; Mr. Broderick's and Mr. Lane's shared gift for turning pratfalls into something like ballet or the nigh pornographic physical agility of Angie Schworer as Ulla, the Amazonian Swedish secretary.
Thanks to such gymnastics, the visual equivalent of punch lines, it would be possible to enjoy ''The Producers'' without hearing a word. On the other hand you would miss the latest in-jokes that have been woven into the script. As before, Max tells Leo emphatically, ''Never put your own money into the show.'' He now adds, as an afterthought, ''That's taboo.''
Much of the audience seemed to catch and savor the reference to ''Taboo,'' the struggling Broadway musical produced by Rosie O'Donnell. ''The Producers'' can afford to gloat at the moment. In terms of wall-to-wall satisfaction, it is again the best show in town.
But in bringing back their original stars, the musical's producers have only made the way more difficult for the actors who follow. It seems newly clear that Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick own their characters in the way Ethel Merman once owned Annie Oakley or Joel Grey the M.C. in ''Cabaret.'' When this Max and Leo depart in April, their shadows will stick more firmly than ever to the stage of the St. James.
THEATER REVIEW
