A unit of Hollinger International made bonus payments totaling $3 million in December 2000 to Conrad M. Black, Hollinger's former chairman, and two of the company's other top executives, wiring the money to the Caribbean unit of a Canadian bank.
The complex transaction, recorded in documents described by people close to the company, sheds light on at least one way Hollinger paid Lord Black, through a transfer that also could have reduced taxes on his compensation. Other payments by the company in recent years to Lord Black and other top Hollinger executives were also made through wire transfers to the Caribbean, according to several people with knowledge of the transactions.
Corporate compensation experts and tax lawyers say there does not appear to have been anything illegal about the bonus payments and transfer in December 2000. But some corporate government experts say that the payments and their handling indicate unusual methods of compensating the managers of a public company based in the United States, and yet another way in which Hollinger executives have been rewarded.
Compensation to Lord Black and his top lieutenants in recent years is the subject of an internal inquiry by Hollinger and the focus of a lawsuit by a big investor, Cardinal Value Equity Partners. The Securities and Exchange Commission is also investigating the company.
Hollinger International, based in Chicago, is a media company whose newspapers include The Chicago Sun-Times, The Daily Telegraph of London and The Jerusalem Post. Lord Black, Hollinger's controlling shareholder, resigned as chief executive on Nov. 17 after an internal investigation disclosed that he and some of his partners had received millions in unauthorized payments. He remains chairman.
A spokesman for Lord Black said that the bonuses had been fully approved and said that the board evidently considered them appropriate compensation for the value delivered to shareholders.
The bonuses in late 2000 were paid by Hollinger Digital, a Hollinger unit, because, according to a memorandum accompanying the wire transfer, the unit had completed an initial offering in one business and had sold its interests in a second. The two transactions generated a $27 million pretax gain, company filings said.
''It is very aggressive,'' said Herbert Denton, president of Providence Capital, a New York investment fund, and an informal adviser to Hollinger shareholders. ''We looked at over 50 public companies that have spun off pieces of themselves to the public, and in only four cases did the officers get a bonus.''
At the time, Lord Black served as a co-chairman of Hollinger Digital. A second bonus recipient was Daniel Colson, the vice chairman and a director of Hollinger International and the vice chairman of Hollinger Digital. The third bonus recipient was F. David Radler, the president of Hollinger International at the time, who had no official role at Hollinger Digital. Spokesmen for both Mr. Radler and Mr. Colson said the men declined to comment.
Hollinger Digital's other vice chairman, Richard N. Perle, still a director of the parent company, did not receive a bonus from the unit, a person close to the company said. In a broadcast interview with Charlie Rose last week, Mr. Perle said that Hollinger should have paid more attention to the interests of minority shareholders.
Charles M. Elson, a professor of corporate governance at the University of Delaware, said a bonus paid to corporate executives from an operating unit was unusual. ''That sort of payment is not in the ordinary course of business, and it raises questions,'' Professor Elson said. ''For example: Was the full board aware that the wholly owned subsidiary made an extraordinary payment to officers of the parent and subsidiary?''
A Hollinger International spokeswoman, Molly Morse, said that all of the company's bonus payments for 2000 -- Lord Black's totaled $1.8 million that year -- were reported in the company's S.E.C. filings. But the company did not disclose that at least some money came from an operating unit.
A company spokeswoman declined to comment on the wire transfers. Besides bonuses, Lord Black earned $448,649 in salary for 2000. He also received that year a large portion of a now controversial $27.8 million payment to a group of executives as a ''noncompete'' premium from companies to whom Hollinger International had sold newspapers. Such noncompete payments, made in other years as well, have angered some Hollinger investors, who say the money should have gone to the company.
Hollinger International's internal investigation began last June, after an investment firm, Tweedy, Browne, and other big Hollinger shareholders raised questions about payments to Lord Black and other top executives.
The bonus payments from Hollinger Digital, made on Dec. 20, 2000, were in the form of a wire transfer to CIBC Caribbean, a unit of the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce. The money, according to people with knowledge of the transaction, was then transferred to Barbados, a country where the tax on dividend income can be as low as 3 percent.
Lord Black is a native of Canada who renounced his citizenship to become a British lord in 2001. But evidently he was still a Canadian citizen in December 2000. Transfers of money offshore are not uncommon for Canadian executives living in Britain as a legal means of reducing tax liabilities, according to a top Canadian tax lawyer with no ties to Lord Black or Hollinger, who commented on condition of anonymity.
But compensation made in the form of wire transfers to the Caribbean is not standard practice for publicly held companies in the United States, according to several corporate governance experts.
''The question inevitably arises: What is the propriety of money going to a Caribbean bank?'' Mr. Denton of Providence Capital said. ''The quick question was whether the money was declared for tax purposes. It just causes one to want to investigate.''
Several people with knowledge of Hollinger's various wire transfers to CIBC Caribbean say the money was eventually transferred to an account or accounts in Barbados for the three executives. Those people could provide no further details. Lord Black has been on the board of the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce since 1977. A spokesman for the Canadian bank declined to comment.
Lord Black has accumulated a fortune that has allowed him to buy homes in London, Toronto and Palm Beach, Fla., as well as a New York apartment. But he has recently put both his London and Palm Beach homes up for sale.
Last week he failed to make an $850,000 payment to Hollinger that he owed in connection with his agreement to repay $7.2 million. The larger figure is his share of the $30 million in noncompete payments that the company says the board did not approve. A spokesman for Lord Black said he was conducting his own investigation to determine whether he was indeed obliged to repay Hollinger.
