IT'S shrewd marketing, of course, for the New York Botanical Garden to open its brand-new shop on the first day of its spectacular orchid show.
The shop is part of the $21 million visitors' center designed by Hugh Hardy, which includes a cafe, ticket booths and an orientation center at the garden's main gate on Kazimiroff Boulevard near Fordham Road in the Bronx. The whole complex -- with its New York bluestone walls, stretches of airy glass, curved roofs, landscaped plaza and reflecting pool -- opens on May 1. But the new shop makes its debut tomorrow, along with the orchid show, which is expected to draw 80,000 visitors. And this spring, when the shop starts selling things like rare alpines, daphnes and heirloom tomato seedlings, it may well give the best local nurseries (not to mention Smith &amp; Hawken and Takashimaya) a run for their money.
In some ways, this is a wonderful extension of the service and education the garden has provided since its first garden classes in 1917, because the books and art and plants have been judiciously selected. It is a museum shop, like those run by the Museum of Modern Art and the Whitney. But is this what a botanical garden should be doing?
As I stood inside the shop, looking through the glass wall to the grove of cinnamon-bark Tanyosho pines and the glass dome of the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory glinting in the sun, I remembered strolling 20 years ago through the dilapidated conservatory, which leaked and wheezed and had to be vented by hand cranks. Its hodgepodge of tropical trees and vines may have been priceless, but only a botanist could identify them -- or understand their significance.
Now there are almost too many signs. The children's adventure garden verges on cuteness. The demonstration gardens are so tidy they are stiff.
This is the same hard economic equation many museums are facing. On the one hand, a botanical garden should be about education and contemplation. But on the other, it has to be self-supporting. And if the shop helps pay for children's education, who can complain?
Still, I miss the days when no signs pointed to the children's adventure garden (there wasn't one) and admission was free. But the botanists were then being paid from a dwindling endowment. No money was available for capital repairs. By the 1970's, the garden looked as run-down as the city's parks.
The Visitors' Pavilion is the latest innovation at the 112-year-old garden since Gregory Long became president in 1989. ''We have to bring revenue into the garden,'' said Mr. Long, who rallied fund-raisers to beef up the endowment, which is now $90 million. The garden's cafe, catered weddings and other special events already reap more than $500,000 a year; about 1,000 continuing education classes bring in $400,000.
''These activities support children's education and Bronx Green-Up,'' Mr. Long said, referring to the garden's community garden program.
I have watched these changes over the years -- the signs in the conservatory explaining the origins and uses of plants, the neatly ordered beds in the demonstration gardens, where you can get a list of the latest tulips or viburnums. I adore the new library, where you can sit in the temperature-controlled rare books room, turning the pages of a 300-year-old herbal. You could do that in the dusty, cozy old library, but few people knew.
Everything is so polished now. Nary a weed is allowed in the peony beds. The day lilies all have labels. Schoolchildren troop through, learning things they couldn't have imagined in the shabby old garden of yore. But there was something fertile in those untended places. Like children without nannies, we were allowed to wander and dream.
There is no denying that the Shop in the Garden is a great store. Plants start at $6. You can page through reproductions of rare books, like one of the 17th-century ''Ville e Giardini di Roma,'' by Giovanni Battista Falda ($300), or buy a reproduction of a botanical print of Cedrus libani (cedar of Lebanon) from the 19th-century ''Pinetum Britannicum,'' by Edward Ravenscroft ($265). You can easily be tempted by other delicious things only distantly related to horticulture, like Belgian hand-blown glass vases by Henry Dean ($28 to $265), or a woven-grass chair from Bali ($2,400), which is artfully surrounded by Areca palms ($637) and a Queen sago ($1,528).
''It's a long way from the old tent with the AstroTurf rug,'' said Catherine Hipp, the director of garden retail and business development, referring to the temporary shop that stood for five years on the grass in front of the Conservatory.
The bookshop alone rivals anything in New York for garden bibliophiles: 3,000 titles (including 100 on orchids, in honor of the orchid show), as well as rare and out-of-print books from Hinck &amp; Wall, an antiquarian bookseller in Paris.
The outdoor plant shop, to open in early April, will offer many of the same plants blooming in the garden, like Baptisia sphaerocarpa Screaming Yellow, and a new Daphne genkwa hybrid whose lavender flowers bloom on bare branches.
Depending on the weather, 600,000 to 700,000 visitors flock to this garden every year. The new shop, just like the cafe, is designed to keep them there a bit longer, spending more money. ''We want people to spend the day, sit in the cafe, in the sun, reading their new book,'' Mr. Long said.
I'm not sure I can start my summer without the $300 aluminum table with glass top and planter tray beneath (perfect, I figure for trailing rosemary), with an elegant three-foot metal and copper vase by Hervé Gambs of Paris ($165) perched on its top. And I want some of those organic hand towels. (The cotton comes from Peru, and they are woven in Japan on wind-powered looms.)
This garden shop is perfect and tasteful and even organic. But it feels a little bit like the tail wagging the dog.
An Orchid-Filled Rain Forest Appears in the Bronx
LAST Thursday, workers at the New York Botanical Garden were trundling thousands of orchids into the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory, attaching purple vandas and delicate yellow-freckled oncidiums to sassafras branches high overhead, and sinking pots of lady-slipper orchids and spotted phalaenopsis among the ferns and philodendrons.
The second annual Orchid Show opens tomorrow.
Darrin Duling, curator of glasshouse collections, stood under the glass dome of the Palm Gallery near a pool soon to reflect hundreds of ivory, pink and magenta oncidiums. In a wing devoted to lowland rain forests, thousands of cattleyas will bloom among trees and ferns. Another gallery will be filled with masdevallia orchids, native to the cloud forests of Peru; behind glass will be plants the size of thumbnails, their blooms the size of pinheads.
The grand slam was already in place in the Seasonal Exhibition Galleries, where a Mayan ruin rises 20 feet, covered with lianas and ferns. (A tip of the hat to Philip Baloun, the show's designer.)
The show includes guided tours, talks on orchid conservation and research, and workshops on growing orchids at home; information, (718) 817-8700 or www.nybg.org. And the new Shop in the Garden is selling hundreds of orchids.
Mr. Duling, who will give a talk on Brazilian rain forest orchids on March 13, did not divulge the location of his most prized possession this year: a Psychopsis papilio. The species resembles a large orange and yellow butterfly and was discovered in Trinidad in the early 1800's, setting off orchid mania in England. One will be hidden somewhere in the conservatory until the show ends on March 28. Go find it.
ANNE RAVER
NATURE
