THALE CRESS is the kind of plant that grows in sidewalk cracks and parking lots, the kind that gets yanked up if it gets noticed at all. Lately, however, this unassuming weed, a member of the mustard family, has been making history. In 2000 it became the first plant to have its genome sequence fully mapped. Now, Aresa Biodetection, a Danish biotech company, is adapting it to help detect land mines.
By hijacking the natural process that causes leaves to change color, the company has engineered plants that turn red when exposed to nitrogen dioxide, a gas often emitted by explosives buried in soil.
News of the breakthrough started spreading in January, when the company announced that the plants had successfully changed color in laboratory tests. But mine removal experts -- known as deminers -- remain skeptical, pointing to regulatory hurdles and scientific questions that stand in the way. The earliest the plants could start serving as a deminers' alarm is probably 2006.
Millions of land mines are buried throughout the world. The International Campaign to Ban Landmines, awarded the Nobel Prize in 1997 for its mine clearance and advocacy campaigns, estimates that 15,000 to 20,000 people are maimed or killed by land mines each year.
''We're clearing fewer land mines today than are put down, so it's a growing problem,'' said Carsten Meier, the chief scientific officer at Aresa and a molecular biologist with the Institute of Molecular Biology at the University of Copenhagen.
Deminers typically use a tedious, often dangerous ''creep and probe'' process, combining metal detectors, explosive-sniffing dogs and hand-prodding to find the mines, and small explosives to destroy them. It is a time-consuming process. ''Just think of the area affected in a country like Zimbabwe or Angola,'' Mr. Meier said.
Most demining teams begin by meticulously clearing paths as they divide an area into small plots. If they adopted the plant solution, they could sow the plots with seed and return after the plants matured to remove the mines. The plants would begin to change color in three to six weeks.
Aresa is experimenting with other varieties of the plant.
''To know where the mines are really changes the complexion of the problem,'' said David Levy, a mechanical engineer who led a two-year project at M.I.T. to develop tools for mine removal. ''If this works, it is a watershed moment in land mine detection.''
Advocates say the plants would be useful in areas with mineral-rich soil, where metal detectors get false positives, or as a way to check land that has already been swept.
Others are doubtful. For one thing, mines are often sealed, preventing nitrogen dioxide from escaping.
''It's an indicator, but if I sowed these seeds over the ground, would you be happy to walk on all the areas that are green, but not the areas that are red?'' asked Bob Gravett, a senior technical adviser with the Mines Advisory Group, a humanitarian group in Manchester, England, that runs mine removal programs in 20 countries. ''I wouldn't.''
While many minefields are in farming areas, plenty of others are in arid climates or swampy rice paddies. And the six-week lag time, Mr. Gravett said, suggests that it might be smarter to clear minefields with the tools at hand.
Critics of genetic modification also question the introduction of new plants into a foreign ecosystem.
Aresa is working to meet Danish standards for genetically modified plants, which require makers to produce sterile plants to control their spread. If they are successful, the company says the plants could be ready for use in two to four years.
''So far we have gotten pretty positive responses, but the final test will be whether deminers will accept the system, since they are the people that risk their lives removing mines,'' Mr. Meier said. Considering the circumstances, perhaps a little skepticism is warranted.
