Surat Thani Province in Thailand is best known as a staging ground for journeys to the tropical resort islands off the country's southern coastline. These days, however, it is emerging as the center of a rural economic boom created by China's seemingly insatiable demand for cars.
Thailand is the largest producer and exporter of natural rubber, and Surat Thani is Thailand's largest source. Essential for things like surgical gloves, natural rubber is indispensable to the manufacture of tires and, thanks largely to Chinese demand, rubber supplies are short and prices are soaring.
''Formerly we said every road went to Rome,'' said Wate Thainugul, manager of the Thai Rubber Association. ''Now all the roads go to China, especially the road of the rubber industry.''
The rubber boom is part of a broader surge in global commodity prices that is doing wonders for fertile developing nations like Thailand. Prices are rising not only for rubber, but also for everything from mung beans and coconuts to sugar and soy. Thailand's agricultural exports jumped almost 30 percent last year, to $6.67 billion, helping its economy grow 6.5 percent.
The rubber boom has also stirred a debate about the merits of the economic policies of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, which have pushed his popularity rating up along with the country's consumer-led recovery. Some economists say Mr. Thaksin is merely benefiting from classic pump-priming to ride a cyclical economic upturn.
Mr. Thaksin is ''the right guy at the right time and taking credit for it,'' said Nick Cashmore, head of research at CLSA Emerging Markets in Bangkok.
Others say he is cleverly using that upturn to break a cycle of poverty in the country's agricultural sector by borrowing from the theories of the Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto, who thinks the poor should be allowed to borrow against the few things they control. Either way, most economists agree that other Southeast Asian nations need to emulate Thailand and let agriculture fill the gap in growth created as more and more manufacturing flees north to China.
Doing so may not sit well with Southeast Asia's older generation of leaders, who since independence have been trying to wean their nations from labor-intensive commodities like rubber by courting foreign investors to build high-tech factories. But agriculture still has an important role in most Southeast Asian countries: in Thailand, agriculture represents about 10 percent of the economy but provides a living to half the population.
Brought to the region by the British, rubber languished until the popularity of the pneumatic tire for bicycles and the later application to automobiles made it critical to industrialization. Fear of losing access to Southeast Asia's rubber -- along with its oil -- persuaded the Japanese to invade the region in World War II.
In Malaysia and Indonesia, the plantations survived the British and Dutch intact, along with their system of peonage. But in Thailand, which was never colonized, small rice farmers in the south took up the cultivation of rubber, and later left their trees to their children. Today 90 percent of Thailand's rubber is produced on small holdings of less than 10 acres. The farmers tap the trees for latex, which they sell to brokers who then sell it to large companies that process it into sheets of rubber.
Thailand already accounts for more than a third of the world's natural rubber. Incentives from the Thai government to encourage farmers to plant even more rubber trees suffered a major setback with the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and 1998. Combined with the global recession of 2001, lower demand for tires pushed rubber prices to 30-year lows, discouraging new planting.
The slump led to the demise of the International Natural Rubber Organization, which brought rubber producing and consuming nations together to help stabilize prices. Instead, Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand created a consortium in 2002 to buy and stockpile supplies.
Even as they did so, prices for rubber began to recover. The consortium has yet to buy a single pound of rubber, but rubber prices last year climbed to their highest in at least seven years.
China, despite being a major rubber producer, has surpassed the United States as the largest rubber importer. ''Big tire manufacturers are moving into China as quickly as they possibly can,'' said Andrew Trevatt, chief executive of Sri Trang Singapore, the trading arm of Sri Trang Agro-Industry, one of Thailand's biggest rubber exporters.
As a result, Thailand's rubber exports jumped 60 percent in 2003, to $2.8 billion, making rubber the country's fastest-growing export. The benchmark price of rubber rose nearly 50 percent last year to roughly $1.40 a kilogram on global markets, pushing tire prices up and hurting tire makers like Goodyear, Michelin and Bridgestone.
Synthetic rubber gives tire makers only some shelter from rising prices. Synthetic rubber cannot match natural rubber's elasticity, so truck tires are still made largely of natural rubber and aircraft tires are made entirely of natural rubber.
The tire makers' pain translates into profits for Thailand's rubber farmers, who according to estimates from Thailand's Office of Agricultural Economics are earning margins of as much as 50 percent on rubber they sell at today's prices. Mr. Cashmore at CLSA estimates that last year's increase in prices put about $714 million into the hands of the country's six million rubber farmers.
Not surprisingly, farmers in southern Thailand are spending much of their bonanza. Registrations of new commercial pickup trucks, a crucial indicator of rural spending power, rose 76 percent in Surat Thani province, according to preliminary estimates by Thailand's central bank. In other rubber-making provinces, registrations more than doubled.
Consumption in Thailand's farming communities is rising so fast that some economists say that the surge in commodity prices may be a bigger factor in the nation's consumer-led recovery than Mr. Thaksin's combination of fiscal stimulus and low interest rates.
''A large part of rising incomes is because of favorable terms of trade in the commodity sector,'' said Sailesh K. Jha, an economist at DBS Bank in Singapore. ''Asia is trade-driven.''
That would seem to leave Thailand vulnerable to the next downslide in rubber prices, except that the current rubber shortage is expected to last until newly planted trees mature in seven or eight years. ''They didn't plant enough and they didn't plant early enough,'' said Hidde P. Smit, managing director of the Economic and Social Institute at Amsterdam's Free University, who recently conducted a study of China's impact on the global rubber industry.
In addition, Thai rubber fetches higher prices because of the greater sophistication of its producers -- their sheer number has led to the creation of a central market and a local futures exchange that enables them to obtain higher prices and forces factories to make margins by producing better rubber.
Creating such competitive advantages in agriculture, economists and executives say, is just what Southeast Asia needs as it loses manufacturing jobs to China.
''If we expand, it makes sense to move to where the demand is,'' said Loh Kin Wah, president and managing director of Infineon's Asian operations, speaking of Thailand's opportunities as Infineon itself recently opened new semiconductor design facilities in Western China. ''We associate agriculture with a poor country, but look at Australia and New Zealand.''
Thailand has another niche agricultural product in rice, of which it is also the world's largest exporter. Thailand specializes in a variety of the grain that is highly prized among Asia's rice-consuming populations -- jasmine rice. Jasmine rice is more fragrant than ordinary rice and commands roughly twice the price. So far no other country has been able to produce it in significant quantities, according to the International Rice Research Institute in Manila.
Some economists say Mr. Thaksin is already seizing on this trend to put in place policies intended to raise rural productivity by letting farmers use their land as collateral for financing. Mr. Thaksin appears to have found a mentor in Mr. De Soto, who argues in his book, ''The Mystery of Capital,'' that developing nations remain mired in poverty because the poor cannot use the assets they control to obtain financing.
Mr. De Soto visited Thailand last November at Mr. Thaksin's invitation and praised the prime minister's rural development policies, which along with debt holidays and village grants have encouraged banks to lend to small, rural businesses and find ways around laws that prevent foreclosure of farmland.
Now, Thailand is encouraging farmers to plant new, higher-yielding rubber trees, including the addition of nearly 400,000 acres of farms in the impoverished Northeast.
Meanwhile, Mr. Wate at the Thai Rubber Association says prices for rubber are so good that laborers in the south have been leaving factory jobs to take up work as rubber tappers, even braving monsoon rains and withering dry-season heat to tap the trees.
''As a tapper you can get more money than working in the factory,'' he said.
