Having risen almost effortlessly as a professor of economics at Harvard, N. Gregory Mankiw is now getting an education in full-contact politics.
Mr. Mankiw, a lanky man with a boyish demeanor and soft-spoken style, is chairman of President Bush's Council of Economic Advisers. Three times in the last two weeks, he has found himself at the center of a firestorm on an issue of enormous political importance to the administration: jobs.
First he drew fire from both Republicans and Democrats for saying that outsourcing jobs to foreign countries was simply another form of free trade that would ultimately be a ''plus'' for the United States.
Even before that tempest abated, Mr. Mankiw (pronounced man-CUE) had to stand by while President Bush and Treasury Secretary John W. Snow scrambled to distance themselves from a forecast by the council that the nation would add 2.6 million jobs this year.
Late-night comedians, meanwhile, lampooned Mr. Mankiw for suggesting in that same economic report that flipping hamburgers at a McDonald's might constitute a form of manufacturing. The punch lines glossed over the report's point, which was not to promote reclassifying fast food as manufacturing but to point out that official classifications are vague enough that many service companies could qualify for tax breaks aimed at manufacturers.
A senior White House official said last week that Mr. Mankiw still had President Bush's full support. But administration officials said the same thing about Lawrence B. Lindsey, who was fired as head of Mr. Bush's National Economic Council in December 2002. Mr. Lindsey was unwaveringly loyal to Mr. Bush's agenda, but he infuriated White House officials by suggesting -- accurately, as it turned out -- that the cost of a war in Iraq might hit $200 billion.
To Mr. Mankiw's critics, it did not matter that his comments about outsourcing echoed the views of many sophisticated economic observers, from Democrats like Robert B. Reich, the former labor secretary, to Republicans like Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve.
What mattered to the White House and to Republicans in Congress was that Mr. Mankiw seemed to condone the export of American jobs to low-wage countries like China and India -- thereby opening President Bush to attack that he shared such views.
Mr. Mankiw, who lives during the week in a Washington hotel and commutes on weekends to be with his wife and three children in Wellesley, Mass., is trying to fight off an image as both a cold-hearted apologist for corporate outsourcing and an Ivy League academic who knows too little of the real world.
Mr. Mankiw, 46, is indeed an Ivy League academic and is scheduled to return to Harvard by September 2005. He is wealthier than many professors, mainly by virtue of his best-selling college economics textbook.
He describes himself as a lifelong Republican, which sets him apart from many Harvard colleagues. He distributed campaign literature for Richard Nixon in the early 1970's, and he grew up in Cranford, a fairly affluent suburb in New Jersey, the son of an engineer and a teacher. He drives a BMW 330i and a Honda S.U.V. He does not ''buy American'' for the sake of American jobs, and he is emphatic in his belief that free trade ultimately benefits everybody.
Still, Mr. Mankiw has not been an orthodox Republican. In the first edition of ''Principles of Economics,'' his basic textbook, he ridiculed the supply-side tax policies of President Ronald Reagan as the work of ''charlatans and cranks.''
In 1999, in an article for Fortune magazine, Mr. Mankiw proposed raising the gasoline tax to pay for an across-the-board income tax cut. Today, that kind of proposal probably would get him fired; as much as the Bush White House values loyalty, it puts even more stock in staying ''on message.''
Administration officials made it clear they were unhappy with Mr. Mankiw's comments about outsourcing. When the Republican House Speaker, J. Dennis Hastert of Illinois, fired off a letter of complaint about the comments, they urged him to write an apology and say he had been misinterpreted. He did so.
Mr. Mankiw's comment on outsourcing ushered the White House into a political mire it was unprepared for, according to Kevin A. Hassett, a Republican economist at the American Enterprise Institute.
''The administration's problem is that it hasn't decided how to handle the political attacks that the opposition is making,'' Mr. Hassett said. ''They are all panicked. They are terrified of saying anything.''
Mr. Mankiw ''said what economists tend to say,'' said Allen Sinai, economist at Decision Economics, but ''he missed the highly political nature of speech, and he is stuck in the middle of the political season.''
Even economists sympathetic to Mr. Mankiw on trade issues have been critical of his prediction that the nation will add 2.6 million jobs in 2004 -- in effect, about 320,000 jobs a month.
The actual rate of job creation has been less than 100,000 jobs a month since last fall, and the consensus view among forecasters surveyed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia is that the rate will be only 91,000 jobs a month for 2004.
J. Bradford DeLong, a professor of economics at the University of California at Berkeley, called the forecast ''ludicrously optimistic.'' But Mr. Mankiw, he added, does not bear all the blame. The Treasury Department and the Office of Management and Budget signed off on the forecast -- until they disavowed it.
