YOU'VE heard of occupational hazards like tennis elbow, runner's knee, footballer's ankle. But those ailments pale next to the agony of the TiVo twitch.
This recently diagnosed condition is exhibited by owners of digital video recorders like TiVo and ReplayTV. Having become addicted to the seven-second replay button -- an essential movie-watching tool in this era of special effects and mumbled dialogue -- TiVo twitch sufferers are often seen reflexively pressing a nonexistent seven-second replay button, even when they're not in front of the television. Their brains helplessly fire the deeply ingrained ''Let me catch that again'' command when they're listening to the car radio, enduring a flaky cellphone connection or savoring a hard-won apology from a spouse.
Truth is, you can't blame the brain for misfiring. It's bizarre that five years into the digital video-recorder era, you still can't buy a digital VCR for radio. Why has the electronics industry developed so many machines that let us time-shift Dr. Phil and ''Saturday Night Live,'' but so few that do so for Dr. Joy Browne and ''Science Friday''?
Actually, there is one such device. Radio YourWay (pogoproducts.com) looks at first glance like a pocket-size (2.2 by 3.9 by 0.7 inches) AM-FM transistor radio, which, in part, it is. But it also contains a built-in timer, so that you can set up a schedule for recording radio broadcasts. Programming it is exactly as easy -- or as difficult -- as programming a VCR, except that it uses a military-style 24-hour clock instead of AM and PM designations.
At the specified time, the radio turns itself on. It tunes in the station, records for the requested interval and then turns off.
Once you've captured a show, you can play it back at a more convenient time (or in an area with no reception), pause it while you take a shower or a meeting, fast-forward through the ads, or even archive it to a Windows PC using a U.S.B. cable.
As if all this weren't enticing enough, the Radio YourWay (RYW) has a built-in microphone that captures voice notes with a single button press. It, too, can record according to a schedule, a feature sure to be a hit with private investigators and spies.
There's also a line input that can record from CD players and other gear, and even a small but crisp-sounding speaker so that you don't have to wedge earbuds into your ear canals every time you want a playback. (Take that, iPod!)
But wait, there's more. The RYW can also play MP3 music files from your computer and even act as an external PC hard drive for transporting data files from place to place. All of this comes in a package about the size of a deck of cards for $150 (for the 32-megabyte model, which holds 4.5 hours of recordings) or $200 (128 megabytes, 18 hours). Both models accept Secure Digital memory cards that can hold even more recordings.
The bad news is that, well, that's all the good news. Despite the overwhelming brilliance of the concept, the rest of the story is all downhill.
The first devastating discovery is the recording quality. Now, MP3 music fans measure quality in kilobits per second (Kbps), a gauge of how much computer data is used to represent the music. They record music at 192 Kbps for great quality; 128 Kbps to save space on their music players, at some cost to sonic quality; and 96 Kpbs when they just want a beat to jog to.
By contrast, the RYW records in mono, and at -- get this -- 32 Kbps. Recorded music sounds like muffled party tunes coming through your wall from the apartment next door.
Talk radio doesn't suffer nearly as much. It still sounds much duller than the original broadcast, but it's tolerable. As Captain Kirk might say, ''Set expectations to Low.''
Reception is another problem. In a neighborhood where my Toyota Corolla receives nine AM stations clearly, the RYW pulls in only three. You get no FM reception at all unless you plug in either the earbuds (whose cord is an antenna) or the included FM antenna (also a cord) -- and even then, the stations and their signal strength are limited. At Yahoo's helpful Radio YourWay bulletin board (groups.yahoo.com/group/radioyourway), the surprisingly polarized fans and foes describe delicate window-sill positioning, buying stronger antennas, and other workarounds.
Another delicate subject is battery life. The manufacturer estimates that a pair of AAA's will drive the device for 9 to 11 hours; in the real world, that's optimistic by a couple of hours. Sooner or later, you'll realize that a set of rechargeable AAA-size NiMH's is an essential accessory.
It's too bad that there's no backlighting; you can see the screen and buttons only in good light. In general, though, the hardware design is rewarding and logical. How many other music players, for example, offer the luxury of separate previous-track and next-track buttons ( &gt;) and rewind and fast-forward buttons ( &gt;)?
But the software needs work. The crisp liquid crystal display provides no information about when a recording was made or from what radio station. And while you can load MP3 files onto the player from a PC, using the included Windows software, the player can't show you song or album names.
If you turn the player off, it remembers where you were in a recording. (Pogo added this feature in a late-2003 ''firmware upgrade.'' New players come with it; older players must be upgraded at the factory, which will cost you $10.)
But here's another gripe that's loudly expressed online: In all other circumstances, the player doesn't ''bookmark'' your spot. If you listen to the first half of a recording (say, ''Car Talk''), switch to live radio or another recording, and then return to ''Car Talk,'' you have to start from the beginning or manually fast-forward to the spot where you stopped.
Finally, the RYW records in a proprietary audio format called RVF. Pogo's transfer software can convert your recordings into standard WAV files on your PC. But what most people want, of course, isn't space-hogging WAV files, but the more compact MP3 format -- and getting to MP3 requires two separate conversions. (Or one smart download of RVFMP3, a free RVF-to-MP3 converter available from www.eonet.ne.jp/y-katow.) Even the manual seems to be excellence-phobic. It's filled with punctuation gems: ''It will seem like you are changing the start time when setting the ending time but trust us you are setting the ending time.''
In short, almost every aspect of Radio YourWay needs improvement. But what's the alternative? Music players like the Samsung YP-910 GS can record from the radio, but only FM and not on a schedule; software like Replay Radio can record on a schedule, but only from Web-based stations or from external radio tuners, and only with a PC.
And when you're the only game in town, you may not be in any particular hurry to fix the glitches. (Insert your own Microsoft joke here.)
You'll wish that Pogo had polished the thing up, improved the recording quality and added a backlight. But if you can find a spot where the reception is good, and if the broadcasts you want to time-shift are primarily talk shows, you'll have to admit that the compact, rugged, extremely versatile Radio YourWay does what it's supposed to. It may not be radio your way, but it's at least radio a better way.
STATE OF THE ART E-mail: Pogue@nytimes.com
