IT was the babies being pushed in Peg Peregos that persuaded them.
When the developers of the Metropolitan, a new 32-story condominium on the Upper East Side, first scoped out their building site, they were struck by the number of children in the neighborhood. ''That is how we decided to build this multimillion-dollar building,'' said Martin S. Levine, one of the developers. ''We just started walking down the street and counted all the baby strollers.''
The result was a condo designed to woo families, with big apartments -- most units have two or more bedrooms -- and kid-friendly details like eat-in kitchens with Internet connections for doing homework while grabbing a snack; floors designed to muffle the sounds of rambunctious toddlers; and medicine cabinets with lockboxes to keep out curious fingers.
Conventional wisdom used to be that you decamped to Westchester or Connecticut as soon as you had your second child. But a growing number of families are choosing to stay in the city, and developers are catering to them with playrooms, child-care services and apartment layouts designed with children in mind. The Opus, a 63-unit condo going up at 2770 Broadway, at 109th Street, is installing a library for children and a stage where they can mount plays. At 455 Central Park West, a 99-unit condo between 105th and 106th Streets, the concierge will help arrange last-minute baby-sitting. The two-year-old Seville, on East 77th Street, features a children's playhouse, a small movie theater and a pool.
Rental properties are family-friendly, too. At 50 Murray, a 390-unit building in TriBeCa with a playroom and an outdoor basketball court, which opened two years ago, building employees organized a Halloween party last fall for 30 children.
The new buildings are capitalizing not only on the growing number of families wanting to stay in the city but also on a shrinking inventory of large apartments in Manhattan.
When Juliet and Chris Kwan began looking for an apartment early this year, preparing for the birth of their second child this fall, they knew exactly what they wanted: a prewar co-op with three bedrooms, a maid's room, two full bathrooms, a roof deck, storage facilities, a bike room and a doorman. ''We found a lot of co-ops that had one or two of the amenities that we wanted,'' Mrs. Kwan said, ''but not the others.''
Enter the Opus, which had all this plus a playroom. Mrs. Kwan said many of her friends were shopping now for apartments in the building. ''Everybody is looking for a luxury family building, and nobody can find what they need,'' she said.
''Luxury family'' doesn't come cheap. At the Opus, the smallest two-bedroom apartments start at $1.1 million, rising to $3 million for a 2,300-square-foot four-bedroom with a private terrace.
The high prices haven't discouraged families who prefer city living over suburban car pools and long commutes. The percentage of married couples with two or more children in Manhattan increased to 20.9 percent of all married couples with families in 2000 from 17.8 percent in 1990, according to an analysis of census figures by the Queens College sociology department.
''When you have both husband and wife working in Manhattan, it's too difficult to commute from the suburbs,'' said Pamela Liebman, chief executive of Corcoran Group, the New York real estate brokerage firm. Families able to afford New York prices -- the average price of a detached house in Westchester County is $737,038, compared to an average $903,259 for an apartment in Manhattan -- say they are getting their money's worth.
Michael and Melissa Meyers, a professional couple who both work in the city, have two children. They looked at houses last year in Westchester County and in Greenwich, Conn., before realizing that they preferred hailing a bus or cab over piloting an S.U.V.
''My wife was going to be in the car for a couple of hours a day, and it would be much less convenient to undertake your activities of daily living in a suburb relative to what we're used to in New York City,'' said Mr. Meyers, a partner in a money-management firm. They ended up buying a four-bedroom, four-bathroom apartment at the Metropolitan.
Families like theirs have persuaded developers to add more two- and three-bedroom units to the mix. Jonathan Miller, president of Miller Samuel, a real estate appraisal firm, said the percentage of one-bedroom condos sold in Manhattan fell to 33.7 percent of all condos sold in 2003 from 42.4 percent sold in 1989. Meanwhile, the proportion of two-bedroom condos sold increased to 49.4 percent in 2003 from 39.9 percent in 1989. And the proportion of sales of three-bedroom condos more than doubled between 1989 and 2003.
The Clarett Group, which is developing the Opus, dropped studios and one-bedrooms altogether. Veronica Hackett, a managing partner at Clarett, said that when she first started looking at other neighborhood buildings, she found people piling several children into one room or dining rooms that had been converted into bedrooms.
Millennium Partners, the developer of a condominium attached to the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Battery Park City, originally planned to build at least 150 units, with a large number of one-bedrooms.
''We thought that in that location we would get all the Wall Street guys who would say 'this is great, we can come home late and have room service and live in a hotel,' '' said Matthew Hall, a spokesman. But when families started beating a path to the neighborhood Millennium slashed the number to 114 and made more of them two- and three-bedroom units.
Other developers in the neighborhood are getting the message. David Wine, vice chairman of the Related Companies, said it would devote more than half of its planned 274-unit rental building to apartments with two or more bedrooms. That's twice the norm, he said.
Developers of the Metropolitan focused not only on the percentage of apartments designed for big households but on subtle details they thought would attract them. The master bedrooms are on the opposite side of the apartment from smaller bedrooms, to help parents get some privacy. In the kitchens, porcelain-tile floors supplanted the limestone often favored by luxury buyers: limestone absorbs stains. ''So the first glass of grape juice that goes on the floor -- the floor is entirely ruined,'' said Roy Stillman, one of the developers, as he showed a three-bedroom on the 25th floor.
He pointed to tempered-glass panels in the kitchen cabinet doors, demonstrating their kid-resistance by slamming one with his black loafer.
His co-developer, Mr. Levine, acknowledged that there was a risk in concentrating on large high-price apartments. But after six months on the market, 49 of the 94 units are under contract.
Michele Conte, a broker with Brown Harris Stevens, who is marketing the building, said those buyers alone would bring 28 children into the building.
''God knows the play dates that are going to go on here,'' she said.
TURF
