Junior Sondheims keep plying their hopeful craft, but despite their best efforts the Broadway musical is fast going the way of opera. Where a steady flow of new shows was once the rule, revivals now predominate. For the American musical the canon is closing. In opera, with its head start of three centuries, it is as good as closed. Like opera fans, Broadway audiences have come to prefer what they grew up on, with just a dusting of the new.
Over the last half-century any fireworks in opera productions have come disproportionately from guerrilla stage directors, who have transported Wagner's ''Ring'' to a power plant, ''La Traviata'' to an AIDS ward, ''Der Rosenkavalier'' to a department store window and so on. The true hit is a show that goes from ritual boos at the premiere to cheers the night it closes.
But opera sees itself as art. Broadway sees itself as show business (with an emphasis on the latter). As commercial propositions, revivals aim to please from the start, catering to customers' expectations. Innovations, if any, must sneak in unnoticed.
''Fiddler on the Roof'' -- book by Joseph Stein, music by Jerry Bock, lyrics by Sheldon Harnick, originally directed and choreographed in 1964 by Jerome Robbins -- is a case in point. The action gets rolling with a ringing endorsement of the old ways: ''Tradition! Tradition!'' Once that production number is out of the way, traditions start falling like ninepins. But for 40 years the revolutions, domestic and political, have played out essentially as Robbins prescribed. All this time his production has been the model to which all others, professional or humbly amateur, have aspired.
Now ''Fiddler'' is getting its first makeover. Opening tonight at the Minskoff Theater, the re-creation has been entrusted to David Leveaux, a director not known for any misplaced awe of precedent. Last season, when he mounted the first Broadway revival of ''Nine'' since Tommy Tune's razzle-dazzle original of 1982, the show's composer and lyricist, Maury Yeston, described the two productions, without prejudice, as ''night and day.''
Material as familiar as ''Fiddler'' leaves a director much less room to maneuver, but again Mr. Leveaux has chosen to start from a clean slate. ''What that doesn't mean is applying a fresh gloss of directorial vanity,'' he said after a recent preview. ''The goal here is not to recreate 'Fiddler' for pure nostalgic value but to put it into the present tense.''
At the same time he could hardly ignore the special place the show holds in the public's affections. ''I told the whole team very early on that I wanted to take care of 'Fiddler,' '' he said. ''That's a phrase I've never used before. But there's already a vast audience that loves the piece, people who will be bringing their children to the theater, perhaps for the first time. And it's very important not to disappoint.''
Having passed from Zero Mostel to Topol, Theodore Bikel and who knows how many others, the starring role of Tevye, the philosophical milkman, now belongs to Alfred Molina. ''We began without any grand ideas,'' Mr. Molina said between performances the other day. ''We wanted to find the truth and simplicity of the story as if for the first time.'' The cast can afford not to pour on nostalgia; audiences bring plenty of their own. Before a recent weekend matinee preview, strangers with children in tow were blocking the aisles, swapping stories.
''I met my husband in high school, at the drama club,'' a mother of three announced. ''He was Motel. I was Tzeitel.'' Later in the dark the high school sweethearts of yore swayed with the music until well into the second act. Then the house was caught in one great collective flutter. That was when Barbara Barrie, as the matchmaker Yente, swept into the snappish ''Topsy-Turvy.'' (Ms. Barrie has since been replaced by Nancy Opel.)
''What's this?'' the former Tzeitel demanded in a hoarse stage whisper. Having the good sense not to fake his answer, her Motel hoisted his expressive shoulders. The song is new, added at Mr. Leveaux's request by Mr. Harnick and Mr. Bock.
How hard was it for the writers to go home to the shtetl they left 40 years ago? ''It felt like yesterday,'' Mr. Bock answered last week at Mr. Stein's Park Avenue apartment, where the three partners had gathered to discuss ''Fiddler'' then and now. ''Exactly the way it felt when we were out of town. The same excitement. The same pressure.''
The authors made other changes, too. ''We want to give today's audiences the same feeling of discovering a new show that people had back then,'' Mr. Harnick said, ''not of just dusting off a museum piece.''
Mr. Stein took his blue pencil to the dialogue, trimming a half-dozen passages in ways that he promises few will notice. New musical underscoring has been provided in similarly camouflaged fashion. Repetitions of tunes have given way to thematic echoes that carry more sophisticated messages, contributing to a more cinematic flow. Mr. Bock, Mr. Harnick and Mr. Stein say they intend to make these modifications permanent. While the new abstract set by Tom Pye looks nothing like Boris Aronson's ingenious tribute to Chagall, an audience weaned on fare like ''Les Miz'' should find it just as homey and familiar. The choreography is a trickier issue. The dances are still credited to Robbins, whose posthumous interests are fiercely guarded by the Robbins Rights Trust. Yet they have evolved, too.
''Contractually Robbins is a writer, and his choreography is text,'' Mr. Leveaux explained. ''I said from the beginning that we would absolutely honor Robbins. At the same time I absolutely reserved the right to rethink the musical staging. You can't do a slavish imitation and expect it to come out alive. Who would alter the Bottle Dance? Or 'Tradition'? But 'Matchmaker,' for instance, was originally a dance with brooms. I knew from the beginning that this time the brooms would not happen.''
So much in this ''Fiddler'' breaks with tradition, but that is not the point. ''Don't ask, 'Is the design modern?' '' Mr. Leveaux said. ''Don't ask: 'Is this hip? Is it ironic?' The only completely dependable question you can ask of a theatrical production is simply this, 'Is it living or is it not?' ''
