Some went directly from Mass to the movie theater with ashes on their foreheads. Some went as if steeled for an extreme spiritual endurance test. And some went just curious to see for themselves what in the world could have generated all that hype.
As if on pilgrimage, moviegoers around the country flocked to theaters yesterday, to see the opening of ''The Passion of the Christ.'' Daytime showings in Tulsa, Okla., and Dallas, where churches had bought blocks of tickets were sold out, but in Richmond, Va., and Boston, theaters were less than half-full.
With the opening coinciding with Ash Wednesday, the start of the Lenten season, many said the movie was a way to renew their faith.
''It wasn't about having a movie experience, it was about having a life-changing experience, and for me it was,'' said Tara Kelly, a youth minister at the Contact Church of Christ in Tulsa, as she emerged from a showing at a midtown theater with a group of staff members from her church. ''I'll never look at the cross the same again.''
Colleen Loiselle, 55, a Roman Catholic from Tyngsboro, Mass., said she prayed three rosaries inside the Loew's Boston Common theater.
''This is the greatest thing to happen to mankind because people are going to convert,'' said Ms. Loiselle, who works for the United States attorney in Concord, N.H. ''People will see the passion of Christ is to live and forgive.''
Movies about Jesus are always cause for controversy, but this one has outdone them all. The debate has focused in part on the violence in the film, 126 minutes devoted mostly to the beating, scourging and breaking of Jesus before he is finally crucified.
Some Jewish and Christian leaders said the film would revive the ancient charge of deicide against the Jews because it appears to portray Jews demanding Jesus' crucifixion over the objections of the Roman governor, Pontius Pilate.
This week, Christian leaders, including the Rev. Ted Haggard, president of the National Association of Evangelicals, and Cardinal Edward M. Egan of the New York Roman Catholic Archdiocese, issued statements that warned against using the film to revive anti-Semitism.
As if on cue, Lovingway United Pentecostal Church in Denver posted a sign on its marquee yesterday saying, ''Jews Killed the Lord Jesus.'' It was quickly denounced by the Colorado Council of Churches and the local Anti-Defamation League, and partly dismantled by a passer-by. But the church's pastor said in a telephone interview that the sign was having the effect he intended.
''It is getting people to go back and look at their Bibles,'' said the Rev. Maurice Gordon, whose church is affiliated with the United Pentecostal Church International in Hazelwood, Mo. ''It's there to show what the real debate is about. Actually all of us are guilty in some way if we reject Christ.''
The church removed the sign last night.
It was believers' day at the movies. Southern Baptists, Catholics, Pentecostals, Methodists -- ''The Passion'' drew them all. As the lights came up, some were speechless, walking to their cars with wet eyes.
Many critics have panned the film as emotionally void and needlessly violent. But in talks outside theaters across the country, nearly all of those interviewed said the film had delivered an emotional wallop and deepened their understanding of their faith. Many said they did not believe the movie had depicted Jews in a negative light. And some volunteered that the film had increased their admiration for the movie's director, Mel Gibson.
''He's an excellent filmmaker,'' said Carlos Amezcua, 50, a television newscaster as he left a showing on Fairfax Avenue in Los Angeles. ''This was unsanitized. It was not gory. I cried when Mary was looking at Jesus and you could tell how much wonderment was in her eyes. There is a message of forgiveness and love in this movie. I didn't see any of the negative things other people saw.''
In Richmond, Va., Adrian Ordogne, 46, a real estate agent who saw the film by himself, said, ''I was prepared to see Jews as the blame, but I didn't see it that way in the movie.''
Many moviegoers said they had been braced for the movie's much-advertised violence, and were curious to see how they would handle it.
Rocio Geronimo, 18, a student in Los Angeles and a Catholic said: ''I went to see it because I heard in the news that it was a really controversial movie. It was pretty good. It wasn't too violent. It was more emotional. I would recommend it to people to watch. I cried when they were torturing him.''
For Kenneth Lee, 23, a New York acting student visiting a friend in Richmond, the film's explicit depictions of the pre-crucifixion torture of Christ may have blurred the message a little. ''I found it visually compelling, but it was more graphic than anything else,'' he said.
Few youngsters were at the showings yesterday. Some people said they were attending to gauge whether they could bring their youth groups or their own children.
Mr. Ordogne, who with his wife and daughters, ages 11 and 12, conducts a Methodist-based services at home, said he doubted he would bring his daughters to see the film because of the violence.
In Tulsa, the Rev. Ron Babbit of Contact Church of Christ said, ''We can be firm about kids not seeing it.''
Ms. Kelly, the youth minister there, said: ''Kids don't have a good understanding of what and why Jesus sacrificed for us. It would be like them going to see two hours of a man being tortured.''
Mr. Gibson spent about $30 million of his own to make the movie, and it appears he may soon recoup his investment.
Nielsen NRG surveys said the film would bring in $15 million to $30 million in ticket sales in the first weekend.
