For nine hours last month, a small band of astronomers got a scare. Their calculations indicated that a newly discovered asteroid was on a collision course with Earth and that it had a one-in-four chance of striking the planet, somewhere in the Northern Hemisphere, within days.
It did not happen, of course. Further observations in the wee hours of Jan. 14 put the asteroid in a different orbit, at no threat to Earth.
But the episode, the latest in a series of false alarms, pointed up the disquieting prospect of an asteroid's showing up suddenly on Earth's doorstep with no time for Hollywood heroics. No guidelines exist for who should have been informed when, if the threat had been real, and what emergency measures should have been taken. At least one planetary scientist says he was ready to recommend a public warning.
''I would not have been comfortable with being quiet through the next morning,'' said the scientist, Dr. Clark R. Chapman of the Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colo., who was involved in discussions of the meteor that night. ''I think the public should be informed of that high a probability of that big an event occurring.''
Dr. Chapman presented a paper on Monday at the Planetary Defense Conference in Garden Grove, Calif., recapping the sequence of events from the evening of Jan. 13 through the morning of Jan. 14.
The asteroid, now designated 2004 AS1, was not a planet killer, like the one that probably caused the extinction of the dinosaurs 65 million years ago, or even a city killer. Believed at the time to be about 100 feet across, 2004 AS1 would most likely have exploded with the force of a one-megaton bomb several miles up in the atmosphere. The shock waves would have set off hurricane-force winds.
''It's right at that boundary line, so we don't know how much damage it would have done,'' Dr. Chapman said. An object half the size would explode harmlessly. One twice as wide would be catastrophic, he said.
Dr. Donald Yeomans, head of the Near Earth Objects Program Office of NASA, said he would not have raised an alarm until a second set of observations confirmed the collision path. He said he hoped the episode would prompt guidelines for how warnings should be handled. ''Hopefully, policy makers will take the ball and run with it,'' Dr. Yeomans said.
For several years, NASA has spent $3.5 million a year on surveys to locate and map the asteroids zooming through Earth's neighborhood, but the program, called Spaceguard, focuses on the larger asteroids, and the presumption that a potential impact would be years away.
''The Spaceguard Survey is not designed to detect objects on their final approach to Earth,'' said Dr. David Morrison, a NASA scientist.
Last month's episode put a spotlight on a dedicated but largely ad hoc network of professional and amateur astronomers. On Jan. 13, the Minor Planet Center at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics received the latest observations from Linear, short for Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research, an automated telescope survey in New Mexico that searches for new asteroids.
Dr. Timothy Spahr, an astronomer at the Minor Planet Center, sifted through, finding several interesting ones. He ran the computer programs that calculated possible orbits for the asteroids and posted them on a Web site so that other astronomers could confirm the locations. Dr. Spahr then went to dinner with a colleague visiting from Hawaii. He did not notice that the orbit he had calculated for one of the new asteroids went straight through Earth.
A short time later, an amateur astronomer in Germany noticed on the Minor Planet Center Web site the odd prediction that 2004 AS1 was to brighten by a factor of 40 in the next day, an indication like oncoming headlights that the object was on the express route to Earth. Soon, both amateur and professional astronomers were buzzing about this object on an Internet bulletin board devoted to asteroids.
Dr. Steven R. Chesley, a senior engineer working in the Near Earth Objects office at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., called the Minor Planet Center asking for more details about the asteroid. Dr. Spahr was still out to dinner. Dr. Brian Marsden, director of the center, was working late and sent the details of the Linear observations -- four images taken over a one-hour period -- to Dr. Chesley.
The pictures of the asteroid show only its position in its sky; how far away it is, whether a million miles or 50 million, is necessarily a guess based on sparse data. Dr. Marsden then changed the information on the center's Web site, now saying that the asteroid was actually moving away from Earth -- an orbit that still fit the observations.
Dr. Spahr did not learn of the worries until he arrived home at 10:30 p.m. ''We never ever imagined that would happen,'' he said. ''I actually felt pretty silly.''
He and Dr. Chesley exchanged information and calculated. Dr. Chesley's calculations of possible orbits put the chances of impact between 10 percent and 40 percent.
What the astronomers needed was a new spotting of the asteroid to see how much it had moved since the Linear observations. But with skies cloudy over most of Europe and North America, asteroid experts scrambled to find amateur sky watchers with a clear view.
Dr. Spahr determined where in the sky the asteroid would be if it were indeed on the collision course. At 3:30 a.m. Eastern time, an amateur astronomer in Colorado looked in that swath of the sky, and saw nothing. The next night, Linear spotted 2004 AS1 again, showing that it was much farther out and not on a collision course at all. (Because it is farther away, its size is now estimated to be 1,600 feet wide.) The errors in the data from the previous night had been somewhat larger than usual, and that slight deviation in location had led Dr. Spahr's software to put the asteroid on the alarming path.
Later observations showed that 2004 AS1, which came no closer to Earth than eight million miles, has no chance of hitting this century.
