An organizer of a Roman Catholic priests' group on Long Island was accused yesterday of ignoring an indecent exposure complaint against a parochial school music director, who later raped another child.
The charge came from a man who said he was the parent of the rape victim. To protect his daughter's privacy, he identified himself only as Jay.
The girl's father made the accusations as one of several parents of victims speaking at a news conference in Stony Brook organized by Parents for Megan's Law, a nonprofit group against sex abuse. The group has called for the removal of Bishop William F. Murphy, who heads the Diocese of Rockville Centre, covering Nassau and Suffolk Counties, citing criticisms of his handling of abuse cases in his prior post in Boston.
The rapist was the former music director at St. Margaret of Scotland in Selden, Matt Filippi. He was convicted last month of sexually assaulting an 11-year-old girl and is serving a 12-year prison term.
''Months before the crimes were committed against my daughter there was an incident where Filippi had exposed himself to a 15-year-old child,'' said Jay, one of several parents who spoke. ''This was reported to the pastor and the church.'' But he said that the incident ''was not reported to the police, and had the police been called at that point in time I feel as though my daughter would have been saved from the abuse.''
The priest, Father Chris Aridas, last night commented on the parent's complaint, saying, ''I can understand the tremendous anger he must have.'' But the priest said he had been unable to take further action about the exposure incident because Mr. Filippi denied it and ''the girl who supposedly experienced it wouldn't see the police or anything, so nothing was able to be proved.''
The priest said he eventually fired Mr. Filippi for lying about arranging an overnight party with children and adults at which the exposure supposedly occurred. Overnight parties are prohibited, Father Aridas said, but there was no indication of any other impropriety that night.
When Father Aridas later suspected the possibility of rape with the second girl, he said he immediately called the police, which led to the arrest and prosecution.
In December, Father Aridas took a leadership role in the diocese when he joined three other priests in circulating a petition seeking to meet with Bishop Murphy because of widespread distress among priests and parishioners over the sex abuse scandals and other issues.
About 50 priests signed the petition, Bishop Murphy agreed to meet and some 190 priests attended the meeting. Father Aridas and the other three organizers also met with the bishop's representatives in a follow-up meeting. The man who said his daughter was raped said that Father Aridas should not be playing such a role. ''No, no, most definitely not,'' Jay said. ''I think he made a mistake in judgment, a very unfortunate mistake in judgment and I think possibly the mistake that he made was influenced by the culture of the church at that particular time.''
Father Aridas said that the priests organized the meeting with the bishop but are not a continuing group, nor is he functioning as a leader.
