Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur tilted back his face mask during a break in the action and peered up at the scoreboard. He watched a videotape of a collection of just a few of his memorable saves.
Brodeur did not contribute much footage to his highlight video in an 8-2 victory Wednesday night over the Buffalo Sabres, but he accomplished something that had never been done in National Hockey League history.
Brodeur, 31, posted his 30th victory of the season Wednesday at Continental Arena. He has won at least 30 games for nine straight seasons. Before Wednesday, only he and Patrick Roy had won at least 30 games in eight straight seasons. Both Brodeur and Roy started their streaks in the 1995-96 season, but Roy retired at the end of last season.
When asked what the record meant to him, Brodeur said, ''Durability and success.''
He added, ''I expect myself to do it because I've been given the opportunity to be successful.''
Brodeur stopped 20 of 22 shots Wednesday, including a breakaway by J. P. Dumont, as the Devils established a season high for goals.
''That was fine with me,'' Brodeur said, smiling. ''Any time we score eight goals, I'm not going to complain.''
The line centered by Scott Gomez, which includes Patrik Elias and Brian Gionta, was once again a force. Elias had two goals and three assists. Gionta had two goals and an assist, and Gomez had three assists. The line has 11 goals and 15 assists in three games.
Elias, who scored his 26th and 27th goals, set a club record Wednesday. He has six goals and five assists in his last three games. Patrik Sundstrom and Brendan Shanahan each had 10 points in three consecutive Devils games in the 1988-89 season.
''I've said it many times: I think I've been playing well the whole season,'' Elias said. ''Lately, the puck has been going in.''
Devils left wing Jay Pandolfo, who had not scored in his previous 18 games, scored twice Wednesday. Defenseman Brian Rafalski scored a goal with less than a second remaining in the second period, and added an assist on an Elias goal.
The Devils moved 4 points behind the idle Philadelphia Flyers, who have played two more games, for the Atlantic Division lead.
The Devils have won three games in a row. They have scored 18 goals in three games and 26 goals in their last seven games.
''This is a couple of games that we've done it,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said. ''I don't want to go overboard, but in today's game, it's very tough to score eight goals. I don't care who's playing.''
Burns seemed to be pleased with the way the rookie defenseman David Hale went after Buffalo center Adam Mair when Mair barged into Brodeur early in the third period. Devils right wing Jamie Langenbrunner was thrown out of the game after another fight.
Referring to the 5-foot-7 Gionta, Burns said: ''When Gionta is on the ice, they just love to go after him. They all seem to be so much bigger when things go bad and Gionta's got the puck. They're all just a little bit tougher.''
Burns is not usually that sarcastic or blustery. It was, indeed, a special night.
HOCKEY
