Democrats on Wednesday plunged into the volatile new debate over a constitutional amendment that would ban gay marriage, saying they were confident that voters would see President Bush's endorsement of the measure as an expression of political opportunism, not shared values.
Senator John Kerry, the Democratic front-runner, made the rounds of the morning talk shows, accusing Mr. Bush of ''trying to divide America'' and ''change the subject'' from his economic and foreign policies.
''Everybody in America can understand this is an effort to drive a political wedge,'' Mr. Kerry said on the NBC television program ''Today.'' Mr. Kerry was careful to note that he opposed gay marriage, like Mr. Bush, but said he chose not ''to tamper with the Constitution of the United States for political purposes.''
The Bush campaign quickly fired back, accusing Mr. Kerry of hypocrisy. ''President Bush is protecting the institution of marriage from activist judges in Massachusetts and local officials in San Francisco,'' the president's campaign declared in a statement. The statement added that while Mr. Kerry ''claims to believe marriage is the union of a man and a woman,'' he had failed to stand up for it in Senate votes.
Senator John Edwards, Mr. Kerry's principal rival for the nomination, told reporters that he also opposed gay marriage, ''because of my own personal view of what marriage is,'' but added that he supported giving gay couples ''the substantive rights that are contained in civil unions.''
When pressed on the difference between civil unions and marriages, and asked to expound on his personal views on marriage, Mr. Edwards ended the questioning. ''I am finished with that question,'' he said.
In declaring his support on Tuesday for a constitutional amendment that would bar same-sex marriage, Mr. Bush called the union of a man and a woman the ''most fundamental institution of civilization.'' He left Democratic candidates trying to walk a careful line, mindful that polls show that most Americans oppose gay marriage but are more closely divided on amending the Constitution to prohibit it.
But many Democratic strategists and gay rights advocates argued Wednesday that the Republicans could end up with a bigger political problem stemming from Mr. Bush's endorsement. While it may energize his base, those Democrats said, it will cost him support among the electorate at large.
''If we do our job right, it can be perceived as an attempt to divert attention away from the economy and the war and the lack of direction in the country,'' said Celinda Lake, a Democratic pollster.
Still, Ms. Lake acknowledged that the gay marriage issue could trouble older, blue-collar voters as well as some Catholics otherwise attracted by the Democratic Party's economic message.
Stan Greenberg, another Democratic pollster, maintained that the Democrats could handle the issue, saying that ''2004 is not 1988, when Bush was able to beat Dukakis handily by waging a culture war.'' Mr. Greenberg argued that backing for the amendment was at best a ''status quo'' strategy that maintained the even political division in the country rather than transforming the landscape.
Democratic and other analysts said both Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards had staked out a middle ground acceptable to much of the electorate. ''It's important not to be supporting gay marriage, to be drawing the line in some way but to draw it in a more reasonable, moderate way than amending the Constitution,'' said Andrew Kohut, at the Pew Research Center.
But Republicans said Mr. Kerry was simply trying to have it both ways. Ed Gillespie, the Republican national chairman, told reporters that ''Senator Kerry has had a number of different positions on this.'' Mr. Gillespie noted that despite his stated opposition to same-sex marriage, Mr. Kerry was one of only 14 senators who voted against the Defense of Marriage Act of 1996, which prohibits federal recognition of such marriages. Spokesmen for Mr. Kerry's campaign said he had voted against the legislation because he believed it had become a Congressional exercise in gay-bashing.
Gay rights leaders said they were well aware that the Democratic candidates had to walk a careful line to avoid alienating not only gay constituents but swing voters as well. They indicated that whatever the balancing act, Democrats would reap the benefit of gay voters' anger over Mr. Bush's embrace of a constitutional amendment.
''This is the one issue that has united the gay community more than any other I can remember, short of the attempt to stop AIDS,'' said Matt Foreman, executive director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. ''So when you have President Bush calling for the amendment from the White House and the Democratic candidates strongly opposing it, there's not a choice.''
