Senator John Edwards came to a college community in this affluent Los Angeles suburb on Wednesday to implore students to rise in a fight against poverty, as his chief rival, Senator John Kerry, campaigned in Ohio, pushing a package of job-creation incentives and deploring the loss of jobs overseas.
The Democratic campaign's focus on the jobless and poor came a day after Mr. Kerry won new victories in the Utah, Idaho and Hawaii primaries.
Mr. Edwards said that ''you and I have a basic American responsibility'' to end what he described as ''this grave injustice'' shadowing the nation.
''I want to know, When did it become acceptable to dismiss our challenges as just the way things are?'' Mr. Edwards said as his audience responded with loud and enthusiastic cheers. ''When did it become O.K. to ignore our toughest problems because it's going to take a long time to solve them? When did 'it's just too hard' become an excuse?''
''Poverty has many causes,'' Mr. Edwards said, uncharacteristically reading his speech from a lectern. ''But the biggest cause of all is the silence of people who can do something about it.''
As Mr. Edwards devoted an entire 25-minute speech here to poverty, Mr. Kerry hit hard at the theme of job losses as he sought to fight off Mr. Edward's criticism of supporting trade treaties that Mr. Edwards said contributed to job loss in the country.
But Mr. Kerry offered few new proposals to stop the flow of jobs overseas, saying he would require companies to report such moves and give workers three months' notice first. He ignored Mr. Edwards, instead attacking President Bush for saying in a speech on Monday that the economy was moving forward.
''I don't think George Bush knows what's going on in the real America, with real workers, where people are struggling,'' Mr. Kerry told more than 800 people at the University of Toledo.
Mr. Edwards typically calls on the nation to fight poverty as one of his campaign themes
But Mr. Edwards, known for giving virtually the identical speech at stop after stop, unveiled a new one that was entirely directed at what he said should be a moral crusade in this country. His aides drew attention to the fact that he had chosen to give a speech about poverty at Pomona College, in a leafy suburb in the mountains about 40 miles east of Los Angeles.
He did it at a time of difficulty in his campaign -- polls suggest that he is facing a defeat in the voting here next Tuesday. And in losing to Mr. Kerry again on Tuesday night, he came in third in Hawaii, behind Representative Dennis J. Kucinich. Mr. Kucinich's showing in Hawaii allowed him to earn his first six delegates in the contest.
If Mr. Edwards was distressed by that, he showed no signs of it as he arrived here Wednesday afternoon for a three-day swing through this state.
''People said it was too hard and too impossible to go to the moon, but we did,'' he said, as the crowd shouted in response. ''People said that we could never cure polio, but we did. And people say that we can never lift millions of Americans out of poverty, and I'm here to tell you today that together, we are going to do it.''
Saying there was a general acceptance of poverty in Washington, Mr. Edwards told the audience: ''We can build one America that no longer accepts the phrase, working poor. I want the phrase working poor to never be spoken by another American.''
And Mr. Edwards, like Mr. Kerry, mocked Mr. Bush's approach to these problems.
''It is clear that when our president is someone who understands that a rising tide lifts all boats, America prospers and grows stronger and millions of Americans are lifted out of poverty,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''And when our president is someone who believes that a rising tide is there to get the yachts out of the harbor, America suffers.''
This was the third day in the last week that Mr. Kerry campaigned in Ohio, a state where Mr. Edwards is looking for an upset and a state that will be pivotal in the general election.
Mr. Kerry said that as president would have his Labor Department track the flight of jobs overseas and study ways to counteract the trend.
''We're going to demand accountability from corporations when jobs are unjustifiably shipped overseas,'' he said. ''We're going to require full disclosure to the American public about how many jobs are being sent overseas, where they're going, and why they're going.''
Mr. Kerry at one point acknowledged, however, that mere studies would accomplish little.
''All of us know that all the ideas and all the position papers in the world won't add up to much if we don't have a president who is ready to wage the fight and who knows how to win it,'' he said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: BATTLEGROUNDS
