Acting only hours after the release of a tough critique of animal care at the National Zoo, Lucy H. Spelman, the zoo's director, said Wednesday that she would resign at the end of the year.
The criticism was issued in an interim report by an independent scientific panel, which found that the health of animals at the zoo, a part of the Smithsonian Institution, had been jeopardized by shortcomings in care, management, record keeping and pest control.
Troubles at the zoo have been a continuing source of controversy, and Dr. Spelman, explaining her resignation at a briefing for reporters, said: ''I have become a lightning rod for too much attention. It has become a distraction for the zoo and the Smithsonian.''
Dr. Spelman, a 41-year-old veterinarian, argued that there ''was no evidence that animals had ever suffered'' during her tenure, which began in June 2000. Yet at another point she acknowledged that the 114-page report, which referred to the death of several animals under circumstances indicating substandard care, was ''candid and accurate.''
The National Zoo, visited by more than two million people a year, is run with federal money. Congress sought a review of its operations not long after two endangered red pandas died there in January 2003, having eaten rat poison buried in their area. The report issued Wednesday was an interim accounting of that yearlong review, begun in July.
The report, by a National Academy of Sciences panel of veterinarians, zookeepers and other specialists, painted a picture of a sloppily run institution with ''a lack of responsibility and accountability at all levels.''
The panel's chairman, R. Michael Roberts, professor of animal science and veterinary pathology at the University of Missouri, said at a news conference separate from Dr. Spelman's, ''We believe there has been a pervasive weakness throughout the institution, from the keeper level to management.''
The 15-member panel found that among the important areas where the zoo had failed was basic preventive care. Poor supervision of its feeding programs has contributed to animal deaths, the report said, including that of a zebra named Buumba, which, the experts found, starved to death in February 2000.
Dr. Spelman served as the zoo's chief veterinarian before being named director nearly four years ago by the Smithsonian's secretary, Lawrence M. Small. The panel said that the zoo had not been following its own preventive care guidelines since 1998, when she was on the veterinary staff.
