Investigators think two of the victims in a triple shooting in Jamaica, Queens, on Tuesday night were bystanders, a police official said yesterday. One victim, Terence Burt, 35, who died, was the father of three young children and the caretaker of three more, his family said.
The police think that the gunman's intended target was another man, Anthony Houston, 36, who was shot in the hip. Mr. Houston was arrested in September on murder charges, but was released after a witness recanted or refused to testify, officials said.
A third man, identified as Dermoth Cross, 24, was shot in the right calf.
The shooting occurred at 7:49 p.m. outside Junior High School 8, 108-35 167th Street, where the gym is open nightly for neighborhood use, the police said. Mr. Burt went to watch a basketball tournament, his sister said, and might have even intended to play in a pick-up game afterward.
He and Mr. Cross were outside at the same time as Mr. Houston, who was smoking a cigarette. Witnesses told the police that three men appeared and began chasing Mr. Houston, with one of them firing a gun. Mr. Burt was shot in the chest.
The police official said Mr. Burt had some felony narcotics arrests but had not been in trouble with the law since 1988. ''He had turned his life around,'' Sheila Buie, his aunt, said last night.
His sister, Cher Windham, agreed, saying, ''And he did it with a lot of support from his wife.''
Mr. Burt and his wife, Angela, had a 3-year-old son. She also has three children from a past marriage who live with them, and Mr. Burt had two daughters, ages 5 and 7, from a previous relationship, his family said.
He did construction work, they said. ''He spent every evening with his children,'' Ms. Windham, 30, said. ''He was a big brother to a lot of kids, a father to a lot of kids, the type of figure that a lot of kids in the neighborhood don't have.''
Mr. Houston was arrested in the Sept. 1 killing of Shahada Bey, who the official said had been arrested in the death of Mr. Houston's brother a few years before. The official said the shooting might have been in retaliation for Mr. Bey's death.
Mr. Houston was in stable condition at Mary Immaculate Hospital last night, and Mr. Cross was in stable condition at Jamaica Hospital Medical Center, officials said.
