AFTER six years of watching ''Sex and the City'' minus all the hype and rarely in the right order because I was overseas, I am facing cold turkey. And ready to say, Thank goodness that's over.
It isn't that the lines on Carrie's neck are getting as reedy and drawn as the ones on her computer screen. No, my hope is that Hollywood will now issue a new role model. I didn't like Carrie Bradshaw any more than I liked Gordon Gekko.
I have a daughter who entered seventh grade a year ago at Brearley, a girls' school so sure of itself that it jokes, ''Chapin girls date doctors and lawyers, Spence girls marry doctors and lawyers and Brearley girls become doctors and lawyers.''
At my first parents' breakfast, some mothers invited me into their circle, one confiding, ''We're debating whether we let our daughters watch 'Friends.' ''
''Oh, dear,'' I said. ''I've been letting my daughter watch 'Sex and the City' since she was 9.''
Yes, I've been accused of robbing her of her childhood, but my ex and I agreed on this: If we chased her out of the room -- especially if her big sister stayed -- we would enrobe it in the allure of the forbidden and undiscussable. Instead she went ''Eeww, gross!'' at the appropriate moments and asked about what she didn't understand. Now she's 13 and likes boys, but for now the goal is still the soccer team and maybe getting a shy guy to slow-dance at a sock hop.
Rather, what I worried about her absorbing was just what made grown-up women watch: the women. Each week I thought: Well, of course these pretty, witty girls are alone and bitter. Great bodies, great clothes, great punch lines. But one bond: what jerks men are.
I hope my daughters don't bloom into that sorority of self-pity.
Decades ago I met someone at my cousin's wedding who told me that all the girls she knew fit into two groups: the lumpen majority who wanted to date Napoleon Solo, and the few who favored Illya Kuryakin (the ''Man From U.N.C.L.E.'' duo: Solo was a gigolo-suave 007 knockoff in ascots, Kuryakin a soulful Russian in black turtlenecks).
Maybe I hang out in the wrong circles, but I have never heard a guy ask, Whom would you pick -- Carrie, Samantha, Miranda or Charlotte? Because each week the answer was, None of them.
From Paris, the view was grim. Diana and her Manhattan huntresses shredding the Actaeons who have seen them naked. What normal guy would not be intimidated by most of their handsome, rich, sometimes sensitive dates? And yet, each man ended up like Manolos: lusted after as an accessory, resented for the pain, and disposable.
It is shocking what massive boluses of crisis were injected in the end-of-season rush to make the girls grow up at last. Cancer to slow Samantha down enough to accept kindness from a man without repayment in fellatio. An impotent Galahad for Charlotte so she can appreciate a hairless but gentle Hobbit -- and then infertility, puppies, Chinese adoption bureaucracies to test his reserves of grace. For Miranda, an unwanted baby, an unwanted Brooklyn and a demented mother-in-law. When she gives the lady a bath and is told that she has committed an act of love, she orders a cover-up.
And Carrie? She outdid a whole generation of women. She landed Illya. Only better: Baryshnikov.
But she couldn't enjoy it. In departing with a man she barely knew, she tore into Big. Handed Paris in a Fauchon tin, she demanded Manhattan treatment, mostly in English, and the Parisians were still sweet to her, except for one beastly kid whose behavior struck me as quintessentially Upper West Side.
And then, in one afternoon, the writers morph her Russian into a monster. He is disliked by his ex-wife, feigns a breakdown to rob Carrie of her moment in the sun, abandons her, then slaps her. Please.
Now, she's back with Big, and we know his name is John. Perhaps she'll learn more. I don't predict happiness for anyone, except maybe Charlotte, who knows how to forgive and how to negotiate. But that, sadly, is why so many women dismissed her as a doormat, not realizing that she was probably the only one who regularly outwitted men.
Which is the one sex trick I do hope my daughters learned from the show.
CLOSE TO HOME
