Speaker Gifford Miller of the City Council proposed a property tax rollback yesterday that would permanently reduce taxes by 2 percent for all city residents and businesses, with larger tax breaks for senior citizens on fixed incomes and the working poor.
The proposal was immediately rejected by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, but got resounding support in the Council, where Mr. Miller controls the overwhelmingly Democratic membership.
Mr. Miller, a Democrat who is likely to run against Mr. Bloomberg in 2005, announced his $297 million tax plan during an impassioned, 40-minute address to city leaders that was rife with swipes at the mayor and political leaders from Albany to Washington. Mr. Miller, standing before a lighted screen covered with the slogan ''Standing up for all New Yorkers,'' attacked the mayor's record on tax increases and mocked his $250 million proposal last month to give a one-time $400 rebate to the owners of one-, two-, and three-family homes, co-ops and condos.
''The mayor's rebate is a gimmick,'' Mr. Miller said. ''It is a page torn straight from the Bush playbook. It is not a tax cut -- it is a one-time check written out to only 20 percent of the property taxpayers in this city.''
Instead, Mr. Miller proposed an across-the-board tax reduction of 2 percent for everyone, including renters and businesses. Under his plan, the average tax rate would decline to $12.037 per $100 of assessed value from $12.283 in the 2005 fiscal year. The owner of a single-family home valued at $413,000 would pay $53 less in taxes, according to Council estimates. Unlike the mayor's plan, Mr. Miller's tax rollback would not require the approval of state lawmakers and Gov. George E. Pataki because it would affect all rate payers and not just one class. Mr. Bloomberg's plan is being reviewed in Albany by state leaders. But the practical effect of Mr. Miller's tax plan would be that the largest savings would go to those who own the most expensive properties. At a news conference in the Bronx, Mayor Bloomberg charged that the speaker's tax plan would shortchange constituents in favor of ''big corporations and big landlords.''
''It would be outrageous to do that,'' the mayor said. ''To give a tax rebate to those who didn't even feel it and to focus it all on the big landlords rather than the people who stepped up to the plate to carry through this city.''
Both tax plans would be financed by higher-than-expected revenues -- an estimated $765 million above projections for this fiscal year.
Hours before Mr. Miller's address, festive bunting was hung over the balcony overlooking the main floor. Mr. Miller arrived to a standing ovation. In his speech, he proposed restoring $72 million in cuts that the mayor had included in his budget, including money for scholarships for city university students, libraries, summer jobs and child care.
The speaker also asserted that the city had been shortchanged on everything from education to antiterrorism financing, and suggested that the mayor had not fought hard enough for the city's interests. ''We are stuck between two irresponsible administrations in Albany and Washington whose treatment of this city veers between abuse and neglect,'' Mr. Miller said to loud applause.
The centerpiece of Mr. Miller's address, though, was the proposed 2 percent property tax cut. Mr. Miller, who frequently visits senior centers, also proposed to repeal entirely last year's 18.5 percent property tax increase on residents who are at least 65 and earn less than $30,000 a year. And he proposed a tax credit of $20 to $215 to city households earning less than $34,692 a year.
Councilman David I. Weprin, chairman of the Finance Committee, said that the speaker's tax cuts would offer more relief for his constituents in eastern Queens. ''It's great in theory to get a rebate, but if that's offset by a huge assessment increase, that minimizes the benefit,'' he said.
City Comptroller William C. Thompson Jr., union officials and advocates for special interest groups all expressed support yesterday for Mr. Miller's tax rollback, but several of them also questioned how the city would pay for it. Charles Brecher, director of research for the Citizens Budget Commission, said that his group did not support either tax plan. ''Rather than indulge in some of these rebates and reductions,'' he said. ''We'd rather see the available funding in a good year go to paying off debt that we took in bad times.''
