PERSONAL computers have simplified life in many ways, but there is a price to pay in the form of a little drudgery. One of the most obvious examples is the need to back up files: everyone knows they should do it, but the task is often put off. After all, the chances of suddenly losing important data seem so remote. And with a million other distractions, who has time to delve into the complexities of backup software and hardware?
On that last point, at least, there are signs of change. Several recently introduced all-in-one devices can back up the contents of a computer at the push of a button or perpetually, and they can do it in the background, as you work. What's more, these devices are generally easy to set up and demand little in the way of attention or maintenance once they are up and running.
The time may be right. As expanding hard disks allow users to accumulate ever more digital photos, music files, e-mail messages and personal documents, the value of that data increases, and the need for an effective backup strategy grows.
One of the easiest options is a dedicated ''one touch'' backup unit. Such devices, roughly the size of a hardcover book, are large-capacity external drives that connect to a computer's U.S.B. or FireWire port. They come with backup software that goes into action at the touch of a button, and once configured, they can back up the contents of a computer quickly and easily.
One such device, the Western Digital Media Center With Dual-Option Backup, works with both PC's and Macintosh computers and comes with a backup program from Dantz called Retrospect Express. A backup can be initiated either manually, by pressing a button, or automatically, according to a schedule.
After the software is installed, pressing the backup button for the first time summons a wizard to the screen that prompts the user through a series of choices about what to back up (all files -- the elephant-gun-to-swat-a-fly approach -- or just documents, from images to e-mail to music files). After you have completed the wizard setup, the first backup begins automatically and the settings are stored as the default. A second button, for scheduling daily or weekly backups, calls up a setup wizard with a different series of questions for that option.
The speed of a backup depends on a computer's processing power, the size of the files to be backed up (one large file can be backed up faster than a batch of smaller files that occupy the same amount of hard-disk space), and whether the connection is the faster U.S.B. 2.0, the older U.S.B. 1.1, or FireWire. With a U.S.B. 2.0 connection, it took me 14 minutes and 42 seconds to back up 12,954 files totaling 1.6 gigabytes.
The Media Center, which comes in capacities of 160 gigabytes ($300), 200 gigabytes ($350; available only at Best Buy) or 250 gigabytes ($400), includes a built-in 8-in-1 memory card reader and U.S.B. 2.0 hub. A version that lacks the memory card slots, the External Drive with Dual-Option Backup, is available in capacities ranging from 120 gigabytes ($200; available only at Best Buy) to 250 gigabytes ($350).
An external drive from Maxtor, the OneTouch, also offers the one-button option. It, too, relies on the Retrospect Express software, and the initial setup is similar to Western Digital's. Maxtor offers the OneTouch with a variety of options: a unit with U.S.B. 2.0, U.S.B. 1.1 and FireWire ports, for example, offers a capacity of 160 gigabytes ($200) to 300 gigabytes ($400); there is a 250-gigabyte FireWire drive formatted for Macintosh computers ($350) and a U.S.B.-only model with 80 gigabytes ($180) or 120 gigabytes ($200).
The Seagate External Hard Drive from Seagate Technology offers a one-touch option and comes with BounceBack Express backup software from CMS Products. A 160-gigabyte version is $250 (a 200-gigabyte model with a suggested price of $300 is expected to arrive in stores in April). The Seagate drive is compatible with both PC's and Macs, and its enclosure is slightly more compact than the drives from Western Digital and Maxtor.
While push-button devices simplify the chore of backing up files, users must take note of exactly what is being backed up and the form in which it is saved, because there are differences -- sometimes subtle -- between the machines' default settings. For example, the Windows version of the Maxtor OneTouch (but not the Macintosh version) will by default delete a file from the backed-up material if you delete it on the computer. Such a detail may seem inconsequential for many users, but it can be important.
While the one-touch backup devices save time in the long run, investing some time early on to review backups for accuracy and to adjust settings can promote peace of mind and head off a belated discovery that something has gone amiss.
An alternative approach is a network device like the Mirra Personal Server, introduced in December, which continuously backs up the contents of Windows XP and Windows 2000 computers connected to a home or small office network. The Mirra server is based on the idea of mirroring, a technique used for backing up Web sites.
It is essentially a computer that runs the Linux operating system and proprietary software developed by Mirra. Once the client software has been installed, users on the network tag the folders they want backed up; a small red dot in Windows Explorer denotes a tagged folder. The server then begins its backup routine, working in the background. After that initial backup is completed, each time a file is added to a tagged folder or one already inside the folder is modified, the server automatically records the change. Up to eight versions of a file can be stored on the server, allowing you to restore a file to an earlier state.
The Mirra client software shows the progress of each backup in a floating status bar, adding to the user's confidence. The server also logs its backup activity, so you can review what files were backed up and when.
One drawback of the Mirra server is speed. The company says it takes about a half-hour to back up one gigabyte of data -- more than twice the time it takes to transfer the same amount to external drives using U.S.B. 2.0 or FireWire ports (including verification that the backup was successful). Another disadvantage is is that backed-up files on the server cannot be opened directly from Windows Explorer. To get access to a backup file, the user must start up the Mirra software and download it to one of the computers on the network. With an external drive, by contrast, the files can be opened through Windows Explorer just as if they were on an internal hard disk, and they are available to any computer on the network.
That the Mirra server is an independent element of a network, however, confers some benefits. It can be used by any number of computers, limited only by the network bandwidth and disk space. That means that the backed-up data is centralized for users who come and go. And if the network has a broadband connection to the Internet, users can retrieve and share files remotely. The 80-gigabyte version of the Mirra server is $400 and the 120-gigabyte disk is $500.
Over all, these backup options provide an easy and reliable mechanism for restoring files that have been corrupted or that resided on a damaged or lost computer. But users should remember that in a fire or a flood, a backup device stored in the same place as the PC is likely to be destroyed as well. To avoid that possibility, users may also want to consider keeping a current backup of their most critical files somewhere else. For that, portable solutions like backup tapes, DVD's or Zip drives may make sense.
If disaster strikes, the only backup strategy that matters is one that works.
Hide-and-Seek  Tracking Down Valuable Files
A critical part of a successful backup strategy is knowing what to back up and where to find it. Different kinds of data files, including music, digital photos, e-mail messages and word-processing documents, are typically scattered around a hard disk.
If you do not plan to back up the entire disk, finding the material you want to preserve requires some digging.
To locate files and folders in Windows XP, click on Start, Search and then All Files and Folders; select Local Hard Drives and More Advanced Options to reach Search Hidden Files and Folders. In the Mac OS X system, click on the Finder, go to File, and then Find, and choose Local Disks.
MP3 music files carry the extension .mp3, and you can run a search for that extension (include the period) to find them. For digital photos, search for ''.jpg'' or ''.tif.'' For documents, use ''.doc,'' ''.ppt,'' ''.xl'' and ''.pdf,'' to find Microsoft Word, PowerPoint, and Excel files and Adobe PDF files. (Another way to search in XP is to use a dropdown menu of file types under More Advanced Options.)
E-mail programs store messages in varying places. To find Outlook Express messages in Windows XP, search for ''.dbx'' files. For Eudora files, look for the Eudora Mail folder, which by default is created within the Documents and Settings folder. For the Mail program that comes with Mac OS X, search for a folder called Mail; for Eudora on the Mac, locate the ''Eudora'' folder.
You can try to verify that you have found the correct e-mail folder by taking note of the dates on which the mail files were modified. If the latest dates are, from say, 2003 and you know that you have received messages more recently, you will need to keep digging.
THOMAS J. FITZGERALD
BASICS  Correction:  March 4, 2004, Thursday  An article in Circuits on Feb. 26 about devices for backing up computer data overstated the Macintosh compatibility of software shipped with the Maxtor OneTouch and the Western Digital Media Center. The software, Dantz Retrospect Express 5.0 and 5.1, works with most Mac operating systems but not with some features of the most recent system, Mac OS X 10.3. A newer version, Dantz Retrospect Desktop 6.0, is compatible with OS X 10.3 but does not accommodate the one-button backup feature of the Maxtor and Western Digital drives.
