Pruning Is a Snap
Q. I have some old Christmas cactuses that have survived many moves and become quite large. Is there a special way to prune them?
A. Nothing special about it. The closely related plants called holiday cactuses (Christmas, Thanksgiving, Easter) all grow clearly segmented branches that can be pruned at any joint.
Segments come off neatly with a twist or can be cut with a sharp knife. Either way, steady the upper section as you prune, so it doesn't get pulled downward. Multiple branches grow from the pruned spots, widening the plant; be sure they are balanced so it stays symmetrical.
And don't forget that smaller plants need less to drink. Regular watering is important -- in spite of their name, these are not desert plants -- but root rot from overwatering is the most common killer of holiday cactuses.
If you want to make more plants, use branch pieces 3 to 5 segments long. Let them dry for 2 or 3 days after removing them from the plant, then bury the bases in damp vermiculite. After they root, in about a month, plant in light, well-drained potting medium.
Dating the Tomato
Q. Tomato seed packets list the number of days to maturity, but that number refers to the time seedlings are set out. Seedlings can be all different sizes, so I don't see how that works. Is there some standard seedling age?
A. Standard advice is to start the seeds at least 6 to 8 weeks before it is safe to set plants out, so right there you have a 14-day window, roughly the difference between an early variety (60 to 65 days) and a late one (78 days or more). Add the fact that many growers start seeds earlier, pile on unknowns like the weather, and it will be clear that days to harvest should be used primarily for comparison, whether of tomatoes or zucchini or almost anything else.
For best results, hedge your bets and extend your harvest by planting early, midseason and late varieties, then ignore the calendar (except to pay your bills). Dazzling numbers of choices are offered by Tomato Growers Supply Company, (888) 478-7333 or www.tomatogrowers.com and Totally Tomatoes (803) 663-0016 or www.totallytomato.com.
Raising the Beds
Q. I know that old-fashioned treated wood (labeled CCA) contains arsenic and is not suitable for raised beds in a vegetable garden. But is it safe to use the new kinds? They are less expensive than cedar or plastic.
A. It is difficult to say for sure. Treated woods must pass many tests, but none that completely cover your question, which is far more complex than it might appear. Even when taken narrowly, the problem has four parts. Will the wood preservatives leach into the soil? If so, will they remain the same or break down harmlessly? If they do remain, will plants absorb them? And if they are absorbed, would the plants be safe to eat?
Each of those subquestions has many answers. Both leaching and breakdown, for instance, are likely to depend on the soil (claylike or sandy, acid or alkaline) and how much it rains. Similarly, different plants absorb different things, and leaves and fruits are by no means equal in what they contain. And much can depend on who is doing the eating; children are far more vulnerable to toxins than adults are.
Because there are so many unknowns, you may prefer to err on the side of caution. Treated wood is the least expensive rot-resistant building material, but that is its only advantage. And raised beds require so little framing that any savings are small when averaged out over the life of the beds.
To explore the subject in greater depth, try the overview of treated woods at attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/lumber.html.
Garden Q &amp; A
