Some of Europe's biggest mobile phone groups have all but persuaded antitrust regulators at the European Commission that they would no longer overcharge consumers for using their phones abroad, an official close to the commission's competition department said on Wednesday.
Mobile phone users pay anything from 10 euro cents (13 cents) to a euro a minute to make calls in other countries, on top of the price charged by their home providers. They often have no choice about what local operator handles these calls and no way of knowing how much each call costs.
The commission has been investigating these so-called roaming charges in Britain and in Germany, where the charges are thought to be the highest since 2000. The inquiries focus on Vodafone, O2 and T-Mobile, which operate in both Britain and Germany, as well as Orange in Britain and the Dutch mobile operator KPN in Germany.
In December, two alliances of mobile operators, including nearly all the companies under investigation, notified the commission of their plans to team up to offer private and business subscribers a transparent, cheaper way to use phones abroad.
One alliance includes T-Mobile of Germany, Telefónica of Spain, Orange of France and Telecom Italia. The other includes O2 of Britain, Wind of Italy, Amena of Spain, Telenor of Norway, Pannon of Hungary and Sunrise of Switzerland.
The commission official, who asked not to be identified, said these alliances aimed to compete with the British mobile operator Vodafone's Eurocall service, which offers subscribers the chance to program their mobile phones so they will always seek a connection abroad from one of Vodafone's European divisions, at a reduced price.
''These alliances may provide the answer to inflated roaming prices in the European Union,'' he said. ''Partly due to pressure from the regulators and partly due to advances in mobile phone technology which allow phones to be directed to one or another operator, the phone companies appear to be putting a stop to the overcharging that has gone on for some time.''
The alliances have told the commission that their subscribers will be able to direct their phones to search for the network of another alliance member when they are abroad, so the subscriber can benefit from a prearranged, reduced rate.
''We do realize that customers perceive that roaming calls are expensive,'' a spokeswoman for T-Mobile, Elaine Devereux, said. ''We have been making quite an effort in the last year to address that perception.''
Commission competition regulators will examine the alliances in conjunction with their continuing antitrust investigations of the British and German markets, the official said.
Consumer groups gave a guarded welcome to these developments. Dominique Forest, an economic advisor at BEUC, a Brussels-based European consumer association, said that any initiative from the industry to do away with exorbitant roaming charges must provide complete price transparency to consumers.
''Right now it's impossible to know how much you are paying,'' he said. Consumers who live near national borders are often charged for roaming even when they are close to home. ''Any solution must put an end to charging for this type of involuntary roaming,'' Mr. Forest said.
T-Mobile's efforts to bring down roaming charges have so far been limited to offering discounts for brief periods, usually around peak travel times like Christmas or Easter.
For example, from March 1 to April 30, T-Mobile customers in Austria, Britain, the Czech Republic and Germany who travel within Europe and the United States will receive discounts of 33 percent on roaming charges.
When asked what kept operators like T-Mobile from reducing roaming fees more fully, Ms. Devereux said only, ''We are making a series of important steps in the right direction.''
Formal charges against the British mobile phone companies will be filed in coming months, and the companies may be fined for previous overcharging, the official said, but he added that the fine would be modest if the overcharging had ended.
Vodafone introduced its Eurocall service in 2001. The official said the company faced fines for overcharging before beginning the service, adding that regulators will also examine the changes in roaming charges since Eurocall appeared.
''If the prices haven't come down,'' he said, ''then the offense continues and the fine would be greater.''
Charges against companies in the German market may follow later, the official said, but declined to give a time frame.
Vodafone is alone in having its own subsidiaries across most of the European continent. The two alliances aim to provide the subscribers of all participating mobile operators a similar service.
The official said that as a result of its investigations, and after the notification of the two alliances at the end of last year, the commission was drafting industrywide rules on the routing of mobile phone calls that would force all companies to reduce roaming charges in line with the reductions promised by the alliances and by Vodafone.
Ms. Devereux said T-Mobile recognized that lower prices tended to increase usage for both voice and data calls. Last April, for example, T-Mobile made permanent cuts to its data calling rates of 70 percent, which resulted in a 60 to 70 percent surge in data usage within a month, she said.
