The Senate voted overwhelmingly Wednesday to take up a White House-backed bill that would provide legal immunity to gun manufacturers and dealers. The action sent a strong signal that the measure, which has bipartisan support but is opposed by many big-city police chiefs and mayors, is destined to pass.
By a vote of 75 to 22, lawmakers agreed to begin debating the measure, which would offer protection to firearms manufacturers and dealers as long as they did not sell defective weapons or violate any law. The main question now is whether the Senate will tack two gun-control measures onto the bill.
Those measures -- one to extend a ban on assault weapons and another to require instant background checks for gun show customers -- also have bipartisan support and are backed by President Bush. But in a blow to the senators pushing the measures, the White House announced late Tuesday that it opposed attaching them as amendments.
''For the president to say he's for the assault-weapons ban, but to act against it is a flip-flop if there ever was one,'' Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, told reporters Wednesday afternoon.
''Now the president is in a glass house when he accuses others of flip-flopping,'' Mr. Schumer said.
Mr. Schumer's remarks, a reference to Mr. Bush's recent criticisms of Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, a Democratic presidential contender, illustrate the political volatility of the gun issue, which is expected to dominate Senate debate for at least the rest of this week. With the vote on the amendments expected to be especially close, Democrats are hoping to delay it until next Wednesday, after the March 2 primaries, so Mr. Kerry and his main Democratic rival, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, both of whom support the amendments, can be present to vote.
A major point of debate is whether a lawsuit filed against a Washington State gun dealer by victims of the families of the 2002 sniper attacks would survive. Backers of the immunity measure, including Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, say they regard the suit as valid and have amended the language of the bill to enable it to go forward.
Mr. Daschle said his amendment, which is in the measure as currently written, ''strikes a meaningful balance between the rights of legitimate business owners and the rights of individuals who have been injured by gun violence.''
Opponents of immunity disagree. They say the dealer, Bull's Eye Shooter Supply of Tacoma, Wash., which has been cited for nine violations of federal firearms regulations, would escape the suit because it did not violate any specific laws with respect to the sale of the snipers' weapon.
''Daschle is in a very, very untenable position here,'' said Richard Aborn, a former president of the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, an advocacy group. ''The Daschle amendment doesn't do anything to soften the negative impact of this bill. It's a disaster.''
