In a few words, Glen Sather said more than he had intended. Sather, the president and general manager of the Rangers, who fired himself as coach on Wednesday, told reporters how difficult it is to assemble a winning hockey team in New York.
''It's a complicated scenario here; the formula probably in New York City isn't the same as it is in a lot of other places,'' Sather said. When asked in what way this was so, he said: ''You know, I'm not quite sure yet. I'm not sure what it is.''
After almost four seasons in New York, Sather, a Hall of Famer who built five Stanley Cup winners with Edmonton in the 1980's, is not quite sure yet how to go about his job. If the Rangers miss the playoffs again, they will be out of the tournament for the seventh consecutive season.
Having turned the coaching over to Tom Renney, Sather will presumably finish the season and the next three years of his contract trying to learn how to build a winner in a different era in a different city, a long way from Alberta during the 1980's.
One small way to improve may be to lose his tin ear for the local vernacular. This may seem a small detail, but it speaks loudly for the perception that Sather has been merely an interloper here who arrived, like so many of his players, well past his prime.
Referring to the ''Fire Sather!'' chants of recent weeks at Madison Square Garden, Sather said: ''The chanting in the Gardens was distracting for the players. They seemed to get uptight.''
In point of fact, hockey fans in New York refer to the Rangers' home arena as the Garden. In Toronto, the old arena was called Maple Leaf Gardens, or the Gardens. People with a feel for their surroundings pick up quickly on subtleties.
But why dwell on small points? Among the larger lessons of how not to build a winning team, consider Sather's acquisitions by trade of Pavel Bure, Eric Lindros and Jaromir Jagr. All three left teams that were happy to be rid of them. All three earned millions of dollars. All three had histories of injuries and were past their prime.
Now, as the Rangers flounder, Bure's career is probably over because of a knee injury, Lindros's is in jeopardy from successive concussions and Jagr recently returned to the lineup after a leg/groin injury, a chronic problem for him.
Consider another part of the winning formula. When Sather led a team of superstars in the 1980's, Wayne Gretzky, Mark Messier, Jari Kurri, Paul Coffey, Kevin Lowe and Grant Fuhr came together in their youth and grew as a group.
Winning teams in hockey usually have this in common. But by assembling a Rotisserie collection of aging stars, Sather has done exactly the opposite of what is commonly accepted as the formula to build a winner in his sport.
''I don't think that I got any dumber over the last few years,'' Sather said, referring to his return to coaching in 2003 after a decade away from the bench. ''I've coached a lot in this league. I think I know the league. I know the players. I know what makes them tick.'' Referring to his coaching, he said, ''I'm pretty stubborn to be able to do it this long.''
His friends -- and he has many in hockey -- admire his loyalty, but that may be a part of the problem. Assuming there is no lockout next season, will Sather bring back Messier, the team captain, to play at age 43? This season, as in recent years, Messier started strong and showed less energy and productivity after Christmas.
But Sather, as coach, gave Messier, his former Edmonton star, much ice time. The new coach, Renney, was dismissed in Vancouver in 1997-98 in part because he did not get along with Messier when Messier was captain of the Canucks. When asked Wednesday about his relationship with Messier, Renney called it dynamite.
He meant that in a positive way. But dynamite is also a dangerous, explosive substance. When filling a coaching vacancy two seasons ago, Sather turned down Ken Hitchcock, who had a Cup on his résumé in Dallas, and chose, instead, the inexperienced Bryan Trottier.
As Trottier failed and was fired, Hitchcock began to build the Philadelphia Flyers into a Cup contender. Now, with experienced coaches like Joel Quenneville, Bob Francis and Scotty Bowman out of work, will Sather turn to them?
Bowman, interviewed Wednesday by reporters at Yankees camp in Tampa, Fla., said of the Rangers: ''They've not been able to develop much of a core from within. Most of their players come from somewhere else. It's not easy sometimes to mold them.''
Bowman, now retired with an N.H.L. record of nine Cup championships, has told friends recently that he does not wish to coach again. He reiterated that on Wednesday. Would he like to be a general manager? He is unlikely to be asked in New York because Sather said he intended to stay in that job. ''Absolutely,'' he said.
So, assuming that Sather means what he says, and will not be fired, and will not try to persuade a proven winner like Bowman to coach, will he keep Renney and hope Renney can coexist for a second time with Messier?
Or might Sather go for inexperience and cronyism again and move Messier from player to coach? That chain of events may sound far-fetched, but not nearly as strange as the Rangers' last four seasons under Sather, the president, the general manager and now the former coach.
Hockey Analysis
