Not many employers hire people who are likely to flip at work, let alone actively seek them out. For the United States freestyle aerials ski team, however, that is exactly what is happening.
The question was how to lure young talent and new blood to the team. The answer came during a trip to China. Jeff Wintersteen, the United States freestyle skiing coach, looked out on the hill and saw more than 40 young aerialists training. China, he thought, is the future. No more talk, it was time for action.
''We're competing against the biggest country in the world and we have to do something,'' Wintersteen said, referring to China's growing aerials program. ''We have great athletes in this country, we have great coaches and we need to get more athletes into the program.''
While China is not known for its Alpine tradition or prowess, the aerials program there has pioneered the practice of mining gymnastics programs for aerials talent. Initially, the Chinese aerialists were inconsistent; they looked angelic flipping and spinning through the air, but they had problems with landings.
Then the scouting efforts in the gym put the Chinese women's aerials team on the map when Nannan Xu won a silver medal in the 1998 Olympics in Nagano, Japan.
Now China could become the greatest threat to the United States aerials team.
''The reality is that we've been competing primarily against Canada and a few Europeans,'' Wintersteen said. He explained how the United States reacted to that competition, saying, ''We run a grass-roots program and try and attract athletes.
''But that's changed dramatically now. China has almost limitless potential.''
The American team's approach has changed with the new challenge. For the first time, in two of the top gymnastics magazines, it launched an advertising campaign -- Come Fly With Us -- featuring the Olympic aerialists Joe Pack and Eric Bergoust and encouraging gymnasts to consider aerials skiing. Last summer, the ski team invited gymnasts ages 12 to 23 to aerials camps here and in Lake Placid, N.Y. The team has another camp planned for this spring.
''There have been no real surprises, but our main goal is to simply get more girls into it,'' the team's development coach, Brian Lake, said. ''The number of women in the sport has depleted. If we get any male gymnasts, that's just gravy.''
The aerials team does not care if athletes know how to ski. They can work on that later. If gymnasts can flip, twist, jump and display the acrobatic athleticism that is the hallmark of aerial skiing, they are halfway there.
''You certainly can't take skiing out of the equation,'' Wintersteen said. ''However, we don't want gymnasts to think they can't be aerialists if they've never skied.''
In the past, former American gymnasts have boosted the team's star power. When Nikki Stone grew too tall for gymnastics, she turned to freestyle skiing and won a gold medal at the 1998 Olympics. Tracy Evans, a gymnast since age 6, picked up aerials at 21 and competed in three Olympics.
Wintersteen admits that the team would be foolish if it did not look more deeply into obvious talent pools, and it hopes to broaden the relationship with programs like USA Gymnastics.
But Wintersteen makes it quite clear that the team is not interested in stealing gymnasts, but rather is looking to spark interest and to offer athletes an alternative if they are facing a fading career or seeking something different.
''We're not trying to raid gymnastics, but we hope to educate young gymnasts that there's clearly a terrific alternative for them when -- for whatever reason -- their gymnastics career is over,'' Wintersteen said. ''We want them.''
THE SKI REPORT
