The Louis Brown Athletic Center, affectionately known as the Rutgers Athletic Center, or the RAC, has held up well since it opened in 1977. With only slight aesthetic upgrades, the building has remained largely unchanged.
The Scarlet Knights like nothing more. Continuing their run of success on their home court, and after a perplexing thread to their season, Rutgers battered West Virginia, 74-53, Wednesday night, boosting its hopes for its first N.C.A.A. tournament bid since 1991.
Rutgers (16-9, 7-7 Big East) is 13-1 at home, including nine straight victories since a loss on Jan. 6 to Connecticut. With one game left here and a game at Virginia Tech before the Big East tournament, Rutgers appears capable of an N.C.A.A. bid.
The flip side of that success is Rutgers's 3-8 record away from home, a major reason it finds itself grouped with three other teams, including West Virginia (14-10, 6-7), fighting for a potential seventh invitation from the Big East Conference.
Nothing underscored the disparity more than the past four days. A 32-point Rutgers loss at Boston College on Sunday was followed by this comfortable victory.
''People always say, 'How are you going to bounce back?' '' said Rutgers guard Ricky Shields, who led all scorers with 24 points. ''We're going to come back at home, a place we feel comfortable at.''
Coach Gary Waters attributed Rutgers's success here to good shooting -- 52.9 percent against the Mountaineers -- and comfort with an environment the Scarlet Knights practice in daily. But he also added caution, reminding the players after the game, ''Understand, we have one more home game and the rest of our games are on the road, so we have to solve this right here.''
West Virginia is 7-6 since its top scorer, Drew Schifino, was dismissed from the team last month after expressing annoyance at being benched late in a loss at Notre Dame, ending his nation-leading streak of scoring in double figures at 48 games. Schifino had 9 points in that game, and the Mountaineers entered this one with one player averaging in double figures.
The Mountaineers shot 56 percent in the second half but watched a 13-point halftime deficit grow larger as Rutgers also shot 56 percent.
''We played like we were carrying around a suitcase at times,'' Mountaineers Coach John Beilein said.
Waters can guard against a return to form on the road, but he does that with his team's postseason hopes looking stronger.
''We knew if we have any future, it had to start today,'' Waters said.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
