The most progressive designer to exhibit clothes during Italy's current fashion cycle probably has the least customary qualifications for the job. Unlike many colleagues doing business in this country, Jil Sander is not a diva. Not a publicity hound. Not the beneficiary of an industrial heritage or fortune, a good friend of Silvio Berlusconi's, or even an Italian.
Ms. Sander is a natural innovator, an attribute that, strangely enough in a country that provided the framework for most of what the West considers civilization, is currently in short supply.
When Ms. Sander shows her first fall collection of women's clothes since resuming control of the company that bears her name, Wednesday at 6 p.m., there is no reason to imagine that she will disappoint her many devotees. There was plenty of evidence at the men's wear collections shown here in January that while Ms. Sander may once have lost control of her company, she did not let go of her confidence or touch.
The singularity of that touch stands in contrast to what by anyone's standards is a static period in Italian design. ''It is such an overused word, elegance,'' Ms. Sander said on Monday. ''But elegance interests me,'' she added. ''When I say it, I mean something that can lift you up, make you lighter.''
A shy, tomboyish blonde of 60, Ms. Sander tends in conversation to crumple her fine hair, to shift in her chair, to push up the sleeves of her blazer and to reveal herself only in oblique formulations. Her return to fashion after a three-year absence, announced last May, was greeted by one retailer in the trade press as a ''second coming.''
In 1999, Patrizio Bertelli's Prada Group acquired 75 percent of Jil Sander A.G., a company that Ms. Sander founded in Hamburg, Germany, in 1973, when she was in her early 20's and still known as Heidemarie Jiline Sander, and which she built into a $200 million empire.
The company seemed primed for expansion. However unlikely a partner the autocratic Mr. Bertelli may have seemed, there was no question that their ambitions for the company were compatible in scale. But fashion insiders were quickly making book on how long it would take until the partnership failed under the strain of two thorny egos. Indeed, six months after signing the deal Ms. Sander quit, having mounted just one show under the corporate aegis of Prada. ''I always thought I would be the last person to leave the company,'' Ms. Sander said.
After the first Jil Sander show designed without Ms. Sander, Mr. Bertelli remarked, ''The individual fashion designer is less important than the company.'' Ms. Sander went into retirement, tending to the Japanese and topiary gardens at her 500-acre estate in northern Germany.
During this sabbatical she renewed her interest in the formal properties of design that have often earned her the meaningless title of a minimalist and that, as with the best Japanese design, is minimal only in a superficial sense. ''I always think in three dimensions,'' Ms. Sander said. Her $2,000 cashmere pullovers and $3,500 leather jackets became cult items, perhaps because they were almost ostentatiously nondescript. ''I look at the fabric and the cut, and I think, 'What can we do to make it less heavy?' '' said Ms. Sander, whose subtle palette, narrow silhouettes and signature androgyny have been lauded by adherents and derided by competitors like Karl Lagerfeld and Wolfgang Joop. ''To show more class, to look less equipped, to have less on the surface'' is her design goal in returning to fashion, the designer said.
During her absence, the company foundered creatively, many critics say, and also financially. The Prada Group seemed befuddled by a design idiom that had attracted devoted customers content to pay exceptionally high retail prices for clothes that looked, in the best way, like nothing. The designs produced after Ms. Sander left were odd hybrids, too gimmicky for her die-hard market and not fashionable enough to forge new ones. Profits fell consistently for clothes that one critic derided as ''pidgin Sander.''
Those collections were designed by Milan Vukmirovic, whose design donnybrook came with the spring 2003 collection of zippered dresses that were as much toothy hardware as cloth. Soon after that collection, Mr. Bertelli apparently approached Ms. Sander and began negotiating a truce. ''I was advised that I would not find the same situation,'' Ms. Sander said. ''It is not like we are an appendage of Prada.''
It was while cultivating her garden, the designer added, that she came to a better understanding of the paradox at the center of any creative enterprise, particularly one capable of generating the kinds of expectations buyers will bring to her show tonight. ''Yes, you are more free if it is your own,'' Ms. Sander said, but you are also more deeply responsible. ''If you make a garden, you have to maintain it, or it's not your garden,'' she said. ''If you have a dog, and you're not there, it becomes your housekeeper's dog.''
FASHION DIARY
