Opponents of gay marriage asked the California Supreme Court on Wednesday to order an immediate end to the issuing of marriage licenses to same-sex couples in San Francisco.
By the close of business on Wednesday, the court had not responded to the request, and a court spokeswoman said there would be no reply overnight.
The filing by the Alliance Defense Fund and the Center for Marriage Law signaled the frustration opponents to same-sex marriage have with the California attorney general, Bill Lockyer, who for two weeks has taken no formal action to stop the marriages.
Mr. Lockyer said Tuesday that he would file papers on Friday with the State Supreme Court asking for a ruling on the legality of marriages. He said his office had not yet decided whether to also ask the court to stop the issuance of licenses.
Almost everyone agrees that the licenses violate the state family code, which defines marriage as between a man and a woman, but officials in San Francisco maintain equal protection provisions in the state Constitution should take precedence. Two lawsuits have been filed against the city in San Francisco Superior Court challenging the city's policy in granting the licenses.
Robert Tyler, a lawyer for the Alliance Defense Fund, said opponents of the marriages were ''not going to wait around'' any longer for Mr. Lockyer. By Wednesday afternoon, the San Francisco county clerk had issued 3,274 licenses to same-sex couples, and hundreds of appointments had been scheduled for more licenses.
''The attorney general had a responsibility to act when this got started,'' Mr. Tyler said. ''He didn't. We aren't going to rely on the attorney general to take action. We have taken action to help restore order and justice to California.''
Opponents of same-sex marriages have worried that San Francisco's continued defiance of the state's marriage law would encourage challenges of marriage laws in other states. Some of their fears have been borne out.
Last week, a county clerk in New Mexico issued licenses to same-sex couples for several hours before the New Mexico attorney general declared them invalid.
And on Wednesday, more than 170 gays and lesbians in Florida were listed as plaintiffs in a lawsuit challenging the Florida state law that prohibits same-sex couples from obtaining marriage licenses.
''In limiting the protections, benefits and obligations of civil marriage to opposite-sex couples, Florida's marriage licensing law violates the basic premises of individual liberty and equality under law protected by the Florida Constitution,'' states the lawsuit, which was filed in Broward County.
