Elizabeth Edwards, the wife of Senator John Edwards, the presidential candidate, visited New York yesterday to woo some of the city's disparate electoral groups, meeting with rabbis to discuss Mideast policy and Staten Island Ferry commuters to talk about baseball.
But it was Mrs. Edwards's Southern charm that figured perhaps most prominently in the minds of New Yorkers who encountered her.
''I think that Southern accent really works in her favor here,'' said Vincent J. Gentile, a member of the City Council from south Brooklyn. ''It is so much more pleasant to listen to than a lot of people around here.''
For her part, Mrs. Edwards said New York felt just like home.
''We have the North Carolina diaspora up here,'' Mrs. Edwards said. ''Anyone can come to New York, which is what makes it such a great place.''
Senator Edwards, of North Carolina, and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, recognizing New York as a key state in Tuesday's primaries, have canvassed the state themselves and sent surrogates.Some supporters of Mr. Edwards's campaign, which currently trails Mr. Kerry's in the quest for delegates, are convinced the city can give a lift to the campaign.
''Get ready to see the grapple in the Apple,'' Mr. Gentile said. ''The outer boroughs will deliver Edwards the win he needs and turn the tide.''
Michael J. Cusick, an assemblyman representing Staten Island, echoed that sentiment by declaring his borough ''the Wisconsin of New York.'' Wisconsin gave Mr. Edwards a lift when he finished a strong second there.
''They're a different kind of breed on the island,'' Mr. Cusick said. ''They think independently and they like independent candidates like Edwards.''
Responding to victory chants from a dozen or so supporters joining her for the ferry ride to Staten Island, Mrs. Edwards responded: ''Y'all can make it happen.''
New Yorkers themselves have not been much different from the people she has met across the country, Mrs. Edwards said between conversations with ferry passengers.
''The same questions about jobs and trade issues are asked everywhere,'' she said. ''Education and health care also come up a lot.''
Touching an issue dear to many New Yorkers, one passenger, Hamilton G. Landrum, asked in a shout whether Mrs. Edwards preferred the Boston Red Sox or the New York Yankees.
''I'm a lifelong Pirates fan,'' Mrs. Edwards said, adding that she was not certain of her husband's baseball allegiance.
In a meeting with the New York Board of Rabbis, Mrs. Edwards was questioned on everything from capital punishment to drug policies to the Middle East.
While emphasizing that her husband would move the White House to engage more actively in working for peace in the Mideast, Mrs. Edwards shied away from a detailed question about a specific peace proposal.
''I hate to plead wife on this,'' Mrs. Edwards said. ''But I am going to have to let someone else answer this.''
Many at the event saw her comments as reassuring.
''She has very strong opinions on Israel,'' said Roger J. Bernstein, a lawyer. ''I agree with her point about needing to constantly put the parties together.''
Pushed for her views on gay marriage, Mrs. Edwards skirted the issue.
''There was a time when there was a ban on interracial marriage,'' she said. ''People of good faith have moral objections on this issue and people of good faith believe it is ethical.''
Beyond politics, many were struck by her down-to-earth demeanor.
''I've never met Teresa Heinz Kerry, but I can tell you that Elizabeth does not come across as a professional politician,'' said Ryan Scott Karben, an assemblyman from Rockland County. ''She's charming, she's smart and that's how I feel after just one afternoon.''
