Travis Lee cruised into Legends Field on Wednesday as the latest addition to George Steinbrenner's universe of stars, thrilled to join the Yankees organization and thrilled that it provides golf-cart drivers to ferry the players a hundred yards from the parking lot to the clubhouse.
The upgrades, both major and modest, never end. The acquisition of Alex Rodriguez, an all-world shortstop who will happily play third base, has been followed by the arrival of Lee, a slick-fielding first baseman from the Tampa Bay Devil Rays who is used to starting and is gladly accepting a reserve role on a team that had a backup at his position.
''I've been in the league six years and I still feel like a little kid,'' Lee said. ''Looking at all these names. It's amazing.''
Amazing for the Yankees, irksome for other teams and demanding for Manager Joe Torre. Torre spoke glowingly about Lee's defense, but he is unsure how much Lee will play because Jason Giambi said that he wants to play first base regularly and that he is a superior hitter when he does.
Torre said Tuesday that he needed the gimpy Giambi to play first often because the designated hitter slot is expected to go to either Bernie Williams or Kenny Lofton, whichever one is not in center field. Now Lee, whose signing has not been announced as the Yankees wait to free a roster spot, is in the talented mix, too.
''I don't want to say it muddies it up,'' Torre said. ''Any time you add more ability, it's a good problem. Hopefully, we'll have an answer.''
Whether it is the answer Giambi or Lofton or Lee likes is another issue, but that is why Torre makes $5 million a year and why Steinbrenner, the team's principal owner, has sent strong signals that he wants to sign Torre to a contract extension. Torre has typically made clubhouses filled with crater-size egos as harmonious as a boys' choir.
Steinbrenner made overtures to Torre about his future the first time they saw each other here in camp, and now both are speaking as if their once-fragile marriage is stable again. Torre said he did not know or care why Steinbrenner had been so warm, but they have had dinner together once and seem poised to share the dotted line on another contract.
''It's a big step for me to be comfortable where you're working,'' Torre said.
Perhaps Steinbrenner realizes that Torre, the soothing manager who has guided the Yankees to six World Series appearances in eight seasons, is still the best man to handle his valuable asset. Especially after the Yankees added Rodriguez, perhaps the best player in baseball, to a high-profile bunch.
Steinbrenner made Torre wait for a contract extension in 2001, even though the Yankees had won three straight titles. At that time, Steinbrenner thought Torre was receiving too much credit for the team's success. Now Torre is surely operating from a position of power because Steinbrenner needs a sturdy managerial presence, someone just like Torre.
Of managing the Yankees beyond this season, Torre said: ''Maybe if I get to the point where this is what I want to do, I'll feel that way. Now I just want to get into it and see how much work it will be.''
Torre's work will include sorting out how to distribute enough at-bats to satisfy some players who are used to playing every day but will have reduced roles. In their championship years, the Yankees had players who adapted to fewer at-bats like Tim Raines, Chili Davis and Darryl Strawberry. But Torre admitted he must deal with an ''added ingredient'' this season because some backups are not Luis Sojo types -- career backups.
The Yankees signed the former Met Tony Clark to a $750,000 contract last month, and he was scheduled to be Giambi's backup. Clark's status quickly changed when Lee agreed in principle to a $2 million contract. Torre is trying to fit four good players into three spots: first base, center field and designated hitter.
So Torre asked Clark and Lee if they had brought outfielder's gloves with their first baseman's mitts. Both sounded amenable to playing the outfield, and Torre said he did not mind having ''just average'' reserve outfielders. But the grass is crowded out there, too. Clark will probably be traded or released.
Giambi is a below-average fielder, so the Yankees' best defensive infield would feature Lee at first. During an injury-plagued 2003, Giambi batted .277 with 25 homers and 66 runs batted in as a first baseman and .220 with 16 homers and 41 R.B.I. as a designated hitter. For his career, he has hit .318 as a first baseman and .264 as a D.H.
''I'd like to play first,'' Giambi said. ''The Yankees see it in my stats. Look at the stats. There's a drastic difference between when I play first and when I D.H.''
Torre does not need to worry too much about the bloated roster. He knows every manager would take the problems of dealing with $180 million worth of talent. But Torre is the man Steinbrenner wants in charge of the Yankees, for this season and probably longer, the man to provide the answers.
''When you're dealing with people used to playing every day, I'm not that good a salesman,'' Torre said. ''That has to be a two-way conversation. As far as being here eight years and having the success we've had, I think that helps in the clubhouse. I'll try to be fair with everyone.''
BASEBALL
