Four-year-old Peyton Glavine has his father's perfectionist tendencies, his single-minded concentration and his cellphone number.
How a 4-year-old memorized a phone number his parents do not remember giving him is something of a family mystery. But during countless mornings last season, Tom Glavine's wake-up call sounded something like this:
''Daddy, what are you doing? Why are you gone? When are you coming home?''
In a season filled with tough questions, those were the only ones Glavine could not handle.
Back in Alpharetta, Ga., a suburb of Atlanta, 9-year-old Amber was taking ballet lessons, 9-year-old Jonathan was in Little League, 3-year-old Mason was making his typical wisecracks and Peyton was dreaming about a pair of Rollerblades.
Meanwhile, Glavine was in New York with the Mets, on the way to his worst season since he was a rookie 16 years ago.
''I didn't anticipate how hard it was going to be for me to be away from home and away from my kids,'' Glavine said.
''They like having their mom and dad around and the normalcy of that. They sometimes get frustrated with baseball and me having to be gone, and that was exacerbated.''
The Mets could not bring Chipper Jones, Javy Lopez and Gary Sheffield to New York, but they tried to provide Glavine with his other all-star team.
Glavine went to Atlanta on certain off days. He bought a house in Greenwich, Conn., where the family could live during the summer. He flew the kids up on weekends during the school year and showed them around Times Square.
But when they returned to Georgia, Glavine was left alone to confront the questions from Peyton and the criticism from everyone else.
He remembers each slight as if it were pasted on his locker.
''There was a whole litany,'' Glavine said. '' 'He's too old' or 'He can't handle New York.' I probably wasn't completely prepared for the constant attention, the nonstop barrage. I know there were people who were happy I was falling on my face. There were times I might have gotten down on myself.''
For the first time since 1988, Glavine won fewer than 10 games and finished with a losing record, 9-14, while posting a 4.52 earned run average.
He fought an ever-changing strike zone, battled a variety of injuries and became disgusted at the lack of support behind him. When the season was finally over, Chris Glavine looked at Tom, her husband, and said, ''Did you really win only nine games?''
The season was almost as difficult for a wife in Atlanta as it was for an ace in New York. Chris found herself defending Glavine to those who believed he left the Braves purely for a three-year, $35 million contract. She could not take her children to games Glavine pitched at Turner Field because he was booed like an enemy. Glavine was 0-4 against the Braves over all with a 10.35 earned run average.
''I can't imagine what it was like for him to walk past the Braves' locker room,'' Chris said. ''It was like going to your house with different furniture. Even after he decided, three or four days later, we were devastated.''
She said, ''I don't think you can overestimate the emotional side of it.''
Glavine and Chris have since concluded that last season was difficult mostly because they did not know exactly what they were getting into. After spending the first year in New York getting acclimated, Glavine plans to spend this one resuscitating his reputation as one of the game's premier control pitchers. Although he will turn 38 next month, Glavine has never relied on a lively young arm. His greatest strength has always been his guile.
Glavine believes he is a more sophisticated pitcher now than when he won the Cy Young award in 1991 and 1998. He is throwing more than two pitches and is working both sides of the plate. Mets catcher Vance Wilson calls Glavine's ability to hit the corners ''absolutely uncanny.''
But even Glavine was concerned last season by his surprising lack of command, which has less to do with age and more to do with focus. Distracted by lofty expectations, what he viewed as inconsistent umpires and shoddy defense, Glavine approached every game as if he had to be perfect. As a result, some flaws were exposed.
''He had a major transition,'' said Rick Peterson, the Mets' new pitching coach. ''The best way to deal with someone like Tommy is to say: 'Tommy, you're my teacher. Tell me what you want me to do and how I can help you get back to where you've been.' ''
The Mets have begun the process. They signed Mike Cameron, a center fielder who is expected to run down the kinds of fly balls that Andruw Jones used to catch behind Glavine in Atlanta. When Cameron showed up at spring training, Glavine welcomed him with a hearty handshake.
Art Howe, the Mets' manager, is so confident he will see ''the old Tommy'' this season that he named him the opening-day starter Wednesday. It does not seem to matter that opening day is in Atlanta, and that a year ago, Glavine was held out of his last two scheduled starts against the Braves.
''That's history,'' Howe said. ''This will be a different story. He's our guy and he's going to have a big year for us. I'm going to send him a vote of confidence right now.''
When Glavine hears critics say he is getting old or is on the downside of his career, he offers this response: ''They're right. I've got far fewer years ahead of me than I have behind me. But people think you'll just fall off the planet. I don't see that happening.''
Last week, Glavine left his family and headed to his second spring training with the Mets, which feels significantly more comfortable than the first. Chris has devised a color-coded calendar -- purple symbolizes days when Glavine will be in Atlanta, yellow for days when the family is flying to New York, orange when all of the children are together, green when Amber is with her mother (Glavine's first wife) and Jonathan is with his father (Chris's first husband).
When Glavine said goodbye to everyone and noticed that Chris looked as if she was about to cry, he stared hard at her. ''Don't,'' he said.
She has seen that look before, strong and determined. He gets it before a big game or a key out, and she expects him to wear it all season.
INSIDE PITCH
TODD ZEILE reported to spring training and said he would retire after this season. . . . CLIFF FLOYD has told MIKE CAMERON not to start workouts until the bone spur in his right big toe has healed. Floyd had a bone spur in his right foot three years ago, tried to play through the pain and had to have the spur surgically removed last season. . . . The first full day of workouts was rained out.
BASEBALL
