In 1997, when Cablevision bought out its partner, ITT, to take control of Madison Square Garden, Cablevision must have assumed it had a successful team in the Rangers. The Stanley Cup champions only three years earlier, the Rangers advanced to the Eastern Conference finals in the spring of 1997, where they lost to the Flyers.
Since then, the Rangers have not played a single playoff game at the Garden, a loss of millions of dollars in revenue to Cablevision. The Rangers' high-salaried underachievement and the Knicks' failure to play in the postseason for the past two years have made the self-proclaimed ''world's most famous arena'' a less than fully booked one.
When Glen Sather stepped down yesterday as the Rangers' head coach and Tom Renney was elevated as his interim replacement, it meant that Cablevision would be paying its seventh hockey coach in seven years.
James L. Dolan, the president of Cablevision, oversees the Garden's sports empire. His family, led by his father, Charles, controls Cablevision, a pugnacious cable operating and programming company that recently started a satellite service.
James L. Dolan's public optimism about the ability of the Knicks and the Rangers to overcome adversity and make it to the playoffs has frequently been undercut by their on-court and on-ice performance. Still, despite the teams' failures, Dolan has shown fierce devotion to Sather since hiring him as the Rangers' president and general manager in 2000; Dolan once exhibited the same loyalty to Scott Layden and Don Chaney, the former president and coach of the Knicks, who were fired in December and January.
Only a month ago, Dolan said that Sather would coach the Rangers for the rest of the season. Sather is the ''right guy,'' he said, adding, ''It's not a time to make a change.''
David Carter, a sports industry analyst and principal of the Sports Business Group in Los Angeles, said that media companies like Cablevision, the Walt Disney Company and Fox have struggled to understand how to run sports teams. Disney has sold the Anaheim Angels and is trying to sell its Mighty Ducks, and Fox recently sold the Los Angeles Dodgers to Frank McCourt.
''To a certain degree, these companies are in scripted businesses, but live sports is unscripted and they're managing in an environment they're not used to,'' Carter said. ''There isn't a core competency to run teams among media companies or large corporations.''
Despite heavy losses on the Dodgers, Fox built up valuable businesses in its two regional sports networks that carry local teams.
Cablevision does not break out its profits or losses on its sports teams, so it is hard to determine the impact that enormous payrolls have on the teams' bottom lines.
But one thing is certain: One of the intangible assets Cablevision acquired was the loyalty of Rangers fans. While the team does not routinely sell out the Garden as it did until several years ago, it has sold out 24 of 34 home games this season. The Rangers' fans have resisted the temptation to abandon a team that is nearly one-fifth of the way to another 54 years without a Stanley Cup.
Sales of season tickets are nearly even with last season, Barry Watkins, a spokesman for the Garden, said, and the team's attendance comes to 96.2 percent of the arena's capacity, compared with 96.8 percent last season. The team does not release turnstile attendance or the number of no-shows, which have increased this season.
Dolan made a vow after last season that may be contributing to consistent patronage: Ticket prices will not increase this season or next season if the Rangers fail to make the playoffs.
The Garden's financial stresses -- from 80 recent layoffs to a reduction in cash flow because of fewer events at the Garden and Radio City Music Hall, which Cablevision also owns -- usually make a relatively minor impression on Wall Street compared with, say, the upgrading of Cablevision's cable systems with digital capabilities, the shutdown of the company's Wiz electronics chain or its sale of the Bravo cable network to NBC.
David Joyce, an analyst for Guzman &amp; Company in Miami, estimates that when the full 2003 financial results are released next week, the Garden will account for about 18 percent of Cablevision's revenues and about 6 percent of cash flow.
Joyce said that Sather's resignation as coach (he will remain as the team's president and general manager) ''is on the radar screen, but doesn't have a ripple effect.''
''But something like buying out Larry Johnson's contract does,'' Joyce said.
In the third quarter of 2001, Cablevision wrote off the value of the Knicks' contracts with Johnson and Luc Longley, who retired because of injuries. The write-offs helped cause a cash-flow deficit of $37.4 million during that period.
Joyce said the Rangers' absence from the playoffs represented standard business, not an aberration. ''People are looking at that as the base-case scenario,'' he said.
HOCKEY
