As it struggles to complete its odyssey of pre-Olympics primping, this scraggly city finds itself pressed to prove more than its ability to pave roads, plant trees and prettify monuments.
It has to show that it hasn't gone to the dogs.
They are legion, and they are leashless. Strays saunter through public squares, tails wagging or teeth bared, depending on their dispositions and the nearness of meaty alms. Strays flank the gilded portals to fancy boutiques like furry, four-legged doormen with a naked hankering for table scraps.
In an unfortunate, widely publicized incident last summer, one stray bit a Ukrainian archery coach who was in Athens for Olympic test events and out for a run.
The wound was not serious, except to the scruffy image of Athens and its environs, whose caretakers are now trying, in a manner that might well be described as dogged, to tame the situation.
Just a few months ago the national government enacted legislation meant to reduce the stray population by holding Greeks more accountable, with toughened pet registration requirements and stiff fines for abandoning their pets to the streets.
People here apparently do that with some regularity, which city officials describe as the principal source of the problem.
Athens, for its part, is funneling about $2 million this year into new animal shelters, new animal control officers and a major sterilization project. Stray by randy stray, dogs are being rounded up, neutered and then -- if they are not adopted in two weeks -- set free to roam anew, but in a less reproductive fashion.
City officials concede that those combined efforts will not work fast enough to make a major difference by the beginning of the Olympic Games on Aug. 13, but they say there may be some benefit.
''The city is trying to change,'' said Tonia Kanellopoulou, the deputy mayor in charge of managing strays. That has become a specially designated task and nearly full-time job.
Athens is not the only European capital with rampant strays, nor is it the first Olympics host city to have to deal with a dog-related problem before its turn in the international spotlight. Bucharest has long been known for its vagabond canines, and Seoul had to take dog meat off restaurant menus in deference to the sensitivities of many athletes and spectators at the 1988 Olympics.
But the situation in Athens has its own special drama, in part because Greeks exhibit such a broad, complicated range of reactions to the strays in their midst.
Many Greeks not only tolerate but also admire strays for being hearty, against-the-odds survivors, which is the way many Greeks see themselves. But at least a few feel differently, and that conflict in views has bred mysterious deaths, insidious accusations and attention-grabbing antics in faraway locales.
In regard to the latter, an animal rights advocate put on a dog costume and tied himself to a 12-foot cross outside the Greek Embassy in Berlin last December. The advocate was protesting what some animal welfare groups outside Greece said was a mass poisoning of stray dogs and cats that had been ordered by Greek officials who wanted the animals out of the way before the Olympics.
Greek officials denied any such slaughter, and several prominent animal rights advocates here called the charges exaggerated and unsubstantiated.
But they said that a little more than a year ago, as Greece assumed the rotating presidency of the European Union and more foreign dignitaries were due to arrive, dozens of stray dogs and cats went missing from parks and squares that those dignitaries were likely to pass by.
In at least one case, advocates said, carcasses were found, along with containers of poison.
''It was organized,'' said Carol McBeth, director of the Greek Animal Welfare Fund, referring to the killings. But, Ms. McBeth said, ''We knew the city of Athens wasn't involved. We knew the Ministry of Agriculture wasn't involved.''
The case was never solved, but the foreign animal welfare groups raised a ruckus, and Greek officials confronted an unexpected public relations nightmare. ''This is the most fascinating side of being a mayor,'' said Mayor Dora Bakoyanni, who took office in January 2003.
''You have the most,'' she continued -- and here she stopped the sentence to search for the right adjective -- ''different problems.''
Toward the end of last year, Ms. Bakoyanni decreed that while the city would sterilize strays, it would not kill any, not even the sick ones, which would be cared for in shelters and clinics.
Athens is intent on an aura of compassion, and one of Ms. Bakoyanni's aides made a point of mentioning, in an e-mail message, that the mayor's dog, Manga, was a former stray that ''seems to believe he's of royal blood and acts as if he is king of the house.''
Gianna Angelopoulos-Daskalaki, president of the local committee that is organizing the Olympics, said she adopted two female strays last summer. Aphrodite, she said, is a blonde, while Olga is a brunette.
Many other Athenians take assiduous care of the strays in their neighborhoods, giving them food and even, in some cases, flea collars. Most of the animals seem docile and surprisingly well adjusted to life on the streets.
''It's like somebody's just let them out, like they're latchkey dogs,'' Ms. McBeth said. ''Some of them could actually benefit from a diet.''
Athens Journal
