With the victory of religious hard-liners in this week's parliamentary elections in Iran, the Central Intelligence Agency is warning of a new era of repression and inflexibility.
A new C.I.A. assessment, shared with members of Congress this week and described by intelligence officials, says the election has dealt a severe blow to Iranian reformers and will strengthen the authoritarian rule of the country's clerical government. The assessment says the ascendancy of the hard-liners will make it unlikely that Iran will moderate its foreign policies.
The State Department has condemned the election as unfair, because some 2,000 candidates were prevented from running, including 87 reformists standing for re-election. But the assessment also blames Iran's president, Mohammad Khatami, and his reformist allies within the government for squandering their political capital through ''their refusal to back bold promises with equally bold actions.''
The assessment describes the government of the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, as ''secure for now,'' but it says the election results will ultimately ''only further deepen the discontent with clerical rule, which is now discredited and publicly criticized as never before.''
The detailed written assessment was reflected in public testimony by George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, to the Senate intelligence committee on Tuesday. It comes at a time when the Bush administration and the International Atomic Energy Agency are pressing Iran for more information about its covert nuclear program, and suggests that Iran is not likely to reconsider its resistance to that effort.
While Iran has agreed to open itself to more inspections from the international agency, and has acknowledged producing low-enriched uranium for use in a civilian nuclear power program, it is also ''trying to preserve its W.M.D. options,'' Mr. Tenet said, referring to unconventional arms known as ''weapons of mass destruction.''
Iran also continues to support terrorist groups, including Hezbollah, the assessment says, and is seeking to counter American influence in Iraq through a number of means, including clandestine activity.
''The strengthening of authoritarian rule will make breaking out of old foreign policy patterns more difficult,'' Mr. Tenet told the committee. Still, he added, ''Because Khamanei and his allies have kept a close rein on foreign policy, we do not expect the defeat of the reformists to lead to a sudden change in Iranian policy.''
Based on the election results, the religious hard-liners are expected to hold at least a 146-seat majority in Iran's 290-seat Parliament when it convenes in June. The majority includes factions that support the absolute rule of Ayatollah Khamenei, but disagree on issues like social freedom, economic policy and relations with the United States.
Mr. Tenet told the Senate committee that the C.I.A. expected Ayatollah Khamenei's government to shut down many outlets for political dissent, and possibly to ''resort to new heavy-handedness that produces public outrage and protest.'' At least eight people were killed and 30 injured in election-related violence last weekend.
In the last year, critics of Ayatollah Khamenei's government took bold new steps in proclaiming their opposition, including publishing open letters calling for an end to absolute clerical rule.
Even so, the C.I.A. assessment describes the prevailing mood among the Iranian public as apathetic rather than confrontational, and Mr. Tenet said in his testimony that ''regime intimidation has cowed the populace.''
In the months after the American invasion of Iraq, some Bush administration officials warned loudly about efforts by Iran's Shiite Muslim government to influence events in Iraq through proxies including the Badr Organization, an Iranian-trained militia affiliated with a major Iraqi Shiite opposition group, the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq.
