The Giants made the first major moves of the off-season yesterday, cutting two of their major disappointments from last season, kick returner Brian Mitchell and running back Dorsey Levens.
Mitchell, the N.F.L.'s career total yardage leader with 23,330 yards, signed a four-year, $3.55 million contract last year, but his 14th season was his worst. Mitchell, 35, averaged 5.3 yards a punt return -- which ranked 14th in the National Football Conference -- and 20.3 yards a kickoff return.
Levens, 33, hardly had a chance to show whether he was worth the three-year, $2.5 million contract he signed last off-season. Levens carried the ball 68 times for 197 yards, but he led the Giants with three rushing touchdowns.
Coach Tom Coughlin has expressed confidence that the running game will remain anchored by Tiki Barber. Delvin Joyce, mostly a kick-return specialist, remains on the roster, as does Ron Dayne, a former first-round pick, who was on the inactive list for every game last season.
Dayne, chosen No. 11 over all in 2000, has one year remaining on a contract that will pay him $704,000 next season.
The Giants re-signed defensive end Keith Washington, a veteran role player who was signed last season to a one-year contract. Washington started 6 games, played in 14 and had 27 tackles.
Washington, 31, is entering his 10th N.F.L. season and is playing for his fifth team. He will help shore up a line that will have to make up for the retirement of the 12-year veteran Keith Hamilton and the probable departure of the free agent Kenny Holmes.
Sophomore to Enter Draft
Mike Williams, a sophomore wide receiver at Southern California, said yesterday that he would enter the N.F.L. draft, making him the first player to take advantage of the court ruling in the Maurice Clarett case.
Clarett, who was suspended last season after starring at Ohio State the year before as a freshman, won a court challenge earlier this month to an N.F.L. rule preventing players who have been out of high school fewer than three years from entering the draft. Such players have until Monday to enter the draft, which is April 24 and 25.
Williams, who is 6 feet 5 inches and 230 pounds, was sixth in the Heisman Trophy balloting last year.
(AP)
Trade Talk Moves Forward
The potential swap of Keyshawn Johnson and Joey Galloway moved forward yesterday, with Galloway interrupting a vacation in Mexico to talk to his prospective coach, Tampa Bay's Jon Gruden.
On Tuesday, Galloway's agent, Leigh Steinberg, said that the Dallas Cowboys were considering trading Galloway to the Buccaneers for Johnson, whom Gruden deactivated for the final six games last season. Galloway said he was surprised and disappointed at first but was more comfortable after calling Gruden yesterday.
Johnson played his first three seasons for Cowboys Coach Bill Parcells when Parcells coached the Jets.
The teams are interested in swapping the receivers only if they can get the finances right. That requires both players to restructure their contracts with the clubs that would be acquiring them.
Johnson has four seasons left on an eight-year, $56 million contract. He is also due a $1 million bonus April 1, but he will most likely be gone by then because of his squabble with Gruden. Galloway has three years left on a seven-year, $42 million deal.
(AP)
Brady Has Minor Surgery
Quarterback Tom Brady, the two-time most valuable player in the Super Bowl, had a minor surgical procedure on his throwing shoulder, the New England Patriots said yesterday.
Brady had ''lingering soreness in his throwing shoulder,'' the team said in a statement. The Patriots said his prognosis was excellent but did not elaborate and did not say when Brady had the procedure.
(AP)
PRO FOOTBALL: NOTEBOOK
