If there was any question that deal making is in the cards, here is an acquisition that is just that.
The maker of playing card brands like Bicycle and Hoyle is being sold to the Jarden Corporation, a conglomerate of niche businesses, for $232 million. The business, the United States Playing Card Company, is the largest playing card company in the world, making cards also under the brands of Bee and Aviator.
Anyone who has ever played in Las Vegas or even a game of Go Fish has almost certainly played with the company's cards. The company was also one of the main sellers of reproductions of the Defense Department's ''most wanted'' cards of 55 leaders of the Iraqi regime.
The deal, which will be announced today, is the latest in a string of acquisitions by Jarden, a publicly traded company worth nearly $1 billion. Jarden, based in Rye, N.Y., makes toothpicks, kitchen matches, plastic cutlery and Ball home canning jars, among other products.
Martin E. Franklin, the chief executive of Jarden, said the strategy holding his far-flung empire of all things mundane together was his interest in buying companies that have high cash flow and dominate their market.
''Cash is king for us,'' he said, adding that the United States Playing Card Company is ''the quintessential dominate player in a niche market.'' Mr. Franklin said that the playing card company, which has $130 million in annual revenue, and was founded in 1876, has been on his radar for more than a year and was once owned by his father, Roland Franklin.
His father was a longtime partner of Sir James Goldsmith, the flamboyant British-French financier known for acquiring and breaking up companies, who died in 1997.
Martin Franklin said he was hoping to take advantage of the renewed interest in poker driven in part by television shows like Bravo's ''Celebrity Poker Showdown'' and expand the business in Europe and Asia.
He also hopes to bolster the company's growth by expanding its licensing program and other games business; the company already makes Nascar branded cards and others.
