A guest at the home of the former basketball star Jayson Williams when a chauffeur was fatally shot provided seemingly contradictory accounts on Wednesday of whether Mr. Williams helped orchestrate a cover-up of the shooting.
During questioning, the witness, John Gordnick, told a defense lawyer, William R. Martin, that Mr. Williams panicked after the shooting that took place in Mr. William's bedroom in February 2002. But, he added, Mr. Williams had never told him to lie to the police about it.
But minutes later, during prosecution questioning, Mr. Gordnick seemed to contradict his own testimony about Mr. Williams, saying that Mr. Williams had given orders to the nine men in his home after the shooting.
''I heard him say out loud, 'Just stick to the story, just stick to the story,''' Mr. Gordnick, a friend of Mr. Williams, told the prosecutor, Steven C. Lember.
Mr. Williams, the 36-year-old former star of the New Jersey Nets, is accused, in addition to two manslaughter charges, of orchestrating a cover-up of his involvement in the death of the chauffeur, Costas Christofi, at the home in Alexandria Township, N.J., about 30 miles northwest of Trenton. A key element in the cover-up story, prosecutors charged, is that Mr. Christofi, 55, had shot himself in the bedroom while Mr. Williams and all of his guests were downstairs.
During persistent questioning by Mr. Lember on Wednesday, Mr. Gordnick said Mr. Williams had first mentioned the notion of Mr. Christofi shooting himself minutes after the shotgun blast, just after Mr. Williams's brother, Victor, called 911 and told a state police dispatcher that the fatal shot was self-inflicted.
The jousting of the two lawyers with Mr. Gordnick came as they spent a third day trying to persuade the jury to accept their arguments.
During his opening argument earlier this month, Mr. Martin seemed to concede that his client was involved in a cover-up, not out of criminal intent but because he panicked immediately after the shooting.
Mr. Martin asked Mr. Gordnick at what point after the shooting did Mr. Williams look panicky.
''The whole time,'' Mr. Gordnick said. ''He was just out of it.'' He described the atmosphere in the bedroom after the shooting as ''very chaotic.'' Mr. Gordnick also testified that Mr. Williams said ''Oh, my God'' twice as Mr. Christofi lay dying.
At another point in the cross-examination, Mr. Gordnick, a 46-year-old personal trainer, said it had appeared that Mr. Williams's good friend Kent Culuko, and not Mr. Williams, took the lead role in starting the cover-up. He said Mr. Culuko appeared to be ''doing things and saying things'' to others in the bedroom.
Mr. Gordnick said he quickly realized after seeing Mr. Christofi's body that he had not shot himself. He said he had argued with Mr. Culuko about the futility of a cover-up, pushing him against a wall at one point.
Mr. Gordnick said he told Mr. Culuko: ''You got a zero percent chance of pulling this off,'' adding, ''He just stared at me.''
After Mr. Martin finished his questioning, Mr. Lember, the prosecutor, pressed immediately for testimony implicating Mr. Williams. Mr. Gordnick recalled Mr. Williams urging the others to ''stick to the story'' and saying that Mr. Christofi shot himself.
Immediately after the shooting, Mr. Gordnick got caught up in the cover-up by hiding the clothing Mr. Williams wore at the time of the shotgun blast. He eventually turned it over to the authorities. In August 2002, he pleaded guilty to tampering with evidence and agreed, in a plea deal with Mr. Lember, to testify against Mr. Williams.
He has said during the trial that his ultimate sentence will be based on whether he testifies truthfully.
After testimony ended on Wednesday, the defense renewed a motion it made -- futilely -- in late 2002 to split the trial into two proceedings, one on the cover-up charges, including tampering with witnesses and evidence, and the other on the manslaughter charges.
A defense lawyer, Joseph A. Hayden, argued that the jury would confuse the evidence on the two aspects of the case. The judge, Edward M. Coleman, disagreed and denied the motion, as he did months ago.
The trial is scheduled to resume on Monday.
