Never in the Nets' magical stretch of success had Coach Lawrence Frank been in a game this tight against an opponent this skilled. How good are the Minnesota Timberwolves? Enough to be the choice in some circles as the N.B.A. champion this season.
When facing a team like this, poor shooting usually means disaster. And on Wednesday night, after 14 consecutive victories -- 13 since Frank took over from Byron Scott -- the Nets ran out of magic. The Timberwolves, behind the hot shooting of guard Troy Hudson, scored 15 consecutive points midway through the fourth quarter to pull away and win, 81-68.
''Did we make some mistakes? Of course we did,'' said Frank, whose winning streak was the longest by any new coach in North America's four major professional team sports. ''The big thing was, we missed some shots.''
More than some; the Nets shot 38.6 percent for the night and 30 percent in the fourth quarter. And Hudson made plenty.
In his first start since returning last week from an ankle sprain, Hudson scored 12 points in the run and finished with a game-high 29 as the Nets lost for the first time since Jan. 23.
Kenyon Martin's double-double (18 points, 12 rebounds) and creditable defense on Kevin Garnett (18 points) could not offset a subpar night from Jason Kidd, who managed 11 points and shot 5 for 20.
Kidd missed all three of his 3-point attempts in a 1-for-6 final quarter, and defensively he was victimized by Hudson, who kept running Kidd into screens.
''They set some good picks,'' Kidd said. ''It was pretty much my fault on the assignments. He just got open over the top, and when he did, he hit big 3's.''
For both teams, this was the second of back-to-back games, and neither was particularly crisp offensively. From early in the second quarter until early in the fourth, neither team led by more than 4 points.
Then Minnesota, ahead by 60-58, took control. Three consecutive baskets by Hudson -- two jumpers sandwiched around a driving layup -- pushed the lead to 8 and forced Frank to call a timeout with 6 minutes 44 seconds to play.
It did not help. The reserve Fred Hoiberg broke free and swished a 3-pointer from the right wing to give Minnesota an 11-point lead.
Richard Jefferson missed two free throws, and Hudson followed with a 3-pointer from the left wing, bringing the Target Center crowd of 17,232 to its feet.
Frank called a timeout, squatted in front of his players at the bench, and calmly gave instructions. Still, the Nets appeared done, and Hudson finished them off with another 3-pointer.
''It's strange not to see us get the win and get the calls,'' said Jefferson, an oblique reference to the discrepancy in free-throw shooting. The Nets took only five free throws and made one; Minnesota was 14 for 17.
''Usually, we're the dominant team on the floor,'' Jefferson said.
The Nets, trailing by 72-58 with 4:46 to play, appeared done, and Hudson finished them off with another 3-pointer.
This certainly was not the same Timberwolves team that committed 25 turnovers and set a franchise scoring low in an 84-61 loss to the Nets on Oct. 31 at Continental Arena. In that game, Latrell Sprewell was hobbled by a sore Achilles' tendon, and the Timberwolves were without forward Wally Szczerbiak (strained left foot) and Hudson (sprained right ankle).
On Wednesday night, Hudson started for Sam Cassell (left ankle tendinitis). Cassell is the fifth All-Star to sit out against the Nets since Frank took over, a list that includes Tracy McGrady, Allen Iverson, Vince Carter (twice) and Baron Davis.
REBOUNDS
Coach LAWRENCE FRANK modestly insists he had little to do with the Nets' winning streak since he replaced BYRON SCOTT. But Minnesota Coach FLIP SAUNDERS is not buying it. ''Let's put it this way: If they were 1-12, he'd have a lot to do with it,'' Saunders said.
LATRELL SPREWELL, who traded verbal barbs with Madison Square Garden's chairman, JAMES L. DOLAN, earlier this season, smiled when told that Dolan would allow the Knicks' president of basketball operations, ISIAH THOMAS, to trade for any player, even Sprewell. ''I'm not even going there,'' Sprewell said. ''That's funny, though.''
Frank is expected to ring the opening bell at the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday morning. ''Better pull your money out of the market,'' he said with a smile.
PRO BASKETBALL
