Home Secretary David Blunkett, Britain's top law enforcement minister, announced a major expansion of the country's domestic espionage agency on Wednesday and urged a strengthening of antiterrorism laws including those allowing detention of foreigners without trial.
Mr. Blunkett spoke in Parliament after publishing a 51-page document setting out the government's belief that Britain -- a close ally of the United States in the invasion of Iraq and the campaign against terrorism -- faced a ''particularly high'' threat of terrorist attack ''because of the evidence that terrorist cells are active'' in this country.
''I am in no doubt that the terrorism threat remains and the need to have the right legislation in place is greater than ever,'' he told Parliament.
Mr. Blunkett said the country's MI5 internal espionage agency would be expanded by 50 percent with the recruitment of 1,000 new agents over the next few years, including desk officers and linguists.
The home secretary also said Britain would spend the equivalent of almost $6 million in improving intelligence gathering by the police Special Branch, which is supposed to deal with threats to internal security.
In future, Mr. Blunkett said, Britain would have to ponder how it ran trials of terror suspects to determine whether telephone intercepts by intelligence agencies could be used as evidence. In recent days he has also indicated he believes Britain should consider lowering the burden of proof to ensure convictions of would-be suicide bombers and to hold some terror trials behind closed doors.
In Parliament on Wednesday, Mr. Blunkett offered a staunch defense of powers acquired since the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States to detain foreign terror suspects indefinitely without bringing them to trial.
''I am convinced that the current threat leaves us with no option but to continue to use these powers,'' he said. But he said it would be a ''grave step'' to seek legislation empowering the authorities to hold British citizens indefinitely without trial or charge.
At present Britain is holding 14 foreigners under the terrorism regulations, which expire in 2006. The 14 men have been in detention for two years, causing an outcry from human rights organizations.
''I cannot believe I am sitting here today to try and argue as to why it is wrong to detain a human being indefinitely without trial,'' Shami Chakrabarti, from the human rights group Liberty, said Wednesday. ''When you create this symbol of injustice, you provide the greatest ammunition for extremists.''
Gareth Peirce, a lawyer who represents the 14 detainees, was quoted by Britain's Press Association news agency as saying none of them had ever been questioned, let alone charged.
Under British rules, the 14 may leave at any time if they can find a country prepared to accept them.
David Davis, the spokesman on law and order for the opposition Conservatives, said he was not convinced by the argument that they could always leave the country.
''On the one hand, to return to some countries might in effect be to return to their deaths,'' Mr. Davis told Parliament. ''On the other hand, releasing people we believe to be international terrorists to travel the world seems itself a peculiar policy.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: LONDON
