FOR all the surprises the Southern California landscape has to offer, few are as unexpected, or surreal, as the sizable chunks of New York rising among the palms on the back lots of Hollywood. These massive scenic reconstructions, half a dozen in all, each covering several acres, are built close to full scale, with 50-foot facades and full-width streets. They are as walkable as any real city.
Far from being part of the industry's mythic past, the outdoor sets constitute a vital part of its present and its future. But a few decades ago, these cityscapes were in danger of disappearing, victims of the contraction of the studio system and the increase in location shooting. At the same time, the rise in Los Angeles real-estate values put intense pressure on the studios to sell off their sprawling back lots. But in the last few years the studio's New York streets have made a stunning comeback, refurbished and in some cases entirely rebuilt, thanks in part to their value as tourist attractions and to the rise in New York's popularity as a setting for films.
Today, while the famous old Western streets lie fallow (in some cases, they were demolished), the New York lots are among the most heavily used sites. In recent years, they have provided the setting for everything from ''Spider-Man'' to ''Friends,'' from Batman and Robin's fantastic Gotham City to the gritty urban background of Madonna and Missy Elliott's Gap commercials. Suitably costumed, they have stood in as 1930's Chicago in ''Road to Perdition'' and mid-21st-century Washington in ''Minority Report.''
In one form or another, streets like these have stood since the late 1920's, when the arrival of talkies ended the silent-era practice of shooting on real city streets. Interiors came to be shot on soundstages and the exteriors were removed to back lots. By the 1930's, almost every studio in Hollywood had found it necessary to erect a New York street, nearly 20 in all, built not for any particular picture but as a fixed asset, to be reused time and again. In itself, this was a testament to the primacy of New York as a setting (and subject) for American movies. When else in history had the landscape of one city made so sustained and sizable an appearance in another, 3,000 miles away?
By the 1960's, however, the back lot streets were becoming an endangered species. In 1961, 20th Century Fox sold its 260-acre back lot, including its New York streets, to Alcoa for $43 million, to make way for the high-rise offices of Century City. Seventeen years later, MGM's legendary New York streets, where ''The Band Wagon'' and ''Blackboard Jungle'' had been filmed, were leveled to make room for a tract of modest two-story condominiums in Culver City. One night in August 1983, another historic New York set disappeared when a devastating fire ripped through the back of the Paramount lot.
But in November 1990, when yet another fire destroyed Universal's New York, the studio startled the industry by vowing to rebuild the set in its entirety. Among other things, the streets had become a major feature of the studio's famed tour, drawing 5.2 million visitors last year. And though location shooting had grown far more common in actual New York, Universal's city streets were still playing major roles in TV shows, low-budget features, music videos and fashion shoots. Soon after, Paramount, not to be outdone, announced plans to build an entirely new New York street near the site of its earlier one.
Made up of 46 facades, Paramount's six-block complex, completed in 1992 at a cost of $15 million, was as ambitious an attempt to recreate New York as any ever undertaken, even at the height of the studio era. Its chief designer was the veteran art director Al Brenner, a former New Yorker whose credits included ''The Goodbye Girl'' and ''The Turning Point,'' and who critiqued the rival effort at Universal (perhaps a touch unfairly) as too generic, not New York enough.
Certainly he could point with pride to the accuracy of his own urban landscape, from the Romanesque Revival town houses of the Upper West Side to the Greek Revival facades of Washington Square. He also added something new to the repertory of New York streets: the cast-iron fronts of SoHo, fashionable today, of course, but something no one would have reproduced in the 1940's.
In fact, both Universal and Paramount's new streets are filled with innovations, many hidden from view. Behind the facades, steel framing, side walls and roofs have replaced the old open frameworks; under the pavement, an infrastructure of wiring (for lampposts), piping (for fire hydrants and sprinklers) and steam vapor (for atmospheric backlighting effects) anticipates the needs of future production designers.
The New York streets are hardly an exact duplicate of New York. A haunting, unmistakably dreamlike atmosphere pervades the back lot city -- one that begins, paradoxically enough, with a kind of hyperreality in which every surface, shape and material, all lighted by the high California sun, seems more sharply defined, more real, than the real thing.
Sooner or later, meandering from one block to another -- for each of these streets is in fact something of a neighborhood, sprawling over several blocks -- one makes one turn too many, only to confront the truth: that these buildings are not buildings at all, of course, but false fronts, propped up by an elaborate framework of telephone poles and wood studs. Those brick or limestone facades, so convincing from the street, are revealed as sheets of plywood covered with fiberglass, or with the plasterlike material known as ''staff,'' which has been stamped into the appropriate pattern, artfully painted to resemble masonry and distressed to achieve a convincing patina.
Located behind the upper windows, meanwhile, are not bedrooms but catwalks from which grips and stagehands can place lights, curtains or flower pots, or install jet-black duvetyn sheets to prevent the sky from poking through and ruining the illusion. Higher still, above the cornices, stand the rigging frames from which white diffusers or black tarpaulins can be stretched across the width of the street, the first to soften the intense California sun, the second to shut it out entirely, thereby turning a bright Los Angeles morning into a velvety Manhattan evening and circumventing the overtime costs of shooting at night).
The old New York set at Warner Bros. offers a particular kind of historic authenticity. The main street, rebuilt after the fire in 1953, is impressive enough: an imposing commercial thoroughfare, with banks, shops, courthouse and theater, the basis for urban settings as varied as the futuristic Los Angeles of ''Blade Runner'' and the 19th-century Tokyo of ''The Last Samurai.'' It is the centerpiece of the studio tour, which draws more than 1,000 people a day.
Few notice a short stretch of row houses off to the side that may be the most haunting spot of all. Called Brownstone Street, it is probably the oldest existing New York street in Hollywood, dating back to the late 1920's. It was on these actual sidewalks and stoops, in other words, that the unforgettable New Yorkers of the classic Warner's 1930's films, Bette Davis, James Cagney, Humphrey Bogart and George Raft, hailed taxis, paced anxiously, flirted shamelessly, or exchanged gunfire. Tracing their footsteps, sensing not only space but time itself being displaced and compressed, one feels the powerful urge to don a trench coat and a fedora, and somehow step away into the filmic New York night.
