HIGHLIGHTS
JANET JACKSON LOSES A ROLE -- Janet Jackson's Super Bowl breast-baring has reportedly cost her a role as the singer and actress Lena Horne, left, in a planned ABC television movie. Reuters reported that Ms. Jackson bowed out of the biographical film after Ms. Horne refused her cooperation in the production as long as Ms. Jackson remained in the role. Stephen Huvane, a spokesman for Ms. Jackson, said she was no longer part of the project ''because Lena didn't want her in it.'' The executive producers Craig Zadan and Neil Meron quit in support of Ms. Jackson. ''ABC and the producers were supporting Janet,'' Mr. Huvane said, ''and Janet realized this wasn't going to change, so she needed to bow out, and then the producers bowed out with her.'' A spokesman for ABC said the television movie was currently ''in limbo.''
JUSTIN TIMBERLAKE CAUSES A FLAP -- Justin Timberlake, who ripped open Janet Jackson's costume to expose her breast at the Super Bowl, was in the middle of a controversy himself yesterday after he canceled his commitment to be the co-host, with Lionel Richie, of ABC's ''Motown 45'' special. The announcement came after a national e-mail, fax and telephone campaign by a coalition of African-American organizations protesting Mr. Timberlake's involvement in the two-hour tribute to Motown, which is to be taped on April 4 at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles and broadcast in May, said a Billboard-Reuters report. ''The selection of Timberlake as co-host of this Motown special is a cultural insult to the black community,'' Najee Ali, executive director of Project Islamic H.O.P.E., said in a statement last week. ''This special, celebrating the success of the legendary music label, should not be compromised in the pursuit of a crossover audience.'' Jeff Margolis, executive producer of ''Motown 45,'' said in a statement that Mr. Timberlake had ''gladly accepted'' when asked to be a host but had to withdraw from all television appearances through April because of a previous commitment to a feature film. Mr. Timberlake is to star with Morgan Freeman, Kevin Spacey and LL Cool J in ''Edison''; he will play a journalist who finds police corruption.
BUDAPEST: TV'S NAKED RUNNER -- Literally outstripping Ms. Jackson, Anettka Feher, a 30-ish Hungarian television host wearing nothing but some jewelry, sat atop a table, legs crossed, yesterday and announced that she was a candidate for a seat in the European Parliament. Hungary joins the European Union on May 1 and has been allotted 24 seats. Ms. Feher, a candidate of the upstart Union Party, rejected any comparisons between herself and Ilona Staller, a former pornography star who is Italian but of Hungarian descent, Reuters reported. Ms. Staller, known as Cicciolina, bared her breasts during a campaign that won her a seat in the Italian parliament in 1987. ''If they think I am just another Cicciolina, they are in for a surprise,'' said Ms. Feher, referring to Hungarian mainstream politicians. ''I am smart, and I have a daily four-hour presence on a national television channel.''
MARIAH CAREY ON TOUR -- Wearing a two-piece silver belly dancing costume, Mariah Carey, left, gave her first concert in the Arab world on Tuesday when she appeared before 5,000 rapturous fans in the heart of Beirut, Lebanon, Agence France-Presse reported. Most of the audience who came to hear her promote her latest album, ''Charmbracelet,'' consisted of young fans in jeans and T-shirts, but the crowd also included Andrée Lahoud, the wife of President Émile Lahoud, and the United States ambassador to Lebanon, Vincent Battle. Ms. Carey is to perform tonight in Dubai.
PRINCE PLANS A TOUR -- For the first time in six years Prince will return to arena stages, singing hits like ''When Doves Cry'' and ''Little Red Corvette'' in a national tour to begin on March 29 in Los Angeles and extend to at least 38 cities, The Associated Press reported. ''It's older music, but it's going to be played in a newer way,'' Prince said in Los Angeles before a half-hour concert with his eight-piece New Power Generation Band.
THEATER: TOGETHER AGAIN -- The Phantom and his true muse are reuniting. Michael Crawford, who starred in the title role of the long-running musical ''Phantom of the Opera,'' will be rejoining its creator, Andrew Lloyd Webber, when Lord Lloyd Webber's semi-operatic musical ''The Woman in White'' opens in May at the Palace Theater in London, The Guardian reported. The show, replacing ''Les Misérables,'' which has moved after a 19-year run at the Palace, is based on the Wilkie Collins Victorian thriller, but this time Mr. Crawford, now 62, will not play the romantic hero but the sinister and devious Count Fosco. Lord Lloyd Webber said, ''We wanted an actor who will take the heart by the throat.''
FOOTNOTES
Wallace Chappell will become the executive director of the Paul Taylor Dance Company, effective March 8. For the past two and a half years Mr. Chappell has been the director of strategic initiatives for American Ballet Theater. . . . Scratch ''Duet'' from the spring lineup of shows on Broadway. This Otho Eskin play, starring Laura Esterman as Sarah Bernhardt and Pamela Payton-Wright as Eleonora Duse, which opened off Broadway on Dec. 4, had been scheduled to open in revised form in early April at Circle in the Square. But Ludovica Villar-Hauser, the play's producer and director, said delays in completing financing for the Broadway production mandated a postponement until the summer or fall.
