Stephon Marbury made his first return to the Valley of the Sun since the fateful trade last month, but this night was ruined for the Knicks by an ill-timed departure.
Only a game earlier, the newly acquired forward Tim Thomas scored 33 points in the loss to the Kings. His coming-out party came to a halt 19 seconds into Wednesday night's game when he hyperextended his right elbow while fighting through a screen.
As Thomas went to the locker room for X-rays, his teammates deflated and watched the Suns burst out to an 18-4 run from which the Knicks never recovered, stumbling to a disheartening 113-95 defeat.
The America West Arena fans cheered appreciatively all night for Marbury, their former point guard, but with Thomas out, Kurt Thomas playing with a severely swollen right pinkie and Allan Houston on the bench in street clothes, Marbury could not save his team from its fourth consecutive loss.
In a lackluster effort, the Knicks dropped their sixth game in their last seven; the Suns broke an eight-game losing streak.
Thomas added the elbow to his jammed left wrist he suffered Tuesday. The elbow was far worse, he said.
''Right now, I can't lift my arm over my head,'' Thomas said.
His status is questionable for Friday's game against the Clippers.
While Thomas's loss was painful, Knicks Lenny Wilkens criticized his team's mental woes more than anything.
''I thought it hurt us,'' Wilkens said of Thomas's injury, ''but that's no excuse for the kind of effort defensively we had tonight. That was terrible.''
The Knicks allowed the Suns to outrebound them, 58-26. The Suns shot 50 percent. Phoenix scored 31 points in the first quarter and 33 in the final quarter.
''Defensively, we got to get back to where we were,'' said Penny Hardaway, also making his return to Phoenix.
''We're playing soft. We're not making anybody make any tough shots. Right now, we're embarrassing our organization, our city, our team. That can't happen. That has to stop.
The Knicks have lost the first two games of the trip, with Friday's game at the Clippers and Sunday's contest against Denver remaining.
The Knicks (26-33), after winning five in a row at the end of January and February, are out of rhythm. Marbury had his fourth consecutive poor shooting night, finishing with 15 points on 7 of 19 from the field. Hardaway also struggled, shooting 4 of 13.
''We're just not playing well right now,'' said Marbury, who is 26 of 73 from the floor in his past three games.
With Houston uncertain if he will return for this road trip as he goes through individual workouts and tests his sore knees Marbury is pressing to score.
He felt the repercussion of Thomas's injury, too.
''He gets into a nice groove, and now we're pretty much back to square one,'' Marbury said.
Thomas said he injured the elbow when he caught it between Shawn Marion and another Suns player on Phoenix's first possession of the game.
Despite Thomas's bending over in pain that first play, he stayed in the game and had a rim-rattling fast-break dunk two minutes later. But he called for a timeout to take himself out of the game with 8 minutes 32 seconds remaining in the first quarter.
''It's very frustrating; of course I wanted to continue what I built upon,'' Thomas said. ''Not only that, but as a team we were struggling. It's about being out there to help, in general.''
Kurt Thomas admitted he was having trouble helping on defense because his finger was so painful and kept getting aggravated every game. Wilkens started Nazr Mohammed again and played Dikembe Mutombo just 7 minutes.
Amare Stoudemire, who did not play in the Suns' first loss to the Knicks, scored 24 points and had 14 rebounds to lead his team.
Wilkens felt confident enough after Thomas's performance Tuesday to say that the Knicks had turned it around.
The Suns won for only the seventh time in 24 games since the trade and the Knicks fell to 12-12.
''We're on a four-game losing streak, the bleeding has to stop,'' Hardaway said. ''We're fighting for our lives, trying to get a higher seed, we're not just wanting to barely make the playoffs.''
REBOUNDS
ANTONIO McDYESS had criticized ISIAH THOMAS for being uncommunicative before he traded him. Thomas came up to him and spoke to McDyess when the Suns were in New York last month. ''He said in five years from now, I'll thank him,'' McDyess said. ''I guess he was saying he did me a favor.'' McDyess raised his eyebrows with Thomas's last trade. ''I wasn't surprised they made another move, but I was surprised they traded Keith, how well he was playing,'' McDyess said. ''I was like, Isiah was just trying to get everybody that Layden put in -- out.'' McDyess played his third game since being activated from the injured list, scoring 8 points in 15 solid minutes . . . OTHELLA HARRINGTON was ejected with 22 seconds left after his second technical foul resulting from exasperation. . . . DERMARR JOHNSON scored 16 points for the Knicks.
PRO BASKETBALL
