After sleepwalking through the first seven minutes of its game against Massachusetts on Wednesday night, St. Joseph's showcased its hallmark explosiveness in an 83-58 victory.
The Hawks moved to 25-0 (14-0 Atlantic 10) and are only two games short of an undefeated regular season after displaying one of their typical scoring bursts. Mixing a suffocating press, accurate shooting and Jameer Nelson's typical brilliance, the Hawks dug out from an early 7-point deficit and cruised to victory.
Nelson finished with 19 points, sparking a 12-0 run over a three-minute span midway through the first half. In that stretch, Nelson drew a charge, made a steal, scored 6 points and hit his fellow senior Tyrone Barley for a wide-open 3-pointer. By the time the scoring blitz ended, the Hawks led by 18-13 and never trailed for the rest of the game.
''I just recognized what my team needed at that point in the game,'' Nelson said. ''After I recognized that, my team responded with me.''
The victory put the No. 2 Hawks on the verge of the first undefeated regular season in college basketball since Nevada-Las Vegas went unbeaten during the 1990-91 season. The Hawks play at Rhode Island (16-11, 5-8) on Saturday and are host to St. Bonaventure (6-17, 2-10) to close the regular season on Tuesday. No. 1 Stanford, which is also undefeated, has four games left in the regular season.
''We're well aware of what is out there,'' St. Joseph's Coach Phil Martelli said of the impending unbeaten season.
For a while Wednesday night, however, UMass exposed the Hawks' weakness -- their lack of a strong front line. For a few moments in the first half, it appeared the Minutemen (9-16, 3-10) would be able to outmuscle the Hawks and stay in the game.
The UMass freshman Rashaun Freeman, a 6-foot-9 left-hander, scored 21 points as he hit a variety of post spins and hooks. Freeman's three consecutive field goals helped the Minutemen take an early 13-6 lead. UMass had a 3-point shot in the air that would have put them up by 10 points early, but it caromed off the back rim.
The problem in matching up with St. Joseph's is that although teams try to exploit a height advantage, the Hawks counter by overwhelming opponents with speed.
That is how the Hawks turned a nip-and-tuck game into a blowout in the second half. Delonte West, the Hawks' second-leading scorer (18.9 points a game), missed six of his first nine shots. But West hit a 15-foot jumper as the first half ended. After scoring only 8 points in the first half, West finished with a game-high 23. He scored 15 in the first 10 minutes of the second half.
''That shot got my momentum going,'' West said. ''I just came out in the second half firing.''
West's jumper to end the first half reflected St. Joseph's explosiveness. After UMass made a late push to cut its deficit to 6 points, the Hawks scored 4 points in the final 1.1 seconds of the half to take a 41-31 lead.
While West struggled to find his shot in the first half, Barley came off the bench to give the sluggish Hawks a boost. He hit two 3-pointers in the defining 12-0 run that catapulted St. Joseph's to its lead. Barley, known as a defensive specialist, hit all three of his 3-point attempts in the first half and finished with 12 points.
Of its two remaining games, St. Joseph's game at Rhode Island on Saturday looms as the stiffer challenge. The Rams beat Providence, now ranked No. 13 in the Associated Press poll, at Rhode Island's Ryan Center in December. Rhode Island played St. Joseph's earlier in the season in Philadelphia, losing, 73-59, but outrebounding the Hawks, 48-26.
''We can't start celebrating too soon,'' West said. ''Twenty-seven sounds a whole lot better than 25. We can't look past anyone. We've got a tough game at Rhode Island coming up and Bonaventure at home. I don't think any of those teams are going to let us beat them.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
