What is the difference between adventure and experience? Adventure, said Katherine Anne Porter, is ''something you seek for pleasure, or even for profit . . . for the illusion of being more alive than ordinarily . . . but experience is what really happens to you in the long run; the truth that finally overtakes you.''
This difference blind sides the people in Howard Korder's plays, from his much-admired ''Boys' Life'' of 1988 to ''Sea of Tranquility,'' which had its premiere last night at the Atlantic Theater and will run through March 29. His characters keep hoping they will find a fairly easy way to convert adventure into just the right kind of experience.
The three pals in ''Boys' Life'' can't decide whether to rest on their ''just out of college and still goofing off'' laurels or to try blundering into adulthood. So they band together to wisecrack and agonize over the small details and grand schemes that would make the difference
The 40-ish couple in ''Sea of Tranquility'' have moved from the East to Santa Fe, N.M. Ben is a tense, emphatically, insistently rational family counselor. Dylan Baker is perfectly cast. No actor does tense, emphatically rational men who fear their own impulses better. He was extraordinary in Todd Solondz's film ''Happiness.'' He is never less than efficient here.
Mr. Korder knows how to pull us into a scene instantly. He makes the outrageous push at the everyday. Fraught pauses interrupt fast repartee. The director, Neil Pepe, heightens this with silent freeze-frame moments in which stance, expression and spatial relations tell all.
The play opens on four unhappy people. Ben is sitting as if he'd been nailed to his chair, legs pressed tightly together. Taut dark-haired Phyllis (Betsy Aidem) sits in a chair at the other end of the room. Ashley (Lizbeth Mackay), thin and pale, perches on one side of a couch looking down; Josh (Jason Fuchs), a sullen teenage boy, sprawls angrily at the other end. Ben shifts his legs ineffectually then asks (no, enunciates): ''How was Hanukkah?''
''I found it very interesting,'' pipes small-voiced Ashley; she was obviously pretty clueless about this ''festival'' until she became Phyllis's lover.
Josh, who is Phyllis's son, says nothing. He doesn't have to. He's wearing army fatigues and a ''What Would Hitler Do?'' T-shirt.
Everyone feels threatened by someone or something close at hand. Every life seems worn to a tearing point. Ben's clever wife, Nessa (Patricia Kalember), is a writer, or rather (his words), ''a popularizer.'' She drapes her embarrassment in literary retorts: ''Don't mock my oeuvre. I sweated over 'Inside Hilary Duff.' I went through hell on 'Atkins for Buddhists.' '' Then she wrote ''Haunted Paws: Felines in the Afterlife.''
''Where do you go from there?'' she asks. ''Alexander wept. Everyone at Sarah Lawrence had me pegged for a slim but assured volume of wry short stories by the time I was 24. I believe I've put them in their place.'' (Patricia Kalember gives her a prickly unease that at last deepens into real grief.)
Characters and crises pile up. Nessa has mysterious immune system problems; the house has mysterious construction problems. Her brother, Randy (Todd Weeks), is a manic Hollywood hack always pitching absurd ideas for his next script or his new life. Gilbert (Matthew Saldívar), the Latino prisoner Ben counsels in jail, treats his therapy credentials with contempt. Ben notes: ''You've had a rough week.'' Gilbert, saying he's dressed like a Creamsicle, adds, ''What do you think my week was like?''
Nessa's new book features an anthropologist who claims that a certain American Indian tribe practiced cannibalism; suddenly an attractive Indian student arrives to challenge her. But the real catalyst for disaster is Astarte, a 22-year-old lost soul who shows up at Ben's office with a long (as written, too long) story about her life in the streets of San Francisco. She fails to mention her legal problems or that she is being pursued by Scientologists. Ben calls them that. The ominous lawyer who threatens to expose distasteful aspects of Ben's past prefers the term the Sea Organization, ''Affiliated With Religious Technologies.''
Situations abound. For all Mr. Korder's craft, though, I was never altogether sure they added up to a full-bodied story. I like quick, easy laughs when they hit their targets. There were moments that yielded more, too: a last conversation between Ben and Nessa, a first meeting between Ben and Gilbert's policeman brother, Roman (well played, also by Mr. Saldívar). But the steady laughter, and the broad characterizations Mr. Pepe encouraged in his good cast distracted us from a tale that was sadder and grimmer, a tale Mr. Korder wanted to tell.
His script's epigraph, from the British novelist Geoff Dyer, reads: ''Life is bearable even when it is unbearable. That is what is so terrible; that is the unbearable thing about it.'' Ben and Nessa traveled West to start their lives over. They found themselves on the frontier, in more pain than ever. And it felt as though Mr. Korder couldn't quite bear to let us face this.
SEA OF TRANQUILITY
By Howard Korder; directed by Neil Pepe; sets by Santo Loquasto; costumes by Kaye Voyce; lighting by David Weiner; sound by Scott Myers; music by David Yazbek; fight director, Rick Sordelet; production stage manager, Janet Takami; production manager, Kurt Gardner; general manager, Melinda Berk. Presented by the Atlantic Theater Company, Mr. Pepe, artistic director. At 336 West 20th Street, Chelsea.
WITH: Dylan Baker (Ben), Patricia Kalember (Nessa), Betsy Aidem (Phyllis), Heidi Armbruster (Astarte), Liz Elkins (Kat), Jason Fuchs (Josh), Jordan Lage (Barry/Johannsen), Lizbeth Mackay (Adele/Ashley), Matthew Saldívar (Gilbert/Roman), Rafael Sardina (Milton) and Todd Weeks (Randy).
THEATER REVIEW
