Senator John Kerry began running this 30-second advertisement throughout Ohio and in upstate New York, two economically distressed areas, yesterday.
PRODUCER -- Riverfront Media/GMMB &amp; SDD.
ON THE SCREEN -- The spot opens with Mr. Kerry addressing a union audience, workers in green and purple T-shirts, while standing before four American flags. He is wearing a jacket and tie. In the next shot, his tie is gone and his blazer is replaced with a leather bomber jacket as he shakes hands and laughs with workers in hard hats. The viewer is next transported to a factory gate that slams shut before the camera's eye. The screen flashes the words, ''End tax breaks that reward companies for shipping jobs overseas.'' The next shot shows factory workers welding and otherwise assembling unspecified parts. The spot ends with Mr. Kerry, bathed in sunlight in his home office, voicing approval for his commercial.
THE SCRIPT -- Mr. Kerry says, ''Three million jobs lost. That is an astonishing failure.'' The narrator says, ''John Kerry's got the strength and experience to fight for America's jobs.'' Mr. Kerry says, ''We need to be on the side of America's workers.'' The narrator says, ''His plan: End tax breaks that reward companies for shipping jobs overseas. New incentives to create and keep good jobs here. A real plan to get health care costs under control.'' Mr. Kerry says: ''George Bush won't do it. I will. I'm John Kerry, and I approved this message.''
ACCURACY -- Mr. Kerry's common assertion that the economy has lost three million jobs under President Bush is almost true, technically. Still, though Bureau of Labor Statistics data show the economy lost nearly three million jobs through much of Mr. Bush's tenure, Mr. Kerry's figure does not seem to take into full account jobs that have been added to the economy. Bureau of Labor Statistics data show the net job loss to be nearer 2.3 million. Mr. Kerry's plan to reward companies for keeping jobs in the United States is similar to Senator John Edwards's jobs plan. Republicans have questioned whether Mr. Kerry could adequately pay for his health care plan to limit costs.
SCORECARD -- This spot tries to address two competitors, from opposite parties, in one televised swoop. On the one hand, it is meant to take the jobs issue away from Mr. Edwards, who has used it to make inroads against Mr. Kerry in economically depressed areas where Mr. Kerry's vote for the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993 is a potential liability. Mr. Edwards was not in the Senate in 1993 but has said he would not have voted for the pact. As much as the spot seems to try blatantly to co-opt Mr. Edwards's bread-and-butter themes, it could prove effective at stripping him of his ownership of the jobs issue, just the same. The spot also takes a dig at President Bush for job losses during his tenure, a likely prominent theme in the general election campaign. This could prove particularly effective against the president in Ohio, a swing state that has suffered a heavy loss of jobs. But in running such an advertisement, Mr. Kerry gives ammunition to strategists for Mr. Bush who point out that for all of his complaints about their attacks on him, Mr. Kerry has spent at least $5 million on commercials that criticize the president in some way since September. Then again, the Bush strategists are planning to begin responding next week with an advertising campaign that is expected to cost tens of millions of dollars.
JIM RUTENBERG
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE AD CAMPAIGN
