Before he lost his Senate seat, before his entire world seemed to collapse around him, Max Cleland would have had little reason to go to a forlorn union hall, way out in Wisconsin's dairy country.
Yet there he was last week, a biography of John Kerry tucked under his arm and a ''Veterans for Kerry'' bumper sticker on his wheelchair, talking to a room that had more folding chairs than people.
Mr. Cleland, a former Georgia senator who lost both legs and an arm in the Vietnam War, was hustling votes for Mr. Kerry, his fellow Vietnam veteran and the man he calls ''my brother.'' Suddenly, a young man in blue jeans and a purple shirt burst into the conversation, spilling forth a tale of rage and suffering after the Persian Gulf war of 1991.
''I just want to give you a hug,'' Mr. Cleland said, reaching his stubby right arm and his intact left one around the man's neck. ''I love you, brother.''
Still bitter over what he regards as Republican attacks on his patriotism in the 2002 Senate race, Mr. Cleland is apparently on a mission, collecting what he calls a ''band of brothers'' along the way to help Senator Kerry of Massachusetts defeat President Bush. Now on the rebound from his loss to Saxby Chambliss, Mr. Cleland, 62, is emerging as a powerful symbol for both veterans and Democrats -- and becoming nettlesome for Republicans, some of whom complain he is exploiting his war wounds for Mr. Kerry's benefit.
With Republicans, including Mr. Chambliss, calling Mr. Kerry soft on defense -- the same accusation they used to defeat Mr. Cleland -- the presidential race is increasingly turning into a reprise of the 2002 Georgia campaign.
On Wednesday, Mr. Cleland began appearing in television advertisements for Mr. Kerry in his native Georgia. He also held a conference call to criticize Ed Gillespie, the Republican National Committee chairman, saying that for Mr. Gillespie, who did not serve in the military, to criticize Mr. Kerry, who was wounded three times in Vietnam, ''is like a mackerel in the moonlight -- it both shines and stinks at the same time.'' Earlier, he used the same line against Senator Chambliss.
Democrats are delighted.
''I hope Max is getting some sweet revenge,'' said Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader.
But Mr. Cleland, who said his 2002 loss was so devastating he was undergoing treatment for depression, insisted that he is not seeking retribution. He is, he said, seeking only healing.
''It kind of echoes a truth in my life,'' he said recently. ''The truth is that politics, fighting for something that I believe in, or someone that I believe in, has been the positive outlet in my life to turn my pain into someone else's gain, which really heals me.''
It is grueling work. If the campaign schedules a 6 a.m. television appearance, Mr. Cleland must wake up at 4; it takes him an hour and a half just to get dressed. Sometimes, campaign workers give him a hand-held microphone, forgetting he has only one hand. Sometimes, the stage has no ramp; in Iowa, when Mr. Kerry wanted Mr. Cleland by his side, a group of firefighters hoisted him onto the platform in his chair.
''He's a very effective spokesman, because he has a very appealing story,'' said Merle Black, a political scientist at Emory University in Atlanta. ''Among Democrats he's viewed as a hero who went down not only in military battle, but also in political battle.''
That is precisely what irks Republicans, who say Mr. Cleland lost his Senate race because of his poor record, not Republican attacks. Most, sensing what Mr. Black called Mr. Cleland's status as ''a folk hero,'' only whisper their complaints in private.
One exception is Ann Coulter, the conservative columnist, who has recently taken Mr. Cleland to task for ''allowing Democrats to portray him as a war hero'' when his injuries were the result of an accident, rather than enemy fire.
The accident occurred on April 8, 1968. Mr. Cleland, then a 25-year-old Army captain and communications officer, had taken a helicopter to a hill near Khe Sanh, to set up a radio relay site for battle. He unloaded his equipment and boarded the copter for the return trip, only to change his mind at the last minute, deciding to stay on the hill to finish the job and drink a beer with friends.
As he ducked under the helicopter blades, he spotted a grenade on the ground. Thinking it was his own -- and that the pin was intact -- he picked it up, and it exploded. ''He could have done that at Fort Dix,'' Ms. Coulter wrote.
Democrats were outraged. Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island denounced Ms. Coulter on the floor of the Senate. Senator Dianne Feinstein of California called the article ''dastardly, vicious and untrue.'' Donna Brazile, the Democratic strategist, said: ''Ann needs a transplant. A heart transplant.''
Mr. Cleland says he has spent his entire adult life trying to recover from that day. He spent three decades thinking that he had blown himself up -- only to learn a few years ago, when a witness came forward, that the grenade belonged to another soldier. His service in the days before the accident earned him the Silver Star for gallantry, but he says he felt embarrassed by it. Politics has been his salvation.
''I got involved in this business,'' he says, ''because I had darn few options. I had to go out there and, by God's grace, make something happen. Everybody said, 'Well, you could have sat in the corner and drawn your pension.' Well, you might as well have given me a .38-caliber pistol and pulled the trigger.''
In 1970, at 28, he won election to the Georgia Senate. In 1976, President Jimmy Carter named him to run the Veterans Administration. In 1996, after four terms as Georgia's secretary of state, Mr. Cleland won election to the Senate. He envisioned himself growing old in the Capitol.
He called it his ''dream job,'' but the dream ended abruptly in November 2002, after a race that turned on Mr. Cleland's vote against the Republican-backed bill to create a Department of Homeland Security. President Bush traveled to Georgia five times to campaign against him. But the low point, Mr. Cleland said, came when Republicans ran an advertisement juxtaposing his face with those of Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein. The commercial infuriated the Senate's Vietnam veterans, including Mr. Kerry and two Republicans, John McCain and Chuck Hagel, who rushed to Mr. Cleland's defense.
In defeat, Mr. Cleland lost not only his job, but also his sense of purpose, spiraling into a depression he called ''too deep and too hurtful to describe.'' For 23 years, he had kept a small apartment in Atlanta, outfitted to accommodate his disability. With no prospects of steady work, he gave it up.
He taught for a time at American University in Washington, but said it provided little more than ''a place to hang my hat.'' He signed on as a motivational speaker, but found that, outside of veterans, he could not connect with the audiences.
''They'd say, 'Can you be in San Francisco on Thursday to talk to civil engineers?' '' he recalled. ''What have I got to talk to civil engineers about?''
Democrats, including Mr. Daschle -- who eventually helped Mr. Cleland become a director of the Import-Export Bank of the United States -- urged him to run again. But, Mr. Cleland said, ''my politics is over.'' Instead, he promised Mr. Kerry that if he ran, ''I'm there with you in the foxhole, until the last dog dies.''
For Mr. Cleland, the political world is divided into two types of people: those who served in combat, and those who did not. On the campaign trail, he takes jabs at President Bush's National Guard service, and repeatedly refers to Mr. Kerry as ''an authentic hero.'' He carries the Kerry biography, ''Tour of Duty,'' by Douglas Brinkley, everywhere he goes, giving it to potential supporters and autographing it as though he had written it himself.
He has been with Mr. Kerry in Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina, Virginia and Georgia, but last week's Wisconsin trip was perhaps the most poignant. His driver was Charlie Wolden, a former marine who was by Mr. Cleland's side on April 8, 1968, ripping up his uniform into tourniquets to stanch the bleeding from Mr. Cleland's blown-off limbs. Together, they spent hours traversing the snowy Wisconsin landscape in a rented white Cadillac, reminiscing as they went.
Mr. Wolden, now a veterans' mental health counselor, said that those who had not fought in war could not possibly understand the power of Mr. Cleland's ''band of brothers,'' and in the little union hall, in Sheboygan, that seemed to be the case.
People sat, slack-jawed, as the young Persian Gulf veteran, Jason Borden, poured his heart out, demanding to know if Mr. Kerry would raise spending on mental health services for veterans.
''The answer is not only yes,'' Mr. Cleland replied, ''but hell, yes.''
Afterward, the former senator from Georgia pulled out a copy of the Kerry biography, and, in his scratchy left-handed scrawl, signed it for Mr. Borden. He did not ask for the young man's vote. He did not have to.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER SENATOR
