Only 36 percent of health workers receive influenza vaccinations each year, despite a longstanding federal recommendation that such workers be immunized for their own protection and to prevent the spread of the disease, a leading health organization said here Wednesday.
Calling that rate ''dismal,'' the organization, the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases, urged an advisory panel for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to take stronger action to increase compliance. The foundation said hospitals and other health care groups needed to develop policies and programs to put the vaccine recommendations into routine practice.
''Low influenza vaccination rates among health care workers pose a serious health threat to the patients in their care, including infants and children, the elderly and chronically ill,'' said Dr. William Schaffner, a board member of the foundation, a nonprofit group in Bethesda, Md., dedicated to the prevention and treatment of infectious diseases.
Dr. Schaffner is also the chairman of the department of preventive medicine at Vanderbilt School of Medicine.
Many members of the advisory panel expressed strong support for the foundation's plea. The panel, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, has recommended influenza vaccinations for health workers since 1986 and so took no action on Wednesday. The Department of Health and Human Services appoints the 15-member panel to advise the centers, which are based here, on influenza immunizations and others.
One panel member, Dr. Gregory A. Poland of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., said he did not want to read headlines saying infectious disease experts recommended the public receive flu shots when health workers were not getting them.
Dr. Kathleen M. Neuzil of the Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System and the University of Washington, urged state health departments and the centers to formally track influenza vaccination rates among health workers. Dr. Neuzil attended the meeting as a representative of the American College of Physicians, which supports the foundation's program.
Dr. Raymond A. Strikas, a vaccination expert at the disease centers, said a tracking program was ''something C.D.C. should look into.''
Dr. Bruce Gellin, the director of the National Vaccine Program, said he would refer the recommendations to higher officials in the Department of Health and Human Services.
The foundation cited studies showing that influenza immunizations reduced absences from work and led to fewer deaths among nursing home patients.
Unpublished national surveys conducted by the disease centers in 1997 and 2001 found compliance rates among health workers of 34 percent and 36 percent, respectively.
Unvaccinated workers in hospitals, offices, nursing homes, long-term-care facilities and other settings can be a major cause of outbreaks in health care settings, the foundation said.
In one influenza outbreak in a neonatal intensive care unit, 19 infants were infected and one died. Epidemiologists determined that health workers were the probable source of the spread. Only 15 percent of the staff had been immunized.
In another outbreak, four patients in an organ transplant unit developed influenza. Each was in a single room, and three of the four had had no visitors who could have accounted for the spread. Three of the 27 nurses also developed influenza.
