A new mobile team of forensic specialists will treat rape victims, counsel them and obtain evidence at public hospitals in the Bronx, as part of a pilot program announced yesterday by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg.
The team, known as the Sexual Assault Response Team, will treat all victims of sexual assault within an hour of their arrival at North Central Bronx Hospital, Jacobi Medical Center or Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center, the mayor said. During that hour, they will also collect evidence from the victims. It will be the first team of its kind in the city and, if successful, will be expanded to the other four boroughs, he said.
''Our administration has done everything it can to see that victims of rape get the help they need and that the perpetrators of this horrific crime get the punishment they deserve,'' Mr. Bloomberg said at a news conference at North Central Bronx Hospital.
He said the team would work toward both these goals by delivering medical care quickly at the same time as preserving evidence for criminal prosecutions.
The team is scheduled to hit the streets in April, the mayor said. It will consist of 12 to 14 examiners trained in forensic science by the Bronx district attorney's office, said Dr. Robert Chin, director of emergency medicine at North Central Bronx Hospital, where the team will be based. It will also draw from a pool of about 50 trained volunteers who will act immediately as counselors for traumatized rape victims and will eventually steer them toward professional help.
North Central has had a similar program in place for six years and is something of a pioneer in the delicate task of treating and counseling rape victims while never losing sight of the courtroom, said Dr. Brigitte Alexander, who will serve as the medical director of the team.
''We have to be compassionate, but we also have to have competent forensic emergency clinicians in the E.R. and the courtroom,'' she said.
The team's medical staff might testify in court, Dr. Alexander said, and its volunteer members might be called upon to escort rape victims into the courthouse if they are asked to testify. Dr. Chin said that the team would operate around the clock every day of the week. One forensic examiner and one volunteer counselor are to be on call at any given time to respond to sexual assault cases at the Bronx's network of three public hospitals.
This expanded version of the North Central program will receive a total of $400,000 in grant money from the Crime Lab Improvement Program of the Department of Justice and the State Division of Criminal Justice Services, the mayor said.
Mr. Bloomberg added that the Bronx had been chosen to host the program not only because of North Central's expertise in the field, but also because the borough has what he called ''a disproportionate number'' of rapes.
He said the Bronx had 16 percent of the city's total population, but 26 percent of its total reported rapes. ''It's clear that the people of the Bronx have suffered more than their share, and we are going to change that,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. Robert T. Johnson, the Bronx district attorney, welcomed the program, saying that evidence in rape cases is notoriously difficult to preserve. He said the team would help his prosecutors do their job in the courtroom while helping rape victims through the trauma of attack.
Mr. Johnson noted that rape remained a problem in the Bronx even though the numbers were, as he put it, ''headed in the right direction.'' He said, for example, that the number of reported rapes had decreased in the Bronx by 29 percent in the last 10 years and by 31 percent since the same time last year.
So far in 2004, 43 rapes have been reported in the Bronx, according to the New York Police Department's Web site. During the same period in 2003, 69 rapes were reported in the borough, and 507 for the entire year.
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly also appeared at the news conference, saying that many rapes go unreported to the authorities. He said the new team would ''make it easier for victims to come forward and to preserve evidence of the crime.''
