IT'S time for the warning, time to remind the outsiders running for president all about fearsome New York, with its booby-trapped politics, internecine warfare, fierce press corps.
Those poor uninitiated Democrats in Tuesday's presidential primary. Lambs to the slaughter. With only days to go, it certainly is time to remind them that with one wrong mot they can do themselves in. They can become tangled, like a diver surrounded by underwater weeds, in ethnic rivalries and racial sensitivities. They can misinterpret religious nuances, or run afoul of unpredictable local politicians, they can ...
Never mind. Time warp. Not this year. This year New York is like a graduate of one of those extreme makeovers. The place is unrecognizable. It is -- dare one say -- peaceful. Quiet. Dull. Democrats are rejoicing. We observers are deploring the unproductive (for us) calm. The voters? We shall see.
''The primary is a big nothing,'' Howard Wolfson, a Democratic political consultant, said with satisfaction because as he and other Democrats see it, the quiescent primary reflects unity -- that rarest of qualities in a place where, it is said, Democrats form a firing squad in a circle.
There are other reasons for the unusual atmosphere, starting with the nature of Super Tuesday, with its total of 10 primaries. ''There's less focus on it, there's less intensity,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer. But he, like each of several Democrats interviewed in the last few days, emphasized unity. ''Democrats so badly want a winner, for one candidate to attack one another would be counterproductive. When there is less attack there is less roiled water.'' The voters seem offended by negative campaigning this year -- and going on too sharp an attack against Mr. Kerry could hurt Mr. Edwards's chances to be the vice presidential candidate, if it comes to that.
New York could be more polite than usual for another reason. It's fairly late in the nominating process. The primaries and caucuses have produced a front-runner -- John Kerry -- who has already won more delegates than anyone else. Logic dictates that it is too late for New York to play kingmaker.
Not that logic and politics are natural allies in New York. Yet most supporters of the candidates who dropped out -- Joseph Lieberman, Wesley Clark and Howard Dean -- quickly moved over to Senator Kerry, others to Senator John Edwards.
Representative Charles B. Rangel, a prominent Clark man, held a rally for Mr. Kerry in Harlem last Monday, and that afternoon Mr. Kerry met amicably with members of Mr. Clark's finance committee. Even the Rev. Al Sharpton, who can generate heat (if not light) at will, hasn't stirred things up in his pursuit of creating a more moderate national image for himself. Nor has he drawn much support.
''It's all about beating Bush,'' said Herman D. Farrell Jr., the state Democratic chairman. ''If Kerry can beat him, people are saying, 'Good, I'm with Kerry.' Everyone is trying to be on good behavior.''
What a contrast with bloody elections and primaries of the past -- the most memorable being the fight of 1988. That year, the Democratic presidential primary in New York turned into a battleground when former Mayor Edward I. Koch said that ''Jews and others supporters of Israel would have to be crazy'' to vote for Jesse Jackson. Michael Dukakis won a resounding victory over Mr. Jackson that year, with Al Gore, Mr. Koch's candidate, coming in a distant third. (Mr. Jackson won the New York City vote.)
THAT primary, the memory of which, it is said, can still give Mr. Gore nightmares, points to something else at work this year: a changed city.
City Hall is now the domain of a quiet, contained Republican, Michael R. Bloomberg, instead of the eruptive, opinionated Mr. Koch. Today's governor is another quiet Republican, George E. Pataki. His predecessor was the mercurial Mario M. Cuomo, who left that plane on the tarmac in 1991 -- the one ready to take him to New Hampshire to file for the 1992 presidential primary.
Both men were large New York characters, lightning rods. ''We don't have time for lightning rods today,'' said Mr. Rangel. ''We're focused. Our eyes are on the prize.''
With four campaign days to go, the primary could turn typically combative. We can always hope. But don't count on it, advised Senator Schumer: ''It's a mirror image,'' he said. ''Republicans wanted to win so badly in 2000 because they believed they suffered eight years under Bill Clinton. It's the mirror image now.''
Metro Matters
