In Siberia, teachers follow reindeer herds to instruct children of the nomadic Nenet people. In Peru, indigenous Andean women can spend their final weeks of pregnancy in professional health care centers, accompanied by their husbands, children and sometimes livestock, to reduce the chance of infant death.
These are rare examples of successful government efforts to help children in the world's indigenous communities, according to the United Nations Children's Fund.
Carol Bellamy, the executive director of Unicef, announced a new campaign on Wednesday to urge countries to improve health care, education and living conditions for indigenous children, while respecting their native languages and cultures.
''We'd like to see the issue placed squarely and unambiguously on the agenda of every government,'' Ms. Bellamy said at a news conference at the Museum of the Americas here. ''Indigenous peoples are disproportionately disadvantaged for many reasons, including racism, and in many cases the survival of the community is on the line.''
The campaign was announced in Spain in part to symbolize Europe's ''historic and moral responsibility'' to the indigenous peoples devastated by colonization,'' Ms. Bellamy said.
Spain also plays a leading role in shaping Unicef's programs in Latin America, where about 20 percent of the estimated 300 million indigenous people worldwide live. The exact number of indigenous people is unknown, since many countries do not register births among indigenous populations.
Following the news conference, Ms. Bellamy met privately with Queen Sofia to urge her to advocate for indigenous children in Latin America. Madrid's soccer team, Real Madrid will help promote the campaign.
The effort centers on a 32-page report, prepared by Unicef's Innocenti Research Center in Florence, which illustrates the problems facing native populations, including the high infant mortality rate among New Zealand's Maori people, the high suicide rate among the Guarani of Brazil and the near-total illiteracy rate among the Hmong people in parts of Southeast Asia.
The report also notes that indigenous children are more likely than nonindigenous children to end up working in factories, as servants, or be exploited in trafficking rings. The bleak picture also applies to wealthier countries, including the United States, Canada and Australia. In the United States, for example, Native Americans receive comparatively inferior education and health care, the report says.
Ciro González, 16, who lives in a Guarani village in Bolivia, where the homes are made of mud and straw and lack electricity, was brought to Spain by Unicef to participate in the news conference.
Sitting at the dais alongside other indigenous people, he urged immediate action. ''If it's like this today, tomorrow it will be worse,'' he said.
