The Bush administration, pressed by Israel to endorse its plan to withdraw from parts of Gaza and the West Bank, is urging Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to work with Palestinian leaders in carrying out the pullout, a senior Bush administration official said Wednesday.
The official said that the administration was encouraging Mr. Sharon to meet soon with Ahmed Qurei, the Palestinian prime minister, and also to work with Palestinian security leaders, at least in the West Bank, so the situation there can be peaceful once a pullout occurs.
''The withdrawal is a good idea,'' said the official, in an interview, adding that it presented an opportunity for ''an enormous and historic change'' in Israel's relations with its neighbors comparable to the 1967 war, the withdrawal from Sinai and the peace accord with Egypt in the 1970's.
But the official said there was a lot of work ahead for the United States, Israel, the Palestinians and European and Arab countries ''to make this happen.''
A withdrawal of settlements from the West Bank and Gaza could help the peace effort, depending on how it is carried out, the official said.
Although the administration's own peace plan, known as the road map, does not say so explicitly, the official said it was understood that ''any final negotiation is going to require the Israelis to pull out of a certain number of settlements.''
The official's comments come as Mr. Sharon has stepped up his pressure for a meeting with President Bush in March or April. Israeli officials say he wants the president's endorsement to win support at home and forestall criticism of the withdrawal in Europe and the Arab world, where it is seen by some as a prelude to an Israeli land grab.
Mr. Bush, many American officials say, would also like to hold a joint session with Mr. Sharon hailing what seems to be progress as a way of defusing Democratic criticism that he has been passive on the search for peace.
Mr. Sharon is sending his top aide, Dov Weisglass, to Washington next week to answer the administration's questions about his intentions.
''I feel they support the concept,'' said Daniel Ayalon, the Israeli ambassador to the United States. ''They would like to endorse it. But before that, they want to make sure what's involved. We will provide them with the full picture very soon.''
The senior administration official emphasized that the United States was not negotiating with Israel on the extent of the withdrawal that Mr. Sharon plans, although he said it was clear that it would entail a pullout from nearly all Gaza and from parts of the West Bank. The full scope remains to be decided, he said.
''When the prime minister has made his decision, he is going to come and tell us about it,'' said the official. ''This is not a negotiation between the United States and Israel. This is their plan, not ours.''
Some other diplomats involved in the Middle East say that because Mr. Sharon is seeking American approval and taking American views into account, the American discussion with Israel is a functional equivalent of negotiations. The most recent round of talks occurred last week during a visit to Israel by Elliott Abrams, director of Middle East affairs at the National Security Council; Stephen Hadley, the deputy national security adviser; and William J. Burns, head of the Middle East bureau at the State Department. The senior administration official's comments were based on those talks.
Among the issues that the United States hopes to see settled are the extent of involvement by Jordan and Egypt in any security arrangements in Gaza, and whether Mr. Sharon can ensure that violence against Israelis will not increase if Israeli forces pull out of densely populated areas.
The American fear, shared by Israelis, is that Hamas and other militant groups that have claimed responsibility for attacks on Israelis might assume greater political power in Gaza after an Israeli withdrawal. Involvement by Jordanian and Egyptian security forces could forestall that, the official said.
The administration official said that while the United States approved Israel's disengagement plan in concept, it hoped the military withdrawals would ''re-energize'' political and other reforms on the Palestinian side.
The failure of the Palestinian authorities to stop attacks emanating from the West Bank contributed to past breakdowns in talks with Israel.
Another potential problem, many diplomats say, are the settlers Israel intends to remove from Gaza. Palestinian and Arab officials have begun charging that Israel plans to move them into the parts of the West Bank, perhaps to existing settlements.
But the administration official implied that the United States did not expect that to happen. Such a move, he said, would violate a pledge Mr. Sharon made in December not to expand West Bank settlements.
Along with urging Israel to work with Palestinians on the withdrawals, the administration is also pressing it to alter the route of the security barrier it is building. The route dips deeply into the West Bank at points; the United States wants it to follow more closely the so-called Green Line, the de facto frontier between Israel and the West Bank.
The administration expects Israel to move the barrier ''closer to the Green Line'' and to ''make it straighter and to diminish the impact on Palestinians.'' He added that Israel had moved as recently as this week to make these changes. ''We have found Israel to be very responsive'' to American concerns, the official said.
