California has pushed up the date of its presidential primary each election since 1992 in an effort to have a role more worthy of the nation's most populous state.
Now, with less than a week to go before the Super Tuesday primaries, California, whose trove of 370 delegates represents 17 percent of the total needed to win the Democratic nomination, may serve only to ratify the front-runner's march to the summer convention.
Two polls this week showed the leader, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, as the favorite going into a debate here on Thursday. A Field Poll released on Wednesday had Mr. Kerry leading Senator John Edwards of North Carolina among likely California primary voters, 60 percent to 19 percent. A poll by The Los Angeles Times this week showed Mr. Kerry leading Mr. Edwards, 56 percent to 24 percent.
Even if Mr. Kerry should somehow falter here -- the polls show some volatility -- he will still walk away with a large number of delegates under rules that allocate delegates in proportion to the popular vote.
''There's no question that our efforts to move up the primary didn't work out in quite the way we had hoped,'' said Antonio Villaraigosa, a Democratic member of the Los Angeles City Council, a former speaker of the State Assembly and a national co-chairman of Mr. Kerry's campaign. ''The rest of the states moved up their primaries, as well, and effectively undermined our effort to be more relevant.''
California has not had a decisive role in nominating a presidential candidate of either party since 1972, when George McGovern won the Democratic primary here but faced a convention challenge from Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, who tried to claim a share of the state's 271 delegates.
Willie L. Brown Jr., then a fiery young member of the Assembly and a fervent backer of Mr. McGovern, mounted the stage at the Democratic National Convention in Miami and demanded, ''Give me back my delegation!''
Mr. McGovern beat back the Humphrey forces, won the nomination and was then crushed by the incumbent, President Richard M. Nixon.
In the following years, nominations were decided long before California's primaries in June. In 1996, party officials moved the vote to late March, still too late to affect the outcome in either party. In 2000, they moved it to March 7. But Vice President Al Gore was already the presumptive Democratic nominee, and the state only cemented George W. Bush's victory over Senator John McCain in the Republican contest.
This year, the primary will be this Tuesday, March 2, along with those of nine other states, including New York and Ohio.
Polls indicate that the state does not appear likely to be competitive in November, with large majorities preferring the Democratic candidate to Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore won the state by 1.3 million votes in 2000.
Yet, Republican officials noted the large number of votes for Arnold Schwarzenegger and other Republican candidates in the recall election for governor in the fall and said Mr. Bush would probably spend considerable time and money courting votes here in the general election.
Despite the size of the delegate cache and huge electoral vote count, none of the Democratic candidates are spending much time or money in the state, which is known for its expensive media markets. Mr. Edwards began three days of campaigning on Wednesday. Mr. Kerry will be here on Thursday and Friday. Both are hoping to gain visibility from the CNN-Los Angeles Times debate that will be broadcast here on Thursday evening. Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio and the Rev. Al Sharpton of New York will also participate.
The debate stands to help Mr. Edwards more than Mr. Kerry, because he is far less well known and well organized here, political professionals said.
''What one expects is not that Kerry loses the debate or Edwards wins it,'' said Representative Brad Sherman, a San Fernando Valley Democrat who, along with almost half the state's Democratic Congressional delegation, supports Mr. Kerry, ''but that it has a positive effect on Edwards, because he goes in relatively unknown.''
Roger Salazar, the California communications director for Mr. Edwards's campaign, noted that his candidate had finished strongly in several states, including Wisconsin and Iowa, and that he expected Mr. Edwards to do the same here. He said his candidate's message appealed to independent voters, roughly one-quarter of the California electorate, who are eligible to vote in the primary under the state's new rules.
''Voters in California are pretty independent, very centrist and middle of the road,'' Mr. Salazar said.
He said Mr. Edwards would campaign in Pomona, Fresno, Sacramento, San Francisco and Los Angeles over the next three days, hoping to capitalize on news coverage.
Mr. Edwards may also benefit from Californians' proclivity to ignore political races until the last minute. The recent Field and Los Angeles Times polls found that 10 percent or more of likely voters were undecided in the primary and had not closely studied the ballot initiatives that will also be decided on Tuesday.
A Republican primary to name a challenger to Senator Barbara Boxer has likewise generated little interest. Bill Jones, a former California secretary of state, is favored to win the Republican Senate primary against several lesser-known candidates.
Jesse Sammons, a second-year medical student from La Canada Flintridge, a suburb north of Los Angeles, said that he leaned toward Mr. Kerry but that he remained open to changing his mind.
''I like the way Edwards talks, but I don't know exactly what he's saying,'' said Mr. Sammons, who added that he voted for Ralph Nader in 2000 but that he was hesitant to do so again. ''Kerry is not as exciting. But I know more about him.''
Mr. Sammons said he would probably not make up his mind until after the debate on Thursday.
Alma Soto, a cashier at a men's clothing store in Glendale and a lifelong Democrat, said she was concerned about the Iraq conflict and the economy. Ms. Soto said that she knew little about Mr. Kerry's positions on the issues, but that she thought he had more experience than Mr. Edwards.
Like other voters across the country, Californians cite jobs and the economy as their most important concerns in polls. But the Iraq conflict animates many voters as well, particularly the sizable cadre of supporters of Howard Dean, who dropped out of the race this month.
Because the California ballots were printed in January, Dr. Dean's name, along with those of other candidates who have dropped out, will appear on them. Many supporters of Dr. Dean say they plan to vote for him as a protest, as well as in hopes of meeting the 15 percent threshold for winning convention delegates.
Rick Jacobs, state chairman of Dr. Dean's campaign, said supporters would rally outside the debate and planned to cast ballots for Dr. Dean.
''It's not so much an act of protest,'' Mr. Jacobs said. ''But to show that we care about the issues we got involved with and we want to make sure people know we still care.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: CALIFORNIA  Correction:  February 27, 2004, Friday  Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about California's role in presidential primaries misstated the title held by Hubert H. Humphrey when he lost to George McGovern in the state's Democratic primary in 1972. He was a senator, no longer the vice president.
