When Gov. James E. McGreevey presented his $26.26 billion budget on Tuesday, he described it as the product of a state that had turned the corner on tough times and ''put itself back on the right track.''
But as legislators gathered on Wednesday to review the budget and other state issues, it was clear that his characterization remained very much in dispute.
At the session, organized by the Associated Press, Republicans said the budget relied heavily on new fees and taxes and depended too much on borrowing from the future rather than on revenue currently in hand.
Mr. McGreevey refrained on Wednesday from offering more specifics on just how much he is proposing to raise some taxes and fees in the coming year to pay for his new programs.
The budget, for fiscal year 2005, proposes the biggest spending increase in five years.
The governor said yesterday that the state's improving economic picture had resulted in new spending opportunities for worthy programs.
But it will also require raising $150 million from new fees collected from manufacturers of petroleum products, a 45 cent-per-pack increase in the cigarette tax, higher fines for unsafe drivers and a 1 percent fee on sales of houses valued at more than $1 million.
The governor wants the state to take out a 20-year loan against money expected to come in from the cigarette tax and the driving fines to pay for state government costs.
''We are continuing the credit card mentality of budget matters in New Jersey,'' Leonard Lance, the Senate Republican leader, said at the forum at the Trenton Marriott, where he and other legislative leaders, as well as the governor, spoke about the budget on Wednesday.
The governor's critics said the increased spending that he was proposing would affect the average taxpayer.
Republican leaders at the forum on Wednesday said Mr. McGreevey and the Democratic-controlled Legislature had still not addressed a fundamental problem in New Jersey: skyrocketing property taxes.
''If this budget passes, the taxpayers in New Jersey should be prepared to pay higher property taxes,'' said Alex DeCroce, the Assembly minority leader and a Republican.
Mr. McGreevey, however, said that he was keeping to his promise not to raise sales and income taxes, and he has challenged his critics to find other ways to cut the budget, or other ways to raise revenue.
''This budget reflects my values and reminds me of why I wanted to be governor,'' he said. ''The first two years were difficult. With this budget we're moving to a better vision of New Jersey.''
The governor's proposed budget is $1.7 billion more than the current budget, which expires on June 30.
It includes $200 million in aid to school districts, $125 million to revamp the embattled Department of Youth and Family Services, $33 million to hire 200 state troopers and $10 million to cover tuition at community colleges for students who graduate in the top 20 percent of their high school classes.
During a question and answer session with reporters, Mr. McGreevey became testy when he was asked for specifics about his proposal to raise $150 million from a new environmental impact fee on petrochemical companies.
Would the taxes be on gasoline as well as on other petroleum products like plastics? Some critics have said that the fees were a ''stealth tax'' that motorists would eventually pay at the gas pumps.
The governor backed down a few months ago on a plan for a gasoline tax increase 15 cents per gallon.
''No,'' the governor said to a question about whether it was a stealth tax. ''You'll have the finalized details within two to three weeks. This is a tax on petrochemicals, understanding that there have been environmental abuses in the past.''
But because of the confusion about who would pay the tax and on what products, the assembly speaker, Albio Sires, a Democrat, later issued a statement about news reports about a gas tax increase of 3 cents.
''The governor assures me that this will be a tax on polluters and not on New Jersey drivers,'' Mr. Sires said.
Mr. McGreevey also said his critics were wrong to compare him to former Gov. Christine Todd Whitman because of his proposal to pay for this budget out of money that the state did not yet have.
''There is a profound distinction between the previous administration that borrowed in the abstract and this one that is using dedicated revenue sources to pay for what we're doing,'' Mr. McGreevey said.
