President Bush is expected to remove American travel restrictions to Libya on Thursday and allow for a significant expansion of diplomatic interchange now that Libya has dismantled most of its nuclear infrastructure and reaffirmed its responsibility for the bombing of Pan Am 103 more than 15 years ago, senior administration officials said on Wednesday.
The action had been expected earlier this week. But it was delayed after Libya's prime minister, Shukri Ghanem, declared several days ago that his country was not responsible for the bombing and had agreed to pay damages to the victims' families only in an effort to restore itself to international acceptance.
Mr. Ghanem's statements prompted a demand from the State Department for a retraction, and he was rebuked on Wednesday by his own government.
Libya released a statement that quoted its August 2003 communication to the United Nations and said that the country ''accepts responsibility for the actions of its officials.''
The Libyan news service, Jana, said ''recent statements contradicting or casting doubt on these positions are inaccurate and regrettable.''
Mr. Bush's move was hinted at by White House officials in December when Libya agreed to turn over its nuclear materials, and reveal how it obtained them.
''They have met our requirements, and we will move forward from there,'' a senior administration official said after the Libyan statement was released.
The official said Mr. Bush's action would ''allow us to get back on track.''
Once travel restrictions are lifted, Americans will be able to travel to Libya and spend money there. American oil companies will be able to negotiate contracts, which have long been barred.
Trade with the country will still be restricted, however, at least until the nuclear program is completely dismantled.
Libyan diplomats will be able to work in Washington, running a Libyan interests section. Mr. Bush will indicate on Thursday that talks can soon begin with the Libyans on establishing full diplomatic status, officials said.
