IF you are a long-suffering Rangers fan, behold: more suffering is at hand.
The level of frustration shot up yesterday even though Glen Sather announced that he would no longer be the Rangers' judge, jury and executioner.
Sather announced that he was stepping down as coach but staying on as general manager and president. Unfortunately for Rangers fans, Sather will still be judge and executioner: he sentences your Stanley Cup dreams to death, then carries out the sentence.
The least encouraging statement Sather made while simultaneously firing himself and kicking himself upstairs was describing what drove him to quit. Losses? Listlessness?
Chants. The ''Fire Sather!'' chants were becoming a distraction. Not to Sather, he said, but to his team.
''Over the last little while,'' he said, ''I think the distraction that came from the chanting in the Gardens was distracting for the players. They seemed to get uptight.
''You hear something like that as soon as we make a mistake, and instead of getting better, they get worse. That was tough for them. I think that's part of the reason I stepped down.''
Sather said that during the Rangers' 4-1 loss to Montreal on Monday, the boos came early and his team was finished. ''You could see them sort of slide into their real defensive panic mode,'' he said.
Imagine that: this veteran team, which Sather assembled with a payroll of more than $80 million, has a fragile ego.
Well, guess what? The chants will not stop simply because Sather has left the bench for the ivory tower of management.
Sather didn't go far enough. Shouldn't he have fired himself as general manager as well?
''I'm not going to do a post-mortem in front of all you people or anyone else right now,'' said Sather, the Rangers' president and general manager since the summer of 2000 and the coach since January 2003. ''We made a decision, and the decision, what we did today, is the way we're going to go.''
The real culprit here is James L. Dolan, the emperor of Madison Square Garden. Dolan should have been at the Rangers' training facility here yesterday to announce the hard news: that Sather was not being kicked up but being kicked out, as the Knicks did with Scott Layden. Instead, the Rangers are moving a piece of furniture from one room to another and calling it housecleaning.
The Rangers, who are about to miss the playoffs for the seventh year in a row, have to rebuild. Re-build. That's a dirty word among front-office executives in New York. You can't rebuild in New York, they tell us. New Yorkers want ready-made stars, names.
''It's a complicated scenario here,'' Sather said, adding to the mythology. Asked why players come to New York and don't perform well, he said: ''I'm not quite sure yet. I'm not sure you come here and think that you're a superstar before you're really a superstar or you come here and there's a lot of pressure on you to perform every day and maybe you're not capable of that every day.''
There's pressure here, but there's pressure everywhere. Executives have to stop throwing millions of dollars to get overrated or past-their-prime stars who -- they hope -- will make their jobs easier. That's payroll-padding nonsense.
New Yorkers want what everyone else wants -- a team that does what most people do every day: work hard, compete and never give up. That's all.
This Rangers team, an All-Star collection assembled by Sather with Dolan's blessing, does not play consistently hard. Even Sather said so yesterday when he said he hadn't lost his love for coaching.
''I like being around the guys,'' he said ''They work hard, just not all the time.
''I know the league, I know the players and I know what makes them tick. But there seems to be a reason we just couldn't get them all going every night here. Maybe a different direction would be the best thing to do.''
Precisely.
This marks the 10-year anniversary of the Rangers' last Stanley Cup championship. The plan, once upon a time, was to get some veterans while primarily building with a core of young players, not superstars. After a couple of seasons without making the playoffs, Dolan demanded stars, big names. He got aging stars, names that were bigger than their remaining talent.
This current Rangers team is not a departure from that.
Yesterday, Sather spent most of his time telling reporters what he was not going to tell us. Long-term strategy? No answer. Short-term goals? Play hard. Will you use the trading deadline to unload and rebuild?
''I'm not saying,'' Sather said. ''I'm not disclosing to you what I plan on doing.''
Here's what we do know: Dolan has steered the Rangers to hockey hell. Maybe Steve Mills, who apparently persuaded Dolan to hire Isiah Thomas as president of basketball operations for the Knicks in December, can persuade his boss to hire a good shepherd for the Rangers, too.
Yes, the jury is still out on Thomas -- especially after he shipped out the suddenly (and mysteriously) beloved Keith Van Horn. But at least there's hope.
For Rangers fans, however, the frustration quotient keeps rising. So should their voices.
Now that you know Sather hears the chants -- and thinks they will stop just because he's not behind the bench -- Rangers fans should lift every voice and let their chants float all the way up to his ivory tower. Fire Sather.
Sports of The Times
