Members of Congress and advocates for workers said on Wednesday that they were calling for a broader investigation at the Hanford nuclear reservation, seeking information about whether Energy Department contractors had protected workers' health and safety.
The Washington State attorney general's office said last week that it was looking into whether the contractor that operates nuclear waste storage ''tank farms'' at Hanford had been lax in providing respiratory protection. The prosecutor's office also said it was looking into accusations that contracted medical clinics had failed to diagnose occupational illnesses among workers who sought treatment.
The Energy Department said that it had been conducting an investigation since last September and that it had asked its inspector general to become involved. According to two experts on health care at Hanford, among the subjects under investigation are a doctor's accusations that her patients' records at a contract clinic had been tampered with.
The clinic, the Hanford Environmental Health Foundation, has denied wrongdoing. In a statement, it said it ''categorically rejects any implication that its worker-oriented medical approach has been compromised.'' The clinic said it was ''an honest broker of health-care services for Hanford workers, exercising independent judgment as to whether a worker's condition is actually related to occupational causes.''
The clinic held the contract for 38 years, recently losing a competition to renew it.
A spokesman for the Energy Department, Joseph H. Davis, said that the officials in charge of awarding the contract were not aware of the allegations or the investigation and that other bids ''offered a better product or better value for taxpayers' dollars.''
Mr. Davis said other unsuccessful bidders were appealing the awarding of the contract to AdvanceMed, part of Computer Sciences of El Segundo, Calif.
Representative James C. Greenwood, the Pennsylvania Republican who is chairman of the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, has asked the Energy Department to respond to reports that the Hanford clinic had mishandled medical records. In a letter to the department, Mr. Greenwood also said he wanted it to address accusations that officials had ''intimidated workers who have requested medical attention and suppressed workers' efforts to make compensation claims related to tank farm exposure illness.''
He said the accusations indicated that information on exposure to chemical vapors had been suppressed.
Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, said, ''The situation is too murky to trust the Department of Energy's self-investigation, and the sooner some independent eyes are trained on Hanford worker safety, the better.''
Mr. Wyden pointed out that Hanford had a joint panel formed by contractors, the State of Washington and nuclear safety groups to discuss safety but that the contractors disbanded it in May.
Heart of America Northwest has been one of the groups that focuses on the health and environmental dangers at Hanford, near Richland. Its executive director, Gerald M. Pollet, said the Energy Department and contractors, particularly the clinic, had long ignored the risks to clean up workers exposed to beryllium, a metal used to make bombs.
Eighty-four workers have been sensitized to beryllium, meaning they are at risk for contracting chronic beryllium disease, an incurable lung condition diagnosed in 21 workers so far, said doctors who treat the Hanford employees.
Mr. Pollet said his organization had asked the state attorney general's office to expand its inquiry to include other health risks to Hanford workers. He added that the group had documented numerous instances of workers with beryllium sensitivity being assigned to work in buildings where the metal was present.
The health contractor, Mr. Pollet said, had done little to protect them adequately from further exposure that could lead to the disease, even after the Energy Department allocated millions of dollars in recent years for a prevention program that was supposed to include comprehensive testing.
''That is unconscionable,'' Mr. Pollet said. ''It means they are not practicing the most simple preventive medicine.''
