Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg is making a push to block state funding for new rail cars on the Metro-North commuter railroad, setting the stage for another city-versus-suburbs battle.
The mayor is trying to exert influence on an obscure state panel that has the power to deny the $230 million in financing that the Metropolitan Transportation Authority needs for the new rail cars. He is also considering going to court over the issue if necessary, according to a senior aide to Mr. Bloomberg who spoke only on condition of anonymity.
''That's an option that is being researched by lawyers,'' said the aide, who is involved in shaping the city's strategy. ''This issue is very serious. It needs to be dealt with, one way or another.''
The mayor's aggressive tactics contrast with his defense of the authority's decision to raise transit fares last year, a move that infuriated many New Yorkers, who said he failed to fight for city transit riders.
The issue this time involves the authority's request for funds to speed up an existing plan to add new rail cars to Metro-North, which has had severe weather-related problems this winter. The mayor has lashed out at the plan several times, accusing the authority of caring more about suburban commuters than city bus riders.
More specifically, he has argued that the borrowing would change the formula used to share the authority's capital spending each year. The usual split of 75 percent to 25 percent favoring New York City Transit over the commuter railroads would shift to 72 to 28.
The mayor is also motivated by a mixture of issues that have strained relations recently between the regional authority and City Hall.
The city has been unable to wrest an agreement from the authority to take over operation of seven private bus lines that cost the city as much as $150 million a year to subsidize. The authority has agreed in principle to a takeover of the ailing lines but not without some financial assistance from the city, and Mr. Bloomberg is reluctant to provide it.
In addition, it remains to be seen whether the authority will agree to help finance a $1.7 billion subway extension for the Bloomberg administration's West Side redevelopment plan. The authority also has not yet said how much money it wants for development rights it controls at that site and at a Brooklyn location where the city wants to see a new basketball arena built.
The authority's decision last month to amend its capital budget to add financing for the Metro-North cars brought the matter to a head.
The mayor is attempting to derail the financing plan before the state's Capital Program Review Board, which must approve the borrowing. The governor, the Assembly speaker, the Senate majority leader and the mayor each has an appointee on the board, any one of whom can veto a request for funds. Normally, the city does not cast a vote on requests for Metro-North or the Long Island Rail Road, only on expenditures for New York City Transit.
The city is basing its argument largely on a change that the authority made several years ago in the way it structures its debt. Barriers were dropped that once prevented authority funds dedicated to city transit from being used to secure bonds issued for capital projects involving the commuter railroads.
Because of that change, the city maintains that it now has a legitimate financial interest in suburban projects, and therefore should be allowed a vote on the financing request for the Metro-North cars. Anticipating that the board will refuse to recognize its veto, the administration has been laying the groundwork for a possible lawsuit to try to enforce it.
In addition, the mayor has been lobbying Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver to wield his veto, relieving the city of the need to cast its own, contested vote. Charles Carrier, a spokesman for Mr. Silver, would say only that the speaker was ''reviewing and asking questions'' about the authority's financing request.
The board members have until Sunday to act on it, but city and authority officials say a decision is likely by tomorrow.
On one level, the mayor's opposition to the new Metro-North cars is another in a long line of spats between New York City and its suburban neighbors, often motivated by city budget politics.
Last year, Mr. Bloomberg lobbied hard, to no avail, for Albany to reinstate a tax on suburban residents who commute to their jobs in New York City.
City officials complain that the new capital-spending formula shortchanges the city and could become permanent, potentially affecting negotiations over the bus lines, since the authority would be taking on hundreds of millions of dollars in new capital costs for those services.
Tom Kelly, a spokesman for the authority, said it has assured the city that the formula shift is only temporary. He also pointed out that the authority diverted funds for an emergency purchase of subway cars five years ago.
Meanwhile, negotiations between the authority and city over the bus lines continue. Gene Russianoff, staff attorney for the Straphangers Campaign, a transit riders' advocacy group, said he agreed with the mayor's newly energized push for an authority takeover of the buses, but not without continued subsidies.
''Otherwise,'' Mr. Russianoff said, ''it's just a tactic to stick the riding public with a $150 million bill.''
