WHEN it comes to Oscar memories, Samuel Goldwyn Jr. has more than his share. There are the two Academy Award ceremonies he produced in the late 1980's, including the 1987 ceremony in which the 79-year-old Bette Davis presented an award in such a rambling, ad hoc manner that the president of the academy, Robert Wise, was poised to walk onstage to assist her.
''That was our big screw-up, when it seemed like Miss Davis was just this senile old woman,'' Mr. Goldwyn, 77, said. ''But everyone thought it was great when she finally opened the envelope and called out 'Paul Newman.' '' After seven nominations, he had won for ''The Color of Money.''
Mr. Goldwyn has memories of Oscar ceremonies attended by his father, Samuel Goldwyn, who produced more than 100 movies, including ''Wuthering Heights,'' ''Guys and Dolls'' and ''Porgy and Bess,'' before his death in 1974. It was not until 1947, when Sam Goldwyn was 67, that he won a best picture Oscar for ''The Best Years of Our Lives,'' his sixth nomination.
''My father had had his heart broken when 'Wuthering Heights' lost to 'Gone With the Wind,' '' the younger Mr. Goldwyn said. That was in 1940. ''He came home with the Oscar, sat down in the living room and just started to cry.''
Today, the gold statuette sits upstairs in the 11,000-square-foot Georgian-style house built here by his father on a two-acre lot he bought in 1925. And here Mr. Goldwyn Jr. -- who received his first best-picture Oscar nomination this year, for ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World'' -- now lives.
His father, a highly regarded gambler, repeatedly mortgaged the house to finance his films. Putting your family home on the line to make movies -- now, that's Hollywood.
''My mother hated using the house that way,'' Mr. Goldwyn said in the dark wood-paneled library that was once his father's screening room. ''And I remember the days he would come home and tell us he'd paid off the loan. I would get a little glass of beer to celebrate.'' On Sunday, Mr. Goldwyn will have another opportunity to celebrate and to add a new chapter to his family's history. Accompanied by Catherine, the oldest of his six children, he will attend the Academy Awards ceremony. He made the $135 million adaptation of Patrick O'Brian's seafaring novels in partnership with 20th Century Fox, and the movie, which was directed by Peter Weir, has 10 nominations, including best director and best picture.
''The Oscars are a lot different when you are a nominee,'' he said. ''You walk around with this big smile on your face, and everyone, even people who work for rival film companies, tells you they voted for you. But when you're a Hollywood brat like I was, and you've grown up in all this, you never really imagine yourself as part of it.''
Sitting in the library, where a large-screen television has replaced the projection booth, Mr. Goldwyn looks every inch the Hollywood scion. Six foot three, dressed in a black turtleneck sweater and gray trousers and with his silver hair swept back, he resembles not so much his father -- famous for hand-tailored Sulka suits and an explosive temper -- as a combination of Kirk Douglas and Paul Newman. Mr. Goldwyn also has a serenity unusual for Hollywood.
There is no constantly ringing cellphone, no beeping BlackBerry or hovering personal assistant, just the soft buzz of the intercom when his chef summons him and this writer to lunch in the formal dining room.
''Sam is very old school,'' said Tom Rothman, chairman of 20th Century Fox and a Goldwyn employee in the 1980's. ''He doesn't trade on his father's name. He comes from an era when producers made genuine aesthetic judgments and not just deals.''
He grew up here, the only son of a Polish glovemaker turned producer and his second wife, Frances Howard. His father was a fierce independent, whose involvement with studios ended when Goldwyn Pictures Corporation, his production company, became part of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in 1924.
The younger Mr. Goldwyn has been an equally independent producer for half a century, with movies to his credit like ''Mystic Pizza,'' ''The Madness of King George,'' ''Wild at Heart'' and ''Stranger Than Paradise.'' Last month, Samuel Goldwyn Films bought the documentary ''Super Size Me,'' which had been shown at the Sundance Film Festival. But Mr. Goldwyn came to his career relatively late.
Growing up in the long shadow cast by his father, who began life as Schmuel Gelbfisz, Mr. Goldwyn left Hollywood as a teenager. ''Leaving that house was the best decision I ever made,'' he said. He attended prep school in Colorado and the University of Virginia and after an Army stint worked as a theatrical producer in London and for Edward R. Murrow at CBS in New York.
''I left home at 15 because Hollywood isn't the best place to grow up,'' he said. But producing drew him, ''because like my father, I like putting something together.''
He returned to Hollywood in the early 1950's, when his father's career was going into decline, and started his own production company in 1955. He lived in Brentwood with his first wife, the actress Jennifer Howard, and their four children: Catherine; Frances; John, who stepped down as the president of Paramount Pictures in November; and Tony, an actor (''The Last Samurai'') and a director, whose credits include ''A Walk on the Moon.'' On weekends, he would drive his wife and children 10 miles to his parents' house for dinners and Saturday tennis.
''My grandparents lived in another world,'' said Tony Goldwyn, who was 14 when his grandfather died. ''They had a chauffeur named Hans, a French maid named Antoinette, who answered the door in a gray uniform, and we used to get dressed up in our best clothes for our regular weekly dinners there. It was like stepping back in time.''
But Mr. Goldwyn Jr. said his father earned the right to that standard of living. ''He'd walked across Europe when he was 13 years old,'' he said. ''He had that determination to really make something out of Schmuel Gelbfisz.''
Mr. Goldwyn brought a similar determination to ''Master and Commander.'' He bought the rights to the novels in 1992, but had difficulty finding a top-flight director and actor.
''Sam had many opportunities to make the film with more workmanlike directors, but he felt it was exceptional material that required an exceptional director,'' Mr. Rothman said. Mr. Weir came on board and so did Russell Crowe to play the ship's captain, Jack Aubrey. Mr. Goldwyn is still chagrined that the academy ignored Mr. Crowe.
And though the movie received 10 Oscar nominations, Mr. Goldwyn does not expect to be making his way up the aisle. ''There's nothing for me to do at the Oscars but sit there and when they announce 'Lord of the Rings' look very pleased and say, 'It's the right thing to do,' '' he said with a laugh.
He brings a similar lack of pretense to living in the fabled house. ''People come here expecting a museum, but this is a family home, where we celebrate Christmas and birthdays and Father's Day,'' he said. He met me at his forest-green front door and led me on a rare tour of the ground floor, the grand foyer, the formal living and dining rooms, a card room and the library -- and of the expansive grounds, which include the pool and tennis court.
Although none of the furniture, save a pedestal table in the foyer, is original, the house remains much as it was during his parents' time. ''It's slightly jerry-built in such a way that you can't really change anything short of tearing it down,'' he said, adding that he and his second wife, Peggy Elliot, with whom he had two more children, Peter and Elizabeth, merely redecorated a bit when they moved in, in 1976. (His wife now lives elsewhere.)
It was his mother's deathbed request that her only child take possession of the house. She said, 'I want you to try living here,' '' Mr. Goldwyn said. ''I just never moved out.''
Tony Goldwyn says his father's commitment to the house, which with its lot is worth at least $10 million today, goes much deeper. ''I don't think he could bear to let it go,'' he said. ''His father was a major force in his life and still is.''
It was his father's dream house, atop a knoll off Coldwater Canyon. ''Land was really cheap in those days,'' Mr. Goldwyn said, speaking of 1925. But it took the Goldwyns until 1934 to finish building the house. Mr. Goldwyn was 8 when they finally moved in.
For the next 40 years, it would be the site for some of Hollywood's most memorable gatherings, tennis matches, poker games with Eddie Cantor, Harpo and Zeppo Marx, dinner parties where his mother, a former model, famously presided. At the first New Year's Eve party in the house, Gary Cooper, Cole Porter, Jack Benny, Frank Capra, Clark Gable and Marlene Dietrich gathered for a midnight Champagne supper. ''You always knew where you stood in Hollywood by where you sat at the Goldywn table,'' Katharine Hepburn once remarked.
Young Sam met the greats in passing, like Bette Davis, Charlie Chaplin, George Cukor and Irving Berlin. (And Mary Berlin, the songwriter's daughter, was Mr. Goldwyn's closest childhood friend.) But during those celebrated dinner parties, Sam Goldwyn Jr. ate in the kitchen with the cook. ''People always say to me, it must have been wonderful coming from old Hollywood, with all those movie stars, but I never knew anyone,'' he said, pausing in the hallway to study a silver-framed photograph of his father with Charlie Chaplin and himself as a boy. ''I didn't know who Charlie Chaplin was. My parents really kept me away from it all.''
Mr. Goldwyn, with four of his six children living in Los Angeles, and several of his nine grandchildren, exudes contentment with the old family place. ''The house is much lighter than when my parents lived here,'' he said, gesturing around the lemon-colored living room. ''One of the things my kids got a kick out of when I moved in here was they could eat fried chicken sitting on the floor.''
Although he has never invited press coverage, at least twice a week Mr. Goldwyn is the host to dinner parties for friends and colleagues in his formal dining room. Tomorrow, he will entertain everyone who worked on ''Master and Commander.''
''I feel comfortable here, and I want people to feel that,'' he said. ''It's nice to be able to touch your roots.''
Where Bette Davis Became a Poker Debt
TENNIS landed in Hollywood with a thwack in the 1920's, with the arrival of English writers, directors and stars like Ronald Colman. Hollywood strivers then adopted tennis along with English accents, akin to buying from Ralph Lauren today. Movie moguls like Louis B. Mayer and Jack Warner turned their courts into an extension of the office. ''It was a status symbol for them and more,'' said Marc Wanamaker, a Los Angeles historian with an expertise in Hollywood.
Samuel Goldwyn Jr.'s tennis court was built, like the house, in 1934. It sits on concrete pylons suspended over a steep canyon. ''The court is one of the reasons I wanted to move back into the house,'' said Mr. Goldywn, who grew up playing weekly matches there and resumed his Saturday afternoon games when he returned to Los Angeles in the 50's. ''I've played on that court since I was 11,'' he said. ''It has a really neat sound that I just love.''
In his parents' day, the court was the site of lawn parties. Between sets it was a place for schmoozing and perhaps a game of poker. A 2001 documentary, ''Goldwyn: The Man and His Movies,'' related how Mr. Goldwyn's father got Bette Davis for ''The Little Foxes'' from Jack Warner because of a poker debt. ''The tennis court was where deals were made,'' Mr. Wanamaker said.
Most of the moguls' courts are gone. Pickfair (the 15-acre estate of Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks) had a tennis court, but it was sold. Pickfair, reduced to 2.2 acres, is on the market for $27 million, with a city to ocean view and an 11,000-square-foot house, but no tennis court. The Goldwyn tennis court, where Mr. Wanamaker said you would once find ''the Who's Who of Hollywood,'' remains.
HILARY DE VRIES
AT HOME WITH: SAMUEL GOLDWYN JR. Hilary de Vries is the author of the Hollywood satire ''So 5 Minutes Ago'' (Villard).
