Israeli forces raided Arab banks on Wednesday in Ramallah, on the West Bank, seizing millions of dollars representing hundreds of institutional and personal accounts that Israel said were financing Palestinian terrorism.
It was by far the largest such seizure during more than three years of conflict. Witnesses said soldiers covered the banks' security cameras with black plastic bags and herded all the employees together before ordering workers with keys to open the vaults.
Israeli officials defended the operation, which was still under way late Wednesday, as aimed carefully at terrorist financing and in line with President Bush's call for action against such funds.
But Amin Haddad, the head of the Palestinian Monetary Authority, called the raid a robbery intended to ''shake our banking system.'' He rejected Israeli assertions that the accounts were linked to terrorism.
In Washington, the State Department criticized the raid. ''Some of these actions that were taken risk destabilizing the Palestinian banking system,'' said Richard A. Boucher, the department spokesman. ''So we'd prefer to see Israeli coordination with the Palestinian financial authorities.''
A senior Israeli security official said the money, in various currencies, was still being counted. He said that the total was probably between $6.7 million and $9 million, and that the amount taken from the vaults equaled the sums held in what Israeli intelligence had identified as suspect accounts.
Palestinian and Israeli security officials said the Israelis entered branches of the Arab Bank and the Cairo Amman Bank, which are both Jordanian. Palestinian officials said the Israeli troops brought bank computer experts who had been arrested overnight Tuesday to help guide them through the systems.
The action, which was led by the Shin Bet security service and included Israeli police forces and the army, recalled Israel's approach to controlling the occupied territories more than a decade ago, before the Oslo peace process began. It demonstrated the extent of the breakdown between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, which was formed under the Oslo accords to govern and police Palestinians in areas like Ramallah.
Israeli officials said the raid also pointed to the changing nature of Palestinian militant groups, which they said were becoming less ideological and more entrepreneurial, with perpetrators earning specific sums for particular attacks.
The senior security official said interrogations of arrested militants showed that an attack might bring its Palestinian planners a minimum of 3,000 to 5,000 shekels, or $673 to $1,122. He also said Israeli intelligence indicated that much of the seized money had come from Iran, funneled through the Lebanese guerrilla group Hezbollah.
The Israeli defense minister, Shaul Mofaz, released a statement late Wednesday saying the seized money would be spent on ''humanitarian goals in Palestinian society,'' like health services, food and ''improving the infrastructure at crossing points and checkpoints.''
The banks were silent about the incident.
In January 2003, Israeli forces took about $7,000 from a branch of the Arab Bank in a Palestinian neighborhood just outside Jerusalem. Officials knowledgeable about the incident said the Bush administration privately rebuked Israel after Jordan complained.
Mr. Haddad, the banker, was voluble in his criticism, saying: ''This is against all laws and norms. They acted like gangs.''
Israeli officials said they had alerted Palestinian officials before storming the banks, but Mr. Haddad denied any advance warning. Mr. Boucher said, ''According to both Palestinians and Israelis, the operation was not coordinated in any way with the Palestinian financial authorities.''
The senior Israeli security official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the Palestinian Authority briefly froze some accounts linked to terrorism last year, but then unfroze them. He said that the Palestinian Authority was not helping Israel at all with counterterrorism and that there was no chance it would have helped in this case.
Raanan Gissin, a spokesman for Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, said the Israeli action might benefit the Palestinian Authority by weakening rivals like Hamas and Islamic Jihad. ''We're actually providing the opportunity for the Palestinian Authority to regain control,'' he said.
Asked for the legal basis for the operation, Israeli officials cited a directive from the Israeli military commander in the area. They said that the Israeli attorney general consulted on the details, and that Israeli forces took care to avoid provoking a financial panic by seizing only accounts they had identified in advance.
Israeli officials said Palestinians whose accounts were emptied would have the right to appeal the seizure. The largest such account was about $22,000, the senior official said.
Palestinians do not have deposit insurance, and it was not immediately clear who would bear the losses. Mr. Haddad said, ''The banks who the money was stolen from are responsible for the safety of the deposits.''
The senior Israeli official said the Israelis had emptied three types of accounts, institutional, personal and family. He cited examples of each: An account held by the Charity Association of Jenin, which he identified as a Hamas front; an account held by a man in Nablus he called a fugitive militant; and an account held by the family of another militant, an account he said held money paid for suicide bombings.
Israeli officials say that over the past year, Hezbollah has significantly increased its financing and direction of all major Palestinian militant groups. The senior official said that Hezbollah paid specifically for each attack, and that interrogations of arrested militants had disclosed an evolving list of prices, which varied depending on whether victims were killed or wounded.
He said one militant reported receiving about 10,000 shekels, or $2,237, for planning a suicide bombing last March in Netanya that wounded more than 30 people.
As Israeli forces moved in Wednesday morning, the army put the center of Ramallah under curfew. Dozens of Palestinians threw stones at the soldiers, who responded by firing rubber-coated steel pellets, the army said. Palestinian hospital officials reported 17 people wounded, three seriously. They said some wounds were caused by live ammunition.
[Two Palestinian gunmen were shot and killed Thursday by Israeli security officers after the gunmen killed an Israeli during a raid on an industrial zone along the Gaza Strip border, Reuters reported.]
