The New York State court system announced yesterday that it planned to begin making criminal and civil legal records available on the Internet, leaping ahead of many other states and government agencies.
The project, which will be phased in over five years, includes some limitations set to protect individual rights to privacy. For example, the courts will not release family court cases, matrimonial actions and case files that are sealed or otherwise not already open for public inspection, officials said. And the online records will not contain complete Social Security numbers, financial account information, birth dates or the names of children.
The responsibility for omitting material like the names of sexual assault victims or information about cooperating witnesses will fall on those who represent the concerned parties. Judges, as well, will continue to have discretion over deleting information.
But briefs, criminal complaints, lawsuits and anything else that already is considered public information will be fair game, making the new policy a step beyond what has become commonplace in court systems, like the online publishing of schedules, calendars, news releases and judicial decisions, something even the New York courts do now.
The limitations on private information are a response to controversies elsewhere about the online publication of information like motor vehicle records, voter registration data and court files. For example, Internet efforts in Cincinnati and Florida have been met with complaints and disagreement, and ultimately, rethinking.
''This will play a significant role in making the courts comprehensible to the public,'' said Jonathan Lippman, the state's chief administrative judge. ''We are one of the few states doing this on the individual case record basis. It's consistent with what we feel should be the openness of the courts.''
Judge Lippman said the new policy most closely resembled the electronic availability of state court records in Colorado. (Its online court records have been updated daily since 2000, said Linda Bowers, the court's public access manager. She said the experience had been positive.)
Judge Lippman continued: ''While the records are open now, remember they're sitting in basements in courthouses with dust all over them, and you have to go to the court and find them. That's very different from the openness and accessibility you have in the modern technological age.''
But questions remain: Can a record ever be expunged from the Internet? Could names be lifted for improper purposes? Removing the inconvenience of having to go to a courthouse could create new problems with privacy and discrimination that need to be monitored, critics say.
''It's a good idea in principle to make public records accessible to the public, but as with so many technical advances, it's hard to predict the problems that will arrive,'' said Donna Lieberman, the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union.
She raised the hypothetical example of a landlord who might have never invested time in searching actual court records, but who now could routinely check online to see whether prospective tenants have ever been involved in a lawsuit.
To examine issues like this, Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye appointed a 22-member commission headed by Floyd Abrams, the First Amendment lawyer, to study the issue. The commission included advocates for defendants and plaintiffs, representatives of the judiciary, and business groups, and journalists, among others. It held three public hearings. ''The courts must adapt to this modern reality,'' Judge Kaye said in a statement released yesterday.
