It is the Baltic Avenue of Yankeeland, the one spot on the field where the starter does not make even $1 million and has never made an All-Star team. When the Yankees traded Alfonso Soriano to the Texas Rangers for Alex Rodriguez, they left themselves without an established second baseman. And for now, they are not even looking for one.
George Steinbrenner could always decide that the Yankees need to lure Joe Morgan out of retirement or rouse Nap Lajoie from the dead. But the Yankees seem comfortable offering a prestigious everyday job to one of three players who expected nothing more than a backup role this season.
Enrique Wilson, Miguel Cairo and Homer Bush are the candidates Manager Joe Torre mentions when talking about his opening at second base. Torre is most familiar with Wilson, who is entering his fourth season with the Yankees. But Cairo has the most experience at second base, and Bush -- a spirited reserve on the Yankees' 1998 World Series championship team -- is a sentimental favorite.
Torre has said that Wilson has the inside track to start, but that he will take a close look at the others -- including the newly acquired Mike Lamb, who is usually a third baseman. Defense will count the most.
''We have to look at the defensive end of it,'' Torre said. ''To me, that's very important. I'm assuming, with the offensive potential that we have, you certainly want the middle of the infield to be as strong as you can.''
After Aaron Boone tore up his left knee playing basketball on Jan. 16, General Manager Brian Cashman scrounged the market for third basemen. But when Rodriguez agreed to play third and the Yankees traded for him, the third-base candidates shifted to second. One of them, Tyler Houston, never reported to camp and was cut.
Of the candidates, Wilson could receive the most justice in the job opening. When shortstop Derek Jeter dislocated his shoulder on opening night last season, Wilson expected to fill in while Jeter was out. But Torre preferred to give a rookie, Erick Almonte, a look instead.
Wilson never held that against Almonte and never complained to Torre. ''I'm not a selfish player,'' Wilson said. But the chance he missed last season is there for him again, and Wilson is eager to prove himself.
''I always want to play every day,'' said Wilson, 30, who has 339 at-bats in two and a half seasons with the Yankees. ''I never get the chance. This is an opportunity to show people that I can play every day. I'm not going to say I'm going to do something like Alex or Jeter. But I'm going to do my best.''
The Yankees signed Cairo, 29, to a one-year contract in December. Cairo was the Tampa Bay Devil Rays' regular second baseman from 1998 to 2000, and he played every position but pitcher, catcher and center fielder for the St. Louis Cardinals last season. The Yankees offered him $900,000 -- more than he had made in his eight-year career -- and Cairo jumped at it.
''When the Yankees offer you a job,'' Cairo said, ''you don't think twice.''
John Flaherty, the Yankees' backup catcher, worked out with Cairo this winter and played with him for Tampa Bay. Flaherty said Cairo would fit in with the Yankees' modest goals for second base.
''He's going to be a real good player on a good team,'' Flaherty said. ''If you're not asking a lot of him as far as carrying the load offensively, he's a really, really nice complementary player. His defense is strong, and he turns the double play quickly. He's a very good base runner. Offensively, he's not going to hit the ball out a lot, but he's got a line-drive stroke, he's a contact hitter and he sprays the ball around the field. He's a good, solid guy.''
Bush left the Yankees on the eve of spring training in 1999, when he was traded to Toronto in the deal that sent Roger Clemens to the Yankees. Bush was the Blue Jays' regular second baseman that season, batting .320 with 32 stolen bases and earning a three-year contract.
Bush has not had 300 at-bats in a season since 1999, and by the end of 2002, he said, ''My career was heading south really quick.'' He spent last season at home in Dallas, rehabilitating a sore hip and watching major league games every night.
By December, Bush was ready to return to baseball. He left a phone message at the Yankees' minor league complex and was soon invited to Tampa for a three-day tryout. The Yankees liked what they saw and signed him to a minor league deal.
Because he is not on the 40-man roster, Bush said he thought he was a long shot to break camp with the team. He said he was grateful to be here at a time when other players who were active last season have struggled to find jobs.
''My No. 1 goal is to come here, show that I'm healthy, and whatever they do with me, I'm O.K. with it,'' Bush said. ''If I show them I'm healthy, hopefully they can use my services at some point.''
Whoever plays second base, the certainty is that the player will bat ninth. For opposing pitchers, it will seem like a National League lineup with a soft spot at the end. There is no denying that, even to the candidates.
''This team is loaded,'' Wilson said. ''The pitchers, they're going to forget about me.''
INSIDE PITCH
DARRYL STRAWBERRY said in a statement that he was resigning his new appointment as a player development instructor for the Yankees to concentrate on his duties for Without Walls International Church. ''While I truly love baseball, my focus and passion now are outreach to the community and youth evangelism,'' the statement said. ''I greatly appreciate the encouragement and support given to me and my family by Mr. Steinbrenner and the Yankees, and I remain committed to helping the Yankees in any way I can whenever possible.'' . . . PAUL WILLIAMS, the Fenway Park groundskeeper who was involved in a bullpen fight with KARIM GARCIA and JEFF NELSON during last season's American League Championship Series with the Yankees, is suing them in Suffolk Superior Court in Boston for $33,785 to cover medical bills and lost wages. Williams said he sustained broken teeth, neck and nose injuries, and cleat marks on his back, arms and head.
BASEBALL
