It has been nearly two centuries since audiences responded to the music of Antonio Salieri with cheers, stomping and demands for more. But the mezzo-soprano Cecilia Bartoli can sell just about anything, and on Tuesday evening at Carnegie Hall she and the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment -- one of the better British period instrument bands -- made a dozen of of Salieri's arias and a handful of his orchestral works sound like the most magnificent music ever composed, and the audience ate it up.
The concert was a measure of Ms. Bartoli's ingenuity and musical curiosity. She could of course spend her time outside the opera house singing recitals of favorite arias. She was quite successful doing just that early in her career, and the repertory is big enough to sustain a reasonable rotation over many years. But a few years ago Ms. Bartoli decided to explore some unusual byways, including Vivaldi opera and now Salieri.
In both cases she has recorded music that has been largely untouched in modern times, and then, taking a page from the rock world, toured to promote the discs. Her Carnegie Hall program was drawn largely from ''The Salieri Album'' (Decca), and she remained on hand after the concert to autograph copies.
Salieri was a composer of considerable stature in his day (he lived from 1750 to 1825), but was overshadowed by Mozart and Beethoven, and was presented as the symbol of competent mediocrity in Peter Shaffer's ''Amadeus.'' It seems unlikely that even as charismatic a performer as Ms. Bartoli can renovate his reputation completely, but her recording and concerts are certainly a start.
Her choice of dramatic, comic and intensely introspective arias showed the considerable range of this composer's work, as well as a gift for melody and effect in cases, for instance, like ''Amor, Pietoso Amore'' and ''Contro un'Alma sventurata.'' Both are as original and as moving as anything his contemporaries produced. But Ms. Bartoli's own contributions are not to be underestimated: anything sung with the ardor and nuance that she brought to those arias is going to be irresistible.
There were seductions of other kinds as well. ''Se Lo Dovessi Vendere,'' ''Non Vo' Già Che Vi Suonino'' and her final encore, ''La Ra La,'' were pictures of comic timing. And there was ample dramatic heat in her readings of ''Gelosia, Dispetto e Sdegno'' and ''Ah Sia Già.''
Technical facility has long been a given for Ms. Bartoli, but even so there was much to admire in her floated pianissimo passages and the crystalline clarity she brought to Salieri's stretches of fiery fioratura.
The orchestra's contribution should not be overlooked. In the arias, it provided finely textured support, and in a set of ''Variations on 'La Folia di Spagna''' as well as a handful of overtures, it chipped away further at Salieri's undeserved reputation as an unimaginative composer.
MUSIC REVIEW
