FOR Sunday brunch there was turkey, sweet potatoes, carrots, pot pie and Granny Smith apples. It was followed by dessert -- half an apple and fudge.
''He'll eat anything,'' said Maddy Tarnofsky, slicing pieces of the carob fudge in her cramped warren of a kitchen, ''but he seems to really like this stuff. It has very little chemicals or preservatives. I watch his food more than my own because it is my responsibility.''
Ms. Tarnofsky, 55, loves her dog. Her apartment on the Upper West Side has her pet's numerous stuffed animals strewn about the floor and on the couch. In her bedroom is a large box with more doggy playthings. And when the big black Labrador, named Moose Ann -- ''a name that came to me in a dream,'' she admitted -- rumbled across the room, he leapt on the people in the room.
''Down!'' she said to her dog, without producing any response. ''Down!''
''As you can see, he is quite obedient,'' she apologized.
The dog, his tongue hanging out of his mouth and his breath redolent of the mixture of foods he had noisily gulped down, put his paws on the chair and his head on the table.
''Moose Ann,'' Ms. Tarnofsky said sternly.
She turned to explain.
''When I get mad at him I use his middle name.''
If you end up with a dog's life, this is not a bad one. Ms. Tarnofsky not only lavishes motherly care on her dog, but is also a lawyer who specializes in battling landlords who want to evict tenants because of pets or, more often than not, multiple pets. But then the term ''pet'' grates on her. She prefers ''family member.''
''I can put myself in their shoes,'' she said, referring to her clients. ''I know what it would mean to have a landlord say, 'You go or your dog goes.' I know how it would feel to have a landlord try and make you get rid of what is basically a family member. This is why the shelters are so full. People are frightened. They think they don't have a choice.''
Oh, but they do have a choice, as long as they can pay the legal fees. Ms. Tarnofsky, a small spark plug of a woman with Little Orphan Annie curly red hair and bright red nail polish on her fingers and toes -- she sat for an interview barefoot -- has built her career by keeping ''family members'' with their owners and quashing eviction attempts.
''There was a lovely man on the East Side,'' she began, in one of numerous stories about clients, all of whom were described as ''lovely.''
''He was a professional dog walker. He had seven dogs of his own. He also ran a doggy day care center. He lived in a one-room apartment. It had no furniture. It was an empty space. He slept in a loft. He devoted his life to animals. He loved animals, his own and other people's.''
And then the eviction threat came, the charges that the dogs were a public nuisance, that they made too much noise and smelled.
Her voice dipped and took on a tone of disgust as she recounted the case.
''When they claim odors I make house calls,'' she said, ''but of course it was untrue. These dogs were trained. I asked the judge to come inspect the apartment. It took about a minute for the judge to get down on her knees and begin playing and hugging the pets. It was a great moment in legal history. There is no law that limits the number of pets you can have.''
There have been cases she has not taken, such as the elderly woman who kept flocks of pigeons in her apartment.
''There was a lovely woman,'' she began as usual. ''She was an artist. The landlord claimed she was feeding pigeons on her terrace and on her roof. He said the pigeon droppings were eroding the roof.''
Her client, although lovely, was ''also a little quirky.''
''She didn't have a phone,'' she said. ''She lived on a top floor walk-up. When I opened the door it was very, very dark. My eyes were adjusting to the light, and I could not see. All I could hear was this ''
She stood up and began to flutter the pages of a notebook.
''There were dozens of pigeons walking and flying around,'' she said. ''There was newspaper and toilet paper all over the floor. The landlord didn't know about this. He had only complained about the outside.''
SHE came to the law late in life after spending years in New York trying to be an actress, getting small parts and making a living mostly as a waitress. She attended law school in her late 30's and after she passed the bar in 1988 at age 40, worked in a firm that specialized in defending tenants. She began to take the cases involving pets. She has been in private practice for about a decade.
She loves musicals and played the songs from ''Oklahoma,'' a show she has seen three times, while she spoke. It was her dream as a young girl in Chicago to come to New York and find her place on the stage. But the stage did not repay her loyalty, not like Moose Ann and her two previous dogs, all in picture frames next to photographs of her parents. She let the remains of her first dog, Max, be disposed of, something she said will never happen again.
''My second dog, Rocky, is still here,'' she said. ''I have his ashes in the bedroom.''
PUBLIC LIVES
