Glen Sather stepped down as the head coach of the Rangers on Wednesday, tossing one of his three job titles overboard as the team heads toward its seventh consecutive season without a playoff berth, four of them with him in charge.
Sather, 60, took a combative posture at times in announcing his decision, but he vowed to remain as the team's president and general manager for the remaining three years of his contract.
Sather's top assistant, Tom Renney, who was Vancouver's coach from June 1996 to November 1997, was named the interim coach for the Rangers' final 20 games.
At the team's practice facility Wednesday, Sather acknowledged that the ''Fire Sather!'' chants that had erupted at Rangers games at Madison Square Garden for more than a month had been a factor in his stepping aside as coach, a position he held since January 2003.
He said that the chanting ''was distracting for the players'' and that ''they seemed to get uptight.''
With Sather remaining the Rangers' key decision maker, it is possible that those chants will grow louder when the team plays its next home game, on Tuesday night against Atlanta. Before then, the Rangers will play three games on the road, beginning with a game on Thursday night at Nassau Coliseum against the Islanders, a team they have dominated in an otherwise inept season.
At 22-29-7-4, the Rangers are in 12th place in the Eastern Conference, with almost no chance of working their way into one of the eight playoff spots. Over two seasons, they were 33-39-11-7 under Sather, who replaced Bryan Trottier as coach less than a year after Trottier had been brought in to replace Ron Low.
Renney is the fourth coach of the Sather regime, which began with high expectations that have not been fulfilled. After Renney put the Rangers through a practice on Wednesday afternoon, Sather said that there were several reasons for giving up coaching and that he had thought about doing so for a while.
''With a couple of weeks before the trading deadline, this will give me the opportunity to concentrate on the other duties that go with this job,'' Sather said.
That deadline is March 9, and the Rangers, with a league-leading payroll of over $80 million, are expected to try to unload any number of high-priced veterans after years of acquiring those kinds of players.
Sather also said he stepped down as coach ''to get some reaction out of the team.'' Although he once again pointed to injuries, especially to several of his defensemen, as the reason for the Rangers' struggles this season, Sather, in the end, took responsibility for the team's poor play.
''I don't think you can blame anybody else but the head coach,'' he said.
Perhaps predictably, Rangers players said it was their fault, not Sather's, that the team was doing so poorly.
''It's because we stink, that's all,'' said Jaromir Jagr, who was obtained from Washington in a Jan. 23 trade in a failed attempt to turn the team around. Because of his huge contract, Jagr is one of a handful of Rangers who are not going anywhere.
But Sather, if he so chooses, could undertake an overhaul of the franchise by attempting to trade veterans like Aleksei Kovalev, Brian Leetch, Petr Nedved, Tom Poti, Martin Rucinsky, Matthew Barnaby, Chris Simon and Boris Mironov. There also appears to be interest in Mark Messier, the Rangers' 43-year-old captain, whose personal playoff drought, with Vancouver and the Rangers, is also in its seventh year. One of the teams interested in Messier is believed to be Detroit.
Sather, the architect of five Stanley Cup championships with the Edmonton Oilers from 1984 to 1990, was brought in to replace Neil Smith as the Rangers' president and general manager before the 2000-1 season. Under Smith, the Rangers won their first Stanley Cup in 54 years, in 1994, but then deteriorated in the late 1990's. And while Sather, like Smith, has had the benefit of a high payroll, the team has not rebounded.
Sather has continued to have the steadfast support of James L. Dolan, the chairman of the Garden and the man who oversees the Rangers and the Knicks. It was Dolan who maintained last month that Sather would be both coach and general manager of the Rangers for the remainder of the season.
In the end, Dolan was wrong. Sather said Wednesday that he met with him on Tuesday afternoon to inform him of his decision, one that Sather insisted was his alone.
''I made it,'' Sather said. ''I would also say I did that in consultation with Mr. Dolan.''
When asked on Wednesday if there were things he would have done differently as coach of the Rangers if he had the chance to do them over again, Sather said he would have to think about it. When asked the same question about his role as general manager, Sather said, ''There are some things I would do differently.''
He added, ''When you look at our team on paper, I still like that team on paper.''
But it is a team he will no longer be coaching when it is likely to be eliminated from postseason contention in the coming weeks.
SLAP SHOTS
Center ERIC LINDROS began his concussion rehabilitation program with some light exercise Wednesday. Lindros, who must be cleared to play, did not speak to reporters.
HOCKEY
