It has been 40 years since Sidney Poitier became the first African-American to win the best actor Oscar, in 1964 for his star turn in ''Lilies of the Field.'' Two years ago Denzel Washington and Halle Berry broke the drought.
Today look at the records of the sequel ''Barbershop 2: Back in Business.'' This month it had the widest opening of an African-American-theme movie ever. It was booked into 2,700 theaters, and the gamble paid off with a gross of $24.2 million, one of the largest February weekends ever.
Still, it's easy to forget that while some things have changed, many more-critical issues have not, like Hollywood's perception of blacks and the concentration of white power behind the camera.
Mr. Poitier's example should be noted in this context, too. The ''Barbershop'' films follow in the footsteps of the 1970's blue-collar comedies that he directed and starred in with Bill Cosby: ''Uptown Saturday Night'' and ''Let's Do It Again.'' His indomitabilty emerged with those films; they bought him new credibility with black audiences after the black action films of the 70's had seemingly shoved him into irrelevancy. (And those films had their influence on rappers in other ways besides helping to make Ice Cube a family-friendly name. Biggie Smalls took his nom de turntable from one of the Mack Daddy villains in ''Let's Do It Again.'')
But other things have stuck with the film industry since Mr. Poitier's day. In the history of the movie studios no African-American has ever had the power to green-light a film. Part of the problem is that the movie business is similar to the Italy of the Medicis; without a patron to offer favor, there's no place to go but down. Mr. Poitier used the production company in which he was a partner with Dustin Hoffman, Barbra Streisand, Paul Newman and Steve McQueen to get those films made, so he didn't have to go hat in hand to raise money. (All the books on the filmmaking vogue, including ''Easy Riders, Raging Bulls,'' ignore the wave of 70's black action films that helped keep the studios flush, a de facto A.T.M. that probably helped finance some of the movies that changed the medium.)
The visibility of ''Barbershop'' comes after a year in which two sizable hits, ''The Italian Job'' and ''S.W.A.T.,'' were directed by African-Americans, F. Gary Gray and Clark Johnson. More important, neither one was distinctly positioned as a black film. It's been quite a journey since 1988, when the studios released their three big films with black principals -- Spike Lee's musical ''School Daze,'' ''Action Jackson'' starring Carl Weathers and ''Shoot to Kill,'' the return of Sidney Poitier after an 11-year absence -- on the same date, Feb. 12, then stood back to watch the clawing.
In its review of ''Barbershop 2,'' Variety noted that ''all theatrical biz will have to be done stateside; first entry earned all of $1.3 million overseas, as international distrib Fox couldn't stir up any interest in the almost entirely verbal ethnic funfest outside of small change in Asia.'' This assessment is a grim reminder of the constraints still generally thought to bind black films. At least the axiomatic $30 million domestic glass ceiling -- the box office figure black films were said rarely to exceed -- has been shattered by several recent movies, among them the first ''Barbershop,'' which made $75 million domestically.
But African-American movies are still considered risky ventures internationally. Then again, so are most comedies because of the language barrier, and their wobbly potential doesn't become a factor in the reporting. The surprise success of Will Smith and Martin Lawrence in the first ''Bad Boys,'' the 1995 action comedy in which they replaced Dana Carvey and Jon Lovitz and started Smith's A-list ascension, should have offered some proof that the ceiling thought to exist for black movies was simply an assumption waiting to be disproved.
Such a condition seems laughable given that America's most powerful cultural export right now is hip-hop. It's the language of the young around the world. In Rome, your French-born cabdriver (who barely speaks English) may be singing along to an OutKast track.
The tides of crossover, especially for film, are engulfing more of the shoreline than ever. F. Gary Gray began his career directing rap and hip-hop videos before moving to ''Friday'' in 1995 and eventually to ''The Italian Job.''
But he wasn't the first black director hired by a studio to handle a film not primarily aimed at black audiences. In the late 1970's, after a filmography that included two Richard Pryor comedies and the seminal 1975 urban comic melodrama ''Cooley High,'' Michael Schultz was brought in to direct a big-budget studio musical, a follow-up from the producer of ''Saturday Night Fever'' and ''Grease''; unfortunately, the picture was ''Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band'' (1978). Blame for its failure shouldn't rest entirely at Schultz's feet, though it may have set the cause back a bit.
The breakthroughs, though, seem to get less traction than the failures. Accomplishment is, as often as not, treated as the exception rather than the rule. Kasi Lemmons's graceful 1997 melodrama ''Eve's Bayou'' helped further the cause of the black art film, an underrepresented genre if ever there was one, essentially pioneered by Spike Lee. The film, which Ms. Lemmons wrote and directed, earned $14 million, no small achievement, especially for a picture that was presumed to have next to no audience. Unlike hip-hop, black art films aren't thought to have crossover potential. There's still a belief that a black film without gunplay won't draw even African-Americans.
Even Denzel Washington's Oscar for ''Training Day'' came for a performance in which he subverted his usual aplomb and pulled the rug from under a genre picture, an action film, in which he played a dirty cop who took pride in his taint.
Both Mr. Washington and Ms. Berry fought their way to their achievements. For Ms. Berry, who labored under what shouldn't be a burden -- being a beautiful African-American woman, which means even fewer roles -- the reward must have been sweeter.
Two years later the fear that their awards would not signal a new age of enlightenment -- or to put it cynically, recognition of a bigger audience -- has been justified. For real sea change in the way the film business regards blacks, there will have to be a shift in the balance of power and in decision-making roles. There's no glass ceiling in the corridors of power. Unfortunately there's a glass wall that prevents entrance for people of color, the last barrier to be sundered.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
