A federal judge in Brooklyn ruled yesterday that an F.B.I. agent made false statements in a sworn application for a search warrant in a drug paraphernalia case. The judge therefore barred prosecutors from using any of the evidence they found during the search.
In the harshly worded decision, the judge, Nicholas G. Garaufis, said the agent, Elvin Quinones, ''recklessly, if not deliberately, disregarded the truth,'' and then gave confused and ''grossly false'' testimony when questioned about his earlier statements.
The unusual ruling left in disarray the government's case against Danny and Richard Teng, the father and son who own a warehouse in College Point, Queens. Much of the evidence against them on charges of conspiracy and trafficking in drug paraphernalia was gathered in May during the search of their warehouse.
Gary G. Becker, a lawyer for the father, said he expected that the prosecutors would be unable to continue with the case. He added that because of what he said were obvious and repeated false statements, ''it would certainly be appropriate for the U.S. attorney's office and the F.B.I. to investigate this misconduct.''
Robert Nardoza, a spokesman for the federal prosecutors in Brooklyn, said only that the prosecutors ''will review the judge's ruling and then make a decision on whether to appeal.''
A spokesman for the F.B.I., Joseph Valiquette, said the bureau's lawyers were reviewing the decision. ''It's not our desire to come to any premature conclusions,'' Mr. Valiquette said. Mr. Quinones, a 17-year veteran with the F.B.I., did not return a call seeking comment.
At a hearing on Tuesday, Mr. Quinones and other F.B.I. agents described going to the Tengs' warehouse after a tip from a drug informant. They said they suspected that the Tengs were suppliers of items like glass and plastic vials and glassine bags of the type used to package heroin and marijuana. Mr. Becker said the Tengs' business was selling bags to businesses.
In his sworn statement requesting the search warrant Mr. Quinones said that he saw ''hundreds of glass crack pipes'' at the warehouse and ''thousands'' of mechanical devices known as ''bullets'' that are used to dispense cocaine powder during inhaling.
During the search, the judge said, the agents found only three bullets. At the hearing, another agent testified that he had told Mr. Quinones that he had seen only ''a couple of them.'' Judge Garaufis noted that Mr. Quinones admitted that he had seen only one or two bullets, not thousands.
Lawyers for the Tengs also noted that a report by another F.B.I. agent did not mention any crack pipes at the warehouse. After hearing the testimony of Mr. Quinones, the judge said, ''I do not believe that he personally actually saw any crack pipes in the warehouse.'' The judge said Mr. Quinones could not explain the difference between a crack pipe and a crack vial.
The ruling said the problems with the search warrant did not end with the false statements.
Mr. Quinones listed glassine baggies and glass vials among the items he saw at the warehouse, but the judge said those items were listed in the ''mistaken belief'' that they were considered illegal drug paraphernalia under the law. The judge said the error was made both by Mr. Quinones and the assistant United States attorney handling the case, Carrie N. Capwell. Ms. Capwell did not return a call seeking comment.
Without the false allegations about thousands of bullets and hundreds of crack pipes, the judge said, the search warrant should not have been granted.
