Prosecutors unexpectedly rested their case on Wednesday against Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, relinquishing their final two days in the war crimes trial that opened two years ago.
It was a low-key end to a marathon that included 300 witnesses and tens of thousands of documents. Prosecutors merely filed a motion asking to close their case. Their decision came in part because Mr. Milosevic had again been ill, for two weeks, forcing them to cancel hearings. But they made it clear that they also moved because the leading judge in the case suddenly had to step down after falling seriously ill.
Lawyers said that the abrupt halt also helped the court deal with the often difficult defendant at a turning point in the trial when a new judge still had to be named. Prosecutors had planned to present four more witnesses in the time allotted to them.
Mr. Milosevic will now have three months to prepare his defense in the enormous trial at the United Nations tribunal where he stands accused of crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide during the three wars of the 1990's that tore up Yugoslavia.
The judge in charge of the trial, Richard May of Britain, last appeared in court in late January but will be unable to return. He will probably be replaced by another British judge, to be named by Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general.
On Wednesday both prosecutors and judges moved uncommonly swiftly. Only hours after the prosecution said it was closing its case, judges announced that the trial will resume on June 8. They gave Mr. Milosevic, who is acting as his own defense counsel, 150 days to set out his arguments and present his witnesses in court. Lawyers said that amounts to the same time, or slightly more, than the prosecution used.
Although the trial began in February 2002, it was suspended for 65 days because of Mr. Milosevic's illness and often ran on a part-time schedule on orders of the doctors treating Mr. Milosevic for heart disease and high blood pressure.
A member of Mr. Milosevic's defense team said that the team had not decided on its strategy.
