THE management shuffle at the Coca-Cola Company continued yesterday as Donald R. Knauss, the head of the North American retail division, was named president of the entire North American business.
The job had been held by Steven J. Heyer, who is Coke's president and chief operating officer and a candidate for the company's top job.
The announcement came less than a week after Douglas N. Daft, Coke's chairman and chief executive, said he would retire at the end of the year. Although Mr. Heyer, 51, had been considered Mr. Daft's heir apparent, the company's board cast his future into uncertainty when it said that he was a strong internal candidate for the job but that the company would also conduct an external search.
Mr. Knauss's appointment heightened the speculation about Coke's plans for Mr. Heyer, who took over the North American business in December after the unit's president resigned. At that time, the company said Mr. Heyer would run the division until the end of 2004.
But yesterday, in a memo to Coke's employees, Mr. Heyer said he had always intended to appoint a president to assume day-to-day management of the North American division ''at the right time.'' Mr. Heyer's memo said he would continue to be ''deeply involved'' with the North American unit.
The company said that yesterday's announcement and Mr. Heyer's standing in the competition for the chairman's job were not related. Coke executives selected Mr. Knauss for the North America job earlier this month, well before Mr. Daft's announcement, a company official said.
''As we said in our announcement today, appointing a president of our North America unit was an action we contemplated since last December,'' a Coke spokesman. ''To read any more into this appointment would be flat wrong.''
In promoting Mr. Knauss (pronounced ka-NOUSE), who is 53 and has been at the company 10 years, Coke is addressing weakness in its North American division, which has recorded disappointing results in the last year, growing only 2 percent while Coke's global volume was up 4 percent. Now, no matter what happens with Mr. Heyer, leadership in North America is secure, analysts said.
''It just makes sense from the board's perspective, if they're watching out for the shareholders,'' said Debbie S. Wang, an analyst at Morningstar. ''You'd want to have somebody that is capable in place who can run the largest market they've got no matter who the new C.E.O. is.''
While there was little second-guessing of Coke's choice to elevate Mr. Knauss, who is well regarded within the company and the beverage industry, analysts found the timing significant, in light of the search for Mr. Daft's replacement.
Mr. Heyer ''is now not just the chief operating officer of the company -- he is in a high-stakes competition to be the next chief executive,'' said John D. Sicker, the editor and publisher of Beverage Digest. ''Things will change for him in the next few months, so putting Knauss in there ensures continuity in the North American business.''
Investors had little reaction to Coke's announcement yesterday, and are chiefly concerned with how soon Coke's board will select Mr. Daft's successor, analysts said. Shares of Coca-Cola have fallen 2.6 percent since Mr. Daft's announcement last Thursday. Yesterday, the stock declined an additional 13 cents, or 0.26 percent, to close at $49.65.
Since Mr. Heyer arrived at Coke in 2001 from the Turner Broadcasting unit of Time Warner, he had been thought to be the leading candidate for the chairman and chief executive jobs once Mr. Daft retired.
With the board declining to give him the decisive nod last week, industry analysts have been speculating that Mr. Heyer may leave before a decision is made.
But if he does stay and is promoted, the North American job will need to be filled anyway, analysts pointed out.
Mr. Heyer assumed control of North America operations in December after Jeffery T. Dunn, then the unit's president, left the company. Analysts said the two men disagreed on how to run the business and generally did not get along.
In Mr. Knauss, Mr. Heyer has found an ally. Mr. Knauss joined Coke in 1994 as senior vice president for marketing in the Minute Maid unit. He has held several positions, including president of Coke's Southern Africa division and president and chief executive of Minute Maid.
In addition to his new responsibilities, Mr. Knauss will continue to oversee the company's retail operations.
''Don Knauss has had a lot of experience with the bigger piece of this operation, so it's an evolutionary and natural appointment in my view,'' said Marc Cohen, a beverage analyst at Goldman, Sachs. ''I don't think this is monumental shuffling. When you get down to it, you're taking somebody that runs two-thirds of the business and giving them the other third.''
More pressing, analysts said, was Coke's need to fill the chairman and chief executive slot. Board members have said they intend to conduct a brisk search.
This week, the board hired Hedrick &amp; Struggles International, an executive search firm based in Chicago, to find candidates for Mr. Daft's job from outside the company.
The firm helped bring Mr. Heyer to Coke three years ago. Among other recent searches, Hedrick &amp; Struggles was also responsible for bringing J. Pedro Reinhardt, the executive vice president and chief financial officer at Dow Chemical, and Maria Elena Lagomasino, the chairman and chief executive of J.P. Morgan Private Bank, to Coke's board last year.
Market Place
