The Supreme Court ruled wisely yesterday when it said that states have leeway in choosing not to finance religious education. For a court that has allowed a weakening of separation between church and state, this was a significant clarification.
In the eagerly awaited ruling written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and joined by six other justices, the court refused to require a state to provide scholarship money for students pursuing theology degrees even if it provides college scholarships for other kinds of study. Advocates including the Bush administration had urged the justices to declare such a refusal unconstitutional religious discrimination. They had hoped to use the case to broadly establish the eligibility of religious groups to participate in general programs of government aid.
Unfortunately, the court did not retreat from its regrettable 2002 decision upholding a Cleveland voucher program that provides for heavy participation by parochial schools. Nonetheless, the new decision affirms that states still have significant room to decline to finance religion.
In this round, all but two justices -- Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas -- correctly rejected the advocates' specious religious discrimination claim. The majority said that the exclusion from Washington State's Promise Scholarship Program of a divinity student enrolled in a program that requires students to indicate ''a personal commitment to Jesus Christ as Lord and Savior'' did not place an unconstitutional burden on the free exercise of religion.
''Training someone to lead a congregation is an essentially religious endeavor,'' wrote Chief Justice Rehnquist. Rather than unconstitutionally discriminating against religion, ''the state has merely chosen not to fund a distinct category of instruction.''
Beyond furthering religious liberty, the decision is appropriately respectful of states' rights. Washington State, like 36 other states, has a Constitution that is emphatic on separating government from religion.
Far from showing a ''trendy disdain for deep religious conviction,'' as Justice Scalia charged in the dissenting opinion joined by Justice Thomas, yesterday's Supreme Court decision upheld the fundamental principle of church-state separation, which, while seemingly lost on the Bush administration, is as old as the country itself.
