Scientists have discovered that monkey cells have innate protection against infection with the human AIDS virus, a clue that may help explain why some people are susceptible to certain viral infections while others are not.
The finding, reported in today's issue of the journal Nature, offers one of the first concrete examples of what researchers call an intracellular system of innate immunity and may open the door to the development of new antiviral therapies, the scientists said.
The monkeys were protected from the virus by a mechanism that resides within cells and that is independent of the antibodies and white blood cells of the immune system. The mechanism appears to have evolved to protect animals from specific viruses.
In the case of AIDS, the researchers found, the monkeys blocked the human immunodeficiency virus, or H.I.V., as soon as it slipped into cells, using a protein that prevented the virus from shedding the hard casing around its genes. The protein, called TRIM5-alpha, apparently floats inside the monkey cells, looking for H.I.V.
''This is really telling us about a system of natural immunity to viruses,'' said Dr. Joseph Sodroski, a professor of pathology at Harvard's Dana-Farber Cancer Institute who was the lead author of the study. He described the protective mechanism used by the cells as ''very specific, very potent and very targeted to particular viruses.''
Dr. Nathaniel R. Landau, an AIDS researcher at the Salk Institute in San Diego, called the study ''excellent,'' and predicted, ''I think it's going to open up a new avenue of research.''
Dr. Sodroski and other researchers said innate immunity might help explain why some people were more prone to getting H.I.V. or other viruses, or why the same types of infections were mild in some people and severe in others. The clue may lie in slight individual differences in cellular proteins conferring this immunity, they said.
The finding will not immediately lead to new AIDS drugs, the scientists said, but they said that any time a new way of intervening in a virus's life cycle is discovered, it can generate ideas for antiviral therapies.
''Once you know there is something that is important for a virus to do you can figure out a way to stop it,'' said Dr. John Coffin, a professor of molecular biology and microbiology at Tufts University.
In the new study, the researchers began with a well-known observation, that some species of Old World primates, including rhesus monkeys, macaques, mangabeys, baboons and African green monkeys, seem impervious to H.I.V., although they are susceptible to a similar virus, simian immunodeficiency virus, or S.I.V.
Dr. Sodroski and others who wanted to study human AIDS in animals began looking for a way to infect monkey cells with the human virus. A method that seemed to work, they found, was to make viruses that were part H.I.V. and part S.I.V.
Using such hybrids, Dr. Sodroski said, ''we could infect monkeys and cause AIDS.''
Then the researchers asked themselves what made the difference between a virus that could infect monkeys and one that could not. They focused on the capsid, the candy-corn shaped casing that surrounds the virus's genes when it enters a cell.
The hybrid viruses had the capsids of monkey viruses but the genes inside were from the human virus. What would happen, the researchers wondered, if they made viruses with capsids that were mixtures of humans and monkey?
Such viruses, the researchers found, could no longer infect monkey cells.
''As soon as you put the capsid from H.I.V. into the viruses, they suddenly were blocked in monkey cells,'' Dr. Sodroski said.
Seeking to understand why this was so, the researchers discovered that it was the monkey's TRIM5-alpha protein that, in a way not yet understood, prevented the infection.
If the scientists put the TRIM5-alpha gene into human cells, the human cells made the monkey protein and were protected from H.I.V. infection. If, however, the researchers blocked the gene in monkey cells, preventing the cells from making TRIM5-alpha, the cells became susceptible to H.I.V.
TRIM5-alpha, Dr. Sodroski said, is not just a peculiar monkey protein that happens to block H.I.V. It appears to be part of an elaborate collection of poorly understood proteins that cluster together, drifting through cells and apparently stopping viruses when they enter.
Dr. Sodroski said that proteins like TRIM were found only in vertebrates and that the proteins were not essential for life. Humans make a protein that is nearly identical to the monkey TRIM5-alpha, he added, but it is only half as effective in blocking H.I.V.
On the other hand, Dr. Sodroski said, the monkey TRIM5-alpha protein is only about 50 percent effective in blocking S.I.V., the monkey virus: its big effect is in blocking the human virus when it gets into monkey cells.
The idea of an innate intracellular immunity to viruses first emerged several decades ago but scientists have only recently begun to understand it. Researchers had noticed that some strains of mice were less susceptible to a mouse leukemia virus than others, and they found that whatever was protecting the mice was inside cells.
Nearly a decade ago, scientists learned that other mammals, including humans, also had an innate immunity to mouse leukemia viruses. A few years ago, they discovered why: cells that resist the mouse leukemia viruses make a protein that has an effect similar to that of TRIM5's on the AIDS virus. Its target is the capsid, and it prevents the early stages of infection.
But innate immunity may also stop viruses at other steps in the infection, Dr. Landau and his colleagues reported last summer. They found a protein that prevents the monkey AIDS virus from taking hold in human cells by mutating the viral genes, making the genes so aberrant that the viral DNA is destroyed by scavenger enzymes in cells. The protein does not protect against the human AIDS virus, the researchers found, because H.I.V. has evolved a viral protein that interferes with the mutation process.
Researchers say they are just beginning to understand innate immunity.
''There's an exploding number of these genes that so far as we know have these antiviral activities,'' said Dr. Stephen P. Goff, a professor of biochemistry and biophysics and a Howard Hughes investigator at Columbia University. ''Presumably they evolved for that reason.''
For now, Dr. Sodroski said, there are many more questions than answers.
Could differences in TRIM5-alpha explain the differences in people's responses to H.I.V.?
Dr. Sodroski described it as ''a great question we're actively looking at it.''
He said more research was needed to find out how TRIM5 worked and whether drugs or gene therapy might increase its levels so that even the less effective human form successfully blocked H.I.V.
''It's a fundamental discovery and I can see a lot of creative ways people might think about using it,'' Dr. Sodroski said. ''We've just scratched the surface.''
