After weeks spent attacking the testimony of prosecution witnesses, too many exhibits to keep track of and a meticulous discussion of the characteristics of ink, lawyers for Martha Stewart concluded their defense yesterday after questioning just one witness for less than 20 minutes.
The short and focused defense case by Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Robert G. Morvillo, is a gamble that prosecutors have failed to make a compelling case and that the defense has successfully undermined the evidence they presented.
''It's a pretty extreme example, where the government has put on such a long trial, to put on nothing in response,'' said Eric R. Havian, a former federal prosecutor who practices at Phillips &amp; Cohen in San Francisco. ''But it's not unheard of.''
The first test of this strategy may come tomorrow morning, when Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum of Federal District Court in Manhattan may announce her decision on motions filed by Ms. Stewart and her co-defendant and former stockbroker, Peter E. Bacanovic, to drop the charges against them.
Ms. Stewart faces charges that she lied to federal investigators and conspired with Mr. Bacanovic to hinder an investigation of her December 2001 sale of stock in ImClone Systems, a company then led by her friend Dr. Samuel D. Waksal. Lawyers representing all sides will meet with the judge tomorrow morning to discuss the instructions that the judge will give jurors next Wednesday. Closing arguments are expected on Monday and Tuesday.
The strategy by Ms. Stewart's legal team will put tremendous pressure on Mr. Morvillo, who is expected to give the closing argument for Ms. Stewart, Mr. Havian said. ''The defense lawyer's performance now becomes everything,'' he said.
In addition to having to refresh the jury's memory of the trial and compensate for a four-day break from the case, he will have to link all the weaknesses that the defense tried to exploit during the trial.
''Essentially what you've got is the laundry-list closing argument,'' Mr. Havian said. ''You have to go back through the trial and point out every place that a government witness was tripped up, told an inconsistent story, appeared nervous or uncertain, had something to gain by implicating the defendant.''
Ms. Stewart's case could benefit from a favorable ruling on the request to throw out some of the government's charges. Prosecutors have made a somewhat novel claim, charging that when Ms. Stewart asserted publicly that she did nothing wrong in selling her ImClone shares she committed securities fraud because she knew her words could affect the price of the stock of her own company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia.
''Normal securities fraud happens when an executive makes a false or misleading statement about the value of the firm, about some fact that has to do with how the firm operates,'' said Jennifer H. Arlen, a law professor at New York University. ''What's novel here is that she made, allegedly, a false or misleading statement about something in her personal life.''
The one witness called by Ms. Stewart's lawyers was Steven Pearl, a lawyer who accompanied her to a meeting with government investigators in February 2002. Mr. Pearl, who at the time worked at Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz, a law firm that has represented Ms. Stewart, took notes on the meeting and prepared a memorandum summarizing the discussions.
In the memorandum, Mr. Pearl wrote that Ms. Stewart told investigators that she did not know at what time Mr. Bacanovic left her a message on Dec. 27, 2001, the date of her sale of ImClone stock.
ImClone's shares fell sharply on news the company released later; prosecutors have charged that Ms. Stewart was tipped by Mr. Bacanovic to sell her shares because Dr. Waksal was trying to sell his own.
They have also charged that at the meeting attended by Mr. Pearl, Ms. Stewart lied about the phone message from Mr. Bacanovic, telling investigators that she did not know about it. Ms. Stewart's lawyers contend that she was aware of the call but did not know about the timing.
Karen Patton Seymour, one of the prosecutors, challenged both Mr. Pearl's notes and his memory of the meeting.
''Mr. Pearl, sitting here today, you have an insufficient memory to say whether your notes are accurate, isn't that true?'' Ms. Seymour asked.
''Yes,'' Mr. Pearl responded.
''And you can't say sitting here today that your notes are complete, can you?'' she continued.
''No,'' Mr. Pearl said. ''I can only say that my notes at the interview represented my best effort to capture the substance of the interview.''
After Mr. Pearl's testimony, the defense rested its case, also putting to rest the possibility that Ms. Stewart would testify in her own defense. Mr. Havian, the former prosecutor, said that the decision not to put Ms. Stewart on the stand was probably an important factor in the decision to keep her defense case brief.
''If your strategy is, 'The government's case is such a piece of you-know-what that you don't even need to bother,' that's one strategy,'' Mr. Havian said. ''If your strategy is you're going to barrage the government with your witnesses,'' that strategy would make it more important to let the jury hear from Ms. Stewart so that her silence does not become conspicuous, he continued. Putting on numerous witnesses without Ms. Stewart would strike a jury as frustrating, he said.
Prosecutors called an expert witness who testified previously, Larry Stewart, who is no relation to Ms. Stewart, to revisit the subject of notes written in pen on a document that, according to defense lawyers, supports their argument that Ms. Stewart's stock sale was part of a prearranged plan and not a response to a tip. Prosecutors contend that the note was added after the sale.
Government lawyers also played a tape of an interview of Mr. Bacanovic that appeared to undermine the testimony of Heidi DeLuca, a witness called by Mr. Bacanovic's lawyers. Ms. DeLuca, a business manager at Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, testified that she spoke with Mr. Bacanovic in November 2001 about the possibility of setting a price at which Ms. Stewart would sell her ImClone shares.
In the interview that was recorded, Mr. Bacanovic was asked whether he spoke to Ms. DeLuca about such a prearranged stock sale plan.
''I don't get into that much detail with Heidi,'' Mr. Bacanovic said.
