On the morning of the taste test, 22 Bronx middle school students filed into a cafeteria and took their seats at long tables set with plastic plates, each with a glistening dollop of something brown. After a brief welcome by a food service manager wearing a lab coat, they reached for their sporks.
Moments later, it was all over, at least for this particular rendition of vegetable chow mein.
''That's nasty,'' said Stephanie Frias, 12. Others agreed, scrawling onto evaluation forms comments ranging from ''too slimy'' and ''smells bad'' to ''it's good for someone on a diet'' and the blunt ''I like meat.''
Further proof that New York City schools need a head chef. In fact, for what officials say is the first time, the Department of Education is looking for one as part of an overhaul of how and what it feeds its 1.1 million charges.
The inspiration is a set of goals that sometimes conflict: improving students' diets so that they perform better in class and saving money, partly by getting more reimbursement from the federal government, a figure tied to how many students eat school meals.
The centerpiece of the overhaul is the search for a head chef: a culinary wizard to oversee the production of more than 800,000 meals a day and make them so tasty that the number of meals served soars. The winning candidate must be able to banish thoughts of carpaccio and truffle oil, and think more along the lines of frozen precooked hamburgers and taco pockets. Meals must appeal to youthful but discerning palates from Staten Island to the Bronx and cost about $2 each, if not less, to produce.
''There should be someone with oversight, who can look at food and say, 'This is appealing, this isn't appealing,''' said Michael Lomonaco, who was once executive chef of Windows on the World and is on a panel to help select the schools chef. ''It has to be someone who's thoughtful and in a way tuned in to what it means to try to feed over 800,000 children a day, and be able to be creative about the menu-writing and yet be open to the guest comments.''
Not that Mr. Lomonaco, now chef/director at Noche, a Times Square restaurant where the signature dish is braised short ribs of beef served on a cornmeal cake with Cabrales cheese sprinkled on top, is interested in the position personally.
To find someone who is, the Department of Education has retained an executive search company, the Elliot Group. In recent months, eight candidates, with experience in hotels, food service companies and entertainment complexes, have been considered for the job, which pays about $125,000 a year. One, an executive chef involved with a number of Manhattan restaurants, is still in the running, and the search continues.
The new chef will face serious constraints. The system is vast. Greasy, sugary snacks are everywhere. While it makes financial sense to serve the same dishes in all the city's 1,200 schools, tastes and facilities differ widely. Jamaican beef patties are a hit in the Bronx but not on Staten Island. Some school kitchens are roomy and well equipped, while others are little more than a couple of convection ovens.
Returning to the cafeteria at Health Opportunities Secondary School on the morning of the taste test helps to show what the chef will be up against.
That day for lunch, the offerings included a vegetable medley of steamed cauliflower, carrots and broccoli; vegetarian patties; roast chicken; and green salad.
But on the tables sat trays piled almost exclusively with French fries and cheeseburgers. The fries are baked these days and the buns are whole wheat, but the goal is to get students to branch out.
School food may be the eternal butt of unsavory jokes for those who can afford to pass it up. At the same time, it is the chief sustenance for children who cannot. More than 70 percent of New York City public school students are eligible for free or reduced-cost meals.
In recent years, school food service directors around the country have felt the competing pulls of tighter budgets and an intensifying focus on nutrition. Their reactions have varied widely, with some districts welcoming fast food onto high school campuses and others agreeing to experiment with organic produce.
In New York City, the school food overhaul is an element of broader changes in the school system under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein. The problems in the old system ran deep; a few years ago, bid-rigging charges were filed against more than a dozen school food vendors.
Last year, the school system spent $370 million to feed its students, with $300 million reimbursed by the federal and state governments and paying students. By getting more children to eat and keeping better records, thereby covering their costs better, officials hope to narrow that $70 million gap to $48 million this year and eventually to break even.
A consultant recommended that the department change its procurement procedures and keep school food in house instead of outsourcing it. Her report outlines goals, including ''run like a business'' and ''make school food cool.''
Now, the system is making its most sweeping changes in decades. New uniforms for school food service workers have been designed. Managers are being held accountable for budgets. Snapple juice and water have replaced soda in vending machines, and some popular high-fat lunches have been reformulated. David Berkowitz, a former executive at Aramark, a company with a large food-service division, was hired to oversee school food.
Toni Liquori, a public health nutritionist at the Community Food Resource Center who, years ago, wrote a paper on school food called ''The Food Fiasco,'' is now in the unfamiliar position of praising the department's efforts. ''The system is a mess and they're restructuring it,'' he said. ''They're listening to me. I used to be their worst enemy.''
So far, there are signs of success. On average, 160,910 breakfasts were served each day for the first three months of the school year, officials said, up from 144,379 a day a year earlier.
Nonetheless, at Health Opportunities, some students passed on even the cheeseburgers and limited themselves to Cheez-Its or chocolate-chip cookies (50 cents each) from the school's à la carte menu.
For Lenny Velasquez, 12, lunch was two big cookies. ''I like McDonald's cheeseburgers better,'' she explained. ''The meat, it has like a weird flavor. It's not juicy.''
Adriana Puello, 12, ate a cheeseburger and fries but did not consider sampling the green vegetables because, she said, ''They don't taste well in my mouth.''
''You'd have to hide them somewhere I can't see them,'' she suggested.
The vegetable chow mein was not a convincing disguise. On their evaluation forms, all 22 critics deemed it unsatisfactory, and tasters at other schools agreed.
Perhaps, it is hoped, the new head chef will have better luck.
