Mike Amadeo was always a soft touch for a hard-luck story. Countless times since the 1970's, he has hit the ''No Sale'' button on his cash register and slipped a few crisp bills to everyone from barkeeps cursed by wrecked cars to friends wondering how to pay the rent.
He is not a banker or a loan shark. He owns Casa Amadeo -- a record store in the Bronx at Prospect and Westchester Avenues. In those days before digital downloads, music megastores or pirated cassettes, places like Casa Amadeo became vital institutions, caretakers of culture and community where the owner knew his clients as well as the record charts. Sometimes the two came together unexpectedly, he explained while flipping through a bin of LP's.
''You see this gentleman?'' he asked, pointing to Felix ''Ola'' Martinez, a dapper guitarist on the cover of an old Trio San Juan album. ''When he died, there was no money to bury him. So I gave it. I did so many things like that.''
Charity is harder to come by now, since his store's future is uncertain as sales plummet. Last year he had a $30,000 loss, which means he worked for no salary.
While the Internet's downloads and shop-around-the-clock convenience have pushed big stores like Tower Records into bankruptcy, the city's dwindling number of independent record stores are also struggling to survive. But the reasons for their struggles are very different, and the Internet is hardly their chief enemy.
Many specialty stores have carved out niches that cannot be duplicated online, selling rare records or used discs. Some cater to die-hard collectors, often free-spending men with free weekends who consider the novel ''High Fidelity'' -- about love and lists in a London record store -- to be nonfiction and about them. Others sell the kind of ethnic tunes the big stores condescendingly call ''World Music'' but which they just call down-home music.
Most of these stores are endangered by more routine urban afflictions, like high rents and real estate taxes, while others are undercut by counterfeit tapes and illegally copied discs.
Joseph GaNun is not worried about piracy or downloads: his store, Academy Records &amp; CD's, on West 18th Street, specializes in used classical LP's as well as popular and jazz compact discs. He said downloaders could not cut into his sales because the classical repertory was too varied to be vulnerable, and computers could not offer the sonic quality of a decent stereo. Web sites, he said, most likely offer only one or two of the most popular versions of a particular symphony.
That limited selection is also reflected in new releases stocked by the big electronics stores, leaving him plenty of chances to cater to more-curious customers.
Where Mr. GaNun cannot compete, however, is in the real estate market, where the chain stores come in and pay whatever it takes to get prime space.
''They raise the value of the block, and it raises our rents and real estate taxes,'' he said. ''That's how big chain stores affect the mom-and-pop stores of New York City.''
It was, he said, disappointing to a lover of both the music and the city.
''To me, all the draws that used to make New York interesting are rapidly evaporating,'' he said. ''We are just becoming another big mall.''
For store owners who came of age during the heyday of wax, their refusal to shutter their doors attests not only to their intense love for the music, but also to their belief that others share their passion.
Casa Amadeo was the musical home to legions of the city's famed Puerto Rican and Cuban artists, masters of romantic boleros or manic mambos, whose portraits still grace the walls. Unfortunately, they are more often now commemorated in a thick stack of prayer cards Mr. Amadeo keeps in a box like eternal i.o.u.'s or trading cards for the afterlife.
''I'm making sacrifices,'' said Mr. Amadeo, who remains casual yet courtly, with smooth silver hair and a natty tan sweater. ''Sixty hours a week to not make a cent. Keeping the store open to see what happens. After 34 years I got to work to maintain the store, rather than the store maintaining me.''
The three jam-packed rooms of the Jazz Record Center in Chelsea are proof of Fred Cohen's faith in recordings that once provided the hip soundtrack to Manhattan nights before, in the view of jazz purists, the bland assaults of Kenny G and lite jazz turned it into little more than brunch music.
''We survived so many crises,'' he said. ''Bebop in the 50's. Rock in the 60's and hip-hop in the 90's.''
Mr. Cohen's friends said he was stupid to open a store stocked with LP's just when compact discs were introduced in 1983. He thought there was a market for a specialized store that is devoted exclusively to jazz. His customers proved him right.
Steve Perlmutter was browsing through the bins of Mr. Cohen's store last week, carrying his usual notepad wish list of dozens of album titles. The chain stores, he said, do not carry a lot of what he is looking for, mostly avant-garde recordings or limited editions highlighted in jazz magazines. This day, he was looking for an album by Fiona Burnett.
''I'm not even sure what instrument she plays,'' he said. ''I can tell you that I read a couple of reviews of her in the past three years, and I want to get her stuff.''
Although Mr. Cohen also sells compact discs, the store has that unique cardboard smell that comes only from a roomful of albums.
''I am from a generation that is very artifact oriented,'' he explained. ''For me, holding a record, the graphics, the cover, the liner notes, the spending time, has as much relevance to it as the music. I don't understand the Internet and the urge to download.''
But downloading -- and its analog counterpart, the pirated cassette -- has plagued many ethnic music stores. On Main Street in Flushing, many of the Chinese records at Danny's Musical Store can be easily found on the Internet, said Coco Wong, a saleswoman.
The store tries to compete by lowering prices to under $10, but has had mixed success.
Up in the Bronx, Raphy Santos, a salesman at Platano Record in Morris Heights, said it was impossible to make a living selling only music. As a result, Platano has so many side businesses that the store's awning and façade look like a small-business directory: bills paid, money wired, cellular phones sold, movies rented and even albums recorded by ''Platano Productions, A Label of International Prestige.''
Sikhulu Shange worries about the street, too, specifically the commercial and cultural changes evident along 125th Street, where all the major retail chains have established outposts. When the record chain HMV opened a block away from his Record Shack, he immediately saw his Top 100 sales vanish.
''The music industry has been dancing in the dark for a long tine, and it does not look like there is going to be a turnaround,'' said Mr. Shange, who hails from South Africa and has sold music in Harlem for 35 years. ''What is it they say in America? 'The big fish eat the small fish.' We are an endangered species, the independents.''
He hangs on by selling gospel, blues and African music. He does it without the benefit of bank loans or advertising budgets, through love, determination and respect for the culture.
Mr. Shange's predicament, however, is not just a simple matter of small business against the big chains. He worries no less about the newcomers he sees moving into the side streets, where brownstones long neglected by banks now attract top dollar from new arrivals.
''The demographics of Harlem are changing,'' he said. ''If we survive to that point, we are going to probably have to cater to new people and change our inventory for everyone who comes in this new wave.''
