Rebel efforts to oust President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti fit a troubling pattern across Latin America. For years, democratically elected presidents in the region were routinely deposed through military coups. Today, many elected leaders continue to see their terms cut short, but through popular uprisings aimed at their removal, like the one in Haiti. Not long ago, Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada was ousted as president of Bolivia after widespread protests stemming from a natural gas deal. In 2001, President Fernando de la Rúa of Argentina resigned halfway through his term after protests about the economy. Today, in addition to efforts to depose Mr. Aristide, large groups of citizens or foreign governments are calling for the resignation of Hugo Chávez in Venezuela and Alejandro Toledo in Peru.
Such demands seek to short-circuit the democratic process. Usually occurring in the most unfortunate countries, they degrade institutions, polarize politics and impede the continuity necessary for growth. Even when constitutions provide for referendums and other mechanisms to remove a president early, they should be invoked only in extreme circumstances.
Early removal is most appropriate when presidents were fraudulently elected. One example is Alberto Fujimori's resignation in Peru in 2000. Corruption scandals were the immediate cause, but Mr. Fujimori would not have been so widely resented had he not stolen elections earlier in the year, and his ouster was correctly seen as just.
For legitimately elected leaders, however, the bar for early removal must be set very high. Mr. Toledo's sin in Peru is that he is weak and apparently corrupt -- not a good enough reason for yet another interruption of democracy. The opposition to Mr. Chávez, whose autocratic leanings and populist demagogy have divided Venezuela in two, has yet to show he has crossed the line into tyranny. He survived large national strikes directed at his ouster last year. Mr. Chávez wrote a constitution that included the possibility of a referendum on his rule. If he is to leave office early, a referendum should be the only acceptable means.
Mr. Chávez is an example of a president who is wildly unpopular with half his country, but fiercely defended by the other. Mr. Aristide in Haiti is another. He is an autocrat whose use of popular violence during legislative elections led to a cutoff of international aid. While he should be sharing power more broadly, he should not be forced out of office by protesters who promise only more bloodshed.
Sacking a president usually makes things worse. Politicians will not make unpopular decisions -- or decisions that offend powerful groups -- if they must face the political guillotine every day. While many protesters want to destroy everything and start from zero, Latin America needs more continuity, not less. Also, with the presidency in constant play, opposition leaders will not make constructive compromises, instead manipulating every issue to try to win power.
