Thirteen agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation took mementos, debris or valuables from the Staten Island landfill that held the rubble of the World Trade Center, and the F.B.I. now plans to formally ban the removal of crime-scene items as a result, officials said on Wednesday.
Among the items taken from the rubble, officials said, were a Tiffany globe paperweight, an American flag, chunks of concrete, bags of dust, bolts and pieces of metal, investigators from the Justice Department inspector general's office found.
The department first began investigating charges of possible theft last year after receiving a complaint that the Tiffany globe wound up on the desk of an F.B.I. secretary in Minneapolis. But the inspector general's investigation found that the removal of World Trade Center evidence was more widespread than previously realized and that the problem was a longstanding one at the F.B.I. at other crime scenes as well.
The results of the investigation, first reported Wednesday night by NBC News, outraged some survivors, who saw the removal of items from the rubble as insensitive to the memories of the nearly 3,000 people killed in the Sept. 11 attacks.
''I would have hoped that the F.B.I. was more concerned with conducting an investigation and gathering evidence, not gathering mementos to sit on their bookshelves as a relic from the worst national tragedy in the country's history,'' said Kristen Breitweiser, whose husband died in the trade center and who has helped lead a group of survivors pushing for more answers about the attacks. ''This speaks to a real lack of focus by the F.B.I. in getting to the bottom of what really happened on Sept. 11,'' she said.
An agent from a field office in Oklahoma who was said to have taken large amounts of World Trade Center debris has been suspended for 10 days, officials said.
In addition, the agent who took the Tiffany globe from the rubble now faces the prospect of disciplinary action, as does Richard B. Marx, the agent who supervised the evidence recovery effort by some 400 bureau agents at the Fresh Kills landfill in Staten Island, officials said.
Mr. Marx was publicly credited last year for his work in retrieving World Trade Center relics that became part of an exhibition at the New-York Historical Society. His team was responsible for sifting through the vast amounts of human remains, personal effects and other items amid the rubble removed from ground zero to find items that could be returned to survivors or aid in the federal investigation. But in the course of the Justice Department investigation, he was accused of giving misleading accounts to investigators about whether he or his agents removed items from the scene for their own use, officials said. He could not be reached for comment late Wednesday.
None of the other agents implicated in the inspector general's investigation are facing disciplinary proceedings because there was no formal F.B.I. policy in place that prevented the removal of such items, according to a bureau official who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
''We didn't have a written policy relative to this type of activity, and that's one of the problems here,'' the F.B.I. official said. ''Obviously we don't encourage this type of thing, and while it was inappropriate, there wasn't a policy we could say they violated.''
Some of the agents who removed items from the scene apparently saw them as harmless mementos that would serve as reminders of the long, difficult hours they spent sifting through evidence at the landfill, officials said.
But in January the F.B.I. put in place a formal policy that prohibits members of evidence recovery teams from taking anything from a crime scene, no matter what its value, and it plans to expand the ban to the entire bureau soon, officials said.
''The policy calls for much greater management oversight and provides F.B.I. employees with clear instruction on the removal of mementos from a recovery site for any purpose,'' the agency said in a statement. ''It effectively prohibits the removal of any debris by personnel at a site.''
The inspector general's report found that the removal of evidence from disaster scenes was a problem long before the Sept. 11 attacks, with F.B.I. agents taking items after the Oklahoma City bombing, the first World Trade Center bombing in 1993 and other disasters, investigators found.
''Our investigation found that memento taking at recovery sites has been a longstanding practice with F.B.I. agents,'' the inspector general's report found.
