Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court decision on Wednesday that states that subsidize secular study at the college level may withhold the scholarships from students who are preparing for the ministry. The vote, in Locke v. Davey, was 7 to 2. The opinion was written by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist. Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a dissent, joined by Justice Clarence Thomas. The full ruling is online at nytimes.com/washington.
FROM THE DECISION  By Chief Justice Rehnquist
The State of Washington established the Promise Scholarship Program to assist academically gifted students with postsecondary education expenses. In accordance with the State Constitution, students may not use the scholarship at an institution where they are pursuing a degree in devotional theology. We hold that such an exclusion from an otherwise inclusive aid program does not violate the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment.
Respondent, Joshua Davey, was awarded a Promise Scholarship and chose to attend Northwest College. Northwest is a private Christian college affiliated with the Assemblies of God denomination and is an eligible institution under the Promise Scholarship Program. Davey had ''planned for many years to attend a Bible college and to prepare through that college training for a lifetime of ministry, specifically as a church pastor.'' To that end, when he enrolled in Northwest College, he decided to pursue a double major in pastoral ministries and business management/administration. There is no dispute that the pastoral ministries degree is devotional and therefore excluded under the Promise Scholarship Program.
At the beginning of the 1999-2000 academic year, Davey met with Northwest's director of financial aid. He learned for the first time at this meeting that he could not use his scholarship to pursue a devotional theology degree. He was informed that to receive the funds appropriated for his use, he must certify in writing that he was not pursuing such a degree at Northwest. He refused to sign the form and did not receive any scholarship funds.
Davey then brought an action under 42 U.S.C. $S1983 against various state officials (hereinafter state) in the District Court for the Western District of Washington to enjoin the state from refusing to award the scholarship solely because a student is pursuing a devotional theology degree and for damages. He argued the denial of his scholarship based on his decision to pursue a theology degree violated, inter alia, the Free Exercise, Establishment and Free Speech Clauses of the First Amendment, as incorporated by the 14th Amendment, and the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment. After the district court denied Davey's request for a preliminary injunction, the parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment. The district court rejected Davey's constitutional claims and granted summary judgment in favor of the state.
A divided panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed. The court concluded that the state had singled out religion for unfavorable treatment and, thus, under our decision in Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye Inc. v. Hialeah (1993), the state's exclusion of theology majors must be narrowly tailored to achieve a compelling state interest. Finding that the state's own antiestablishment concerns were not compelling, the court declared Washington's Promise Scholarship Program unconstitutional. We granted certiorari, and now reverse.
The Religion Clauses of the First Amendment provide: ''Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.'' These two clauses, the Establishment Clause and the Free Exercise Clause, are frequently in tension. Yet we have long said that ''there is room for play in the joints'' between them. In other words, there are some state actions permitted by the Establishment Clause but not required by the Free Exercise Clause.
This case involves that ''play in the joints'' described above. Under our Establishment Clause precedent, the link between government funds and religious training is broken by the independent and private choice of recipients. As such, there is no doubt that the state could, consistent with the federal Constitution, permit Promise Scholars to pursue a degree in devotional theology, and the state does not contend otherwise. The question before us, however, is whether Washington, pursuant to its own Constitution, which has been authoritatively interpreted as prohibiting even indirectly funding religious instruction that will prepare students for the ministry, can deny them such funding without violating the Free Exercise Clause.
Davey urges us to answer that question in the negative. He contends that under the rule we enunciated in Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye Inc. v. Hialeah the program is presumptively unconstitutional because it is not facially neutral with respect to religion.
We reject his claim of presumptive unconstitutionality, however; to do otherwise would extend the Lukumi line of cases well beyond not only their facts, but their reasoning. In Lukumi, the City of Hialeah made it a crime to engage in certain kinds of animal slaughter. We found that the law sought to suppress ritualistic animal sacrifices of the Santeria religion. In the present case, the state's disfavor of religion (if it can be called that) is of a far milder kind. It imposes neither criminal nor civil sanctions on any type of religious service or rite. It does not deny to ministers the right to participate in the political affairs of the community.
And it does not require students to choose between their religious beliefs and receiving a government benefit. The state has merely chosen not to fund a distinct category of instruction.
Because the Promise Scholarship Program funds training for all secular professions, Justice Scalia contends the state must also fund training for religious professions. But training for religious professions and training for secular professions are not fungible. Training someone to lead a congregation is an essentially religious endeavor. Indeed, majoring in devotional theology is akin to a religious calling, as well as an academic pursuit.
Even though the differently worded Washington Constitution draws a more stringent line than that drawn by the United States Constitution, the interest it seeks to further is scarcely novel. In fact, we can think of few areas in which a state's antiestablishment interests come more into play. Since the founding of our country, there have been popular uprisings against procuring taxpayer funds to support church leaders, which was one of the hallmarks of ''established'' religions.
Most states that sought to avoid an establishment of religion around the time of the founding placed in their Constitutions formal prohibitions against using tax funds to support the ministry.
Far from evincing the hostility toward religion which was manifest in Lukumi, we believe that the entirety of the Promise Scholarship Program goes a long way toward including religion in its benefits. The program permits students to attend pervasively religious schools, so long as they are accredited.
In short, we find neither in the history or text of Article I Section 11 of the Washington Constitution nor in the operation of the Promise Scholarship Program anything that suggests animus toward religion. Given the historic and substantial state interest at issue, we therefore cannot conclude that the denial of funding for vocational religious instruction alone is inherently constitutionally suspect.
Without a presumption of unconstitutionality, Davey's claim must fail. The state's interest in not funding the pursuit of devotional degrees is substantial, and the exclusion of such funding places a relatively minor burden on Promise Scholars. If any room exists between the two Religion Clauses, it must be here. We need not venture further into this difficult area in order to uphold the Promise Scholarship Program as currently operated by the State of Washington.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is therefore reversed.
FROM THE DISSENT  By Justice Scalia
When the state makes a public benefit generally available, that benefit becomes part of the baseline against which burdens on religion are measured; and when the state withholds that benefit from some individuals solely on the basis of religion, it violates the Free Exercise Clause no less than if it had imposed a special tax.
That is precisely what the State of Washington has done here. It has created a generally available public benefit, whose receipt is conditioned only on academic performance, income, and attendance at an accredited school. It has then carved out a solitary course of study for exclusion: theology. No field of study but religion is singled out for disfavor in this fashion. Davey is not asking for a special benefit to which others are not entitled. He seeks only equal treatment -- the right to direct his scholarship to his chosen course of study, a right every other Promise Scholar enjoys. . . .
The court does not dispute that the Free Exercise Clause places some constraints on public benefits programs, but finds none here, based on a principle of ''play in the joints.'' I use the term ''principle'' loosely, for that is not so much a legal principle as a refusal to apply any principle when faced with competing constitutional directives. There is nothing anomalous about constitutional commands that abut. A municipality hiring public contractors may not discriminate against blacks or in favor of them; it cannot discriminate a little bit each way and then plead ''play in the joints'' when hauled into court. If the Religion Clauses demand neutrality, we must enforce them, in hard cases as well as easy ones. . . .
What is the nature of the state's asserted interest here? . . .
It may be that Washington's original purpose in excluding the clergy from public benefits was benign, and the same might be true of its purpose in maintaining the exclusion today. But those singled out for disfavor can be forgiven for suspecting more invidious forces at work. Let there be no doubt: This case is about discrimination against a religious minority.
Most citizens of this country identify themselves as professing some religious belief, but the state's policy poses no obstacle to practitioners of only a tepid, civic version of faith. Those the statutory exclusion actually affects -- those whose belief in their religion is so strong that they dedicate their study and their lives to its ministry -- are a far narrower set. One need not delve too far into modern popular culture to perceive a trendy disdain for deep religious conviction. In an era when the Court is so quick to come to the aid of other disfavored groups, see, e.g., Romer v. Evans, its indifference in this case, which involves a form of discrimination to which the Constitution actually speaks, is exceptional.
Today's holding is limited to training the clergy, but its logic is readily extendible, and there are plenty of directions to go. What next? Will we deny priests and nuns their prescription-drug benefits on the ground that taxpayers' freedom of conscience forbids medicating the clergy at public expense? This may seem fanciful, but recall that France has proposed banning religious attire from schools, invoking interests in secularism no less benign than those the court embraces today.
When the public's freedom of conscience is invoked to justify denial of equal treatment, benevolent motives shade into indifference and ultimately into repression. Having accepted the justification in this case, the court is less well equipped to fend it off in the future. I respectfully dissent.
