I DO not sew.
As a girl, I was taught to hem and to replace buttons, of course, because the thrifty housewives who raised my generation had no idea that when people like me grew up, we would delegate those tasks to the dry cleaner and the tailor.
My glory days as a seamstress were short-lived, peaking briefly when my daughter Ella was small and I was called upon to perform an emergency ear transplant on her frayed but beloved Bubby Bunny. Afterward, the rest of the spare Bubby organs (harvested from an identical stuffed animal) went to the bottom of the sewing box and the sewing box went under the bed.
Usually I don't miss it. The rhythm of my life is so hectic -- with three children's carpools to juggle, a job and a dog who looks heartbroken if he doesn't get a daily hike -- that the last thing I have time for is the slow repetition of puncturing fabric with thread, one stitch at a time.
But winter is an old-fashioned season. Even here in Northern California, there's nothing modern about the weather. We're being subjected to the same cold rain, whipping winds and dark afternoons that have plagued mankind for centuries. This month, the weather awakened an urge in me to hunker down and impose an old-style order on my household.
If I were a more accomplished seamstress, this would be the time of year to visit online sites like Singer's (singerco.com) to daydream about a new sewing machine or the McCall Pattern Company (www.mccall.com) to buy dress patterns, the season to stock up on bodkins and nit-pickers and bias-tape makers at sites like sewtrue.com.
But my goals were simpler. I decided to patch a pair of ripped jeans and to replace a missing button on my favorite raincoat.
My seasonal urge to mend was not unusual. ''Sewing is an activity that's akin to eating comfort foods,'' said Karen Koza, a spokeswoman for the Home Sewing Association, a nonprofit organization that promotes suppliers for some 35 million sewing enthusiasts nationwide. ''There are times when people are especially drawn to it, because sewing is an absorbing activity and it reduces heart rates.''
At its Web site, www.sewing.org, the association lists dozens of links to sites -- from quilt-in-a-day.com, homedecinasec.com and www.kwiksew.com -- that sell everything from notions to patterns to snaps.
I could browse at those sites all day. But I'd be a pretender. I confessed to Ms. Koza how modest my current sewing goals were: ''It's just a little rip on the knee.''
''Start small,'' she said. ''You can get the benefits of sewing from the smallest things, like embroidering a letter on a sweater. Sometimes it's even a nonsewing thing that gets you thinking about sewing. Using a glue gun, even. It's anything that plants the seed in your head to want to sew more.''
With that encouragement, I spent an hour browsing at the ribbon and trimming site mjtrim.com. Ostensibly in search of a green replacement button for my raincoat, I caught myself gravitating inevitably toward the Fringe category, where the Safety Pin Fringe (black/silver) would have real novelty value on a Halloween costume.
Then I hauled out my sewing box, thinking all the while about my mother's, a round metal tin with a flower pattern stamped on the lid. My grandmother's sewing box held many red pincushions shaped like miniature tomatoes. My great-grandmother hauled a heavy treadle sewing machine around eastern Kentucky with her, because how else would anyone in the family have ever gotten a new dress?
Inside my own sewing box was an angry tangle of neglected thread, stray buttons and snippets of green felt adorned with jingling bells -- a memento from the long-ago year when someone needed an elf costume. The mess in the box looked like a tornado with a fuzzy Bubby tail.
Suddenly, I had a purpose: organizing my sewing supplies. It would be a small start, yes, but perhaps significant. Or put another way: Colored thread is pretty. I wanted to play with it.
Organizing supplies.
Martha Stewart.
The word association was automatic.
Ms. Stewart's Internet site is on my list of favorites. Her prices are too high, but the merchandise is high-quality. I have been surreptitiously visiting it daily for the last few months, since she started to offer full-price merchandise as ''One-Day Sale'' specials, one item per day.
And there, as if in a dream, the current ''One-Day Sale'' item was a wooden Spool Rack (comes in white or natural) that holds 72 spools of thread. It was marked down from $39 to $29.
That was still too much to pay for a thread rack, of course, especially when I could have purchased the industry standard -- one of the models made by the June Tailor company -- for less than $20 at sites like joann.com, craft-n-fabric.com and www.craft-supplies-store.com/June-Tailor-1.asp.
The June Tailor racks -- see junetailor.com -- are sturdy, practical and available in natural wood or plastic. You can hang them on the wall or sit them on your sewing table.
But I suspected the Martha Stewart rack -- in white to match the window trim -- would look very, very good hanging on the laundry room wall above the stacks of folded laundry that, in another lapse of organization, never seem to get transported back to their owners' bedrooms.
I got out the tape measure.
The tape measure confirmed my hunch about Ms. Stewart's spool rack.
I ordered it. A few days later, it arrived. It was lovely, of course, and came with nice heavy hooks on the back.
I hung it on the wall, which took two minutes, and then I untangled all my spools of thread, which took two hours. Then I arranged them, by color, in rows on the rack.
Critically, I stepped back to admire my work.
I was low on shades of white and beige thread.
The urge for immediate gratification drove me out of the house and to the nearest Jo-Ann fabric store. There I bought six spools. While waiting in line at checkout, I noticed a useful little cutting tool with a razor blade. The customer ahead of me in line confided, ''It's so useful, I bought one for almost every room.'' It cost less than $2. I bought one.
Back home, I rearranged all the spools of thread again. I put the (unnecessary and probably never to be used) cutting tool on the rack's top ledge.
I admired my handiwork. With a glance, I could see exactly which of my six shades of white/beige thread would be the best match for the patch I planned to sew on the jeans.
Then I glanced out the window, saw that the sun was out and took the dog for a hike.
At least I showed winter who was boss.
ONLINE SHOPPER E-mail: Slatalla@nytimes.com
