Lives and innocence were lost 11 years ago today, when the World Trade Center was attacked for the first time.
Then the survivors lost again.
On Sept. 11, 2001, they lost their memorial -- a simple, circular granite fountain by the artist Elyn Zimmerman, set in a surprisingly tranquil alcove between the north tower and the Marriott Hotel -- where they gathered every Feb. 26 after a Mass at nearby St. Peter's Roman Catholic Church. There, at 12:18 p.m. (by Charles J. Maikish's watch), they would let a moment's silence pass and cast roses onto the rose-colored stones.
''We're sort of a group without a place now to memorialize the sacrifice of those who perished and were injured,'' said Mr. Maikish, who was the director of the world trade department of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey at the time of the 1993 attack. Four authority employees were among the six people killed when a truck bomb exploded on level B2 of the underground parking garage at the trade center.
''In the past, we had the comfort of gathering at a fitting memorial,'' he said. ''We don't have that now.''
Come the 12th anniversary, however, they may once again have a spot. Today, at their annual breakfast, the survivors and relatives will be shown a proposal by the Port Authority for an interim marker that would stand until the permanent memorial, ''Reflecting Absence,'' is built. No definite location for the marker has been chosen yet.
Should family members endorse the plan, this temporary memorial would be a brushed stainless-steel pylon, nine and a half feet tall, similar in proportion to one of the twin towers. A wedgelike incision in the middle would serve as a kind of reliquary for the one piece recovered from the original memorial: a chunk of granite 9 inches high, 10 inches wide and 4 inches thick. Eight letters are visible on its polished surface.
It says ''mem'' at the top, from the inscription, ''Esta fuente está dedicada en memoria de aquéllos que perdieron sus vidas.'' (''This fountain is dedicated to the memory of those who lost their lives.'')
''John D'' it says at the bottom, for John DiGiovanni, who happened to have been in the garage at the time of the explosion. His name was inscribed on the perimeter of the fountain base with those of Monica Rodriguez Smith and her unborn child, Wilfredo Mercado, William Macko, Stephen Knapp and Robert Kirkpatrick.
The remnant was discovered in the rubble by a Port Authority police officer.
''When this was found, it was something to cling to, to hold on to,'' said Alan Reiss, who narrowly survived the 1993 attack, when he was supervising engineer for operations, and the 2001 attack, when he was director of the world trade department. ''It is so much more than a piece of granite.''
The piece is now kept in an exquisite velvet-lined wood box, with dovetail joints and brass fittings, made by a carpentry class at Bayonne High School. Mr. Reiss, who is the deputy director of the aviation department at the Port Authority, said some family members wanted to be able to see the relic more often than once a year.
''We're not seeking to impose ourselves,'' Mr. Reiss said. ''We're saying: 'We heard you. We have an idea. Here it is.'''
No memorial can recreate the sheltered setting of Ms. Zimmerman's fountain, unveiled in 1995. ''It was very much for the community of the World Trade Center,'' she recalled, ''the people who worked there and passed through there all the time.''
That included Michael Macko, one of William Macko's sons, who visited the memorial frequently. ''It was a very important place,'' he said. ''My dad is buried in New Jersey, but to me, this was more his grave than where he's actually buried.''
Kevin M. Rampe, the president of the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation, said yesterday that the 1993 bombing would have a prominent role in the memorial center at ground zero.
Mr. Macko, for one, wants to be sure his father is not forgotten in the greater plans. ''A lot of times, it's spoken of as the 9/11 memorial,'' he said.
''Every time that happens, it stings a little.''
