During the last two decades HBO Films has sent its casts and crews all over the world, from Norway (''Gulag,'' 1985) to Morocco (''Live From Baghdad,'' 2002) to Rwanda, where ''Sometimes in April,'' a story of the Rwandan genocide, is being filmed.
But the one place an HBO feature film has never gone is the Academy Awards. Until now.
On Sunday, as the nominees for best adapted screenplay are read, HBO will mark yet another milestone in its 32-year evolution from minor-league pay cable channel to cultural powerhouse. Its first feature-film nomination is for ''American Splendor,'' the quirky docudrama about the cult comic-book writer Harvey Pekar, written and directed by Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini. It is one of eight films the company has produced in the last year alone.
As that, and the nomination, might suggest, after a decade of being hailed and envied for its innovative television programming (''The Sopranos,'' ''Sex and the City,'' ''The Larry Sanders Show''), HBO is increasingly gaining attention for its film division.
Led by the British producer Colin Callender, HBO Films had a banner year in 2003, with wins at Cannes (the Palm d'Or for ''Elephant,'' Gus Van Sant's take on the Columbine massacre), the Sundance Film Festival (the grand jury prize for ''American Splendor'') and at the Golden Globes. (''The Gathering Storm,'' a drama about Winston Churchill, won for the best motion picture made for television.)
Already this year the company has picked up prizes for recent projects like ''Angels in America,'' Tony Kushner's AIDS epic, directed by Mike Nichols, which won five Golden Globes, and ''Maria Full of Grace,'' about a Colombian teenager working as a drug mule, which won the dramatic audience award at Sundance.
And after years of creating movies solely for its premium cable channel HBO has begun actively to release its films to theaters nationwide. While the grosses have been modest for the three movies released so far, the film division that began churning out made-for-cable movies in the early 1980's is increasingly looking like a Hollywood studio. It is attracting major directors, big stars and critical plaudits, all on budgets that are significantly less than what studios spend.
''HBO is like the best of the studios,'' Mr. Nichols said. ''They are very light on their feet. I'm not saying that didn't make it tough for my line producer, because they don't say, 'Spend, darling, spend whatever you need.' They are frugal, and they are careful, but they're also completely on your side, trying to solve your problems. Once they say they are going to go with something, they are there.''
Much of HBO Films' recent success comes from its eclectic and carefully chosen roster of films, ranging from the small-budget endeavors like ''American Splendor,'' with a $3 million budget, to the six-hour, $66 million ''Angels in America.''
Its ability to attract top talent willing to work cheap says a lot about HBO's unusual position in the television universe. With 28 million subscribers paying the rent instead of ticket buyers or advertisers, HBO does not have to worry about a movie's opening weekend's sales, company officials say.
''We're not beholden to box office,'' said Chris Albrecht, HBO chairman. ''And that's what's allowed us to take risks.''
That kind of freedom has allowed HBO to build a reputation among directors, producers and actors as a haven for artistic experimentation, despite being an unit of Time Warner, a conglomerate that does not exactly scream ''boutique art house.'' But sure enough, among the projects in production for HBO are scripts that independent producers say would have been unlikely to survive the gantlet of executives at major studios.
''When you look at something like 'The Laramie Project,' which had a first-time director working with a series of first-person interviews and very difficult subject matter, where else could we have made this movie?'' asked Ted Hope, a producer of that 2002 HBO film, based on Moisés Kaufman's documentary-style play about Matthew Shepard, a young gay man who was murdered in Laramie, Wyo., in 1998. ''It just wouldn't have happened the way it happened.''
Mr. Callender, a veteran television producer who won his first Emmy in 1983 for ''The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby,'' began his tenure as president of HBO Films in 1999. Working with senior vice president Keri Putnam, Mr. Callender said he made a conscious effort to move HBO's film slate away from the kind of biographical and ripped-from-the-headlines movies common on broadcast networks and to diversify the scope of its films and its creative partners.
''All the budgets were more or less the same and a lot of the same directors were being used, doing a lot of biopics,'' Mr. Callender said. ''We wanted to spread the money over a greater range of movies and change the whole slate of what we were offering.''
HBO also nurtured a close connection to the New York theater scene, producing a series of movies based on dramas, including ''Angels in America''; ''Wit,'' the 1999 Pulitzer winner and Mr. Nichols's first project with HBO; ''Dinner With Friends,'' the 2000 Pulitzer winner; ''The Laramie Project''; and ''Hysterical Blindness,'' Laura Cahill's small-town comedy (directed by Mira Nair). George C. Wolfe, who recently announced plans to step down as the producer of the Public Theater, is to make ''Lackawanna Blues,'' a play by Ruben Santiago-Hudson that played at the Public.
That attention to the theatrical has been noted by playwrights like Mr. Kushner, whose 1993 Pulitzer winner waited for nearly a decade before being made by HBO.
''If it had been at a major studio, it would have been immediately tortured to death,'' he said. ''There's no way anyone really could have signed off on a six-hour movie.''
And what about the pay? ''It's not as much as a studio film,'' Mr. Kushner said, adding with a laugh, ''but for a playwright it's great.''
In 1996 Mr. Callender and his staff members discovered the miracle of niche programming when they produced ''If These Walls Could Talk,'' a drama about abortion, starring Demi Moore, Cher and Sissy Spacek. The film drew a large audience of women. ''Suddenly we discovered this silent giant of an audience waiting for us to program for them,'' he said.
Since then HBO has made a point of making films about characters, like the preoperative transsexual hero of last year's ''Normal,'' written and directed by Jane Anderson, who might not fit your average heroic mold.
But the company's attention to diversity and themes has also drawn jibes about being a little too sensitive. A critic for The New York Post, for example, recently noted that three recent HBO films -- ''The Laramie Project,'' ''Angels in America'' and ''Iron Jawed Angels'' -- featured women dressed as angels.
Mr. Callender said that he certainly did not want his films to be sanctimonious. ''The last thing in the world we want anyone to feel is that our movies are worthy or that they are granola bars,'' he said. ''But part of the fun and challenge is taking stories which otherwise might sound dry and make them entertaining.''
The film division probably owes a debt to the success of the network's documentaries, which have won Oscars, and shows like ''Sex and the City'' and most notably ''The Sopranos,'' which helped build HBO's subscriber base and, Mr. Callender said, the interest of other artists.
''It created a new wave of people saying, 'Gosh, there's something interesting going on at HBO, I want to be part of that,' '' he said.
Still, considering the relative safety of cable, why would HBO want to send its movies out into the multiplexes, where box-office numbers do matter?
Mr. Albrecht and Mr. Callender said that HBO's decision was influenced by several factors, including a full cupboard of movies ready or nearing completion (nine) and perhaps most important, an effort to solidify the HBO brand.
''It gets the HBO name out in the theaters and into places where people might not have HBO,'' he said. ''One of our key strategies is to develop the brand outside the channels.''
All of which means one can expect more HBO films showing on the big screen. Which may also mean more trips to awards ceremonies.
''I think they could dominate the festivals, much the same way they dominate the Emmys,'' Mr. Hope, the producer, said. ''No question about it.''
