On the verge of defeating Tiger Woods on Wednesday, John Rollins acted as if he suddenly remembered that he was not expected to win.
Heading to the 17th hole, Rollins was 1 up on Woods, the world's No. 1 player, and in position to send him packing. These are the moments that make the Accenture Match Play Championship unlike any other event on the PGA Tour, because nobody is guaranteed more than a one-day stay.
Closing out Woods, however, is not easy. While he has lost in match play, Woods has rarely beaten himself.
Count this match at La Costa Resort and Spa as another example. Rollins lost his lead with a three-putt bogey at the 17th hole and lost the match at the par-5 No. 18, which he nervously bogeyed while Woods ended the match by sinking a 20-foot putt for a birdie. With the 1-up victory, Woods avoided a shocking first-round exit and advanced to a second-round match on Thursday against Trevor Immelman.
To win six matches and repeat as champion, Woods will have to play far better. But at least he could look forward to Thursday instead of to a flight out of town.
''I feel bad for the way he ended up on No. 18,'' Woods said of Rollins. ''I'm sure he feels pretty bad making bogey with a sand wedge in his hand on No. 18.''
Rollins, a 28-year-old native of Richmond, Va., looked like a forlorn fisherman standing on a boat after letting the biggest catch of his life slip away.
''Anytime you get the chance to go up against the greatest player in the world, you're always excited about that,'' said Rollins, whose only Tour victory came last year at the Canadian Open. ''This was my first time playing with Tiger, and it wasn't the showing I wanted in terms of the way either one of us played. I wish that I could have played a little bit better early in the match, and it may have been a different result.''
Woods's escape was one of many pulsating moments on the opening day of 32 matches, as 15 matches went 18 holes or beyond. In another highlight, Darren Clarke defeated Eduardo Romero in a 25-hole marathon after Clarke forced extra holes with a birdie at No. 17, followed by a chip-in from about 80 feet for an eagle at No. 18.
Five other matches went extra holes. Shaun Micheel defeated Paul Casey in 21 holes, Colin Montgomerie defeated Nick Price in 20 holes, David Toms defeated Niclas Fasth in 19 holes, Bob Estes defeated Scott Verplank in 19 holes and Steve Flesch defeated Brad Faxon in 19 holes.
Vijay Singh, Mike Weir, Davis Love III, Phil Mickelson, Kenny Perry and Stuart Appleby all advanced, as Retief Goosen was the only top-10 player in the world ranking who was eliminated. Goosen lost to John Huston, 2 and 1.
Woods walked a tightrope but refused to tumble. With the match even, he hit his tee shot out of bounds at No. 11, leading to a bogey that dropped him 1 down. Rollins then birdied the par-3 No. 12, putting him 2 up and forcing Woods to give himself a pep talk.
''I'm not going to make a mistake and give him a hole anymore,'' Woods said of what he was thinking then.
Woods cut his deficit to 1 down at No. 13, getting up and down for a par, while Rollins failed to get up and down and made a bogey.
The turning point came at the par-4, 483-yard 17th hole. After each player hit the fairway, Rollins hit his approach shot about 45 feet right of the pin, giving Woods an opening. He responded with his best shot of the day, an 8-iron from 171 yards that stopped 4 feet from the pin.
''If I don't stuff it in there and make him make that mistake, then it's a different story,'' Woods said.
Rollins said he could almost sense that shot by Woods coming.
''I told my caddie that he's due any minute to just hit one of his towering shots that sit right by the flag, and it just so happens that he must have heard me,'' Rollins said. ''That's what a champion like that does.''
Knowing that Woods would probably make his next putt for a birdie, Rollins tried to make his 45-footer, but his aggressive putt ran 10 feet past the hole. He missed the comeback putt and conceded the birdie to Woods, tying the match heading to No. 18.
Woods and Rollins each had about 90 yards to the pin on his third shot at No. 18. Woods hit first, and his sand wedge shot spun about 20 feet away from the hole. But Rollins hit his worst shot of the day, a sand wedge that sailed to the right and into the greenside bunker. That left Rollins with a difficult bunker shot, and he flubbed the shot barely out of the bunker and still short of the green.
Rollins knew he had given the match away. After missing his chip-in attempt, he took off his hat, stood back and watched Woods roll in his 20-footer to end the match.
Did Woods feel fortunate to win?
''Oh, without a doubt,'' he said.
GOLF  Correction:  March 29, 2004, Monday  A sports article on Feb. 26 about Tiger Woods's victory against John Rollins in the first round of the Accenture Match Play golf championship misstated the year in which Rollins won the Canadian Open. It was 2002, not last year. This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.
