DVD mega-changers have been around for years, but they have not exactly made a splash. While they tidily stow 300 or 400 DVD's -- perhaps your whole collection, bonus discs and all -- navigating through the titles can be difficult. You see an alphabetical list, but movies frequently go unrecognized there, appearing as ''unknown'' until you manually enter their proper names.
To address these problems, a new product has emerged: the mega-changer manager. Until affordable technologies arise to allow users to rip movies to hard drives the way they copy music to an iPod, these changer managers might be the best way to organize a large video collection.
The FireBall DVDM-100 from Escient (www.escient.com) hit the market in December. Designed to operate up to three Sony or Kenwood 400-DVD changers simultaneously, it connects to the Internet to assist in disc recognition (it's better than the stand-alone changer, but still not perfect) as well as to download graphics, movie synopses and other information. Instead of a boring list, your collection now appears in a colorful, kiosk-like catalog.
At $2,000, it's a big-ticket item, especially when you add on $800 to $1,500 per compatible mega-changer. And it's not perfect: you can still browse only by movie title, although a midyear update should give you more options, like searching for movies with particular actors or directors.
The second mega-changer manager will arrive in May: the $2,500 Video ReQuest. The device, from ReQuest Multimedia (www.request.com), will allow you to sort by actors and directors as well as genres and ratings, and will support up to four Sony changers, for a total of 1,600 DVD's. Escient's FireBall takes minutes to set up and operate; the Video ReQuest is more complicated.
While the immediate impact of these two products is to make mega-changers easier to use, both Escient and ReQuest have designed platforms able to evolve alongside home video. Like CD's that can be ripped to a hard drive, DVD's may someday be transferable to a hard-drive jukebox.
''Everyone has that on their radar,'' says John Reine, ReQuest Multimedia's co-founder, adding that ReQuest software can manage movies wherever they reside.
In fact, the first hard-drive movie jukebox is already here: the Kaleidescape System, available at www.kaleidescape.com. The $27,000 starter kit consists of three components: a DVD reader, a server and a movie player. The server stores 160 to 440 movies copied bit for bit from DVD.
Players pull movies from the server using standard Ethernet wiring, and an unlimited number of them can be installed in the house ($3,995 each after the first).
WILSON ROTHMAN
