EVER since the release of ''Toy Story'' in 1995, computer-animated movies have been dropping an anvil on traditional cartooning. ''Finding Nemo'' and other pixel-powered hits have done so well that Disney is going nearly all-digital. On television, however, things are different. Budgets are smaller, nowhere near the $94 million price tag for ''Finding Nemo.'' Schedules are tighter. Decidedly low-tech cartoons like ''South Park'' rule.
Now, animators who cut their teeth on ''The Simpsons'' and ''King of the Hill'' are trying to change that, creating network television's first completely computer-generated prime-time series.
''Game Over,'' which is to make its debut on March 10 on UPN, begins with a question: What happens when video-game characters are off duty?
The answer, it turns out, is that they act much as a typical TV sitcom family does. Raquel Smashenburn, the mother (with the voice of Lucy Liu), struggles to balance the responsibilities of work and home. Her husband, Rip (Patrick Warburton of the Fox sitcom ''The Tick''), gets steamed over his daughter's dates. Of course, Rip and Raquel aren't exactly like other made-for-TV clans. She is a swashbuckling heroine à la Lara Croft, and he is a racecar driver who always falls just short of a high score.
The creators never questioned whether the Smashenburns would be computer-generated. These are characters who live in a digital world, after all. And video gamers -- so accustomed to their deeply illustrated, playable worlds -- might not care much about yet another hand-drawn two-dimensional cartoon.
''The goal was to make TV as vivid as video games,'' said David Goetsch, the former writer for ''Third Rock From the Sun,'' who is one of the program's executive producers.
There are plenty of other all-digital television shows in the works, including ''Father of the Pride,'' which is scheduled to appear on NBC next fall. But years ago, when Mr. Goetsch's colleague David Sacks conceived of a show about the personal lives of video-game heroes, a computer-animated television series seemed far too daunting.
In the years it took to get the show approved, however, the Smashenburns' journey to the small screen was made decidedly easier. The cost of digital animation has sharply declined; this show costs less than half what it takes to produce a live-action sitcom. And a series can be put together in a hurry. Six episodes were completed in about eight months. That's a fraction of the time it takes to make a feature film like ''Shrek.''
Faster, more powerful computers played a part, of course. But more important was the way that DKP Effects, the Toronto company responsible for animating ''Game Over,'' crunched the data required for the show. Digital worlds are typically made up of a series of geometrical shapes, or polygons. The more polygons, the longer the scenes take to process. DKP Effects developed a way to build computer-animated shots with far fewer polygons. While some animation shops take as long as 20 minutes to put together a single television-quality frame, DKP Effects says it is crunching two to three frames per second.
Much of the credit for a fast-developing show also goes to theGrid, DKP's high-powered database, which can store and sort the program's assets -- that is, every character, every prop, every ray of imagined light, every wall of every building and every camera swerve among them.
''Before, it took three to four hours to find all of the assets and put it into a single shot,'' said DKP's chief, Dan Krech. ''Now we can take the whole show -- 380 shots -- and call up all the assets in 30 seconds.'' Without the database, he said, ''there'd be a whole lot more pain involved.''
TheGrid also lets the show's producers tweak the program as DKP animates it. A series of mirrored Internet servers enables the animators in Toronto and the production team in Los Angeles and New York to go over each shot in the show together and make changes. In the pilot episode, for example, a rocket launched from the Smashenburns' minivan sends their pet, Turbo, flying. At first the purple spiked, cigar-chewing dog flew through the air on a smooth trajectory. After an online huddle with the producers, DKP turned Turbo's flight into a flailing, anxiety-ridden ride.
''With 'The Simpsons,' you'd check out for five months while the show was being animated, and you'd live with what you got back,'' said Mr. Sacks, a former writer for that series. ''Now you can look at endless cuts at every stage of development.''
Video games have been spawning movies and television shows since the Space Invaders age, with results that critics have usually judged bad or worse. ''Lara Croft Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life,'' a 2003 film starring Angelina Jolie, is among the latest to be panned.
The ''Game Over'' producers hope to buck that trend by embracing the gaming world rather than using its characters to create by-the-book action films. The show is peppered with winks to the unrealities of video game life: the family next door always seems to be fighting a ninja horde; Raquel Smashenburn gets cellphone calls from her children while she is suspended in midair, about to grab a priceless artifact.
The producers have gaming credentials. Three years ago, one of them, Ross Venkour, bought a Ms. Pac-Man arcade game with his wife for Valentine's Day. Mr. Goetsch's eyes still light up when he recalls his childhood in East Lyme, Conn., where Theo's Arcade doled out six free tokens for every ''A'' received in school.
Mr. Goetsch professes to be in awe of his gaming counterparts. ''Most of the video-game guys, they're better writers and producers than most of the people working in Hollywood today,'' he said.
But the feeling may not be mutual.
Dan Hsu, editor of Electronic Gaming Monthly, one of several people in the game world to whom the producers have shown episodes, said that ''Game Over'' would ''go on my TiVo list.'' But he said the show was ''kind of dummied down for a wider audience -- the jokes are kind of obvious.''
Mr. Hsu sees potential humor in the show's conscious evocation of video-game violence. For example, Rip is punched randomly while he is on the way to the mall. But when he asks, ''What is this, Vice City?'' the overt reference douses Mr. Hsu's chuckles.
But gamers aren't the show's only audience, the producers say. ''Game Over'' is meant to spoof contemporary family life in a way that even those without PlayStation will understand.
''Video games are one of the few things more insane than reality these days,'' Mr. Sacks said. ''So it gives us a unique vantage point to explore the family and to satirize modern life.''
