COLLEGES  Colorado Hires Ex-UConn President
University of Colorado officials yesterday appointed John DiBiaggio, a former University of Connecticut president, to help determine whether the athletic department mistreats women.
The athletic program is at the center of a scandal that includes allegations of rape and accusations that recruits were lured to Colorado with sex and alcohol. (AP)
BAYLOR IS CLEARED IN LAWSUIT -- Texas State District Judge Ralph Strother dismissed the final count in a wrongful-death lawsuit filed against Baylor by the father of a basketball player who was shot and killed last summer. Patrick Dennehy Sr. had sought unspecified damages in his suit, which claimed that his son Patrick became the target of ''violent threats'' because he intended to expose wrongdoing in the basketball program and that Baylor ignored his requests for help. The former Baylor basketball player Carlton Dotson has been charged in Dennehy's death. (AP)
TENNIS  Venus Williams Wins; Capriati Loses
Venus Williams, playing her first competitive match in three weeks after a right leg injury, beat Alicia Molik, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday to reach the Dubai Open quarterfinals in the United Arab Emirates. Jennifer Capriati, playing her first match of the year after being out with a bad back, lost to Eleni Daniilidou, 6-4, 7-6 (2). (AP)
SOCCER  Porto Defeats Manchester United
F.C. Porto defeated Manchester United and its American goalkeeper, Tim Howard, 2-1, yesterday, and Deportivo La Coruña edged Juventus, 1-0, in the second round of the European Champions League. In other games, Lyon won, 1-0, at Real Sociedad, ending Sociedad's 26-game home unbeaten streak in European competition, and Chelsea won at Stuttgart, 1-0. (AP)
U.S. WOMEN WIN EASILY -- Midfielder Shannon Boxx scored three goals to help the United States women's national team defeat Trinidad and Tobago, 7-0, yesterday in San Jose, Costa Rica. It was the first game for the United States in regional qualifying for a berth in the Summer Olympics in Athens.
SQUASH  Defending Champion Returns to Final
What shaped up as a tough semifinal in the Tournament of Champions between the defending champion, Peter Nicol of England, and the four-time champion Jonathon Power of Canada turned into a one-sided victory for Nicol last night at Grand Central Terminal when back spasms helped upset Power's game. The scores were 15-5, 15-13, 15-8. Nicol, in his fourth consecutive final, will meet John White of Scotland for the title tonight. White defeated Lee Beechill of England, 15-9, 15-13, 15-7.
