WHEN 33 surgeons turned up at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan last summer for a training program in suturing techniques for laparoscopic surgery, they started their day not by hearing about an intriguing case study, but by playing Super Monkey Ball, Star Wars Revenge Racer and Silent Scope, three off-the-shelf video games.
The doctors were guinea pigs in a study designed by Dr. James Rosser Jr., who is the director of both minimally invasive surgery and the Advanced Medical Technology Institute at Beth Israel.
Dr. Rosser, a video game enthusiast, came up with the idea for the study after he saw a photo of himself playing a video game and another of him performing surgery. ''I said, boy, that looks similar,'' he recalled.
He wanted to investigate whether doctors who were good at gaming might be better at laparoscopic surgery, too, or at least better at the simulated techniques taught in the training course.
They might be. In January, Dr. Rosser presented the results of the study at a conference on medicine and virtual reality in Newport Beach, Calif. What he found was that surgeons who currently play video games scored 40 percent better in the suturing course than doctors who never play.
Even past gaming experience helps. Doctors who avoided organic chemistry in college by playing Doom but who have not touched a joystick since scored better than those who had never played video games, the study showed. Perhaps even more significant, ''the video game play was a stronger determinant of excellence than sex, dominant hand, number of cases or years of training,'' Dr. Rosser said.
Laparoscopic surgery is a minimally invasive technique that involves threading a tiny camera into the abdomen through a small incision and threading surgical instruments through two or three other incisions to remove organs like the gall bladder or appendix, or to perform procedures like hernia repair. Once the instruments are inserted, surgeons operate by using keypads and joystick devices while watching their progress on a video screen. More than 1.9 million laparoscopic abdominal surgeries were performed last year in the United States, according to the Millennium Research Group, a consulting firm.
The most difficult task a surgeon faces is to suture inside the abdomen without touching any tissues, Dr. Rosser said. That task is made more complicated because the laparoscopic view inside the body is a two-dimensional projection on a screen.
More than 5,000 physicians have taken a suturing training course designed by Dr. Rosser. The doctors are given percentile rankings based on their performance, and the large database was used as a control for the video game study.
During the suturing course, doctors take part in several drills to demonstrate their ability to control surgical tools remotely. Using the nondominant hand, for example, they manipulate the tools to drop a pea into a tiny cup with a small opening. The course ends with the surgeon's performing a clinical task, suturing inside the body on a simulated body cavity.
The 21 residents and 12 attending physicians who participated in the video game study first filled out questionnaires on their experience with video games, surgical specialty, years of surgical experience, number of laparoscopic cases, sex and hand dominance. Then they played games, and finally, took the suturing course.
Dr. Andrew Lo, 43, a general surgeon at Beth Israel with 11 years of experience in the operating room, took the course and took part in the study. He had played video games in college, but today the only gamer in his home is his 14-year old son. Dr. Lo, who performs two to three laparoscopic procedures a week, said he was not surprised that video game experience could help improve surgical skills.
''Watching the screen and then doing things as opposed to seeing it directly, it's a different sense of spatial relationships,'' he said.
Because gaming can improve hand-eye coordination, Dr. Lo said, ''people who play a lot of computer games can have a slight advantage.'' Yet the study does not ultimately show whether gaming experience causes a doctor to be a better surgeon, said Dr. Douglas Gentile, the director of Research for the National Institute on Media and the Family in Minneapolis, who tabulated the results and is one of the study's authors. ''Can you actually improve surgical skills by making them play video games?'' he said. ''There is still more to be known about this issue.''
In the meantime, Dr. Lo said, playing a video game for 20 minutes before a complicated laparoscopic operation might not be a bad way to warm up.
