WITH proxy season nigh, it will soon be time to tally the chief executives whose 2003 pay was enough to feed and clothe the population of Haiti.
One person taking aim at egregious executive pay is Daniel J. Steininger, chairman of the Catholic Funds, a $30 million fund company in Milwaukee. He has submitted a proposal to limit the chief's pay at seven companies to a figure that is 100 times that of the average worker, unless shareholders approve more. If a company asks them for higher pay, it would have to list at least one performance goal that was reached mostly because of the chief executive.
''All we're asking is that the shareholders be allowed to vote on the compensation,'' Mr. Steininger said. ''And if the C.E.O. is going to be paid more than 100 times the average worker, we want to know why.''
The Steininger Seven are Cendant, Compuware, Delta Air Lines, the El Paso Corporation, International Paper, Sun Microsystems and Viacom. All were picked because their chiefs' pay had rocketed versus that of their average workers.
The gap between chiefs' pay and that of lower-level workers has yawned in recent years. J.P. Morgan, the financier, is credited with suggesting that executives earn no more than 20 times the pay of low-level workers. How quaint: a 2000 study by Towers Perrin showed that chiefs at big domestic companies earned 531 times what their hourly employees did, on average.
The Securities and Exchange Commission must decide whether the proposal will be included in the seven companies' proxy materials and put to shareholder votes.
In a letter asking the S.E.C. to exclude the proposal, Cendant said it would ''impose a constraint'' on the salary of its chief executive, Henry R. Silverman, cutting it to $2.7 million a year from the $3.3 million promised annually until 2012. And Mr. Silverman would lose his annual bonus of $100,000 for each penny a share that Cendant earns.
Of course, Mr. Silverman could cut his pay to zero and not face the poorhouse. Brian Foley, a compensation expert in White Plains, said that from 1998 to 2002, Mr. Silverman received $36.6 million in salary and bonus and reaped $223 million from exercising options. He had unexercised options worth $46 million, and his life is insured for $100 million, at a cost to shareholders of $6.5 million. And Cendant will pay Mr. Silverman $83,000 a month after retirement.
For him to earn all that, his performance must surely be clear and measurable. But Cendant's letter to the S.E.C. calls the fund's proposal too subjective: ''How will the company distinguish between those achievements stemming from the C.E.O.'s contribution versus those that are a result of favorable economic conditions or other factors?'' That is precisely what critics of executive pay have wondered for years.
James E. Buckman, the general counsel at Cendant, said that Mr. Silverman's pay was justified by his leadership skills and his ability to bring people together to make decisions.
''In terms of the performance of the company, we're saying that in reality you cannot pinpoint performance based on the efforts of one particular person,'' Mr. Buckman said.
But they sure are good at pinpointing one particular person's pay.
The S.E.C. has asked Mr. Steininger to revise his proposal to address future pay at Cendant. His quest may be quixotic, but his message resonates.
''We're trying to get at the notion of economic injustice in what the C.E.O. is making compared to the average worker,'' he said. ''It's bad for the long-term performance of a company because it breaches the trust between top management and the people who work for them.''
MARKET WATCH
