TEN years on, the conductor Anne Manson recalls a compliment that meant more to her than most. After her first and only appearance with the Vienna Philharmonic, in Mussorgsky's ''Boris Godunov'' at the Salzburg Festival, the English tenor Philip Langridge, who had sung the conniving Prince Shuisky, told her: ''Usually, when a woman is conducting, I see a woman conductor. Tonight, I saw a conductor.''
On Friday, Ms. Manson, 42, will make her New York debut, at the Juilliard School in the final concert of Focus 2004, a festival devoted to music of Ives. The program includes the ''Emerson'' Concerto and the mighty Symphony No. 4, works of daunting complexity, left in disarray at the composer's death.
An in-depth history of women on the podium remains to be written, but in truth, there is not yet all that much to say. In some ways, the most impressive figure to date may have been Sarah Caldwell, who flourished in the 1960's and 70's, founding and running the Opera Company of Boston. Eve Queler, as founder of the Opera Orchestra of New York, has likewise had to create her own opportunities.
Among younger talents, Marin Alsop, an American of rising international reputation, is making waves now as principal conductor of the Bournemouth Symphony, a second-tier British ensemble. Simone Young, a native of Sydney, flew high in Europe only to have her wings clipped once she went home to run Opera Australia. (She has since taken over the opera company in Hamburg, Germany.) Claims have been made for other women (some of them featured on the seductively named Web site www.beautyinmusic.com). But the genuine breakout career is still to come.
Some say it never will. One European manager, speaking off the cuff and off the record, recently equated conducting with what he saw as the male role in sexual intercourse. Such rhetoric plays poorly now, and not only for what it says about women. Any maestros who wanted to crack the whip, throw tantrums and spew invective today in the manner of old-time tyrants would find themselves out the door faster than you can say ''hostile work environment.''
Still, an unspoken, creeping notion may persist that conducting represents the subjugation of the many by the one. In a profession flush with monster egos, Ms. Manson, who is open about her limitations, may seem insufficiently self-assertive, excessively self-effacing. Of course, the proof of her musicianship must lie in her performances.
Ms. Manson also acknowledges that what the musicians and audiences see on the podium makes a difference. Bearing a likeness to Jodie Foster and Helen Hunt, she dresses for the stage in simply tailored black pantsuits with flat shoes. Unlike maestros who like to toss their manes, she keeps her hair (blond, straight, shoulder-length) under control with a clip. An inconspicuously styled pair of glasses completes the look: professional and elegant.
''What we are communicating does have something to do with what we look like and what our movements are,'' she said recently from her studio in Washington. ''So I suppose I try to wear clothes that will take the focus away from my clothes. What I want the orchestra to focus on is my face and my hands.''
This month, a Dvorak program with the New Jersey Symphony showed the crisp yet expansive expressivity of her gestures. She coaxed from the players, an uneven lot, a mystery and grandeur that spoke as well of her imagination as of her technique.
Not much was made of it at the time of the Salzburg ''Boris Godunov,'' in 1994, but Ms. Manson's debut merits at least a footnote in the annals of the mighty Vienna Philharmonic, traditionally the most obdurate male bastion in the symphonic universe. Never before had the musicians been led by a woman, and the first official appointment of a female player lay three years in the future.
But what Ms. Manson pulled off was as remarkable as the fact that she was there in the first place. The opera's run was being led in ruminative, epic -- not to say, tepid -- fashion by Claudio Abbado, who on this night had a conflicting engagement in London. Though Ms. Manson had been hired far enough in advance for her name to appear in the season brochure, the festival granted her no rehearsals. Yet in her hands ''Boris Godunov'' sprang to life. The dramatic accents were swift and sure, and her tempos -- propulsive but never rushed -- shaved 20 minutes off the running time,
Was this a watershed? ''For me it was,'' Ms. Manson said, ''because it was a very empowering experience, in that I honestly didn't know until I stood up there whether I could pull it off. For them, I guess it wasn't. In terms of changing their view of women, it's unlikely to have had a big impact. But they were incredibly responsive, more than any I've worked with since.''
Every so often, such a trial puts the career of a talented newcomer into orbit. For Ms. Manson, who has led orchestras from The Hague to Honolulu, that has not happened. Nevertheless, her résumé, pre-  and post-Salzburg, features many bright spots.
Raised in Cambridge, Mass., she studied music at Radcliffe and at the Royal College of Music in London. There she founded the Mecklenburgh Opera, a venturesome chamber company dedicated to undiscovered pieces of the 20th century.
Her greatest challenge, she says, was probably a project with the crack Ensemble Intercontemporain in Paris: a four-hour film score by Michael Obst, a German composer, for Fritz Lang's silent thriller ''Dr. Mabuse, King of Crime'' (1922). ''It was meant to be done like an opera,'' Ms. Manson said. ''Watch and accompany. At the beginning, I thought it would be impossible. But the musicians were absolutely phenomenal. It was wonderful, a real barrier breaker.''
As music director of the Kansas City Symphony from 1999 to 2003, Ms. Manson, long a dedicated modernist, could turn her attention to the standard orchestral literature. ''The mission for which I was hired was to build the orchestra,'' she said. ''My personal mission involved more than that. I had done some of the Brahms symphonies and wanted to do them all. I wanted to develop my own ideas of Beethoven, of Mozart. I wanted to do Stravinsky's 'Rite of Spring.' But after four years, I was eager for more freedom again.''
Even at that, according to Paul Horsley, the classical music critic of The Kansas City Star, Ms. Manson's programming eventually proved too progressive for a community whose musical roots run as conservative as they do deep. Ms. Manson confirms that the committee formed to recruit her successor has made more conventional programming a priority.
MR. HORSLEY also suggests that Ms. Manson's acknowledged inexperience in the symphonic repertory turned players against her. On at least one occasion, he was told, an instrumentalist ''corrected'' Ms. Manson's beat in a troublesome passage, the type of helpful hint calculated to undermine authority.
''I think her lasting legacy will be the boost she gave to the general quality of musicianship through the hiring of players from top conservatories,'' Mr. Horsley said. ''We're on the brink of a Cinderella story.''
Ms. Manson is now back on the road, and her Cinderella story will be written elsewhere. Can she envision what form it might take?
''I'm not sure, to be honest,'' she said. ''It would be great to be a musical director again, under the right circumstances. But I don't feel that it has to be right away.''
MUSIC Matthew Gurewitsch is a writer based in New York.
