THE president of the United States can't afford to be seen with him. Lawmakers want to impeach him. Editorial writers condemn him. Voters do not trust him.
John G. Rowland, governor of Connecticut, has become John G. Rowland, groveler of Connecticut, a serial apologist after deceiving the public about free renovations made to his lakeside cottage.
And yet, saying sorry has not helped. No matter how much he pleads for forgiveness, no matter how diligently he dog paddles toward that illusory island of mercy, where President Bush will still call him ''Johnny'' and State House Democrats will obediently heel, no one from either party has risked his own political future to throw the sinking governor a lifeline. Or give him a face-saving job in the private sector.
Aside from David Boomer, the Republican operative who has been on freelance assignment behind enemy lines at the State Ethics Commission, Mr. Rowland is bowling more or less alone. How alone? On the verge of becoming the first Connecticut governor to be impeached, John Rowland has taken on Bill Clinton as a role model.
Part of his problem is that Mr. Rowland's apology took so long to quicken into genuine contrition. But even now the feeling among many of his fellow Republicans is that Mr. Rowland admits and promptly regrets only as much as he thinks is necessary to stay in office.
''Part of his whole problem has been his arrogance,'' said the State Senate's longest-serving Republican, George L. Gunther.
Consider the truth's long, languid emergence over the last six weeks.
When he first apologized, through a printed statement on Dec. 12, for denying that friends, associates and his own employees had outfitted his lakeside cottage, the governor admitted only to giving out ''incorrect and incomplete'' information a mere mistake. That statement was presented by aides late on Friday so that it would appear in Saturday newspapers, when readership is lowest, and it concluded with Mr. Rowland's now-laughable assertion that ''I will have no further public comment on these issues.''
After five days of laying low, Mr. Rowland actually spoke about his actions, apologizing but also blaming other people: ''I should have paid more attention to people around me, people I trusted,'' he said.
Then came The Poem, the ode from his wife that essentially blamed the media for the governor's problems.
That made things worse. So on Jan. 7, left with no other foreseeable way to beat back a political revolt, the governor went on live television to admit, ''I lied.''
Even State House Republicans who stood by Mr. Rowland year after year, holding his line on state budget after budget, now wonder at the governor's unwillingness to come completely clean.
''There are a lot of questions that have appropriately been asked of the governor that haven't been answered,'' said Robert M. Ward, the minority leader in the State House of Representatives who, unlike a majority of Republicans in the Senate, has not urged Mr. Rowland to resign.
The next Bright Lights, Big News moment in Connecticut politics may come this Thursday, when President Bush is scheduled to arrive in Greenwich for a fund-raiser. The biggest news, though, will be that Governor Rowland, the state chairman of Mr. Bush's re-election campaign, had steered clear of the event.
''Given the current circumstances, it would detract from the president's day,'' a spokesman for Governor Rowland explained.
Translation: It would detract from the president's re-election campaign.
That may not even be the most awkward moment on the governor's horizon. On Feb. 4, he is scheduled to stride into the House to deliver Connecticut's State of the State speech to all 187 state lawmakers, most of whom are Democrats demanding his resignation and another two dozen of whom are Republicans demanding his resignation.
Will they stand and applaud -- or just applaud, or just stand, or remain seated and not applaud for a governor whom 57 percent of voters want booted from office?
''A number of legislators intend not to be there, they will boycott,'' said Kevin B. Sullivan, the Democratic Senate president pro tem. ''I think it's going to be a very cool reception.''
Senator Sullivan, who has called for the governor's resignation, said he briefly considered not sitting on the dais during Mr. Rowland's speech, in protest, but decided ''there is a certain dignity to the process that needs to be observed.''
His greatest concern about that afternoon, he said, was that Mr. Rowland ''will try to pack the hall with every crony he can scrape up from every state agency where he's got people loyal to him.''
What is no longer surprising is that two of Connecticut's three Republican members of Congress have called on Governor Rowland to quit and that the one member who has not, Nancy Johnson, has endorsed impeachment proceedings.
What is surprising is how much trouble a few hours of free labor at the governor's rural home has made for a governor once called Teflon John.
National magazines now mock Mr. Rowland, political blogs are full of predictions of how long he will last.
Last week's Time contained an article about the national rash of high-profile lying. In between Pete Rose and the Ohio woman who admitted she filed a false police report claiming she had lost a $162 million lottery ticket, was the governor of Connecticut.
Even The Economist, a tweedy British newsweekly that had to explain to readers that Hartford was the capital of Connecticut, published a chippy summary this month of how Mr. Rowland ''made it all up.''
Then again, it has been roughly 225 years since Connecticut cared about what the British had to say about politics here.
More important is whether Governor Rowland can remain a positive rather than a distracting or even negative force for the state's struggling big cities. Since ''I lied,'' the governor may have lost some of the powers of political persuasion so elemental to Adriaen's Landing, the $700 million downtown Hartford revitalization project Mr. Rowland has made the cornerstone of his legacy.
''When the main fund-raiser gets into this kind of trouble, it's harder to call on those pledges,'' said Matt Hennessy, chief of staff to Hartford's mayor, Eddie A. Perez, referring to Mr. Rowland and his years of careful groundwork securing private sources of cash for the project.
''Now people are turning to see who can help them keep these projects going,'' Mr. Hennessy added.
''The old dynamic was the governor was going to make it happen and the city was going to come hat in hand,'' he said. ''Now it's more up to Hartford city government and developers to make things happen for themselves.''
POLITICAL MEMO Paul von Zielbauer, a reporter at The Times, is a former chief of the Hartford bureau.
