REALITY television shows like ''Fear Factor,'' ''Big Brother'' and ''The Bachelor'' have crossed over from sideshow entertainment to network television's main event. But their success has caught the attention of more than advertisers and disgusted critics. Hollywood's unions are showing an interest, too.
The International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, which includes the International Cinematographers Guild and the Motion Picture Editors Guild, is trying to unionize reality shows that are shown by the networks, as well as gritty documentary-style cable shows like ''Trauma: Life in the ER.'' Arguing that those who work on unscripted programs should receive health insurance, pensions, overtime pay and other benefits, the alliance has unionized ''Big Brother,'' which is produced by Endemol USA, a unit of Telefónica S.A, and is in negotiations with ''Blind Date'' and ''Fifth Wheel,'' produced by Renegade 83.
Reality shows, many of which originated in Europe and on cable channels in the United States, have traditionally been made by nonunion production companies. Now that reality shows are broadcast on the big networks, unions say their workers should get the same pay and benefits that go to unionized workers of other network shows.
If the unions are successful, some people in the industry say, there may be less eating of crickets and fewer tear-filled rejections broadcast into America's living rooms. If the producers have to pay overtime and union wages, and to make contributions to health and pension programs, the shows will be more expensive to produce. That could make them less appealing to the networks, which have come to rely on reality shows as bargains for their prime-time schedules.
Like unsuccessful strategists on ''Survivor,'' producers of reality shows may wind up being voted off their island. ''We are the bastard children of television,'' said Eric Schotz, president and chief executive of LMNO Productions, which has produced shows like ''Man vs. Beast'' and ''Celebrity Boot Camp.'' ''I find it fairly humorous that now, all of a sudden, the unions are showing up.''
The recent ratings success and the lucrative advertising revenue of reality programming is part of the genre's appeal to unions, said Tris Carpenter, a national organizer with the Motion Picture Editors Guild, I.A.T.S.E. Local 700. ''These shows are not paying actors, except for a host,'' he said. ''They are made for less money but are still aired on the network, and that success is not getting passed on to everyone who makes the show happen.''
Wages for reality shows, on average, are not in line with those of scripted programming. Workers on the reality shows are generally freelancers who rarely receive benefits like health insurance or pensions, Mr. Carpenter said. Many work on a single show and then move on. Jobs can be as short as three or four months.
While an hour of prime-time reality programming for a major network costs about $700,000 to produce, the average scripted drama can cost $1 million to $2 million an hour.
LOW costs initially drew networks to reality programming, said Jerry Katzman, the director of industry relations in the department of film, television and digital media at the University of California, Los Angeles, and the former president of the William Morris Agency. While he was at the agency, it helped bring programs like ''Big Brother'' from Europe. ''These programs helped the networks balance out the high cost of producing scripted programming,'' Mr. Katzman said.
The production differences between reality programs and scripted shows have attracted some unions and befuddled others. A scripted show tends to have a large production staff that includes camera operators, highly paid scriptwriters and union actors. Reality programming, on the other hand, uses contestants who are nominally paid -- except for the prize winners -- and, usually, small production crews. Most of the work occurs after the cameras are put away.
Jay Renfroe, a partner in Renegade 83, said that on a reality show, production crews may shoot for only a few weeks, but that post-production takes nine weeks or more. Writers do not play much of a role. ''Reality TV is really written in post-production,'' Mr. Renfroe said. ''The storytellers are the producers and the editors.''
Mr. Renfroe said a reality show could employ 12 editors at a time. That is because producers do not know during filming who will be voted out of the house, or which contestant will get the final rose and win the guy. They end up shooting hundreds of hours of tape so they have everything they may need. All that tape is then dumped on the editors and producers, who determine what stories to weed out .
The editors' union wants to organize the production companies of reality programming because they employ so many editors, which as a group are crucial to the programs' creation, Mr. Carpenter said.
The Writers Guild of America is also working to unionize reality TV, said Paul Naurocki, assistant executive director of the guild, and has had some success. Although reality shows do not use traditional scripts, someone writes the host introductions and voice-overs, he said. Union members write a variety of programs, from dramas and sitcoms to game-shows.
JUST because there are no polished scripts like those in a drama like ''The West Wing'' does not mean that reality writers should be treated differently than writers on other shows, Mr. Naurocki said.
''Every hour of television competes with every other hour of television,'' he said. ''If the nonunion stuff is done on the cheap, then it undercuts the standards established in dramatic programming.''
And to the extent that there are writers, they are not treated like writers on other shows. Unionized writers receive residual checks, for example, when their shows are syndicated. Without union writers on the reality shows, no one gets a residual check if a program is rebroadcast.
A few reality shows have gone into syndication. Renegade 83 recently sold the first three seasons of ''Blind Date'' to Spike TV, but no one will receive a residual check for reruns, Mr. Renfroe said.
Organizing is also a challenge when a show's staff members rotate every few months, Mr. Carpenter said. The unions need to work quickly. In most instances they do not go through the National Labor Relations Board for official elections because, he said, the show may be done before a vote takes place. While every case is different, Mr. Carpenter said that in many instances, if the union manages to sign up a majority of employees on a show, it can approach the production company and negotiate for a contract without going through the N.L.R.B.
When a show is unionized, the I.A.T.S.E. negotiates a contract for all of the different skills it represents, from camera operators to make up artists.
The editors' union does not draw the line at unscripted network programming. In 2001, it organized New York Times Television, which produces documentary-style programs for the Discovery Channel and other cable networks. Mr. Carpenter said that these documentary-style programs are produced in much the same way as shows like ''Big Brother.'' And editors on these shows have many of the same concerns.
David Kirchner, now an assistant editor on feature films who worked at Times Television in 2001 and helped bring in the union, said that the work environment had improved with the payment of overtime and provision of unemployment insurance and health benefits.
But not everyone is persuaded that unionizing will bring benefits. For a freelance cinematographer to gain union benefits like health coverage, members must put in 600 hours of work a year on unionized shows, a tall order for someone who works mostly on nonunion reality shows.
Brian Gaetke, a cinematographer on ''Fear Factor,'' which is among the shows that the cinematographers' union is trying to organize, said that he had not yet been contacted by the union. But he said he had little interest in joining, particularly if he had to pay the large upfront fee, which for that union can be as high as $10,000.
''They want an exorbitant amount of money to join and offer nothing to compensate for it,'' Mr. Gaetke said.
The cinematographers' union did not return phone calls seeking comment, and the I.A.T.S.E. declined to comment.
To encourage people like him to join, unions are in some cases waiving the initiation fees. That was enough to persuade a camera operator on a network reality show, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The camera operator figured that joining the union would lead to work on feature films, where union membership is often required.
Most people who work in reality programming move from one show to another every three or four months. If they are union members and work on union shows, they are also allowed to work on nonunion shows, at nonunion pay. Some say that advertising their union affiliation could alienate potential employers.
''I am a bit scared about certain employers knowing that I'm in the union,'' the camera operator said. ''I don't want people to think that I'm a troublemaker.''
For some workers, salary is not a big motivator. On a scripted network show, union editors earn $2,800 a week or more, Mr. Carpenter said. On a popular reality show, they earn $2,500 or more a week.
Mr. Gaetke says that he has been happy with the nonunion work environment on ''Fear Factor.'' He said the show paid better and in a more timely manner than many others on which he works.
Such employee satisfaction may be an obstacle for organizers. But they are also looking to organize cable shows, the bulk of reality programming, where the budgets, margins and salaries are much smaller.
Mr. Katzman cautioned that because the economics of cable television were different, inflating production costs with union salaries and benefits could be disastrous. ''Cable is niche programming,'' he said, adding that if the cost of development rose, cable channels might find original shows less affordable.
It's an argument that Mr. Carpenter hears often, and one that he cannot say is totally without merit. But so far, he said, unionized companies that produce reality shows have been able to continue operating. And the union will continue its work.
''Cable is no different for us,'' he said. ''Shows are crossing over. Just because it is on cable today doesn't mean it's not going to be on a network tomorrow.''
