IN the 1980's and 90's, Long Islanders were forced to admit that the racial issues they associated with New York City were now resident in their own counties, albeit in a less intense form. It was during this period that arguments declaring the primacy of English over the languages that America's immigrants bring to this country reached a crescendo. Due to sheer numbers, the topic of bilingualism in the delivery of educational and other public services to Hispanic communities became a primary focus of discussion.
While sympathetic to the challenges that Spanish-speaking immigrants from places like El Salvador or the Dominican Republic face in adapting to this country, I reasoned as did others that somewhat of a laissez-faire approach was best -- expect immigrants to learn English and let the cultural and genetic mixmaster that is America do its work to integrate them over the long haul. After all, that worked well enough for previous generations of European immigrants.
Hispanics now compose an increasingly larger portion -- 11.3 percent -- of Nassau and Suffolk's population. Not surprisingly, considering their wide presence, my contacts with Latinos from all backgrounds have grown in frequency in the course of my daily personal, professional and social activities. From these interactions I have found that, although their fluency in English varies broadly, along with obvious pride in their cultural traditions, they harbor a strong desire to assimilate and achieve success on the same terms as most Americans.
Polls conducted by respected organizations, like the 2002 Pew Hispanic Center-Kaiser Family Foundation collaboration, corroborate my own experience. Hispanic immigrants are engaged in a dramatic, multigenerational process of assimilation as measured by intermarriage rates and a widespread recognition that English is necessary.
But recently I learned of an apparently common obstacle to advancement that these immigrants, as well as other ethnic newcomers not fluent in English, must confront that leads me to reconsider my attitude toward bilingualism. This past year, as I was assisting my son in applying to college, I discovered through contacts with an Hispanic acquaintance that insufficient English mastery tends to exclude Hispanic parents from information necessary to more than superficially participate in their children's college application process.
Attentive parents with a command of English quickly appreciate that they will have to be educated as to the myriad choices their children have about college types, academic majors and financial support. For them, most of this information is easily accessible. For similarly motivated Hispanic parents without a solid grasp of English, obtaining and comprehending such information often remains a foreign mystery.
Some high schools try to ameliorate this situation by sending out notices about informational meetings in Spanish. Nevertheless, the actual sessions are generally conducted only in English.
Assumptions that this matter is addressed by the Spanish-speaking guidance counselors that schools have hired to make education more user-friendly for Hispanic pupils are no more than wishful thinking in most places. The workload of these counselors rarely permits them to provide the detailed assistance that is essential for most parents to actively help their child in the application process.
How different the student's role is in these suburban families than in those where parental fluency in English exists! I've begun to realize that this is just one issue on which it would be helpful to re-evaluate the aid we give our immigrant families. Bilingualism, if it ever was, no longer seems to be a sub-rosa attempt by Hispanics to take over the United States. Rather, we may have learned enough about the different stages of acculturation that immigrants encounter to offer a spectrum of well-timed, bilingual interventions that permit easier access to a range of public services without requiring more than modest investments of public, private or neighbor-to-neighbor assistance. Why shouldn't we plan to accomplish this in an orderly manner when there is such a payoff for immigrant families and for larger society?
SOAPBOX Harvey Lieberman, a clinical psychologist, lives in Rockville Centre.
