CHARLES T. FREEMAN, lead manager of the $18.5 billion Vanguard Windsor fund, calls himself a ''price opportunist.''
''The stock market is rational and prices stocks correctly in the long run, but investors often misprice stocks in the short run,'' he said.
Mr. Freeman aims to take advantage of short-term mispricing, which occurs, he said, when investors become too concerned about short-term events and lose track of a company's long-term value. He considers buying shares when they sell for discounts of 30 percent to 35 percent to what he believes is their fair value.
The fund returned 5.3 percent a year, on average, for the three years ended on Thursday, versus 1.1 percent, on average, for other funds that buy large value stocks. The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index lost 3.7 percent, annualized, during that time, according to Morningstar Inc.
The fund returned 42.5 percent in the last 12 months, compared with 32.7 percent for its group and 31.2 percent for the index.
Mr. Freeman, 60, is a senior vice president and partner at Wellington Management, in Boston, the fund's main adviser. He is based in Radnor, Pa., outside Philadelphia. Mr. Freeman works with a co-manager, David R. Fassnacht, 37, vice president of Wellington.
In June 1999, Vanguard named Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company in New York, another value manager, to handle 30 percent of the fund's assets. The co-managers who work at Bernstein, Marilyn G. Fedak, 57, and John D. Phillips Jr., 56, add diversification to the portfolio, Vanguard says; in early 2003, Vanguard added another management firm to its International Growth fund, also saying that the move added diversification and cut down on risk for investors.
Mr. Freeman and Mr. Fassnacht choose about 85 of the fund's 160 stocks from companies of all sizes worldwide. Currently, the median market capitalization of the portfolio companies is $19 billion, versus $50 billion for the S.&amp;P. 500.
Mr. Freeman is willing to concentrate his investments: each of his favorite stocks accounts for 3 to 5 percent of the fund's assets. The 30 biggest holdings account for 69 percent of assets.
He periodically performs what he calls a ''value check'' of the portfolio companies, using five-year consensus projections of earnings growth rates.
Over all, the projected five-year earnings growth rate of all the portfolio companies averages 11.7 percent, versus 11 percent for the S.&amp;P. 500. But the stocks in the fund trade for 12.7 times projected 2004 earnings, on average, compared with a multiple of 17.5 for the index.
To find bargains, Mr. Freeman predicts a company's earnings over the next 6 to 12 and months and then compares his forecast to those of Wall Street analysts. Next, he meets with management to find out why stock prices are lagging and whether the problem is short term.
Bargains are sometimes found among stocks of companies in merger negotiations, he said. Such stocks can be oversold because investors often wait until deals are complete before buying. He also looks offshore for bargains, because overseas stocks held mainly by foreign investors may trade more cheaply than comparable American companies.
The annual turnover rate of the fund is 23 percent, compared with 103 percent for the large-value fund category, Morningstar said.
Last April, the fund began buying shares of HCA Inc., the hospital management company in Nashville. The fund has paid $32.16 a share, on average, for its position; the stock now trades at $45.74. The shares were down to less than $30 last April from more than $40 in March, Mr. Freeman said, because of investors' focus on slowing hospital admission rates and slowing pricing growth.
But the company is an industry leader, he said, with a good competitive structure and strong long-term earnings growth prospects. Yet shares trade for just 10 times projected 2004 earnings, he said. The fund originally bought shares of Michelin, the French tire maker, in October 1997 and added recently to its stake. Michelin trades for seven times projected 2004 earnings; a comparable American company, Cooper Tire, trades for 14 times projected earnings.
''Yet Michelin has a much stronger market position, better returns and a highly recognized, exploitable brand name,'' Mr. Freeman said.
The stock is undervalued, he said, because some European investors are worried that a strong euro will create competitive pressures for European cyclical companies.
The fund has paid $38.49, on average, for each of its shares. (The fund owns shares that trade overseas; some were bought in francs and others in euros.) They now trade at 38.3 euros, worth about $48.26.
IN December, the fund began buying shares of Bank of America. Its tumbled from a high of $83.55 last July to a low of $72.85 on Oct. 28, after it announced a merger with FleetBoston Financial; the combination is subject to shareholder approval in March. Although many investors do not like the deal, Mr. Freeman said, ''we think the market's missing the fact that Fleet has excess capital that can be leveraged.''
Shares trade very cheaply, at just over 10 times projected 2004 earnings, compared with 12 or 13 times earnings for the financial services group, he added. The fund paid $75.68, on average, for its shares. They are now at $81.27.
Investing With Charles T. Freeman
