DO guards with guns protect airplanes and their passengers from terrorist attacks? For many Americans, long used to the association of law enforcement with weapons, the answer might seem an obvious yes.
But since the United States ordered foreign airlines to deploy sky marshals on some flights to the United States, the question has stirred passionate arguments among airline pilots in Europe, particularly those in Britain, who remain apprehensive about such a role. On Jan. 16, Asa Hutchinson, the United States under secretary for border and transportation security, held inconclusive talks in Brussels with European civil aviation officials, but most of them were not in favor of deploying sky marshals, Gilles Gantelet, a spokesman for the European Commission, said later.
Even in those lands where the governments have accepted the American view -- like Britain -- pilots and their managers remain unconvinced and want strict ground-rules covering the way armed guards are deployed. ''My starting position has always been that guns and planes don't mix,'' said Rod Eddington, the chief executive of British Airways, which flies 72 flights a day to and from the United States.
The dispute began in late December, when the United States secretary for homeland security, Tom Ridge, said that foreign airlines would be asked to deploy sky marshals on specified flights to, from or over the United States if intelligence information indicated a potential threat. Airlines that did not comply, officials said, could be denied access to American airspace.
The use of armed guards as a deterrent to hijackers has been common in the United States for decades. El Al, the Israeli airline, has long used armed, plainclothes marshals on all its flights, and some European airlines, like Lufthansa, have deployed them on selected flights, particularly since 9/11.
But in Britain there has been strong resistance to the idea. Armed police officers are still relatively unusual here, and most plainclothes and uniformed officers conduct routine business without weapons. Indeed, security experts in Britain say prevention efforts on the ground before a flight are more effective than intervention in the air.
''Americans have a particular view of how to provide security, and many in the world do not share that vision,'' Amit Chanda and Kate Joynes of the World Markets Research Center, a private political and economic analysis group, wrote in the International Herald Tribune.
''The history of the United States gives it a level of comfort with firearms that most in the world do not share,'' they said. ''Hence the lobby of British pilots opposed to flying with sky marshals on board. This is not simple anti-Americanism; it is a fundamental disagreement about what makes us safe.''
The pilots themselves have more practical considerations, too, according to Keith Bill, a spokesman for the British Airline Pilots Association, which represents 8,050 of the country's 9,200 airline pilots: Who would be in charge of the airplane in the event of an attack -- the captain or the sky marshal? Who would be legally responsible for death or damage if a gun were fired?
Pilots also ask: Who should be aware of a sky marshal's presence? What if terrorists seized the marshal's gun for use in an attack? What kind of weapons and ammunition would be used?
Airlines in Portugal, South Africa, Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Finland have said in public statements that they would not use sky marshals. Air France, which canceled six flights to Los Angeles in December because of United States concerns over the identity of some passengers, said its airplanes would not take off if there were a specific terror threat.
In Britain, where a British Airways flight to Washington was delayed for several hours on four consecutive days in early January because of terror concerns of American officials, the opposition to the deployment of sky marshals is tempered by financial considerations. The trans-Atlantic route is a major earner for British airlines, including Virgin Atlantic, which was the first to agree to the United States demand for armed guards on its flights.
''We had a choice to make,'' said Mr. Bill of the pilots association, which is negotiating the marshal issue with the British government. ''If we say we will never ever fly a sky marshal, the result would be the loss of trans-Atlantic business, and that would damage the whole industry.''
In negotiations with the government this month, British pilots insisted that if deployed, sky marshals would be under the command of the airplane's captain. Moreover, their identities and seat numbers should be made known to crews. And along with technical issues related to the training of guards and the type of weapons they would use, the pilots also sought an indemnity against any damage or loss of life caused by a sky marshal's gun.
The United States has not responded specifically to those ideas.
It may be, though, that the chance of sky marshals' flying on British planes will remain limited because, in Britain at least, pilots would still rather ground flights seen as seriously threatened than deploy armed guards. ''We believe that they may never be used,'' Mr. Bill said.
TRAVEL ADVISORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT
