Atlanta Thrashers forward Ilya Kovalchuk had most of the Islanders on their heels Saturday night with his aggressive skating and his nose for the net. But the Islanders had goaltender Rick DiPietro, who would not let Kovalchuk take over the game.
DiPietro stopped the charging Kovalchuk two times in the second period on close shots, once on a breakaway, and the Islanders won, 3-0, before a season-high crowd of 18,633 at Philips Arena.
''If he had an off day, Kovalchuk would have had three or four goals,'' defenseman Kenny Jonsson said.
The Islanders (24-20-4-1) entered the game with a 2-point lead over the Thrashers (21-22-5-2) for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference. The Islanders, who won at Carolina on Friday night, won back-to-back road games for the first time this season.
''Winning two games on the road against two teams that are going to fight us the rest of the season was huge, even this early in the season,'' Jonsson said.
Mattias Weinhandl, Oleg Kvasha and Arron Asham scored for the Islanders, who were playing without Michael Peca, their captain. He was scratched because of a strained chest muscle.
The 22-year-old DiPietro set the tone in the first minute of the second period when he blocked a Kovalchuk shot from 10 feet. Kovalchuk was credited with three shots in the period, but at least five times he appeared in position to find the back of the net.
''I was just trying to be patient,'' DiPietro said of Kovalchuk. ''He's pretty nifty and makes a lot of pump fakes. I was just trying to stay on my skates as long as possible.''
DiPietro, who made 25 saves, stopped Kovalchuk eight times over all. DiPietro has won his last four starts. He earned his second shutout of the season.
The Islanders took a 1-0 lead on a power-play goal 9 minutes 32 seconds into the first period. Weinhandl skated in from the corner to slap in a well-timed pass from Kvasha.
The Islanders had a chance to add to the lead in the second period, when Jason Blake was awarded a penalty shot after he was slashed on a short-handed breakaway. Atlanta goalie Pasi Nurminen blocked the shot.
The Islanders added some insurance at 4:12 of the third on a power-play goal by Kvasha. DiPietro caught the Thrashers off guard with a quick pass up ice and was credited with an assist.
Asham scored his goal in the final second of the game. Janne Niinimaa, who had an assist on Kvasha's goal, and Blake assisted.
BLUE JACKETS 4, BLACKHAWKS 3
Rick Nash scored his league-leading 29th and 30th goals to help host Columbus beat Chicago, extending the Blackhawks' road losing streak to a franchise-record 17 games. Manny Malhotra and Tyler Wright each added a goal and an assist for the Blue Jackets. (AP)
AVALANCHE 5, PENGUINS 3
After missing four games because of injury, Peter Forsberg had two goals and an assist for Colorado. Pittsburgh extended its home losing streak to seven games. (AP)
PANTHERS 2, BRUINS 1
Roberto Luongo made 43 saves and Florida hung on for a victory in Boston. Juraj Kolnik and Valery Bure each scored a power-play goal for the Panthers. (AP)
FLYERS 2, SABRES 1
Jeremy Roenick had two goals and Robert Esche stopped 25 shots for host Philadelphia. (AP)
MAPLE LEAFS 4, CANADIENS 1
Bryan McCabe, Joe Nieuwendyk and Mikael Renberg scored second-period goals in Toronto's victory in Montreal. (AP)
STARS 3, BLUES 2
David Oliver had a goal and an assist, and Dallas completed a home-and-home series sweep by beating the Blues in St. Louis. (AP)
COYOTES 5, RED WINGS 2
Jan Hrdina and Daniel Cleary scored on host Phoenix's only two shots of the second period. Brian Boucher registered a career-high 44 saves. (AP)
ROUNDUP: N.H.L.
