I'D been walking fast, propelled by the escalating wind chill and the crunch of time. Before my boot got caught in the grate and I went flying, I'd been absorbed in a pressing if mundane calculation: How many more blocks to the subway, how long to reach downtown from the Upper East Side so I could type up interview notes, check e-mail messages and still get the kids to their 6 o'clock dentist appointment?
In an instant, my busy purposefulness vanished. That scared me more than the various pains shooting through my body, especially my face, which took the brunt of my graceless dive. I've been a New Yorker my entire adult life, and planning is part of my essence. Suddenly I couldn't decide whether to try to sit up.
In this city, however, everyone has an opinion. Within seconds, a group of women had gathered. With my left eye swelling shut, I couldn't see them very well, but I could hear them.
''Sit up!''
''No, lie down!''
''Should we call E.M.S.?''
''Get ice.''
I'd always assured my friends back in the Midwest that New Yorkers were secretly generous souls who could be counted on in a crisis. But I had never meant to test this theory on myself. As I listened, not quite comprehending, to the contradictory advice being dispensed, I realized how much I needed to hear it. Though I live in Manhattan, the Upper East Side at that moment felt impossibly far from my apartment in SoHo. My husband was on business in London. The chatter assured me I wasn't alone.
When I stumbled to my feet, however, the group scattered, except for one small woman bundled in a large coat. Calmly she told me not to rush and accompanied me to a little cafe right there, near 92nd Street. The woman behind the counter wrapped ice in a towel and handed it to me. Another employee, a young man, asked if I'd like something hot to drink, then wouldn't accept money for the tea he brought.
My companion, who I discovered was 79, distracted me with a stream of anecdote and commentary. After a few minutes, I decided to take a taxi home and offered to drop her off. The cold outside was fierce.
The cabdriver weighed in on my situation. He took one look and urged me to stop at the Lenox Hill Hospital emergency room. ''I'll go with you,'' said my elderly guardian angel.
Having a head injury put me on the emergency room fast track, but even so the process took a couple of hours. The woman from the street never left me. She chatted up the Yugoslav immigrant who had cut his hand repairing a dishwasher while we waited to see a doctor.
I made it to the dentist's office in time to pick up the children. When I told them about the amazing thing that had happened to me that day, I wasn't talking about my impressive shiner.
JULIE SALAMON
URBAN STUDIES/MENDING
