Loretta Weinberg is a conscientious assemblywoman with a mother's sharp eye for the ills that can befall children and a Democrat's inclination to enact laws aimed at preventing them. So when the children of an impoverished Collingswood couple were found to be starving, unschooled and without proper medical care, she decided that New Jersey needed a law that would make sure home-schooled children would be well cared for.
Ms. Weinberg's idea was to make sure that children educated at home had passed a physical examination when they started at 5 or 6, had received the necessary inoculations and could pass a competency exam along the way to show that they were being adequately educated.
It seemed to her like a logical step, and who could object to a bill aimed at protecting children?
The home-school moms, that's who. It turns out that Ms. Weinberg had not worked through the political logic to resolve the question: if people don't trust the government to educate their children, will they trust it checking up on their children? They will not.
''The home-school population, or at least a portion of that population that I heard from, went a little over the top when they heard about this,'' she said. ''They jammed by e-mail and filled up my voice mail on the phone, and they were still arguing about it after it was clear nothing was going to happen during the old session.''
The old session is history, and the bill went nowhere, but Ms. Weinberg re-introduced the measure in the new session on Thursday -- but without a provision for the assessment test, since that is not something required of public school children.
''The psychology of this was a real eye opener, not that I would back down,'' she said. ''I told someone in the hallway, the more of this reaction I see, the more convinced I am we need some regulation, because they were going a little overboard on a proposal that was still undergoing changes and that they could still formally and informally have their input on.''
So we took a drive to the Audubon Society's amazing nature center at the Plainsboro Preserve here to watch a group of these firebrand home-school moms and their children in action. A few conversations established the distance between Ms. Weinberg's idealism and the fierce independence of even the mildest-manned of the mothers.
''For me, personally, I don't think the government should try to regulate our lives in such a specific way,'' said Alison Snieckus, a doctor of education with two home-schooled boys, Kurt, 13, and Teddy, 11.
As Ms. Snieckus saw the situation: ''I think there would be no stopping it. This proposal is doable, but what's next?''
Forty-one states regulate home schooling, often requiring registration of children, proof of vaccinations (with exemptions on religious grounds) and approval of the curriculum. New Jersey is one of the nine states that does not, and to Ms. Weinberg the absence of such state-mandated oversight might be to blame for some of the shocks she has had involving children in her career in public service.
For example, shortly after she was elected to the Teaneck Township council in 1990, a 15-year-old boy was shot and killed by a policeman. The subsequent investigation showed that that boy had not been in school and was not known to any authority; he had been invisible in the community until the day he died.
''That just really stayed with me,'' Ms. Weinberg said.
Or the article she said she had recently read in The Record about a 13-year-old girl who was just starting to read because her home-school regimen had not required her to learn earlier.
''This brought up the obvious point,'' Ms. Weinberg said. ''Here was a girl who had missed eight years of reading - and of learning.''
The mothers at the Plainsboro Preserve contend that the invisible boy who was shot and the starving children in Collingswood were evidence of mistakes by the state's child welfare agency, the Division of Youth and Family Services, not of its educational system. And as for a 13 year old just learning to read, well, that's not proof of a problem.
''I would say there are kids I've known who didn't start reading until they were 12 or older,'' said Barbara Rapaport, who educates her two children, ages 11 and 15, at home. ''I don't have all the answers about how we learn or how we should teach our kids, but I do know that one way is not the answer for every child.''
On this day, a half-dozen children ranging from 6 year olds to teenagers were involved in a joint lesson on Vietnam. The mothers had brought Vietnamese food - including nuoc mam, a pungent fish sauce, and litchi ice cream. One boy made a collage of war planes from the Vietnam War another featured the country's lacquer ware.
A 6-year- old read a long and complicated story - a folk tale? - about a magic tree, and the betting here is that there are high school students who could not have done it as well.
But the children at the preserve have highly educated parents with enough income to allow the mothers to stay home to teach.
What about the children of the uneducated, of the religious fanatics who only teach holy text, or the merely incompetent? Shouldn't Ms. Weinberg's law exist so that there is someone to watch over those children? No, said the mothers. Those are the parents who will ignore any new rules anyway.
Look for this political divide to reopen later this year, when Ms. Weinberg's bill begins to work its way through the Legislature.
ON POLITICS Iver Peterson reports from New Jersey for The New York Times.
