AMID an army of commercial storefronts lining the eastbound side of Route 46 stands a tall, whitewashed sign under a bright winter sun beckoning drivers to the Costa Trailer Court. The court is an odd collection of narrow aluminum-clad residences packed tightly together that years ago became rooted to the ground.
Costa and a smaller mobile home park next door, Brown's, are anomalies in this densely populated slice of southern Bergen County. Home to almost 240 families who pay less than $650 a month rent for their patches of earth, they have survived for decades against New Jersey's tumultuous real estate market.
But now their survival is in jeopardy. Officials in Lodi, a tired industrial town in search of a new identity, want to replace the weathered-looking 17-acre stretch of trailer parks with new stores that they say will generate more taxes. But for the cash-strapped residents of the two parks, nothing less than their way of life is at risk.
So the battle lines have been drawn, a battle over a rapidly disappearing commodity in northern New Jersey: affordable housing.
''The time for its redevelopment has come,'' said Stephen Lo Iacono, the borough manager of Lodi, a blue-collar town of 25,000 residents. ''This is an effort to bring Lodi into the 21st century.''
Though Mr. Lo Iacono would not say whether the goal of redevelopment was to increase revenue, he did say the site --assessed at $6 million --would produce at least $1 million in annual taxes when redeveloped, compared with the $250,000 it now generates.
On a recent morning in the parks -- filled with winding streets populated by many longtime residents with close ties -- an elderly woman shoveled her handkerchief-sized front lawn. Nearby, a middle-aged man cleared ice from a car parked an arm's length from the front door of his house as a lone cat sashayed across a driveway, leaving behind paw prints in the two-day-old snow.
The residents, many of them elderly or disabled, have more than winter weather on their minds these bitterly cold days. They are worried about being uprooted from the communities where some have nested for more than a quarter century. In October, the borough declared the parks and three other acres crammed with businesses an area in need of redevelopment. It announced plans to designate a developer who would bulldoze the parks, where some of the residences date to the 1940's.
In place of the parks -- on what has come to be a valuable highway site in one of the wealthiest counties in the state -- borough officials envision brisk commerce. For his part, Mr. Lo Iacono said he envisions such a store like Lowes, Staples or Bed, Bath and Beyond because ''the site screams out retail.''
''But it could also be offices,'' he added quickly.
Recycling the land now occupied by the parks is permitted under state law if the borough proves it is an area in need of redevelopment, as Lodi officials maintain. The law also says residents must be given relocation assistance, including money, and found comparably priced housing.
But those who oppose razing the trailer parks question what better use there could be than affordable housing. Indeed, many tenants are questioning how -- in the name of redevelopment -- the town can be allowed ''to confiscate our homes,'' said Kendell Kardt, who moved to Costa about three years ago with his wife and a stepson. A relative newcomer to Costa, Mr. Kardt, a 60-year-old musician who pays about $400 a month for his sliver of land, has emerged as a leader of the tenant group that has vowed to fight the plan.
Mr. Kardt, who paid $10,000 for his home, is working with William Eisenman, a boyish-looking 59-year-old park resident. Stricken with polio as a child, Mr. Eisenman has lived at Costa since 1972, when he paid $500 for his 8-foot-wide home, now crammed with papers and folders. One of his newsletters assails the redevelopment plan as the borough's way of saying, ''Get out of Lodi, trailer trash.''
To Mr. Eisenman, ''These mobile homes are the only legitimate form of affordable housing in Lodi.''
As for the redevelopment, he said that it was missing ''the human element.''
These days, the tenants are reduced to repeating the same question: ''Where can we go for this rent?''
The answer, Mr. Kardt said, is that ''we will be forced into a housing market that is brutal.''
The average cost of renting a two-bedroom apartment in Bergen County is $1,113 -- slightly above the state average of $1,026 -- according to figures provided by the National Low-Income Housing Coalition, a nonprofit advocacy group in Washington.
Homeowners File Lawsuits
The owners of the parks have sued Lodi, maintaining that the borough acted arbitrarily and capriciously and that the site does not meet the requirement to declare it an area in need of redevelopment. John Baldino, the borough attorney, said that Lodi officials denied the accusations included in the lawsuit, which was filed in State Superior Court in Hackensack in December.
Robert D. Bonanno Sr., whose family has owned Brown's trailer park since 1986 as well as a truck sales business and other ventures, called the borough's redevelopment plan discriminatory.
''Who will compensate me for the loss of my businesses?'' Mr. Bonanno said. ''And where can I find another location within miles of here?''
David Bole, a lawyer for the owners of the Costa Trailer Court, would only say the family ''is challenging the designation.''
This is not the first time someone has looked longingly at this patch of land. In the 1980's, a developer tried to build a hotel on the site of the park, but was blocked by residents, who contended that a variance needed for the project was not properly granted.
Despite the current legal tug-of-war, Mr. Lo Iacono said the borough was moving forward with the redevelopment and preparing to solicit proposals from developers in March.
Watching from the sidelines are advocates for affordable housing as well as owners of other mobile home communities, which in the last two decades have so evolved that they have a new name, manufactured housing, and often look like traditional subdivisions.
Though some say that what is happening in Lodi is an isolated incident, others say it could set in motion a domino effect for other parks, especially older ones on prime real estate, as well as remove affordable housing from an already scarce supply. The state Department of Community Affairs, which handles housing issues, predicts that New Jersey will need 146,000 affordable residences by 2014;. the New Jersey Catholic Conference puts the number at 600,000. The state says there are now 141,000 such units.
The average price of a new home in the state is $360,000 and for a resale it is $324,800. In contrast, existing mobile homes sell for $40,000 to $70,000 on average, while new ones cost $55,000 to $85,000, according to John C. Solly, president of JCS Management Consulting in Toms River, which specializes in such communities. Monthly land-lease fees average $350, said Mr. Solly, a 34-year veteran of the industry.
''As the state grows, we get squeezed out,'' said Robert Dolan, a second-generation mobile home park owner and past president of the New Jersey Manufactured Housing Association, a trade group. ''And the feeling from municipalities is, 'We don't need your type of housing anymore.'''
Until now, the state's stringent laws concerning evictions and park closings have enabled about 300 parks, also known as land-lease communities, to remain relatively stable over the last dozen years. In 2000 there were 33,600 mobile home residences in the state; a decade earlier there were 33,551, according to Census data.
Industry insiders say the squeeze comes from restrictive zoning that makes it difficult and at times prohibitively expensive to upgrade and expand older parks or to build new ones, particularly in the state's more densely developed northern half. Local officials, Mr. Dolan said, think that ''we are putting in the old-style trailer parks and are unfamiliar with the new styles.''
But Bruce Savage, a spokesman for the Manufactured Housing Institute, a trade organization in Arlington, Va., said redeveloping older parks had become increasingly popular in the last decade.
So far, no one is sounding alarms. Supporters say the industry has come a long way since the early days of the mobile home immortalized in 1960 with the Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz movie ''The Long, Long, Trailer,'' and are a far cry from the storm-tossed mobile homes seen on news clips.
Manufactured housing, while still built in a factory and trucked to a site, not only looks like traditional homes but usually sits on large plots. Some of these houses are even situated in communities with clubhouses, swimming pool and tennis courts. Such is the case at the Oaks of Weymouth, set on 153 acres in the Pine Barrens, in Atlantic County. About half of a planned 630 homes have been placed there, each with 1,300 to 1,800 square feet and set on lots of 5,000 to 18,000 square feet.
Nonetheless, the communities continue to suffer from an ''undeserved and unfortunate stigma, and many people still consider them trailer parks,'' said Christopher J. Hanlon, a lawyer in Freehold who represents mobile home communities.
History of Mobile Homes
Mobile homes, some say, really trace their roots to the 1500's, when Gypsies roamed from village to village in horse-drawn wagons. The first mobile homes are believed to have appeared in the United States in the 1870's on the Outer Banks of North Carolina, where beachfront properties were built on skids and moved from a moody ocean by teams of horses. ''Tin boxes'' --pulled by a trusty Oldsmobile or Chevrolet -- originated in the 1920's as trailer coaches for vacationing Americans who wanted homes away from home.
In New Jersey, mobile homes began peppering the landscape in the 1930's and 40's, when land was relatively cheap and formal zoning rules did not exist. Because they were used for recreational purposes, many trailers appeared in shore communities in the southern half of the state, Mr. Solly said.
Still other trailer parks, like the ones in Lodi, started appearing in northern New Jersey. Mr. Bonanno said his 2.5-acre park, which dates to the late 1940's, was started by five brothers who originally ran a gas station with toilet facilities on the site. But after a group of entertainers bound for Manhattan was allowed to park their trailer, others followed and the community grew to 74 homes.
During World War II, trailers evolved into mobile homes and were used as temporary housing for factory workers who traveled long distances to help in the war effort. After the war, veterans, faced with a housing shortage, lived in such homes, enabling their families to move to towns that held out the promise of jobs.
Initially, the homes averaged 8 feet wide and up to 24 feet long, but by the late 1940's they included bathrooms and extended to 40 feet long. The homes continued to grow, and by the late 1960's they were 12 feet wide and 70 feet long; a decade later they expanded to 28 feet wide, giving rise to the term doublewides and making them all but impossible to haul by car. In 1976, the homes were constructed to meet federal building codes, and by 1980 they became known as manufactured housing.
Communities built more than 30 years ago typically were put in the outskirts of towns. ''Now,'' said Mr. Savage of the national trade group, ''sprawl has caught up with them.''
That is why some parks like Brown's and Costa wear their locations like ill-fitting suits. One park in Mahwah is flanked by upscale homes, and two in Moonachie sit across from Teterboro Airport.
Some older parks, like Ideal Mobil Home Community in Avenel, have evolved over time. To change the face of an aging trailer park, ''you have to bring in new product'' and sometimes that means combining lots to accommodate today's homes, said Carmen Zullo, a vice president at the state trade association and owner, along with two siblings, of the 20-acre park in Avenel started by their father in the 1950's.
Today, ''there is always someone in need of affordable housing,'' Mr. Zullo said, noting that the average rent at the 315-unit park was $350 a month, compared with $800 for a one-bedroom rental apartment in the area.
Whether they are old or new, called mobile or manufactured housing, the trailers are situated in communities in which tenants own the house but not the land. And because they are trucked to the site and placed on slabs rather than permanent foundations, the homes are considered vehicles, not real estate, and have titles rather than mortgages.
A Stereotype That Endures
Then, of course, there is the stigma.
''The perception is that they are a detriment to the community because they are seen as a less desirable form of housing for a transient population,'' Mr. Savage said. ''That stereotype is embedded in American culture.''
Mr. Solly says the stigma remains in New Jersey ''because there are still remnants of the old decrepit houses in not well-maintained or managed parks sprinkled around the state and because people notice them more than the five-star modern parks.''
He also says some people live in mobile homes by choice, not necessity. They like the lifestyle, like not having people on the other side of the wall, as in an apartment building, and like having their own patch of land. Then, of course, they like the low cost.
In many municipalities, Mr. Solly said, rents for mobile home spaces are controlled, and in other instances the communities help towns meet their share of affordable housing. Yet, he said, ''the older mobile home communities are just there, and if they blew away tomorrow no one would cry.''
Here in Lodi, residents of the two parks -- where some homes are ragtag -- certainly feel that is true.
In another of his newsletters Mr. Eisenman of Costa Trailer Court said that Lodi was "being blinded by ratables'' and warned other borough residents, ''Your home could be next.''
Mr. Bonanno, the owner of Brown's trailer park, said that over time he had eliminated lots as homes became vacant, slimming the park's population to 47 homes, in the hope of developing his land himself.
''Now that I put the entire 5.5-acre parcel together, the town wants to take it,'' he said. As part of his redevelopment, he said, he would build an apartment building for his tenants where they could pay comparable rents and stay in the community.
But Mr. Lo Iacono says the rest of Lodi's residents support the redevelopment of the parks, which he said are dense and have no recreation or open space. The residents of the parks, he added, are also better served if the town redevelops the sites, given the protections afforded them under the redevelopment law.
''Can we be faulted for wanting to upgrade our town and project a different image?'' he said. ''I don't blame them for being upset, but as painful as it seems for them, the redevelopment is for the greater good of the entire community.''
At Costa, Mildred Samuels, a petite 76-year-old honey blonde, recently showed off her tidy home, which was gaily decorated for the holidays. A few neighbors were on hand to discuss the future.
Mrs. Samuels, then a widow, said she came to the park 25 years ago, when she remarried, to Abraham Samuels, who had been living there. Now retired, they have come to love the distinct rhythms of mobile home living and what Mrs. Samuels called its neighborliness.
''We care for each other,'' she said, noting that she has the keys to the home of her 83-year-old neighbor, John Boris, who she said ''can barely walk.''
That is why she is so adamant. ''I don't want to move,'' she said, choking back tears. ''It will kill my husband.''
Correction:  February 1, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about the possible demise of two mobile home parks in Lodi misstated the release year of the movie ''The Long, Long Trailer,'' starring Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz, which illustrated the cumbersomeness of trailers of that era. It was 1954, not 1960.
