The time was 1998, when Republicans were on the verge of impeaching President Bill Clinton. Howard Dean, then governor of Vermont, was unhappy with Mr. Clinton and disgusted with the Republican leadership in Washington. But he did find a Republican to admire.
''George W. Bush did very well,'' Dr. Dean said of the Texas governor, who had just been elected to a second term. ''Why? Because he is talking about his issues in a civil, thoughtful way in getting his point across.''
Dr. Dean could have been describing himself as governor -- a measured, pragmatic, nonideological chief executive who could tip his hat to a Republican.
That dispassionate Dr. Dean may seem like a distant cousin to the finger-jabbing populist who has emerged on the presidential campaign trail and who alarmed many viewers Monday night with his howling concession speech in Iowa.
But that more conciliatory Dr. Dean has been preserved here on 300 hours of videotape taken by CCTV, Channel 17, the regional government-access cable channel, during his nearly 12 years as governor.
The tapes show Dr. Dean as a no-nonsense decision maker grappling with the stuff of governing -- health care, education, attracting businesses to the state. It is this man whom his aides are trying to reintroduce to voters in New Hampshire this week with town hall meetings, where Dr. Dean can discuss issues and showcase his accomplishments.
The tapes reveal just what a small stage Dr. Dean occupied before his presidential bid. They also show how different he was as governor, raising questions about how much presidential politics can both distort a candidate and magnify his true nature.
With slightly more than 600,000 people, Vermont ranked 49th among the states in the 2000 census, ahead of Wyoming. Although Dr. Dean dealt with the range of domestic issues confronting many governors, the dollar amounts involved were comparatively minuscule.
Nor did he hold rallies or deliver big speeches, except for his State of the State addresses. There seemed to be no occasion for the kind of exhortations he has made to crowds of thousands in this campaign.
He held weekly news conferences, attended by a handful of reporters, in a small, unadorned room in the legislative office building in Montpelier, taking questions until none were left. He seemed more formal then, always in a suit and tie, never in rolled-up shirt sleeves.
Still, there was a small-town nature to his appearances. He gave out his home address on call-in shows. The profoundly local aspect of his job was clear in 2002, when he said, ''I can assure you, of all the things that I had to live with which was the most difficult were the cascades of calls in the summer of '93 and '94 about how long the wait was at the Department of Motor Vehicles.''
As early as 1997, speculation began that he might run for president in 2000. His reasons were close to home. ''Because I really think this country has not paid enough attention to kids and families, and we have done a really good job in this state, relative to other states,'' he said. But, he added, ''I have no idea if I have higher aspirations or not.''
At the same time, the tapes show several flashes of the Dr. Dean who has emerged on the campaign trail. His message seemed unvarnished from the start. In his opening State of the State address in 1992, he said his budget cuts meant that ''the pain for Vermonters will be real.''
During Mr. Clinton's impeachment in 1998, Dr. Dean took a now-familiar jab at Washington and at Mr. Clinton's Republican accusers, saying, ''Who would want to listen to those windbags pontificate about morality when they are so incapable of illustrating it themselves?''
When Dr. Dean was praising Mr. Bush in 1998, he added that the Texas governor and others he did not name were successful because ''they govern from the center, they are respectful of their opponents.'' Governing from the center was Dr. Dean's approach as well, and he often cited the Clinton model with approval.
As a presidential candidate, however, Dr. Dean has criticized that model as outmoded and little more than ''damage control'' against the Republicans. But as governor, it worked for him. He balanced the state budget, cut taxes, favored tightening the rules for welfare recipients, won the top rating of the National Rifle Association, opposed methadone clinics, fought the legalization of marijuana (a big issue in Vermont) and was re-elected five times.
''I am the most fiscally conservative governor this state has seen in 40 years,'' he declared in 1998. ''Nobody can manage these programs more tightly and more conservatively than I have.''
He supported the death penalty. He said in 1997 that he had initially opposed it because sometimes the wrong person was executed and ''if the state says it's wrong to kill, why should it kill?'' But, he said, he came to believe that some crimes, like killing children and police officers, ''are so bad and they don't seem to be getting any better that maybe we ought to try something else.''
He also appointed judges whom he considered conservative, even though their stiff sentences resulted in overcrowded jails. ''I've put much more conservative people on the bench because I've wanted longer sentences, and I'm getting those longer sentences,'' he said in 1997.
Despite these conservative credentials, Dr. Dean has been cast by some pundits in the presidential campaign as an extreme liberal, largely because he signed a bill making Vermont the only state to provide the same legal benefits to gay couples as to married heterosexuals. But in Vermont, he was criticized by some for not going further and allowing gay marriage.
During the drafting of the bill, his public comments were more matter-of-fact than passionate as he noted that the measure had been forced upon the state by the courts. He signed the bill in private.
He refused to say whether he personally favored same-sex marriage. ''The matter of what I personally think about gay marriage is my business,'' he told reporters.
Reporters asked why a civil union would not be considered marriage, eliciting a rare personal reference.
''Marriage for many people, including myself, is a religious ceremony,'' he said. ''We were actually married by a judge because my wife is Jewish and I'm Christian, but it was a religious ceremony, one we wrote, one that we asked to be blessed by God.''
How, he was asked, was his marriage religious if a judge presided? ''I think that people's religion is deeply personal,'' he replied, ''and if I think it was a religious ceremony, that's good enough for me.''
Only after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, did foreign affairs begin to creep in to Dr. Dean's public comments. Immediately after the attacks, he said he was open to ''more aggressive measures in terms of dealing with terrorism, measures that we would have perhaps declined to do on humanitarian or constitutional grounds.'' He did not specify what measures he had in mind.
But when he was asked if the United States should retaliate for the attacks, he said, ''I don't think we should do anything out of revenge.''
Still, he added: ''We have to capture Osama bin Laden, and I think we have to destroy his terrorist network. So I don't consider that retaliating; I consider that protection.''
At an August 2002 news conference, he was asked whether the United States should remain focused on catching Mr. bin Laden rather than attacking Iraq. ''I have not and I don't intend to start now faulting the president for the conduct of the war on terrorism,'' he replied.
His approach, of course, has evolved into an intense antiwar, anti-Bush fervor. But there was little in his pronouncements as governor, even after Sept. 11, to indicate that his antiwar stance would become central to his presidential bid. As late as August 2002, when it was clear he was running, he said, ''Let's talk about balancing the budget, which is the centerpiece of the campaign.''
Still, in that same news conference, he seemed inclined to support a pre-emptive attack on Iraq, though only if Mr. Bush provided evidence that Saddam Hussein had unconventional weapons and only if Mr. Bush acknowledged that the war might take as long as 10 years.
When a reporter noted to Dr. Dean that other countries had nuclear weapons but the United States did not attack them, Dr. Dean replied, ''Other countries do not have leaders like Saddam -- and possess nuclear weapons and have leaders like Saddam Hussein, who clearly is a great dangerous, unpredictable person.''
Dr. Dean chafed at the idea of prepared remarks. In his final news conference as governor, he was asked last January what he would say the next day in his farewell address. ''I'm going to talk about whatever comes into my head,'' he said happily. He added, ''I speak much better off the cuff than I do from a written speech.''
Turning uncharacteristically reflective, he said that it was dawning on him that it would be hard not to be governor anymore and not to be able to influence events. He also said he was surprised to find that since he started running for president, he was losing his anonymity. ''Yesterday was the first time that somebody recognized me,'' he said, sounding a bit amazed at this first step toward political celebrity.
''I have assumed I'm going to be able to run around the subway with a suitcase and nobody's going to worry about who I am or pay any attention to me,'' he said. ''Of course that's not going to happen.''
At that point, Christopher Graff of the Associated Press, dean of the Montpelier press corps, said to him, ''If they don't start recognizing you, Governor, come home.''
''I'll tell you something, Chris,'' Dr. Dean said. ''No matter what happens, this will always be home.'' He was suddenly choked up with emotion and tears welled in his eyes. ''And I'm going to quit there,'' he said, hurrying out of the room.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
