NO sooner had Howard Dean given his now infamous speech on Monday night than the same social forces that had raised him up began chopping him down.
Techno-mutations of Dr. Dean's performance proliferated like kudzu. Dozens of remixes, overlaying his speech to music, were played on radio stations, computers and at dance parties nationwide.
The Deanian shriek can be used as an alert chime for the Eudora e-mail program, instant messaging or other software (http://pad.metoca.net). It has also been spliced into movies and television dialogues.A digitally manipulated photo showed Dr. Dean strangling a kitten with his outstretched hand. Another image from the speech showed his eyeballs jiggling in their sockets.
Mentions of ''Doing the Dean,'' a dance where you supposedly roll up your sleeves and bounce around, appeared on blogs, the online discussion boards where Dr. Dean first began attracting attention.
During his campaign, Dr. Dean has repeatedly rallied crowds by repeating ''You have the power!'' And his campaign boasted of moving politics away from a broadcast medium into something more interactive.
But in a connected world, empowerment works both ways.
It is just as easy to register the Web site DeanGoesNuts.com as AlaskaforDean.com. And if the anti-establishment appeal of Dr. Dean's Internet campaign has attracted new people into politics, the pop culture status of his shriek is attracting the otherwise politically disengaged. (MTV.com has a page of remixes of the Dean speech.)
Dr. Dean made his speech Monday night. The soundtracks were available by Tuesday afternoon. Within hours, many blogs had linked to the remixes, and by Wednesday, they were being played on national radio and television.
''If you really want to spread the word on something really, really quickly, there is only one way: get on the Internet and get the micropundits, the bloggers, to cover it,'' said Jonas M. Luster, a sociologist who has heard his own Dean remix played on the radio.
DeanGoesNuts.com was actually started by a creative Dean supporter, Caner Ozdemir, a 21-year-old college student in Muncie, Ind.
''I thought the more people saw it and heard it, the less shock it has,'' said Mr. Ozdemir, who posted requests for remixes on the Dean campaign blog, identifying himself as a Dean supporter.
The campaign staff, however, didn't see eye to eye with him. The Web site administrators deleted his requests and suspended his account.
''They didn't feel like that at the time,'' he said, ''and they just wanted to shut me up.''
