DAVE is a sensitive New Age barbarian, the kind of fellow Conan might eat as an appetizer. He likes to imitate bird calls, do needlepoint, play with shadow puppets and wear polka-dot boxer shorts. Despite a Schwarzenegger-size chest, he is an accidental action hero who grovels and pleads with the forces of evil to spare him.
His parents are the king and queen of Udrogoth, but they are usually out of town on royal business, leaving Dave and his two sisters to battle magical sprites, man-eating muffins, teenage-delinquent dragons and the most persistent villain, the Dark Lord Chuckles (aka the Silly Pig). Their kingdom, with its loyal subjects and dastardly invaders, is the setting for ''Disney's Dave the Barbarian,'' a new animated series shown on Disney Channel at 5:30 p.m. on Fridays with repeats over the weekend.
Dave's big sister, Candy, is a medieval material girl who likes the Backstreet Minstrels; his fierce little sister, Fang, prefers chomping on leg of fowl. Then there's Lula, the sharp-tongued talking sword with the voice of Estelle Harris; Uncle Oswidge, the fallible sorcerer; and Faffy, a pet dragon who spits lightning. As the theme song goes, ''They ain't the greatest heroes, but they're the only ones we've got.''
The show's biggest charmer is Dave, who explains that he had wanted to be a barbarian since he was 5, when he thought that ''it meant a librarian who also cut hair.''
The gentle giant Dave is ''a lepidopterist trapped in the body of a barbarian,'' said Doug Langdale, the show's creator and executive producer. ''He's sensitive and artistic and not that interested in smashing things up.''
He usually vanquishes evil not with brute strength but in quirky, peaceful ways: Dave offers his origami to a villain, for instance, and helps a repressed monster express his emotions by weaving potholders. After Dave triumphs over a recurring tyrant, the narrator intones that our hero ''defeated evil Piggy with the awesome power of folded paper . . . and bird calls.''
Mr. Langdale said, ''The overall theme of the show is you can't achieve success by being what other people want you to be, but being what you really are.''
Though billed as an ''offbeat comedy in the Middle Ages,'' ''Dave the Barbarian'' aims for humor partly by playing fast and loose with its medieval setting. Fang, wearing a bone through her ponytail, resembles the prehistoric Pebbles from ''The Flintstones.'' The self-involved Candy likes to hang out at the ''great indoor marketplace'' and seems to take her sartorial cues from Britney Spears. ''Why do I have to be princess of, like, the weirdest kingdom ever?'' she whines. And that crown is definitely a ''fashion don't.'' Even rogue dragon biker dudes (with the voices of Metallica's James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich) show up in one episode.
Dave's world just doesn't seem to share the same millennium with, say, ''Redwall,'' the animated children's series a few years ago in which woodland creatures battled one another at medieval Redwall Abbey.
''The key to it is that it isn't really the Middle Ages,'' Mr. Langdale said of ''Dave the Barbarian.''
There are homages to King Arthur, like the episode in which Lula the sword gets stuck in a tree stump and whoever pulls her out rules the kingdom. But Udrogoth, at heart, is more modern than medieval, and Dave is not a barbarian but a Renaissance man.
Lisanne Renner
FOR YOUNG VIEWERS
