STUDENTS returning to class last week for the start of the spring semester at Adelphi University might get A's for their analytic skills if they described their school as thriving. By just about any measure, the picture on Adelphi's manicured 75-acre Garden City campus is brighter than it was five years ago.
Enrollment is up. Adelphi currently has close to 8,000 students in its undergraduate and graduate programs, up from a low of 4,000 in 1998, though still below the 10,000 students it had a decade earlier.
Applications have risen as well. ''We had 1,200 applicants in 1999 and 2,400 this year, a 100 percent increase,'' said the university's president, Robert A. Scott. ''And their SAT's are stronger too: 1096 for this year's freshman class, as compared to last year's average of 1070, up from 1049 in 1998. We've also had a major increase in our retention rate, which demonstrates that students are happy with the quality of education they receive here.'' To house some of them, a sixth residence hall opened in the fall.
Nearly 100 new faculty members have been hired since 2000, 34 in this past fall semester alone. Adelphi currently employs 240 faculty members, still considerably below the high of 300 in 1987 but up significantly from 196 in 1998. ''Many of us were concerned that the hiring was taking place too fast,'' said Martin Haas, the faculty senate chairman. ''My department, history, has doubled in the last four years. But in fact it has rejuvenated the university and led to very high morale.''
University officials say its budget is balanced and its financial outlook has solidified. ''We have close to $70 million in invested funds, and our endowment is growing steadily,'' said Jack Bierwirth, formerly chief operating officer of Grumman and now an Adelphi trustee. ''Our bond rating is a solid A-minus, and we expect a very strong rating next year.''
Alumni giving has increased nearly 400 percent since 2000, said John Gutleber, an alumnus and trustee. ''In the 90's you didn't mention that you went to Adelphi,'' he said. ''Now we've seen an enormous turnaround.''
In short, Adelphi has come a long way from the fiscal disaster that sent the 108-year-old private liberal arts university into a near death spiral in the late 90's under Peter Diamandopoulos, its seventh president. He attempted to elevate a school with a modest academic reputation to an Ivy League level. To finance his dream, he raised tuition and cut staff, resulting in a dangerous drop in enrollment and a steep reduction in revenue that brought the school into a full-fledged fiscal crisis.
In 1997, the state Board of Regents stepped in, dismissed the entire board of trustees and appointed a new one, which ousted Dr. Diamandopoulos and hired a new president, Matthew Goldstein. When Dr. Goldstein left Adelphi two years later to become chancellor of the City University of New York, the board hired Dr. Scott.
While numbers tell a big part of Adelphi's story, much of the change on campus is attitudinal. Gayle Insler is dean of the college of liberal arts and sciences and was the union president during the troubled period in the 90's. ''Today Adelphi is all about possibilities and opportunities; then it was about punishment and restriction,'' she said. ''We're in a better position today than we could have hoped for years ago.''
The students seem enthusiastic. ''No one ever drops out here,'' said Christopher Horan, a senior double-majoring in music and communications. ''That's because there's always someone to help you if you don't understand something. I couldn't get a better education anywhere else.''
Andrea Fasano, president of the senior class, said she had seen a welcome increase in school spirit as students got more involved both on and off campus and in the life of the university. ''We're the first class to go all the way through college with Dr. Scott, since he started when we did,'' she said. ''We've learned from him that the more you put into your experience, the more you get out of it. You can't sit in your room and complain. He doesn't. Afternoons and weekends he comes to our games and roots for us. That really matters to us.''
Dr. Scott describes the school's mission as a mandate to ''prepare students for careers, commerce, citizenship and character'' through ''a strong liberal arts and sciences program bound with our professional schools.''
Adelphi currently offers courses of study in arts and sciences, humanities, business, education, nursing and allied health services, social work and clinical psychology.
''We wanted fiscal stability first, and now that we have achieved that we plan to move into a new phase of vitality,'' said Dr. Scott, who came to Adelphi after 15 years as president of Ramapo College in New Jersey. ''In 1997 we had a $10 million deficit. Now we have a balanced budget. And it is time for big plans.''
These include developing new academic programs like degrees in applied physics, nutrition and environmental science. Dr. Scott said he planned to increase the budget for sabbaticals for research and wants to build a new sports center, expand Olmsted Theater and renovate older buildings like the Woodruff Hall gymnasium.
Not all the scars have healed from the Diamandopoulos years. ''Teaching workloads are still higher than at other Long Island universities, and faculty pay is at the lower end of the spectrum,'' said Debbie Cooperstein, president of the local chapter of the American Association of University Professors, the faculty union. ''When you have an identity crisis the size of the one we had, it takes more than a few years to set everything right.''
But Adelphi's net gain in faculty bucks a national trend that saw a 5 percent decline in the number of tenured professors, according to statistics provided by the American Association of University Professors. ''It's great having new faculty with energy, creativity and cohesiveness of purpose to deal with the huge influx of students,'' said Dr. Insler, who taught biology at the university for 20 years before becoming a dean.
While approximately 1,200 students live in the six residence halls on campus, including the recently opened $14.5 million New Hall, the university remains primarily a commuter school.
Nevertheless, students who commute from as far away as New York City say the opportunities are worth it.
''This semester, in addition to a full load of classes, I have an internship in Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton's office,'' said Ewa Sobczynska, a 24-year-old international studies major who grew up in Poland and is part of the honors college at Adelphi. ''It's amazing to me that at my age I am able to participate in the political life of such an influential person.''
Dr. Scott said that one of the core beliefs of his administration is the value of what he calls an engaged university. ''We feel it is vital for us to be engaged with society and with the community,'' he said. ''That means we want students to work in an off-campus setting, to be involved in the community in meaningful ways through internships, volunteerism and other field placements.
''We are committed to making that happen for all our students, not only those studying nursing, but our English majors, too. We want to get the students into the community and the community onto the campus.''
Dr. Insler attributes much of the growth of the university to increased interaction with the outside world. ''We're part of the community in a very productive way that just wasn't there before Dr. Scott,'' she said.
''He's just what we needed,'' said Michael Lazarus, a trustee and an alumnus. ''He jumped into community life here with both feet. He believes in preparing students for a future he hopes will take place on Long Island. That's something those of us involved in the local economy applaud mightily.''
Students, faculty and trustees give Dr. Scott high marks, especially when it comes to paying attention to their needs. ''He not only listens when we discuss our concerns, he takes notes,'' said Dr. Haas, the chairman of the faculty senate, who has taught history at the university for more than 30 years.
Despite the usual student complaints about the availability of parking and the quality of the food, Dawn Sagan, student government president, said that the students were happy with the administration. ''We all feel they're on our side,'' said Ms. Sagan, a senior psychology major who plans to earn an M.S. at Adelphi next year and then head for medical school. ''We know they'll go to bat for us when we need them. My class will leave in May feeling they did great things here at Adelphi. They work hard to give us that feeling.''
