There is little question that Jaromir Jagr, when he is happy, is still one of the most -- if not the most -- gifted hockey players in the world.
And there is no question that Jagr, a 31-year-old right wing who made his debut with one shot in the Rangers' 9-1 loss to the Ottawa Senators on Saturday night, is undoubtedly as happy as he has been in a long time.
But it remains equally true that Glen Sather's acquisition of Jagr from the Washington Capitals on Friday -- a move made after the Rangers won two of their previous 10 games to fall further back in the playoff race -- does not address the team's most pressing needs.
The Rangers' defense is in tatters. Three of the team's top six defensemen are out with injuries: Greg de Vries (knee), Darius Kasparaitis (knee) and Tom Poti (back). So is the organization's top defensive prospect, Fedor Tjutin (knee).
Mike Dunham, the Rangers' No. 1 goaltender, is out indefinitely with a mild concussion. Even with Dunham, the team's goaltending has been inconsistent.
Jagr's strength is scoring goals or setting them up -- not preventing them.
''Have you ever seen an All-Star team play defense?'' That was the rhetorical question asked by one member of the defending Stanley Cup champion Devils during last season's playoff run, when it was observed that the Rangers always seem to field an All-Star roster but have rarely achieved success.
And that, concluded the Devils' player, who requested anonymity, was the main reason the Rangers have not qualified for the playoffs for a franchise-record six consecutive seasons, despite all their stars.
Not much has changed this season. The Rangers (18-20-7-4) trail the Islanders by 6 points in the race for the Eastern Conference's eighth and final playoff berth with 33 games to play.
''We needed a shot in the arm to help us get into the playoffs,'' said Sather, the Rangers' president, general manager and coach, who heard chants of ''Fire Sather!'' at Madison Square Garden during the Rangers' three-game losing streak entering Saturday's game. ''And if we were going to do something, the time to do it is now, before it's too late.''
That was the same reasoning Sather used when he obtained Jagr's former teammate Aleksei Kovalev from the Penguins in a similar fire-sale trade last February. But Sather's acquisition of Kovalev, like his deals for Eric Lindros and Pavel Bure before it, was not enough to put the Rangers in the postseason.
''The bottom line is he's going to help us win hockey games,'' Rangers center Petr Nedved said of his good friend Jagr. Nedved and Jagr helped form one of the league's most potent lines in Pittsburgh in the mid-1990's.
Early in his career, Jagr helped the Penguins win consecutive Stanley Cups. But he grew disenchanted in Pittsburgh and was traded to Washington in July 2001. After signing a seven-year, $77 million deal with the Capitals, the best Jagr could do in two and a half seasons in Washington was help the Capitals qualify for one playoff appearance, where they lost in the first round.
''I still think he's a great player,'' Nedved said of Jagr, who this season was selected to his ninth N.H.L. All-Star Game. ''A lot of people are saying he could be a problem. But I never saw that in Pittsburgh.''
The same accusations came up in Washington, especially after the Capitals fired their coach, Bruce Cassidy, earlier this season.
''I get the feeling he had a problem maybe with the coach in Washington,'' Nedved said Friday.
For his part, Cassidy, now a scout with the Chicago Blackhawks, recently said he felt Jagr had tried hard for him this season. Even so, the Capitals are 14th in the 15-team Eastern Conference.
From a hockey standpoint, there is no question that Sather won in the trade for Jagr, who for years has openly pined to play in New York. All Sather had to give up was Carter, a right wing the Rangers felt had underperformed in New York. Carter, who was ninth on the Rangers with 17 points (10 goals, 7 assists), makes $2.8 million this season.
The Rangers will pick up the rest of what Jagr is owed this season, around $5 million, but the Capitals will pay $20 million of the remaining $44 million on his contract over the next four seasons. Jagr also agreed to defer $1 million a season on the rest of his contract.
The Rangers, in other words, will pay Jagr $5 million a season over the next four seasons, a bargain for a player of his ability, even given that Jagr's average points per game have decreased in each of the last six seasons. For Washington this season, Jagr had 45 points (19 goals, 26 assists) in 46 games, tying him for the 12th most points in the league.
Jagr will undoubtedly be used on the Rangers' power play, which, Sather argued Friday, has cost them games this season. But as Kovalev warned about Jagr: ''We have to make sure we don't get to the situation where he's not happy. He likes to win and compete. If he wins, he'll be happy.''
If not, the Rangers could find themselves in yet another expensive mess.
HOCKEY
