PERHAPS you trailed the Grateful Dead in a paisley-painted Microbus, or crammed the whole family, with luggage, into a Beetle taxi in Mexico. Maybe you and a buddy recreated that da-da-da commercial for the Golf, cruising aimlessly and picking up discarded furniture.
Whatever richly memorable experiences you may have had in a Volkswagen, you probably did not have them in a memorably rich Volkswagen. That may soon change. After decades as an icon of the counterculture and a symbol of sensible chic, VW has elitist aspirations. Its latest model, the 2004 Phaeton, goes where no Jetta dared to tread.
My test car had a sticker price of $73,365 -- and this was only the entry-level Phaeton V-8. That tab included $1,000 for Antibes Blue paint and $300 for chestnut interior trim. (For $1,300 you could have once bought an entire new Beetle, with paint.)
Did I mention the gas-guzzler tax?
It is $1,300 for the V-8, which has an economy rating of 15 m.p.g. in town and 22 on the highway. (The more thirsty flagship model, the Phaeton W-12, is rated at 12/19 m.p.g., which earns it a $3,000 surcharge.) Whatever deficiencies your old VW may have had, it was not penalized by the government for poor fuel economy.
That sound you hear is the final nail in the coffin of the Age of Aquarius.
The Phaeton (pronounced FAY-tun) is a large car aimed at the biggest Mercedes-Benz and BMW sedans -- and by extension, the new A8 L from Audi, a subsidiary of the Volkswagen Group. This is not a lightweight crowd on any scale, and I must note up front that the Phaeton holds its own on the road against some of the world's best sedans.
The Phaeton is a bit longer than either the Mercedes S-Class or the extended version of the BMW 7 Series. It has the most powerful V-8 in the class. (Borrowed from Audi, that engine produces 335 horsepower in the VW, 5 more than in the A8 L.) The passenger compartment is huge and the appointments are second to none.
The Phaeton W-12 goes further. Its engine, a W-shape 12-cylinder, will show up later this year in the Bentley Continental GT supercoupe, whose twin turbochargers will raise the horsepower to more than 500, from 420 in the Phaeton. The same basic engine, expanded to 16 cylinders, is destined for the $1 million Bugatti Veyron, another future product from the relentlessly upward-striving VW Group.
Compared with the Veyron, the Phaeton is a relative bargain. The flagship W-12 is $98,215 including shipping charges and guzzler penalty. Just a few of the $10,900 in possible options will make it the first six-figure Volkswagen.
If you find this shocking, consider that the company has run advertisements that read, ''What were you guys smoking?'' In this case, the guys were in the executive suite.
A few years ago, Ferdinand Piëch, the strong-willed chairman of the Volkswagen Group, decided that VW needed to compete head-on with its fellow German automakers. Mr. Piëch, who has since retired, ordered up new vehicles that incorporated a range of technical innovations like VW's exclusive W-shape engine.
First to arrive was the Passat W-8, a plush $40,000 version of the midsize sedan, which drew a yawn from customers. Last year brought the Touareg, a respectable sport utility with an inscrutable name (and a price that can top $50,000), developed in conjunction with the Porsche Cayenne. Now the Phaeton, which has sold poorly in Europe, is rolling onto American shores.
There are several reasons to be skeptical about this überwagen. When you think of luxury, VW doesn't spring to mind. Its dealers, who must now pamper demanding luxury-car buyers, rank well below the industry leaders in customer satisfaction.
Nor has VW been scoring high in quality rankings, including Consumer Reports', and the company angered customers last year with its delayed and seemingly disorganized response to a spate of ignition coil failures.
There is also the matter of cannibalism. Americans can already buy a large, powerful, all-wheel-drive sedan from the VW Group, the AudiA8 L. Like the other upscale new VW's, the Phaeton might be expected to steal sales from Audi. VW officials dispute this, asserting that the two brands appeal to different customers. Audi's target is BMW, with its sporty image, while VW aims at Mercedes, with its reputation for solid, safe, well-engineered automobiles.
One might think the Phaeton is simply a rebadged A8, but this is not the case. While their V-8 engines and all-wheel-drive systems are essentially the same, the A8 is made of aluminum and the Phaeton of steel.
The Phaeton is therefore the chubbiest kid in the class. At 5,194 pounds, the V-8 model weighs 730 pounds more than the BMW 745Li. Some 55 percent of the weight is at the front end, contributing to a tendency toward understeer -- that is, a resistance to change direction.
Still, the car is a sweetheart on the open road, as I discovered on a trip from New York to Detroit, and back. Engineered for the autobahn, the Phaeton gobbled up long mountain stretches of Interstate 80 in western Pennsylvania. The 200 m.p.h. speedometer is just for fantasy, since the top speed is electronically limited to 140 m.p.h., but the car feels so unruffled that anything seems possible.
Solid, substantial and stable at any speed, the Phaeton reminds you of the sorts of heavy, understated sedans that Mercedes used to build. An air suspension lets you adjust the shocks from firm to soft, and you can raise or lower the ride height by pressing a button.
While the styling is conservative, the car has presence simply because of its size. Yes, it resembles a Passat that has been stretched and inflated, but you won't mistake the two cars on the road. For one thing, the Phaeton grille carries a tortilla-size VW emblem, and for another, its rear roof pillar has a sharp, elegant rake that gives the car a formal air.
The cabin is especially special. VW's interiors are among the industry's best in terms of design, materials and execution, and the designers outdid themselves on this cost-no-object car. There is just the right amount of wood, richly lustrous without being polished to the point of plasticity. The leather is first rate.
You may drive the car for a while before you realize that something seems to be missing. The dashboard air vents are hidden behind wood panels, which motor out of the way only when you set the climate control to direct air at your body. Otherwise the heat is radiant, emanating from the porous surface atop the instrument panel. Four sets of controls allow occupants, front and rear, to create their own climate zones.
The seats in the test car adjusted 18 ways, with built-in heaters, coolers, massagers and lower-back supporters. A motor shortens or lengthens the bottom cushion at your command, and another tilts the top of the backrest separately from the section below it. The back seats can be adjusted all sorts of ways, too.
Still, while I had no specific complaints about the VW seats, they failed to impress my backside like those in the big Audi.
Every new car in this class gets more electronic gizmos. Aside from power air vents and a power rear sunshade, VW adds a power shade under the power sunroof. The trunk lid raises and lowers by itself, in theory, though it occasionally froze in midair, forcing me (or the hotel bell captain) to try to force it open.
And while I am continually impressed by Teutonic engineering, the Germans still struggle with low-tech things like cup holders. Before I had even left Manhattan, my standard half-liter bottle of water had tumbled onto the floor a half-dozen times; the holders are too shallow and too wide.
Nor have the German automakers embraced the less-is-more philosophy when it comes to electronic controls. While BMW forces you to call up menus with a mouselike device, an approach that Audi adopted and significantly improved upon, VW's approach is closer to that of Mercedes. An array of 12 buttons calls up various functions (including audio system, climate control, navigation aid) on a central dashboard screen. On either side of this screen, eight more buttons correspond to listings on menus that change depending on the system being addressed.
While not as maddening as BMW's iDrive, the VW controls are hardly user-friendly, and I found myself browsing menu after menu, trying to find the tire-pressure monitor. Is it embedded behind the Vehicle button? Under Settings? What does Manual mean? I tried the Help button, but it was unhelpful.
You must also push a button to agree, each time you start the car and try to adjust the air flow, that you will not allow these distracting controls to distract you into a crash. The screen also urges you to ''obey traffic laws,'' which is useful if nagging in-laws cannot ride along.
The navigation system deserves special mention, because it is perhaps the poorest I've ever used. It is CD-based, requiring eight discs to cover the United States and Canada (instead of a single DVD) and slow to respond to commands.
Worse, it is exceedingly hard to program, and the map displays are largely uninformative. In many rural areas, the map simply shows an icon, representing your car, on a line, representing the highway. In urban areas, you see a grid of streets without names -- even in Manhattan, where it's nice to know that you are merging onto the F.D.R. Drive and not into the Lincoln Tunnel.
In the Cleveland suburbs, the map didn't bother to display the names of towns or intersecting roads, but from time to time an obscure cemetery or golf course would pop up.
While the Phaeton will let you know if the fuel-filler cap is loose, it will not let you fast-forward or reverse a music CD -- as you can on many economy cars -- so you can catch a passage obscured by the navigation system's voice prompts.
I found I liked the Phaeton much better if I switched off the navigation system. The big VW is easy to drive, comfortable, quiet and classy, and despite its electronic overkill, it manages to feel understated. It may appeal to well-to-do consumers who disdain designer labels.
Still, given the choices in this class, I'd opt for the Audi, which is lighter, better looking, more contemporary feeling and more prestigious, for just $3,000 more.
But in the end, the big sticker may not mean much. VW is already offering subsidized leases -- as little as $697.92 a month for three years on the Phaeton V-8 -- to counter lower-than-projected demand.
VW has certainly proved that it can build a luxury car. Now it just needs to prove that it can sell one.
INSIDE TRACK: All right, what were you guys smoking?
Behind the Wheel
