There is a lot of earnest nodding as Leo Godzich tells the seven couples in his premarital education class how important it is to enter into marriage knowing each other's finances, sharing assets, and agreeing on their budget priorities. He tells of a time early in his marriage when he and his wife went without utilities -- dinner by candelight, every night -- to save money, and how, because they chose their sacrifice together, it became a fond memory.
He asks his students what they will budget for, and they call out the basics: Shelter. Food. Car payments. Utilities. Clothing. Entertainment. Debt. Pets. There is a pause, then one young man asks, uncertainly, ''Golf?'' Yes, if that's a priority, Dr. Godzich says.
It is a mixed group, this premarital class at the Phoenix First Assembly of God. Some are members of the church, but most are not. Some have their weddings planned, while others are just beginning to explore the idea of marriage. Most are middle class, but some are eligible for a subsidy through the state welfare program, which has budgeted $1 million for initiatives to promote marriage -- much as President Bush proposes to do, to the tune of $1.5 billion, in the welfare re-authorization bill.
Many such programs already exist, without government backing. Over the last decade, marriage education has mushroomed, in churches, community centers, colleges and even high schools.
There are dozens -- perhaps hundreds -- of curricula, written by therapists, lawyers, psychologists and pastors, covering everything from communications skills and finances to sexuality and divorce law.
What there is not is solid evidence that such efforts can bring down the nation's divorce rate, which has plateaued at about 4 divorces per 1,000 people -- down from the high of 5.3 in 1979 and 1981, but still higher than the 2 per 1,000 of the 1940's and 1950's.
For several years, states have experimented with ways to use money from the Federal Temporary Assistance to Needy Families program to promote marriage. West Virginia pays a $100 monthly bonus to married welfare recipients. Oklahoma, like Arizona, has appropriated money for marriage education, and has even hired a pair of marriage experts to hold ''relationship rallies'' around the state.
Several states offer cheaper marriage licenses to those who have had marriage education; in Florida, couples who have not taken such a course have to wait several days for a license.
The Bush administration's plan to use federal money to foster healthy marriages among low-income families, first announced two years ago, has drawn considerable fire. While there is consensus among family experts, conservative and liberal, that two-parent households give children the strongest start, there is sharp disagreement about government involvement in promoting marriage.
Some see such efforts as intrusive meddling in a purely private aspect of life. Others worry that marriage promotion could push women to enter into, or stay in, marriages with abusive men. And many advocacy groups concerned with poverty say that what low-income women need is not marriage education, but jobs, training, education and child care. The Bush administration has it backwards, they say: self-sufficiency leads to healthy marriages, not the other way around.
There are other concerns , too. The 1996 Federal Defense of Marriage Act, defines marriage as a man-woman union, and with gay marriage emerging as a wedge issue with voters, some see the Bush administration's marriage-education initiative as a sop to conservatives pushing for a stronger stance against same-sex marriage.
Those in the Phoenix class, though, are enthusiastic about the information and advice they are getting.
''We've been overwhelmingly impressed by these classes,'' said Sean Algee, 29, an embalmer, who attends with his fiancée, Tanya Wilson, 28, who works at a public radio station. ''We get in the car afterwards, and we start talking right away, and it just keeps going. It brings out so many things I wouldn't usually be talking about.''
Ms. Wilson said it was her parents' idea to find some premarital education. ''We have two distinct personalities, and we sometimes wonder how that will work in making a marriage,'' she said. ''There's so much that comes up in these classes that I can't imagine anyone who wouldn't get something out of them. I think it's a good thing that low-income people should have the same access as people who can pay.''
Neither Ms. Wilson nor Mr. Algee is a member of Phoenix First Assembly, but they are pleased that the classes are being held at a church.
Dr. Godzich's organization, the National Association of Marriage Enhancement, has three programs open both to paying clients and to those subsidized by the state: the six-week premarital course; ''Married Forever,'' a large weekend couples workshop at a hotel; and ''Home Together,'' where a few couples meet in the home of a leader couple for 16 weekly sessions.
Darrin and Valerie Chandler, who went to ''Married Together'' deep in debt, say it helped save their troubled marriage. ''We had been going through a big thing off and on for two years, and we got real deep financially,'' Mr. Chandler said. ''Then we went to that hotel, with all those people, and when they had us turn to each other, I tuned everyone out, I looked in her eyes, and all I saw was her. I apologized for not being the man I was meant to be. I wanted so bad for my marriage to last.''
In evaluations from 1,115 participants subsidized by the state, Dr. Godzich said, an overwhelming majority said they had learned tools to resolve conflict in their marriage, and their marriage would be better as a result. But, he conceded, whether the programs actually produce more stable marriages is unknown.
''This is all still experimental,'' he said. ''That's one reason we need the federal program, to get some research on outcomes and what works.''
Arizona's program got off to a rocky start: two years ago, the state chose 11 contractors, religious and secular, to provide marriage education to low-income clients. But some of those programs never got off the ground, and after the first year, the state renewed only those that had spent at least 30 percent of their contract amount. Now there are only six contractors.
In Dr. Godzich's class, religion was not much in evidence. Almost everything in the two-hour class was straightforward advice that would make sense in any setting: Don't blame a spouse for financial decisions. Don't hide money from your spouse. Don't hide from your creditors. Concentrate on giving rather than taking. When money is tight, cut back on expensive haircuts and hair gel.
And above all, be sure this is the right partner. ''Is what this person is doing with their finances as a single person pleasing to you?'' Dr. Godzich asks. ''If someone uses cash to hoard, they probably are going to hoard other things down the road.''
For Dr. Godzich's group, the National Association of Marriage Enhancement, this is a ministry -- one it hopes to spread through its new Marriage Mobile, a trailer that it plans to park at inner-city locations for several weeks at a stretch, as a base for counseling, classes and free food and clothing.
But many others see their marriage efforts as a public-health issue, akin to parenting classes or education on smoking or drinking.
''We don't really know that telling kids not to smoke lowers the cancer rate, but we all think they should have information about the risks,'' said Diane Sollee, director of the Coalition for Marriage, Family and Couples Education. ''It's the same with marriage: If I had 11th graders I would want them to know what to expect of marriage, what are the benefits of marriage, and which behaviors increase your chances of success.''
Most Americans, she said, need to learn the skills that help a marriage succeed. ''People don't know that the first year has the highest divorce rate, because there's so much to disagree about in creating a new civilization,'' said Ms. Sollee, whose annual ''Smart Marriage'' conference attracted nearly 2,000 participants last summer. ''They don't know that the birth of the first baby is the event that precipitates the most separations and divorces, not because she's getting fat, and there's poopy diapers, but because there's so much more to disagree about.''
While Ms. Sollee is heartened by the Bush administration's proposal to spend $1.5 billion -- $200 million a year for five years from the government, plus $100 million a year in state matching funds -- on marriage skills, she said that the marriage movement would grow with or without government help.
''The best, biggest programs are all grass-roots efforts that the government has not funded in any way,'' she said. ''The welfare-reform money would be a drop in the measly bucket.''
