TWO years after its debut, Lime, like two-year-olds everywhere, is showing the stuff it's made of, and that's happy news for serious diners. If you think too much lime green is not a good thing, you might want to book a table elsewhere, but then you'd miss out on some really wonderful food.
Jonathan Dorf, the chef and co-owner, knows what to serve when the temperature is 12 degrees and falling. His braised meats, red wine sauces, grains and legumes are American at heart, but it's hard to miss the French inflections. The food I ate at Lime was refreshingly direct, with a distinctly personal feel; Mr. Dorf knows when to stop fussing with a plate and rely on his marvelous constellations of flavor to carry the day.
Lime shares a block with a Chinese takeout shop and a carpet store, but Mr. Dorf and his wife, Anne Schlesinger, have transformed their few square feet into a modernist shrine. Frosted interior windows in various shades of lime are a play on the Pantone grids so popular with designers. The requisite bead lighting, bleached wood and stippled paint are all in place; it's a junior version of SoHo chic.
If the décor is a little put on, the staff shows an admirable lack of pretension and seems to really care that things are going well. The mood is relaxed, but there is luxury in the details; it's a neighborhood place that ups the ante for the genre.
Starters made a strong showing. A few stood out for their delicacy: tender agnolotti filled with goat cheese in a light tomato cream sauce; fragrant potato and fennel soup showered with chives; and meltingly rare seared tuna dimpled with coriander, served with tart orange sections and shaved fennel. My children fought over the crisp, spicy hoisin chicken rolls, with their pungent scent of cabbage.
A mound of watercress supported by a cast of endive, blue cheese, dried cranberries and slivers of green apple used every cliché in the book, but it was a salad to remember. Trivelli pasta with shrimp and wild mushrooms was pleasing at first bite but one-dimensional, and just too rich for an appetizer.
There were playful twists on French standards: perfectly seared foie gras came with spokes of crisp bacon, a tangle of sweet onions and a blast of barbecue sauce. Fricasseed snails featured smoky nuggets of pancetta, garlic confit and roasted tomatoes, a welcome change from the traditional garlic butter treatment.
My favorite main course was a crisp duck leg confit paired with sautéed greens and a jumble of potatoes and wild mushrooms. Tender cubes of braised venison in a silky wine sauce made a fine match with garlicky puréed potatoes. Pistachio-crusted salmon served with a slightly sweet vanilla veloute and a cake of sticky black rice was a bit novel, but delicious.
There were miscalculations. Clumsy sweet potato latkes and overly bitter broccoli rabe detracted from a flavorful pork chop stuffed with brandied apples. A gorgeous piece of cod was overwhelmed by salty tapenade and an astringent tomato coulis. Plump seared sea scallops, served with dollops of creamy celery root purée and a lovely parsley custard, were so heavily salted that the whole effect was ruined. Other, less egregious acts of oversalting could easily have been remedied in the kitchen.
The $30 three-course dinner is a sweet deal (it must be ordered before 6:30 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays). Go with the lovely roasted chicken.
Though short, the one-page wine list is not limiting, with most bottles under $50. Ms. Schlesinger, who doubles as the hostess and sommelier, loves to guide diners in making a choice. She steered me to a velvety, cherry-flavored 2000 Tolosa pinot noir ($50) and a youthful but beautifully balanced 2001 Chassagne-Montrachet premier cru from Bouchard Aines &amp; Fils ($90). The bar offers an array of specialty drinks, many of them involving lime juice; teetotalers might try the bracing, nonalcoholic limeade.
Noteworthy desserts include Key lime tart, a chocolaty brioche pudding charmingly adorned with chocolate-covered raisins, smooth-textured homemade sorbets and a caramel-laced pineapple tart tatin.
Children will be drawn to the classic ice cream sundae, with a cherry on top.
Lime  154 Larchmont Avenue,  Larchmont,  (914)833-3399.
VERY GOOD
Atmosphere -- Polished American food served in a spare, modernist setting with a lot of lime green. Upholstered chairs and banquettes have a softening effect. The tiny bar would be more inviting if it weren't at the center of comings and goings.  Service -- Friendly, earnest and attentive.  Recommended dishes -- Goat cheese agnolotti, potato and fennel soup, seared tuna, hoisin chicken rolls, watercress salad, seared foie gras, snail fricassee, duck leg confit, roasted chicken, pistachio-crusted salmon, venison bourguignon, chocolate brioche pudding, homemade sorbets, Key lime tart, pineapple tart tatin, ice cream sundae.
Hours -- Dinner, Tuesdays through Sundays, from 5:30. Sunday brunch, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.  Prices -- Appetizers, $8 to $18. Main courses, $21 to $29. Desserts, $7 to $8. Brunch, $18, price fixed.  Credit cards -- All major.  Reservations -- Recommended on weekends.  Wheelchair access -- Through front door.  The Ratings -- Excellent. Very good. Good. Satisfactory. Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambience and service taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.  Review published: Jan. 25, 2004
DINING OUT E-mail: westdine@nytimes.com
