WITH mortgage interest rates hovering near historic lows and with just about anyone who could benefit from refinancing a mortgage having already done so, lenders are scrambling to find new ways to attract customers. One such strategy is a retrofitting, of sorts, of a mortgage product that has been around for a while but which was originally marketed mainly to high-income, investment-savvy borrowers: the ''interest only'' mortgage.
With such a mortgage, the borrower is permitted to pay only interest payments early in the term of the loan -- deferring repayment of principal to the later years -- thereby freeing cash that can be used for other investments or making it possible to borrow more money than the buyer might otherwise be eligible for.
''I think that interest-only loans can be attractive for just about everyone,'' said Oded Ben-Ami, senior loan officer for Sterling National Mortgage, a lender based in Great Neck.
Mr. Ben-Ami noted that while interest-only mortgages typically carry closing costs like those on standard adjustable rate mortgages -- and carry basically the same interest rate -- the postponement of principal payments for a period of several years reduces the monthly payment in the early years of the loan. The money saved by that reduction can be used to qualify for larger loan or can be invested.
''So you give up nothing, while you gain a number of options,'' he said. He added, however, that since the monthly payments will increase after the interest-only period expires, the borrower must be prepared to make those higher payments.
Keith Gumbinger, vice president of HSH Associates, a mortgage publisher based in Pompton Plains, N.J., said that while such mortgages can indeed be used to a borrower's advantage, it is critical to understand how such mortgages work.
''For starters, the name is misleading,'' Mr. Gumbinger said. As with any other type of mortgage, the principal balance will eventually have to be repaid. ''What you're really getting is an interest-only payment schedule combined with a traditional mortgage,'' he said.
Mr. Gumbinger said that while some interest-only mortgages are fixed-rate loans -- which means that the interest rate being charged remains constant for the life of the loan -- most such mortgages are adjustable rate mortgages. On a standard ARM, the interest is adjusted according to a formula and the principal is paid off over the loan's full term. So, for example, a ''5/1, 30-year adjustable rate mortgage'' would carry a set interest rate for the first five years, and then the rate would change -- either up or down according to some preset formula -- on an annual basis for the next 25 years. At the end of the full 30 years, the loan would be paid in full.
With an interest-only adjustable rate mortgage, on the other hand, the monthly payment initially includes only the interest due on the amount borrowed for a specific number of years after the loan is taken out. For example, Mr. Gumbinger said, in most cases, with an ''interest-only, 5/1, 30-year adjustable,'' the borrower would make only interest payments for the first five years. At the end of the five-year period, however, the interest rate would change according to the formula set forth in the loan documents and the monthly payment is recalculated to include the amortization of the outstanding balance of the loan in addition to the interest being charged.
That, Mr. Gumbinger said, is known as ''term compression.'' In other words, instead of the principal balance being paid off over 30 years -- as would happen with a traditional self-amortizing fixed-rate or adjustable rate mortgage -- the repayment of that balance is compressed into a period of 25 years.
There are, however, potential benefits for borrowers who take out interest-only loans. They are particularly attractive, for example, for people who expect to move within a few years. ''Why pay a premium for a 30-year loan when you plan to keep the mortgage for only a few years?'' said Tim Malburg, president of the Capstone Mortgage Company in Wilton, Conn.
He noted that since the monthly payment on an interest-only loan does not include any repayment of principal, the monthly payment on such a loan is lower than it would be for a traditional fixed-rate or adjustable-rate mortgage. And that, Mr. Malburg said, permits the borrower to qualify for a larger mortgage.
For example, he said, if a particular borrower can afford a monthly mortgage payment of, say, $1,200, he would generally qualify for a $250,000 30-year 3/1 adjustable rate mortgage at 4 percent. If that same borrower were to take out an interest-only loan on the same terms, he could borrow nearly $350,000.
He said that while ARM's are usually less expensive than fixed-rate mortgages, they can end up being more expensive if rates go up during the years when the mortgage rate is adjusted.
It is also possible, Mr. Malburg said, to invest the money saved by not paying off principal. ''If your investments are earning more than the cost of your debt, you come out ahead,'' he said.
Interest-only loans are also attractive for people who receive a large portion of their income at the end of the year. ''Why eat beans and franks for 11 months of the year when you know you're going to get a bonus in December?'' Mr. Malburg said. He added that such individuals can also use such earnings -- or other money that happens to come their way -- to pay off principal if they want to.
In fact, Mr. Ben-Ami of Sterling National Mortgage said that this is yet one more factor that makes interest-only mortgages more attractive than fixed-rate loans or traditional ARM's.
''When you make a payment against principal on an interest-only loan, your monthly payment usually will be reduced the very next month,'' he said. Mr. Ben-Ami explained that when a prepayment of principal is made on an interest-only loan, the monthly interest charge is immediately reduced, with the size of the decrease proportionate to the amount repaid.
With a standard ARM, on the other hand, the monthly payment is not recalculated until the initial interest rate period has expired. And with a fixed-rate mortgage, prepayment of principal does not reduce the monthly payment at all but, instead, reduces the ultimate term of the loan.
Marc Eisenson, president of Good Advice Press, an Internet-based consumer watchdog organization, said that while interest-only loans might be good for disciplined people who make wise investments, they can end up costing those who are not so disciplined or savvy some extra money.
For example, he said, if a borrower takes out a $250,000, 30-year, 5/1 adjustable-rate interest-only loan at an initial rate of 6 percent, the monthly interest payment for the first five years will be $1,250. At the end of five years, however, the interest-only period expires and the borrower still owes $250,000.
Mr. Eisenson pointed out, however, that instead of having 30 years to repay that amount, the borrower now must repay it over 25 years. This means that even if the interest rate remains the same, the monthly payment will increase from $1,250 to $1,610, nearly 30 percent.
''That could be a budget buster for some people,'' he said.
YOUR HOME
