The Knicks' starters were running ragged from Friday night's narrow escape in Atlanta, where Stephon Marbury's game-winning shot worked magic off the glass.
Last night against the Miami Heat, the Knicks substituted Michael Doleac and Penny Hardaway for magic. They carried the team until the final four minutes, when they had only so much to give and too much to give away. Marbury had no rhythm and Keith Van Horn did not know why Coach Lenny Wilkens had benched him. Sitting alongside him, Allan Houston said he felt bathed in a big spotlight when his sore knee left him unable to help.
Doleac and Hardaway scored 10 of the Knicks' 13 points in their anemic fourth quarter, but they also combined for five of the team's six turnovers. As the Knicks passed up shots and threw the ball away, Miami capitalized, outscoring the Knicks, 10-1, in the final five minutes to walk away with an 85-77 victory at Madison Square Garden.
''Tonight we looked like we were a worn-down team; we didn't look like a team playing with a lot of energy,'' said Marbury, who finished with 4 points and shot 2 for 11.
Marbury, Houston and Van Horn (who missed his first six shots) combined for only 22 points. Doleac scored a season-high 18 by coming off pick-and-rolls, and Hardaway scored 16. The two anchored an unfamiliar fourth-quarter group, which included Frank Williams and Kurt Thomas, and shot 5 for 16.
''They had a group on the floor they were comfortable with and they showed it,'' Hardaway said. ''It was a game we should have won.''
Against Stan Van Gundy's Heat, which was coming off a rout of the Nets in Miami, the Knicks faltered and fell back into bad habits.
The Knicks (20-26) knew they missed an opportunity last night against a team with a losing record. They began the game three games behind the first-place Nets for the Atlantic Division lead. Miami, not far behind the Knicks, improved to 18-26.
Houston's surgically repaired knee continued to be a source of concern, although he said he planned to play in Tuesday's game against San Antonio. ''I felt like I was playing on one leg out there,'' he said after scoring 11 points in 23 minutes and sitting from the 4-minute-30-second mark of the third quarter.
Van Horn was frustrated for another reason. He was unsure why Wilkens kept him on the bench until the final minute. ''Every coach is different,'' he said. ''It's an adjustment. Hopefully I won't be in this situation again. Everybody's trying to figure everybody out.''
Wilkens coached his sixth game with the Knicks in nine nights; they are 4-2 in that span.
Wilkens did not have his entire active roster available when Shandon Anderson was sent home with a migraine after the team's pregame walk-through.
Until Friday night, though, Anderson had not missed a game in 7 years 24 days. That fueled speculation that he could be involved in a trade, even if it was more likely that he felt he could miss the game because his league-leading streak of consecutive games played had come to an end at 543 Friday night in Atlanta. ''I think every player wants to play,'' Wilkens said. ''If I thought he was upset by it, I would certainly talk to him.''
Although Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' president of basketball operations, has said it will be difficult to make another big trade like the one involving Marbury, he also has said he will not rest until he feels the Knicks are at their best.
That was not the case last night. Kurt Thomas scored with 3:54 left, giving the Knicks their last lead, 76-75. As the Heat's Eddie Jones sparked the run, Van Horn made one of two free throws to complete his team's scoring.
Van Gundy did not buy the Knicks' fatigue as an excuse. ''We also played a game last night,'' he said.
He continued the work his older brother, Jeff, did with Houston in shutting down Marbury, who shot 8 for 31 against the Van Gundys this month.
''Please don't paint it like I or my brother has the answer to stopping Stephon Marbury,'' Van Gundy said. ''When you have a guy like that having a bad night, you thank your lucky stars and get on the plane and go home.''
PRO BASKETBALL
