THE first episode of Donald Trump's new hit reality show ''The Apprentice'' began with an introduction. As usual, Mr. Trump did the honors. Over aerial views of Manhattan's glittering skyline, he intoned, ''My name is Donald Trump and I'm the largest real estate developer in New York.'' The camera panned across Trump International Hotel and Tower at Columbus Circle, and he continued: ''I own buildings all over the place, modeling agencies, the Miss Universe contest, jet liners, golf courses, casinos and private resorts like Mar-a-Lago.''
For millions of viewers, the show is an opportunity to watch 16 remarkably ambitious people compete for a $250,000-a-year job with Mr. Trump. But for those who follow the New York real estate market, the show provides something else: a hilarious look at Mr. Trump's blend of fact, image and sheer nerve. Even when the show plays a bit with the truth, it's an excellent primer -- sometimes unintentionally so -- on Mr. Trump's peculiar brand of success.
To start with, the superlative-prone developer does own many valuable assets. And the Corcoran Group reports that 22 of the 50 most expensive apartments for sale in the city today are in buildings developed by Mr. Trump. But as far as his central claim to fame, he is not the largest developer in New York, nor does he own Trump International Hotel and Tower (he redeveloped the Columbus Circle skyscraper on behalf of GE Pension Trust for a tidy fee and a percentage of the stratospheric apartment prices). In Manhattan, he has developed 13 residential towers -- Trump Tower, Trump Palace, Trump World, etc. -- and about 4,100 apartments. Mr. Trump no longer owns the condominiums he built, although, by all reports, he continues to manage the buildings well.
In contrast, consider the relatively invisible Leonard Litwin of Glenwood Management (developed and owns more than 5,000 apartments) or the Elghanayan brothers of Rockrose Development (developed and own 7,000 apartments in Manhattan and are starting construction of 3,500 on the Queens waterfront). And Stephen M. Ross of Related Companies has developed and managed 11,000 apartments in the city and has five projects with a total value of over $2.5 billion under construction, including Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle. (These are all private residential developers and owners; even they look small compared to some of their commercial counterparts.)
In at least five follow-up phone calls to an interview, Mr. Trump insisted he is ''by far the biggest builder in New York.''  ''There might be some guy in Queens that sells more units,'' he said. ''But one of my units sells for as much as three or four of their buildings.''
''The Apprentice,'' on Wednesday nights on NBC, includes a few more fudges: the Trump Organization's ''boardroom'' in Trump Tower, where one contestant is ''fired'' at the end of each episode, was constructed for the show; the company's real office is 22 floors above it. And the show's theme song, the O'Jays' 1970's hit ''For the Love of Money,'' has morphed from a warning about greed, gold and celebrity into a paean to them. Two key lines were excised: ''I know money is the root of all evil/ Do funny things to some people.''
''The Apprentice'' will offer its winner a quick, highly public entry into the real estate world. But when it comes to how its star got his start, the show is nearly silent. It doesn't mention, for example, that whereas some contestants worked their way up from nothing, Mr. Trump grew up in a Georgian mansion in Queens. As for his own apprenticeship, he didn't have to beat out a pack of bloodthirsty peers; he served it in the office of his father, who was a wealthy real estate developer.
On the other hand, the show is true to Mr. Trump's thirst for brutal competition. The contestants have been split by gender into two competing groups. Their trials, calculated to reveal the contestants' business acumen (or lack thereof), include selling lemonade on city corners, designing ads for a private jet company and renovating and leasing a dilapidated apartment. The contestants are pitted not only against members of the opposing team, but also against their teammates: in each episode's final boardroom scene, players are asked to suggest which of their peers should be eliminated.
Likewise, Mr. Trump has never cultivated much popularity among his real estate brethren. His peers recoil from his publicity-hungry antics and his propensity for a high profile, preferring to keep their own blood-curdling feuds behind closed doors.
Three real estate executives were asked by a reporter to view the first episode of ''The Apprentice'' in the privacy of their homes. They all hated it outright, because, they said, of the Donald's inflated claims, his gauche sense of taste and his hair, an elaborate structure best left to an architecture critic. (Some may question whether a real estate executive is the best judge of taste, or whether there is not a dollop of sour grapes, since no other developer is as famous as Mr. Trump).
''I don't know how you're going to return to me the evening you stole from me last night,'' complained Peter Hauspurg, chairman of Eastern Consolidated Properties. ''It was a watershed in self-promotion, coldly and carefully designed as a business strategy to achieve millions in free publicity.''
The second executive, Adam Rose, president of the family-owned Rose Associates, which manages 30,000 apartments, dismissed the program, but not before wondering why Mr. Trump's secretary was still using a paper rolodex. ''It's hard to believe someone who says he's worth $2.5 billion does not have an electronic database for his thousands of international contacts.'' The third viewer, who has worked closely with Mr. Trump in the past, didn't want to be identified, for fear of angering him. But he wondered why the prize salary was so low, adding that ''working for Donald is like working at Alice's tea party.''
In the three episodes of ''The Apprentice'' that have been broadcast, the women's team has beat out the men's three times. And each time, the women have used their gender and good looks to get ahead. In order to sell lemonade, the women -- all attractive and trim, and some scantily clad -- rewarded customers with kisses. Their winning advertising campaign pitch for the jet company invoked phallic double entendres about nose cones and fan tails, which the women delivered wearing adorable flight attendant uniforms. In the most recent challenge, the women shamelessly flirted with a gold merchant in order to win a key discount.
Trump has always been alert to the marketing potential of beautiful women, or as he puts it, ''higher heels and shorter skirts.'' When Trump Tower opened in the early 1980's, Mr. Trump lured Pierre Michel, the hairdresser then famous for the big-haired ''Dynasty'' look, into the tower as a tenant. ''You had two or three hundred of the most attractive women in New York walking into the building every day,'' said one broker, adding that Mr. Trump uses the same techniques with the Miss Universe contest. Mr. Trump himself rarely appears in public without a beautiful woman on his arm.
But the truest-to-Trump aspect of ''The Apprentice'' might be its advocacy of fame as a means to business success. The contestants on ''The Apprentice,'' many of whom made something of themselves at a very young age, are abandoning conventional paths to success for instant stardom on television.
A lot of Mr. Trump's success, after all, is based on his fame, which has enabled him to rent out his name to builders in Florida, Phoenix and Seoul, South Korea. No other developer is paid to lend his name to development projects in other cities.
''He's a marketing genius,'' said Mr. Rose. ''He's gotten to the point where he can license his name. It's a perfectly respectable way to make a living. But it does not make him a major owner of New York real estate.''
Mr. Trump gave an interview in his corner office, with views up and down Fifth Avenue and a wall plastered with magazine covers depicting, who else, the occupant. Speaking of his licensing deals, Mr. Trump said: ''They pay me huge numbers. I will only do it if they listen to me exclusively on design. Otherwise it could hurt the name. Huge ceiling heights, best fixtures, best locations, great kitchens.''
It's not just Mr. Trump's designs that make the brand work. His own life may be just as compelling an advertisement. Dennis Mangone, a top broker at Corcoran, said he has clients who are Trump devotees, buying a condominium in Trump World Tower, an apartment at Trump Place on the West Side as an investment, and a condominium at the Trump National Golf Club in Westchester for the weekends. ''They want a piece of Mr. Trump's perceived lifestyle,'' Mr. Mangone said.
Apparently, viewers do as well. ''The Apprentice'' has started out with spectacular ratings: the second episode scored even higher than the first, with 20.4 million viewers tuning in, capturing the 18-to-49 demographic and beating the hit CBS drama ''C.S.I.'' (Mr. Trump and Mr. Burnett are 50-50 partners in the show; in addition, Mr. Trump is paid an unspecified fee for starring in it).
Even Robert Lederman, a painter and an advocate for street peddlers who claims that he was arrested three days in a row during protests in front of Trump Tower against the developer's efforts to ban peddling, enjoyed ''The Apprentice.'' He took special pleasure in the first episode, in which the contestants were sent out onto the streets of Manhattan to sell lemonade, the quintessential American symbol of entrepreneurship.
''It was terrific,'' he said. ''But I found it ironic that this man who spent 15 years trying to eliminate vendors in Midtown would send them out to become vendors. Obviously, Mr. Trump understands that if you make it as a New York City vendor you can do just about anything.''
TELEVISION  Correction:  February 8, 2004, Sunday  A picture caption on Jan. 25 with an article about ''The Apprentice,'' the television series featuring Donald Trump, misidentified the location of the Trump Village residential complex where Mr. Trump was shown with his father, Fred C. Trump. It is in Brooklyn, not Queens.
