IN need of just the right shoe for its new star, LeBron James of the Cleveland Cavaliers, Nike designed the Air Zoom Generation for the teenage sensation to wear and promote. It's not called Air James yet, but just as Air Jordans borrowed elements from Ferrari and Aston Martin, the shoe took inspiration from the Hummer that James's mother bought him -- with lace holes that resemble Hummer wheels and tread that bears the chevron pattern of the Hummer tire. Nike has now returned the favor. Its designers helped General Motors to shape the H3T concept, shown recently at the Los Angeles auto show as one answer to the question: can you build a smaller Hummer that people will want? Can the Hummer look work on a smaller scale?
The process began with the truck's ''shoes'' -- its tires. ''Usually the tires of a concept like this are an afterthought,'' said Clay Dean, Hummer design director. ''Here, they were the key element.''
The tires, developed with B.F. Goodrich, include gray and orange tread elements like the sole of a trail-running shoe from Nike All Conditions Gear, or ACG. The orange bits of are varying softness, shaped like ''sand paddles'' and ''traction pads.'' They look like orange bits in ice cream or candy. ''It's a nuggets-of-flavor'' look, said Tracy Teague, Nike's design director of performance footwear.
Designers of shoes and cars are natural allies, and Nike and G.M. have worked together for a while. Nike designers always scout the Detroit auto show, taking hundreds of photos.
''We have a lot in common,'' Mr. Dean said. Mr. Teague agreed. ''We vary our products across shared platforms,'' he said. ''The difference is we have to do it all in much smaller scale than a car. We only have 12 or 15 inches to work with.''
Hummer, in particular, fits with the Nike ethos: like a Nike shoe, the big hinges, handles and other elements of a Hummer are overstated, almost toylike in their exaggeration.
''The idea is to call out the parts with color and material,'' Mr. Teague said. ''It's almost overexpressive.''
The H3T has Nike Epic backpacks attached to the seats by bungee cord. The Epic has the same skeleton and fabric shape as the ACG shoes. Like most sport utility vehicles, ACG's usually remain on pavement but they must look all the tougher for this.
A truck like the H3T signals a growing vision: the vehicle as a piece of sporting equipment -- like a shoe. As if to close the circle, Nike recently began advertising its Shox Turbos as ''a supertuned blast of go-fast under the hood.'' Be ready, the company warned, ''when you put your foot to the floor.''
