YOU'D see them at the Decorate-Your-Own-Cupcake table at the street fair in spring, and on the sideline of Safe Haven basketball games on wintry Saturdays. They were fixtures on the list of class parents at Public School 87 on West 78th Street, volunteering wherever parents were needed. When Sondra Segal and Roberta Sklar signed up for cupcake table duty, you knew they'd be there, dozens of cupcakes in hand -- living proof that two moms can do twice as much as one.
They show up with lawn chairs, Starbucks cups and Creampuff, their white toy poodle, to cheer on Rachel and her teammates at soccer, basketball and softball. They dovetail their schedules so that one of them can be available when Rachel gets home from school. Their rambling apartment in a prewar building near Columbia University is an orderly jumble of art and books, Nintendo paraphernalia, musical instruments (cello, electric guitar, upright piano), cat and dog, and a stream of kids running in and out -- hallmarks of a busy, happy family life on the Upper West Side.
Sondra Segal and Roberta Sklar have been together for nearly 30 years. They are parents to two children: their godson, Jesse Gilbert, 30, whom they raised in a collective with his mother, her partner and others, and Rachel, 13, whom they adopted in Romania when she was an infant. They took a family name, Segal-Sklar, that they use at school and at the doctor's.
Last Aug. 29, in Vancouver, British Columbia, Sondra and Roberta got married. Jesse and Rachel, whose permission they asked before the wedding, gave them to each other at the ceremony.
They celebrated that wedding a few weeks ago with family and friends at a party, one of those events that make you feel as if you lived in a small town. My daughter, a pal of Rachel's since they were fourth graders, and I went to get our hair cut that afternoon and mentioned to Jennifer Kalikapersaud, the owner of Salon West, a busy neighborhood spot, that we were going to our friends' wedding party. ''Oh, Sondra?'' she said. ''I've been cutting her hair for years.''
Sondra and Roberta's life is a New York love story, for each other, for their family and for their home for nearly 20 years: the Upper West Side. Against a political backdrop of debate over same-sex marriage, including talk of a constitutional amendment prohibiting it (which President Bush suggested last week that he would support), their life is also a reminder that even in the protected bubble of tolerance that the Upper West Side affords, the personal is still intensely political.
There are few guideposts for their family, from big issues such as how to raise children or deal with health insurance to how to word a wedding ceremony, or even how to fashion their wedding cake.
They wanted a cake topped by two brides, but discovered that bride-and-groom figures are made as one piece. They could get a bride and a bride on the Internet, but it would be expensive. Instead they searched the city for bride figurines.
Finally, the staff at Veniero's, an old Italian bake shop on East 11th Street, where Roberta used to live and where they had gotten many of the children's birthday cakes, pointed her to a store on Clinton Street, and they found the single brides. Roberta spent hours with Krazy Glue to attach the two figurines, with a heart surrounding them and a tasteful sprinkling of silver glitter on their dresses, to a platform that would stand atop the cake.
The other day, the newlyweds were still glowing from the excitement of the wedding and the party and more than happy to talk about how their lives first intersected. They met as young feminists, and together they founded the Women's Experimental Theater, acclaimed as a leading feminist theater in the 1970's and 1980's. Sondra works as a management consultant for nonprofit organizations and as a writer, and Roberta is a press secretary for the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force and a communications consultant for public policy organizations.
Why, after all this time, did they want official sanction for their clearly committed, loving relationship? Part of it, they said, was emotional. ''You want the recognition of your relationship and the respect for it,'' Sondra said, ''for yourself and for your friends and family and community. It becomes real for them.''
Roberta added: ''In some sense it's a contradiction. You've made your peace with living outside the law. But you want the ability to take care of the people you love. You want to know that when something happens to you, or to them, they'll be taken care of. The+ commitment of marriage is a mutual caretaking. Not to be able to marry deprives you of that ability.''
They had planned to wait until same-sex marriage was possible in Massachusetts, given hope by a recent decision by the state's highest court. But then a friend prompted them: ''If you can do it in Canada, why don't you?''
''We would have liked to have done it in our own city with our family and friends, but that wasn't going to happen for a long time,'' Sondra said. ''We knew we loved each other, we've been together a long time, it meant a lot to our children.'' So they switched their summer vacation plans and headed to Vancouver. (British Columbia and Ontario are the two provinces in Canada where same-sex marriage is legal.)
Although Sondra and Roberta know many other families with same-sex parents and have supported each other, they have not found themselves isolated as a same-sex family. Or isolated at all. ''The Upper West Side is truly diverse in all kinds of ways,'' said Roberta. ''P.S. 87 had something like 122 countries represented among its families. We're a part of that fabric.''
Rachel compares it to the suburbs, where her perception is that everyone is the same. In the city, she said, ''Everyone is different.''
Still, even here, Sondra said: ''The prohibition of public commitment to the person you love is very painful and hurtful. If there is a battle over a constitutional amendment, it will be ugly.''
THEY signed their domestic partnership registration in New York at City Hall when that became possible in 1998. It was casual; they wore shorts and T-shirts and emerged to have a photographer thrust flowers into their hands, congratulate them and snap their picture, which came in a ''You and Me Forever'' cardboard frame.
Five years later, at their wedding celebration in a friend's building on West 66th Street, Sondra, in a colorful flowing outfit, and Roberta, in a black and white silk pantsuit, welcomed their family and friends, a strikingly diverse group spanning ages and ethnicities. Champagne and pop tunes from the 70's flowed. Before they cut the cake, they read from the civil service that had been performed by a marriage commissioner in Vancouver.
They toasted many in the room: trailblazers in domestic issues like second-parent adoption and gay civil rights legislation, their families, their neighbors, friends. The Upper West Side. ''To a Democrat in the White House,'' Roberta offered, to a rousing cheer.
Many of Rachel's friends were there, dazzling in the way that 13-year-old girls are, mouths still full of braces, comfortable with one another as only kids who've grown up together can be. Sondra and Roberta offered them a toast, too, and had them all stand for applause.
They seemed a bit puzzled at the attention. After all, it was just Rachel's parents getting married. It seemed perfectly normal to them.
CITY PEOPLE
