IN a different place and time, it was my mother's habit to wheel her first-born to the park near her apartment. In those days, few young mothers worked. Not surprisingly, at that park on Elm Avenue in Brooklyn, she met a group of women who, over the years, became known as the baby-carriage crowd.
Maybe it was something about the air in that park, or in 1950's Brooklyn, because even today I marvel at how successful so many of those women's children became.
One designed the computer software Lotus 1-2-3. Another is a well-known political figure. Karen Berger is by no means the wealthiest, or the most famous, but to me, her career has always seemed like the most fun. She's also one of the few offspring of the group who settled in New Jersey.
At 45, Ms. Berger, of Maplewood, is a vice president of DC comics, home of Superman, Wonder Woman and other legends. A bit of a Wonder Woman herself, she is also the founder and head of Vertigo, the renowned imprint that publishes Neil Gaiman, Garth Ennis and other intellectual heavyweights of the genre. Think of Ms. Berger as the Max Perkins of comics.
In some ways, New Jersey is comic book country. Joe Kubert, the legendary writer and founder of the Joe Kubert School of Cartoon and Graphic Art, lives in Dover. Kevin Smith, who wrote Green Arrow and is more famous as the director of ''Clerks'' and ''Chasing Amy,'' lives and preaches the virtues of graphic novels (comics in book form) in Red Bank, where he opened Jay and Silent Bob's Secret Stash comic book store. And at least a half-dozen other comic book editors and artists have settled, along with Ms. Berger, in Maplewood and West Orange. Short Hills is to stockbrokers what Maplewood is to comic book executives, who like its relaxed atmosphere and artistic leanings.
But back to Brooklyn, where Ms. Berger, who has several times won her industry's most prestigious award, started her ascent. Except for being raised by a working mother - her father died when she was 2 - Ms. Berger was a fairly happy and conventional teenager. Put aside for the moment that she was instantly drawn to an elective offered at her high school: the Literature of the Violent and the Weird. When a friend, a comic book writer, told her about a job at the company where he worked, she applied.
''I thought it would be a stepping stone to something more real,'' she said. Twenty-four years later - ''it's been my only real job.''
''What made you so successful as a comic book editor?'' I asked during a recent interview.
Basically, she said, it was her lack of interest in the genre -- ''I felt no emotional connection to superhero comics.''
More to her liking were stories like ''Carrie'' by Stephen King, ''A Clockwork Orange'' by Anthony Burgess and anything on the ''Twilight Zone'' - stories in which ordinary people are confronted by extraordinary circumstances, or even ordinary circumstances that require super-hero strength: death, dying, aging, racism, experiences that most people eventually have to face.
At the time that independent filmmakers were challenging Hollywood's notion of movie-making, graphic artists like R. Crumb and Harvey Pekar (the subject of the recent film, ''American Splendor'') were chipping away at the old Zap! Pow! Zowie! definition of comics. People who grew up reading comics in the 50's and 60's wanted the comics to grow up with them. Ms. Berger responded to their calling.
During a talent search in 1987, she met Neil Gaiman, then an unknown British journalist, and now the bestselling author of ''American Gods'' and ''Coraline.'' With her guidance, he resurrected an older DC original, ''The Sandman,'' and the result was eventually a whole library of comics - by Mr. Gaiman, Grant Morrison and others -- that had the depth and complexity of literature.
Forget ''Millie the Model.'' The latest Vertigo book, ''It's A Bird,'' by Steven T. Seagle and Teddy Kristiansen, scheduled for publication in April, has witty dialogue, quotations from Nietzsche and Epictetus, and a main character who, asked why he doesn't have children, replies, ''What if they're stupid or ugly or listen to country music?''
After nine years at DC, Ms. Berger married a colleague who is now an executive vice president. They have two children, 12, and 8.
''Do your children read comics?''
''Yes,'' she answered, but in a phrase rarely uttered by parents about comic books, added, ''We try not to force them.''
JERSEY
