First Selectwoman Nancy S. Bader of Marlborough called it ''the never-ending story,'' as voters in the three towns that make up the R.H.A.M. school district turned down the 11th budget proposal on Tuesday by a mere nine votes.
Marlborough was the only town to vote in favor of the $17.14 million budget, 378 to 275. Hebron turned it down with 741 people voting no and 647 voting yes, while Andover voted 203 to 185 to reject it. The 2,429 votes were off by more than 26 percent from the average turnout in the first 10 votes.
Neither side saw much to celebrate in the outcome, which failed to give a clear mandate to any particular course of action.
''This is not good; a budget needs a significant number of votes either 'yes' or 'no,''' said Donna J. McCalla, a spokeswoman for Hebron Dollars and Sense, which has campaigned against the school spending plan. ''Either pass it or fail it, but not by nine votes, not when there are so many people who are tired of all this.''
Alfred F. Covino, the vice chairman of the R.H.A.M. Board of Education, said he thought a closer vote might have reflected more satisfaction that the new board elected in November had begun to make significant changes, including $52,000 in cuts since the last referendum.
He said state law required that another vote be taken within four weeks, adding that the board would meet this week to set the next date, probably Feb. 17.
''It's frustrating when it's this close, but we're almost there, and hopefully one more round and we'll be able to get it behind us,'' Mr. Covino said. ''My gut feeling is, maybe we won't have to make any more cuts, maybe if we put it out there one more time and do a better job of explaining it to people, we'll be in better shape.''
But Brendan T. Shea, the chairman of the Hebron Board of Finance and the Tri-Town Board, which is supervising the finances of R.H.A.M. High School and Middle School, said that would be a mistake.
''They've done that way too many times,'' he said. ''Action is going to be necessary, and if they don't take significant action, we know from past votes that there will be a much more substantial vote against it next time.''
ROBERT A. HAMILTON
WORTH NOTING
