In his State of the Union address last week, President Bush deplored ''the unfair tax on marriage.'' Yet his proposal to eliminate permanently the so-called marriage penalty doesn't go far enough. If Mr. Bush wants to promote marriage, as he says, he should abolish the marriage penalty for those it hurts the most: two-income households.
The marriage penalty is not universal; some couples actually receive a marriage bonus. Sometimes couples filing jointly pay more in taxes than they would have if each person remained single. Other times the tax bill for married couples is less than the combined bill would have been had each person stayed single.
What accounts for the different treatment? The politics of tax law are always complicated, of course, but there is no denying that more ''traditional'' families receive better treatment under the tax code. The marriage bonus is greatest when only one person in a household works outside the home. The marriage penalty is greatest when both husband and wife have jobs and earn roughly equal amounts.
The most substantial tax relief, therefore, should be aimed at married couples in which both spouses work and make about the same salary. And according to the 1990 census, African-American couples are more likely to meet this description than white couples. In fact, white couples are more likely to receive a marriage bonus, because they are more likely to live in households with only a single wage earner.
It is true that at some income levels -- households where total annual income is between $60,000 and $90,000 -- more married white couples pay a penalty than receive a bonus. But at all other income levels, more white couples receive a marriage bonus than pay a marriage penalty. For African-American households, it is just the opposite: at every income level, from $30,000 to $120,000, more couples are penalized than benefit. (Only when annual income exceeds $120,000 are there more married African-American households receiving a bonus than a penalty.)
Too many couples -- African-American and white -- pay a price for being married. The tax cuts passed last year did reduce the marriage penalty for many couples in some tax brackets. But the president should give his plan more focus.
By easing the tax burden specifically for married couples in which both husband and wife work and make comparable salaries, President Bush can serve several constituencies. Fiscal conservatives will applaud a more fair and rational tax code. Social conservatives will be pleased that he is promoting marriage as an institution. And African-Americans will welcome a tax-relief plan that has real benefits for their community.
Op-Ed Contributor Dorothy A. Brown is a professor at the Washington and Lee University School of Law.
