SLOW and steady may win the race. But when the cult artist Chris Burden burst onto the art stage in the 1970's, he was distinctly harelike, getting shot in the arm, kicked down a flight of stairs and nailed to the hood of a car, all in the name of art.
Whether it's his age or insurance premiums, Mr. Burden no longer has the pedal to the metal. ''I always wear a seat belt,'' he insisted last weekend, while watching his latest work being assembled at the Gagosian Gallery in Chelsea. ''I think everyone should have to wear a crash helmet in their cars.''
On one hand a thoughtful, mild-mannered professor with a dry sense of humor, Mr. Burden, 58, is also a neo-Luddite who says he hasn't seen a movie in 20 years and doesn't own a computer. His show at the Gagosian, which runs through Feb. 28, juxtaposes large stainless-steel models of bridges with bullets cast in 24-karat gold, archetypes of patient construction and instant destruction.
If there is a boyish charm to his bridges, reminiscent of Erector Sets, Mr. Burden has something of Peter Pan about him. To wit: the thing that gives him the most pleasure is what the uninitiated might call a toy locomotive.
Make no mistake, however; this is not a toy for a 6-year-old to find under the Christmas tree, unless the goal is to send the tree up in flames. It is a 10-inch-long model live-steam locomotive, for what is called a garden railroad, meant to be enjoyed, as the name suggests, outdoors, unlike the electric trains that wend their way benignly around basements. ''You've got hot oil and live steam spewing all over the place,'' Mr. Burden pointed out. ''It's not something you want inside.''
''They come with all these disclaimers all over them warning you about all the dangers,'' he added. ''They're like motorcycles. I can't even believe they're legal.''
Mr. Burden has several live-steam trains, but his first engine -- a humble Cricket, which he bought in Berkeley, Calif., in the late 1980's for about $500 -- remains his favorite. (Live-steam locomotives, largely handmade in limited numbers, now cost up to $7,000 or more, depending on detail). Mr. Burden's Cricket runs on a figure-eight track behind the house that he shares with his wife, the artist Nancy Rubens, in Topanga, west of Los Angeles. There is a plum tree in one loop and an apricot tree in the other.
Different trains fire their boilers with different fuels; Mr. Burden's Cricket uses butane. He said he could have purchased one that ran on alcohol, but ''I'm loath to have it shoot off the track and down the hill, spewing flaming alcohol through fire brush and burning down 700 homes.''
Who says wisdom doesn't come with age? But even if Mr. Burden is eager to avoid catastrophe, his simple garden railroad set-up -- unlike the mind-bogglingly intricate bridges on exhibit in Chelsea -- is for him an almost Zen-like pursuit, as far from danger as he can stand.
''You try and go as slow as possible,'' he explained, adding that the ritual of filling the engine's tanks with distilled water, butane and oil, is part of the enjoyment. ''You want to try and get the longest possible run out of it,'' he said. On a good tank, his model train runs for 27 minutes.
In other words, it's all about stamina. A thought worth remembering for any artist impatient for success -- or any danger seeker, waiting in the emergency room.
POSSESSED
