For 12 years, Steve Elmendorf was Representative Richard A. Gephardt's political alter ego, first in Congress and then in the presidential campaign, the first person outside his family to see Mr. Gephardt every morning and the last to talk to him every night.
''They were so bonded together,'' said George Kundanis, a veteran of Mr. Gephardt's staff in the House of Representatives, ''that it was often hard to tell where one of them started and the other ended.''
Mr. Elmendorf said his goal for most of the time he worked for Mr. Gephardt, a Missouri Democrat, had been to ride their relationship into the White House. But that was not to be. On Monday, Mr. Gephardt finished fourth in the Iowa caucuses, and on Tuesday he dropped out of the race.
On Friday afternoon, Mr. Elmendorf decided to become deputy campaign manager for Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, who finished first in the Iowa caucuses and moved into the top spot in the polls for Tuesday's primary.
It was a wrenching decision, Mr. Elmendorf, 42, said by telephone on Saturday as he cleaned out his desk in the shuttered Gephardt headquarters on L Street in Washington.
''I wanted Dick Gephardt to become president,'' said Mr. Elmendorf, Mr. Gephardt's campaign chief of staff. ''I wanted to work for him in the White House. It was very hard to lose.
''But I entered this two-year period planning to work on a campaign,'' he continued, ''and once he lost, I thought it was best to keep going. There's no question in my mind that John Kerry is the best candidate still in the field.''
An influencing factor, Mr. Elmendorf said, was his long friendship with Mary Beth Cahill, Mr. Kerry's national campaign manager.
As word of the hiring spread this weekend through Democratic political circles, it was seen as a boon for the Kerry campaign. Mr. Elmendorf takes into the Kerry camp extremely close relationships with organized labor, members of the House and political leaders of gay and lesbian organizations -- all areas where Mr. Kerry is not particularly strong.
''He's one of the best operatives and political thinkers in the party,'' said Jim Jordan, who was Mr. Kerry's campaign manager until he was let go in November. ''Steve understands where all the levers are. He understands what it takes to win, and he's really good at political hand-to-hand combat.''
Mr. Elmendorf grew up in Summit, N.J., went to Trinity College in Hartford and became involved in Democratic politics out of college, as an organizer for Walter F. Mondale's 1984 presidential campaign.
In the years since, he has built an ample political address book. On Saturday, those on his list received this e-mail message: ''I have had a wonderful 12 years with Dick Gephardt. He is the best person you could ever work for, and I am sorry he won't be president. I am excited to be joining the Kerry team. He has the values, judgment and stature to beat George Bush, and I look forward to the challenge.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE AIDE
