GENNIFER FLOWERS, who makes her New York supper club debut this week, looks darn pretty with her blond hair and size 4 figure, and darn younger than her 54 years, and she's the kind of gal who doesn't mind telling you why.
''I've had a face-lift,'' she was saying last week, in the back room of Dillon's, a restaurant and lounge on West 54th Street, where she will be performing. ''I've had my eyes done; liposuction; the nose job -- well, that was a long time ago.''
Lips? one asks, unable to stop looking at her boldly painted and pneumatic pair, which Ms. Flowers, in perhaps an iconoclastic stroke, or possibly because of middle-aged eyesight, colored outside the lines.
''Ummmm, why did I leave that out?'' she asks, speaking with a soft Southern lilt. She likes to emphasize what she is saying with big gestures: eyes horror-show wide in this case, and face pulled tight with her hands to show the perils of a bad face-lift.
She offers a caution about liposuction: If you're going to have it, you had better be toned, otherwise you will come out looking like ''cheesecake.''
Cheesecake? Does Ms. Flowers mean cottage cheese?
She nods affirmatively.
''Cellulite. Like we say in Arkansas, 'If it ain't pretty, don't put it out on the front porch.' ''
Time flies in political scandals, does it not? It seems like only yesterday that Ms. Flowers nearly derailed a presidential campaign. In the wake of her tale of an affair with Bill Clinton, then governor of Arkansas, Mr. Clinton came in second in the 1992 New Hampshire primary and Bill and Hillary Clinton were compelled to do a post-Super Bowl interview on national television about the state of their marriage. Thursday night, in a parallel few commentators failed to mention, Howard Dean and his wife, Judith Steinberg Dean, went on national television with Diane Sawyer to try to rescue his candidacy after his caucus-night outburst in Iowa. Their comments displayed a gentler, softer Dr. Dean.
If you wonder if the New Hampshire primary this Tuesday provokes any memories in Ms. Flowers, the answer, she says, is that it does not.
''I try to deal with it on my own terms,'' she said. ''I don't sit and belabor all that business. I'm a married woman. I love my husband; I have a good life. I'm not saying occasionally something doesn't come to mind. I take it right out of my memory bank and move on.''
Ms. Flowers is a toucher, a woman who remembers first names and uses them, who exchanges confidences easily with another woman. She holds your hand for an instant when she meets you and says, ''Hi, Babe.'' She not only will tell you early in the game that her hair color is fake, but asks, soon after, if yours is, too.
''My boobs'' -- oh, and did we mention that ''Boobs: The Musical'' is the name of the revue in which she's starring -- ''which are large, by the way, are real,'' Ms. Flowers offers. ''Large is not always good. For this show, they had to make me my own corsets. Some of the gowns are held up with a string.''
She's dressed in black pants, sweater and vest, but there are red lips on her long pink nails, red lips on her pink cellphone. Lips are her logo, Ms. Flowers says. She likes pink. Her Rolex is a gift from her husband, Finis D. Shelnutt, a real estate broker, who sometimes leaves a gift and a pink rose near the coffee pot.
They live in New Orleans, where she owns the Gennifer Flowers Kelsto Club, a supper club, where she sings three times a week.
She is scheduled to open in ''Boobs'' this Wednesday. The show, which originally opened last May, features the songs of Ruth Wallis, who in the 1940's, 50's and 60's wrote and sang what were known as party songs. Songs like ''She's Got Freckles on Her But She Is Nice'' and ''Johnny Had a Yo-Yo,'' in which, Ms. Flowers explains, she and another actress come out dressed like little girls and discuss, well, Johnny's yo-yo.
''You understand that Ruth's songs were all innuendo, à la Mae West,'' she says. ''In another scene there's a lady who happens to be married to a gay man. She sings, 'Queer things are happening to me.' ''
Ms. Flowers sings a bit of the song: ''And now I think of my blushing groom, whenever I see the pansies bloom.''
''All the skits are fun,'' Ms. Flowers says. ''Except one that is serious and really the root of it all. She talks about all the clowns are not in the circus, they all don't wear baggy clothes. Some of us are beautiful people. It means all of us out there have moments of being the clown, but we're really good people.''
''What I particularly liked about this when I was approached, I see a lot of parallels with her life and mine,'' Ms. Flowers continues. ''She was involved in scandal and controversy. Eisenhower tried to shut her down, so she, too, was involved with a sitting president.'' (Well, yes, Mr. Clinton was not yet president when the scandal broke, Ms. Flowers acknowledges, but the repercussions occurred later.)
''They confiscated her albums in 1965 in Australia. She dealt with a lot of controversy in her career, which I have had.''
Ms. Flowers insists that if she never had to talk about Bill Clinton again, that would be fine with her. How long would anyone want to keep talking about a man who is no longer in her life?
Still, she never gets far from the subject that brought her notoriety. Consider a number she sometimes does in her New Orleans show. ''I tell the accompanist I want to do a song about love gone wrong,'' Ms. Flowers says. She sings: '' 'Hey, did you happen to see, the most beautiful guy, that walked out on me' '' -- here she stops, scrunching up her pretty face, doing a Bronx cheer so evocative of digestive distress it would make the Farrelly brothers squirm.
''Then I say, 'Love gone wrong,' '' she says, in the voice favored by bad-news blondes in 40's films noirs. Then come references to Tammy Faye Bakker and Ivana Trump. ''Then there was Gennifer, who whispered in the president's ear, 'Why not face the fact, my dear?' '' She sings again. '' 'It was just one of those things. . . .' ''
The depth of the Flowers-Clinton affair is, of course, a matter of contention. Ms. Flowers told of a relationship in The Star in exchange for a reported six-figure fee; she will not divulge the amount, citing a confidentiality agreement. Mr. Clinton, who at first denied a relationship, later said in a legal deposition that he had spent a single night with her.
Couldn't it be argued that the Clinton controversy helped Ms. Flowers's career?
''No,'' Ms. Flowers says. ''If I have made progress in my career it's in spite of the scandal and the fame, if you will. Not because of it, but in spite of it.''
''I would get offers which would mysteriously turn cold and was basically not able to get on with my singing career, which I had done since I was 11 years old,'' she says.
Indeed, the thing most people don't understand about her, Ms. Flowers says, is that she was a singer most of her life. She was raised in Arkansas. Her father, a crop duster and a flight instructor who died in an air crash, could charm everyone, she says.
''He was like a John Wayne character,'' she says. ''A big, handsome man with an outgoing personality. He had that aura about him, when he walked into a room you noticed him.''
Hmmmmmmm.
''Mmmmmmm,'' Ms. Flowers laughs, in assent.
There had been a song in ''Boobs,'' Ms. Flowers said, about how once in everyone's life, there is a boy named Bill. The sketch included a Hillary Clinton character, who carried a book entitled ''It Takes a Village.'' Ms. Flowers had the sketch removed.
''It was just hilarious,'' she says. ''But I felt if it was in there, everyone would focus on it.''
In New Orleans, Ms. Flowers does a lot of torch songs, standards. Is a show called ''Boobs'' really the way she wants to present herself?
Absolutely, yeah, no doubt. ''I like that part of my personality,'' Ms. Flowers says. ''I love bawdiness and the sexuality. It's funny.''
Is she exploiting her notoriety?
She hopes people will come to see the show and decide she's a talented person, a nice person. ''If they come out of curiosity, from my notoriety, bring it on, fine,'' she says. ''I don't intend to crawl in a hole and stop performing.''
''Since when is opportunistic a bad word in America?''
The reporter gets her coat; Ms. Flowers, freshening her makeup, is singing, half to herself, a song from the show.
'' 'You gotta have boobs, if you want to impress tycoons and rubes.' ''
