PEOPLE in New Jersey probably have a better appreciation of the New York skyline than do New Yorkers. That is because they see it everyday, from a distance, without the familiarity and indifference that comes from living in a place. Out here, the skyline shimmers like a mirage.
Perhaps that is why the Morris Museum in Morristown is offering ''The Rise of a Landmark: Lewis Hine and the Empire State Building,'' an exhibition of photographs by Lewis Hine (1874-1940) documenting the building of a quintessential New York symbol. Or maybe the museum simply decided, correctly, I might add, that these are fascinating, timeless photographs, made more so by the fall of the World Trade Center and current debates about its replacement.
Hine was born in Oshkosh, Wisc., before moving to New York City, where he took a degree in sociology and education at Columbia University. He then turned to photography, documenting conditions in the city's tenement blocks. Later, he documented the human costs of industry, and during the First World War offered his services to the Red Cross.
After the war, Hine took up another subject: the strength and dignity of working men and women. This led to a commission in 1930 to chronicle construction of the Empire State Building. Hine embraced the assignment, lugging his camera equipment all over the site, and even swinging out on a derrick to get a few aerial shots. The best of these images were published in a book, ''Man at Work.''
The show here presents about 50 of Hine's black-and-white photographs. Some are classics, like ''Icarus Atop Empire State Building'' (1931) from the series ''Empire State Miscellaneous Workmen.'' It shows a young workman balancing on a loop of coiled wire somewhere near the building's windy apex, the city many miles below.
Part of the attraction of ''Icarus,'' and images like it, of which there are many here, derives from a human fascination for looking down on the world from great heights. This is also what gives observation towers their hypnotic novelty. But, here, we are captivated as well by the worker's seeming indifference to danger, as he swings alone, without a harness, high above the ground. His actions seem reckless and, yet, heroic.
The idea of the Empire State Building as a heroic venture, and the men who built it as heroes, is a constant theme in Hine's photographs. He was not just pandering to his employers either, for how else should we characterize the decision, in the darkest year of the Depression, to erect the world's tallest building? (Insane is another word that comes to mind.) What is more, nobody was sure, not even the architects, that the building would stay up.
Some of the most heroic images are of the derrick operators. These carefree youngsters were responsible for hoisting bricks, cement, steel girders, and just about everything else to an army of welders, bricklayers, carpenters and riveters busy pushing the great building upward at a spanking rate of a story of steel a day. Accidents, sadly, claimed many lives.
One photograph shows a derrick operator on a hoisting ball. He wears no shirt, or gloves, or any kind of harness to protect him as he sails into the air with a load. Why on earth is he being so reckless? We know why: He loves the danger and the risk. Tanned, with tight, taut muscles, he seems like a god.
Aside from heroism, Hine also stressed the skills of the workers. Image after image records a specific tradesman at task, from a sheet metal worker installing a heating duct, to a welder enlarging holes in a girder, to a bunch of plumbers maneuvering a large pipe elbow. More than just workers, Hine says in these images, these are skilled craftsman.
Given the lack of jobs in 1930, anyone who got work on the building was lucky. Perhaps that accounts for the spirit of good cheer and optimism pervading Hine's photographs. There is also a sense of pride, derived from the knowledge that they are working on something important, a building to stand for the ages. Or at least that is how Hine presents it.
Although Hine's photographs tell the story of one of the world's great buildings, they do so not to glorify modern architecture, or even capitalism, but to salute the courage, dignity and skill of the building's thousands of anonymous workers. These are the real heroes here, and Hine wants everyone to know it.
''The Rise of a Landmark: Lewis Hine and the Empire State Building'' is at the Morris Museum, 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown, through March 14. Information: (973)971-3700.
ART REVIEW  Correction:  February 1, 2004, Sunday  A review last Sunday about Lewis Hine photographs at the Morris Museum in Morristown misstated the title of his book about the building of the Empire State Building. It is ''Men at Work,'' not ''Man at Work.''
