THERE is a school bus stop in Oakwood, Staten Island, that is at the foot of a hill. Every morning, three groups of women trudge down there from three directions. In cold weather they are mostly dressed in leather jackets above oversize T-shirts and either pajama bottoms or sweat pants. Some cradle a mug of some steaming drink in one hand and drag a sleepy kid with the other. The straps of their kids' brightly colored school bags cut into the padded shoulders of their jackets. They smell of cigarettes, burnt toast and peanut butter. They shiver, yawn and curse the weather.
At the bus stop, they drop the backpacks, smacking them onto the sidewalk, let go of the kids' hands and arrange themselves in their designated spots.
Nobody knows how and when these designations occurred, but for as long as the school bus stop has been there, the English-speaking mothers (and, this year, a father) have gathered on an eight-foot-wide space in front of a white and faux brick building. The Russian-speaking ''mothers'' (currently two mothers, two grandmothers, one baby sitter and occasionally one older sister) stand a few feet away, between two large trees that block the light from a nearly identical building. The Chinese speakers (two grandmothers, one mother) congregate across the street from everybody else, next to a white fence. The English speakers are of Italian, Irish and Jewish descent, but the Russian and Chinese call them simply Americans.
One woman, a recent immigrant, doesn't quite know where she belongs. She stands alone in the narrow space dividing the Russian and American territories.
The regulars in each set greet one another, and then exchange polite but distant nods or smiles with the other two camps. The meeting has officially started and will last for 5 to 20 minutes longer, depending on traffic, the school bus driver's mood, or both.
As in the daytime soap operas that the groups watch in their respective languages, the characters and themes have been established in advance. The conversation is picked up where it was left off the day before. There are no awkward pauses. A morning late last year was typical.
''So, did you try it?'' a 60-year-old woman in a bell-shaped green leather coat, the self-appointed leader of the Russian group, asks an older woman.
''I did, but my husband smelled it and wouldn't eat.''
''You should've put some garlic in your stew!''
''But his doctor. ''
''Nonsense!''
The woman in the green coat is an advocate of the beneficial effects of fish oil, and she had suggested that the older woman secretly put it into her sick husband's food.
Meanwhile, the kids are running around wildly -- Chinese, Russian and American in one great pack. Nobody pays any attention to them except when they get too loud.
''You shut up this instant, Christopher (David, Stephanie, Christy)!'' the mothers yell out. One day in early January, the older woman was in the spotlight in the Russian group. She was recounting recent episodes of ''Luz Maria,'' a Peruvian telenovela broadcast in Russian on a Russian TV channel.
''And then the ex-wife decided to kill Gustavo and sets up a car accident.''
''Oh, my God!''
''Yes, but instead she kills herself.''
''What about Gustavo?''
''He just loses his memory.''
It is during just such a discussion of plot twists one day late last year that one of the Russians, a white-haired woman in a black beret and jeans, decides to take a step in the direction of the English speakers. This woman has long been known for her independent streak. First of all, she doesn't own a leather jacket. Also, she can speak fluent English, and at times she even tries to practice her skills.
''Hello,'' she says to one of the Americans. She is greeted in return and takes another step closer so she can hear what the Americans are talking about.
''THOSE pretty, tiny dumplings are to die for!''
The conversation has settled on the abundant offerings of the recently opened New China Buffet, and the orator is the only man in the English-speaking group. In fact, he is the only man at the bus stop. At first he avoided the women, guarding his masculinity a few feet away near the statue of a saint on a nearby lawn. The craving for conversation, however, soon overcame his male pride. Now he is a full member of the group. Clad in a leather jacket and sweat pants, he is not too shy to discuss prom dresses, cleaning devices and sweet sixteen parties, and even uses words like ''tiny'' and ''pretty.''
But the Russian woman has a question. ''Excuse me,'' she interrupts. ''How much I leave a tip in a Chinese buffet?''
The group is silent for a moment in contemplation. There are waiters. But the waiters don't really do anything: they serve you your drinks; you have to get your food yourself. But then they have to clean up after you.
At last, the verdict is ready.
''A dollar. You leave them a dollar. A dollar is enough.''
''Thank you,'' the Russian woman says with a nod, stealing a glance at the other Russians. She suspects her behavior is being frowned upon.
Indeed, when she returns to her circle, a woman reproaches her for her visit to the other group.
This tension had arisen before. Once, the same woman said, ''You're bringing shame on us Russians!''
''How am I bringing shame?''
''You ask questions. They will think the Russians are stupid.''
''Won't they think that about some people who have been living in the country for 10 years and still can't say a word of English?''
''How will they know that? Maybe I can speak English but just don't want to!''
Another time, the woman with the sick husband scolded her. ''Look at the Chinese,'' she said. ''They are always together. Not one of them ever tried to cross the street.''
But this time, the coming of the bus interrupts all communications. The kids have to be helped with their school bags, kissed goodbye, waved at and sometimes taught manners. ''No pushing, Christopher (David, Stephanie, Christy)!'' ''No cutting the line!''
After the bus's yellow body has swerved out of the street, the mothers don't leave. Shivering, yawning and cursing the weather, they stay for a few minutes to continue talking.
Chastened, the woman in the black beret is now feigning genuine interest in the lives of the soap opera characters.
She could have struck up a conversation with the recent immigrant. Both speak fairly fluent English, and both used to work as psychologists. But the recent immigrant isn't standing alone anymore. She has taken her own brave step and joined the majority group, the Americans.
NEW YORK OBSERVED Lara Vapnyar is the author of ''There Are Jews in My House,'' a collection of short stories published last month by Pantheon.
