HIS name was Pantelis. With his black beret perched obliquely on a butte of silver hair, he stood on the ancient hill during the white heat of summer and through the sporadic dreariness of Athenian winters, always with a smile, a pleasant word.
I expected to find him in his usual spot behind his camera every time I climbed the slippery marble, every time I emerged, awestruck, at seeing the Parthenon through the massive gateway of its propylaeum. He was an indelible part of the ancient Greek landscape, an artifact himself.
In 1976, I lived in Athens on a study abroad program, learning basic Greek before being sent out to stay with host families in rural outposts and islands. The rest of the year was spent navigating the Technicolor street markets of the neighborhoods I lived in, parsing out the bewildering language, and occasionally becoming stranded on the islands during capricious winter storms that kept the ferries docked.
With no classrooms, we 11 Americans were educated alfresco, under the shadow of the Acropolis marbles, entertaining an imaginary audience in the theater of Dionysus, or tracing remains of the Themistoclean wall into subterranean parking garages.
In late autumn, while winding through the streets of the Plaka, we decided to dress up like goddesses for Halloween and pose in front of the Parthenon, mimicking the stoic faces of the statues we were studying. We changed our minds about the costumes, but there, in the old photo album, is my first shot by Pantelis, seemingly the official Acropolis photographer, made with his old box camera and developed as we waited. Astride the felled column he used as a portrait seat, four girls lean on each other, all stone-faced except for me, who couldn't resist a smile.
Pantelis didn't look much different when I returned three years later with my boyfriend, Phil -- who's now my husband -- but I did. Just before the trip, I cut my long hair. The image from that trip has a lost, Dickensian quality; we huddled on the same dismissed column drum, hands in our laps, looking like orphans.
It was high season: hordes of German, Japanese and American tourists were struggling up the white-hot rocks in the merciless sun. I recall one boisterous sightseer, seizing a comedic moment to entertain his group, bellowing, "I came all this way just to see a bunch of rocks?"
Next time, in 1984, we were married. I had worked that summer on an excavation in Greece and Phil and I met up in Athens for a vacation. Up we went for the customary photograph with Pantelis. My hair had grown back, and we curved into each other like the married couple we were, enjoying a contented solidity on the familiar pillar.
From his office with the unparalleled view, Pantelis told us about his family and his work. A visit to Pantelis became a chief mandate of any Athenian sojourn. A trip was not complete without that postcard-sized, black and white shot; it was an official emblem of my visit: a Hellenophile's rite of passage.
I returned the next year with my younger sister on our way to a vacation in Israel and Egypt. It was January: not a good time to be in Greece. With much rain and little sun, we spent the days chatting through the smoke of the Red Lion Pub, or nursing a Nescafé under leaden skies in Syntagma Square. Kiosks blew over in the hurricane force winds that battered downtown Athens; we spent part of one day mopping rainwater that had flowed in under the balcony door, pooling across our marble hotel room floor.
When the storm let up, we trudged up the slick marble steps made even more treacherous by the rains and found Pantelis, sterling hair peeking out from under his beret, working his old box camera. There, shoulder to shoulder in the atypical gloom, I initiated my sister into my rite.
Some years later, after my mother died, I went through my parents' faded photo albums. Before they met and married in Germany just after the war, my father had toured Europe while on leave. As I turned to the last, resin-colored page of the scrapbook, my heart stopped. There was a photograph of my father and his buddies, slouched and self-possessed, their uniforms off-duty loose, balanced casually on top of the fallen column I knew so well. The format, the angle, the size and position of the photograph was unmistakable: it was the signature style of Pantelis, taken in 1946.
I returned to Athens again recently, this time with my daughter. We climbed the stairs to the Acropolis reverentially, in anticipation of a site that never ceases to thrill. But Pantelis was nowhere to be seen. I asked a tour guide if she knew what had happened to him. Upon hearing his name, her eyes lighted up with recognition, then turned melancholy.
''Itan megalos anthropos,'' she nodded solemnly. ''He was a great man.''
''He worked up there, all by himself, for decades,'' she continued, ''but after he was gone, there was no one else who could do that job.'' After a moment, she added softly, ''No one.''
The column on which my father sat, which I occupied some 30 years later, has now been restored and placed in the Parthenon. So, I stood with my daughter, in the void where the pillar used to be, to have our picture taken by my older sister, who had met us there while also on vacation.
I wasn't thinking about the Golden Age, but about wars and fathers, the passage of time, and a man who spent his entire life on this hill. A man who as a youth had seen the Nazi flag hanging over the Parthenon, and had witnessed scaffolding migrate the circumference of the temple over the decades as it was dismantled, cleaned and rebuilt. Pantelis saw the city grow into a vast urban sea of concrete lapping at the surrounding mountains. He could watch the color of the Aegean change in the distance.
I studied the pillars in graduate school, how they were quarried in the mountains above Athens, the unfinished drums drawn in oxcarts, gleaming, to their new home. How the stylobate on which they stood was curved, so the colonnade could theoretically meet in parabolic grandeur some miles into space. Thirty years isn't much to the Greek column we sat upon, but the column -- and Pantelis -- helped create a little history of my own.
Essay AMANDA SUMMER SLAVIN is an archaeologist who writes frequently about Greece.
