THE Girdle Factory building on Bedford Avenue and North Fifth Street, near the heart of the Northside section of Williamsburg, Brooklyn, is home to a wine store, a cheese shop, an Internet cafe and a record store that offers an eclectic selection of rare vinyl. In the front window is a sign that in the opinion of the building's co-owner, a 33-year-old developer named Mayer Schwartz, points to the future:
''Come home to the ultimate apartment complex,'' the sign reads, amid promises of wood floors, exposed brick and high ceilings. ''The Opera House of East Williamsburg.''
The Opera House, the newest project of Mr. Schwartz and his partners, sits about two miles east of the Girdle Factory and its chic mini-mall. Past the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, past a row of high-rise public housing projects and past, even, the outermost edge of East Williamsburg. Although the four-story brick building is firmly situated in Bushwick, some people are already calling it one of the latest outposts of hip young Brooklyn.
But Arion Place, the one-block street between Broadway and Bushwick Avenue where the Opera House, a former German singing hall, has stood since the late 1800's, is not quite fashionable Bedford Avenue. Not yet. And Broadway has no cafes, no boutiques. Instead, there is a store that sells live chickens.
The subway station for the L line, which the Straphangers Campaign, a transit advocacy rated the best in the city in a survey last summer, is a 15-minute walk away. Much closer are the elevated J and Z lines, which the same survey ranked the city's dirtiest.
The hundred or so artists, actors and dancers who live in the Opera House Lofts, which opened in September, lack some of the swagger of their peers to the west. What they share with their new neighbors in Bushwick is an uneasy feeling that the fate of their community is undetermined.
The story of gentrification in New York is familiar, but on the blocks around Arion Place, few are sure how this chapter will end. If more of the new people follow, the developer's subtle blurring of community boundaries -- turning Bushwick into East Williamsburg, at least on paper -- could become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Eurides Echavarria can stand in front of his business, a secondhand store under the elevated train tracks along Broadway near Arion Place, and point out the reasons people wouldn't want to move there. Down the street sits a methadone clinic. Across the street gapes an empty lot where people sleep in abandoned cars. A few doors over is a seemingly empty building that he says has been a haven for prostitutes.
Still, Mr. Echavarria believes that the new people, and the change they represent, will keep coming. He sees them every afternoon around five, young and mostly white, getting off the subway from their jobs in Manhattan and rushing past his store, their heads down, to the Opera House and smaller buildings like it, where rents of around $1,500 a month for thousand-square-foot apartments are not unusual.
Within 10 years, Mr. Echavarria believes, he will be out of business. The secondhand clothes that he sells, the worn-out coats for a dollar or two, are not ironic or kitschy, like the ones in Williamsburg's thrift shops, and the grit on the sidewalk is not a charming kind of grit. His customers are not stylish young men and women looking for that certain vintage look, but poor people who just want to keep warm.
As for the Opera House's residents, when they come to Bushwick, ''they just come to sleep,'' said Mr. Echavarria, a thin Dominican with an easy smile who has lived on Myrtle Avenue for a decade. ''They bring everything from the city. They don't spend. And they don't talk to anybody.''
Mr. Echavarria's landlord, Morris Todras, who has owned the building for 38 years and is a member of Community Board 4, believes that Bushwick is in the middle of a renaissance, which he thinks remarkable, considering how bad life got. The low point came after the citywide blackout in July 1977, when looting and fires -- some of the worst in the city -- devastated Broadway, one of the neighborhood's major shopping streets. ''Twenty-five, 30 years ago, Bushwick was burning,'' Mr. Todras said. ''The blackout caused many, many of the old merchants to give up and never come back.''
Since those dark days, when the word Bushwick became synonymous with urban decay, wishful predictions of a neighborhood rebirth have arrived regularly. Time and again, newspaper articles cautiously heralded improvement. But real change has been long in coming, especially along Broadway, where the neighborhood meets Bedford-Stuyvesant, another neighborhood that has had its share of problems.
Is it any wonder, then, that a developer would promote the Opera House Lofts as being in East Williamsburg, reaching for some of the cachet the name confers?
Mr. Schwartz, the developer, who grew up in Borough Park and who has lived in Williamsburg all his adult life, says he never gave the neighborhood's name much thought; he just knew that young professionals would want to live there. ''To be honest, I don't know the legal definition of the neighborhood,'' he said. ''I don't even remember having a question about what this neighborhood is.'' And his more recent ads do place the Opera House in Bushwick, although those ads are appearing after the 66-unit building is 80 percent full.
It is an old tactic in real estate, but one that can trouble people who already live in a neighborhood.
''When you rename something,'' said Marci Reaven, a director of Place Matters, a joint project of the cultural group City Lore and the Municipal Art Society dedicated to preserving New York's local landmarks, ''you are trying to wipe out, frequently, what was there before, and pretending that you can start fresh,'' she said. ''There's an old tradition in American history where an occupying force will come in and render the original population invisible.''
Of course, she added, ''you don't want to overstate the case, because the people who are moving into these individual buildings are not seeing themselves like that.''
A Renter's Calculus
The Opera House, which is just around the corner from Mr. Echavarria's store, dominates the west side of Arion Place. It is a sprawling, homely structure with three distinct sections. Most photogenic, and closest to Broadway, is the red brick facade with soaring arched windows that is featured in the ads for the building.
Stephan Laboccetta, a lanky 24-year-old who works as a real estate broker, a recording engineer and a graphic artist, lives on the fourth floor of the Opera House. For him, the calculus of moving to Bushwick was simple. Rents may be high by the neighborhood's old standards, but they are a bargain compared with rents in Manhattan and the trendier parts of Brooklyn. Mr. Laboccetta pays $1,050 a month for a bright apartment that is around 850 square feet; apartments of roughly the same size advertise for $1,600 or even $2,000 in Dumbo, Park Slope and parts of Williamsburg.
''Williamsburg's very pricey,'' he said, sitting next to a large window that faces Arion Place. ''Dumbo's getting expensive. This is one of the only places in Brooklyn where you have access to the city in 10 minutes, and it's still a decent place to live.''
If the area can be rough -- ''not a neighborhood I would recommend walking around too late, if you're a single girl,'' he said -- that is part of the tradeoff. ''If this was a nice neighborhood,'' he said, ''this place would be $1,600 instead of $1,000.''
This is Mr. Laboccetta's third apartment in Brooklyn. After being priced out of Park Slope, he moved to Sunset Park, where he lived with two roommates. After discovering the Opera House via the Internet, he moved in last fall with a futon, an audio mixing board and several guitars.
Mr. Laboccetta was impressed by his new landlord, who had big ideas for the building, and a youthful face behind his glasses and beard. In exchange for a possible discount on his rent, Mr. Laboccetta soon agreed to help build a recording studio in the basement as part of Mr. Schwartz's grand plan -- yet unrealized -- to fill the 12,000-square-foot space with a yoga studio, a darkroom, a gym, washing machines and a gallery. Whatever amenities the surrounding blocks might lack, Mr. Schwartz's thinking went, the building could make up for it.
Warily Optimistic
That idea attracted Nelson Peña, a 34-year-old filmmaker who used to live in Hamilton Heights, in northern Manhattan, but had grown tired of living in a community with few artists. Since moving to the Opera House, and paying more for less space, he has met painters, photographers, actors and other filmmakers.
But there have been frustrations. The lights and loud music from a storefront Pentecostal church across the street kept him awake at night; finally, after a few residents complained, the church began closing its front doors and turning the lights off overnight. In addition, he said, there is no place in the neighborhood to relax and have a cup of coffee, and people must leave the neighborhood to eat a nice meal.
Another source of worry is the old Rheingold Brewery, a 6.7-acre site half a block away on Bushwick Avenue, which for nearly two decades had been a vacant lot. Currently, hundreds of units of subsidized housing, including about a hundred low-income apartments, are being built there. Community leaders call it a rebirth, but some Opera House residents have trouble figuring out what will distinguish the new development from the city housing projects in nearby Bedford-Stuyvesant.
For all this, the new residents say they are warily optimistic. ''You've got to get in these neighborhoods while it's still cheap,'' Mr. Laboccetta said. ''When people talk about a neighborhood turning, it's the period that's questionable that's the best time to be there.''
Weddings and Robberies
Emily Delgado understands why residents of the Opera House would be apprehensive about their new surroundings. Ms. Delgado, a small, round-faced woman of 26, grew up on Arion Place, across the street from the building; she remembers weekly weddings there when she was a girl. Her parents still live in the apartment where she grew up; she lives down the block, and her parents own both houses, along with two beauty salons on Broadway.
Two years ago, going home late from a class at St. John's University in Jamaica, Queens, Ms. Delgado was robbed across the street from her house. Rain poured down, and the street light was broken. When she got out of her car, she recalled, two men held her up at gunpoint and stole her purse.
The 83rd Police Precinct, which covers Bushwick, had 44 murders and more than 1,500 robberies in 1993. In 2003, there were still 16 murders and more than 500 robberies, although the crime rate there last year showed a slightly smaller decline than the citywide rate. Yet Ms. Delgado's feelings about the neighborhood are complex.
''There's a lot of good,'' she said the other day, sitting in her parents' living room near a large painting of Jesus. ''For instance, the street that we live on, the neighbors look out for each other. Although, yes, it was not a good neighborhood to grow up in, and it was considered the ghetto -- though more so than it is now.''
Ms. Delgado, who works as an administrative assistant at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, is also ambivalent about all the new housing. Although her parents and other homeowners in the neat row houses on their street are seeing their property values rise, other residents, she knows, are not so lucky.
White, mostly non-Hispanic people started moving into apartments along Broadway about three years ago, slowly at first. They stood out, because Bushwick is almost entirely black and Hispanic. Some people who had lived there for years found they couldn't afford their rent.
It gnaws at her that a lot of longtime Bushwick residents are having trouble finding a place to live. ''Being that the neighborhood is predominantly Hispanic and African-American, we as a people have not united in the past for this not to happen,'' Ms. Delgado said.
''But then again,'' she added, referring to the people across the street, ''they are bettering the neighborhood.''
A Neighborhood of Its Own
Mayer Schwartz has seen neighborhoods wax and wane. His wife's family made sweaters in the factory at Bedford Avenue and North Fifth Street for more than 20 years, until a Manhattan developer offered to buy them out in the late 90's. The family declined, and Mr. Schwartz set to work converting the building himself. Now, with the mini-mall, the shops, the record store and the 27 loft apartments overhead, the Girdle Factory is a Williamsburg centerpiece.
But local housing costs are so high that many artistic young people who spurred the area's resurgence can no longer afford to live there. This, in turn, drives them to Bushwick, and to the Opera House Lofts.
When Mr. Schwartz first saw the building three years ago, it sparked his imagination, and he took pains to preserve as much of the existing structure as he could, fretting at the loss of this or that historical detail. The renovation, which began 18 months before the building opened, and cost about $4 million, is still a work in process.
The building's new name -- the Opera House Lofts -- is a tongue-in-cheek poke at the aspirations of the German choirs that once used the hall, but the artistic overtones are intentional. Like his tenants, Mr. Schwartz wondered whether the neighborhood could support a large development. His solution, much of it hinging on his plans for the basement, involves turning the building into a neighborhood of its own.
Although Mr. Schwartz can be guarded and awkward in conversation, even terse, like any successful developer he is dogged in promoting his building. In a visit on a recent windy day, he pointed out his favorite place, a garden in an empty lot next door, where there are potted shrubs and benches behind a tall fence topped with wire. He has heard reports of a time capsule buried in the basement of his building. And he is especially fond of the roof deck, where tenants have already held getting-to-know-you parties.
''Take a typical apartment,'' Mr. Schwartz said. ''You have an apartment, and that's it. There's no place to hang around with a friend. The idea of this building is to have people enjoy the space.''
Climbing the stairs to the deck, Mr. Schwartz reflected on how far the building had come. Yes, he said, the neighborhood is unpolished, and it will be some time before it resembles its hipper cousin to the west. Still, he is optimistic. ''The infrastructure, and the trouble of getting the neighborhood up and running?'' he said. ''Yeah, it's a point. But it's going to work.''
From the deck, the Triborough Bridge was barely visible to the north. Closer, a boxy concrete-block apartment building rose on the edge of the Rheingold property. To the south were the housing projects of Bedford-Stuyvesant. An elevated train rolled eastward through the low-slung rooftops of Bushwick.
To the west, just past Bushwick Houses, the Empire State Building jutted out between two East Williamsburg high-rises, and south of that, one could just make out the metallic-blue towers of the Williamsburg Bridge.
Up on the roof, Mr. Schwartz thought back on the headlines that greeted his last big real estate venture, just north of that bridge -- the gamble on an old industrial building in a gritty neighborhood.
''It's the same thing,'' he said. ''It's 'Brooklyn Developers Have Lofty Ideas.' And it was about, 'Is the neighborhood going to take off or not?' This was back in '99.''
Williamsburg, of course, did take off.
''Yeah, thank God,'' Mr. Schwartz said. ''To me, it's a little bit déjà vu.''
