For 2004, NASA is now two for two in putting six-wheeled rovers on Mars.
About 9:05 p.m. Pacific time on Saturday (12:05 a.m. Eastern time on Sunday), the rover Opportunity made its first bounce on the Martian surface, officials for the space agency said. The rover continued to send radio signals to earth as it bounced and rolled along the planet's surface.
''We're on Mars, everybody,'' said Rob Manning, manager for entry, descent and landing, as people in the control room cheered and clapped. When the rover came to a stop a few minutes later, it sent a beep that it was in working condition.
As Opportunity sped toward landing, mission managers said earlier Saturday that they had homed in on the problems that had waylaid its twin, Spirit, which landed three weeks earlier on the opposite side of Mars, and that they were hopeful they would be able to repair it.
Opportunity's landing site is a region known as Meridiani Planum, which contains a deposit of iron oxide the size of Oklahoma. What particularly interests scientists is that this type of iron oxide, hematite, usually forms in the presence of water, at least on Earth.
Meridiani Planum might once have been the bottom of a lake or a sea, and the hematite formed out of iron and oxygen dissolved in the water. An alternate hypothesis is that the area was a hot spring, the hot groundwater percolating through volcanic ash to transform it into hematite. It is also possible that the hematite formed without water in oxygen-rich lavas.
Because of the hematite, Meridiani Planum is expected to look unlike other landscapes seen to date on Mars, perhaps with shiny hematite outcrops jutting out of the ground.
The $820 million mission is searching for vestiges of a watery past on Mars.
Mars, now cold and dry, has long offered hints of a much different climate. Giant canyons slice through parts of its landscape. Elsewhere, some scientists see geological features reminiscent of shorelines.
If Mars was once a warm, wet world, as some suspect, then perhaps it could have given rise to life, and if so, then perhaps some simple microbes might yet survive deep underground where warmth and liquid water exist.
Mission managers expressed confidence Saturday that Spirit would be able to resume its mission of Gusev Crater, which looks like it may have once been a lake bed.
The computer on Spirit started crashing on Wednesday, and the problem has been traced to part of the computer memory, said Peter Theisinger, the project manager. It will still take some time for the problem to be fully diagnosed and for the engineers to devise procedures to work around it.
''I think we're probably like three weeks away from driving,'' Mr. Theisinger said.
That would be about a quarter of the three months originally allocated to Spirit's mission, but ''our analysis shows we're probably going to last a lot longer than three months,'' said Dr. Edward J. Weiler, NASA's associate administrator for space science. ''We've got reserve on the end to do the real exploring.''
The troubles began Wednesday, as controllers were testing one of the instruments. Spirit's computer crashed, and over the next two days, a cycle of rebooting and crashing repeated more than 60 times. The rover also did not shut down at night.
The rover uses random access memory, or RAM, which loses data when power is lost, as well as flash memory, which retains data without power. RAM is the type of memory used in personal computers, and flash memory is what is used to store photographs in digital cameras.
Suspecting that the problem might be with the flash memory, flight controllers radioed instructions for Spirit to start up in what Mr. Theisinger called the cripple mode, using only the RAM and not the flash memory. For the first time since Wednesday, the rover's software did not crash.
After nearly an hour talking with the rover, controllers sent a command to the rover to shut down to allow it to recharge its batteries. Unlike the day before, the rover did not answer back, leading researchers to believe the vehicle was sleeping, Mr. Theisinger said.
