IN the drive to make art museum collections fresh and accessible, the Neuberger Museum of Art has hit upon a novel idea: pairing portraits of artists by the photographer Marvin Lazarus (1918-1982) with artwork from their collection. While the artwork might not be the best by these artists, or even the finest in the collection, the photographs make them seem more interesting, and vice versa.
Mr. Lazarus, a former lawyer and assistant attorney general for New York State, left his law practice to pursue a career as a commercial photographer. Good for him, I say. He mostly did magazine work, photographing for Harper's Bazaar, Time, Art News and other magazines. But his real love was taking artist's portraits.
Mr. Lazarus always wanted to publish a book of his photographs of artists, displaying them with examples of the artist's work. He never did. Picking up the idea, the Neuberger's modern art curator, Dede Young, decided to pair off about 40 of his portraits from the late 1950's to the early 1960's with works from the collection. The result is a surprisingly lively, high-spirited exhibition titled ''Side by Side: Marvin Lazarus and the Neuberger.''
Ms. Young's checklist presents a stellar cast, including Mr. Lazarus's portraits of, and artwork by, the artists Jasper Johns, Frank Stella, Alberto Giacometti, Mark Rothko, Josef Albers, Andy Warhol, Milton Resnick, Alexander Archipenko, Stuart Davis, Louise Nevelson, and others. Like Mr. Lazarus's portraits, which are not well known and rarely exhibited, most of the works here have never before been on public display.
Besides their aesthetic qualities, many of the portraits and artwork have wonderful stories to tell. For instance, when Mr. Lazarus first telephoned Willem de Kooning for an appointment to take his photograph, the artist declined. ''You see, I'm a little tight right now,'' the painter mumbled. Mr. Lazarus thought he was referring to his busy schedule, but soon realized what he meant.
Among the more substantial artwork on display is George Segal's ''Appalachian Farm Couple 1936'' (1978). It consists of plaster casts of a man and his wife standing in front of a log cabin. Both of them are wearing farmer's clothes, and seem haggard and gaunt. It is an image of deprivation, but also, somehow, of stoic defiance. This is, after all, their home.
Curiously enough, Mr. Segal found the models for his Appalachian farm couple in New Jersey. They were his friends, Billy Kluver (an engineer who collaborated with artists like Robert Rauschenberg in making new media artwork in the 1960's), and his wife, Julie. Once, a few years back, according to the Neuberger's registrar, the couple came to see Mr. Segal's sculpture on display at the museum. They looked exactly like their casts.
Most of Mr. Lazarus's portraits are simple and direct, the artists standing or sitting quietly in their studios surrounded by their artwork or tools of trade. Some smoke or fidget, but most look blankly at the camera. Why this setting? Studio photographs, Mr. Lazarus believed, best revealed the artist's personality. Moreover, they offered a porthole to the mysteries of the creative process.
One of the more engaging studio photographs is of the Russian-born Cubist sculptor Alexander Archipenko. Wearing a dirty white apron and wiping his hands on a towel, he stands in the middle of a rustic-looking room, the walls decorated with irregular-shaped artwork, He looks like a butcher, tidying up at the end of the day.
Aside from studio portraits, others were taken at exhibition openings. Of these, the photograph of a young Frank Stella offering a surly tough-looking guy in (what looks like) a Roy Lichtenstein painting a drag on his cigarette merits praise. Playful and fun, it contrasts with the somber seriousness of the studio portraits. It's also one of the few portraits in the exhibition that look posed, or at least staged.
Mr. Stella's portrait hangs alongside ''Fortin de las Flores'' (1967), one of a portfolio of lithographs of colorful geometric shapes and grids. It's not a terribly important work, but certainly among the more attractive of Mr. Stella's early efforts with the medium. The youthfulness and verve of the portrait are mirrored in this handsome, vivacious print. It's a model pairing.
Perhaps the most alluring photograph is a circa 1960 portrait of the sculptor Marisol. It shows the artist's beautiful young head balancing on the upper shin of a wooden leg forming a T-bar in one of her sculptures, the rest of her body out of frame. It's the precariousness of the composition that gives the image such force, along with the playing off of empty space against full; black against light; circle against straight lines. This is among Mr. Lazarus's best works.
''Side by Side: Marvin Lazarus and the Neuberger'' is at the Neuberger Museum of Art at Purchase College, 735 Anderson Hill Road, Purchase, through June 13. Information: (914)251-6100.
ART REVIEW
