IT was a risky move, to say the least. Robert Kotick had plunked down $440,000 in December 1990 to take control of the video game manufacturer Activision, then nearly insolvent. By the next February, as its new chief executive, he found himself head to head with the company's creditors.
One of them, Philips Electronics, threatened legal proceedings to liquidate Activision, which owed it $6.6 million after losing a patent infringement lawsuit. Mr. Kotick, then 27, remembers entering a conference room along with his business partner, Brian Kelly, and their lawyer to face some 70 Philips executives, lawyers, accountants and other representatives. ''I think they had paramedics there,'' Mr. Kotick joked.
But rather than liquidate, he proposed turning that debt into equity by making Philips a major stockholder in Activision. Philips, its executives said, was not interested. Exhausted and demoralized, he took out his electronic access card for Activision's offices and put it on the table, indicating surrender. ''I said, 'Good luck,''' he recalled.
Mr. Kotick was still in the building when, less than 30 minutes later, a Philips executive called him back into the room to say that the company would accept his offer.
Since then, Activision has become the No.2 video game maker in the United States, after Electronic Arts. Activision had $865 million in sales in 2003, compared with just $10 million in 1991, and its market value has soared to $1.8 billion. With blockbuster games like ''Spider-Man,'' ''Tony Hawk'' and ''True Crime: Streets of L.A,'' Activision is the envy of much of the industry.
How to explain Mr. Kotick's success? He gives some answers to that question, and analysts serve up others. But over the years, one apparent constant has been his ability to bounce back from failure.
That, perhaps, and an effusive personality. As a college student, he charmed his way onto the private jet of the casino mogul Steve Wynn after meeting him at a party in Dallas. Weeks later, Mr. Wynn invested $300,000 in Mr. Kotick's software company, Arktronics, which was building an easy-to-use operating system.
The company later failed because of a lack of demand for its products, a setback that taught Mr. Kotick a lesson. In his next venture, TDC Group, which he started in 1985, he worked on contract for other companies, so that they footed much of the software development bill. He later sold TDC for $26 million.
Despite his early business experience, he now says, both he and Mr. Kelly were ''naïve about the business'' when they took over Activision. ''As much as I'd like to think I provided some grand vision, our first year we were pretty much blocking and tackling,'' he said, recalling regular visits from sheriffs who collected Activision's computer equipment, bought with loans on which the company had since defaulted. ''Every year from '93 to '97, we had more flops than successes.''
''Leather Goddesses of Phobos,'' in which a team of Amazon warriors takes over the world, was one such disappointment. ''It wasn't any fun to play,'' said Mr. Kotick, who was once a video game enthusiast himself. But the real lesson he drew from that dud was that original characters did not sell nearly as well as established action heroes or famous athletes.
The company did enjoy one or two hits a year, including ''Pitfall Harry,'' which was first released by Atari in 1982; it sold 4 million copies. But the turning point, Mr. Kotick said, was the 1995 release of a game of battling robots called ''MechWarrior 2.'' It pushed Activision's sales to $200 million a year from $50 million.
With other hits in the mid- and late 90's, Mr. Kotick said, the company reached a crossroads: ''eat or be eaten.'' It decided to eat, acquiring three distributors in Europe and several design companies in the United States.
''We would have a developer do a project under contract by taking a small equity stake'' in their company, Mr. Kotick said. Activision, now based in Santa Monica, Calif., would then buy up the best performers -- eight so far, most recently Infinity Ward in October. ''It was kind of like dating,'' he said.
Plenty of titles failed, but in 1999, the company hit upon one of its most popular product lines when it signed the skateboarding star Tony Hawk to develop games bearing his name. One of them, ''Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 2,'' was the best-selling game of 2000. Similarly, games based on Marvel Comics heroes like Spider-Man have validated Mr. Kotick's strategy of exploiting pop-culture icons.
Mr. Kotick attributes his company's growth in part to the management expertise of executives he recruited from Fortune 500 companies like PepsiCo and Pillsbury, and in part to his business model of treating the company's design groups as separate entities with their own business plans.
He also cites its extensive market research. Dave Anderson, the executive in charge of business development, said surveys of ''Tony Hawk'' game players had indicated that they would like to insert themselves into the game. So the company created a new version that allowed them to send in their photographs and have their faces appear on game characters.
Some people say that luck, as much as research or management acumen, is behind Activision's success. ''A lot of guys are doing product testing and market acceptance,'' said Jeetil Patel, a senior analyst at Deutsche Bank Securities in San Francisco. Other analysts note that Activision killed 10 unsuccessful titles in 2002.
And Activision has had its share of strategic goofs. Stewart Halpern, an entertainment analyst at RBC Capital Markets in New York, says it ''totally missed'' a seismic trend, players' abandonment of PC's for consoles like the PlayStation from Sony.
STILL, Mr. Halpern says Activision has bounced back, partly ''by getting a license for 'Spider-Man' and 'Tony Hawk' to prosper in the PlayStation 2 market.''
Activision recently signed a deal with DreamWorks SKG to develop games for the studio's movies, including ''Shrek 2.'' Mr. Kotick also sees huge advertising potential in his products; the company has already put Nokia phones and McDonald's restaurants into ''Tony Hawk's Underground,'' the latest in the series.
How many hours will Mr. Kotick, who was a ''Defender'' player when he entered college in 1981, put in on that one? None, he says; he no longer plays video games.
Private Sector
