Coming out of the Chanel show this week, the actress Kristin Scott Thomas observed of the candy-box perfection of the couture blouses and sinewy skirts, ''It makes you want to be a film star.'' With a life here that includes a husband, two children and the freedom to go to the movies anytime she likes, Ms. Scott Thomas isn't about to challenge Nicole Kidman as Hollywood's leading clotheshorse. All Ms. Scott Thomas, the star of ''The English Patient,'' really meant was that glamour gets under your skin.
Movie stars have been trooping to Paris with regularity since the end of World War II, none with a greater sense of self perfection than Marlene Dietrich, who had Christian Dior create a series of suspenders inside her suits so that whether she was standing or enjoying a plate of brown bread and sauerkraut at her favorite restaurant, no bad lines ever showed. Nowadays, you have to wonder how many celebrities are really committed to couture's hidden charms and how many are merely serving as elaborate place holders in the front row.
At the Ungaro show, Christina Aguilera wore almost as much makeup as the models, her hair a smooth Cleopatra cap. Yet to see her next to the actress Lou Doillon, the daughter of Jane Birkin and the filmmaker Jacques Doillon, was to sense a familiar Jamesian awkwardness. Ms. Doillon, with her irreverent blend of an old tweed jacket, beaded minidress, cowboy boots and a fedora on her untrained hair, was easily the more up-to-date version of Parisian chic.
As the spring 2004 season sputtered to a finish on Thursday, it became clear that for all its creative powers, couture is struggling to be relevant. Despite the Oscar-time hype for $50,000 dresses and the presence here of stylists like L'wren Scott, who brought her friend Mick Jagger to the post-show Valentino dinner, fewer than 1,000 women regularly buy couture, and even they are not as dedicated as they used to be. ''In the past, a woman bought six outfits a season,'' Valentino said. ''But today, because of the costs, they are buying only two dresses.''
Yet some of the youngest designers are still flogging that old nag. ''Oh-so Parisian, she strolls along the quaysides of the Seine,'' trilled the press notes for Stéphane Rolland's Jean-Louis Scherrer show. ''Doesn't travel begin on water?'' (Actually, with the Seine at flood stage this week, the traffic wasn't going anywhere.) What Mr. Rolland sent out, predictably, was warmed-over Yves Saint Laurent. Julien Macdonald showed some finesse with what will presumably be his last Givenchy couture show (his contract expires in April), but the glamour was in aspic: stiff lace-cut coats and suits presented to a senior-swinger version of ''Light My Fire.''
Aware that couture has lost some of its soul to the demands of the media, Emanuel Ungaro opted to return to the intimacy of his house on Avenue Montaigne. But while the 25 looks he showed were pretty and airy, with boleros and kimonos over skimmy print dresses, the models' affected party moods made for another awkward moment.
Jean Paul Gaultier also wanted people to see his clothes up close. But he chose to confine guests to a dozen curtained rooms and have the models visit one by one -- making for a disjointed presentation. Still, the clothes displayed technical majesty in their blend of Japanese warrior and French chic. ''It's a comment on the armor of the samurai and the corset, which is, of course, very feminine,'' he said. That meant chaste suits with laced insets, a luscious coat in pale pink Mongolian lamb worn in reverse, and dresses made from pieces of crocodile or stingray laced with organza. The collection indeed played tricks on the eye.
With his lieutenants off to the Golden Globes, Valentino spun refined sugar in the form of neat suits (rare this season) with boleros and pockets trimmed in pailletes, and dresses in coral tones gathered in a swish of fabric at the hip. Frilly gowns in polka-dot layers looked cheerful, but it was the simplest -- in white with a black ribbon crossing the bare back -- that reeked of sin.
In contrast to the rest of Paris, Ralph Rucci's show -- colored in ivory and vanilla with sparks of chartreuse -- seemed a tranquil sea. All looked effortless, especially a dress in blond chiffon with delicate pleating down the front, and a silk wrap dress with bits of feathered chiffon at the neck. Now that Mr. Rucci has brought more femininity to his architecture, it would be interesting to see him take on something beyond his métier, like a juicy print or a bit of lamé.
Review
