AT about this time each year, the class divide that characterizes Los Angeles seems to shift from the one between the haves and the have-nots to another showcasing the haves and the have-way-more-than-enoughs. With the televised presentation of the Golden Globes tonight, awards show season 2004 begins -- a period of dazzle and venality in which every day is something of a fashion Christmas for the world's Uma Thurmans and Nicole Kidmans. The Golden Globes are followed on Feb. 8 by the Grammy Awards and on Feb. 29 by the Oscars, being held three weeks earlier than usual.
As all but those living among the wombats surely now know, awards season marks the time when designers frantically importune the very famous to wear the satins and tiaras they produce, without any of the petty merchant's expectation of payment. A red-carpet image of Ms. Kidman in Chanel, is for Chanel after all, compensation plenty.
But what becomes of you if you are not Ms. Kidman? What happens if fate demands your presence at the Golden Globe ceremony but fails to include you among the nominees for best performance in a miniseries or motion picture made for television? How do you get dressed, in other words, if you're Jenny Cooney Carrillo?
Ms. Carrillo is one of the 90 members of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, obscure Los Angeles-based entertainment correspondents from 46 countries who are the sole voting body for the Golden Globes and the hosts of the event. For them come no calls from John Galliano or Ralph Lauren, even though without the press association there would be no event at all. Tonight Ms. Carrillo is planning to wear a black spaghetti-strap dress she bought at Loehmann's in Beverly Hills for $30. Many of her colleagues also spend meager sums or recycle old dresses and suits from past affairs. The Golden Globes are ''A Place in the Sun,'' with the hosts consigned to play Shelly Winters's role and the guests blessed with playing Elizabeth Taylor's.
''I don't think any designer would care about giving me a dress,'' said Ms. Carrillo, who writes for TV Guide, New Zealand. ''I'd take one, but the designers don't even know who we are.''
Though the Golden Globes take place during a seated dinner, the members of the press association are never in a position to pass the butter to Michael Douglas during the proceedings. They are partitioned off with their spouses and companions at separate tables and remain off camera. ''We don't get the choice seats, but we do sit on the sides,'' Karen Martin said with a tempered chipperness. Ms. Martin, who writes for a German magazine called Widescreen delighted in the fact that a few years ago she sat right above an actor. ''You know the one who played Hector the hotel manager in that movie with Julia Roberts,'' Ms. Martin said, pausing and then recalling the title, ''Pretty Woman.'' (To be accurate, the actor Hector Elizondo played Barney, the hotel manager.)
Many of the foreign journalists seem to take pride in the comparative haphazardness with which they approach this particular occasion for evening dress. Two years ago, Dagmar Dunlevy, the current chairman and former president of the press association still did not have a gown two days before the Golden Globes, even though she had to grace the stage and address the audience of millions. ''The first year that I was the president,'' Ms. Dunlevy, a German who writes for the Canadian fashion magazine Flare, said, ''I was so bogged down with finding presenters and getting security in place, that I didn't have time to get anything.''
At the last minute, she went to an unassuming shop called Vernon's in downtown Los Angeles and got a chocolate brown dress by a designer called Tadashi for about $200, she said. ''It's basically the sort of place where a working woman would go and find an evening dress,'' Ms. Dunlevy said. ''He's the sort of designer you would find at Macy's.'' The shoes she wore were plastic.
Few would mistake press association members for Jessica Simpson, largely because a fair number of the corps are, to say the least, substantially older than the stars they cover. But age does not necessitate laxness. ''I pick out the best that I have, and I wear it,'' said Argentina Brunetti, who last week was working on an article about ''Cheaper by the Dozen,'' for a publication called Marco Polo. ''I am 96 years old, '' she said. Ms. Brunetti had planned to wear ''a dress with sparkles'' this year, she offered. ''It's very nice.'' Also an actress, Ms Brunetti appeared in ''General Hospital'' and ''Joanie Loves Chachi'' among other television series and movies. She does not buy a new dress every year though, ''because I like my old dresses,'' she said.
Others share her inclination. ''The first few years I'd get into quite a fizz and try to get really smartened up,'' said Gabrielle Donnelly, a British journalist who has been attending the Golden Globes for 15 years. ''These days I have two trusty outfits; one is a heavy velvet dress, and the other is a lighter silk pantsuit,'' Ms. Donnelly said. Her husband, like many of the men who go, wears a tuxedo, which makes him a curious focus of attention nonetheless. ''He's a rather large, commanding man, and he looks very good in a tux,'' Ms. Donnelly said. ''Starlets start flinging themselves at him because they think he is a powerful producer,'' Ms. Donnelly elaborated, ''there's a lot of desperation in Hollywood, you know.''
But much hard work too. Journalists of the international celebrity press corps are quick to remind anyone inquiring about the Golden Globes, that the evening is one of enterprise and obligation. Many in the press association are on deadline interviewing stars while others are asked to escort them to the red carpet or otherwise assist in streamlining the entry process.
''We make sure the celebrities don't get harassed by security,'' Ms. Carrillo said. Celebrities must show identification to enter the Beverly Hilton, where the awards are held, and sometimes those who forget to bring any find that guards do not recognize them. ''There's always someone who forgets to bring a driver's license, and if it's Kiefer Sutherland I'm going to make sure he gets in,'' Ms. Carrillo said.
The point here is that work needs to get done and clothes can't be too constricting. ''Celebrities don't have to worry about comfort,'' Ms. Carrillo pointed out.
Nor do they have to worry about who will do their hair and makeup. Ms. Carrillo and some of her colleagues were planning to head to Fantastic Sam's this morning, a chain, for $24.95 blowouts. Ms. Carrillo had scheduled a makeup application at a cosmetics counter at Nordstrom's.
Elisabeth Sereda, an Austrian who writes for a movie magazine called Skip, said: ''I have a friend who is Austrian and a hairstylist. He hasn't confirmed with me for this year. He's always doing Catherine Zeta-Jones or something.''
