NEAR Bob McElwee's desk, the one filled with industrial engineering drawings at his office here, is a photograph of him with Katarina Witt, the former Olympic figure-skating star from Germany, at an exhibition football game between Chicago and San Francisco.
''I was going to escort her to midfield, where she was going to do the coin toss,'' Mr. McElwee said of the game, played in Berlin on Aug. 3, 1991. ''She said: 'You know, you will hear a lot of whistles. Here that is not a good thing. I am East German and they don't like us in Berlin.'
''So I laughed and I told her, 'Believe me, Miss Witt, that will be nothing compared to what I am used to hearing.'''
Mr. McElwee has been used to whistles, boos and all sort of jeers in his 42 years of officiating football games. When he retired after the Pro Bowl game last February, he was the most senior referee in the National Football League. This will be the first January since Gerald Ford was president that Mr. McElwee will spend entirely at home, in Haddonfield. In 27 years as an N.F.L. official -- 23 as a referee, the boss of the officiating crew -- he has worked three Super Bowls, a couple dozen other playoff games and more than 400 regular-season games.
Though he offers no prediction about who will win the Super Bowl next Sunday between the New England Patriots and the Carolina Panthers, you can bet he will be in front of the TV for it, like millions of other Americans.
''I said early on about the playoffs: flip a coin,'' Mr. McElwee said about his preference in the big game. ''The first reason is that these guys are the greatest players in the world or they wouldn't be there. The second reason is, with our salary cap, it's evened things out. You don't have the old Cowboys, who were in three out of four Super Bowls, and the old Raiders and the old Steelers -- you don't have that anymore.''
And you didn't have Bob McElwee this time around in the N.F.L. playoffs. What you have now is Mr. McElwee talking publicly for the first time about his life in the N.F.L. The league, he said, prohibits referees from speaking to the press, a policy that he views as archaic.
''I question that because if the fans had an idea of who that guy is and what he is trying to do and accept him from a personal standpoint, they would be able to understand referees' decisions on the field,'' he said.
Mr. McElwee, who officiated at college and high school games in New Jersey for 15 years before going to the N.F.L., is to be honored tonight by the New Jersey Sportswriters Association for his long service. On Monday night, at a banquet in Cherry Hill, the Philadelphia Sportswriters Association plans to honor him for his charitable contributions. As chairman of the West Jersey Hospital trustees four years ago, he set up Renew, a program to rehabilitate homes in West Camden and sell them back to former tenants at a cut-rate cost, all the while schooling the new owners in essentials like home finance, repair and maintenance.
Despite all the accolades, Mr. McElwee acknowledges that he is going through a little football withdrawal. He said it was time to leave after last season. Yet, though the work was arduous, he misses the thrill of game day.
''Emotionally, from the day the regular season starts, if you do what I did, football owns you, trust me,'' he said. ''It owns you on Sunday. It owns you on Monday. It owns you on Wednesday, because if you are going to work on that level, you really have to immerse yourself in it. The bottom line is you have to do this because you love to do it. There is just no other way.''
The other three major professional sports -- basketball, hockey and baseball -- have full-time officials, but the N.F.L. has relied on part-timers. Depending on seniority and how many playoff games one works, an official can make $25,000 to $80,000 a year plus expenses. On the high end, that is not bad for part-time work. But Mr. McElwee said that because of his time away, he had probably lost more from his family's heavy construction business than he gained in refereeing.
First, he said, officials have to be in the city where the game is to be played at least 24 hours beforehand, mostly for reviewing tapes of previous games. On the Monday after the game, the referee, who oversees a crew of seven, has to fax extensive reports on the game to the league office. In response, the league gives him two critiques, one on Monday and one on Wednesday, essentially grading his crew on every play. ''And then on Thursday, you start worrying about the next game,'' he said.
His office is chock-full of football mementoes. But the spacious home in nearby Haddonfield where he lives with his wife, Bette, has little memorabilia, save for a classic black-and-white photograph of him in his Naval Academy football uniform and a large photograph in the living room of him at the coin toss at the 2002 Super Bowl.
His children had their own sporting careers. His daughter, Suzanne, was a field hockey star at Duke. His younger son, Tom, was a youth ice hockey standout. His older son, Scott, who still works with him in the construction business, is also a football referee, in the Atlantic 10 college conference and the Arena Football League.
Mr. McElwee said that becoming friends with coaches and players is verboten for referees, but he still had his favorites.
''Mine, all time, was Walter Payton,'' the Chicago Bears back, he said. ''Not only was Walter a great player, but he loved to play. He had more fun on the field. He would get up off the ground and pop my shoelaces, for instance. He came out there to play, but he came out to enjoy the process.''
Still, it is infinitely harder to be a referee today than when he started, he said.
''Back then, you pretty much managed a game,'' he said. ''That was really fun, because unless something really dramatic happened you could pretty much pick your spots and make sure it was fair. The first game I ever worked in the pros, my first game my rookie year was the Steelers and Oakland. Better name for that would be open warfare. That was a game when Lynn Swann had his jaw broken and was lost the rest of the season.''
Now, he said, television dictates a different game. Everything is replayed a million ways, and every fan in the TV audience is a referee critic.
''You have to call and get involved in more than things than I would like to,'' he said. ''I am not a control freak. I like to let them play. But if somebody at home or someone in the league office is going to look at this thing in the detail that they are capable of seeing it which you never saw, and say, 'Why didn't you call this?' I have to shift a different way.''
He still loves reading and discussing football strategy, but he is returning to reading novels and nonfiction that he has long neglected. He was a standout in baseball, basketball and football at Haddonfield High. Though he weighed less than 200 pounds, he played both center and linebacker for Navy while studying at Annapolis, in the days when athletes played both offense and defense, and he helped Navy win the 1955 Sugar Bowl. After graduation, he played three years of service football in California before he returned to New Jersey and started refereeing at high school games.
''You work your way up,'' Mr. McElwee said. ''I did freshman high school football and then varsity, then college freshman, then varsity before getting a chance as a line judge in the N.F.L.'' Because it takes so long to get to the N.F.L., most officials there are significantly older than the players. At 68, Mr. McElwee, trim as a two-by-four, still works out an hour a day.
''You get those hot, humid days in Miami in September and you remember that a player only does a third of the game and then sits and sips his Gatorade the rest of the time,'' he said. ''If you don't stay in shape, you're done.
''I remember one day down there with Green Bay playing Miami,'' he said. ''There had been a big rain storm and it shot up to maybe 100 degrees. Then the sun came out. Even the players were going through the motions. I think the only score was a safety because the Green Bay quarterback couldn't handle the ball, his hands and arms were so wet.
''But I got through it. Those hour runs on the streets,'' he said. ''And my love of the game.''
IN PERSON
