AFTER more than a year of frenzied job hunting, hitting up every friend and family member he could think of for leads, sending out truckloads of introductory notes and résumés, and having attended too many informational lunches and job groups to count, Michael Perrone was just plain flummoxed.
''I had a career counselor and did everything that he told me to do, but nothing worked out,'' said Mr. Perrone, 45, who has 12 years of experience in information technology. ''The traditional networking strategies just weren't working all that well.''
Mr. Perrone's luck changed when he signed up for the online business networking site LinkedIn.com, which connects people through mutual contacts. After setting up a personal page and urging some other friends to join, Mr. Perrone, from Campbell, Calif., was connected not only to his immediate friends on the site but also to the friends of all of his friends around the world -- within four degrees of separation. ''I'd say my network grew exponentially,'' he noted.
In less than a month, he established contact with a hiring manager in his network who worked for the publicly traded sales and marketing service provider Rainmaker Systems. Mr. Perrone had actually e-mailed a résumé there several weeks earlier for a job opening he had spotted on Craigslist.org, only to receive an automated response.
''I spent all this effort physically going out and meeting people for job leads and ended up landing this one by the click of a mouse,'' he said, laughing. A couple of weeks later, Mr. Perrone went in to Rainmaker, which is based in Scotts Valley, Calif., for an interview and was hired as systems operations manager, the same job on Craigslist.
Although the employment picture is brightening, the competition for jobs is still high, with 8.7 million people looking for work, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Many openings do not even make it to newspapers or to online job boards, which puts a lot of pressure on unemployed professionals to do whatever they can to make connections at companies. ''Networking is a lot trickier these days,'' said Jeri Sedlar, a partner at the New York outplacement consulting firm Sedlar &amp; Miners. ''People have to be a lot more creative than just asking their family and friends.''
The importance of networking is clear. In a survey last fall by Bernard Haldane, the career management firm, 61 percent of respondents said they found their last job through networking, while only 16 percent said they landed their positions through newspaper listings. Lee Hecht Harrison, another outplacement company, estimates the networking number to be over 80 percent.
Filling the growing need to extend contact lists are networking Web sites like LinkedIn and Ryze.com (pronounced ''rise''), which are free to join and are the business equivalents of dating sites like Friendster and Match.com. Users create a personal Web page with vital facts like job experience and education, goals, hobbies and sometimes pictures and are instantaneously hooked into a virtual world of unrealized friends, or a ''tribe.'' Sites like Monster.com and Craigslist are also popular for talking shop and hooking in, but are less organized and more focused on advice and venting.
Since it began in May 2003, LinkedIn has ballooned to 140,000 members worldwide, and it is growing at the rate of about 1,000 every week, the company says. LinkedIn allows members to search for people in their network within four degrees of separation. However, if users want to communicate with anyone beyond the first degree -- mostly immediate friends -- they must be referred by a mutual contact.
Ryze, on the other hand, which began in 2001, has 90,000 members and is a lot like a grab bag. A person can search the entire site by signifiers like university, company and state and contact anyone.
When Kris Duggan, 29, joined Ryze after four months of fruitless job hunting, he searched the site for people working at the companies he liked not far from his home in San Jose, Calif. After sending out a bunch of introductory notes -- some people did not respond -- he ended up befriending an employee from WebEx, a sales conferencing software company in San Jose. That man passed his information on to human resources. ''After trying to get in the door there for months, I was taken to top of the line with a stamp of approval from an employee,'' Mr. Duggan said.
Two weeks later, he was hired as a sales manager, and the employee who got him in the door landed a referral fee. ''The trick to networking is aligning the haves and have-nots,'' Mr. Duggan said. ''I was qualified and wanted a job. And the guy at WebEx wanted to make some money. That's a good match.''
It is not only job seekers who interact in this virtual world of networking. As LinkedIn points out, roughly 33,000 of its members are hiring managers from national companies, including Oracle and I.B.M. Axel Schultze is one of them. As the chief executive of BlueRoads, a start-up sales solutions company in San Mateo, Calif., he is particularly concerned about who he brings on board. Although he has not eliminated the need to use a recruiter, he used LinkedIn for two hires so far. ''It's a trusted network because I'm hiring people I know,'' he said. ''When I approach someone on LinkedIn, it's between me and a friend of my friend.''
Other managers are using the Web sites because they have stopped or curtailed advertising available jobs, which makes it all the more urgent for professionals to broaden their contact lists. ''Hiring managers don't want to deal with the 10,000 e-mails that come in from any one listing,'' said Andrew Sherwood, president of the New York outplacement firm Goodrich &amp; Sherwood. ''Imagine all the responses a company would get for sales director. Come on.''
Steve Tucker, vice president of business development at Z-Tel Communications Inc., a national exchange carrier in Tampa, Fla., stopped posting positions on job boards after getting slammed with thousands of responses from a Monster.com listing last summer. ''Most of them weren't even qualified,'' said Mr. Tucker, who works in New York. He said that 80 to 90 percent of his hires were now from networks. ''Through networks you know what you're getting.'' he added, ''It's not so random.''
Still, some experts warn job seekers not to do everything online and avoid face-to-face meetings. ''It's safer when you do it that way -- you won't get hurt as badly when you get rejected,'' said John A. Challenger, chief executive of Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas, an executive outplacement firm. ''But lots of times you have to be right there for someone to commit to set up a lead. In that way online networking becomes a cheap substitute to effective networking.''
Most would agree, however, that online networking, though not a replacement for personal contact, does give people a new opportunity to meet people they would not ordinarily encounter. While some of these relationships never get off the ground, many others flourish and not only offer business opportunities and job leads but also spill over into the social world. In fact, Ryze sponsors mixers for members at local pubs and restaurants nationwide.
Suzanne Harle, 46, of Mill Valley, Calif., used Ryze members to start her environmental-film distribution company, Green Planet Films. She is a regular at the mixers. ''It's just another way for people to connect, especially since everyone is there for the same reason,'' she explained. ''It's easy to go up to a complete stranger and say, 'So what do you do?' and get away with it not sounding like a pickup line. Though, at its core, it usually is.''
