Not since a legendary power broker named Robert Moses sketched his plans for the region's elaborate system of bridges and highways has New York City stood on the brink of so much change to its haggard transportation network.
After decades of neglect and deadlock, politicians and planners have begun to lay out a grand vision for the city's steel skeleton of subways and commuter trains, one that offers relief to residents of Manhattan's East Side, spurs growth on the far west, links Lower Manhattan to the region's airports and frees thousands of Long Island commuters from having to double back on their routes.
The plans would double the number of trains for New Jersey commuters heading into Midtown, create a transit hub in Lower Manhattan and construct a new Pennsylvania Station. A long-running proposal to dig a rail freight tunnel under New York harbor is also vying for federal money, spurred by worries of a terrorist attack on the George Washington Bridge.
''This is like a moon shot,'' said Peter Kalikow, chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, about the sudden confluence of blueprints. ''The planets are lined up right. We can't let this opportunity drop.''
But will this giant leap for New York City's overburdened infrastructure really happen?
The vision is expensive, some $50 billion for all its parts. Few believe there is enough money to go around, and everyone has a favorite. So a bare-knuckled political battle is expected in the coming year, as the transportation authority issues its new capital plan and Congress moves to reauthorize a mammoth federal transportation bill. The outcome could determine what is built and is not.
''It's definitely Darwinian,'' said Gene Russianoff, a lawyer for the Straphangers Campaign, a transit advocacy group. ''It's definitely survival of the fittest.''
Over the last 60 years, for a host of reasons, almost nothing significant has been done to expand the city's transit system. In a last paroxysm of spending before the fiscal crises of the 1970's, Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller built a rail tunnel under the East River at 63rd Street and segments of a subway line under Second Avenue before financing dried up.
By the early 1980's, the subway and commuter rail systems were in steep decline. Authorities realized that drastic measures were needed. A capital plan was issued to pay for restoration, but expansion had to wait.
''You couldn't have a conversation about expanding the capacity of the system,'' said Robert Yaro, president of the Regional Plan Association, an independent urban policy group. ''The system was collapsing.''
The restoration of the system remained the focus throughout most of the 1990's. In 1996, however, Gov. George E. Pataki ordered the transportation authority, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and the city to begin studying projects that would lead to a seamless transportation network in metropolitan New York, permitting convenient travel through the entire region.
It soon became apparent, however, that politics would play a role in setting priorities. In what was widely seen as a nod to their suburban political bases, former Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and later Mr. Pataki locked onto East Side Access, a proposal to build a connector at Grand Central Terminal for the Long Island Rail Road that would allow commuters easier access to the East Side of Manhattan. With their support, East Side Access quickly became the leading megaproject.
Former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani elbowed his way into that debate with a plan to connect the subway to La Guardia Airport, a benefit for business travelers and his political base in Queens.
And the abandoned Second Avenue subway found a powerful champion in Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, who represents the Lower East Side. Mr. Silver vowed to hold up the state budget unless the Pataki administration committed to building the entire length of the project, as opposed to a small segment that was initially favored.
Eventually, all three projects, including a commitment to the full length of the Second Avenue subway, wound their way into the transportation authority's capital plan for 2000 to 2004, which had a record outlay of $19.5 billion.
As those proposals were being made, the Port Authority, after decades of false starts, began work on a rail link to Kennedy International Airport. The difference this time was a plan to use airport passenger fees to help pay for the AirTrain, which connects the airport to subway and Long Island Rail Road lines.
But then came the terrorist attack on Sept. 11, 2001. Rather than be content with simply rebuilding Lower Manhattan, politicians argued that the attack represented a rare opportunity to start anew and fix longstanding problems.
John E. Zuccotti, chairman of Brookfield Financial Properties, the largest downtown landlord, began promoting a ''super shuttle'' commuter rail that would connect Lower Manhattan to Kennedy Airport and the suburbs of Long Island. Under the plan, trains would use the tunnel for the A and C subway lines to go under the East River, requiring some rerouting and displacing tens of thousands of subway riders, but the alternative was a new tunnel, which could take decades and billions more dollars.
State and city officials eventually went to Washington with a wish list of more than a dozen projects, including the downtown commuter rail. Total price tag: $7.5 billion.
However, the package of transportation aid they received was barely half of what they wanted. Federal officials balked at several of the projects that clearly had little to do with Sept. 11. But they left the state to decide which projects to finance with the $4.55 billion award.
Gov. Pataki settled on three major initiatives: a grand hub centered on the rebuilt PATH station, the Fulton Street Transit Center and a revamping of the South Ferry subway terminal. He also approved an array of smaller ideas. A degree of consensus had coalesced around the big projects. More importantly, they were reasonably priced.
Notably absent from the list, however, was airport access. Its price, anywhere from $2 billion to more than $5 billion depending on the plan, made it prohibitive. Transportation groups also raised questions about how many riders it would serve.
With all the momentum in Lower Manhattan, proponents of the Second Avenue subway and East Side Access began fretting that their projects might be left behind. Strictly speaking, the downtown projects did not threaten theirs because they sprang from the $21 billion earmarked for post-9/11 relief. The other big-ticket projects depended on the federal transportation bill, reauthorized every six years. But advocates worried that without a unified voice, New York City would run into trouble.
Mr. Kalikow traveled to Washington to seek reassurances from important members of Congress and reiterate that East Side Access and the Second Avenue subway remained the top priorities.
''Of course they know they gave us $21 billion, and $5 billion was for transportation due to 9/11,'' he said. ''But because we followed their guidelines about our downtown projects, we think they will have no effect on what we will or will not get on the other projects.''
But the playing field was becoming more cluttered. With the city's pursuit of the 2012 Olympics, an old proposal thrust its way to the forefront under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. Deputy Mayor Daniel Doctoroff, in charge of economic development and the Olympic bid, proposed extending the No. 7 subway line from Times Square to 34th Street and 11th Avenue, where a new Olympic stadium -- and a possible home for the New York Jets -- may be built.
''On the far west side, you have a unique opportunity,'' Mr. Doctoroff said. ''That opportunity is to, in effect, fund a project out of the incremental revenues when you extend mass transit into more or less undeveloped territory. That opportunity doesn't really exist anywhere else.''
Knowing he faced a battle if he took money from the other projects, Mr. Doctoroff suggested that the city, rather than the authority, pay for the $1.2 billion project entirely, issuing bonds that would be paid back with revenues from rising property values in the neighborhood. But after questions about the plan's feasibility, the city is now interviewing investment banks for other ideas.
What makes the No. 7 extension especially threatening to some is its drastically reduced timetable. For the line to be ready in time for the Olympics, work needs to start in 2005. Advocates of other projects worry that Mr. Doctoroff's alternative financing scheme will not materialize.
''They haven't announced their funding plan,'' said Representative Jerrold L. Nadler, whose district includes parts of Manhattan and Brooklyn. ''Until they do, we can't analyze it.''
For 20 years, Mr. Nadler has been pushing a proposal to build a rail freight tunnel under New York Harbor, linking New Jersey to Brooklyn. He has commissioned a series of studies, wresting financing out of Congress. As his project has readied for construction, he has watched as other projects that have not been similarly scrutinized pushed their way to the front.
For proponents of the Second Avenue subway, worry turned to alarm in November when the Partnership for New York City, a leading business group, released a report that prioritized transit options according to economic development benefits. Under the group's analysis, the Lower Manhattan transit hub, the new Pennsylvania Station at the Farley Post Office site and the No. 7 line extension would provide the most return. In contrast, the report said the Second Avenue subway, in its full form, would not be worth its price.
''Unless we set a few priorities and relatively short-term priorities and allocate enough money to actually get them done, you'll have lots of planning and little getting done,'' said Kathryn S. Wylde, the partnership's president.
In response, the coalition behind the Second Avenue subway mobilized, releasing a study at a news conference on the steps of City Hall saying that the partnership's methodology was flawed and that the economic benefits for the Second Avenue subway were much greater.
The La Guardia proposal fell off the radar screen after its principal backer, Mr. Giuliani, exited the scene. But the Lower Manhattan commuter rail proposal, long seen as a pipe dream, is re-emerging.
Senator Charles E. Schumer pushed the idea during a December speech and insisted that the project could be paid for out of the city's post-Sept.11 money. A few weeks later, Gov. Pataki announced in his State of the State address that he would soon unveil four options for the airport rail link and select a final design in April.
M.T.A. officials say they believe a mixture of post-Sept. 11 and transportation authority money would help pay for the project, but because the timeline for the project is further down the road, it should not interfere with other plans. Others, however, doubt it will be so simple.
Still another project agitating for attention is a decade-old New Jersey Transit proposal for a new rail tunnel under the Hudson River into Midtown, known as Access to the Region's Core. If transportation decisions were truly made on a regional basis, advocates said, the project would be at the top of the list because New Jersey is the city's fastest-growing commuter market. But the $4.5 billion project has largely been labeled a New Jersey issue.
Much of the jockeying that is going on now stems from paranoia, advocates from several groups said. Confusion reigns over which projects are actually in danger. The three Lower Manhattan projects -- PATH, South Ferry and the transit center -- clearly have their financing. After delays, the new Pennsylvania Station should also finally go forward with money already earmarked for it.
Significant money has already been spent on preliminary construction for East Side Access, although the need to clean up toxic areas of the Sunnyside rail yard in Queens may cause delays. Years of work have gone into securing recommended status from the Federal Transit Administration for both Second Avenue and East Side Access.
But the reality is that the last M.T.A. capital plan was paid for in large part by issuing bonds that are projected to cause yawning deficits in coming years. It is unclear how much more debt the authority can afford to issue for its new plan, which is expected to exceed $20 billion. On top of the new projects, the authority also needs to make sure that it continues to maintain the existing system. Some have pushed for reinstating the commuter tax, charging tolls on the East River bridges, raising the statewide gas tax or closing various tax loopholes.
''We need to go find the money,'' said Mr. Yaro, of the Regional Plan Association. ''Our grandparents did this. We need to do it again.''
