We were having problems in our marriage. Finally, at the urging of my husband, Pat, I consented to see Dr. Jan, whom he had met once. I made the call. She sounded comforting, understanding, like a good shrink who reminds herself to be patient in the face of ignorance. I told her the situation: ''Every weekend, beginning in August, I lock myself in my office and play my classical music full blast. I won't come out until February.''
''That's not uncommon,'' Dr. Jan said. ''What do you listen to?''
''Mostly Rachmaninoff. I love the Piano Concerto No. 3 in D minor.'' Dr. Jan was silent. ''Opus 30,'' I said.
''I see,'' Dr. Jan said. ''How soon can you and your husband come in?''
We arrived at Dr. Jan's office, actually her husband's office, on the campus of Nova Southeastern University in Davie, Fla., at 9 a.m. on a weekday morning. Dr. Jan greeted us standing behind a big mahogany desk. Through the windows behind her, we could see a perfectly manicured carpet of tight grass that did not look real.
''Have a seat,'' she said. She was a pert little blonde with boyishly cut, short hair and a lot of makeup. Folding her hands on her desk, she looked at me with a smile and said, ''The first thing you have to have is an interest in learning.''
''I know,'' I said. ''I'm so ignorant sometimes. . . . I'm embarrassed.''
Dr. Jan smiled. ''That's what I'm here for. To open up lines of communication. Now what is the one thing you really want to learn?''
''The rules!'' I said. ''I don't understand them. Two minutes always means an hour!'' I felt tears welling up in my eyes. ''I don't even know what a touchdown is.''
Dr. Jan laughed. Pat said: ''See! I told you!''
Dr. Jan nodded. ''And you were right, Pat. Some wives, like Susan, you have to show them a football and explain what it is.''
Dr. Jan is Jan Wannstedt, the 51-year-old wife of Dave Wannstedt, the head football coach of the Miami Dolphins. She has been explaining football to women -- ''football widows'' -- for the past 14 years as the founder of Football University for Women, a weeklong course that begins with a chalk talk and game films on Tuesdays at the Dolphins' training facility at Nova Southeastern. The course advances to a Dolphins home game and finishes up with an evaluation the following Tuesday. Most of the 300 women who have enrolled each year in Jan's course did so at the insistence of their husbands, who, Jan said, ''are sick and tired of answering their wives' dumb questions.''
I explained to Jan that shortly after Pat and I married and moved to Fort Lauderdale, he suddenly became a fanatical University of Miami Hurricanes football fan.
''We were in a bar,'' Pat said. ''I was watching the 'Hail Flutie' game.''
''See?'' I said. ''How am I supposed to know what that means?''
''Susan, dear,'' Jan said, patiently. ''That was the game when Doug Flutie's pass for Boston College beat Miami in the last second of play.''
''Oh,'' I said. ''Well, anyway, I began to grow orchids. Anything to get away from the screaming of those football announcers. They sound like the bad children in the third-grade class I used to teach. Their screeching would even waft out to the yard. So I got in the habit of locking myself in my office and playing classical music. The games meant so much to him. I mean he was devastated when the Canes lost to Ohio State for the national championship. 'Why?' I asked him. 'It's only a game!'''
''Only a game?'' Pat said. ''The Canes are proof God exists!''
''It didn't bother Pat that I didn't know football -- hated it, in fact,'' I said. ''And I admit it, I did try to undermine his pleasure in those games.''
''One Saturday at 1:05 p.m., Susan called me from the supermarket to ask me what I wanted for dinner,'' Pat told Jan. ''One-oh-five, Jan! The Canes against Virginia Tech! She knew kickoff was 1 p.m.!''
Jan sighed. ''That's not uncommon.''
Jan grew up in Pittsburgh loving football; her mother was a Steelers fan. Then Jan met Dave in high school, where he was a football star and she a cheerleader. When he became a coach, Jan found herself the sounding board for players' wives and girlfriends who wanted to learn the game. They'd ask her a question, and she'd write it down and then ask Dave. That led to Football University.
Jan begins with the basics. She hands out a playbook that breaks down the teams and the rules -- a touchdown equals 6 points, that sort of thing. It also shows offensive and defensive alignments, the playing field, officials' signals, definitions of maneuvers like ''the bump and run'' and failures like fumbles. The last page has a glossary of common injuries, like a tear of the anterior cruciate ligament (A.C.L.) and turf toe.
After her students familiarize themselves with the playbook, Jan shows them game films so she can point out the difference between a quarterback's three-step drop and seven-step drop. She includes such tidbits as why uniform jerseys cling so tightly to players' bodies. ''To show off their biceps,'' Jan said, ''and to make it harder for defenders to grab their loose jerseys to tackle them.''
Then Jan takes the women out to the practice field and runs them through plays. ''Some of the women are really fired up,'' she said. ''They wear their Dolphins jerseys. One woman brought her own mouth guard.''
On game day, Jan and her students have a tailgate party, then get to roam the sidelines during warm-ups. For the game, they sit in a private section. The following Tuesday, the students recap Sunday's game.
Jan asked me if I had any questions. ''If a team wants to make a touchdown,'' I asked, ''how do they do it?''
I didn't have time to take the full class, but Jan agreed to give me an immediate private session. She started by making x's and o's on a piece of paper. ''First there is the kickoff. If the ball goes into the end zone it automatically comes out to the 20-yard line.''
''Why?''
''That's the rule. If the player who catches the ball wants to run it back, his teammates form a wedge of blockers in front of him. Sometimes they hold hands.''
''How cute!'' I said.
Jan then took us on a tour of the Dolphins' training facilities. We peeked into the weight room, and then we stopped at the locker-room door. Jan asked an attendant if the room was ''clear.'' It was, so we walked inside.
''This is very organized,'' I said. ''Very neat! It's not like a stage dressing room. They're always so messy.'' Jan showed me stacks of shoulder pads that looked heavy but were really very light. I tried on a pair and looked in the mirror. All I could see were my eyes and the top of my head. ''I look like one of the no-neck monsters,'' I said.
''Who?'' Jan said.
''The little kids in 'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof,' I said. ''You know, Tennessee Williams? Maggie's husband, Brick, refuses to sleep with her because he might be gay. Actually he was a football player, too.'' Jan looked shocked. I dropped it.
We went out to the practice fields with the short, tight grass that did not look real. I bent down to touch it. Pat looked at Jan. ''She's a gardener,'' he said.
As we were leaving, I thanked Jan. ''Maybe now I'll even watch a game with Pat,'' I said.
''Yes,'' Jan said, ''and ruin his life.''
Watching a game with Pat on the following Sunday, I couldn't think of anything to say except repeat some of the things Jan had taught me. ''That's the line of scrimmage. . . . That's a fair catch. . . . That's a face-mask penalty.'' I couldn't hide my basic uninterest. My mind wandered out to the yard where my vanda orchid was coming into bloom. A little before halftime, I went to the kitchen to mix some Bloom Buster for the orchid.
''Do you mind?'' I asked Pat.
''Not at all,'' he said.
I thought about putting some Rachmaninoff on as I prepared my plant food but decided not to. ''Remind me to call Jan and thank her,'' Pat said.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-25-04: ESSAY Susan Ryan Jordan is the author of ''The Immune Spirit,'' a memoir.
