Though his father, Ron, was a Navy Seal, Carolina Coach John Fox said his mother, Kaye, might have been tougher. Kaye earned a master's degree in business from William and Mary in the 1960's when few women did. Kaye was the law. Kaye ruled.
His mother is the origin of Fox's toughness, his aggressiveness. Those traits, as well as his volcanolike enthusiasm and rare instincts for football and people, helped him take a team that was 1-15 two seasons ago to Super Bowl XXXVIII against New England on Feb. 1 in Houston. As Fox remembered his mother while in a Panthers meeting room here on Thursday, he also remembered the strength he needed when, soon before she died of cancer in 1986, she told him the unbelievable.
''Basically, she says: 'Your dad is not your real dad,' '' Fox said. '' 'Here is your real dad in this photograph. Here is his phone number. You do what you think is right.' ''
Just like that.
Fox, who will turn 49 a week after the Super Bowl, was stunned. He was 30 then, with a family of his own. He called his biological father. It turned out he had another son whose birthday was the same day as Fox's. Father and son met soon afterward. ''I sure look like him,'' Fox thought. Then they did not talk again until two months ago, when his biological father called.
''You take a situation like that, I mean out of the blue, that calls for some toughness,'' Fox said. ''But I figured the father who had provided for me, Ron Fox, my dad who now lives in Fullbrook, Calif., is my dad. Something like that toughens you up even more. You never know what's around the corner.''
Terry Lathrum, one of Fox's boyhood friends from Virginia Beach who now lives in San Diego, revealed another side of Kaye Fox's relationship with her oldest son.
''I had been a running back on our little league team and John came and became the running back and kept scoring touchdowns,'' Lathrum said. ''He was getting close to breaking the touchdown record that me and another teammate shared. So, whenever he started to break a long run and was heading to the end zone, we started clipping on purpose to make sure it would be called back. And his mother caught on, grabbed us by the back of our jerseys and said, 'Boys, this stops today!' We said, 'Yes, ma'm.' It stopped.''
All things considered, it was little wonder that John Fox rolled into Carolina last season and did not blink even though he found not only a team that had lost 15 straight games under Coach George Seifert but also a franchise near shambles from off-field troubles, most notably the former receiver Rae Carruth's imprisonment after being convicted of conspiracy in the murder of his pregnant girlfriend.
Growing up in Virginia Beach until age 15, then moving near San Diego, Fox was a swimmer and a surfer and worked on a boat hooking bait for fishermen. All he had to do with the Panthers, he believed, was reel them into his world of enthusiasm and hard work. Fox knew plenty about both after coaching defenses at eight colleges and in the United States Football League before he gained his first N.F.L. job as Pittsburgh's secondary coach in 1989.
''I remember my first preseason game here and we lost but did some nice things running the ball, and I was pleased,'' Fox said. ''But nearly everyone connected with the organization after that game had their heads hung down and were shuffling around. The scars of the people here and in the community over this team were overwhelming.''
Fox told the Panthers he did not question their athletic ability, but he questioned their toughness. He asked them how they could have lost 15 consecutive games and not look at themselves as the reason. He tore the Panthers down even further psychologically before building them up.
Fox told them he would make them tough, smart and the league's best-conditioned team. He told them they would build an offense that ran the ball to win and a defense that dominated. Last season, the Panthers responded with a 7-9 record, the second-best improvement by an N.F.L. team with a rookie coach since 1978. Their defense rose to 2nd from 31st, the best one-season improvement in league history.
This season, the defense ranked eighth as Carolina improved to 11-5 and toppled defending Super Bowl champion Tampa Bay to claim the National Football Conference South. In the playoffs, the Panthers beat Dallas at home, then won games at St. Louis and at Philadelphia to become the conference champions.
Fox's routine is familiar, said Washington linebacker Jessie Armstead, who played five seasons under Fox with the Giants. Fox was the Giants' defensive coordinator from 1997 until he became the Panthers' coach.
''John came into our first meeting and told us, 'You think you're a good defense; you're not a good defense,' '' Armstead said in a telephone interview from Dallas. ''The players started looking at each other wondering, 'Who is this guy?' I thought, 'This guy here, he's going to last; he's tough.' He won us over. He turned us into a dominating defense in the league. John brings attitude to the table. He understands the game, and his players understand the game.
''He would tell you during a game that on the next play the ball is going to a back in the flat. You line up and the formation looks nothing like that's going to happen, and you think he's dead wrong. And sure enough, the ball goes to the back in the flat. So you learn quickly with him: if he says go to the flat, you run to the flat. He's a captain now, not just a passenger. I'm not surprised at all that he's a head coach in the Super Bowl. I knew he'd make it.''
Fox showed his toughness as a walk-on at San Diego State, where he and Herman Edwards, now the Jets' coach, starred in the defensive backfield.
Over the years, Fox studied John Wooden's pyramid of success. He was also influenced by the football coaches he worked under. At United States International University in 1979, Fox met Sid Gillman, whom he called ''the most innovative coach who ever lived.'' With the Steelers from 1989 to 1991, he learned from Chuck Noll the importance of fundamentals. With the San Diego Chargers in 1992-93, Fox was reminded of the importance of family by Bobby Ross. And exposure to the defensive guru Rod Rust taught him ''as much about football as anyone.''
''Coach Fox preaches mental toughness,'' Panthers linebacker Brian Allen said. ''We learned he is going to be who he is, how he is and what he is -- and it's working.''
Carolina General Manager Marty Hurney said: ''John has a great feel for the game of football, for the current N.F.L. system, for players and for how to reach players. It's all natural. People connect with him. We had a lot of anxiety looking for a head coach; when John left here after two days of interviewing, we had relief. He fit us.''
In part because of his keen insight into others. And into himself.
A critical time during this season came after the Panthers' 8-2 start. They lost successive games to Dallas, Philadelphia and Atlanta. After the loss to the Falcons, Fox said that Panthers receiver Muhsin Muhammad had run an incorrect route. A reporter wrote that Fox said Muhammad had cost them the game. Muhammad did not like it. Neither did his teammates.
''He told us to trust him,'' safety Mike Minter said of the incident. ''Now what?''
Fox met with Muhammad and apologized. He then met with the team and explained the context of his remarks and apologized to them, too.
''I've got a lot of respect for John,'' Muhammad said. ''He cares about what his guys think about him, what they feel, what they say. Any player is going to work harder for a coach like that. And yet, things still are going to go his way. That makes him as good a politician as he is a coach.''
This is not a time for reflection, Fox said. There is a championship to be won and his players understand, he said, that this is going to be a tough, physical Super Bowl against New England.
Just the way Fox likes it.
''The experience, the game, is only fun,'' he said, ''if you win.''
PRO FOOTBALL
