WHEN snow fell on Philadelphia last month, John P. Meyers, a local lawyer, posted a note on a Web message board for Mini Cooper owners, asking if his new car would handle slick and snowy roads. No problem, the owners told him.
But Mr. Meyers, 44, wasn't really an owner yet. His Mini Cooper S was being assembled thousands of miles away, at a factory near Oxford, England. In fact, it would be six more weeks before Mr. Meyers first set eyes on his car and tested it on a snowy January day.
To keep track of his purchase, he logged on at least once a day, if not two or three times, to the Owner's Lounge area of the Mini Cooper Web site (www.miniusa.com). Using his vehicle identification number, Mr. Meyers tracked his car's status from the day he ordered it, Nov. 11, to when it arrived at the port in Jersey City on Jan. 6. By the time he picked up his Mini at a local dealer on Jan. 15, he had already named it Chili Palmer, after John Travolta's character in the movie ''Get Shorty.''
''This car is definitely a guy,'' Mr. Meyers said of his Mini, which is chili red with a glossy white roof. He had also introduced Chili to other Mini owners by posting its specifications on the owners' section of the site. ''I have become absolutely obsessed with my Mini,'' he said.
Many car makers must rely on big discounts to woo buyers, but some models are so popular that would-be owners face long waiting periods. They include the Mini, from BMW; the Maybach, from Mercedes-Benz; and, to a lesser extent, the Mazda RX-8 and the Nissan 350Z. The companies are aiming to make those delays, whether caused by high demand or custom orders, a bit more bearable for the consumer.
For many years, companies and their dealers did little for waiting customers. There seemed to be little advantage in doing so, given that the sales were already made. Sometimes, marketing campaigns tried to keep early enthusiasts in the loop until the cars were widely available. But after the initial excitement subsided, the programs were often discontinued.
The picture has changed as automakers find benefits in maintaining interest in their brands. Mini, for example, regularly sends out welcome kits to its new buyers as part of its ''Make Waiting Fun'' program. The kits include retro 1950's games like Interstate Highway Bingo and a stencil that can be used to spray-paint a ''Mini Parking Only'' sign in the garage.
The wait can be up to six months for the luxurious Maybach, which can cost more than $350,000 depending on one's choice of wood, leather and other extras, including a golf bag. During that time, customers receive a replica of their radiator emblem and their car's blueprints in a brushed aluminum tube. Mazda allows buyers to track the progress of their RX-8 sports cars at the factory in Japan and has sent out miniature models and books.
Keeping up the enthusiasm has been the main goal for Kerri Martin, Mini's marketing communications manager in the United States, in its program. (Her business card calls her the ''guardian of brand soul.'')
''These people are super-excited for their cars, but they have a long way to go before they see them,'' Ms. Martin said. The wait for customized Minis, which make up 95 percent of sales, is now 8 to 12 weeks.
When BMW introduced the restyled Mini in early 2002, owners waited more than 10 months for their cars. Shortly after the introduction in the United States, Mini created the ''Where's My Baby?'' program on the Internet, so customers could check on their cars' progress. But that didn't seem enough for what were shaping up to be rabidly enthusiastic Mini owners. ''It was a little impersonal to just be able to know the basics,'' Ms. Martin said.
So the company added online message boards, where owners can ask one another about maintenance and warranty issues or just swap stories about their cars. Owners, or soon-to-be-owners, can even write journals, some of which have become quite elaborate. The site has about 12,000 registered users.
Jerry Bradbury, 59, a retired technology executive from Berkeley, Calif., uses the name Siddhartha, after the character in the Herman Hesse novel, in his online journal. He wrote of his mission to find and take possession of Sad Arthur, as he called his red-and-white Mini Cooper S, to which he added the John Cooper Works supercharger package, pushing its horsepower to more than 200.
Instead of waiting up to 18 months to get his car through dealers in San Francisco, where Minis are in especially high demand, Mr. Bradbury ordered it from a dealer outside Chicago last October. When his car was ready, after about two months, he flew to Chicago and was met at the airport by his ''motoring adviser,'' as Mini calls its dealers. He picked up his car the next day and drove 2,200 miles back to Berkeley, later chronicling his journey in detail online.
Some Mini owners say their experience was much better than their previous car-buying episodes.
''When my husband special-ordered his Acura, the dealer simply said, 'It'll be here in three months,' and that was it,'' recalled Angel Durham, 40, whose online name is Minimom.
By contrast, Mrs. Durham said, her entire neighborhood in suburban Atlanta knew about her car, which she named Maggie. Her family also became accustomed to all the gifts Mini sent while she waited more than two months for the car.
''My kids really like the bingo game,'' she said. She has five Mini mugs, and when she found out on the message board about the ''Mini Parking Only'' stencil, she called Mini to get one.
Mrs. Durham's customized car is blue with red-and-white stripes on the hood, and she added side-view mirrors with the Union Jack on them.
Mercedes-Benz takes customization further for its Maybach, as part of a ''commissioning'' procedure that is meant to turn the process of buying the car into a life event. It starts in special rooms at the dealership, where a potential buyer settles into a black leather chair in front of a giant plasma television screen.
Customers are offered Champagne or wine as they pick their way through the car's options. From black-lacquered drawers, the Maybach ''relationship manager'' pulls out heavy tiles in the 17 body and side panel colors, which have names like Himalayas Gray and Caspian Black. Leather and wood options run into the dozens. Customers then consider other extras, like sterling silver goblets, cigar humidors and luggage. They can also choose a glass roof, or even small flagpoles for the hood.
As options are chosen or rejected, the Maybach manager feeds the information into a computer modeling program through a wireless tablet. The options then appear on the plasma screen. Customers can virtually fly through their cars, inspecting their choices from almost any angle.
''It should be like a kid in a candy store,'' said Brian Bucholtz, the Maybach manager at Mercedes-Benz of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
Ordering a Maybach requires a $50,000 deposit. During the four- to six-month wait that follows, the owners-to-be get the cellphone numbers of their Maybach managers so they can contact them day or night.
''If I'm out on the golf course and they call, it's 'No problem, what can I do for you?''' Mr. Bucholtz said.
He has added some perks of his own. He gives customers Mont Blanc pens inscribed with their signatures and will deliver the new cars almost anywhere. Once, he picked up a new owner at the Detroit airport as onlookers gawked at the car.
Wayne Killen, a Maybach brand manager at Mercedes-Benz U.S.A., said he had not looked to other car companies for ideas about how to treat customers.
''We thought there was room for improvement even at the most luxurious levels in cars,'' he said. ''Instead, we looked at the world of yachts and customized aircraft.'' What he found, he said, was that ''you simply can't spend too much time with these people.''
''These people almost expect daily phone calls on what's happening as their cars are in production,'' he added.
Makers of more mainstream cars are not as likely to go to such lengths, but more are considering ways to ease the wait for popular or customized cars. Treating owners right can mean more revenue from repeat business, and even new business from word of mouth.
JOHN STRAMATOS, a marketing manager at Nissan, led the product planning for the 350Z sports car when it was introduced in 2001. Before it was even on dealer lots, he said, 8,000 people were on the waiting list. His team stayed in contact with those on the list by sending out postcards and other direct mail. Recently, the company sent out coffee-table books about the ''Z'' to some customers.
Mr. Stramatos's work on the car taught him that keeping those early enthusiasts happy was crucial to the car's continuing success. ''Those people bring in other customers,'' he said.
But they can just as easily make their complaints known. Mr. Stramatos said that when some dealers started charging premiums over the manufacturer's suggested retail price, ''they were 'outed' pretty quickly on the Internet.''
