THE same lawmakers who spit venom at Gov. John G. Rowland, are ladling out honey for his second in command, Lt. Gov. M. Jodi Rell. She is viewed by many state legislators as ''bipartisan'' and ''fair,'' the type of leader who can help heal the state if the governor resigns or is impeached.
That may be a virtue of her current position, which allows her to stay on the sunny side of government. Her days are often long on public relations and short on tooth-and-nail politics. Though Ms. Rell presides over the Senate, she casts a vote only in the event of a tie and has not cast many memorable ones. She has been able to stay above the political fray for the past nine years, championing feel-good campaigns for better technology in schools and libraries and breast cancer awareness.
''She definitely is a good person to take over with a clean image,'' said Dr. Howard Reiter, the chairman of the political science department at the University of Connecticut.
Dr. Reiter said the lieutenant governor's role, which is largely ceremonial, has kept her away from the governor's side. While he sweats out his days at the governor's mansion or in his office, she gives speeches at chambers of commerce and schools.
''You don't get the sense she's played a strong role'' in the governor's major decisions, he said. ''You don't get the sense that she's one of the inner circle, and that's a great advantage right now. She has a general image as someone who's a faithful public servant and not involved in any chicanery.''
As the governor deals with the scandal, Ms. Rell, 57, has gained new prominence. But, even though she took the unprecedented step of meeting with officials from all 169 cities and towns in Connecticut after she was elected, 70 percent of voters polled by Quinnipiac University earlier this month didn't know enough about her to form an opinion.
So who is Jodi Rell, and why do so many people think she would be the right person to succeed the governor, if it comes to that?
Ms. Rell, whose first initial M. stands for Mary, was born in Norfolk, Va., and attended Old Dominion University there but never graduated. Her father, a federal government employee who worked at the Norfolk naval base, and her mother, a bank teller, are both deceased
She married her husband, Louis, a Navy pilot at the Norfolk base, when she was 20, and they moved to Brookfield after Mr. Rell became a pilot at Trans World Airlines. They bought a white-shingled Colonial house, built in 1843, on Long Meadow Hill Road.
Before her two children were born, Ms. Rell worked as an office clerk at an investment firm in Danbury, but she decided to leave to rear them. In an interview a year after she was first elected lieutenant governor, Ms. Rell talked about how she didn't think of herself as a political person.
''I'm an ordinary person who enjoys what she's doing, who loves people and loves to be involved with government,'' Ms. Rell said. ''It's the political side I hate. I just want to do the job, not think to say the right thing to the right people.''
Last week, she reiterated that point.
''I don't consider myself a politician,'' she said. ''I consider myself a person first and a government leader, not a politician.''
Ms. Rell got involved in local Republican Party politics in Brookfield in the early 1980's, serving on the local party committee and campaigning for candidates. Ms. Rell went back to college, enrolling at Western Connecticut State University, but before she could finish, a new opportunity arose. In 1984 she ran for the House in the 107th Assembly District and won. She went on to serve for 10 years.
In the House, Ms. Rell developed a reputation for fairness and was often the lawmaker Republicans chose to broker deals with Democrats. She also believed in fighting for bread-and-butter Republican issues, like tax cuts and fiscal responsibility. As a freshman legislator, she developed a reputation as a leader in the party, and sometimes employed what became known as ''Rell's Rule.''
''It was something that our freshman class joked about,'' said Representative Robert M. Ward, the House minority leader who began his career in the House the same year as Ms. Rell. ''When it appeared that most of us were supporting something that was good for the state, a good Republican issue, and say 90 percent of us were behind it, she knew if she could get us to 100 percent we'd be a more effective voice. That became known as 'Rell's Rule.'''
Ms. Rell's straightforward style earned her respect on the floor of the House. She rose to become the assistant minority leader in the House and, eventually, deputy minority leader.
Though lawmakers would sometimes leave the room while other representatives were speaking, they rarely left when Ms. Rell spoke, said Representative James A. Amman, a Democrat who is the House majority leader.
''There are certain times when people stay in the room, and with Jodi people would give her that respect,'' Mr. Amman said. ''She was one of the most respected voices in the chamber.''
But some lawmakers said that while Ms. Rell was respected, her time in the Legislature was not particularly memorable.
''She was very much a lady and you never heard much from her,'' said Representative Christopher L. Caruso, a Democrat from Bridgeport who has served 14 years in the House. ''I don't remember any legislation that she pushed for. I don't know if it's in her demeanor to get into the fight.''
Whether or not she made a splash in the House, her political and personal abilities caught the eye of the governor, who asked Ms. Rell to be his running mate for the 1994 governor's race. Mr. Rowland and Ms. Rell's political styles complemented each other, Dr. Reiter said.
''She's got a very different personal style from the governor, who obviously enjoys the give and take of politics,'' Dr. Reiter said. ''I think the lieutenant governor has more of a genteel demeanor.''
Senator Andrew R. Roraback, a Republican who represents Ms. Rell's home district described Ms. Rell as ''a lady,'' while emphasizing that he was using the term ''without being sexist.''
''She's tough as nails, but the way she conveys her toughness is different than the way the governor conveys his toughness,'' he said. ''Pity the fool that allows their cell phone to ring during the session. Jodi doesn't even speak. She just directs her gaze at the offending person.''
Mr. Roraback wasn't the only person to call Ms. Rell a ''lady.'' Indeed, as often as lawmakers used adjectives like ''bipartisan'' and ''fair'' to describe her, they said she's ''genteel'' and ''cordial'' or call her a ''steel magnolia.'' Calling the lieutenant governor a ''lady'' may not be sexist, but Ms. Rell is obviously cognizant of some of the preconceptions people attach to her gender.
''Sometimes I think that, being a woman, many legislators feel that 'she's not going to be real tough on us,''' she said. ''I had to establish early on that I was not going to tolerate bad behavior.''
Mr. Roraback added that Ms. Rell's experience in the House served her well in her new position. When Ms. Rell became lieutenant governor, she came directly from the House, whereas Mr. Rowland had been out of state politics for a decade. Lawmakers weren't as comfortable with the governor as they were with his second in command.
''She's not perceived as being distant from us or different from us,'' Mr. Roraback said.
As lieutenant governor, Ms. Rell spoke at 101 town halls, encouraging local leaders to contact her for help at the Capitol. She pushed the Legislature to make technology in schools and libraries a priority and make sure all K-12 schools are fully wired and have Internet access, securing more than $30 million for the project. In 1998, she headed a panel in charge of guiding downtown development in Hartford, including the Connecticut Convention Center at Adriaen's Landing.
When the governor admitted he had lied about gifts given to him by political appointees and state contractors for his Bantam Lake vacation cottage, Ms. Rell expressed her disappointment.
''I was angry and disappointed, and I'm still disappointed,'' she said last week. ''The anger has dissipated somewhat. I forgive him, and I think we have to give him an opportunity to rebuild trust, and I'm giving him that opportunity.''
Though she has stood behind the governor's decision not to resign, Ms. Rell has not condoned his actions.
''She's not distancing herself from what's going on,'' Dr. Reiter said. ''She's letting it be known that she's unhappy about what the governor did.''
But Ms. Rell herself has had to deal with inquiries into her ethical behavior.
In 1995, Ms. Rell's son Michael was found in possession of a Jet Ski that had been stolen two years before at Candlewood Lake. Mr. Rell, now a researcher for the House Republicans, told the Jet Ski's owner that he hadn't known it was stolen and was merely storing it in his basement, according to a report issued by the state attorney general's office. After an investigation that the office called ''flawed and grossly deficient,'' an investigator with the Department of Environmental Protection decided not to file charges.
In 2001, two D.E.P. officers filed a complaint after they said they heard the D.E.P. investigator on Mr. Rell's case say he had probable cause to file charges, but ''it was not pursued because that would mean the lieutenant governor's son would have to be implicated as well.'' The two whistle-blowers said they were harassed by supervisors after filing their complaint. Both were placed on administrative leave and one was later fired, though they were reinstated after a set of Senate hearings.
An internal D.E.P. report cited by The Hartford Courant also indicated that the investigator had said Ms. Rell's office had conducted high-level meetings on the investigation. In 1999, Ms. Rell's office made a call to help a patrol officer who had worked on the original investigation retake a test for a state job.
By the time the internal investigation was conducted, the statute of limitations on the charges had run out and Mr. Rell was never arrested. Though Senate hearings were held on the incident, neither Ms. Rell nor her office was implicated in any ethical improprieties.
Ms. Rell denied having anything to do with the decision made in her son's case and said numerous reports have exonerated her office.
''All have found there was no wrongdoing on my part,'' she said. ''There was nothing.''
Ms. Rell's family again made headlines in 1997 when the lieutenant governor's husband, along with members of Mr. Rowland's family, took state surplus military equipment that was intended for law enforcement. The equipment was later returned.
Whether or not the governor serves out the rest of his term, Ms. Rell's political star is rising. Although there are still almost three years before the next gubernatorial election, political observers are already predicting a race between Ms. Rell and Attorney General Richard Blumenthal. Neither of them will say whether they will run.
If she does end up replacing the governor before the end of his term, some said they thought she is perfectly suited to bring the state around and rid it of the nickname ''Corrupt-icut.''
''I think she'll be a healing force for the state of Connecticut,'' said Senator Cathy Cook, a Republican from Mystic.
Others, however, said the jury was still out.
''It's very hard to guess about someone who hasn't been in a policy-making role for nine years now,'' Dr. Reiter said. ''It's reading tea leaves at this point.''
Representative Diana Urban, a Republican from North Stonington, also used a tea analogy.
''It's like the old 'tea bag' thing,'' she said. ''You don't know how strong a woman is until you put her in hot water.''
