Over the next several days, Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, is expected to impugn members of a revered group central to Pakistan's national pride -- the nuclear scientists who built the atomic bombs that deter its neighbor and rival India.
Taking such a step is expected to be among the most treacherous tasks General Musharraf has faced since reversing Pakistan's support for the Taliban in September 2001 and becoming an American ally in the campaign against terrorism.
The general, who seized power in a bloodless coup in 1999, is expected to announce that a handful of Pakistani nuclear scientists -- a group long considered the pride of the nation -- sold nuclear technology to Iran in the late 1980's without government permission. On Friday, General Musharraf said that ''some individuals'' appeared to have been involved in the transfer of technology, but he did not give names.
General Musharraf is also expected to say the scientists acted without the knowledge of Pakistan's famed and feared military intelligence agency, Inter-Services Intelligence.
On Friday, General Musharraf said that ''some individuals'' appeared to have been involved in the transfer of technology for personal gain, but he did not give names.
The problem for the general is that few people are likely to believe him. If he files criminal charges against the scientist at the center of suspicion, Abdul Qadeer Khan, considered the father of the Pakistani atomic bomb, he could open himself to a political savaging from Islamist and secular political opponents.
In addition to involving issues at the heart of Pakistan's self-image, the situation highlights the central split that has festered in Pakistani society since the country's birth in 1947 -- civilians versus soldiers.
''The biggest question is how these nuclear scientists could do this without the government and the intelligence knowing,'' said Rasul Baksh Rais, a Pakistani political analyst and professor. ''Generally, the people I speak to are skeptical.''
When General Musharraf, or one of his top aides, makes the announcement, his opponents will be watching to see whether the generals walk free and the low-level scientists pay.
The investigation, to date, centers on three men, according to interviews with government officials and news media reports.
Pakistani investigators have concluded that at least two scientists -- Dr. Khan and an aide, Dr. Muhammad Farooq -- shared technology with Iran, The Washington Post reported Saturday. A senior Pakistani official said Saturday that the investigation was continuing and no conclusions had been reached.
Circumstantial evidence exists that Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg, the commander of the Pakistani army at the time, at least tacitly approved of such transfers. Senior Pakistani officials have said that Dr. Khan has told investigators that General Beg approved the transfer of technology to Iran. Former government officials have said that General Beg proposed forming a strategic alliance with Iran and, according to one account, selling it nuclear technology.
In an interview in November, General Beg denied transferring technology to Iran. Dr. Khan made the same denial through associates. Relatives of Dr. Farooq insist that he would never have acted without government permission.
Political opponents of General Musharraf predict that General Beg and Dr. Khan will go unpunished. General Musharraf, they say, must maintain the loyalty of the army, his main power base, at all costs. Prosecuting Dr. Khan, a national hero would be politically too dangerous.
The way the investigation has been conducted reflects bias, they say. Dr. Farooq has been detained and has not contacted his family since Nov. 22, his relatives said. Dr. Khan has been repeatedly questioned but not detained, a senior official said. General Beg has not been questioned.
The three men could not be more different. Dr. Khan, tall and voluble, is aggressive, wealthy and hungry for publicity, associates say. They describe him as a proud ''techno-nationalist'' who dismissed American nonproliferation efforts as an attempt by a small group of wealthy, white countries to keep atomic weapons for themselves.
General Beg, burly and soft-spoken, is viewed as somewhat eccentric. Since retiring from the army, he has run a nonprofit group called Friends -- Foundation for Research on International Development and Security -- and has published hard-line Islamist articles. ''The Muslim World is facing unprecedented oppression and injustice because their struggle for liberation has been labeled as terrorism,'' he wrote in an article last November.
Dr. Farooq, who is quiet, was described by his family as a recluse who read poetry, drove a Korean-built sedan and lived in a simple four-bedroom house with his wife and five children. But at the country's top nuclear site he held an important position: head of overseas procurement.
Mahmud Ali Durrani, a retired general and analyst, scoffed at that notion and predicted that General Musharraf would hold anyone who broke the law accountable. ''The military is not a holy cow,'' he said.
For average Pakistanis, the scandal represents yet another disappointment. Talat Masood, a retired general and analyst, said the investigation represented the fall of another Pakistani institution -- its nuclear program. In the 1990's, when democracy appeared to have taken hold in the country, two prime ministers, Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto, were forced from office in disgrace.
Islamist parties are expected to play on another sentiment -- that the charges have been manufactured by the United States and General Musharraf is America's lackey. Secular political parties are expected to attack any ruling on culpability, saying it is too harsh on the scientists and too easy on the generals. Both groups are expected to urge Pakistanis to direct their anger at the country's generals, not its scientists.
