Karl Malone's knee injury hurts the team, and Kobe Bryant's shoulder injury is tough to overcome. But the injury that has devastated the Lakers is Shaquille O'Neal's strained right calf muscle.
Without O'Neal, they are merely a good playoff team. With him, they are favored to win their fourth N.B.A. title in five seasons.
The question for the Lakers, who beat Utah last night, 93-86, but have lost 10 of 16 games, is not whether they can overcome this slide once their stars return, but whether O'Neal can stay healthy when he comes back.
On Thursday, O'Neal, who has missed 13 games, said he might play Wednesday against Seattle. Even so, O'Neal may not have seen the last of his calf problems, which are related to a surgically repaired toe that has bothered him the past few seasons. Doctors have tried to get O'Neal to change the way he moves.
''It's something we're concerned about because he's had two calf injuries this year that have been to different muscle groups,'' Coach Phil Jackson said. ''Basically, there is something wrong with the mechanics of his foot function. He's created this situation by trying to overcompensate for his toe. It's in his movement, how he moves. And his weight contributes to it because of the immensity of his size and the amount of pressure that puts on his foot.''
O'Neal, who will turn 32 in March, missed 30 games over the previous two seasons. He is in his 12th season, has played 136 playoff games and has perhaps taken more of a pounding than any other player because smaller opponents often have no recourse but to hack away.
''Shaq takes a beating when they foul him,'' Jackson said. ''They foul him so darn hard that it should be a full flagrant foul every three out of four times he's fouled.''
One Eastern Conference team executive, speaking on condition of anonymity, said O'Neal, who is listed at 340 pounds, would probably be hampered by injuries for the rest of his career.
''It appears to me that at his size and with the physical way he plays that he's going to be,'' the official said. ''The toe is still bothering him, and now it's the calf. It's just attrition. Nobody gives out and takes more contact than this guy, and that takes a toll. He's probably going to have leg problems unless he comes in 30, 40 pounds lighter one year. That might make a difference.''
Rob Babcock, Minnesota's vice president for player personnel, knows a hindered O'Neal would open the door for his Timberwolves and everyone else. ''As long as we've got to play them, I hope he has a lot of nagging injuries,'' Babcock said with a laugh. ''It's natural. The older you get, the more injures you get and the harder it is to come back. It takes a little longer. That said, Shaq is still the most dominant player in league, and a healthy Shaq is a very, very tough matchup, to say the least. He's had nagging injures in the past and he's come back from them and dominated.''
O'Neal's recuperative powers always seem to peak around playoff time. He has never missed a game in 10 postseasons.
Basketball, European Style
The best European players in the world will meet today when the Dallas Mavericks play host to the Sacramento Kings. For the past few years, Dallas's 7-foot Dirk Nowitzki of Germany has been regarded as the top European, but Sacramento's Peja Stojakovic of Serbia and Montenegro is challenging him this season. The 6-foot-10 Stojakovic has led the Kings to the top of the Western Conference without the injured Chris Webber.
Stojakovic is averaging career highs in eight categories, including points a game (25.4, third best in the league), rebounds (6.0) and field-goal percentage (49.3). Nowitzki's numbers have dropped, largely because Antoine Walker and Antawn Jamison have crowded the Dallas frontcourt. He is averaging 20.7 points and shooting 44.2 percent.
In a conference call last week, the teams' owners pitched their best arguments for who is better.
''I think Peja is really coming into his own this year,'' said Gavin Maloof, who owns the Kings with his brother, Joe. ''I still don't think he's at his peak. He's improved every year. His shooting has just been phenomenal. I'm blown away. I think everybody here is blown away at how great he is shooting the ball.''
Not to be outdone, Mark Cuban, the Mavericks' owner, said: ''Obviously, Peja is amazing and he's had an amazing year, but our guy is taller, prettier, younger -- and knows how to play the saxophone. That's all you need to know.''
Team Before Country?
Mark Cuban and the Maloof brothers addressed a growing concern around the league: the dangers of having players compete for their national teams during the summer. Both teams' owners said they would like to see international play eliminated for N.B.A. players. Recently, San Antonio Coach Gregg Popovich, who assisted Larry Brown with the United States national team last summer, pointed out that Tony Parker of France, the Spurs' starting point guard, was feeling the effects of his rigorous off-season, and that the Nets' Jason Kidd and Orlando's Tracy McGrady both started slowly after competing for the United States.
''With the exception of Peja really, with our guys and other guys around the league, it's been detrimental,'' Cuban said. ''I know Dirk and Steve Nash both got off to tougher starts this year. They both needed breaks and wanted more breaks.''
Joe Maloof, whose team also features Vlade Divac of Serbia and Montenegro, said: ''It's too dangerous. We pay these guys tremendous salaries, and to have one of them injured in one of those games would be devastating to our fans, would be devastating to the league and to us. I don't think it's a good move.''
Cuban said: ''Why in the world would we give our most valuable asset to another tournament knowing that when we have to offer our product, it could potentially have a negative impact? That's just dumb business.''
Wallace's Options
An official with a playoff-bound team said he saw only three likely destinations for Rasheed Wallace after the trade deadline Feb. 19: Dallas, New York or Portland.
Dallas has been talking with the Trail Blazers about trading Wallace for Antawn Jamison. The Knicks have been offering Keith Van Horn, but Portland has strong interest in Kurt Thomas, who has a more favorable contract.
''On paper, the Knicks would be better with Rasheed because that guy is really good,'' the official said on condition on anonymity. ''But people in the Knicks organization say that Kurt Thomas is the glue that holds that team together. He'd be a tough guy for them to lose.''
Drawing a Crowd
A nationally televised game between high school teams on Friday night will attract officials from roughly a dozen N.B.A. teams, including Memphis's Jerry West, Orlando's John Gabriel, Cleveland's Jim Paxson, Chicago's John Paxson and San Antonio's Danny Ferry. ESPN2 will televise Southwest Atlanta Christian Academy versus Landmark Christian School of Fairburn, Ga., at Georgia Tech, at 8 p.m. It will be the second high school game this season to be televised on ESPN2. In December, a game featuring Sebastian Telfair of Brooklyn's Lincoln High was aired.
The main attractions are Southwest Atlanta's Dwight Howard, a 6-11, 235-pound forward/center, and Landmark's Randolph Morris, a 7-foot, 269-pound center. Howard is widely viewed as the top high school player in the country and could be the No. 1 pick in this year's draft. He averages 25 points, 18 rebounds and 8 blocks. Morris, who averages 25 points, 15 rebounds and 6 blocks, is considering turning pro or attending Georgia Tech or Kentucky.
INSIDE THE N.B.A.
