ON Jan. 31, my son will celebrate his bar mitzvah. As Alex's father, I am expected to rise to the occasion by giving a speech. Some paternal words of wisdom. Rabbi Ed Schecter of our temple in Hastings-on-Hudson has already warned me: ''Limit your talk to five minutes. Please do not refer to your child's baby or toddler days! That stuff is embarrassing in front of his friends.''
My assignment is intimidating.
The truth is that anything I say will embarrass Alex because 13 is the age when teenagers dread mom and dad's foibles. Yet the bar mitzvah is supposed to be a milestone, a rite of passage. How can I not speak from the heart? Isn't the out-of-touch-Dad lecture a prerequisite to hitting life's turning points?
That's part of my dilemma here; I don't want to lecture. I am not the learned Elie Wiesel discoursing at the 92nd Street Y. I am a humble teacher from Yonkers, already feeling emotionally (as well as financially) overwhelmed by the big event. What can I say that is meaningful?
My words must somehow connect to the Torah portion that Alex will read from. Then he can't accuse me of going off on a tangent. But there is good news. The relevant section is Exodus, a stirring and malleable topic. My niece had to expound about leprosy at her bat mitzvah in April. Such is the luck of the draw!
In Exodus, the skies of Pharaoh's Egypt were obscured by a plague of locusts, followed by a ''thick darkness'' lasting three days. But ''the Israelites enjoyed light in their dwellings.''
How could the rich and powerful be plunged into blackness while mere slaves basked in an ethereal glow? What is this light? Is it relevant to my family in 2004? Is it relevant to all American families?
Rabbi David Kudan explained it to me: ''It is this light of hope, born of suffering, that allows us to live through many a dark age and to kindle the lamps of hope and faith for many other peoples who have been affected by the darkness of injustice and inhumanity.''
Indeed, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. wrote about transcending the gloom of his jail cell in Birmingham by feeling the light of divine presence.
Exodus marches us into the Passover festival, which recalls the Hebrew slave cry for freedom. The hymn ''Let My People Go'' has been sung by Harriet Tubman (''the Black Moses''), Nelson Mandela and dissidents across the globe yearning for democracy. Once again, the symbolism is universal. But Passover asks us to take the next step to break free of every type of bondage, spiritual as well as physical. At his seder table, the actor Leonard Nimoy calls on each guest to declare what personal yoke he or she plans to soon throw off.
The bondage of ignorance can wrap a society in chains stronger than vulcanized steel. Ignorance leads to intolerance. Intolerance leads to the horrific headlines that so often greet us.
Two ancient Buddhist statues in Bamiyan, Afghanistan, were obliterated by the Taliban to prevent the worship of ''false idols.'' The date? March 2001, a precursor to the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001. Pro-Nazi leaflets were recently left in some Westchester communities. Ignoring the ignorance is not an option.
Prejudice, oppression and violence are forms of blindness. But I am enlightened by the Exodus portion. I know what to say on Jan. 31. And I'm no longer wary. Well, just a bit; a group of 13-year-olds is a tough audience.
SOAPBOX Barry Hantman, a special education teacher, lives in Yonkers.
