Tennessee surrendered its stranglehold on the spotlight in women's college basketball in recent years, going nearly three seasons without the No. 1 ranking, which had seemed to be its birthright.
But on a night when Duke honored one of the best players in the country by retiring guard Alana Beard's jersey number, the Lady Vols re-emerged as perhaps the nation's best team. Tennessee, ranked No. 2, beat No. 1 Duke, 72-69, on Saturday night in front of a sellout crowd at Cameron Indoor Stadium.
The Lady Vols (16-1) held off a furious last-minute comeback by the Blue Devils (15-2), who have a history of stunning rallies. Duke pulled off a 14-2 run in the final minutes on Jan. 3 to beat Connecticut, then ranked No. 1, and took over the top spot in the polls.
The Blue Devils, who had won 15 games in a row, nearly came back again. They rallied from a 66-59 deficit with 56 seconds left to close to 68-66 with 24 seconds remaining when Beard scored on a layup.
The Blue Devils came close to a steal on the ensuing inbounds play, but after a scramble for the ball, Tennessee retained control on the possession arrow.
The Lady Vols put Duke away by hitting four free throws in the last 13 seconds.
Tennessee will most likely take over the No. 1 spot for the first time since February 2001. Not that it mattered much to Coach Pat Summitt.
''It's January,'' said Summitt, who has won six national championships, the last in 1998. ''With our schedule and our league and all we had on us, we take this and certainly we're proud, but we've got to keep getting better because we want to win in March and April, and today was a step in the right direction.''
The Blue Devils realize they are going to have to get better, too, if they are to win the national title that has eluded them in the Beard era.
Duke, which reached the Final Four the past two seasons, lost to Tennessee in last year's N.C.A.A. tournament semifinals. Having already defeated Connecticut this season, Duke could have established itself as the clear favorite with a victory against the Lady Vols.
But Duke shot only 35.8 percent from the field. The senior forward Iciss Tillis, who was a dominant presence defensively and finished with 14 rebounds, 4 steals and 2 blocks, shot only 3 of 16 from the field. She finished with 15 points after making 9 of 11 free throws. Beard and Monique Currie led the Blue Devils with 18 points each.
Tennessee struggled in the first half as Duke took a 26-22 lead, shooting 26.3 percent from the floor. The Lady Vols shot 58.3 percent in the second half and scored 50 points. The sophomore guard Shanna Zolman and the junior forward Shyra Ely each had 15 points.
''I would have loved to have the win for Alana, for our team and for the crowd,'' Duke Coach Gail Goestenkors said. ''It was a disappointing loss for so many reasons.''
Particularly for Beard, who became the first woman to have her number retired by the Blue Devils. Her No. 20 jersey will join those of former stars like Grant Hill, Christian Laettner, Bobby Hurley, Shane Battier and Johnny Dawkins, among others, in the rafters at Cameron.
''She measures up to the guys up there and probably surpasses most of them,'' Duke's athletic director, Joe Alleva, said.
OKLAHOMA ST. 88, TEXAS TECH 87
Nicole Campbell hit a jumper with less than 30 seconds left in the second overtime period, leading Oklahoma State past No. 3 Texas Tech in Stillwater, Okla. (AP)
NEBRASKA 81, KANSAS STATE 63
Margaret Richards scored 21 points and host Nebraska beat No. 9 Kansas State. (AP)
UCONN 71, SETON HALL 63
Barbara Turner made a 3-point play with 1 minute 5 seconds remaining to help No. 5 Connecticut avoid consecutive road losses for the first time in 11 years. (AP)
COLLEGE BASKETBALL -- ROUNDUP: WOMEN
