Q: One of your major initiatives as party chairman has been to change the primary calendar. Not everyone thinks such a compressed schedule is a good idea. What's your defense?
As you know, it used to be Iowa and New Hampshire and then a six-week break. You know, Iowa and New Hampshire, great states -- but really not representative of the Democratic Party. Don't mean it critically, but there really aren't any minorities in those states. So with the calendar now, with Iowa and New Hampshire and then a week later is Feb. 3, we've got South Carolina, where 40 percent of the vote could be African-American. We have Arizona and New Mexico, where 35 percent of the vote is Hispanic. We need to reward those constituencies that continually support our party.
Another big difference between this election and the last is campaign finance reform. Has it weakened the Democratic Party, relative to Republicans?
Oh, I love campaign finance reform.
That was very convincing.
You know, I think it's just an absolute tragedy. I always said, if you're going to do true finance reform, you've got to get rid of all soft money. But to allow a system like we have today, where money isn't leaving the system -- it's just not going to the party anymore. I tried to explain this to Democrats, but it is what it is. Can't do anything about it now.
Do you have a prediction for how this campaign will play out over the next several weeks?
I think it's going to go very rapidly now. My best guesstimate is that after the morning of Feb.4, we'll have had nine contests in all regions of the country, all the diverse parts of our party represented, and if you haven't won a state in those nine contests, I think at that point it's time to seriously reassess your candidacy. And I think we will be down to two or three candidates going through February. And I believe by March 10 that we will have a victor in the Democratic Party.
So you can't tell us who's going to win?
No, I can't. And I get asked a hundred times a day. I've had a standard response I've used for the last 16 months: I'm a lover. I love them all equally.
It's going to be Kucinich, isn't it?
Maybe. Love them all equally.
A few weeks ago, Dr. Dean called on you to stop the other Democratic candidates from attacking him.
He did? (Laughs.)
Yes. And what was your reaction? Should you be more involved?
It's not up to the chairman of the party to litigate. This is what primaries are for. I don't remember Jim Nicholson telling George W. Bush to lay off John McCain, to quit attacking his patriotism and his mental sanity. Remember that?
You've obviously been very critical of President Bush. Have you ever sat down and talked to him?
No. I've only met the president once.
Where?
Well, my wife is on the board of the Kennedy Center. Every year they have the Kennedy Center Honors. And on the Sunday night of the Kennedy Center Honors, the White House holds a reception. So in 2001 we're there. I loved going, because I saw all the guys who used to work at the White House -- the bartenders, I knew everybody. And the issue is, should we go through the receiving line, and my wife said, ''Well, let's go through.'' So they bring you right up to him. Very close, like a couple of inches. And he turns, and I'm telling you, he goes back about five feet. And I said: ''Mr. President, I want to thank you for the invitation. It's great to be back in the White House.'' He looks at me and says, ''Well, Terry, don't steal the silverware.''
And did you?
Didn't take anything.
Matt Bai
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-25-04: QUESTIONS FOR TERRY MCAULIFFE
