On Jan. 1, Brazil began requiring that arriving American citizens be photographed and fingerprinted, in procedures similar to being booked at a police station. The actions, ordered in retaliation for comparable new security measures in the United States, have complicated the process of entering the country and have become a sore point in relations between the two countries.
In the first days, the registration process was slow and cumbersome, with few immigration agents to photograph arriving passengers and take prints of all 10 fingers. That led to delays of up to nine hours at the international airport in Rio de Janeiro. But the Federal Police have been installing electronic equipment at most major ports of entry, which has reduced the wait to just a few minutes in most cases.
The fingerprinting and photographing requirements apply to all American citizens, whether arriving by airplane, ship or land vehicle, although enforcement has been reported as lax at some remote border posts. More than 600,000 Americans visited Brazil in 2003, and the negative publicity generated by the new policy has led to the cancellation of some cruises and package tours, according to associations of travel agents.
Polls indicate that about three quarters of all Brazilians approve of the measures, and there has been anti-American sentiment expressed in letters to newspapers and on radio call-in programs. But on the streets, Brazilians continue to be friendly, with some even making a point to express embarrassment at what they consider a hostile act by their government.
With Carnival in less than a month, the municipal government in Rio de Janeiro has gone further in its efforts to apologize for the inconveniences. American visitors arriving there are being given a welcome kit with flowers and a ''Rio Loves You'' T-shirt, and samba musicians and dancers have been dispatched to the airport to greet them.
Even so, some American visitors have expressed dissatisfaction with the system; one group of cruise ship passengers chose to remain on board rather than be fingerprinted.
But it is best not to manifest any negative feelings until leaving the customs and immigration area because the Federal Police have shown unusual zeal in enforcing the procedures. In a widely publicized incident on Jan. 14, an American Airlines pilot arriving in São Paulo was arrested for disrespect for authority, an offense that can carry a jail term of six months to one year; he was held overnight, then fined $12,750. The authorities said he made an obscene gesture to police officers and had a ''sarcastic smile'' while being photographed. Other members of his crew were denied entry for showing a ''derisive'' attitude.
Despite the State Department's complaints that the fingerprinting process is discriminatory, Brazil's government has issued an edict to keep the current system until a commission establishes permanent rules. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell is scheduled to visit Brazil in February to discuss the restrictions, but travelers should expect no relaxation of the controls before then.
LARRY ROHTER
TRAVEL ADVISORY
