ON a glistening moonlit night in midwinter, downtown Chatham put me in mind of that Norman Rockwell painting of Stockbridge, Mass., at Christmastime: prosperous, peaceable and frozen in time, circa 1957. Driving down Main Street, I half-expected to find myself in a regatta of tailfinned DeSotos and wood-paneled Ford station wagons, each one populated by a mom, a dad, a flop-eared spaniel and 2.2 perfect children.
In the real world of 2004, of course, the vehicle demographics run more to Lexuses and Lincoln Navigators. But Chatham still feels like the quintessential small town of our nostalgic dreams. So eyebrows must have gone up last March when Eric Daley opened Salsa Chatham, a Southwestern restaurant in a storefront that once held a deli, its awning a nearly lurid blood-red.
Yet Mr. Daley, a 37-year-old M.B.A. who left a comfortable perch on Wall Street shortly after witnessing 9/11 at a range that was all too close, clearly knew what he was doing. Before settling on a location, he scouted half a dozen. He assembled focus groups. He fixed his sights on a target Chathamite: a 37-year-old émigré from Hoboken or Manhattan, ''looking for SoHo in the municipality of Chatham.'' He hired a consultant from a chain of yuppified Latino restaurants in New York to help him plan a menu and plot price points. He poured in the sweat equity. He even sent out press kits in blazing red folders; that is how I became aware of his new venture.
The results must be gratifying. On a recent Saturday evening, every one of the 78 seats was filled, with a small crowd waiting around the nonalcoholic ''guacamole bar.'' Larger groups spilled from the rather cramped booths onto makeshift islands of tables, around which the hearty young waiters zipped and zoomed like skateboarders in heavy traffic. (One even took a spill, to general merriment.)
The long, narrow room pulsed with jovial noise, and by eight o'clock the kitchen was out of its signature dessert -- churros, the sugary strips of fried dough. Romantic it wasn't. But it was a cheerful place to come in from the cold, its cheeriness amplified by whimsical wall sconces and star-shaped lights hanging over the bar.
Prices are cheerful, too. You supply the wine or beer, so the average check works out to just $20 or so, plus tip. It buys you truckloads of food, starting with a giveaway of first-rate, greaseless tortilla chips and the restaurant's namesake homemade salsa, an unusually clear-flavored blending of chipotle and adobo peppers, roasted tomatoes, onions, garlic and fresh lime juice. The inevitable guacamole is simple and superb, just fresh Haas avocados mashed on site in the squat stone mortar and pestle called a molcajete -- with diced onion and tomato, cilantro and lime juice.
Despite outward appearances, the cooking here is more Chatham than SoHo: solid, abundant and far from funky. Especially on that busy Saturday, we ran into a few cases of unevenness in the kitchen. Tortilla soup was oddly tepid -- a mixture of roasted tomato, Vidalia onion and chipotle chiles with julienned strips of tortilla that started out crisp but quickly grew soggy. An overdose of lime juice threw the dressing out of balance in the red, white and blue tortilla salad, which the menu described as ''a combination of crispy red, white and blue tortilla strips with masculine greens, shrimp, grilled peppers, corn, jicama and diced carrots.'' (Masculine greens? Typo? Or obscure pun?)
Tasty as it looked, most of it went uneaten as we focused our attention on a pleasant if unmemorable pinwheel quesadilla of cheese, black beans and grilled peppers.
On another visit, fried calamari dusted with ancho chile powder were a bit tougher and blander than we would have liked (though they went well with a smoky, creamy chipotle dipping sauce), and so were the shrimps in a shrimp-and-scallop ceviche.
The standard Tex-Mex and Cal-Mex main courses -- chile relleno, enchiladas, burritos and fajitas -- are dependably immense and unsubtle, crowding their vast platters with rice and beans, cheese and guacamole, sour cream and calories. This is not a complaint; they are what they are. We encountered two exceptions, one at either end of the spectrum. The vegetarian fajita was terrific, with roasted poblano chiles, red and green peppers, shredded zucchini and carrots, and caramelized onions. And the seafood burrito was mediocre, with overcooked, over-the-hill shrimp muscling the other ingredients into the background.
Yucatan baby back ribs, marinated in the spice blend called achiote, came off surprisingly bland, though we liked the lumpy, character-filled chipotle mashed potatoes. Shredded pork in the chile colorado burrito was agreeably ropy and tender.
Curiously for a Southwestern restaurant, the best and worst dishes of our two visits were both based on seafood. A thick triangle of Chilean sea bass, tender and almost rich, stood up stoutly to its vigorous topping of habanero, chipotle and jalapeño peppers. Tequila and orange shrimp -- linguine tossed with shrimps and vegetables in a sweet, soupy, alcoholic sauce -- was uncharacteristically awful.
Having missed out on the churros, with their over-the-top-sounding caramel dipping sauce, I can testify only about such un-Southwestern dessert standbys as carrot cake and pecan pie. They are fine. A card on each table carries the odd injunction ''Turn Your Beer Into a Margarita.'' I missed out on that too, this time by choice.
Salsa Chatham  255A Main Street, Chatham  (973)635-0055  www.salsachatham.com
GOOD
ATMOSPHERE -- Lively, convivial Southwestern dining in a storefront restaurant; noisy and almost boisterous when crowded.  SERVICE -- Young and willing, if occasionally forgetful.  SMOKING -- Not allowed.  WINE LIST -- Bring your own.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Guacamole, chile relleno; Chilean sea bass; enchiladas, burritos and fajitas, except those based on seafood.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers, $6.95 to $10.95; entrees, $10.95 to $23.95; desserts, $5.95 to $7.95 (for churros for two). Lunch entrees, $6.95 to $14.95.  HOURS -- Open daily. Sundays through Thursdays, 11:30 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Fridays and Saturdays, 11:30 a.m. to 10 p.m.  CREDIT CARDS -- Discover, MasterCard, Visa.  RESERVATIONS -- Recommended.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Fully accessible.
REVIEWED -- Jan. 25, 2004.
IF YOU GO -- Chatham is in eastern Morris County. From Interstate 78, follow Route 24 westbound to Exit 7A, Route 124 westbound (also called Main Street). The restaurant is a mile from the exit, on the left.
RATINGS -- Poor, Fair, Satisfactory, Good, Very Good, Excellent, Extraordinary. Ratings reflect reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
RESTAURANTS
