Hard-nosed iconoclasts are the cliché of New Hampshire. This is, after all, a state that has long demanded that candidates take an anti-tax pledge, that has embraced political mavericks like Patrick J. Buchanan and John McCain, and that enshrined in its Constitution the ''right of revolution.''
And as the Democratic presidential contenders descended on the state fresh from the Iowa caucuses, legislators were actually considering a bill to nullify the United States Constitution's 16th Amendment and end the collection of federal income taxes in New Hampshire. (Ultimately the bill was sidelined when its sponsor, Representative Henry McElroy, a Republican from Nashua, proposed a study committee, saying, ''It's come to our attention -- hey, you can't nullify a federal law.'')
But while its stubborn streak is still strong, New Hampshire these days is more nuanced than its past political prickliness might suggest. Maybe there was a metaphor in the loss last year of the state's famously craggy-faced icon, the rock formation known as the Old Man of the Mountain: New Hampshire is developing a less sharply etched face.
For one thing, most residents -- 57 percent -- were not born in New Hampshire, an unusually high figure for a small Northeastern state.
For another, the newcomers -- many of them well educated and solidly upper middle class, and many of them from other New England states or the mid-Atlantic -- have helped turn New Hampshire from a place of fading factories and textile mills into a state-of-the-art economy with one of the country's highest percentages of high-tech workers.
Devastated by the recession of the early 1990's, New Hampshire has weathered this one much better, and while some high-tech jobs have been lost, unemployment, at about 4.3 percent, is well below the national average. Although property taxes and home prices are high, New Hampshire residents continue to oppose state income and sales taxes.
''The combination of high education, high income and the independent streak has given New Hampshire a lot of people who are liberal on social issues, conservative on economics,'' said Linda Fowler, a government professor at Dartmouth College. ''It's ended up being quite a volatile electorate. It's not reliably anything.''
New Hampshire, whose first-in-the-nation primary gives it outsize influence, is in an unusual position this year. Because issues like the Iraq war and the economy's slide have struck less intensely here, voters are looking less at the issues and more at the candidates.
''In other elections we can identify the economy voters, the environmental voters, the choice voters, the war voters,'' said Dick Bennett, president of the American Research Group in Manchester. ''I can't do that now.''
''The only issue is George W. Bush,'' Mr. Bennett said. ''People say: 'I'm looking at Clark and Kerry and Dean or Edwards. If you can tell me which of those will beat Bush, I'll vote for them.' And they don't like it when the Democratic candidates attack each other, because they feel that it would hurt in defeating Bush.''
Interviews with several dozen people in and around Portsmouth, a rejuvenated coastal city of 21,000, seemed to bear this out.
''I'm going on whether or not I like the person,'' said Kim Perkins, 37, an independent who is head waitress at Betty's Kitchen in North Hampton. Ms. Perkins said she would vote in the Democratic primary on Tuesday but had not decided for whom. ''I just don't like what Bush does,'' she said.
Reanna Henshaw, 21, an art student and independent who was eating pancakes at the Friendly Toast in downtown Portsmouth, said, ''I honestly don't know a lot about the other candidates, but I'll vote for pretty much anybody else except for Bush.''
Even some Republicans seemed to be making assessments based on personal characteristics. Richard Marshuetz, 61, a building products executive, said he was a Republican and would probably vote that way, but was checking out Democrats.
''There's an attitude about George Bush that I think is unbecoming to a leader of the greatest power the world has ever seen,'' Mr. Marshuetz said. ''I like what I think is the caliber of both Kerry and Lieberman. I liked Wes Clark until I went to see him. He was too simple.''
Political analysts say that because New Hampshire voters are less driven by particular issues, the state, which has often been unswayed by the Iowa caucuses, may be more susceptible to the views of Iowans this time.
Independents make up the largest segment of the New Hampshire electorate, 37.7 percent, and have been growing for the past dozen years -- partly because newcomers are often slower to affiliate with a party, partly because a 1993 law allowed independents to vote in a party's primary and then switch back to independent status.
Republicans, who constitute 36.7 percent of registered voters, are the next largest group. The governor, the state's Congressional delegation and most members of the Legislature are Republicans. In 2000, Mr. Bush defeated Al Gore by just over 7,200 votes here.
Professor Fowler said New Hampshire Republicans generally rejected the party's ''evangelical wing.'' They are, she said, ''uncomfortable with the anti-environmental, anti-abortion stance that supports rolling back civil rights, school prayer and the invasion-of-privacy provisions in the Patriot Act.''
Democrats, who account for 25.6 percent of registered voters, are the group that changed the most with the influx of new residents, said Andrew E. Smith, a political scientist and director of the University of New Hampshire Survey Center. In contrast to the blue-collar union members whose predominantly Roman Catholic background made them conservative on some social issues, he said, the new New Hampshire Democrat is a ''Volvo Democrat,'' well off and socially liberal. Twenty years ago, about a quarter of Democratic primary voters here labeled themselves liberal, Mr. Smith said; in 2000, more than half did.
That liberalism may account for the early popularity of Howard Dean. But the state's large ranks of independents may explain his diminishing support.
''Most of the independents probably have relatively weak party attachments and they want to vote in a primary that matters, so this time around they'll say, 'Let's vote in the Democratic primary where the action is,' '' said William G. Mayer, a professor of political science at Northeastern University.
Analysts say Portsmouth, whose electorate is 43 percent independent, reflects much of New Hampshire's influx. Once a bastion of blue-collar and military jobs, it is now populated by the Starbucks set and humming with cultural programs, artsy shops and stylish restaurants.
John Shea, an independent who moved to Portsmouth 18 months ago, exemplifies the well-educated newcomer trying to make up his mind. Mr. Shea, 40, a private school administrator, has lived in California, Massachusetts and Indiana, and his votes have ranged from John McCain to the Green Party.
This time, he says, he will vote in the Democratic primary because he is disappointed in President Bush's tax cuts, his handling of the Iraq war and his stewardship of America's international image.
Mr. Shea said he started out favoring Dr. Dean because he liked his ''fiery anger.''  ''He's frank and he just speaks off the top of his head,'' he said. But he said his enthusiasm ''peaked a while ago'' for Dr. Dean, who has ''said things that are bordering on stupid.''
A self-described social liberal who is ''fiscally conservative at the federal level,'' Mr. Shea said that while he had wanted Wesley K. Clark to run, the general had been a disappointment.
''He's been so phenomenally deliberate, strategic, political in everything that he's done,'' he said.
Mr. Shea said he did not connect with Mr. Kerry ''on a personal level,'' but liked his judgment on issues and became more interested in him a few weeks ago. He said that the Iowa caucuses had convinced him to ''take a harder look'' at John Edwards, who finished a strong second. Iowa, he said, validated his opinions.
''I was already looking at Kerry strongly and Iowa said you should be,'' he said. ''And I was already feeling uncomfortable about Dean and Iowa said you should be. I want someone who's going to beat Bush.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: NEW HAMPSHIRE
