AT a CBS press party to talk up the network's shows a week ago Saturday, Kathryn Morris turned down innumerable platters of mini grilled-cheese sandwiches and chicken skewers, and endured roving media critics and enough fellow television detectives to investigate a gangland slaying should one have taken place that balmy evening at the Avalon club in Hollywood.
Then, no sooner had she stepped onto the sidewalk, than she was beset by a chorus of autograph hounds. ''Kathryn, Kathryn! Kathryn, pleeaase.''
Still new enough to celebrity to oblige, she plunged into the fray, signing photos of herself as Lilly Rush, the tough Philadelphia police investigator she portrays on ''Cold Case,'' the season's most popular new crime drama.
''It's a big adjustment,'' she said, ''all these people who are obsessed with the show.''
With a gesture typical of Detective Rush, she brushed aside strands of highlighted-blond hair from her eyes. ''But because I play a really intelligent woman, there's a certain respect from the fans who come up to me that I don't think I would get if I was on a sitcom where I played a dippy character.''
After small roles in ''As Good as It Gets'' and ''Minority Report,'' and scores of television appearances (in ''Murder, She Wrote'' and ''Xena: Warrior Princess,'' among others), Ms. Morris has moved to the top of the television heap with the success of ''Cold Case.''
She stars in the Renny Harlin film ''Mindhunters'' later this year. ''It's really kind of a Sigourney Weaver role,'' she said. ''I get into a major knockdown fight with LL Cool J.''
Slipping into a Town Car with her fiancé, Randy Hamilton, Ms. Morris, 34, began talking about the next stop, the Hollywood Wax Museum. As a struggling actress in San Francisco, Ms. Morris, who was born in Dallas and grew up in Connecticut, collected tickets at the Wax Museum at Fisherman's Wharf, so she wanted to find out how the Los Angeles version measured up. ''Michael Jackson and Madonna will be there,'' she said. ''They probably have some interesting ones -- you know, the classics, like the Bionic Woman. I love Lindsay Wagner.''
At the museum, Ms. Morris wandered through the hallways, providing a running commentary. ''Whoopi is morphing into E.T.,'' she said. ''Jerry Seinfeld looks like he's had a chemical peel.'' She spotted Lynda Carter in her trademark superhero bodice. ''I like this one,'' she said, ''because Detective Rush is a kind of modern-day Wonder Woman.''
Back on Hollywood Boulevard, with its stretches of sex shops and tumbledown hotels, Ms. Morris recalled Philadelphia, where ''Cold Case'' is taped. As part of her research for her role, riding along with a real police detective, she has seen a lot worse than Hollywood Boulevard.
Once, she said, she arrived at an all-night Chinese restaurant at 3 a.m., after a shooting. ''At these restaurants you can buy anything, from Comet to crack pipes,'' she said. ''Blood was everywhere and they didn't know if the victim was going to make it. And people were riding bikes through the crime scene.''
At nearly midnight, she arrived at Fred 62, a diner in Los Feliz, near where she lives with Mr. Hamilton, a financial adviser. Ms. Morris had a Wimpy Burger, while Mr. Hamilton had the Bang Bang Noodles.
A gangly patron brushed past the table in a blue blazer three times too small for him.
''That's like the jacket I used to wear when I worked at the wax museum,'' Ms. Morris said. The sight brought to mind a few criticisms of the Hollywood museum. ''They didn't have any rappers,'' she said. ''And Oprah, she should have been there.''
''She's one of my idols,'' Ms. Morris declared, making herself heard over the rocking strains of the Smithereens. ''People like Oprah have tapped into the same frequency as many of the crime investigation shows do -- the same desperation for understanding, and trying to wrap your mind around a lack of order.''
She looked around at the raucous crowd at Fred's, and smiled.
A Night Out With
