MARQUEE, one of the new mega-nightspots in West Chelsea, has its dose of pretension. But while the stylish interior reflects an exclusive, high-class dream, the clubby attitude keeps the atmosphere down to earth. It's a ritzy ski lodge the downtown set can endorse.
On a recent night, Mathieu Baillargeon, 24, danced under the chandelier in a trance. Glass beads dropped snowflakes of light across his face. ''Beautiful women and famous people all together. And me,'' said Mr. Baillargeon, a Parisian, hugging his brown sweater. ''It feels like Cannes.''
Uma Thurman, swaddled in pashmina, and her new boyfriend, the hotelier André Balazs, snuggled at the bar, flanked by two security guards. Smokers passed underhand cigarettes and sideways glances to their partners in crime as Eminem's ''Lose Yourself'' blared from the speakers.
''We wanted to create a club that was warm and inviting, yet chic, a Studio 54 of the new millennium,'' said Noah Tepperberg, an owner with Jason Strauss. Their 10-year club résumé includes Suite 16 in Chelsea and the celebutante playground Conscience Point in Southampton (now defunct).
The architectural firm of Philip Johnson was brought in to work on the 35-foot wishbone-shaped staircase. It leads to a lounge enclosed by a wall of glass, useful for spying on the action.
Voyeurism, of course, is essential. ''We racked our brains to create a place that works on a social level,'' Mr. Tepperberg said. The three rooms have their own sound systems, bars and color schemes. The banquettes, arranged in L-shapes, are built double-decker style so partyers can perch, free to descend and mingle.
Off the main room is a lounge decorated in red. Sweaty strays from the dance floor stretch at the bar. It is quieter and less crowded than the other rooms -- an attempt, the owners explain, to welcome an older crowd that prefers conversation.
Ben Stiller was sitting diagonally across from a boyish-looking man who could have been Corey Feldman's stunt double. As Michael Jackson's ''Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough'' played, a fan in the jeans-with-heels uniform sat down and tried her luck. ''Would you please do 'blue steel'?'' she asked, referring to the signature look of his male model character in the film ''Zoolander.'' Clutching his bottle of spring water, Mr. Stiller smiled and affably declined.
With no V.I.P. sections, it's difficult to tame the riffraff.
Marquee  289 10th Avenue; (646) 473-0202.
GETTING IN -- Guest list or $20 cover.  D.J. PICKS -- ''Crazy in Love'' by Beyoncé; ''La Di Da Di'' by Doug E. Fresh and MC Ricky D.  DRESS CODE -- For women, low-cut shirts and low-rider jeans; for men, vintage T-shirts with blazers and neck chains.  SIGNATURE DRINK -- L'Orange Rushh (Grey Goose L'Orange, Rushh energy drink, orange peel), $11.  SIGHTINGS -- P. Diddy, Pharrell Williams, David Blaine, Benicio Del Toro.
BOÎTE
