THE Greenburgh town government bid good riddance to its outdated and ailing building on Tarrytown Road a few months ago, opening the door to debate over the future of the building and the eight-acre site, which is also home to the town's public library.
Two companies have stepped forward with plans to develop senior housing on the land. But at recent public hearings much of the public comment has focused on the future of the library, with residents who spoke overwhelmingly urging the council to put the expansion and renovation of the crowded and outdated library ahead of other development.
''Our optimum wish would be that the entire site be given to the library,'' said Robert F. Reninger, president of the Broadview Civic Association, which is made up of residents in a subdivision adjacent to the land.
But, the development of senior housing on the site could provide much needed revenue for the town and ultimately to pay for work on the library, which is 35 years old.
Town Supervisor Paul J. Feiner said the sale of the old Town Hall might be a good thing. ''I basically feel that if the library wants an expansion it would have to be an affordable expansion,'' he said.
Many library supporters are urging caution, asking whether the town is moving too quickly on those projects before ascertaining the needs of the library and exploring other options. This week, the Greenburgh Neighborhood Health Center, a local non-profit health center that gears its work to the poor, asked to rent the old town hall for a year, Mr. Feiner said, while its new building is being constructed, which will help to pay costs while a plan is debated.
Two companies are interested in building on the site. One, Wilder Balter Partners of Elmsford, has offered a little more than $2.6 million and has proposed building affordable rental housing for the elderly. The plan for the project, called the Commons at Greenburgh, features five stories as well as a penthouse with 58 parking spaces. According to a site comparison on the town's Web site, the Wilder Balter plan would require 3.8 acres of the site, and the company has asked for a tax break that would result in an annual tax payment of just over $99,000.
In contrast, Minneapolis-based Sunrise Development has proposed building an assisted-living center for the elderly that would have 82 units in three stories and use 3.5 acres. The Sunrise tax payment is estimated by the assessor to be between $250,000 and $300,000 a year, and its parking requirement is estimated at 40 spaces.
Both projects estimate that, in addition to the parking spaces for their own use, they would be able to add badly needed parking spaces for the library, raising the number to about 160 from the current 39. Mr. Feiner said the request for proposals for the land was specifically for senior housing. A total of four were received, he said, but only two were viewed as suitable for the site.
The library board is pressing for an expansion of as much as 30,000 square feet, and has hired Todd Harvey, a New York architect known for his work on several other libraries in the region, to come up with plans. Mr. Harvey said he was currently looking at presenting perhaps two to four options. He said he felt the library would need to grow more than 10,000 square feet, but probably not as much as 30,000 square feet.
He said he could also see the library expansion working with either of the two alternatives although he said the Sunrise assisted living facility might be a better fit because it would not need as much parking and would generate less traffic.
''I think what we're trying to do is see if we can't have it all,'' he said. ''From what we've been doing so far I'm not sure that's not feasible.''
''The question for the library board is how much of an expansion is necessary,'' said Demita Gerber, Greenburgh's librarian.
The library, which serves about 48,000 people in unincorporated Greenburgh and the village of Elmsford, was built to serve about 18,000 people, said Howard Jacobs, chairman of the library's board. It has the fifth-largest service area in the Westchester library system and the fourth-highest circulation of materials. But its per capita square footage is third smallest.
''We have wonderful services and people and we're very pleased with that,'' Mr. Jacobs said. ''But at the same time it's extremely crowded. We can't keep books on the shelves for a long period of time so we're rotating them.''
Beyond that, he said, the wiring is bad and not capable of supporting new computers, and the limited space makes it hard to schedule special programs. Aside from installing a restroom for the handicapped in 1996 (doors to the library and elevator are not handicapped accessible), no other renovations or capital improvements have been made to the library.
But the wait-and-see group wants more time and more study of the issue. ''We really feel the current approach is not the way to go about this,'' said Mr. Reninger. ''There seems to be an intention to speed up the process and, as you know, haste makes waste.'' While public sentiment voiced at meetings seems to lean toward putting the needs of the library before building additional housing, which would generate funds for the town, the library board has indicated that if the site must be shared they would prefer the assisted-living complex.
Not only does that plan generate far more in taxes, it is suggested that there would be far less need for parking with such a building and less overall traffic, which is a persistent problem for the area. ''Parking is a major, major issue,'' Mr. Jacobs said. ''We have 39 parking spaces with nearly 300,000 people coming through a year. You can wait for 15 to 20 minutes to get a spot.''
For Mr. Feiner, paying for any library expansion is a key part of the equation and from that respect, he said, ''the sale of the old Town Hall makes sense.''
But, he cautioned, it was unlikely the sale would cover the costs of the library improvements based on suggestions to this point. ''The library's goal was to ask for 30,000 square feet,'' he said. ''You're looking at a very expensive program. If they got everything they wanted, like their dream, it could easily be going $15 to $20 million.'' He said he would support a project of under $10 million.
At this point, however, it's unclear what the expansion and renovation would entail. Steve Bass, a council member, echoed a widely held sentiment of library proponents saying the process should be slowed to allow more time to assess the needs of the library and how they can best be addressed.
''Based on the community, of the folks who have attended public hearings, clearly we need to do what's right for our library,'' he said. ''I don't think that means people don't believe there's a need for assisted living. But people want to take care of their library.''
DEVELOPMENT
