JOE NICHOLS hardly looks like the new face of country music. Bereft of the requisite cowboy hat, his tousled mass of shoulder-length hair suggests a bad-boy rocker; with his pierced left ear lobe, he could more readily pass for a contestant on ''American Idol'' than on its country counterpart, ''Nashville Star.''
Mr. Nichols doesn't sound like the future of country music either. If anything, he sounds like its past: he sings in a molasses baritone that evokes the purling voices of jukebox legends like Lefty Frizzell and Merle Haggard; bearing titles like ''Brokenheartsville'' and ''She Only Smokes When She Drinks,'' his singles are steeped in the verities of sawdust-and-steel honky-tonk. The antithesis of the amped-up twang of Toby Keith or Brooks and Dunn, Mr. Nichols's subtle, ruminative music draws listeners in rather than bowling them over.
This mix of hipster chic and down-home classicism has served Mr. Nichols well. The first two singles from his major-label debut, ''Man With a Memory,'' topped the country charts. He received two Grammy nominations last year and another this year, and took home new male vocalist honors at the Academy of Country Music Awards in Los Angeles in May. At the Country Music Association Awards in Nashville in November, he won the Horizon Award, given to the rising act whose career has flourished the most over the last year.
A tradition-minded singer who doesn't look or act the part, Mr. Nichols has not only caught Nashville off guard; on the eve of the Grammys, where he is nominated for best male country vocal performance -- instead of superstars like Mr. Keith and Kenny Chesney -- he may well be the harbinger of country music's next phase.
Over its 80-year history, country music has cycled back and forth between styles, reinventing itself by looking either to the past or to outside influences, like rock, pop or soul music. Mr. Nichols, 27, who was born and raised in Rogers, Ark., is at the forefront of a group of young male vocalists whose music extends the neo-traditionalist movement led by George Strait and Randy Travis during the 1980's.
Mr. Nichols, along with Darryl Worley, Gary Allan, Blake Shelton and Buddy Jewel (the four other 2003 Horizon Award nominees), came of age listening to Mr. Strait and Mr. Travis on country radio. Each of them is reviving a commercial sound rooted, to varying degrees, in honky-tonk and Western swing.
This shift toward what's often called ''hard country'' was very much in evidence at the Country Music Association awards in November. Johnny Cash, who won three awards posthumously, loomed over the proceedings. Alan Jackson, long a torchbearer for tradition, won three others, beating out Mr. Keith, the oddsmakers' favorite, in the album and entertainer-of-the-year categories. The shift was even apparent among female country acts, who for years have been emulating the crossover pop of glitzy stars like Faith Hill and Shania Twain. Neither Ms. Hill nor Ms. Twain received nominations this year; vying instead for the honor of best female vocalist were bluegrass-leaning veterans like Patty Loveless, Alison Krauss and Dolly Parton.
Among Nashville's new class of neo-traditionalists, Mr. Allan and Mr. Worley have been at it the longest. Dierks Bentley, another of the history-conscious newcomers, had a major hit with ''What Was I Thinkin' ,'' the first debut single to top the country charts in two years. Mr. Nichols, however, is the singer who's most likely to become country music's next Randy Travis or Alan Jackson. Mr. Nichols seemingly has it all: looks, style, a voice that's richer and has greater range than Mr. Jackson's and an unassailable country pedigree (his father was a long-haul trucker who played honky-tonk music in V.F.W. halls). Record executives along Nashville's Music Row hardly could have produced a more marketable package had they dreamed up Mr. Nichols in the boardroom.
Mr. Nichols's current album subscribes to the ''less is more'' aesthetic of a bygone Nashville, applying contemporary production values to arrangements that are roomy and free of extraneous soloing and gimmickry. Many of the songs Mr. Nichols sings plumb heartache, and quite a few take place in a tavern -- a familiar setting for the country hits of old that is growing scarce among the generic anthems of uplift that have dominated radio playlists in recent years.
''She Only Smokes When She Drinks'' is an empathetic ode to a woman left lonely, which echoes the Kitty Wells classic ''It Wasn't God Who Made Honky-Tonk Angels.''  ''Joe's Place,'' a skipping mid-tempo number that extols the virtues of ''pickled eggs in a jar'' and ''old boys and bankers sittin' side by side'' at the bar, could be the theme song for a down-home update of the television show ''Cheers.''
Augmenting the straight-ahead honky-tonk on Mr. Nichols's album are revisionist takes on country-soul (the swampy ''Everything's a Thing''), hillbilly jazz (Tom T. Hall's wry ''Life Don't Have to Mean Nothin' at All'') and Western swing (his current single, ''Cool to Be a Fool'').
The title of the album, ''Man With a Memory,'' could serve as Mr. Nichols's statement of purpose. When Country Music Television polled industry insiders last year to determine the 40 greatest men in country music, Mr. Keith, the star of the moment, made the cut, while two of Mr. Nichols's heroes, Gene Watson and Keith Whitley, didn't. Sure, it was a commercially motivated list, but the omission of Mr. Watson and Whitley was egregious (along with that of Marty Robbins and Ray Price), testimony to the industry's loss of institutional memory. Onstage, Mr. Nichols often talks about and sings hits by Mr. Watson and Whitley -- both are emotive stylists whose names rarely come up in conversation anymore. Mr. Nichols doesn't try to look or sound like his forebears; he pays tribute to them by building on their legacies.
MUSIC Bill Friskics-Warren is the author, with David Cantwell, of ''Heartaches by the Number: Country Music's 500 Greatest Singles'' (Vanderbilt University Press).
