SPIRIT OF HARLEM: A Portrait of America's MostExciting Neighborhood  By Craig Marberry and Michael Cunningham  Doubleday  ($27.50, hardcover)
Noah Stewart: In my senior year, I heard that Leontyne Price was doing a CD signing at Tower Records. I got there two hours early and was the second person on line. A couple of hundred people showed up. I was so nervous when I spoke to her. I told her, ''I want to be a professional opera singer and I'm trying out for Juilliard.'' She said: ''Well, you probably know I went there. I think that's the best school for you.'' I said, ''At the audition, I'm going to sing the spiritual I've heard you perform, 'Witness.' '' She said, ''That's not an ordinary song. Sing it from the heart.'' I felt like I had been blessed by the Pope.
I guess I was naïve because I never understood the prestige of Juilliard. When I told people I was applying, they said. ''Wow, that's the Harvard of the arts world!'' An African-American classmate asked me what I was singing at the audition. I told her I was singing four pieces: ''Where'er You Walk,'' by Handel; ''Selve Amiche'' by Caldara, which is in Italian; ''Les Berceaux'' by Faure, which is in French; and ''Witness,'' a Negro spiritual by Hall Johnson, an African-American composer. My classmate said, ''A Negro spiritual? No one sings a Negro spiritual at a Juilliard audition.'' I said, ''Well, I am.''
HIRSCHFELD'S HARLEM  By Al Hirschfeld  Glenn Young Books  ($75, hardcover)
Harlem was as familiar and as accessible to me as the blocks around your house are to you, or the fields around your homestead, or the ice floes around your igloo. When at long last I finally made enough money to buy my own house I bought one on the Upper East Side of Manhattan -- just below Harlem.
One of the biggest shocks of my life came only a few years after the end of Prohibition in the mid-30's. I was just walking down a Harlem street like I always did when a cruising patrol car pulled up next to me. Scared the heck out of me.
The cop looked at me like maybe I was crazy. What the hell was I doing walking there anyway. What did he mean, I asked him. Didn't I know, he says, it's not safe to walk around Harlem?
That incident had a very disquieting effect on me and in some way prompted the work you see before you now.
I had been so continuously enchanted with the Harlem I had grown up near and visited my whole life that I was unprepared to see, I resisted, the new Harlem realities that had crept upon her unguarded flanks. And what I began to seepost enchantment was something more akin to love and awe forthe Harlemites who carried on.
HARLEM ON THE VERGE  By Alice Attie  Quantuck Lane Press  ($35, hardcover)
From the introduction by Robin D.G. Kelley:
The rise in Harlem's land value was fueled by a federal grant of $100 million and another $250 million in tax credits -- the result of being designated an ''empowerment zone'' by the Clinton administration in 1994. The purpose of the Upper Manhattan Empowerment Zone is to support capital investment and various business ventures in Harlem, although it has focused more energy on attracting outside corporate capital than building up local businesses.
One of the UMEZ's big projects was the massive shopping center known as ''Harlem USA,'' which houses the Magic Johnson multiplex theater, an HMV record outlet and the Disney Store. Harlem is now home to Starbucks, Old Navy, the Gap, H&amp;M clothes store, Marshalls, and several other global chains.
The space now occupied by H&amp;M and Marshalls was originally designated as the site for the Harlem International Trade Center, but Governor George Pataki and his supporters rejected the center, despite strong protests from local Harlem business people. In fact, Reverend Butts not only opposed the Trade Center, but he committed ADC to work with outside developers who built this multimillion-dollar retail mall.
THE VIADUCT: A Harlem Thriller  By Grace F. Edwards  Doubleday  ($22.95, hardcover)
Three houses away from the corner of Lenox Avenue, he slowed again to glance in back of him. The streetlight was so dim he could not make out his own shadow. The stealthy echo of his footsteps followed him and he was glad for the sound.
Most of the buildings had been boarded up, and few people walked through the block. Even so, he had to be careful. The street was still empty. The house facing him was as dark as the others and he climbed the broken steps quickly and slipped inside.
The lobby was even darker but the stairs leading to the third floor were illuminated by the streetlight slanting through the window. He waded through boxes and bags stacked on the landings and nearly slipped when something stuck to his foot.
''Damn!''
He leaned against the wall, scraped his shoe on the edge of the step, then moved faster, as if he had already wasted too much time.
I'll be in and out. Let her know what's gain' on. What I'm gonna do.
Of the four apartments on the floor, three were sealed. He approached the door of the unsealed one and knocked once, then waited a breath before he rapped again, three times in quick, light succession. He listened in the dark to the dull scrape of the piece of two-by-four being lifted from the iron hasps. Then the door creaked open.
His mother cupped her hand over a candle burning in a small mayonnaise jar and stared at him in the wavering light.
''Conroy! I thought you was back in jail!''
NEW YORK BOOKSHELF/HARLEM
