In July 1979, as a member of the United States Olympic Sports Medicine Committee, I went to Puerto Rico to teach stress management and performance enhancement to athletes there for the Pan Am Games. I played basketball at Stuyvesant High School and at Harvard in the early 1950's, loved the game, and jumped at the chance when Coach Bob Knight invited me to work with the Pan Am team. I attended practices and sat on the bench during games.
That's how I met an 18-year-old fresh out of high school named Isiah Thomas. What amazed me was not only his talent, but also his poise and maturity.
He was supposed to be a second-stringer, but by the second week there was no stopping him. Playing with men much bigger and older, Thomas quickly became a starter, took charge and, to my mind, became the team captain.
Off the court, Thomas was relaxed and casual. But I had never seen anyone so focused, so intense, once a game started. As an athlete and strategist, even at 18, Thomas showed leadership qualities like vision, goal-setting, accountability and commitment.
We had a number of conversations on the importance of focusing on the target, and of playing to win. The team wound up winning the gold medal. I gave Isiah one of my books, and he contributed a jacket quotation for another, ''A Strategy for Daily Living.''
Meanwhile, my experience with Olympians helped me hone my ideas about how people in all walks of life could tap their hidden potential and maximize their performance. My work evolved into coaching financial traders at some of Wall Street's biggest firms.
Thus, as a longtime admirer of Thomas, and as a Knicks fan since the days of Dick McGuire, Ernie Vandeweghe and Carl Braun, I was elated when Thomas was hired by the Knicks, but not surprised when he began to turn around the team. There are lessons Thomas has to teach all of us.
He took the reins of a high-profile, high-payroll, terrible team. I feared that hungry Knicks fans might expect miracles out of him. Yet step by step, he has almost miraculously transformed the Knicks' hangdog self-image of losers.
When I am coaching traders, I regularly remind them of the importance of playing to win. It is clear that Thomas has demonstrated an uncanny understanding of this psychology from his earliest days.
Playing to win means visualizing a future far loftier than you ever thought possible. Have a plan; work the plan by implementing necessary steps. Couple this vision with a sense of urgency, developing a strategy that contains the critical ingredients for success.
What is the strategy? Demand accountability and get your people to commit to the results. Build momentum. Keep looking for what is missing or what has dropped out of your strategy. Make a diagnosis. Assess strengths and weaknesses. Find the right people. Build on their strengths. Pair people in a mentoring relationship. Constantly review your strategy. Don't be caught up in daily events; focus on executing the plan.
Isiah Thomas has understood this both as a player and as an executive. It is as relevant to sports as it is to business -- and to the business of life. His vision is to make the Knicks a playoff team. Some sportswriters seemed stunned at how quickly Thomas has moved, but he is not only churning his portfolio of people, he is also creating a new culture. As Madison Square Garden's chairman, James L. Dolan, said, ''You can recognize the new sense of urgency and excitement in the organization and a sense of expectation at the same time.''
What was missing? A point guard who would be the floor leader. Enter Stephon Marbury. Never mind that he's a local legend. Marbury is the right person for the right job.
''Commitment, courage, respect, trust and loyalty: those are the things I look for in a player,'' Thomas told reporters. ''Stephon has demonstrated three of them: commitment to winning, the courage to overcome things in his life -- coming from a tough background -- and loyalty, to family and friends.''
Marbury, Thomas said, understands what he must do to achieve the missing elements. ''You have to be able to respect and trust your teammates, and that's leadership,'' he said. ''The question is: Can Stephon lead men? I think he can.''
Marbury bought into the vision even before Lenny Wilkens arrived. His numbers prove that. First game: 8 assists. Sixth game: 17. Thomas knows what works for a player of Marbury's size and potential. ''As a little guy, you learn quickly that this is a big man's league,'' Thomas said. ''At first you just try to fit in; then you want to dominate. These are the stages. Stephon has proved he belongs. Now I hope he can understand what it takes to dominate.''
Thomas remarked that Marbury would ''no longer be judged on how many points he scores, but how he leads.'' Marbury scored 38 points against the Mavericks on Jan. 12, but the Knicks lost. Two games later, he scored only 8 points, but the Knicks crushed Seattle.
The resurgent Keith Van Horn appreciates Marbury's new mind-set. ''He dominated the whole game'' -- against Seattle -- ''without having to shoot,'' Van Horn said. ''He found guys on time, in rhythm.'' The two players -- antagonists when they were Nets teammates -- now seem to have formed a mutual admiration society.
The team's captain, Allan Houston, has also bought into Thomas's strategy. ''There is a vision,'' he said. ''We have to just move toward it.'' Over and over, Houston has used the word accountability.
In bringing Wilkens on board, Thomas decided that however much he would like to coach, it's more critical now to focus on executing his overall plan. And Wilkens is the ideal person to train Marbury in floor leadership. Wilkens does not shout much, but he is confident in his own ability to lead and to guide.
''The most important relationship on a basketball team is the relationship between the coach and the point guard,'' Thomas said. ''The player-mentor relationship between them is going to be ideal for Steph. You couldn't ask for a better fit.''
My mantra for chief executives and financial team leaders is the same one I see Thomas communicating brilliantly: teach your people to stretch, to perform past their limiting beliefs, to play over their heads. In the process, you are creating almost a satori-like state of ''no mind,'' an intense focus. At this level, you not only win, you also experience a profound joy.
Since I met him a quarter of a century ago, Isiah Thomas has grown enormously. Like the very best leaders, he is becoming a Zen master.
Back Talk Ari Kiev, a psychiatrist, is author of 15 books, including ''Trading to Win.''
