In the early 1970's, when developers were planning a high-rise apartment building on Columbus Avenue and 65th Street, they struck a deal with the city: if the developers included an open-air public space on the ground floor, they could build 63,000 additional square feet.
In the late 1980's, the 6,300-square-foot space was enclosed and occupied by what is now the American Folk Art Museum. In keeping with the agreement with the city, the museum was open to the public, free of charge. Now that the museum has opened a larger, permanent home on West 53rd Street, however, it may vacate the gallery, and residents are worried that the intent behind creating the public space may be subverted if a prospective new tenant moves in.
The possible tenant is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which owns the land underneath the building and operates a church next to it. The church has expressed interest in opening a public genealogical research center in the building.
The idea is still in the early stages of discussion, but some people say it would allow the church to ''double dip'' -- to benefit twice -- from the creation of the public area.
''The owner of the land got more value because the public space was built as part of it,'' said Hope Cohen, chairwoman of Community Board 7. ''So our position is that they shouldn't be allowed to benefit a second time by using the public space for their own interest.''
Councilwoman Gale A. Brewer, who represents the area, compared the situation to ''the fox in the chicken coop'' and added, ''We feel in the community that we want a real museum there, not an expansion of the Mormon church.''
A church spokesman, Scott Trotter, confirmed that his institution was discussing various options for the space, including a public genealogical research center, and was preparing a proposal for the City Planning Commission.
David Karnovsky, a lawyer for the commission, said, ''If that's something they want to consider for general use, we'd want it to be a resource for the public without there being a proselytizing and religious message associated with it.'' Although Mr. Trotter said any genealogy center in the space would be secular, genealogical research holds a special spiritual meaning for Mormons, who believe that dead relatives in the spirit world can be baptized by proxy.
The building above the gallery is owned by a real estate company, Banker &amp; Banker Realty. The company is responsible for coming up with a new occupant, who must be approved by both the church and the commission.
Joel Banker, managing partner of the company, said it had not made any decisions. But he added, ''We have a long and close relationship with the church, so we would tend to be positive with any suggestions that the church has.''
It is still uncertain whether the space will become vacant. Gerard C. Wertkin, the museum's director, acknowledged that maintaining the space had become difficult financially. But, he added, the museum was considering options. ''Anyone who says this is a 'done deal' would be wrong,'' he said.
TARA BAHRAMPOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: LINCOLN SQUARE
