IF New York City sells 300 new taxi licenses this year, the financier Andrew M. Murstein will be watching the proceedings as closely as any driver aspiring to own a cab.
Mr. Murstein is president of the Medallion Financial Corporation, a publicly traded company in New York that specializes in lending money to buyers of taxi licenses, known as medallions because of the metal tags affixed to the hoods of licensed cabs. His company, which traces its roots to taxis his immigrant grandfather bought nearly 70 years ago, has grown to a market capitalization of $161 million.
Last year, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg proposed selling 900 new medallions -- 300 a year for three years, starting this year -- to raise revenue. While Mr. Murstein said he was looking forward to the sale, it could portend trouble for his company's finances if it undercut the medallions' value. New York medallions served as the collateral for nearly 60 percent of the company's net loans as of the end of September.
But Mr. Murstein and a big shareholder in his company argue that the sale would be a boon, prompting a surge of interest in owning cabs.
''Nine hundred new medallions is a lot of new potential demand,'' said Joseph A. Jolson, chief executive of JMP Asset Management in San Francisco. JMP owns about 10 percent of Medallion's stock.
Mr. Murstein is so enthusiastic about the proposed new medallions, he said, that, for the first time, he expects that Medallion Financial would try to buy as many as 500 outright, rather than merely lending money to buyers. ''We'll either bid ourselves or back operators and take a share of the upside appreciation,'' he said.
Independent of the company, the Murstein family owns 150 medallions, a remnant of the 500 Mr. Murstein's grandfather accumulated.
Mr. Murstein's father, Alvin, is the chairman of Medallion Financial. The family controls more than 16 percent of the stock, according to a proxy statement filed last April. Its board includes prominent political names like Mario M. Cuomo, the former governor of New York.
New York City's sale could come at a crucial time for Medallion Financial. The company spent 2002 restructuring its finances. For that year, it reported a net loss of $12.6 million, or 69 cents a share, on revenue of $33.9 million, compared with a net loss of $4.1 million, or 24.5 cents a share, on revenue of $42.1 million the previous year. It returned to profitability in the final quarter of 2002, reporting net income of $188,171 on revenue of $7.6 million, and remained profitable through the first three quarters of 2003. It has not yet reported fourth-quarter results.
From a high of $31 in April 1998, the stock fell to $3.02 in July 2002, and has since rebounded to $8.82.
Medallion Financial also lends to taxi-medallion buyers in other cities. It offers asset-backed lending, taking assets like accounts receivable as collateral. And it lends to companies aiming to go public. Even so, with its portfolio of New York medallion loans, a hefty dip in medallion values could augur trouble.
New York froze its supply of medallions in 1937, when Mr. Murstein's grandfather bought his first one for $10. For the most part, medallion values have climbed since.
In 1996 and 1997, the city sold 400 more medallions, raising the total to 12,187. In 1997, the price of a driver-owned medallion reached $199,875, said Bruce Schaller, principal of Schaller Consulting, a transportation consultant based in Brooklyn. The next year, the price hit $229,000, a record.
But the price fell in 1999 and 2001, partly because of a driver shortage, Mr. Schaller said. When the economy was strong, drivers found jobs outside the industry.
During New York's economic slowdown, driving a cab has looked more attractive, he said, and medallion values, which reflect expected revenue from a cab's operation, have rebounded. In July, a driver-owned medallion sold for $220,214. A corporate medallion -- a license for a cab that the owner doesn't drive -- sold for $253,143. Prices have climbed faster for corporate medallions because of the growth of taxi fleets.
Mr. Schaller predicts that 900 additional medallions ''will be absorbed readily into the market because the demand for taxi service is so intense.''
Not everyone shares his optimism. Peter L. Hernandez is a New York cabdriver who financed his medallion with a loan from Medallion Financial. He worries that a sale would sting him financially.
''The only thing I have to prosper is my medallion equity,'' he said. ''If they pump new taxis into the industry, it devalues my medallion. It devalues my daily income, too.''
Mr. Murstein argues that a 25 percent taxi fare increase, also proposed for this year, would act as a counterweight, protecting medallion values. ''The city will probably do the medallion auction at the same time it bumps up meter rates,'' he said.
ALLAN J. FROMBERG, a spokesman for the city's Taxi and Limousine Commission, would not comment on the likelihood of a fare increase or of a medallion sale. Both are subject to the commission's approval. In late December, the commission released a draft of an environmental impact study, saying that selling more medallions would bring modest amounts of additional traffic and pollution. The study also said that a sale would undercut medallion values unless it was accompanied by higher fares.
Rather than hurting Medallion Financial, the auction could give its growth a boost, some analysts said. ''It's a source of new loan demand,'' said Henry J. Coffey Jr., an equity analyst at Ferris, Baker Watts in Washington.
The company's attempts at diversification elsewhere have had mixed results. In medallion lending, it has made inroads in Chicago and Boston. But Mr. Murstein said it had made fewer loans in Los Angeles than it had expected. Lately, it has turned its attention to San Francisco.
Medallion Financial has also expanded into advertising, selling space on the signs on top of taxis. Today, it controls about 60 percent of the taxi-top ad space in New York and sells ads in several other cities, including Tokyo. But it recently pulled out of 10 smaller cities, including Pittsburgh and Kansas City, Mo. Its advertising unit reported losses of $3.3 million for the first nine months of 2003.
Mr. Coffey said the company's advertising push had not been well timed. The company ramped up the business in the late 1990's, just before the economy slowed. In addition, the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, sapped the New York ad market.
Before the attacks, Medallion sold all of its taxi-top space in New York for several years, Mr. Murstein said. But for nearly two years after 9/11, it sold only 65 percent of the space each month. In June, it sold out again.
The attacks hurt Medallion Financial in other ways. About three weeks later, its $250 million line of credit expired, and its lead bank, the FleetBoston Financial Corporation, did not renew it. A spokeswoman for Fleet declined to comment.
In September 2002, Merrill Lynch, through its bank subsidiary, stepped in with a new line of credit. In the meantime, Medallion Financial began working to form its own bank.
The new bank, based in Salt Lake City, received regulatory approval in October and began doing business in December. It is officially an industrial loan corporation and is regulated by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Utah Department of Financial Institutions. It will make loans and accept federally insured deposits by selling certificates of deposit through brokers. It will not offer checking accounts; large industrial loan corporations chartered in Utah are not permitted to do so.
The new bank should halve Medallion Financial's borrowing costs, to 1.5 percent, or even lower, from 3 percent, Mr. Murstein said.
Combine that with the sturdiness of taxi medallion values, he said, and the company could be poised for profit gains, despite the setbacks of the last several years.
''My father and grandfather have been through things worse than 9/11 -- World War I, World War II,'' he said, adding, ''The medallions always do well.''
