RUTGERS 78, ST. JOHN'S 70
Even the modest goal of beating Rutgers and escaping sole possession of last place in the Big East proved insurmountable for St. John's on Saturday.
Rutgers, having a tough season of its own -- it was in next-to-last place in the Big East entering the game -- took over in the final six minutes behind the freshman guard Quincy Douby. When it was over, St. John's was staring at a 78-70 defeat, a six-game losing streak and solid evidence that it was the worst team in the conference.
The score was tied at 55-55 when the Red Storm's Tyler Jones dunked with 6 minutes 17 seconds remaining. But Douby made a 3-pointer on Rutgers's next possession, part of an 11-3 run from which St. John's could not recover. Douby made two more 3-pointers in a span of 45 seconds. He finished with 19 points and hit all 5 of his 3-point attempts, although he was only 2 for 10 on his 2-point attempts.
''Quincy hit those five 3-pointers in a row and that's what he's capable of doing,'' Rutgers Coach Gary Waters said. ''As a freshman, he's still in the process of learning what to do. He's doing more thinking than playing, and that slows him down. But one day you're really going to hear from this young man.''
On Saturday, it was the inability to stop a hot-shooting freshman that cost St. John's a victory. In the Red Storm's last game, it was a defensive lapse that led to a decisive dunk by Georgetown's Courtland Freeman with five-tenths of a second left.
St. John's is 4-12, 0-6 in the Big East and dragging along its first six-game losing streak since the 1996-97 season.
Ricky Shields also had 19 points for Rutgers (10-6, 2-4). Kyle Cuffe led St. John's with 19 points and 10 rebounds.
St. John's problems seem to run deeper than talent. With few exceptions, the Red Storm has been competitive in every loss this season, only to falter in the end.
The players are receiving credit for playing hard, but little else.
''I'm still proud of them in terms of their physical effort,'' said Kevin Clark, the Red Storm's interim coach. ''We still have a way to go in terms of mental toughness. That's what this came down to, a failure to execute at times, a failure to execute in transition, and defensive breakdowns. Physically, we're fine. Mentally, we need to mature and learn how to win.''
The frustration is starting to gnaw at some St. John's players. The reserve guard Andre Stanley was jawing at some Rutgers players near the end of the game, and the postgame locker room was even more somber than usual. The players vow to keep plugging, but they have yet to find a way to produce a Big East victory. Their best chance to win a conference game this season may come Wednesday at Alumni Hall, where they will play host to West Virginia, which is playing without its top scorer, Drew Schifino, who was dismissed from the team.
''I hate to keep saying it because it's the middle of the season, but we keep knocking on the door,'' Stanley said. ''We'll keep knocking on it until we knock it down.''
SETON HALL 83, VIRGINIA TECH 76
J. R. Morris scored 21 points off the bench to lead Seton Hall to a Big East victory at home.
Seton Hall (13-4, 3-2) won its second straight after dropping two straight conference games. Virginia Tech (8-8, 1-4) lost its third straight and fifth in six games. (AP)
WEST VIRGINIA 65, B.C. 62
Tyrone Sally had 18 points and D'or Fischer blocked a team-record 8 shots in West Virginia's home victory. Patrick Beilein made 6 free throws in the final 25 seconds to help seal the victory for the Mountaineers (10-6, 2-3 Big East). (AP)
RHODE ISLAND 75, FORDHAM 54
Dawan Robinson was 8 of 12 from the field and scored 18 points to lead visiting Rhode Island.
Dustin Hellenga, who hit four 3-pointers, added 16 points for Rhode Island (13-7, 2-4 Atlantic 10).
Drew Williamson led Fordham (4-12, 1-4) with 11 points. (AP)
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
