CHRISTOPHER WEBB was standing in the middle of a ring of model cars, about to pose for a photograph, when he noticed a troubling presence: a green one.
''I definitely don't want to be near green,'' he declared, his British accent flaring. Coming from a man poised to become one of North America's leading arbiters of color, this was a notable pronouncement. Not only is green out, apparently, but it has always been a somewhat star-crossed hue.
''You have to be aware of the historical sensitivities to color,'' Mr. Webb explained. In China, ''it's a color worn by men when they've split from their wives,'' he said. ''So it's not a highly popular color.''
It is? It's not?
Mr. Webb, 28, is not a household name, but soon it will be hard to miss his work. He is the manager of color trends in North America for General Motors, the world's largest automaker, which means he has the lead role in picking the exterior colors for Chevrolets, Pontiacs, Cadillacs, GMC's, Buicks, Saturns and Hummers, beginning with the 2005 models, which go on sale this summer.
Mr. Webb, a former fashion student who has been at G.M. only since 2001, says his first order of business is to return color to cars.
The coming trends? More metallic colors, silver blended with bolder shades like blue or orange, in contrast to the past decade of minimalist silver, gray, white and black. There will also be more splashes of primary colors.
''For so long we were in the neutral values,'' said Mr. Webb, who attributes this partly to anxiety about the approach of the millennium. ''The black, white, silver and beiges were very important. The whole neutral phase of silver has been around almost a decade. We're only moving out of it now. You'll see shocks of color happening.''
This parallels trends across the design world, from housewares to fashion, which has been adding more color each season, in a revolt against basic black. For spring 2004, fashion is showing more corals and oranges.
''Kitchen appliances were always just aluminum, just metal, just white,'' Mr. Webb said, referring to the past decade. ''Now you're seeing the whole range of kitchenware -- the fridges in baby blue, baby pink.''
Cars across the industry have just begun a transition period between neutral and bolder colors, Mr. Webb said. It is a moment of silvery blends named Cappuccino Frost and Light Bronzemist Metallic.
Some makes are farther ahead on the color wheel, like Hummer, which counts a high-wattage banana-yellow as one of its most popular colors. Karl Lagerfeld just bought a Hummer and had it painted a deep burgundy, Mr. Webb said.
Because the economy is stirring and terror fears are beginning to recede, ''people are more likely to explore products and try different things, be more expressive,'' he said.
Dr. G. Clotaire Rapaille, the founder of Archetype Discoveries Worldwide, a consumer research firm in Boca Raton, Fla., that advises the Big Three automakers, said: ''Colors represent the mood of the time. After 9/11, the mood was not very happy and more sober, so we had more black and white and gray. It was not proper to be too colorful.''
Now, he added, ''People are feeling better and they want color.''
Will Americans, who lately bought tame-toned S.U.V.'s by the millions, really go for color, the way they did in earlier eras, falling in love with brassy red Buick Skylarks in the 1950's and minty blue Corvettes in the 60's?
The auto industry, because of its manufacturing timetable, is often ''one trend late,'' Dr. Rapaille noted. The risk, he said, is that ''by the time they come with colors, we might have had another terrorist attack and people might not want colors.''
Mr. Webb's studio is in the General Motors Technical Center, a sprawling research and design complex that is a testament to 1950's Modernism, designed by Eero Saarinen and distinguished principally by a sculptured stainless-steel water tower. The center has a frozen-in-time quality to it; its distinctive design represents the last era in which G.M. was actually a design leader.
But the company would like to be a leader again. It has hired Robert A. Lutz, the former Chrysler president, as vice chairman for product development. He has given G.M.'s designers power that had been ceded to the company's bean counters.
Inside Mr. Webb's brightly lighted studio, a closely guarded area, are posters and displays outlining color trends, car seats that look woven from pinstripe suits, and miniature cars that serve as color samples. Mr. Webb works in a cubicle overflowing with shots of models torn from magazines, Guess ads, pictures from a Stella McCartney fashion show, a color sample from the rival automaker Toyota and a bamboo plant. (''It's the plant of the moment,'' he explained.)
So what will we see in the 2005's?
''More color coming into silver, and more color coming generally,'' he said. ''You'll start to see yellows and oranges happening now -- the oranges, the reds, the blues, all these different solid colors.''
And there will be new color technologies, like a teal that seems to shift from green to blue. It will appear this year on Pontiacs, Buicks and the Chevrolet SSR, which is an unusual cross between a pickup truck and a roadster that starts around $42,000.
''If you go around the car, it goes from quite an obvious green to an obvious blue,'' Mr. Webb said. ''The color actually moves. It's different from anything else on the road right now, and you obviously always like to have the new thing.''
Like many designers, Mr. Webb eschews color in his own closet. ''The majority of my wardrobe is blue or black,'' he said.
But it was clothing that got Mr. Webb into the auto industry. As a fashion student at the University of Brighton in England, he made two pairs of trousers for a show. Because he was partly sponsored by a British auto design company, he used materials often used in car interiors, specifically carbon and glass fiber, and inlaid the pants with silk.
Helen Emsley, who oversees the exterior and interior aesthetics of G.M.'s cars and trucks, was scouting for talent at the show and after looking at Mr. Webb's clothing designs asked if he would like to work for G.M. in America.
''When he came here, he knew nothing about paint,'' said Ms. Emsley, who is also British. But she liked his instincts.
''I don't just want car designers,'' Ms. Emsley said. ''I want people from different fields of design. He had a different way of looking at things, and an enthusiasm and personality.''
Car designers want colors that look ''like liquid metal, like mercury,'' Mr. Webb said. He developed a luminous, metallic eggplant for the Cadillac Sixteen, a show car G.M. created for the North American International Auto Show in Detroit last year that looked like a cross between a Batmobile and a Bentley. The Sixteen had 27 coats of paint; mass-produced cars have two or three coats, and often look coarser.
''In a production environment, colors can go a little bit darker or a little bit dirtier,'' Mr. Webb said. ''It's just the rules of requiring paint to be lasting on an automotive product.''
A car's colors are designed two to three years before the car itself appears on the road, in contrast to fashion, where colors are decided a few months before each season.
Clare Johnston, head of textiles at the Royal College of Art in London, said the basic approach in color forecasting runs across industries. Ms. Johnston was Mr. Webb's boss in the late 1990's, when he was an intern at Marks &amp; Spencer, the British clothing retailer; she said he had both an instinct for trends and the ability to communicate with executives.
''One of the things about designers is people assume we're all fashion lovies and flippant,'' Ms. Johnston said. ''But the training we have to go through means that people have been intellectually strongly challenged.''
''You look at eras of colors and cycles of color and what's likely to come back because we haven't had it for a while,'' she said. ''There's a lot of instinct, using what I'd call your antennae, what you feel is either lacking or suddenly rather exciting. Designers can see around the corner that other people can't see around.''
