Anita Scott does not know everything about basketball, but after 20 years of marriage, she knows a great deal about her husband.
So after Nets Coach Byron Scott arrived home from Miami at 4:15 a.m. Saturday, having questioned whether he was still getting through to his players or had lost them entirely, she realized the severity of the situation.
Scott said: ''I had a long talk with my wife this morning that really helped me. She doesn't understand a whole lot about basketball, but she understands people.''
He added: ''If a coach thinks he's gotten to the point where players aren't listening, then I don't think there's anything he can do. I didn't know at times if I was getting through or not. But I don't feel that way anymore. I'm not there yet.''
Days after a change in Nets ownership, the potential for a coaching switch may have increased. At the midpoint of this season, which has already been filled with struggle, the Nets (21-20) have lost five games in a row for the first time in the Jason Kidd era. On Friday, Scott suggested he was out of answers after the Nets were embarrassed at Miami, 85-64.
''Everybody is still listening to him,'' Kidd said. ''But he can't be there to shoot for us and rebound for us. It falls on our shoulders.''
Scott came under heavy scrutiny Dec. 13, when the Nets lost by 47 points at Memphis and Kidd screamed at the coaching staff in the locker room. If the Nets cannot regroup again, Rod Thorn, the team's president, has the authority from the new ownership group to make any necessary changes. Thorn continues to voice his support for Scott, but he has been particularly upset by the team's lackluster rebounding. He said the team had regressed.
''Whether his message is getting through or not is a legitimate question and a pertinent question, but it's hard to say,'' Thorn said. ''As to whether anything material will be done, you never know when those things come up. Right now, we need to concentrate on what we have.''
He added: ''All of us need to be accountable, not just players. All of us need to do our jobs better.''
At least the Nets are coming home, where they have won four of their last five. As Scott tries to secure his employment status, the work environment could not be any more bizarre. The Nets play their first game Sunday without a true home court or a natural pool of fans. They will remain in New Jersey for the immediate future, but barring a business disaster, the franchise belongs to Brooklyn.
Although a decent turnout is expected for Sunday's game against the Boston Celtics, many of those at Continental Arena could be coming to voice their displeasure. The Nets are second to last in the league in attendance and they realize that those figures can drop. The players, who had nothing to do with the sale of the team, are bracing for dwindling crowds, nasty signs and particularly aggressive hecklers.
''That's a moot point,'' Richard Jefferson said. ''I appreciate every fan who supports us, but realistically, the amount of support we get for the work we've put in and our work in the community and our work across the board -- sometimes you just need a change.''
The Nets have always taken pride in manufacturing their own energy. They won consecutive conference championships despite a paltry following. They dominated in the playoffs despite prolonged skids in the regular season. With their us-against-the-world attitude, the Nets often like to say no one is on their side. Now they may be right.
''The crowd won't make a difference,'' the reserve Lucious Harris said. ''It's not like we were getting sellouts anyway. I don't think they'll take it out on us, but they're mad that the team is moving. Sometimes you take it out on the people you see, and most of the time, they see us.''
The Nets can stage their own demonstration Sunday. If they truly want Scott out as coach, they can play exactly the way they did in Miami, and they may just get their wish.
The Nets have arrived at this point several times in the past couple of seasons and were able to use it as a springboard. There was no emotional team meeting Saturday, but Scott and Kidd chatted during practice and several players talked to one another about where this season was headed.
The most pertinent conversation of all might have involved Anita Scott. When her husband showed up at the practice facility, he sounded much different than he had the night before. He vowed to ''go back to the coaching handbook,'' ''let this thing play out,'' and ''see if we have that championship heart.''
He seemed ready for one final stand.
PRO BASKETBALL
