House Has History, Just Not the Right Kind
So far, there has not been an outpouring of bids for the three-bedroom ranch house in DeWitt, a suburb of Syracuse. True, it is 44 years old and needs renovations, but it is in an upscale area, comes with a large lot and is priced at only $75,500.
There is, though, the history.
In June, the owner, John T. Jamelske, pleaded guilty to charges that, at separate times from 1988 to 2002, he kidnapped three teenage girls and two women and imprisoned them on the property for periods ranging from two months to nearly three years, during which he often raped them.
The captives were locked in a concrete bunker Mr. Jamelske built beneath the back yard in the late 80's, dividing it into two dank rooms, each 12 feet square and 8 feet high.
He released four victims with warnings that they would be killed if they went to the police. The fifth, allowed to accompany him on an errand last April, sneaked a call to a relative, leading to her freedom after six months and to the revelation of the terrifying tale of suburban sex slavery.
Mr. Jamelske, 68, is serving 18 years to life in the Clinton Correctional Facility in Dannemora. Under his plea deal, his assets are to be used to compensate his victims, whom the authorities described as people easily preyed upon, including a 14-year-old runaway, a drug abuser in her 20's and a middle-aged immigrant from Vietnam.
The assets are substantial for a retired handyman who collected empty bottles and cans for the deposit money.
''It's in the vicinity of $1 million,'' mostly in real estate investments, Mr. Jamelske's lawyer, J. Michael Forsyth, said last week.
Proceeds from the house sale -- the bunker has been demolished -- are also earmarked for the victims, he said.
But in the two months the house has been on the market, the real estate agent handling the sale has received only one offer, which Mr. Forsyth called unacceptably low.
The agent, Carol A. Saleh, said this was a slow season for home buying generally, but ''the history is going to be a big deterrent to a lot of people, especially women.''
Black, White, And Yellow Cabs
In 1999, after the actor Danny Glover publicly complained that New York City taxi drivers refused to pick him up because he was black, the city stepped up its undercover crackdown on drivers who illegally refuse pickups because of race, disability or destination.
Offending drivers began having their taxi licenses suspended on the spot, instead of receiving summonses and being allowed to drive until their hearings. And, after the hearings, more drivers had their licenses revoked after a first unjustified refusal; previously, that action was usually taken after three such refusals.
In April 2002, a judge ruled that the immediate suspensions violated drivers' rights; the city did not appeal and ended summary suspensions. In July 2002 another judge ruled against the faster revocation policy; this time the city did appeal.
Recently, a state appellate court removed that red light for the city, reversing the lower-court ruling and upholding the quicker revocations.
The Taxi and Limousine Commission said last week that pickup-refusal revocations had plunged even before the ruling against the quicker revocations -- to five in the year ended June 30, 2002, from 76 in the previous 12 months. (There was only one in the year ended last June 30.)
This shows, the agency maintains, that though illegal pickup refusals are hardly history, the tougher policies took many of the worst offenders off the road even before the court rulings.
Following Up
