VAUGHN REALE acknowledges that when he was much younger, he did not always champion the cause of safe and friendly skateboarding.
''Yes, I guess it's true,'' he said. ''I skateboarded fast down the street, scared some older people. I did it on park benches and on private property sometimes, too. But, really, no one gave us another alternative. No one was interested in giving skateboarders a place to go.''
Mr. Reale, 38, is now the mayor of Margate, an increasingly year-round Atlantic County shore town. And he is among a growing number of city officials around the state who want to provide that place for what has, in their minds, been thought of as an outlaw group for too long. Mr. Reale has convinced his fellow town commissioners, even 72-year-old Sigmund Rimm, who is otherwise not a skateboard enthusiast, that it is time to acknowledge that skateboarding is as mainstream and worthy of recreational space as soccer and basketball.
''Honor students skateboard, too,'' Mr. Reale said.
But that is not the reception that skateboarders have received just a few miles down the road in Cape May. There, an ordinance was recently proposed to ban even carrying a skateboard on public property, including - and especially - the beachfront promenade. Theoretically, that would have meant you could legally carry a weapon like a knife past the shops and arcades, but not a skateboard.
After an uproar over the idea, Mayor Jerome E. Inderweis of Cape May persuaded the city commission to back off. ''I think we went a little too far,'' he said. ''I have 10 grandchildren, and I don't want to see kids having a hard time.''
Nonetheless, Cape May, like towns around the state from Fanwood to Morristown to Merchantville to Collingswood, bans skateboarding downtown or near municipal property. Though the rationale is that skateboarders either destroy public property or are injured while doing tricks, Mr. Reale says he is annoyed that skateboarders are perceived as criminals first and children second.
''Sure, we should have rules about destroying public property or running over pedestrians,'' he said, ''but you can break a window with a baseball, too, and no one is thinking of banning that on public property.''
Federal statistics show that skateboarders are far less susceptible to injury, or injuring others, than in years past. The Consumer Product Safety Commission noted that there were 51,000 injuries - but no deaths - from skateboarding in 1999, the last year monitored. That is one-third the number of injuries recorded in 1977.
The commission said that though even more youths engage in skateboarding, they are doing so more safely because of better boards and the more frequent use of helmets and pads.
The slowdown in injuries comes, too, the commission noted in its statistics, as 5.8 million children younger than 19 have taken up skateboarding, far more than participate in sports like tackle football and ice hockey. Instead of mere transportation, skateboarding has become more of a sport, particularly in the wake of X-Games sponsored by ESPN and advocacy by Tony Hawk, the skateboard trickster from California.
''Statistically, there are more kids skateboarding than playing Little League, so that seems pretty mainstream to me,'' said Mr. Hawk, 35, who was World Champion in extreme skateboarding 11 times in his teens and 20's. Now he is the face of several video games, a skateboard manufacturer and an icon for extreme sports enthusiasts.
''In the old days, I think it was the jock community that just hated something new,'' Mr. Hawk said. ''Now, when people finally realize lots of kids want to skateboard and they build parks, they find more people use them than tennis courts.''
So, slowly, towns around New Jersey are trying to find places for would-be X-Gamers to do their tricks.
In the mid-1990's, Medford, a primarily wooded and wealthy borough on the edge of the Pine Barrens in Burlington County, found it had an unexpected police problem.
''A lot of the developments here don't have sidewalks, so the kids, if they wanted to skate, they went downtown, where they drove business owners and shoppers crazy,'' said Beth Richmond, the director of recreation in the borough. ''The police would tell them to stop skating, but then they would say, 'Where are we supposed to go?' They would leave point X and gather at point Y, and it would start all over again.''
Meanwhile, Medford was planning a big recreation park project, with walking trails and tennis courts and soccer fields -- all the usual suburban accouterments.
''The police themselves came to the rec council and asked to set aside room for skateboarders -- I'm guessing no one thought of it before that,'' Ms. Richmond said. Then a group of 50 or 60 young skateboarders came to the city council at the suggestion of the police department. ''The council was impressed,'' Ms. Richmond said. ''They were polite and respectful, and the council ended up letting them help plan the park.''
The 30,000-square-foot Freedom Park Skatepark was dedicated in June 2000, and since then there have been no liability claims and only three major injuries, according to Ms. Richmond.
''It's pretty amazing,'' she said. ''I guess it's that parents know skateboarders will fall and have them padded for it. On a soccer field, you don't expect a pothole, so when your kid falls and fractures his arm, you sue. Skateboarders and skateboard parents seem to have a different attitude.''
But while some towns have found compromising with skateboarders to be advantageous, others are still going through certain pains.
Ocean City, Clifton, Carteret and Highlands, for instance, have built skateboard parks with heavy use and few community rough spots. But in Pompton Lakes, a skateboard park that opened last fall was closed for a time almost immediately when neighbors complained about skateboarders yelling, cursing and playing loud music into the night. The city council finally had to install a $14,000 chain-link fence around the park, make users wear stickers on their helmets to identify locals versus out-of-towners, and adopt fines for noise-code violators. Last summer, Millstone banned skateboarders near the town's Little League fields, fearing damage and delinquency, despite some parents' complaints that the ban discriminated against their skateboarding children.
Dr. Joel Fish, a Philadelphia sports psychologist who wrote ''101 Ways to Be a Terrific Sports Parent'' (Simon &amp; Schuster, 2003), says that the outlaw stereotype of skateboarders has been tough to break down, especially for parents who never had skateboarding as part of their youth.
''Some kids are attracted to skateboarding because they are risk-takers, and there is that kind of thrill in skateboarding,'' he said. ''Some kids, I believe, go to it as a reaction to the structure of traditional sports, and that is why some adults don't understand it. There is a free play associated with it that doesn't match up these days with the highly organized youth sports scene.''
But while other nontraditional sports have not been threatening to adults -- ultimate Frisbee, say, or canoeing -- skateboarding and its distinctive language, dress and style have alienated some adults, Dr. Fish said.
''The irony is that parents today lament the free play of their youth, when all you had to do was go to a ball field and find some other kids to play a game, not have a million parents decide that for you,'' he said. ''So here you have skateboarding, which is precisely that, and adults don't understand it.''
John Tait, of Voorhees, chose to try to understand. At a 13th birthday party for his son, Doug, 20 friends came over for a traditional set of activities indoors.
''But all of a sudden, I looked around and everyone was out skateboarding,'' Mr. Tait said. ''I always thought these were kids who just wrecked up property and got in trouble with the police. But I knew Doug and his friends weren't doing that.''
He sensed, however, that the boys were acquiring a reputation as being bad just because they were skateboarding. As a member of a community outreach program at his church, Ashland Evangelical Presbyterian, he decided that finding a safe place for children to use their skateboards would be a good youth project. So, in late November 1997, the Ashland Skatepark opened, a down-home bunch of half-pipes and racing courses in the parking lot of the church. About 30 to 50 youths come each Saturday to use the park.
''Let's just say that I was not pro-skateboard, but pro-kid,'' said Mr. Tait, who still supervises the park. ''I've learned to skateboard myself over the years. Why make the kids who do this instead of baseball or soccer into some kind of criminal when it's another way to have fun?''
Other towns are building skateparks or planning to do so. In Brick Township, a $2.3 million expansion of Drum Park, which is expected to be finished in April, will include a skatepark. And East Brunswick and Franklin are planning small ones.
''Every new sport -- every new thing in general -- takes time for people to get used to,'' said Josh Rabinowitz, publisher of the site skateboarddirectory.com. In fact, he said, skateboarding is not that new, having been started in California and Hawaii as surfers put wheels on mini-surfboards in the 1940's and 1950's. ''I guess skateboarding attracted loners and the disenfranchised at first,'' he said, ''but now I think it is more the individualistic kid, the one who wants a little bit more freedom than the soccer guy and all his coaches. Look at Tony Hawk. He is squeaky clean. Does milk commercials. He's a role model no matter what his sport.''
But even Mr. Hawk would no doubt be frustrated in Cape May. Though you can carry a skateboard around town, you are still not allowed to use it on city-owned property or the wide walkway along the beachfront.
''I know -- I was a kid myself once and did things adults didn't appreciate,'' Mayor Inderweis said. ''But you can't have destruction of city property, and you can't scare everyone who comes here for a good time. We have narrow streets, and lots of people who walk on them. The skateboarders will just have to find other places to go.''
