FOR Steve Greenberg, the job is ''sort of a perfect assignment.''
''I know baseball,'' Greenberg explained. ''I know the people involved in this case. I think I have a pretty good understanding of the dynamics of the ball club.''
For others, however, Greenberg's handling of the sale of the Milwaukee Brewers comes as a curious development in baseball history.
Greenberg, a former minor leaguer player, is managing director of Allen &amp; Company investment bankers. He is also the former deputy commissioner of Major League Baseball, having served during Commissioner Fay Vincent's abbreviated term from September 1989 to September 1992.
Greenberg was not forced out with Vincent and, in fact, was invited to remain in his position, but he departed when it became obvious that his role was becoming irrelevant.
When he announced his resignation, Greenberg said he had been excluded from baseball's ''decision-making process that previously had been an integral part of my duties as deputy.''
The curious link to Greenberg's involvement with the Brewers is that Bud Selig, the commissioner and longtime owner of the Brewers, was in the forefront of the move to oust Vincent and therefore also paved the way for Greenberg's eventual departure. As chairman of the executive council, in effect, acting commissioner, Selig had increasingly left Greenberg out of discussions and decisions.
But time and business obviously change the landscape of relationships. ''I've been doing some other work for Major League Baseball,'' Greenberg said. ''I'm not a stranger to these people. In the last two years at Allen &amp; Company, I've been working with Major League Baseball on a variety of things.''
Greenberg, a co-founder of the network now called ESPN Classic, said he was working with baseball officials on an attempt to initiate a baseball cable network. He has worked with the Chicago teams on their cable network and he represented Fred Wilpon in his acquisition of Nelson Doubleday's 50 percent share of the Mets. ''So this is not out of the blue,'' he said of the Brewers' sale.
As for his relationship with Selig, Greenberg said Selig was ''very gracious'' when Vincent hired him as deputy commissioner and when Selig asked him to stay on as deputy. Greenberg recalled that Vincent's ouster was not a personal vendetta but a business decision. Selig, Jerry Reinsdorf of the Chicago White Sox and other owners wanted to remove Vincent so he would not interfere with their labor strategy for the negotiations with the players union.
''Jerry Reinsdorf is among my better friends,'' Greenberg said. ''He's been a friend for more than 20 years. Sometimes it works out that you have two friends that don't get along. That's life. But Fay is a dear friend.''
And now, in effect, Selig is a business partner.
Japanese Closers Change
Shingo Takatsu is coming; Kazuhiro Sasaki is going.
The difference in the paths of the Japanese closers to and from the United States is that the Chicago White Sox, among other teams, pursued Takatsu aggressively while the Seattle Mariners are reluctantly going to let Sasaki forgo the last year of his contract with them.
''He's evidently got some issues at home that he wants to be closer to his wife and kids,'' Bill Bavasi, the Mariners' general manager, said of Sasaki. ''He made it clear that he was serious about it. We still have to get it done. We told him we'd do our best to accommodate him. His intention is to sever the two-way obligation and sign in Japan.''
Sasaki, who gained 119 saves in his first three seasons as Seattle's closer, encountered a combination of ineffectiveness and injury last season, lost his job and finished with only 10 saves. Now he is prepared to give up at least $9 million by going home.
''He's real healthy; he's in great shape, throwing real well,'' Bavasi said. ''He was prepared in our mind to reclaim a dominant role as a closer.'' But the Mariners will not be without a replacement.
They have Eddie Guardado, a free agent, whose 41 saves for Minnesota were second most in the American League last season; Shigetoshi Hasegawa, who had 16 saves in Sasaki's absence; and Rafael Soriano, a youngster whose future the Mariners like.
''We have some pretty solid people in the bullpen,'' Bavasi said.
The White Sox thought they had a solid closer in Billy Koch, who led the A.L. in 2002 with 44 saves for Oakland. But he faltered last season, losing his job and finishing with only 11 saves for Chicago.
Koch's performance prompted the White Sox to pursue Takatsu, who surpassed Sasaki last season as Japan's career saves leader.
Orosco's 'Fire' Ebbs
Arizona General Manager Joe Garagiola Jr. was explaining last Wednesday why the Diamondbacks signed reliever Jesse Orosco as a free agent this off-season. Orosco, after all, will turn 47 years old three weeks into the season.
''I think it starts with which hand the ball comes out of,'' Garagiola said of the left-handed Orosco. Always in demand, left-handed relievers have the greatest career longevity of any players.
Orosco has pitched in the major leagues for 24 years and has appeared in 1,252 games, most ever for a pitcher. He worked in 65 games last season for San Diego, the Yankees and Minnesota.
''He's someone who at his age proved last year to be very durable and effective in that role,'' Garagiola said. ''We're not bringing him in for some publicity stunt value. If he didn't think and we didn't think he could compete for a job, we wouldn't do it.''
''But more importantly,'' Garagiola added, ''I have enough confidence and have been around enough veteran players to feel confident with the assumption that he still wants to compete. I don't think at his age and stage of his career that he feels the need to go to spring training just to go to spring training.''
At the same time, Garagiola acknowledged a reality of the game. ''It gets to the point,'' he said, ''where they say, 'I know I can do it, but I don't want to do it.' The good ones reach the point where they have self-awareness and say enough is enough.''
Funny that Garagiola should have offered that observation at that moment. As he said it, he mentioned that he had just received a telephone message from Orosco's agent saying, ''Jesse has made a decision about spring training; call me.''
So Garagiola called Alan Meersand and learned Orosco had decided against a 25th season.
''He's retiring,'' Garagiola said later in the day. ''He'd been thinking about it for a while. As we were saying, he's recognizing what it would take. He said, 'I just don't feel the fire anymore.' I said, obviously that's the right decision. It's silly to go to spring training just to go to another spring training. The business is tough enough. If you're not committed in your heart, it's silly to do it.
''He's had a great career and it would be bad to end it on a sour note. I'm sorry he won't be around for our younger players. But look at it this way. I won't have to be the guy who releases Jesse Orosco at the end of spring training.''
On Baseball
