Last year, Gov. George E. Pataki proposed a $90.8 billion budget, then sounded alarms that the State Legislature had caused a ''fiscal train wreck'' when it added $2 billion in spending. He even suffered through the humiliation of the Legislature's overriding his vetoes because he believed that the budget had grown too large.
This year, with the economy just beginning to revive, the governor has proposed a budget of $99.8 billion, 10 percent more than he proposed last year and 7.5 percent more than the budget that legislative leaders thought they enacted.
Yet in his budget address, Mr. Pataki said this year's proposed budget was based on ''sound fiscal policies,'' and in a press release, he asserted that it increased spending only 1.5 percent over last year's plan.
How can that be, some lawmakers and budget experts ask.
In the weird and wacky world of Albany, everything depends on how you count, and none of the major players count the same way.
Mr. Pataki's senior budget aides blame the Legislature for the rise in spending, saying legislative leaders badly underestimated the real cost of the budget they passed last May, an assertion Senate and Assembly budget experts dispute.
The finger-pointing aside, one thing is certain: this year the governor has proposed a budget that not only continues the state-supported spending the Legislature added last year but increases it by about $3.2 billion, to $63.4 billion. State-supported spending does not include federal aid.
That $3.2 billion amounts to a 5.5 percent increase, the second-highest rise in state spending Mr. Pataki has put forward in his nine-year tenure, exceeded only by the 8.5 percent rise he proposed in 1998 an election-year budget, analysts say.
''He's accepting all the spending increases they did last year, and he's leaving in the tax increases, too,'' said Edmund J. McMahon, an analyst with the Manhattan Institute, a conservative group. ''He's basically seeing them and raising them.''
For his part, the governor has been reluctant to openly bash the Legislature for the rise in spending, an indication he is not seeking a budget battle like the one he went through last year. But he has gently suggested the Legislature's refusal to rein in spending as he proposed last year, especially in Medicaid, the main federal-state health insurance program for the poor, has left the state with an inexorably growing bill.
''We would have been in tremendous shape had it not been for the budget that was adopted,'' the governor said on Tuesday.
Legislative leaders continue to say that the cost of the budget they passed for the current fiscal year, which ends March 31, will not exceed $92.8 billion including federal aid. But the budget director, Carole E. Stone, has maintained that the Legislature's budget will end up costing about $1.6 billion more.
In addition, the state paid about $1.9 billion in bills from the previous fiscal year in the current one, because the Legislature was slow to issue bonds the governor wanted to help close the gap. That inflated spending for the current budget even more.
Finally, after the budget was enacted, Congress came through with extra federal aid, a windfall of $1.2 billion in additional money for Medicaid, after Washington adjusted the formula governing the program. The state also received about $560 million in additional aid to help New York City recover from the attack on the World Trade Center, which the Pataki administration shows on its books as state spending, even though it only passed the federal money on to the city.
Meanwhile, the faltering economy drove up the number of people on welfare and those seeking government-supported health care. Those trends, coupled with a few other unexpected costs, added $160 million to the yearly Medicaid tab, budget officials said. Because the Legislature did not cut back the growth of Medicaid, the Pataki administration found itself fighting a losing battle to keep costs down, budget officials said.
''You can't get it all out,'' said one senior budget aide, speaking on condition of anonymity. ''The combination of legislative largess in the current year and the fact of the economic situation drives these costs up.''
In the end, budget officials say, the grand total of spending for the fiscal year that ends March 31 will be $98.3 billion. For the coming year, the governor, who cultivates an image as a fiscal conservative, chose not to devise a budget that would cut spending back to take into account the loss of one-time revenues, like the extra federal aid for Medicaid, budget analysts said. Instead he added $1.5 billion in spending, bringing next year's grand total, under his plan, to $99.8 billion. Not counting the federal aid, the total would be $63.4 billion.
''His approach has not been to cut spending in this budget,'' said Diana Fortuna, an analyst with the Citizens Budget Commission, a nonprofit business-financed watchdog group. ''It's much more a status quo budget.''
Pataki aides argue that state spending will continue to grow because the Legislature did not take steps last year to rein in programs like Medicaid. Kevin Quinn, the spokesman for the State Budget Division, said that if the same budget were adopted next year as this year, spending would shoot up to $103.2 billion, driven largely by Medicaid, debt service and higher costs for pensions and health benefits for state workers. Indeed, the administration is proposing cutting back Medicaid by $800 million this year, just to keep the growth in what the state spends on the program in the ballpark of $672 million.
Legislative leaders deny they are to blame. Aides to the Senate Majority Leader, Joseph L. Bruno, and the Assembly Speaker, Sheldon Silver, say that the additions the Legislature made in May to the governor's proposed budget totaled about $2 billion and that they raised taxes by $2.8 billion to pay for those. They contend the governor controls spending. The Legislature cannot be held responsible, they said, if the administration allowed spending to rise steeply once additional federal aid came through in the fall.
''That's flat out wrong,'' said John McArdle, a spokesman for Senator Bruno. ''We appropriated less than $2 billion in additions to the governor's budget and we paid for it.''
