Debt Clock Will Tick On
Q. Now that the Durst real estate empire has bought the last holdout properties on the Avenue of the Americas between 42nd and 43rd Streets for an office tower, what will become of the National Debt Clock the Dursts put up on that block?
A. It is likely to move one block north. Douglas Durst, president of the Durst Organization, said it was considering putting the clock ''over or next to the entrance'' of the Durst building at 1133 Avenue of the Americas, between 43rd and 44th Streets. But there is one problem, Mr. Durst said: ''It doesn't quite fit.'' If it cannot be placed there, he said, it will go to another Durst building.
The green and white sign, facing northbound traffic on a four-story building just south of 43rd Street, has two electronic figures that are constantly changing: ''Our National Debt'' was more than $7.006 trillion late last week and was rising by more than $1,400 a second; ''Your Family's Share'' was more than $76,470 late last week.
The billboard-size clock was put up by Mr. Durst's father, Seymour B. Durst, in the late 1980's to call attention to government borrowing. It was turned off for nearly two years while the federal government ran a surplus, but in July 2002 it was turned back on.
In December, Douglas Durst completed an effort begun 36 years earlier by his father when he bought the last of 32 parcels on the eastern end of the city block, where the debt clock now sits. He intends to build a 50-story, $1 billion office tower that will include the New York headquarters for Bank of America. The small structures on the site, mostly one- and two-story buildings that house fast food and T-shirt shops, will be demolished.
Shipshape on 44th
Q. What's that building on 44th Street, west of Fifth Avenue, with carved windows that look like the backs of pirate ships?
A. That's the New York Yacht Club, matey, at 37 West 44th. Inaugurated Jan. 20, 1901, on land donated by J. Pierpont Morgan when he was the club's commodore, the clubhouse is a spectacular Beaux-Arts creation of Whitney P. Warren, who went on to design much of Grand Central Terminal. This was the sixth clubhouse for the yacht club, which was founded in 1844.
The most prominent features of the elaborately carved Indiana limestone front are three windows modeled after the sterns of old Spanish galleons. The neo-Baroque carving depicts sea creatures, flowing water, braids of seaweed and festoons of shells.
The equally lavish interior includes a grill room that imitates the ''tween decks'' of an old ship, with curved open beams across the ceiling and walls that incline inward, as a ship's hull would. ''Except for the absence of motion, one might fancy oneself at sea,'' a contemporary newspaper account said of the space. The club's 100-by-45-foot Model Room displays models of past America's Cup defenders.
The America's Cup trophy, for supremacy in large-yacht racing, was first won in 1851 by the New York Yacht Club schooner America. The cup was housed at the club from 1901 to 1983, when Australia ended the winning streak.
It Grows in Brooklyn
Q. What is the biggest tree in New York City?
A. According to ''New York City Trees; A Field Guide for the Metropolitan Area,'' by Edward Sibley Barnard (Columbia University Press, in consultation with the city Parks and Recreation Department, 2002), the tree with the largest diameter is an American hornbeam in Prospect Park in Brooklyn, southwest of the Boathouse. It measures 144 inches in diameter, or 4 yards. (This is former Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern's favorite tree, the book notes.)
A tulip tree beside a home in Riverdale, the Bronx, measures 150 feet tall.
MICHAEL POLLAK
F.Y.I.
