Dynamite and wrecking balls aren't the only things that destroy buildings. Some buildings, even historic landmarks, are demolished by neglect.
Such is the case with New Brighton Village Hall, an 1871 Second Empire building that served as the seat of government for a large swath of the north shore of Staten Island before the consolidation of New York in 1898.
Although the structure was declared a landmark in 1965 and is one of only three village halls left in the city, it has been vacant and in decline since 1968.
Now the Department of Buildings has determined that the hall is unsafe and must be torn down.
''From a structural perspective, it cannot be saved,'' said Ilyse Fink, a department spokeswoman, adding that the city was preparing to solicit bids to tear it down. ''The roof is gone. The interior of the building is rotted.''
Retrovest, a real estate development company in Burlington, Vt., has owned the building since 1985, when it was already in poor shape from years of neglect. James Ferreri, president of the Preservation League of Staten Island, and other preservationists have tried over the years to prompt the company to shore up the structure and keep the rain out, to no avail.
''We made it a top priority, and we tried to get the Landmarks to act,'' Mr. Ferreri said, noting that the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission can sue the owners of landmarks for failing to maintain the properties.
Robert B. Tierney, chairman of the commission, said the city had worked with the owner on various alternatives: developing the building as condominiums, leasing it to a nonprofit group that would turn it into elderly housing or selling it.
''Nothing was coming to fruition and we sued them,'' he said. That was in 2002. The suit, which the city intends to pursue even after the building comes down, is still pending. Neither the owner of Retrovest nor his lawyer on Staten Island returned repeated phone calls last week.
Mr. Ferreri said he hoped Retrovest would be held accountable by the courts, if only to deter owners of landmarks from letting them fall down and then selling the land where they once stood.
''If these owners get away scot-free, they'll make a profit on one of the most important buildings in New York,'' he said. ''But we need to set an example with this building and put the fear of God in them.''
JIM O'GRADY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NEW BRIGHTON
