BROOKLYNITES who would be displaced by a new arena for the Nets are howling about the proposal, while many people who live elsewhere in the borough are big boosters of the idea. But among merchants and residents who are in between -- living outside the area where the arena would be built but in the close vicinity -- there is no such clear consensus.
Billy Bob, a manager of Jimmy Jazz, a clothing store on nearby Fulton Street, is happy about the idea, which, if it leaps numerous regulatory and other hurdles, will bring a 19,000-seat arena and other improvements to Flatbush and Atlantic Avenues in Downtown Brooklyn. Mr. Bob expects brisk sales for basketball paraphernalia emblazoned with the borough's name. ''This will be great for business,'' he said. ''It will bring more people in.''
Ludlow Beckett, however, who owns a home furnishings store on Greene Avenue, is not convinced that basketball fans will patronize his shop. ''They will be going to a Red Lobster, not to small, unique stores,'' said Mr. Beckett, president of the Fulton Area Business Association, which represents 60 merchants. ''This won't bring foot traffic into our shops.''
For some Brooklynites, the prospect of Manhattan-style vehicular traffic is particularly unsettling. ''Whenever there is a game, Atlantic and Flatbush Avenues will become parking lots,'' said Councilwoman Letitia James, who represents much of the area, including Prospect Heights. ''People moved outside of Manhattan to get away from the traffic and noise.''
Clarence Nathan, co-owner of Premium Goods, a sneaker store on Fulton Street, says he is unsure what the arena's impact will be, but he tends to pessimism as both a businessman and a resident. ''I live around here, and the traffic will be really bad,'' he said. ''There will be no parking. I don't think it will increase business. They're coming here for the game, and then they'll leave. But who knows? Maybe we'll get more people.''
Other merchants, however, are even more optimistic than Mr. Bob, the owner of Jimmy Jazz. Bob Killen, owner of La Bagel Delight on Seventh Avenue in Park Slope, sees the arena as a great economic boon for the borough. ''It's going to create a lot of jobs,'' he said. ''It will be great for business. We would like to open a store right there.''
In some ways, reaction to the plan seems to vary according to how far someone lives from the site. Patti Hagan, who lives two blocks away, worries that the proposal will undo her eclectic, reviving neighborhood. ''This great urban mix will be crushed,'' said Ms. Hagan, a member of the Prospect Heights Action Coalition.
Bernard Graham, who lives about 20 blocks away in Park Slope, has a rosier outlook.
''It's good for Brooklyn, it's good for Brooklyn's economy, and it's good for Brooklyn's self-esteem,'' said Mr. Graham, president of the Park Slope Civic Council, which represents 800 residents. ''A lot of small cities identify with their professional sports teams, and Brooklyn is no different from a small city.''
One group of residents seems to fully support the stadium: Nets fans. ''Even at my age, I still get that feeling of being in the N.B.A. when I make a layup,'' said Darrell Canada, a 45-year-old construction worker who lives at the Raymond V. Ingersoll Houses. ''Growing up in Brooklyn, I know that that court gives kids hope.''
Mr. Canada added : ''We're talking about bringing opportunities to an impoverished community. They're talking about losing a few parking spots.''
DENNY LEE
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: DOWNTOWN BROOKLYN
