The two candidates vying to head District Council 37, the city's largest municipal union, are each predicting that they will emerge victorious when the union's 327 delegates vote on Tuesday night.
Lillian Roberts, the incumbent executive director of the 120,000-member union, is being challenged by Charles Ensley, president of the 15,000-member social workers' local, one of the 56 locals within the council.
''We think that we have picked up momentum as the campaign intensified,'' Mr. Ensley said in an interview on Friday. ''We have increased what we think will be our margin of victory.''
Ms. Roberts also forecast victory. ''Yes, I'm confident,'' she said in a set of written responses to several questions.
Other unions, and City Hall, are closely following the campaign because past leaders of District Council 37, like Victor Gotbaum and Stanley Hill, have traditionally set the tone for municipal labor relations and often negotiated contracts that set the pattern for other city unions.
In the campaign, Ms. Roberts has emphasized her experience, while Mr. Ensley has stressed that he would seek to increase the union's organizing and political activity to help return it to its former standing as the nation's premier union for city workers.
In her written responses, prepared with the help of her campaign lawyer, Larry Cary, Ms. Roberts said, ''I've done more to make this union function properly in my 20 short months than what my predecessors did in the decades they were in office.''
The campaign has taken an unusual turn because Ms. Roberts has focused her attacks not on Mr. Ensley, but on his running mate for treasurer, Mark Rosenthal. Mr. Rosenthal was elected the council's treasurer 23 months ago when he ran on Ms. Roberts's slate, but the two had a falling-out.
In numerous mailings, Ms. Roberts has accused Mr. Rosenthal of corruption, noting that his annual salary is more than $200,000. Hers is $250,000.
Mr. Ensley said he found the accusations puzzling because Mr. Rosenthal, who also serves as president of a local representing city drivers and park employees, came to prominence in the late 1990's by exposing and publicizing corruption at the district council. Afterward, he began receiving death threats. More than 20 council officials were convicted of embezzlement or vote-rigging.
''I don't understand why they're attacking Mark personally,'' Mr. Ensley said. ''Mark is the most courageous labor leader I have ever met. District Council 37 would still be a cesspool of corruption if it hadn't been for him.''
Ms. Roberts has accused Mr. Rosenthal of improper motives in seeking to engineer a deal in late 2002 in which 3,000 welfare recipients would become members of his park employees local, receiving union benefits. That plan, she asserted, was designed to fatten his local's dues collections.
Ms. Roberts criticized Mr. Rosenthal for being ready to accept the plan if the city paid those workers $7.75 an hour, which she said was unconscionably low. She insisted on $8 an hour. When the city rejected her demand, the deal collapsed and the city employed the welfare recipients at $7.50 an hour, without union benefits or membership.
At the time, Mr. Rosenthal and city officials said Ms. Roberts's negotiating intransigence had ended up hurting the welfare recipients.
In a letter to delegates, the Roberts campaign suggested that Mr. Rosenthal's push for such a deal was corrupt. ''While Rosenthal goes to the bank, poor single mothers pay the price,'' the letter stated.
After criticizing Mr. Rosenthal's salary, it added, ''Some people can make a lot of money, and never forget where they came from. Not Rosenthal, he's forgotten what it is to be poor and hungry.''
The letter also said, ''Once all we care about is getting the dues, DC 37 is back on the road to corruption.''
On the accompanying envelope, in large block letters, were the words ''Rosenthal goes to the bank.'' The outside of another envelope read, ''Did you know Rosenthal takes in nearly $260,000 a year?''
Mr. Rosenthal declined to respond to the attacks, while Mr. Ensley expressed bafflement and disappointment. ''In this campaign, Ms. Roberts will say anything,'' he said. ''She has no shame.''
Several Ensley supporters said that one reason Ms. Roberts was hardly criticizing Mr. Ensley was that she apparently was unable to find much to criticize him about.
Two years ago, Mr. Rosenthal enthusiastically backed Ms. Roberts for election, viewing her as a figure who could unify the district council as it emerged from a trusteeship imposed by its parent, the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees.
Tensions further erupted between Ms. Roberts and Mr. Rosenthal last year when he called for scrapping a $180,000-a-year legal services contract that she had helped steer to Vladeck, Waldman, Elias and Engelhard, a law firm that employed her nephew. Mr. Cary, her campaign lawyer, works for that firm.
