By Wednesday morning, Bruce C. Ratner had nearly sealed his $300 million offer to buy the Nets and move them to Brooklyn. But nothing was certain, not after a week in which his confidence soared and plummeted as he struggled to outnegotiate a rival.
Around 10 o'clock, a fax arrived in Skillman, N.J., at the law office of Edwin Stier, a former prosecutor who became president of the Nets' ownership group a month ago with a mandate to bring order to the sale.
The message was three lines long: Charles Kushner had raised his offer to $300 million, all cash, and he demanded an answer that day.
Kushner, a real estate developer like Ratner, thought he was on equal footing. The offer surprised Stier, who thought Kushner had placed his final bid the day before.
''Crumple it up,'' said Joe Ravitch of Goldman Sachs, one of the team's investment bankers, convinced the priority was to complete the remaining issues left in the contract with Ratner.
At 5 p.m., Kushner sent Stier a second fax: he withdrew his bid.
Kushner could have saved the call. He had lost. Ninety minutes later, Stier called Ratner to tell him the team was his.
''I can't believe we did this,'' Ratner said Friday, his 59th birthday, hours after he signed the contract. ''But what a huge responsibility. It was like a big wow.''
Ratner's pursuit of the Nets began 14 months ago, long before he put the team and a proposed arena at the center of Atlantic Yards, a $2.5 billion commercial and residential complex in downtown Brooklyn.
The idea was hatched in October 2002, by two men who are not sports fanatics: Ratner and Marty Markowitz, the voluble Brooklyn borough president. Markowitz placed the first of his weekly calls to Ratner to bring a sports team to Brooklyn.
As Markowitz recalls it: ''I asked him: 'Just look into it. It may be impossible, but I feel we owe it to the people of Brooklyn.' He said, 'I don't know anything about it; I'm not into sports.' ''
Ratner thought it ''wasn't remotely possible'' to land a team but began to learn about sports economics. He felt the Nets were the likeliest candidate to lure to Brooklyn.
Ratner and two executives of his Forest City Ratner Companies visited Coney Island, Red Hook and the Brooklyn Navy Yard but rejected them because they lacked public transportation. Then they inspected the Long Island Rail Road yard at Flatbush and Atlantic Avenues, where Walter O'Malley had once sought to build a stadium for the Dodgers.
''I thought it was a matter of getting them to move over,'' Ratner said. ''Then one day, I realized one would have to buy a team to get them.''
But he wanted a project that would make Brooklyn an urban wonderland and provide offices as well as housing for poor, middle-class and wealthy residents. Last February, Ratner showed his nascent plans to a potential investor and basketball fan, Vincent Viola, chairman of the New York Mercantile Exchange. Ratner's company had built the exchange's headquarters in Lower Manhattan.
''The first thing that struck me,'' said Viola, who has had season tickets to the Nets for 11 years, ''was that the site was only two blocks from my high school, Brooklyn Tech. After the first meeting or two, I realized it was an opportunity to work for a positive social result. I was in.''
By the spring, Ratner was seriously examining the Nets, who had the unfettered right to move into New York. The team's holding company, YankeeNets, had floundered in trying to build an arena in Newark for the Nets and the Devils, in whom it owns a 30 percent stake. And tensions between the owners of the Yankees and the Nets were simmering, as were those within the Nets.
The Devils were losing money; a $50 million note, the final payment to the team's former owner, John J. McMullen, was due in August. Believing he could find a way to buy the Nets by investing in the Devils, Ratner began discussions with Lewis Katz and Raymond Chambers, principal owners of both teams.
A World-Class Architect
Ratner did not want a sports architect for his arena, let alone the entire complex. He wanted a visionary, and he found one in Frank Gehry, the Canadian-bred architect whose idiosyncratic projects include the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain.
Ratner is also the development partner of The New York Times Company in a new building for the newspaper's headquarters, and he met Gehry in 2000 during the design competition for that building. Although Gehry withdrew from the competition, Ratner vowed one day to work with him. He saw Gehry's presence as ''something that could be appreciated by people who were not basketball fans,'' he said.
In May, Ratner flew to Los Angeles to woo Gehry. ''He brings this incredible project,'' Gehry, who was quickly entranced, said. ''I'm a hockey nut. He thought he was going to get the Devils, at first.''
Ratner's friends and family listened attentively to his plans but rolled their eyes behind his back. His companion, Dr. Pam Lipton, however, supported him and even found an investor when others got cold feet.
Ratner next needed city support. He started to pitch his project, which at this point included the arena, 4,500 apartments, four office towers, and shops and public spaces. But he was unaware that the focus of the city's economic development and planning officials was on making a $1.5 billion stadium deal for the Jets on the West Side of Manhattan. Frustrated, he went directly to Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. ''From the moment the mayor heard about it,'' one person involved in the talks said, ''he ordered everyone to get in line.''
Meanwhile, Ratner and Viola, his investor, were raising $75 million to acquire a stake in the Devils and move them and the Nets to Brooklyn. The Devils had to pay McMullen the $50 million note on Aug. 22.
At the last moment, the plan unraveled. Chambers, who held out hope that the teams could find a home in Newark, paid the note, along with other owners.
But George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, lobbied to put the Nets on the auction block. At an acrimonious board meeting in September, YankeeNets decided to hire the investment banks Goldman Sachs and Lehman Brothers to explore a sale. ''When that happened,'' Ratner said, ''we were totally ready. We'd shown our master plan to the city.''
Making a Deal
The bankers had four bidders: Ratner; Kushner, whose primary partner was Senator Jon S. Corzine, Democrat of New Jersey; Charles B. Wang, a co-owner of the Islanders who once thought he had a deal to buy the Nets; and Stuart Feldman, a publicity-shy financier. But Wang withdrew in December, irked by the slow pace of talks, and Feldman's plans and motives were a mystery.
Kushner wanted to keep the Nets playing at Continental Arena and was negotiating a financing plan with the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority for up to $150 million in renovations. He believed his strength rested in the certainty of the team's staying put.
''We were under the impression we had an advantage because of the contingencies of the Ratner transaction,'' Kushner said, referring to the welter of city and state approvals Ratner needs to build in Brooklyn.
About 10 days ago, the bankers began to seriously challenge the $300 million offer Ratner first made last month. Would he assume the hefty payments due former Nets like Jayson Williams, Dikembe Mutombo and Alonzo Mourning? At first, Ratner would not, and his offer's actual value sank below $240 million. ''His people were looking at the finances and said, 'By the way, we won't assume responsibility for a lot of the long-term liabilities of the team,' '' Ravitch, of Goldman Sachs, said.
A few days later, Ratner made another offer with conditions that held its value below $300 million and included a threat to withdraw it, said Ravitch, who brushed off the warning.
Ratner disputed that account, saying he always expected to assume the liabilities but pressed for protection against the team's losses. ''That scared the sellers, who thought we were trying to renegotiate,'' he said.
One official briefed by Ratner's company said: ''When things were going south, Bruce was very nervous. Our team sensed there were midlevel people at the Nets who didn't want the team sold.''
More than a week ago, Stier, the president of the ownership group, Community Youth Organization, reacting to a snag in talks with Ratner, tried to lure Wang back into the bidding. Wang refused.
Stier and the bankers then awaited Kushner's return Monday from a trip to Jerusalem before negotiating further with Ratner. Kushner had offered $267.5 million in November, based on preliminary financial information. ''Charlie had expressed concerns early on that he didn't want us to use him against Ratner,'' Stier said.
So Stier structured a process in which he would not relate one bidder's offer to the other. He wanted to see passion in the game.
But upon his return, Kushner did not immediately raise his bid.
Ratner did. Concerned about the tussle over the long-term liabilities and willing to share the team's losses of upward of $15 million this season, Ratner made his final bid on Monday. In a telephone conversation Monday morning, Stier said, ''Bruce said he was prepared to offer $300 million without any adjustments or conditions, 'Net-net, $300 million.' ''
Last-Minute Moves
Kushner struck back the next day, but he did not match Ratner: he offered a choice of $267.5 million in cash, or $200 million up front with $100 million to be paid over 10 years.
The latter option, the bankers figured, was not worth $300 million.
Kushner, two people involved in the talks said, believed he was overbidding. ''The team isn't worth $267.5 million,'' he said during a conference call with the negotiators. Rather, he said, the right price was $225 million.
Privately, he had told his negotiating team the same thing, but that he could make the finances work for the Nets and justify the price tag, one member of his group said.
Kushner said: ''I wanted an answer in a day. I thought my bid would be enough to precipitate dialogue and discussion. It never did.''
Advantage Ratner, whose offer was now being negotiated round-the-clock. The talks with Ratner were so far along by Wednesday that only a collapse would leave the door open for Kushner. Kushner still felt a need to go further despite discomfort he felt because Katz, part of the selling group, was one of Ratner's investors. Stier said he barred Katz from influencing the sale.
While Kushner awaited the response to his faxed offer of $300 million, he also sought financial aid on Wednesday from the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, which owns Continental Arena. George R. Zoffinger, the agency's president, called it a request for a $25 million subsidy, one that he and Gov. James E. McGreevey considered for most of the day but rejected.
Kushner said it was a request for a $25 million loan that he and his investors would repay, as they would have for the arena renovations.
''I asked for it,'' he said, ''because I felt a sense of urgency.''
Stier said there was little choice but to try to complete talks with Ratner.
Kushner thought that as long as he bid $300 million, in what he called an ''ill-defined process,'' he would be taken seriously.
The agreement on Wednesday was approved by the YankeeNets board on Friday, a formality that paved Ratner's path to his jubilant performance hours later at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where he was joined by a cadre of New York cheerleaders, including Bloomberg and Gov. George E. Pataki.
''This is not only about basketball,'' Ratner told a crowded second-floor room. ''It's about a vision, about housing, about jobs, and an urban landscape we can all be proud of.''
Outside, a cluster of protesters demanded that he abandon his dream.
PRO BASKETBALL
Correction:  April 27, 2006, Thursday  Because of an editing error, an article in The Arts on Tuesday about Frank Gehry's design for the first phase of the Grand Avenue development project in Los Angeles misstated the location of the proposed Atlantic Yards project that Mr. Gehry is designing in Brooklyn. (The error also appeared in sports articles on Feb. 9 and April 11, in the City section on Jan. 15 and in several articles in 2003, 2004 and 2005.) It is on rail yards and other land in Prospect Heights and on a block in Park Slope; it is not in Downtown Brooklyn, although it is near that neighborhood.
