It was 1987, and Junior Bridgeman's playing career was coming to a close. What will he do with the rest of his life, he thought? The answer came during a meal.
''I felt that one thing people were always going to do was eat,'' Bridgeman said in a telephone interview last week. ''So since I was looking to invest in something, I figured food would be the safest investment.''
A chance to buy a few Wendy's franchises presented itself, and Bridgeman, a former guard for the Milwaukee Bucks and the Los Angeles Clippers, jumped in headfirst, buying five franchises in the Milwaukee area.
''I thought about a career in basketball, but there was a part of me that wanted to go out and see what else I could do,'' he said. Bridgeman, 50, is one of Wendy's five most productive franchisers, owning 153 restaurants in Wisconsin, Illinois, Kentucky, Tennessee and Florida. He lives in Louisville, Ky., where he is remembered as a college star there, with his wife of 27 years, Doris. They have three children, and their youngest son runs track at the university.
As one of the great sixth men of his era, Bridgeman teamed with Sidney Moncrief, Marques Johnson and Bob Lanier to create a playoff team. Milwaukee won six division titles during Bridgeman's 10 years with the Bucks, but they never got past the conference finals because of the Philadelphia 76ers of Julius Erving and the Boston Celtics of Larry Bird.
What Bridgeman treasures most about his career are the friendships he forged, including one with Don Nelson, his former Bucks coach. ''It appears that at that time, guys were a lot closer knit than they are today,'' Bridgeman said. ''The friendships have continued and that's something I feel as good about as anything else.''
Now, Bridgeman feels good about being a hands-on owner, one who often travels, working four or five days at each of his restaurants.
''One of the great misconceptions about ownership is that you just sit back and let others do all the work,'' he said. ''My philosophy is that if you don't inspect what you expect, then why do it? I'm sure a lot of people that own restaurants just let somebody else run it, but that's never been my philosophy. That's not how we've gotten to this point. I'm in the stores, doing everything everybody else does, from making hamburgers to working the register to handing hamburgers out of the window.''
Then and Now
