The initial report seemed typical of Orange Alert America: an explosion at a Brooklyn loft had led the authorities to a cache of weapons, explosives, photographs of the World Trade Center and maps of New York City.
However, after the Police Department's bomb squad, fire marshals and eventually the department's elite counterterrorism unit arrived to investigate, a band of somewhat sheepish -- but admittedly relieved -- law enforcement officials had a vastly different story to tell.
The owner of the loft, Christopher Hackett, 31, was not a terrorist but a performance artist, they said. His gun powder and assault rifles, while illegal, were not weapons meant for some dark purpose. They were ingredients for eccentric public happenings and pyrotechnic works of art.
Although some might say that Mr. Hackett's only crime was to extend the label of art to a jury-rigged ice-cream truck that spewed flames from its cargo bay, he was, in fact, arrested yesterday and charged with several weapons violations. Mr. Hackett was in stable condition at Lutheran Medical Center in Brooklyn with burns related to the explosion.
Colleen Mulleedy, 27, a friend of Mr. Hackett's, said at the hospital that his jaw had been broken as well.
Officers from the 76th Precinct in Boerum Hill received a report about the explosion around 11:30 a.m. yesterday, said Deputy Chief John Colgan, who leads the department's counterterrorism unit. When they arrived at the loft at 217 Butler Street, they found a burned and bleeding Mr. Hackett with some sort of propane or acetylene torch, Chief Colgan said.
In a typically deadpan police manner, the chief then described what Mr. Hackett had been doing with the torch. ''A preliminary investigation showed that he was trying to construct a confetti gun,'' Chief Colgan said.
The confetti gun, made from a two-foot-long metal tube, was to be used a short while later as the starter pistol in a wacky shopping cart race from Brooklyn to Manhattan. Friends and neighbors called the piece typical of Mr. Hackett, who liked to fashion real guns into fanciful, harmless weapons that shot things like soap bubbles.
Mr. Hackett is the chief creative force behind a loosely federated group of sculptors and performance artists known as the Madagascar Institute. The group is known for putting on weird events like a restaging of Pamplona's running of the bulls in which a crowd of men and women in bull costumes rode through the city streets on bicycles, some wearing tutus and carrying giant packages of Oscar Mayer Bull-loney.
''They're not terrorists,'' Andrew Robinson, a painter and neighbor, said.
Though it eventually became apparent that Mr. Hackett was no threat to national security, nearly a dozen emergency vehicles were outside his loft all afternoon, and the block was cordoned off.
It seemed a clashing of two distinct and very separate worlds as agents of the Joint Terrorism Task Force descended on the cluttered, funky workshop on the fringes of hipster Brooklyn where Mr. Hackett dreamed up his shenanigans. Nonetheless, Chief Colgan said, the authorities had found two AK-47 assault rifles, a World War II-era British Sten gun, several hundred rounds of 7.62-caliber ammunition and lots of gun powder in the loft.
The authorities also said they had found maps of the city and documents pertaining to the Brooklyn Bridge and the Croton Reservoir. But Mr. Robinson said Mr. Hackett's girlfriend runs an organization called Dark Passage, which leads people on what he called ''tourist journeys into off-limits places.''
Mr. Hackett's block of Butler Street has become a gritty haven for artists in the last 10 years or so. Not far from the understated chic of Smith Street, the block dead-ends into a public housing project, the Gowanus Houses.
Mr. Hackett moved into the neighborhood three or four years ago and slowly attracted the attention -- and eventual respect -- of the local teenagers, some of whom would hang out in his workshop ogling his odd inventions and collection of junk. These teenagers, mostly black, said yesterday that they were somewhat bowled over by the light-skinned, dread-locked Mr. Hackett with his punk-rock clothing and arty ways.
''Everybody thought he was kind of weird until we got to know him,'' said Chris Rasin, 15. ''He dressed funny, but he was cool. We all kind of looked up to him.''
Richard Nelson, 15, found the response of the authorities understandable, if a bit overblown. ''They're making something big out of nothing,'' he said. Then he thought for a moment. ''I guess we are at high alert.''
