NOT just for Greek tragedies any more, the trilogy has become the all-but-obligatory format for major franchise films. Both ''The Matrix'' and ''The Lord of the Rings'' had grand finales last year, packing them in at multiplexes around the world.
But trilogies have been turning up in the art houses, as well, in part because of the critical and commercial success of Krzysztof Kieslowski's ''Three Colors'' series of 1993 and 1994. Kieslowski, a Polish filmmaker then based in Paris, worked through three apparently unrelated tales, each named for a color of the French flag: ''Blue,''  ''White'' and ''Red.'' As the trilogy unfolded, it revealed a complex internal structure, based on the repetition of themes and the rhyming of images.
Kieslowski died before he could complete a planned second trilogy, based on the Catholic accounts of heaven, hell and purgatory, though the German director Tom Twyker made ''Heaven'' (2002) from the screenplay by Kieslowski and his frequent collaborator, Krzysztof Piesiewicz. Rebecca Miller's one-film trilogy, ''Personal Velocity,'' also in 2002, packed parallel stories of three women's search for freedom into one feature. Lars von Trier's Danish film ''Dogville,'' which will be released in America in March, is the first panel in a planned triptych on European visions of American life. Mr. von Trier says he will continue the series even though the star of ''Dogville,'' Nicole Kidman, has dropped out of the next two.
Beginning this week in New York (with a national release to follow) is Lucas Belvaux's series ''The Trilogy'' (''La Trilogie),'' a great critical success in France when it was released in 2002. The film's three feature-length installments -- titled, in the order they will be shown in the United States, ''On the Run,''  ''An Amazing Couple'' and ''After Life'' -- are all set in the mountain city of Grenoble, where the three female protagonists work in a high school. The women and their husbands, lovers and rivals, cross over from film to film, though each movie has its own story and, more particularly, its own genre.
''On the Run'' (opening on Friday) is a political thriller, in which Mr. Belvaux (long a professional actor) plays a militant radical who escapes from prison and forces an old comrade, a schoolteacher played by Catherine Frot, to help him plan a new series of bombings. In ''An Amazing Couple'' (opening on Feb. 6), the tone shifts to something approaching screwball comedy for the tale of a Grenoble industrialist (François Morel) whose wife (Ornella Muti) mistakenly believes he is having an affair. For the final film, ''After Life'' (opening on Feb. 13), Mr. Belvaux shifts to a more intimate, naturalistic tone for a domestic drama about the tortured relationship of a corrupt police inspector (Gilbert Melki) and his morphine-addicted wife (Dominique Blanc) who is harboring the radical.
The stories take place simultaneously, with events seen from different perspectives in different films and major characters in one film becoming supporting players in another.
''It began with a theoretical question,'' Mr. Belvaux, speaking French, said during a recent visit to New York. ''What is a secondary character? When I was making my first film, 'Parfois Trop d'Amour' in 1992, I thought I had three very sympathetic leading characters, but I realized that from the point of view of one of the secondary characters, they were really quite antipathetic. I thought then of making a series of films in which the characters would change their stature -- principals become secondary and supporting characters become principals. At the time, I was reading lots of Balzac, and in his novels you see the same thing: characters who are important in one story but who appear as background figures in another. It is all a question of point of view.''
Where in the past many Hollywood trilogies -- Francis Ford Coppola's ''Godfather Saga,'' for example, or the ''Die Hard'' movies -- seemed to become so after the fact, driven by commercial demands for sequels, the recent European trilogies have been imagined from the very beginning as single unified works (as were, of course, ''The Matrix'' and ''The Lord of the Rings,'' and George Lucas has said that he planned the ''Star Wars'' series as three interlocking trilogies from the start). For Mr. Belvaux, the configuration made inherent sense; paraphrasing Aristotle on the principle of the golden mean, he says: ''Two is too little and four is too much. And also, three gives a sense of unbalance, of irresolution, where an even number is too symmetrical, it suggests a conclusion.''
Mr. Belvaux, a pleasant, rumpled 42-year-old, began writing ''The Trilogy'' shortly after he completed his second feature, ''Pour Rire'' (''For Laughs''), in 1996. ''The three films advanced in parallel,'' he said. ''Roughly, I worked about a week on the global project, defining the idea of the three principal couples who would pass through three different genres. I needed to find a way to cross the three stories without making it seem too forced, so I settled on the idea that if the three women were friends and all worked in the same place, necessarily the stories would intersect.
Mr. Belvaux began by writing the comedy, without worrying too much about how it would intersect with the other two films. When he wrote a sequence involving characters from a later film, he would cut and paste it into the appropriate script. ''Which meant that Films 2 and 3 already had major scenes before I even started writing them,'' he said.
Because of economic pressures, Mr. Belvaux was forced to shoot all three films at once, often shifting gears -- and rhythms and colors and acting styles -- several times a day. ''It was actually a lot of fun,'' he recalled. ''Usually, what's most tiring when you're making a movie is all the waiting. But here, there was no waiting -- I had to keep the brain working all the time. For one shot, we would be in the comedy, with the camera mounted on a tripod, and for the next, we had to reshoot it for the thriller, with a hand-held camera. Then, of course, there were entire weeks when we worked on only one film.''
Mr. Belvaux's trilogy, like those of the other European directors, is an attempt to escape the constraints of the standard 100-minutes-more-or-less running time of a feature film. As formally determined as his project may be, with its clever variations in perspective and perception, it is ultimately a naturalistic gesture, intended to liberate the hidden portions, the shadings and the undertones, of individuals who would be reduced to stereotypes in a more conventional representation. The police inspector, brilliantly played by Mr. Melki, evolves from a stock tough guy into a Dostoyevskian figure racked by guilt and doubt but driven by his sincere, helpless love for his afflicted wife.
Rather than prolonging an epic narration, Mr. Belvaux's trilogy folds back in on itself. It is not a linear trilogy, but a vertical one, a movie that burrows down and spreads out.
In fact, when the trilogy was released in France, the comedy, ''An Amazing Couple,'' was the first to appear in theaters. In the United States, the first will be the thriller, ''On the Run,'' because the American distributor, Magnolia Pictures, thought it was more likely to hook an audience. ''In the end,'' Mr. Belvaux said, ''the order doesn't make any difference. If you see them in the order comedy-thriller-melodrama, which is the order I imagined them in, you'll see the film the most under my control. If you see them in another order, you'll see a film that I couldn't control, with effects that I didn't intend. What's fun is that the spectators are free to see them any way they want. What I've found is that for each viewer, the ideal order was the order they happened to see them in.''
FILM  Correction:  February 1, 2004, Sunday  An article and a picture caption last Sunday about the three films by Lucas Belvaux known as ''La Trilogie'' misstated the American title of one film, ''Après la Vie.'' It is being released as ''After the Life,'' not ''After Life.''
