Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, arriving in Georgia for the inauguration of its new president, asserted that Russia had no reason to be concerned about the United States desire for friendship with this troubled region, which Russians consider within their sphere of influence.
Only two months after a popular revolt forced the resignation of Eduard A. Shevardnadze as Georgia's president, Mr. Powell was here to support the efforts of the newly elected president, Mikhail Saakashvili, to gain control of a country widely described as fractured, impoverished and hobbled by corruption.
In Moscow, however, Mr. Powell's visit was looked upon with some suspicions, focused in part on the presence of a small contingent of American military trainers who have been here since mid-2002 to help battle terrorism.
Expressing some impatience with Moscow's concerns, Mr. Powell repeated the assertion he has made in the last week to Russian interviewers: that the United States was actually helping Russia because the terrorists based in Georgia were a threat to them in separatist Chechnya, on the Georgian border.
''It's a very modest presence,'' Mr. Powell said of the 80 to 200 trainers. ''We expect the basic mission to be completed in the next several months.'' He said the goal had been ''explained to the Russians all along'' as ''a way of assisting Georgians to deal with the terrorist threat that was threatening Russia.''
Many Russian leaders accuse the United States of meddling in Georgia and other parts of the former Soviet Union, but many American officials say they are concerned with meddling by Russia in such areas.
Criticism of American ties to Georgia were also based on the friendship that many American leaders had with Mr. Shevardnadze when he was a foreign minister in the last days of Communism.
A senior administration official said recently that many former cold warriors in government still have great affection for Mr. Shevardnadze, who has been involved in ceding power twice in the face of a popular uprising -- once as a pillar of the Soviet government and late last year as leader of Georgia.
But Mr. Saakashvili, a reform-minded 36-year-old politician who did graduate work in the United States, is also emerging as a favorite of Washington.
Speaking to reporters on his plane as he arrived here Saturday night, Mr. Powell said he wanted to show solidarity with Mr. Saakashvili's battles against corruption and shady business practices.
He also said that he was impressed that Mr. Saakashvili had reached out to the leaders of the three regions that have tried to break away from the central government.
Mr. Powell pointedly declined to endorse the criticism that Russia might have been encouraging those revolts. He specifically said he did not want to use the word ''meddling,'' and took a low-key and nonjudgmental approach upon arriving here.
Acknowledging that concerns about Russian involvement in Georgia were heightened two months ago, Mr. Powell said that ''things have moved forward rather peacefully and steadily'' and that he planned to discuss American concerns with the Russian foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, and, on Monday, with President Vladimir V. Putin in Moscow.
The meetings, he said, ''will show that Russia and the United States can cooperate in areas where people might think we should be in competition or are in competition with each other.'' The message, he added, ''is that there is no competition here, at least far as we're concerned'' and that ''we're here to help the people of Georgia who are in desperate need.''
Still another irritant in Russia's relations with the region is its continued military presence at bases dating from the days of the Soviet Union. Russia promised to remove its forces from Georgia and other nations in the Caucasus region, but is now trying to stretch out the timetable.
Mr. Powell made it clear that he would press Russia to live up to its commitments to withdraw forces. He also said that he would raise with Russia the importance of making its criminal justice system ''open and transparent'' -- especially in prosecuting business leaders on corruption charges.
The Russian crackdown on news media and opposition business leaders like Mikhail Khodorkovsky has introduced another concern into Russian-American relations, but Mr. Powell again declined to criticize Moscow, saying only that he would have an ''open and candid'' conversation about such developments.
''It's important that Russians do everything to put their democratic system on a solid base that has the normal tools and institutions of democracy that will serve it well in the future,'' he said.
