EARLIER this month, as Westchester's office market showed palpable signs of making a comeback, Altria Group, the parent company of Kraft Foods, announced that it would vacate its 560,000-square-foot building in Rye Brook and put it up for sale.
The move is a significant setback in a county that has reeled in recent years from downsizings and relocations by large corporations, and it is expected to send Westchester's vacancy rate -- which had finally been dropping -- upward once again.
John Goodkind, managing principal of Newmark &amp; Company Real Estate's offices in Westchester and Fairfield, called Altria's announcement ''a momentum buster.''
At the end of the fourth quarter of 2003, the commercial office vacancy rate for the county was just under 13 percent, according to figures released by CB Richard Ellis, the real estate brokerage and services company. The rate was down from 14 percent at the end of the previous quarter and from close to 16 percent at the end of 2002, according to the figures. Over all in Westchester at the end of 2003, there was about 4.3 million square feet of unoccupied office space, down from 4.7 million in the third quarter of last year and from 5.2 million at the end of 2002.
Mr. Goodkind said the latest quarterly numbers reflected a number of recent deals, including Ameriquest Mortgage's signing at year's end of a long-term lease for 223,366 square feet at 44 South Broadway, White Plains. The 850,000-square-foot building, built three decades ago, is the former home of I.B.M. and Prodigy Communications, among others. It has had surplus space available for several years, with space on the market sometimes exceeding 50 percent. Ameriquest, a national mortgage lender, leased four full floors, a portion of another and the lower level at 44 South Broadway, also known as Westchester One.
Another positive development was the announcement this month by Cadbury Schweppes Americas Beverages, the new American beverage subsidiary of Cadbury Schweppes, that it had signed a lease for 135,000 square feet at 900 King Street, Rye Brook. The site, a three-story, 201,460-square-foot former I.B.M. building on 17 acres, has been empty since the early 1990's.
Cadbury Schweppes is combining Snapple Beverage Group, based at 709 Westchester Avenue in White Plains, and Mott's, which has its headquarters at Six High Ridge Park in Stamford, to form Cadbury Schweppes Americas Beverages. Rye King Associates, a joint venture of Brickman Associates and Wafra Investment of New York City, intend to spend a total of $12 million to convert the structure to a multitenanted building.
In recent years, other large blocks of corporate space have also been matched with new tenants. In 2002, Morgan Stanley purchased the former 725,000-square-foot Texaco headquarters on 107 acres in Harrison for $42 million; that deal took place just months after the property was listed.
It took much longer to find a buyer for the long-empty Mount Pleasant Executive Center in Sleepy Hollow, the former headquarters of I.B.M.'s Latin American division. Last spring, New York Life paid $38 million for the 383,000-square-foot building on 76 wooded acres, which it is expected to occupy this year, moving some of its employees from Manhattan.
Other office buildings in the county, however, are languishing on the market. Among them is 445 Hamilton Avenue in White Plains, a 320,000-square-foot building owned and partially occupied by MetLife, the giant insurer. Built in the late 1960's and occupied from mid-1980's until the late 1990's by Prodigy, it has 260,000 square feet available.
Also in White Plains, 632,000 square feet is being refurbished in four connected structures at 333 Westchester Avenue. The complex, which is at North Street and Westchester Avenue, was the headquarters of General Foods from the mid-1950's through 1983 and continued to house company operations until it became empty in July 1997. It has started to add tenants, including Ameriquest, Allied Irish Bank and Macsteel Asoma, a steel trading company. About 100,000 square feet is still available.
THE headquarters that General Foods moved to in 1984 was the 54-acre Rye Brook site that Altria is now putting on the market. General Foods merged into Kraft Foods in 1989.
The decision to sell the facilities in Rye Brook, where 1,000 employees work, is expected to mean a loss of 320 jobs for Westchester. All of the Kraft workers are to be out of the building by the end of 2004, although many of them will be relocating to other sites in the county.
The pending vacancy could also be major drag on the office market. The site's square footage is expected to cause a jump of two percentage points in the county's office availability rates, according to Dean J. Shapiro, a senior managing director of CB Richard Ellis, and other brokers.
The eight-level building is a postmodern complex designed by Kevin Roche John Dinkeloo &amp; Associates. It has a central domed atrium that doubles as the cafeteria, and an exterior staircase, which splits on either side to form an archway over the entry road. Besides the main building, the property includes a 65,000-square-foot second building and a man-made lake.
The complex is not expected to be an easy sell. ''It looks and feels almost like a palace,'' Mr. Goodkind said, ''and in today's world, corporations place more of a premium on efficiency than looks. It doesn't easily lend itself to multitenant users.'' At 75,000 square feet each, the floor plates are unusually large.
The easiest buildings to market are those that can be converted from single to multiple tenant use, said Jeffrey H. Newman, executive vice president of W&amp;M Properties, which owns about 650,000 square feet of Class A office space in Westchester.
For example, AT&amp;T is vacating 95,000 square feet at 500 Mamaroneck Avenue, a W&amp;M building in Harrison. Mr. Newman said the company is ''mitigating its risks'' by renovating some of the space for several tenants rather for than a single user.
The refurbished space will be marketed to financial firms in Manhattan hoping to establish satellite offices in Westchester and to companies in Fairfield looking for more favorable rents, among others. Class A office space in Greenwich, he said, goes for $45 to $75 a square foot annually, depending on its proximity to the central business district. In Westchester, rents for comparable space go for $25 to $33 a square foot, he said.
Also, Mr. Newman said, Westchester is increasingly becoming a sought-after office location because of the accessibility of mass transportation and highways leading in and out of Manhattan, and the fact that ''companies realize they're not go to be driving over a cliff when they leave Greenwich to go into Westchester.''
Mr. Shapiro at CB Richard Ellis said that Fairfield's availability rate at the end of the fourth quarter of 2003 was 17 percent, compared with 13 percent in Westchester. He said that extensive retail and residential development in the central business district of White Plains this past year had improved Westchester's image and attracted new office users. In particular, Cappelli Enterprises built the $300 million City Center at White Plains with 500,000 square feet of retail space, two 35-story residential towers and a six-story loft building.
Over all in the county, as elsewhere in the New York metropolitan office market, sales of buildings continued at a brisk rate, with buyers taking advantage of low interest rates, said Glenn P. Walsh, a senior director for Cushman &amp; Wakefield.
Mr. Walsh cited as an example Westchester's second-largest commercial sale for 2003: RPW Group's purchase of 2975 Westchester Avenue, an 18-year-old office building on the famed Platinum Mile in Purchase, from Ivy Equities for $18.5 million. (The largest commercial transaction in the county last year was New York Life's.)
''The interest rates enabled the buyer, Robert P. Weisz, to acquire something at a purchase price he may not have been able to justify otherwise,'' Mr. Walsh said.
Looking ahead, Mr. Walsh predicted that 2004 would represent a period of recovery from the recession for Westchester, as small and midsized companies begin to talk about expansion. A full recovery of the market, however, will probably not occur until 2005, he said.
In the Region | Westchester
