The city is poised to spend $25 million and two years replacing an underground water main along the length of Houston Street. Except for the dread of living in a construction zone, the pipe-laying part of the project has generated scant controversy among residents of neighborhoods it will pass through.
But while it may seem odd to hear no complaints about digging up the streets, there is a hot-button issue lurking. About $10 million of that money has been set aside for prettying up the street once the project is done. And there are almost as many disagreements about that part of the work as there are potholes in New York.
The city's Department of Transportation believes that its redesign will dress up the area and improve traffic flow. Proposed improvements include adding several left-turn bays, raising and replanting the center median and widening the sidewalk on the south side of the street between the Avenue of the Americas and Broadway.
What could be bad? Plenty, some residents say.
One unhappy resident is Lenny Cecere, 80, who said the sidewalk outside his general store at Macdougal and Houston Streets, which he has owned for 25 years, didn't need widening. ''I have a tough enough job already to keep it clean,'' he added. ''There is sweeping and shoveling snow. And more sidewalk means more possibility to get sued.''
Sean Sweeney, executive director of the SoHo Alliance, a civic group, agreed for a different reason. The sidewalk, he said, is one of few in the area that isn't crowded, even on weekends, when shoppers flock to the neighborhood. ''Why would you want to widen it when it is underutilized?'' he asked.
He also objects to adding a two-foot-high median with bushes and trees, which the city hopes will prevent jaywalking. Mr. Sweeney describes it as a Berlin Wall that will separate SoHo from the West Village.
As John Kaehny, executive director of Transportation Alternatives, an advocacy group, put it, ''The proposed plan puts traffic before pedestrian concerns.''
Still another critic of the plan is Councilman Alan J. Gerson, whose district includes Houston Street and who said the Department of Transportation did not seek reaction from residents before drawing up its design. He said a standoff was avoided last week when the department sent a message to Community Board 2, which was poised to officially condemn the project, promising to hold more public meetings on the plan and consider modifications. The board then passed a resolution that criticized the plan but did not reject it.
''It's time for the city to go on a listening tour with the impacted community,'' Mr. Gerson said. ''And, to their credit, they've agreed to do it.''
The next task, said Keith Kalb, a Transportation Department spokesman, was to square the competing, sometimes contradictory concerns. ''We're going to reevaluate the concept of the streetscape and find something mutually agreeable,'' he said.
Mr. Cecere's wife, Lucy, has vowed to attend every meeting on the subject. ''And how,'' she said. ''This is our neighborhood, and we need to be responsible for it.''
JIM O'GRADY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: SOHO/GREENWICH VILLAGE
