THE large room at the Westchester Artificial Kidney Center in Elmsford looks and smells hospital-clean. It is lined with expensive medical machines that thrum softly while patients rest on large, reclining chairs at numbered stations around the perimeter.
Alan Hynard, 60, is one of those patients. A former facilities trainer at the Bronx House of Detention, Mr. Hynard dozes as blood flows out and back into his body from two tubes attached to his left arm.
Mr. Hynard suffers from polycystic kidney disease and has been getting dialysis three times a week, three or four hours at a time, for 16 years. He says he does not want a kidney transplant, because his brother, who also had the disease, died after having a kidney transplant.
Like nearly all patients with kidney failure, Mr. Hynard can't survive without dialysis. Because kidney failure ''is the only chronic disease that Medicare pays for, it's atypical,'' said Brian J.G. Pereira, the president of the National Kidney Foundation and a nephrologist at Tufts University in Boston. That's why ''dialysis is a big business,'' he added.
It's also a concern for taxpayers, since about 6 percent of the country's Medicare budget is used to treat patients with end stage renal disease, according to figures provided by the United States Renal Data System, a federally financed organization that collects information on kidney disease. "That is a large portion of the budget for such a small population," said Ronald Kuerbit, the chief administrative officer for Fresenius Medical Care, a company with 1,100 dialysis clinics nationwide.
About 300,000 Americans require dialysis, the majority because of complications of diabetes and high blood pressure. About 1,000 are treated in Westchester, at one of the 15 outpatient dialysis centers in the county, according to figures supplied by the End Stage Renal Disease Network of New York, a nonprofit group that promotes improved care for patients with renal disease. In addition to Elmsford, there are centers in Hawthorne, Tarrytown, Port Chester, Cortlandt Manor, White Plains, Yonkers, New Rochelle, Valhalla and Yorktown Heights.
Most of the centers in Westchester are affiliated with one of two companies: Dialysis Clinics Inc., a nonprofit group based in Nashville, which owns 187 clinics in 26 states, as well as Westchester Artificial Kidney Center and four others in the county, and TRC of New York, a wholly owned subsidiary of DaVita, a for-profit company that administers 560 dialysis centers nationwide, six of them in Westchester.
The dialysis business in New York State differs from that in the rest of the country since New York State is the only state in the nation that prohibits publicly traded companies from owning medical centers. So DaVita relies on TRC to provide consulting for 27 dialysis centers in New York State.
This arrangement began in 1998, when New York first allowed for-profit dialysis centers to operate here. Until then, dialysis patients relied on nonprofit hospitals or foundations to provide life support. But the hospitals had difficulty staying solvent, because they were providing so many other services and it was ''hard to have a revenue-neutral cost center,'' said Dr. Rene Garrick, a nephrologist at the Westchester Medical Center in Valhalla.
After for-profit companies entered the market, the process became ''sleeker, and more computerized and more automated,'' and many hospitals gave up the dialysis business as an inefficient use of their space and staff, Dr. Garrick said.
In addition, dialysis treatment appealed to profit-making businesses, since Medicare guarantees payment for the treatment of dialysis patients who are not covered by private insurance, according to Kevin M. Smith, president of Gambro, Inc., the United States holding company for a Swedish medical services concern.
Mr. Smith said that his company owns 550 dialysis clinics in the United States, none of them in Westchester, and provides dialysis services to 54,000 patients nationwide.
''The transplant waiting list is longer than the availability of organs,'' Mr. Smith said, ''and there is an increasing need for dialysis driven by an aging population, and the increase in diabetes, high blood pressure and obesity.''
Kidney failure is more common among African-Americans than Caucasians, and more than one-third of the Elmsford dialysis patients are African-American, according to Dr. Stephen Adler, a nephrologist at the Westchester Medical Center and medical director of the Westchester Artificial Kidney Center.
The dialysis business is burgeoning. Nationwide, its total annual cost is about $20 billion, and the number of dialysis patients is increasing between 5 and 7 percent a year, Mr. Pereira said.
''The reason we're attracted to the business is due to the recurring nature of the services provided to patients,'' said Grant Babyak, managing director of TimesSquare Capital Management, an investment firm in Manhattan which own shares of DaVita.
MEDICARE pays about $60,000 a year to treat each dialysis patient, according to Dr. Adler. About 65 percent of the center's patients have primary coverage from Medicare, he said, although Medicare pays at least some of the costs for nearly all of the center's patients. Likewise, at the TRC facilities, at least 85 percent of its patients are covered by Medicare, according to Mr. Greenwood.
Paul Eggers, the project director at the National Institute for Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases in Bethesda, Md., said most patients could not afford dialysis without such payments.
''This is an industry that the for-profits dominate,'' he said, noting that about 70 percent of dialysis patients nationwide are treated at for-profit clinics.
This may be due, in part, to the fact that the dialysis business requires a large financial investment in medical staff and equipment.
TRC's Hudson Valley Dialysis Center in Tarrytown, for example, is open six days a week, between 15 and 18 hours a day, said Jim Greenwood, regional director of DaVita in White Plains. At the busiest times, three nurses and four patient-care technicians are on duty, he said. The nonprofit dialysis center in Elmsford is open between 13 and 16 hours a day, and at peak times there are eight caregivers working with patients, Dr. Adler said.
Each dialysis machine costs about $15,000, Mr. Greenwood said, noting that some of his centers have as many as 20 or 25 of them.
''These machines are intensely monitored and constantly updated with new parts,'' Dr. Adler said. ''The biggest improvement in the technology is our ability to control fluids, but the machine is basically a pump, tubing and an artificial membrane through which blood is cleansed.''
The need for dialysis will not disappear any time soon, most experts agreed. There are not enough kidney donors for all of the people who need them, Mr. Eggers said.Finally, a new study sponsored by the National Institutes of Health, set to begin within the next few months, will analyze 400 dialysis patients, to see if more frequent dialysis results in better health, Mr. Eggers said. If it turns out that dialysis six times a week for shorter periods of time is better than dialysis three times a week, which has been the standard of care for the past 30 years, ''that will have implications for the business of dialysis, in terms of how it's paid for,'' Mr. Eggers said.
The future of Medicare financing for dialysis is an issue that should concern the public, since many people have at least one relative suffering from diabetes or high blood pressure, said Linda Donald, president of the Renal Research Institute in Manhattan.
''People need to be aware of how to prevent kidney failure, because most patients are stunned that it happens so fast,'' she said. ''And the end of that is being one of our patients, which no one wants.''
