LATE last year, the Ossining village board earmarked $130,000 for a new police commissioner in the 2004 budget. But the post has yet to be created, and opposition to the move has brought out controversy over larger issues.
Mayor Joseph Perillo, who has been in office for just a year, started the effort to install a commissioner to oversee the force. He has said publicly that the current police chief, Joseph Burton, who joined the department in 1967 and became chief in 1991, has not dealt effectively with what Mayor Perillo calls a growing drug problem in Ossining.
Mayor Perillo's two Republican allies on the five-person board approved the move to install a commissioner who would outrank Chief Burton.
But the move is not likely to take place quietly. Miguel Hernandez, a Democrat on the board who opposes the move, says such an action requires a referendum and a rewriting of the village charter. Mayor Perillo said the village corporation counsel, Richard Leins, and a special counsel have both advised him that passing a local law is all that is necessary to create the position, as long as the board of trustees, which also acts as the board of police commissioners, does not relinquish its duties.
Peter Constantakes, a spokesman for the State Department of State, said that villages and towns may appoint a commissioner, but Ossining has its own charter, which Mr. Leins said is silent on the issue of whether the village can create the position of a single police commissioner. In that case, said Mr. Constantakes, a referendum would be required to amend the charter and only then could a commissioner be appointed.
Mr. Hernandez disagrees with the mayor over the extent of the drug problem in the village of Ossining, which has a population of 24,010, according to the 2000 census. ''The mayor wants to create another patronage position and install someone who is beholden to him,'' Mr. Hernandez said. ''He's up for re-election in November and this is all part of the opening volley of his campaign.''
Mr. Burton did not respond to several requests to comment for this article, although he did speak to representatives of other news organizations. In an interview with The Journal News, he defended his record and said his request to hire three police officers at a cost of $110,000 for 2004 had been turned down.
After a contentious board of trustees meeting on Tuesday, the parties agreed not to speak with reporters, said George Longworth, chief of the Dobbs Ferry Police, who serves as a lawyer for the Westchester County Chiefs of Police Association.
The New York State Police Chiefs Benevolent Association, based in Peekskill, may mount a legal challenge if the mayor's plan goes through.
''It's a bad idea,'' Mr. Pavone said. ''Police chiefs are responsible for the day-to-day operations of the department and commissioners are more concerned with policy directives and budgets. Situations like this generally happen in venues when the mayor or other political figures want to control the activities of the police department and they're not able to do so through the chief.'' In Westchester, the cities of New Rochelle, White Plains, Mount Vernon, Rye and Yonkers have commissioners, as does the county's Department of Public Safety. In Yonkers, where the population is almost 10 times that of Ossining, the commissioner's salary is $125,000.
Drugs are indisputably present in Ossining. Mr. Perillo said that one of the main hot spots of outdoor drug sales is one block from the police station at the intersection of Spring and Broad Streets. One night not long ago, at 11 p.m., a woman standing on the corner of Spring and James Streets told a passer-by that she would be willing to sell the passer-by crack cocaine.
''They have the same ethos as the Post Office: neither rain, nor sleet nor snow shall deter them,'' Mr. Perillo said of the drug dealers. ''We've got to put police officers right next to these people. If they move 10 feet, the officer moves 10 feet.''
Mr. Hernandez, a former federal Drug Enforcement Administration officer, said of Mr. Perillo: ''He sees kids congregating on the street wearing baggy hip-hop pants and automatically assumes that they're gangsters. Crime has been going down and drug arrests have been going up.''
Drug arrests totaled 60 in 1998 and 135 in 2002, including joint operations with the county, according to Mr. Longworth. Village police department statistics show that drug arrests where only the village force was involved totaled 99 in 2002 and 71 in 2003.
Mr. Perillo says that drugs are not the only issue. Since he took office in January 2003, he has reorganized the highway department and the buildings department and replaced the village manager and the village treasurer.
Mr. Perillo said one of his goals is to revitalize the downtown area and the waterfront, which includes support for a development by the Valhalla-based developer Louis R. Cappelli. ''The criticism of what I call 'the Cappelli haters' is now overflowing onto other issues,'' he said. ''To me, quality-of-life issues go all the way down to people putting garbage out on the wrong day. I've been accused of micromanagement, but I'm just trying to get things done.''
Since he took office, Mr. Perillo has held several meetings with Chief Burton, where he and the trustees outlined 53 directives for the 57-officer police department. The village recently concluded difficult negotiations with the officers' union, which resulted in a five-year contract.
The mayor's tactics have alienated some people in town, said Eugene Napolitano, a Democrat and trustee who served as the board's liaison to the police department.
''Ossining is underpatrolled and we need more community police officers walking the beat, not an overpaid guy in a suit,'' Mr. Napolitano said. ''The mayor is acting like John Wayne, riding into town saying that nothing has been done before he got here and it's just not true. Our officers do an excellent job.''
GOVERNMENT  Correction:  February 1, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about proposed changes in the Ossining Police Department identified one set of statistics incorrectly. The numbers, 99 in 2002 and 71 in 2003, referred to drug investigations (not drug arrests) in which the village police force was involved independent of county operations.
