LISTING the parts of the economy that were creating job opportunities was not particularly hard for much of the last few years. The list began with health care, real estate and some government agencies. It often ended there, too.
But the roaring economic growth of late 2003 has finally brought some company for those industries, even if overall job growth remains weak. Wood manufacturers, electronics and appliance stores, trucking companies, movie studios and architectural and engineering firms all added to their payrolls during the last six months of 2003, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Merrill Lynch, which has cut thousands of positions since 2000, plans to increase its ranks of financial advisers by 650 this year. Lockheed Martin, the big military contractor, has been looking for engineers in Georgia, Minnesota and elsewhere.
Even Web sites are emerging from the hangover caused by the dot-com bubble. They added a couple of thousand employees in late 2003; in contrast, they cut their work force by almost 20,000 people, or 40 percent, in 2001 and 2002. Other sectors that were making deep cuts in 2001 and 2002, like computer manufacturing and telecommunications, are still shedding workers but at a slower rate than they were.
Much of the new hiring has been in a crescent that stretches roughly from the Pacific Northwest down through California and eastward to Texas, said Mark Zandi, the chief economist of Economy.com, a research company.
Military spending has created work in San Antonio and in long-suffering Tacoma, Wash. A jump in trade, as growth of the global economy picks up, has benefited Pacific ports. Patchwork increases in technology spending have helped rekindle growth in employment in Austin, Tex., and San Diego.
Elsewhere, the rebound of domestic tourism and the continued growth of gambling have once again made boom towns of Las Vegas, Atlantic City and Reno, Nev. Each ranked in the top six on the list of metropolitan areas with the strongest job growth between May and November 2003, the last month for which the federal government has released local statistics. A handful of Florida areas, including Orlando, Sarasota and West Palm Beach, also made the top 50.
For workers who are hoping for pay increases in their current jobs, instead of new jobs as blackjack dealers, nurses or Wall Street traders, the trends are less encouraging. Although employment has grown for each of the last five months, ending the longest streak of job loss since the Great Depression, the labor market remains weak.
The economy added 278,000 jobs between July and December after having lost about 2.7 million jobs from early 2001 to last summer, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says. Many economists say that the government is probably underestimating recent job growth, but no one is suggesting that employment is anywhere near its peak.
Knowing that they still have the upper hand, companies have become less willing to increase salaries than they were as recently as the autumn of 2003. For most middle- and lower-income workers, hourly pay appears to be growing roughly at the rate of inflation, according to government statistics.
The average hourly wage for production and nonsupervisory workers -- a government category that covers roughly four-fifths of the work force -- rose 2 percent last year, while the inflation rate was 1.9 percent.
Pay is increasing more quickly for upper-income workers, causing inequality to rise in ways it has not since the early 1990's, economists say.
The cost of health care is also weighing on pay, as some companies are telling workers that as a condition for continuing to cover health costs, they will freeze pay or lift it only slightly. Health-insurance premiums jumped 13.9 percent last year, after rising more than 10 percent in 2001 and 2002, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation
''There's now a clear trade-off that's occurring,'' Mr. Zandi said. ''Workers are willing to give up cash for health care.''
Of course, all of the new health-care spending -- as Americans get older and medical research leads to exciting but expensive new treatments -- continues to create employment. Job growth at hospitals, doctors' offices, home health-care companies and other medical services has slowed in recent months, but it is still increasing by more than 10,000 a month, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which adjusts its numbers to account for normal seasonal variations.
Almost one out of every nine jobs in the United States is now in health care, compared with one in 12 at the start of the 90's. The good news for job seekers, limited as it still may be, is that there are finally some other places to look.
Correction:  January 26, 2004, Monday  Because of an editing error, the front page of the special expanded Job Market section yesterday carried incorrect continuation page numbers for four articles. ''A Rosier Picture for Hiring'' continued on Page 6; ''Changing Careers'' on Page 4; ''Honing Your Skills'' on Page 4; and ''Take to the Streets?'' on Page 3. The Times regrets the inconvenience to readers.
