TO be honest, I never really noticed the PATH train between the World Trade Center and Hoboken, though I must have boarded it hundreds of times while my boyfriend Jeff and I conducted our torrid two-state romance, Jeff in Hoboken, I in Brooklyn. Blame it on infatuation. It was the arrival, not the journey that mattered. Blame it on too many movies. When I had the time and the cash, I preferred the ferry, with its double skyline twinkling above the Hudson. The PATH had all the romantic allure of a brisk scrub with bleach and hot water.
My PATH-antipathy surprised me. Though I grew up somewhere else, I was born in Manhattan, and I spent my infancy traversing the New York subways in my mother's arms. I was, my mother said, the prettiest baby the subways had ever seen. I loved the trains in Rome, in Paris, in Boston, in Washington, D.C. Somehow, the PATH never felt like a real subway to me. The point of that train was to get you somewhere else -- into the bowels of the financial district, into the gentrifying bustle of Jersey City or Hoboken, or onto a connecting train to take you deeper into New Jersey where family waited dinner. To use a therapist's term, the PATH from the World Trade Center to Hoboken was a transitional space.
Then, my relationship with Jeff deepened. We married, I moved to Hoboken, and my relationship with the WTC-Hoboken PATH ended. When I moved into Jeff's place, I said formal farewells to a lot of things. But I didn't give the WTC-Hoboken PATH train a second thought.
Ten days later, the twin towers fell. I was lucky on all counts. I lost no one I loved; I was safe at home in Hoboken. And it was those same prosaic PATH trains that provided me with a happy story to tell about that terrible day. Thanks to the courage and skill of PATH employees, quick thinking had saved hundreds of the train's passengers. They were safe -- but now that train was gone.
Months passed. At the Hoboken station, on my way into the city via the 33rd Street train, I'd glance across the platform where the World Trade Center train used to pull in, and wonder when it would ever come again. For the first time, I looked forward to its return.
And then the World Trade Center PATH train came back, and the new station opened with great fanfare. I made ready my $1.50.
And did nothing.
A day passed. A week. I read about the improvements and changes in the station. I studied up on the PATH train as if I had to pass a final exam -- except I kept putting off the test.
I told myself it was as simple as walking across a platform, just as I used to. Was I afraid? I suppose so. But we were on alert, weren't we? My husband applauded my good sense, but I knew myself for what I was: a coward. Then, I found something else to be afraid of. A mole above my left eyebrow darkened and swelled. Skin cancer runs in my family. I called my doctor, whose office, if it had a window, would overlook the Brooklyn Bridge in Lower Manhattan. He could see me as soon as possible. All I had to do was jump on a train.
So I did what I always do when I am afraid: I puttered. I took showers, changed clothes, dried dishes and peered into the mirror to see if the mole had shrunk. No dice. What had shrunk were my transit options. I was too late to take anything except the WTC-PATH train.
Once I was on the train, it felt very familiar, even tedious. I whipped out a crossword puzzle and raced through it. As the cars pulled into Jersey City, this felt like just another train ride, nothing special. How could I have been so ridiculous? We left Jersey City and headed to Manhattan. Then the light began to pour in.
Sunlight. My years riding Brooklyn subways knew this light to be the first sign of a train that is about to rise up onto an elevated track, into the sky. I have always loved that feeling, and so I looked out -- and up.
But the PATH stayed on the ground. It was the earth itself that had fallen away. I wasn't the only one who gathered at the window, who stared and shivered as that train took us through that unforgettable canyon: the footprint of the World Trade Center.
Pretty winter sunshine settled on the canyon floor. Nobody spoke. We knew someone, many someones, had paid a terrible price for this exquisite light. Then, the train passed underground again and reached its destination. We spilled out.
All my fears that day revealed themselves to be groundless. My errant mole was just a skin allergy. I returned to the PATH station buoyant and grateful. I had places to get to, as we all did, as we always would, all of our precious lives. But before I entered the train, I did something new. I slowed down. I stopped, I marveled, and I mourned.
SOAPBOX Martha Garvey is a freelance writer.
