MIKE LEIGH'S comedy ''Abigail's Party'' may not have as much to say today as it did when it was first seen a quarter-century ago, but the five drolly brilliant actors in Two River Theater Company's staging of the play prove that when it comes to humor, it's not necessarily how much you say, but how you say it.
The play, an import from England, where it has attained cult status, looks in on the worst cocktail party ever held. Beverly (Henny Russell) and Laurence (Warren Kelley) have invited over some newcomers to the neighborhood, Angela (Anna Cody) and Tony (Randall Newsome), along with a divorcee named Susan (Pamela Wiggins) who lives next door.
The five of them have nothing to say to one another, and Beverly tries to compensate for the awkwardness with liquor. The alcohol, though, only highlights the misery, especially within the two couple's marriages. Susan, meanwhile, is quietly distraught about what might be going on back at her house, where her teenage daughter, Abigail, is having her first unsupervised party, the event of the title.
Mr. Leigh, who is also well known as a film director (''Topsy-Turvy''), mercilessly satirizes that social stripe in which living rooms are decorated in orange and black, spouses live together in near silence and social conversation rarely involves any issue weightier than whether olives are fit to eat. This probably cut a bit deeper in the late 1970's than it does today, after the orgy of consumption of the 1990's. It's now more obvious that vacuous materialism is ever with us and that making fun of those caught up in it is an easy sort of sport.
What is most entertaining in the Two River production is not the play, but the performance of it. This type of comedy, built on awkward pauses rather than pratfalls, is difficult to pull off, but Jonathan Fox, the director, has managed it nicely. He has resisted the temptation to rush things along, and so the first act opens at an almost painfully slow pace, deliberately uncomfortable and static.
Just when you think you can't stand another minute of it, you realize that all five characters have somehow established identities and even become endearing. The actors are all great, but the standout is Ms. Wiggins as poor, put-upon Susan. She brings down the house repeatedly by saying practically nothing more than ''No,'' when someone asks if she wants a drink or cigarette or hors d'oeuvre, and ''Thank you'' when they force it on her anyway. Her comic timing is perfect, and so is her look of distress at the play's end, as Mr. Leigh brings matters to an ambiguous, disturbing conclusion.
''Abigail's Party'' is at the Two River Theater Company, Algonquin Arts Theater, 171 Main Street, Manasquan, (732)345-1400, through next Sunday.
THEATER REVIEW
