THE rigors of playing a high-school football game against a longtime rival in a nearby town would seem to be limited to putting a few players, pads and helmets on a school bus and driving a few minutes to the game. But under a scheduling and assessment system for football teams that has come into use in Westchester recently, that game against the crosstown rival is no given.
The annual Rye-Harrison football game, a much-anticipated local sports event for about 75 years, probably will not be played this coming fall because of the scheduling method, called the Piner system. Under the system, football teams are ranked six months before the season starts and are scheduled to play against teams of similar perceived skill level, as judged by the system's ranking criteria.
Proponents of this involved system, long used on Long Island, say it limits the hurt feelings that arise from the blowouts that come when good teams play bad ones and also cuts down on injuries.
Opponents say that such power rankings leave no room for the sort of longstanding rivalries that give an air of history to high school football and draw alumni and community members to games. These opponents also say that the process of ranking a high school team six months ahead of time, when players can still move in and out of the district or gain 40 pounds of muscle, is so subjective that it's close to meaningless. Coaches might even undersell their own team, they add, to get an easier schedule.
''Theoretically and in design, it lets teams play those of a similar nature,'' said Dr. Edward J. Shine, the superintendent of Rye schools, ''but what it does is it sets aside all other significant factors. It's a rigorous system that doesn't allow for flexibility.''
The direct effects are visible in the Rye-Harrison game. At a recent school board meeting, the Rye district voted unanimously to petition the New York State Public High School Athletic Association's Section One to continue the Rye versus Harrison varsity football game this fall. The move is necessary because Harrison, with increased enrollment, will move to Class A from B. Rye will remain in Class B and under the Piner system there can be no such thing as inter-class games.
Class A, which for football has schools with 625 to 1,000 9th-, 10th- and 11th-graders in the previous year, recently voted to abandon the system because officials thought it cumbersome . But Class B, which has schools with 401 to 624, kept it.
Ray Kurowski, the athletic director at Eastchester High School, as chairman of Section One Class B, is in charge of assembling the power rankings. ''I don't think we're going to get anything perfect,'' he said, ''they can't even get rankings perfect in college football.''
But, he added, the effort to get evenly matched schedules is educationally sound. ''There is not a purpose in a strong team playing a patsy,'' he said, because strong teams aren't challenged, the weak get demoralized and the chance for injury is greater.
As for the possibility of lost rivalries, Mr. Kurowski is dismissive. In light of the advantages of the power-ranking system, he said, trying to circumvent it is ''thinking 'we' first and 'everyone else' second.''
Mr. Kurowski said: ''People can live without Rye-Harrison. Americans even lived without the Olympics one year.''
New rivalries form over time and, he added, ''Rye could move up to Class A in a year, just like Harrison did.''
Stephen Feeney, the president of the Rye Board of Education and co-founder of Alumni and Friends of Rye High School, said that in losing the biggest game of the year, the community loses something that had bound it together. All the coaches whose teams are to be ranked are given packets in which they itemize returning players, past records and awards, whether there was a JV or Modified program and how they did, as well as whether players went to a football camp or hit the weight room. The coaches make presentations and vote on rankings.
With pressure to achieve winning records, ''there is a question as to whether the coaches are being straight shooters about their teams with their peers,'' said Mr. Feeney, who has a suggestion for a less involved way to proceed. Teams should play their natural rivals, he proposes. If the score is lopsided, the coach of the team in the lead should simply take his starters out and put his second and third string in.
Mr. Feeney said, ''It's called sportsmanship.''
FOR THE RECORD E-mail: Fuchs@nytimes.com
