Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey staked out an apparently conciliatory approach to the dispute in Cyprus on Saturday, saying he would allow the United Nations to ''fill in the blanks'' of a settlement just days before he is scheduled to visit the United States to meet Bush administration officials.
Turkish troops invaded the northern part of Cyprus in 1974 after a pro-Greek coup on the Mediterranean island. Since then, the Turkish Cypriot government in the north has won no international recognition, and the continued division of Cyprus has bedeviled Turkey's relationship with many of its traditional allies.
Mr. Erdogan met with the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, on Saturday on the fringes of the World Economic Forum here.
At a news conference later, Mr. Erdogan said Turkey was prepared to accept a proposal that Mr. Annan complete the details of a settlement worked out by Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders.
The issue has taken on urgency since Cyprus is set to join the European Union as one of 10 new member states on May 1, and the European Union has pledged to decide later this year whether it will allow Turkey to open accession negotiations.
''If the Greek Cypriot administration in the south accepts the secretary general to fill in the blanks, then we as a guarantee country, as far as Turkey is concerned, would accept him to do that,'' Mr. Erdogan said. His remarks were translated from Turkish by one of the officials in his entourage.
Mr. Erdogan, who is expected to fly to the United States from Switzerland, said he had also urged Mr. Annan to appoint a new Cyprus negotiator to pursue the United Nations effort to reunify the island. ''Annan said he will assess this proposal from us,'' Mr. Erdogan said.
Turkey has 30,000 troops in northern Cyprus. Mr. Erdogan made clear that he hoped Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders would reach a deal on their own account, saying, ''I wish that the leaders can get together and fill their own blanks.'' He said Turkey would urge Rauf Denktash, the Turkish Cypriot leader, to go along with settlement proposals. Previously, Mr. Denktash rejected United Nations settlement ideas.
The disputes to be resolved in Cyprus include the sharing of territory, the resettlement of refugees and the presence of Greek and Turkish soldiers in a unified Cyprus.
Mr. Erdogan also said Turkey had offered to mediate between Israel and Syria. Turkey shares a border with Syria and has diplomatic relations with Israel.
