WINTER SPORTS
Austrian Wins Downhill
Stephan Eberharter of Austria captured one of the most prestigious downhills on the World Cup circuit yesterday in Kitzbühel, Austria, beating Daron Rahlves of the United States.
Eberharter, 33, completed the Streif course on Hahnenkamm mountain in 1 minute 55.48 seconds. He was 1.21 seconds faster than Rahlves. Ambrosi Hoffmann of Switzerland was third. Bode Miller tied for 16th. (AP)
PAERSON RALLIES IN GIANT SLALOM -- The world champion Anja Paerson of Sweden won her second World Cup giant slalom of the season, in Maribor, Slovenia, with an outstanding second run yesterday to edge Michaela Dorfmeister of Austria.
Paerson, second after the first leg, finished in a combined 2:18.27 seconds -- 0.98 ahead of Dorfmeister, the 2000 winner. María José Contreras of Spain was third, 1.23 behind. (AP)
RECORD FOR LUGE VICTORIES TIED -- Georg Hackl of Germany won a luge race yesterday in Igls, Austria, tying Markus Prock's record for World Cup victories at 33.
Hackl won in a combined 1:38.050, outpacing Armin Zoeggeler by 0.041. Zoeggeler still secured the overall championship with one race left. Zoeggeler has 586 points, 111 more than Hackl. (AP)
BASEBALL
YANKEES TO OPEN IN TOKYO -- Major League Baseball announced its schedule for this season, confirming that the Yankees will open March 30 in Tokyo against Tampa Bay. After playing again March 31, the Yankees will resume play at Tampa Bay on April 6. Their home opener is April 8 against the White Sox.
The Mets will open April 6 at Atlanta with a three-game series, then head to San Juan, P.R., for a three-game series against Montreal. The Mets' home opener will be April 12 against the Braves. (AP)
WOMACK SIGNS WITH RED SOX -- The Boston Red Sox signed infielder Tony Womack, who led the National League in stolen bases from 1997 to 1999, to a minor league contract and invited him to their major league spring training camp.
Womack hit .226 with 13 steals in 103 games with Arizona, Colorado and the Chicago Cubs last season. He had surgery to replace a ligament in his right elbow in October and expects to be ready for spring training, the Red Sox said. (Bloomberg News)
URBINA ARRESTED IN VENEZUELA -- The free-agent pitcher Ugueth Urbina was arrested early Friday morning in Caracas, Venezuela, for firing a gun out the passenger window of an S.U.V., the Chacao police chief, Leonardo Diaz Paruta, said in yesterday's El Nacional newspaper.
A Chacao police spokeswoman confirmed the remarks. Diaz Paruta was not immediately available for further comment.
Urbina finished last season as the closer for the World Series champion Florida Marlins.
Diaz Paruta said Urbina and a friend, Cesar Diaz, were intoxicated when they were detained. Police seized a 9-millimeter revolver, and the two were charged with possession of a weapon without a license and misuse of a firearm.
It was not clear whether they were still in custody. Urbina could not immediately be reached for comment. (AP)
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
Rivers Leads South
North Carolina State's Philip Rivers passed for 213 yards and directed all of the South team's scoring drives in a 28-10 victory over the North in the Senior Bowl last night in Mobile, Ala.
Rivers completed 12 of 19 passes, two for first-quarter touchdowns, and was named the game's most valuable player.
Florida State's Greg Jones rushed for two touchdowns and was the South's offensive M.V.P. Florida State's Darnell Dockett, who set up a touchdown with a fumble recovery, was the team's defensive M.V.P. (AP)
