CHRISTINE PICCININNI, on her way to the casinos in Atlantic City to help her parents celebrate their 50th wedding anniversary, was eating a sandwich of roasted vegetables on crispy grilled bread here. The setting? Under the golden arches that say McDonald's.
''These sandwiches are a good idea,'' Ms. Piccininni said. ''It's modernizing with the times.''
Indeed, that is the idea. The times are challenging the McDonald's empire, what with changing consumer tastes, fierce competition from ''fast casual'' restaurants and negative publicity from lawsuits contending that McDonald's products caused patrons to become obese. As a result, the chain is striking back with changes like those in evidence here at the Marlton McDonald's, on busy Route 70 near Voorhees and Cherry Hill.
The concept is called Bistro Gourmet, and this is its first appearance in the Northeast and its first appearance in a non-tourist area. (It started in Florida three years ago.) Corporate officers say customer reaction will determine whether it continues.
Bistro Gourmet promises trendier fare -- and some of it is certainly more healthful than a Big Mac and Chicken McNuggets. Here in Marlton, it includes specialty sandwiches, a chicken burrito, Bucks County Coffee drinks, desserts like chocolate love-in cake for $3.49 a slice and hand-dipped Hershey's ice cream. Along with the food, this McDonald's now has a somewhat swankier décor, with beige and black granite countertops and dark wood wall panels. Customers eating here are even served their orders on plates of white glass instead of plastic foam.
''We wanted a more upscale look for the community we are in,'' said Mark Heinz, the owner-operator, who took over from his father, Joseph, when he retired five years ago. The McDonald's franchise has been in the Heinz family for 31 years and last year did $3.4 million in sales.
The McDonald's Corporation itself, however, recently encountered the previously unimaginable: a quarterly loss. The chain, founded in 1948, by 2000 had grown into an international behemoth with average sales of $1.6 million a restaurant in the United States. But in January 2003, McDonald's reported its first quarterly loss since the company went public in 1965.
McDonald's remains the world's largest food retailer, with 30,000 locations around the world, and it has regained traction in the last year. For December, it reported a sales increase of 17.1 percent over December 2002 and a 16.6 percent increase in the fourth quarter. But McDonald's customer base is said to be wearing thin as established rivals like Burger King, Wendy's and Subway have been joined by upstarts like Baja Fresh Mexican Grill, Panera Bread and assorted cafes and coffee stores.
Bistro Gourmet is not McDonald's only response to such change. Elsewhere in the Northeast, 650 McDonald's restaurants in New Jersey, New York and Connecticut recently began displaying posters and brochures that show how customers can tailor the company's products to fit into low-carbohydrate, low-fat and low-calorie meal plans, by deleting buns, for example, as well as condiments and, in some cases, lettuce and tomatoes. McDonald's outlets in Southern California have started promoting salads and low-fat sandwiches, while some in Houston are providing low-fat menu items and exercise tips. Last year, McDonald's introduced several products billed as healthy and began allowing consumers to replace fries in Happy Meals with bags of fruit.
Mr. Heinz said McDonald's executives asked him about a year ago if he would be interested in the Bistro Gourmet concept. He agreed to try if for a year. There are now about 10 Bistro Gourmet McDonald's in Florida and two are scheduled to open in Pennsylvania and Delaware, according to David Murphy, general manager for McDonald's in the Philadelphia region.
''I don't know that we are trying to compete with the 'fast causal' as much as we are constantly monitoring the likes and dislikes of our customers,'' he said. ''There are food dollars out there people are spending. We're all in competition for the consumer food dollars.'' He added: ''There's a lot to be learned. We will get a sense of consumer reaction.''
Mr. Heinz's restaurant is a good one to monitor because it is in a neighborhood with a mix of families and business people, unlike the Orlando restaurants that have a big tourist trade, Mr. Murphy said.
The Marlton restaurant can seat 220 customers and has a large playroom with tables for young families and more than 100 parking spaces.
''We come for the kids, and we'd like to have a healthier alternative,'' said Erika Schlaffman of Newtown, Pa., who says her family eats at McDonald's about once a week and was in Marlton last week with her children and a friend. Like Ms. Piccininni, she liked the vegetable panini, with roasted vegetables on grilled bread.
Both she and her friend Ronna Sklar, from Holland, Pa., who was eating the chicken and cheese panini with roasted peppers, while her 3-year-old daughter had a Happy Meal, said they would eat at McDonald's even more often if the one near their home had the Bistro Gourmet concept. ''It's one-stop shopping now,'' Ms. Sklar said.
Customers will pay more for the upscale food and coffee. A small cup of McDonald's coffee is 91 cents while a cup of Bucks County Coffee is $1.25. The specialty sandwiches range from $5.50 to $5.70. With a drink and French fries or a salad, they range from $7 to $7.20, about $2 more than a regular McDonald's value meal.
While most people were still dining on burgers, chicken and fries, scattered tables were trying the new items.
''I applaud these people because they are always updating,'' said Esther Goldstein of Cherry Hill, who ordered the vegetable panini instead of her usual grilled chicken sandwich. ''Plus, they put it on a plate.''
But even an upscale menu doesn't always keep the customer satisfied.
''I think it's very nice,'' Esther Patton, 85, who was at the Marlton McDonald's with her husband, Raymond, said of the new menu. ''But I'm sorry they don't have pancakes after 11 in the morning. I was so hungry for pancakes.''
BUSINESS
