THE most rapidly growing community on Long Island are the new immigrants of Latino descent. This trend is but a reflection of a similar pattern across the country. Certainly there has been greater visibility of the Latino community in some circles of society, but much more needs to happen in order to bring this community into the mainstream of the general population; participating and being represented in all facets of political, business, cultural, and social life in America.
Without question, the business community has come to recognize the tremendous buying power and potential within the Latino community. There is tremendous investment being made in advertising to reach to this segment of the population. Of course, the cynical side of me tells me that the only reason business is paying attention to us is because we have something business wants. Money.
Business is willing to treat us equally as any other consumer who has money to spend on products they want to sell. Politically, culturally and socially is another issue. For the most part, politicians are ignoring the Latinos even though we have been growing in numbers, and we are partly responsible for that. Latinos come from about two-dozen countries and have been slow at obtaining American citizenship. The average politician has little motivation to help, represent or acknowledge any group of people that has no voting power. While Latinos have a tradition of maintaining their identity and ties with our country of origin, it is vital that we remember that we have come to the United States for economic and educational opportunities.
If we are to fully realize the opportunities we seek, and to make the American Dream a part of our lives, we must make an intentional effort to naturalize all who have planted new roots here in the United States. Failure to go down this path will result in the continued marginalization of millions of people, and we will only have ourselves to blame.
The most recent race for Suffolk county executive saw two candidates from major political parties totally ignoring one of the major issues in that county. The issue of undocumented workers was not debated or addressed by either candidate, and the media never challenged them to do so. Why? Because the Latino community is largely seen as a group that can be ignored without having to pay a political price.
Another example that comes to mind is the lack of visibility of government officials willing to condemn the brutal bias attacks against Latinos. For the most part, major political leaders remained silent when two day laborers were lured by neo-Nazis and almost killed in Farmingville in 2000. Equally disgusting was the lack of our officials' coming forward to condemn the firebombing of the home of a Latino family in Farmingville this past summer. Even the Suffolk County police department was reluctant to label this a possible bias incident.
Latino community leaders must realize that nobody is going to help our community, unless and until we help ourselves by setting our sights on naturalization for every Latino.
A voice must be raised that a new day is coming to America. A new day of justice and righteousness that will be made possible when we exercise the basic principle of having the power to participate in the democratic process through our vote. We must challenge ourselves and each other to integrate fully into the fabric of the great nation so many have risked their lives to reach.
Today our community may be mostly doing the dirty work nobody else is willing to do. Dishwashers, maids, landscapers, construction workers, short-order cooks, car-wash attendants, office cleaners, etc. Yet, we must dream that from these humble roots will come the next generation of leaders for the United States. Our children will become teachers, doctors, lawyers, government officials, accountants, etc., and our contributions will usher us into a new day for the United States.
A new day can and will come to America, but it is up to us to make it happen. And citizenship is the only way.
SOAPBOX The Rev. Allan B. Ramirez is pastor of the Brookville Reformed Church and chairman of the Nassau County Commission on Human Rights.
