The Democratic presidential candidates hurtled through their final weekend of campaigning before the New Hampshire primary, with Howard Dean attacking two of his rivals on Saturday in a race that Democrats described as increasingly volatile.
For the most part, the candidates -- visiting town halls, hockey rinks and general stores -- tried to adhere to the civil tone that had been evident since the Iowa caucuses on Monday. That reflected, to a large degree, an effort by the candidates to nail down the support of independent New Hampshire voters who are permitted to participate in a Democratic primary and are being viewed as an increasingly significant force in the vote on Tuesday.
A heavy turnout of independents is central to the hopes of Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut and is becoming more crucial to Dr. Dean's hopes of resuscitating his campaign here, political strategists said.
''They are counting on them as if they were a silver bullet,'' said John Weaver, who was a senior strategist to Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, in 2000, when he won the New Hampshire primary with considerable support from independent voters.
But despite efforts to keep the tone civil, some strain showed through on Saturday. Dr. Dean, traveling with his mother in an effort by his campaign to soften his image, raised questions about two opponents as he spoke to reporters aboard a bus rolling through snow-covered hills.
He complained that in the Iowa caucuses, the campaign of Senator John Edwards of North Carolina pushed Dr. Dean into third place by using ''under the table'' tactics, by distributing booklets to supporters instructing them to use hard-ball maneuvers to dissuade Dr. Dean's supporters in caucuses. Mr. Edwards has since apologized, saying he knew nothing about it.
And returning to the issue that helped catapult his candidacy in the first place, Dr. Dean attacked Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the candidate who has replaced him as the leader in the polls, for supporting President Bush's bid to invade Iraq last year, after opposing the first Persian Gulf war in 1993. Dr. Dean supported the first war and opposed the second.
''I would be deeply concerned about that kind of judgment in the White house,'' he said.
The remarks came as a number of polls showed that Mr. Kerry was in the lead into the final days of the campaign. Dr. Dean's once dominant position in this state has declined markedly since his third-place finish in Iowa and the unruly concession speech he gave afterward. Many Democrats said his conduct raised questions about how strong a candidate he would be against Mr. Bush.
Aides to all the candidates described the race as volatile because of what many described as the depth of support among Dr. Dean's most committed supporters, the amount of time and money he had spent in his next-door state and the get-out-the-vote operations his aides had built before he came here.
''I think this race will be a lot closer than it looks right now,'' said Mr. Kerry's campaign manager, Mary Beth Cahill, speaking of New Hampshire. ''And that's what we assumed to be the case all along. So I don't feel like we can take our foot off the pedal in New Hampshire at all -- until Tuesday.''
Dr. Dean's advisers said they were seeing signs, in some polls, that their candidate had at least arrested his decline and might be on the upswing after an intimate interview he and his wife, Judith Steinberg Dean, gave on ABC on Thursday. Dr. Dean's campaign said it was distributing 120,000 copies of the video door to door across New Hampshire.
And, inevitably, the expectation game has begun, as candidates, reading the polls, tried to get the best possible interpretation of the actual vote next Tuesday. Aides to General Clark, who had been saying just a week ago they expected him to come in second here, declared that they would happy if he came in fourth.
The candidates brought the race to a close by focusing their attention not only on Democrats, but also on independents, that distinct group of New Hampshire voters who helped Senator McCain upset George Bush in 2000.
Some campaign aides estimated that independents could make up 40 percent to 50 percent of the vote in the Democratic primary. That is a particularly large figure because, unlike in 2000, there is no significant Republican presidential primary.
''There are significantly many more independents than Democrats in New Hampshire,'' said Ray Buckley, vice chairman of the state Democratic Party and an adviser to Mr. Lieberman. ''If a candidate in the closing days is able to get the support of those votes, it can make things vary wildly, which is exactly what happened with McCain.''
The evidence of this courtship was abundant through the week and through Saturday, as the candidates nearly jumped over one another as they sought to denounce ''special interests,'' pledge their fealty to campaign finance reform and denounce partisanship in government -- all themes that Mr. McCain used to great effect in appealing to independent voters in 2000, when he defeated Mr. Bush by 18 points.
''In three days, the voters of New Hampshire will have an opportunity to break the grips of the powerful special interests in this country and put the people back in charge,'' Mr. Kerry told Democrats at a dinner in Nashua on Saturday evening.
Senator Edwards brought the audience at the dinner to its feet with an appeal that helped him come from behind to place second in Iowa last Monday, and that his aides said could be particularly effective in this environment: denouncing candidates who ran ''sniping'' campaigns, declaring that ''we have a moral obligation'' to lift poor Americans out of poverty.
''If you are looking for the Democrat who will do the best job attacking the other Democrats, that's not me,'' he said. ''I think the election is bigger that that.''
Dr. Dean spent two days of his tumultuous week talking about campaign finance reform, the issue that, as Mr. McCain demonstrated, has had deep resonance with this segment of the electorate.
Mr. Lieberman has featured supporters of Mr. McCain's campaign in his advertisements and sent out a mailing to 70,000 independents. He now ends his stump speech by saying, ''I urge independents to come out and vote next week.''
General Clark went so far as to try to recruit Mr. Weaver, the former McCain strategist, to help run his campaign this year. And throughout his travels here, he has stressed his credentials as a nonpartisan candidate.
''We need a higher standard of leadership of America,'' General Clark said in Auburn, N.H., on Saturday morning at a pancake breakfast that was so crowded that the fire marshal threatened to shut it down. ''We need leadership that looks out for what's good for the whole country, not just looking out for special interests.''
Steve Bouchard, General Clark's New Hampshire state director, said he thought General Clark would appeal to independent voters. ''As our opponents have pointed out, he is not an intense partisan, not a rabid partisan.'' Mr. Bouchard said. ''That's an element that a lot of these people can relate to.''
Asked how important independent voters were to Dr. Dean, his New Hampshire manager, Karen Hicks, responded with a one-word e-mail message: ''VERY.''
There are 690,159 registered voters in New Hampshire, of whom 260,021 are independents, 253,504 are Republicans and 176,634 are Democrats. William M. Gardner, the secretary of state, said Saturday that he expected 184,000 people to vote in the Democratic primary.
Under New Hampshire law, independent voters can turn up at a polling place on Tuesday, sign a form declaring they are Democrats and vote in the primary. Upon voting, they can fill out a form that reverts their status to independent.
Mark Penn, Mr. Lieberman's pollster, contended that his candidate's support had been undermeasured because polls did not reflect the views of independents.
Mr. Penn said that Dr. Dean's third-place showing in Iowa and his concession speech had scared off many of the independent voters who had originally flocked to his candidacy. ''He originally tapped into the straight-talk model,'' Mr. Penn said, referring to what had been the theme of Mr. McCain's campaign. ''But he's lost it.''
Mr. Kerry, in an interview to be broadcast on ''60 Minutes'' Sunday on CBS, took issue with a statement by General Clark in which he suggested that his experience as a general would make him a superior candidate to Senator Kerry because Mr. Kerry was only a lieutenant.
''That's the first time I have heard a general be so dismissive of lieutenants, who bleed a lot in wars,'' Mr. Kerry said in the interview.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
