AFTER more than a decade in the wilderness, the companies that dig rocks out of the ground are capturing investors' imagination.
The newfound glamour of the mining sector extends beyond the price of gold, which has gained much attention during its 17 percent climb since last January. Nickel recently traded at a 15-year high, while copper surged by almost 40 percent last year, rising above $1 a pound in December for the first time since the fall of 1997. Aluminum, coal, lead, platinum and even silver, which is up 40 percent since mid-2003, are among other metals and minerals that have posted sizable price gains.
''We think there are some huge changes going on in the commodities market that are sustainable for a long period,'' said Tom McKissick, who manages the TCW Galileo Large Cap Value fund at the Trust Company of the West in Los Angeles. The fund's holdings include international metals giants like Rio Tinto, Alcoa and Barrick Gold.
Mr. McKissick notes that the basic-materials component of the S.&amp;P. 500-stock index has climbed from a low of 1 percent of the index's total value in the fall of 2000 to 3.3 percent now. That share, however, is still well below the peak of 12.2 percent, in 1981, so Mr. McKissick says he is confident that commodity-related stocks will continue climbing for some time.
Christopher Hsu, an analyst at Aristeia Capital, a hedge fund in New York, said that ''it's not a bad idea to be overweight'' in mining stocks. Aristeia recently increased its exposure to the sector, especially to copper and gold, represented by companies like Freeport-McMoRan of New Orleans, which operates a big mine in Indonesia.
The stock market boom of the 1990's largely bypassed the mining sector. Despite buoyant consumption, metal prices were held back by a tendency among mining companies to focus more on output than profits. Their response to rising prices was typically to expand mines and open new ones rather than to exercise discipline and enjoy a higher return on capital. As a result, upturns in metal markets tended to be short-lived.
Even as the technology boom was moving into high gear in 1997, the mood in mining soured further because of the scandal involving Bre-X Minerals, a small Canadian company. Its report of a potentially huge Indonesian gold find had sent its shares soaring, but they collapsed as the site was found to contain nothing worth mining. In the wake of that scandal, funds dried up for the junior exploration companies, mostly based in Canada and Australia, that grease the wheels of the industry through new discoveries, mergers and takeovers.
But much has changed over the last year or two. ''The market is moving way faster than the analysts or the corporate development departments of major mining companies,'' said Donald Lindsay, head of global mining at CIBC World Markets in Toronto. Mr. Lindsay's unit participated in 55 equity financings worth 4.02 billion Canadian dollars ($3.11 billion) last year, up from 34 deals worth 2.55 billion Canadian dollars in 2002 and just three financings, totaling less than 200 million Canadian dollars, in 2001.
Despite exceptions, like Newmont Mining and Freeport-McMoRan, which are based in the United States, the global mining industry is generally dominated by British, Canadian and Australian companies. Several of the biggest foreign metal producers, like BHP Billiton, Inco and Alcan, are listed in New York. Rio Tinto's stock trades on the New York Stock Exchange as American depository receipts. Many small exploration companies are listed on the Toronto exchange, although the American Stock Exchange recently secured the listings of several small and midsize gold producers.
A spate of mergers and takeovers has increased the market share of some of the biggest players, like BHP Billiton, Phelps Dodge and Newmont Mining, while spawning a new group of midsize companies.
Among the newcomers, Wheaton River Minerals, a gold producer based in Vancouver, British Columbia, made four acquisitions and raised 366 million Canadian dollars in three equity offerings in 2003. The company has operations in Mexico, Argentina and Australia and is listed on the Amex and in Toronto. Its share price has risen 168 percent in the last year, and is now at $2.71.
Investors who have broadened their exposure to metals cite two main attractions: the weakening American dollar and fast-growing metal consumption in China.
Nathan Leight, a principal partner at Terrapin Partners, a portfolio management firm in New York, said his strategy was shaped by the likely impact of a rising federal budget deficit on the dollar. ''I wouldn't be surprised if we saw the dollar swing as low as 1.40 euros,'' Mr. Leight said. (A euro bought 1.26 dollars on Friday.)
Terrapin increased its holdings of gold bullion and stocks like Newmont Mining last summer. It has also invested in Australian inflation-protected bonds and short-term New Zealand certificates of deposit as a way of gaining exposure to commodity-based economies. Not only have those two countries' currencies appreciated markedly against the American dollar, but the yield on New Zealand C.D.'s with maturities of a month to a year has consistently been above 5 percent, Mr. Leight said.
The currencies of Canada and South Africa, two other mining industry bastions, have also appreciated sharply against the American dollar.
On the demand side, China's surging economy has done wonders for metal consumption. According to Brook Hunt, a British consulting firm, sales of automobiles and air-conditioners in China surged by 36 percent in the first nine months of 2003 alone. Sales of household refrigerators were up 28 percent, and power generation equipment by 65 percent.
As a result, Brook Hunt estimates that China's copper consumption ballooned by 24 percent last year, after a gain of 8 percent in 2002. Richard Wilson, the firm's managing director, said in a recent presentation that while a global shortage this year might be tempered by the release of copper from a large Chilean producer's stockpile, 2005 was likely to be ''an exceptionally good year for copper prices as supply struggles to keep pace with growth in demand.''
BESIDES these cyclical factors, some investors say, the mind-set has changed among producers of metal and many other commodities. ''You've seen an increase in capital discipline,'' said Mr. McKissick, the fund manager. ''The managements now understand that you can't continue to develop resources when you're generating a return on capital of only 5 percent. This is a major departure from where the world was for the past 10 to 15 years.''
As evidence of this transformation, Michael Bradshaw, a senior analyst at Pioneer Investment Management in Boston, cited the decision by Codelco, the big Chilean copper producer, to build a large stockpile in recent years, rather than risk pushing down prices by selling the metal. Inco, the Canadian nickel producer, suspended construction at a big project in New Caledonia in December 2002 after the projected cost jumped by as much as 40 percent.
''You've had a more rational market,'' said Mr. Bradshaw, who takes the view that this process has been hastened by the recent consolidation, especially among copper miners. Pioneer funds are sizable holders of Phelps Dodge and Rio Tinto stock.
But how long will such discipline last if demand and prices keep rising, and money for more exploration keeps flowing? Skeptics point to the aluminum market where, despite mergers and acquisitions, a host of new smelter projects kept prices sliding from 1995 until mid-2003. The spot aluminum price on the London Metal Exchange rose by a relatively modest 18 percent last year.
According to the contrarian argument, the current shortage of nickel stems less from producer discipline than from the disappointing results of a new extraction process, known as high-pressure acid leaching. Several projects in western Australia began using this technology in the late 1990's, but output has been much lower and costs much higher than expected.
Gerald Harper, a consultant in Toronto who tracks mine financings, said that while mining companies raised about the same amount of money last year as in 2002, ''the use of proceeds has changed dramatically,'' from paying down debt to funding exploration and new projects.
''There are grounds for a little caution,'' Stephen Briggs, a metals economist at Société Générale in London, wrote in a recent report. Though Mr. Briggs expects demand for all major metals to exceed supply this year, he says that ''more of the many voluntary cutbacks will almost certainly be rescinded in response to better market conditions.''
He also sounded a note of caution about China, saying that growing Chinese exports of products like lead-acid batteries to North America and other parts of Asia are often displacing goods made elsewhere, rather than expanding overall demand for metals..
Mr. Lindsay at CIBC said that investment in the mining sector was moving into a ''quasi speculative'' phase. ''We're in a very exciting period,'' he said. ''I think it could last a little longer, but I have no illusions that it's going to last for 10 years.''
