IS the ghost of Robert Moses still haunting New York? Last Sunday was the 70th anniversary of the appointment of Robert Moses as the city's parks commissioner. He was by far its longest-serving commissioner -- 26 years -- from January 1934 to May 1960. Only Henry Stern's 15 years came close.
Every parks commissioner since Moses has served in his shadow. As Robert Caro wrote in his classic 1974 biography, ''The Power Broker,'' Moses increased the number of New York playgrounds to 777 from 119 ''and then filled the parks with zoos and skating rinks, boathouses and tennis houses, bridle paths and golf courses, 288 tennis courts and 673 baseball diamonds.'' He filled marshes to make more parks and dredged sand to make more beaches. More notoriously, Moses cleared tenements to make way for highways. Cemented in memory by Mr. Caro, Moses is a towering figure, if not a household name.
Even though Adrian Benepe, the current parks commissioner, has toiled in the department's trenches for many years, he remains almost unknown two years after being appointed by Mayor Bloomberg to the top job. If he lasts for many years, his personality will emerge as strongly as that of his antic former boss, Mr. Stern. But so far, the cult of personality has not been a hallmark of the Bloomberg administration.
Yet in striking ways, the unprepossessing Mr. Benepe sees his mission as being very much in the spirit of his most famous predecessor. In a contrarian view, Mr. Benepe says Moses' reputation has been unfairly sullied, arguing that despite his image as a champion of the rich and the middle class, much of what he did as parks commissioner eventually benefited the poor and working class.
Because of the Moses swimming pools in neighborhoods like Harlem, Washington Heights and the South Bronx, he says, people no longer routinely drown in the city's rivers (though with pollution subsiding, who knows?). As for condemning neighborhoods to build highways, if Moses hadn't done it, Mr. Benepe argues, somebody else would have, and New York might look like Dallas or Houston. Instead, the city also got picturesque parkways.
Despite his dictatorial zeal, Moses constantly balanced what he saw as the public good against private interests. A case in point was his dispute in the mid-50's with Walter O'Malley, owner of the Brooklyn Dodgers, as recounted by Michael Shapiro in his recent book ''The Last Good Season.'' O'Malley wanted Moses to condemn land in downtown Brooklyn so it would be cheap enough for O'Malley to buy it and build a stadium on it. Moses declined, saying that cheap land was available in Bedford-Stuyvesant. O'Malley left town.
The news that the developer Bruce Ratner wants to move the New Jersey Nets to Brooklyn can only bring with it a sense of the familiar. Like O'Malley, Mr. Ratner wants government to use its power to condemn land for a sports arena.
What would Moses do if he had it to do over? Mr. Benepe doesn't hazard a guess. But he points out that in the wake of Sept. 11, New York faces other Moses-like moments: redeveloping Lower Manhattan and struggling with how to use the city's last remaining bits of vacant land and abandoned industrial property, much of it on the waterfront.
''The mayor has directed us to go and get the waterfront and bring it back for recreation,'' Mr. Benepe said the other day in his office at the Central Park Arsenal, pondering the anniversary of Moses' appointment. This time, he said, the city is looking not for opportunities to twin parks with highways, but for chances to create ''greenways'' -- anti-highways, actually -- intended for non-motorized transportation: pedestrians, bicyclists and in-line skaters.
In the last two years, Mr. Benepe has spent a lot of time -- rather magical time, he adds -- circling the city by boat, prospecting for land, particularly in Staten Island. During this journey, he has found himself thinking about the similarities and differences between Moses' era and his own.
''What's the same,'' he said, ''is that we're going back to the waterfront. What's different is that we have a pedestrian and bicycle orientation, and that this time is more difficult, because this is not a tabula rasa.''
In the parks that still bear Moses' stamp, Mr. Benepe boasts, his department has planted more flowers than at any time in the city's history. Flowers may seem more ephemeral than grand public works. But Mr. Benepe says, ''They are humanizing.'' At this point in history, that doesn't seem so bad.
COPING E-mail: amh@nytimes.com
