After a week of searching for a man who witnesses said fell through a Brooklyn lake last Sunday, police divers pulled a body out of the lake yesterday and said it seemed to match witness descriptions of the man they were searching for.
Witnesses last Sunday said that a man in his 20's walked out on the partly frozen Prospect Park Lake and ventured about 40 feet from shore, despite several ''No Skating'' signs. Passersby heard him shout for help and fall through.
Yesterday, Officer Albert Kaufmann, a police diver, found the body, which the police described as that of a Hispanic man in his mid-20's and of medium build and height, face-down on the lake bottom about 10 feet below the surface. Officer Kaufmann said yesterday that in the pocket of the rescued man was a card with the name Miguel Flores and the name of a nearby homeless shelter.
While the police declined to officially identify the body until it was seen by the medical examiner, an official with the city's Department of Homeless Services said that a Miguel Flores, a 24-year-old Honduran immigrant, entered the Kingsboro Men's MICA shelter on Clarkson Avenue in Flatbush in November. The shelter is several blocks from the lake.
One resident, Angel Garcia, called Mr. Flores an amiable man who had recently moved here and wanted to work on his English in order to get a restaurant job in Manhattan.
''He was a nice guy,'' Mr. Garcia said. ''He seemed happy.''
Another resident, Peter Cohen, 30, said Mr. Flores was ''a quiet guy who kept to himself. He was no trouble,'' he added. ''He seemed pretty content and never really seemed angry.''
Officer Kaufmann said that the body ''was three-quarters frozen with rigor mortis, but preserved.'' He said he had been searching the lake for about a half-hour, tethered to a line held by other divers on the shore. Visibility was about one foot.
''I noticed myself being moved, drifting in a certain direction,'' he said at the scene yesterday. ''Whether it was the wind or underwater currents, I didn't know, but I went with the drift and bumped into him.''
The man, whose body was dragged onto the shore, had black hair and a goatee and was wearing black jeans. He wore a black hooded jacket over a sweater, a tan scarf around his forehead and a blue Nike baseball cap. His clothing matched witnesses' descriptions from Sunday. His arms were stiff and extended from his body, with his right eye slightly open.
Despite extensive media coverage of the accident, police said they had received no missing-person reports matching the description of the man.
''I feel a sense of satisfaction knowing that we did our job, we completed the task,'' said Officer Kaufmann, a 16-year veteran who found the body about 200 to 300 feet from where witnesses said the man had fallen in.
A spokesman from the city's Department of Homeless Services was not able to confirm yesterday afternoon that the man lived at the Brooklyn shelter, but police officials said they were fairly certain that the body was that of the man from Sunday's reported accident because of the match in clothing.
Also in the man's pocket was a copy of a police summons issued for jumping a turnstile, said Officer Kaufmann, who was outfitted with heavy diving gear and a thick waterproof suit.
He said that last week, weak ice hindered divers' attempts to walk to the point where witnesses said the man fell in, but that that the recent cold weather strengthened the ice.
But, he added: ''It was a difficult task with the ice conditions as is.''
''That's why it took so long to recover the body, because of the condition,'' He said. ''It's very cold and the gear freezes up.''
