Some replies were lengthy. Some were sad. But many, by the end, were filled with elation. When readers were asked what they would do if they could start over, they offered stories of career switches that had profoundly changed their lives.
He worked long hours and long years for scant pay. He would have liked to quit, but he was afraid. He had a wife and children and a mortgage. A lot of people could raise a hand and say, ''That's my story.'' But in his case, a miracle happened.
In 1949, Elliott R. Cummins of Herkimer, N.Y., was 23 and a former G.I. with a degree in retail business management from a community college. A chain of auto accessory stores offered him a $40-a-week job as a management trainee and perhaps an eventual assignment in buying and administration.
The offer, he was told, was just the beginning of the opportunities that would come with hard work and devotion to the company.
Five years later, he was an assistant manager. Two years after that, he was promoted to manager, making $90 a week for the long hours and substantial responsibilities.
''It was shortly after this that I began to realize that most of the juicy jobs in management, buying and administration were going to relatives of the owner, who were much less qualified than I and others in my situation,'' he wrote. ''When I complained about this blatant nepotism, I was assured that my time would come and that I would be rewarded for my hard work and devotion.''
By now, Mr. Cummins had a wife and children. ''I was hesitant to leave my job and look elsewhere, so I continued doing what I was doing, not having the courage to do something about it,'' he explained.
After 27 years, Mr. Cummins still made less than $11,000 a year, and, to make matters worse, he hadn't had a salary increase in more than five years.
''When I approached my boss for a raise, he went into a diatribe about how high our overhead was and the high cost of doing business,'' Mr. Cummins said. ''He then told me that even though I was a valued employee, I was free to look elsewhere, and that he wouldn't stand in my way. I think he was really thinking, 'You are 50 years old -- good luck, buddy, in the job market.'''
By now, Mr. Cummins's eldest son, his heart set on a career as a lawyer, was a college freshman, and two other children were also planning on college. Mr. Cummins feared that he would have to remortgage his home.
Then, in Mr. Cummins's words, a miracle happened. He described the events this way:
In November 1975, while he was selling tires to the district supervisor for the John Hancock insurance company, Mr. Cummins was summoned to the phone and informed that his store would now be open on Sundays and that he would be working extra hours with no increase in salary.
When he returned from the call, his customer told him, ''Elliott, you look like you just lost your best friend.'' Mr. Cummins explained what had happened, and the customer asked him if he had ever considered selling insurance.
He said he didn't know anything about insurance.
The customer replied: ''Elliott, I've been doing business with you for over 10 years. If you tell me something is worthwhile, I trust your judgment and buy your product because I trust you. Insurance is just another product, and with the literally thousands of people in this area who also trust you, I know you'd be a great insurance agent.''
Mr. Cummins's wife, Florence, agreed.
''The rest is history,'' Mr. Cummins said. ''I passed the exams on the first try. In my first three months with John Hancock, I earned more than I did the entire previous year. Also in that year, I was among the top 2 percent in sales of all the 7,500 agents in all of John Hancock in the United States, and things just kept getting better until I retired in 1989 at age 63.
''By the way, my three children got degrees in law, optometry and teaching, and it wasn't necessary to remortgage my home.''
After 25 years as a marketer in financial services, most recently as a senior director of marketing at American Express, Cathy Shockey of Manhattan found herself studying phonetics and curriculum design at Columbia University, writing term papers and cramming for exams. Some of the students were not much older than her 19-year-old daughter. Ms. Shockey was enrolled in a course required for a Tesol (Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages) certificate.
Not long after 9/11, and just shy of her 11th anniversary at American Express, she was called in and told that her job was being redesigned. If not chosen during the reposting process, she would be entitled to severance pay. In late January 2002, when Ms. Shockey no longer had a job, she left.
''Since October, I've been teaching English to young adults from around the world and having a blast,'' she wrote. ''While my compensation isn't what it was, my happiness level is far higher.
''While I wish my former colleagues the best, I know that I've found a new career at an age when many of my friends are contemplating early retirement. I think I can sum up my experience by the expression 'When one door closes, another opens' -- an expression I must remember to teach my students.''
''I was an architect in Chicago for about 45 years,'' Seymour Goldberg writes. ''For the last 10 years or so, I lost interest in my profession for various reasons.
''My hobby since I was a teenager was motorcycles -- riding and fixing. In 1981, as our children began to leave home, I started riding again. In 1987, I bought my first BMW motorcycle, the top of the line. Soon I was servicing my own bike and doing the same for others.''
As time passed, Mr. Goldberg found himself doing less architectural work and spending more time, as he puts it, ''riding and wrenching.''
''Three years ago,'' he writes, ''I opened my own BMW motorcycle shop, and on Jan 1, 2004, I quit the work I went to college for and spent the greatest part of my life doing.''
Mr. Goldberg, now the proprietor of Seymour's BMW Motorcycle Service in Chicago, notes that his wife, Cynthia, says she married an architect and not a ''grease monkey.''
Bu, Mr. Goldberg says: ''The new occupation has greatly invigorated me. I am 70 years old, and others my age envy my having something I am passionate about. It gives me energy and exercise. I am learning all over again.''
ON THE JOB
