THE actress Jackie Hoffman -- five feet of auburn-coiffed nervous energy -- has made a career of comic self-deprecation. Her face is long, with hyperexpressive features -- a prominent nose, persimmon lips and deep cheek creases. And she has worked those assets for decades, along with a talent for mimicry, and the whisper of a lisp, to convulse her yeshiva classmates in Queens (''It was a way to not get beat up in school,'' she says modestly) and, much later, to win over New York audiences in comedies and her own one-woman shows.
In the early 90's, Ms. Hoffman met the comic writer and actress Amy Sedaris while performing with the Second City comedy troupe in Chicago, and on returning to New York, she acted in several satires by Ms. Sedaris and her brother David, who call themselves the Talent Family: ''One Woman Shoe'' in 1995 and ''Incident at Cobbler's Knob'' in 1997. At the same time, Ms. Hoffman was also appearing in shows with parodic artists like Charles Busch and Lypsinka, gaining a gay male following along the way. ''I don't know how gay men discovered me,'' she said recently. ''I don't know how they discovered Bette Midler and good clothes! I'm just honored to be their choice for entertainment.''
In the late 90's Ms. Hoffman began to do solo shows around Manhattan. ''You know,'' she said, describing her shtick, it's ''just a nervous, funny Jewish woman and her take on everything that happens in her life.'' In 2001 she won an Obie award for her performances in the Talent Family comedy ''The Book of Liz,'' in which she played a competitive cheeseball maker, among other roles. The play was presented by the downtown theater company the Drama Dept., which then enlisted her to appear in a series of holiday variety shows, among them ''Jackie Hoffman's St. Valentine's Day Special'' and ''Jackie Hoffman's Hanukkah.''
She was 40 by then, and even if she made her bread and butter by doing humorous voiceovers for radio and for ''Dilbert'' and other television cartoons, she had started to land character roles in television and film: a job counselor in 1999 in Comedy Central's ''Strangers With Candy,'' a series that Ms. Sedaris helped create; the pregnant co-worker in the 2000 film ''Kissing Jessica Stein''; a dog spa receptionist in ''Legally Blonde II'' in 2001.
By 2002, Ms. Hoffman had what might be called a very big small career: she had an audience and regular work and, for a change, she had a steady boyfriend -- an easygoing musician who plays the trumpet in nightclubs.
But in April of that year, she got a big break: she was cast in a new Broadway musical. Another actress might have exulted, but Ms. Hoffman reacted with suspicion. She was doing a solo show at the time, ''Live at Joe's Pub: If You Call This Living,'' and on the final night of the run, she broke the news to her audience. ''I told them: 'So much of my material is about not getting work or sex, and now I'm on Broadway and have a boyfriend. Does that mean my career is over? Or is this when they start finding the tumors?' '' The next day, she went into rehearsals for ''Hairspray.''
''Hairspray'' won eight Tony Awards last year, and Ms. Hoffman garnered a Theater World Award for her outsize portrayals of a handful of wacky characters in the show: a repressive 60's mom, a Sapphic gym coach and an S&amp;M prison matron. When John Waters, who wrote the film on which the musical is based, first heard Ms. Hoffman read, he demanded that her role be expanded. (It was: she wrote many of her own lines.)
Predictably, she was not dazzled by her good fortune. On the contrary: over the last two years, Ms. Hoffman has found ample grounds for her early misgivings, which she reveals in a new solo show at Joe's Pub, ''The Kvetching Continues.'' She will be appearing in it for the next three Monday nights (when ''Hairspray'' is not performed).
''I deflate all the glamour,'' she said recently, ''by telling how the toilet doesn't flush backstage. I call it 'Deconstructing ''Hairspray.'' ' '' Ms. Hoffman was speaking in the Library Bar of the Paramount Hotel, where the extended company of ''Hairspray,'' and Mr. Waters, had gathered to toast two departing members of the original cast.
At the party, Ms. Hoffman's colleagues stopped to enfold her in embraces and offered anecdotes of her travails. A dresser, Kay Gowenlock, recalled Ms. Hoffman's despair during early rehearsals: ''I came across her crying and crying backstage, and what she was saying was, 'I don't know how to put a wig on!' I told her: 'This is Broadway! They actually do that for you! They don't want you to touch the wig!' She said, 'Are you sure?' And I said, 'Yes.' And then she said, 'Every time?' ''
By now, those jitters are only a memory, but Ms. Hoffman has found fresh sources of kvetchworthy material, like the dwindling number of gay men in the audience and the increasing number of children -- the natural consequence of a long run. She can't leave the production, though, because, her mother cautions darkly, ''It's never time to leave.''
Maternal panic and her own pessimism notwithstanding, Ms. Hoffman's prospects seem good. Mr. Waters was so impressed by her performances in ''Hairspray'' that he cast her in a supporting role in his next film, ''A Dirty Shame,'' about sex addicts, to be released in July. At the ''Hairspray'' party Mr. Waters said: ''Women are always meant to be funny in my movies, even if men play them. But the woman is always the main part, and the strongest character, so Jackie seemed like a natural to be in my movie. She knows timing. She's a great comic.''
Ms. Hoffman responded to the praise by grousing: ''It happened to be filming between Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur. So I had to make three trips back and forth to Baltimore in nine days.''
She was also cast -- sight unseen by Larry David -- in an episode, broadcast earlier this month, of his HBO series ''Curb Your Enthusiasm.'' She played a woman who dates a blind man, telling him she is a model. When she arrived in California for the taping, Mr. David, the show's star and one of its producers, complained that she looked too good. Ms. Hoffman laughed. ''I thought, 'Aww, that's the nicest thing any man has ever said to me.' ''
'The Kvetching Continues'  Joe's Pub at the Public Theater.  7:30 p.m. tomorrow, Feb. 2 and Feb. 9.
THEATER Liesl Schillinger is an arts editor at The New Yorker.
