JUST three days into a new exhibition this past September, the Bellevue Art Museum in Bellevue, Wash., abruptly closed its doors and suspended programming. Among the reasons, according to an article in The Seattle Times, were regional financial woes, an unclear mission and leadership conflicts. But another, less familiar issue was also raised: the museum's building, a three-year-old avant-garde edifice designed by the New York architect Stephen Holl. As the article explained, public support for the new museum was weakened by ''galleries poorly suited to traditional art shows.''
While the institution's past and present leaders are still assessing the situation, many -- including two former directors and the current board chairman -- acknowledge that the new building, with its expansive, soaring interior, called for programming that left local audiences disenchanted.
Bellevue may be the first casualty of a phenomenon known as the Bilbao effect: following the example set by Frank Gehry's Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain, museums are commissioning high-style architecture that will not only raise the profile of the institution but boost the economy of the area. But in addition to spectacular architecture, this can also produce exhibition spaces less in service to works of art than in service to the building itself as art.
The very public failure in Bellevue has sent a shudder through the museum world, especially in cities where capital campaigns for fancy new buildings, begun in a more robust economy, now face tough going. Publicly, few will admit to second thoughts. The leaders at the Bellevue Art Museum, though, have no choice.
Rick Collette, the museum's board president, insisted that officials were merely regrouping around the institution, which was founded 28 years ago.
''We have to rebuild our mission, be clear about it,'' he said, ''rebuild our management, rebuild our board.''
Even so, he said, architecture remains an issue: ''Personally, I like the building, but it does present challenges, with very large spaces, high ceilings, glass and curved walls.'' The board's initial research, he said, indicates a desire in the community for less contemporary art and more traditional painting by Northwest artists and regional crafts like glass, basketry and textiles, which often require intimate settings.
Mr. Collette said that the museum's building committee had a vision when it chose Mr. Holl's design, but that perhaps it had not given enough consideration to the kind of art that would be shown in the spaces. ''I personally wasn't involved,'' he said, ''but today you look at the building and wonder how well thought out that was.''
Mr. Holl countered that in Bellevue, ''challenging architecture was the whole point.''
''The building never was meant to be just a bland box of galleries,'' he said in a recent interview. ''It was not designed for traditional gallery space as an end-all, but for the future of what Northwestern art could be, including digital, new media and installation art.''
Mr. Holl said he had volunteered to lay out a plan for temporary, more traditional 20-by-20-foot galleries and had designed the main lateral structure to be as flexible as possible. ''It's very disturbing that the museum closed, but it's really a trustee decision,'' he said. ''They need to organize themselves.''
Whatever the particularities of Bellevue's situation, Mr. Holl's building embodies many of the preferred attributes of avant-garde museum architects: big, volumetric voids designed for big, imposing artworks, as opposed to ''bland box'' backdrops or neutral containers. The aim is galleries that will be active rather than passive, that will become part of the art-making process, providing inspiration for artists who, ideally, will make site-specific works for the spaces. Thus new museums often end up with tall, irregularly shaped, light-filled chambers, with idiosyncratic features like curved walls, varying ceiling heights and odd corners. In the wing now under construction at the Denver Art Museum, designed by Daniel Libeskind, none of the exterior walls will meet the floors at right angles.
Faced with a new building's exotic features, some museum staff members may have quiet fits -- or just move on. Indeed, heavy staff turnover is a common consequence of major capital projects, so common that a recent article in Architectural Record magazine called it the ''new building syndrome.'' Museum staff members frequently say that a backlash is likely to set in among curators who assume that only superstar architects and wealthy patrons will get to call the shots when designs are chosen.
''Avant-garde architects are making spaces that are sculptural, that they consider works of art,'' said Michael Auping, chief curator at the Modern Art Museum in Fort Worth.
''But artists don't want to present their work in spaces that are very sculptural, or a space that's already considered to be a work of art. John Chamberlain, for instance, would not want his work presented inside a Richard Serra.''
Regarding the trend toward huge galleries, he said: ''Architects say, 'I know you need big, open, flexible spaces, then you can build walls when you need them.' Flexibility is a myth. When you do build walls inside these big spaces, it ends up looking like a trade show. Why not get it right from the get-go?''
Mr. Auping was able to work closely with the architect Tadao Ando during the five-year process of designing galleries for the new museum building that opened in Fort Worth last December.
''I said what I needed most is beautiful walls, not big spaces,'' he said. ''I need a kind of compression, intimate spaces in which viewers can feel a physical relationship to the artworks. Natural light is another myth. You have to create a mix, so that it looks mostly natural, but really is mostly artificial. Natural light has to be controllable.''
Mr. Auping is the envy of more than one curator who has felt ignored during a design process. ''We're definitely a positive model,'' he said. ''I was brought into the process early on, and put on the building committee. Usually the building committee consists of patrons and the director. But our director wanted me to be more responsible for the outcome.
''I acted as a kind of aesthetic lawyer, and my client is the artist. Ando understood that. But if the curator is not empowered to make the program known, it's easier for the architect to say, 'Let's get all these inconsequential people out of the way.' ''
Susan Courtemanche, a New York-based consultant for nonprofit groups who is advising several museums with capital projects, said: ''What I see happening in many institutions is what I call a one-off. It's the first time a team of people has ever done this, and they feel that if they build the iconic statement, people will come -- the Bilbao effect. But the community may only come once.''
A major mistake, she said, was hiring the architect too soon, before the institutional team, including curators and other important staff, fully grasped what its audience would sustain. ''Once that mission is solidly understood, a vision is then crafted for the future. It requires going back to your touchstone. Then you hire the architect, who will be in service to the institutional vision. Otherwise, the institution is supporting the architect's vision, and tension is inevitable.''
Some curators stand up to the effects of high-profile architecture. In St. Louis, Brad Cloepfil's main-floor gallery at the new Contemporary Art Museum was designed to be wide open and virtually without walls until the curator, Shannon Fitzgerald, insisted on one long wall to accommodate the 11 artists in the building's inaugural show. ''Brad wanted that wall to come down after the show, but I keep wondering how that would look then -- like a factory?'' Ms. Fitzgerald said.
The exhibition spaces in St. Louis are also flooded with unscreened natural light from two huge window walls, which will necessitate rebuilding the inside space for a video show that was planned before the building opened last September. ''I'm still thinking about how to control the light,'' Ms. Fitzgerald said. ''Do you build heavy theatrical curtains every time? We're looking at filters or scrims, but it's a pretty big-budget concern. And now that it's winter, I'm tracking the light's movement across the walls, wondering, can you hang a Polaroid there?''
Despite its quirks, Ms. Fitzgerald said, ''I think it's a great building; overall, it's artist-friendly.'' Artists are increasingly making art that is ''space-driven'' anyway, she said, and because of that, Mr. Cloepfil's architecture is having an impact on her planning. (The St. Louis museum, like the Bellevue, has no permanent collection.) ''Just being in the empty galleries,'' she said, ''I'm sparked to think of certain artists who would be great here.''
But a more typical experience at institutions with collections might be that of Judith Fox, former curator at the Davis Museum at Wellesley College in Massachusetts. The main gallery in the museum's 1993 Rafael Moneo building ended up with 20-foot ceilings, even though 90 percent of the collection ''is off the living room walls of Wellesley alumnae,'' Ms. Fox said, adding that a visitor once quipped that an exhibition of the permanent collection ''looked like ring around the bathtub.''
''You need an exhibition designer to create an environment for exhibitions of artworks not specifically designed for these unusual, large and open spaces, to shield the light, to bring down the ceilings,'' she said. ''With budgets getting shorter, this is one more extra cost. And it's very hard to work with corners that meet in obtuse and acute angles when you're installing.''
Ms. Fox, now an independent curator, had been working on an exhibition planned for Mr. Holl's Bellevue Art Museum. ''There's a three- or four-story space shaped like a giant Chinese pea pod -- really tall,'' she said. ''You have to do something really spectacular there.'' In Bellevue and elsewhere, she said, ''avant-garde architecture does drive curatorial goals, and it therefore shapes the program.''
The Bellevue museum's last director, Kathleen Harleman, who resigned in August shortly before the museum closed, agreed. But she also echoed Mr. Holl's contention that there was nothing wrong with provocative architecture. ''The building did drive the program, but I think it was an exciting challenge,'' she said. ''The boldness of the architecture needs to be matched with the boldness of the program.'' She was skeptical about the proposed new exhibition program of traditional arts and crafts. Small things in the galleries, she said, ''tend to disappear on the walls; to leave a feeling of emptiness. And there are relatively limited places relegated for the display of art.''
Ms. Harleman's predecessor, Diane Douglas, is credited with raising money and community support for the building project and with helping draft the museum's design and mission. Ms. Douglas disagreed with Mr. Collette, the current board president, that the building's architecture was in conflict with community expectations. ''I felt there was a desire for architecture of distinction in the city,'' she said.
So why did the museum fail? Was it money? Mission? Programming? Architecture? ''That would be my question,'' she said. ''What was it? Do we have enough data to separate those strands?''
However, and whenever, things get sorted out in Bellevue, Mr. Holl's architecture will still have to be reckoned with. ''The building is a strong statement, no doubt,'' Ms. Douglas said. ''It's beautiful, a work of art in itself.''
ART/ARCHITECTURE Ann Wilson Lloyd is the Boston correspondent for Art in America.
