My mother was a ghost. She haunted me for 16 years, off and on. Hers was not a traditional haunting. She did not rattle chains or appear beside my reflection in the mirror, though I would have much preferred it that way. She just became invisible. It happened when I was 18. On a brilliant September afternoon, I ran away from home to escape my stepfather. She came home from work to find me stuffing my belongings into my beat-up Chevy Nova. Instead of stopping me, she watched for a moment and then warned that she wouldn't have me in her life if I didn't have him in mine. I was stunned.
Though he had pushed me, humiliated me, kicked me, nearly broken my arm and nearly broken my spirit, he had never really hurt me as much as she did just then. I never thought she would let me go, no less without a fight. But when I looked at her standing there with arms crossed and legs taut as if bracing against a gale, I saw she wouldn't save me from myself any more than she would save me from him. So I left. I had to.
Everything changed that day -- not just where I lived and how, but what I thought at night when I couldn't sleep and what I believed about people. I switched jobs and lived for a while with my brother and sister-in-law. A month shy of 19, I stumbled into marriage. A few years later I found a career and had a daughter. At 27, I divorced, settled in a new town and wrestled with single parenthood. True to her word, my mother let me do it all on my own.
I survived without help, but I was bitter. Some mothers stand beside their children when they are murderers. What was it about me that made her capable of walking away? Eventually I realized that when I fled our home, I exposed her husband as the abusive, controlling man that he was. Her second marriage was more of a failure than her first to my father. She couldn't admit that, so she clung to her marriage all the harder.
My mother kept a relationship with my brother and sister-in-law. She was never doting, but she was occasionally in their living room. She held their children in her arms. For my daughter and me, she was dead. My family tried to spare me any further hurt. They never spoke of her unless it was big news, and even then, they prefaced it with, ''I'm not sure you want to talk about this but. . . . ''
Over the years, I learned she had retired early. She and her husband sold the house that was a home to only my anguish. They bought a motor home so they could drive around the United States, fulfilling their retirement dream. She left behind my grandmother, who was starting to suffer the series of strokes that would eventually kill her. In a few years, they saw nearly all of America. If California had a bridge to Hawaii, I'm sure they would have gotten there. Most summers they visited our family in Rochester, but they never stayed long, even to help care for my deteriorating grandmother. My uncle never forgave my mother for that. But he was as kind a person as I have ever met, so he tried not to let his bad feelings show. When he died, my mother declined to come to the funeral.
By 30, I continued to be haunted by her absence, though I no longer wanted her near me. It felt worse after she began mailing my daughter and me Christmas and birthday cards in recent years. I'd rip up the cards, knowing their presence had already cast a shadow over me, bringing a new round of sleepless nights. My daughter would examine her gifts -- the cheap Barbie knockoffs and the clothes that didn't fit -- and started calling her ''my wacky grandma.'' It was unprompted by me, I swear.
More than two years ago, my mother learned she had cancer, a particularly horrible cancer that began in her mouth and spread viciously. I went to see her once, the day after her surgery. I showed up hours before visitors were allowed so that I would miss her husband. The nurses let me through with empathy in their eyes. I felt like a fraud. My mother lay bandaged and in pain. I sobbed on her shoulder, and she patted me on the back as if she could take away the hurt the way she once could. The surgery had left her unable to speak, so we wrote notes. Her first note said, ''I always loved you.'' I didn't know what to think about that. I still don't.
For a couple of months, it looked as if she might beat it. I wish I could say that she contacted me then -- that after facing death and holding me, she found the courage to approach me. But whatever it was that was missing in her stayed missing. Then the cancer came back. She died. I grieved for her, and for the dream that died with her. I had always wanted a better ending for the two of us. But death has cleared up some of the confusion. She doesn't contact me now because she can't, not because she chooses not to. That makes me feel less haunted. If there is an afterlife, I hope she has found in it the kind of love she never found, not with my stepfather nor with me, here on earth.
LIVES Michelle York is a frequent contributor to The Metro Section.
