DESPITE the beckoning title, there are few treasures in ''Envisioning New England: Treasures from Community Art Museums'' at the New Britain Museum of American Art. Instead, mostly minor paintings by 19th- and early 20th-century American artists stock the exhibition. Some of these artists are well known, but many are best forgotten.
On paper, ''Envisioning New England'' probably seemed like a winner: Arrange then tour an exhibition of the best paintings from the collections of 14 of New England's premier community museums. Sounds enticing, right? And with the combined holdings of more than 200,000 works of art, including bona fide masterpieces, how could it go wrong?
But it did, and badly. For starters, few of the participating museums appear to have coughed up their very best paintings. For instance, the Florence Griswold Museum generously provided six of the 47 paintings in the exhibition, more than any other lender but the Farnsworth Museum in Rockland, Me. But of these six paintings, none ranks among the museum's best-known and admired pieces.
Also, the exhibition lacks a coherent curatorial rationale. Although loosely conceived as a survey of images of New England from roughly 1850 to 1950, this hotchpotch of gilt-edged pictures offers scant insight into the subject, and no new research.
Notwithstanding these gripes, there are enough attractive paintings here to make a visit to ''Envisioning New England'' worth its while. If nothing else, the exhibition promises time with paintings from way-off regional art museums that few of us, myself included, rarely get to visit.
Among the star attractions is George Bellows's ''Farm of John Tom'' (1916), here courtesy of the Art Complex Museum in Duxbury, Mass. A rousing and colorful seascape, the painting shows a barn atop a cliff overlooking a little harbor. Frigid blue-green waves pound a rocky shore, creating a wall of white foam at the entrance to a narrow inlet. This painting counts among the artist's more lyrical seascapes.
Hanging nearby is Childe Hassam's ''Ten Pound Island'' (circa 1896-99), on loan from the Griswold. Hassam liked to paint saccharine impressionist knock-offs, and ''Ten Pound Island'' is one of these. It depicts a popular resort island, which received its name from the amount of money early settlers paid the Indians for it, near Gloucester, Mass., as a kind of unspoiled, light-filled paradise. Of course the reality was something else, the artist omitting any reference in the painting to a nearby fish hatchery and other light industry.
The rest of the exhibition offers a pretty bumpy ride, with exhibits ranging from elegant if unimportant landscapes by George Inness, Albert Bierstadt and John Frederick Kensett, among other good painters, to pure potboilers like Harrison Brown's ''Barn Interior'' (circa 1885). Brown's hapless painting is a pastoral fantasy, one of many the self-taught artist did for the tourists who flocked to the Catskills during the warm summer months.
Aside from landscapes, the exhibition includes a few portraits. Few tell us anything about New England life, or the people who lived there, with the happy exception of Charles Webster Hawthorne's ''The Dress Maker'' (1915). What's so interesting about this picture of a woman alone at home mending clothes? Mostly the décor, for the simple wooden furniture and laconic decoration reflect the taste for colonial revival furnishings popular at the time.
N.C Wyeth's ''Mrs. Cushman's House'' (1944) is another painting here worth lingering with. At first, it seems still, silent, and even dull. But look closely and you'll notice a local fisherman (Mr. Cushman, perhaps?) attending to lobster traps stacked outside the barn. Is he on his way out to sea, or returning? We cannot say, but the thick, encroaching fog gives his activities a strange urgency. In a few minutes, everything will be blanketed in a dense mist.
Pleasantly intriguing, yet informative, ''Mrs. Cushman's House'' has much to say about the New England landscape and its inhabitants. While the architecture and atmosphere conjure an unmistakable sense of place, the lobster traps hint at the nearby coastline and a way of life that has gone unchanged here for hundreds of years. This little painting is no treasure, but it is well worth a look.
''Envisioning New England: Treasures from Community Art Museums'' is at the New Britain Museum of American Art, 56 Lexington Street, New Britain, through March 21. It then tours New England for the next two years. Information: (860)229-0257.
ART REVIEW
