After Rangers goaltender Jason LaBarbera surrendered his third goal of the second period to give the Ottawa Senators a 7-0 lead on Saturday night, Rangers Coach Glen Sather stood motionless with his hands in his pockets.
While Sather spent much of the remainder of the 9-1 loss pacing the bench, crossing his arms and adjusting his glasses, he might as well have reached for his cellphone.
Just a day after acquiring Jaromir Jagr from the Washington Capitals, the Rangers' loss to the Senators, their most lopsided defeat in 11 years, was evidence that the high-priced Rangers need more than another inventive goal scorer if they hope to advance to the playoffs.
The Rangers' defense is riddled with injuries. Greg de Vries and Darius Kasparaitis are sidelined with knee troubles, and the Rangers' top defensive prospect, Fedor Tjutin, is out for at least two weeks, also with a knee injury.
On Saturday, Vladimir Malakhov left the game in the second period after spraining his right wrist in an awkward collision into the end boards. He is scheduled to have X-rays on Sunday.
''My first thought was that it's broken,'' he said. ''It was numb all the way up my arm.''
The Rangers acquired defenseman Jamie Pushor from the Columbus Blue Jackets on Friday, but he was minus-3 against Ottawa, worst on the team. His addition alone will probably not be enough to help the Rangers compete with the Eastern Conference's top clubs.
''There's no question Sather has to make more moves,'' said the former Hartford Whalers Coach Pierre McGuire, now a hockey analyst with the Canadian sports cable channel TSN. ''Jagr may help them athletically, but their weakness is stopping people. Even when they had de Vries and Kasparaitis, their defense wasn't among the N.H.L. elite.''
With the addition of Jagr, the Rangers have a record payroll of more than $80 million, but they may get some financial relief soon when insurance companies reimburse them for the loss of Pavel Bure and Kasparaitis to injuries. The two make a combined $14.2 million this season.
The problem is that the sort of puck-moving defenseman the Rangers covet is the kind that teams do not want to offer until they have fallen out of the playoff race. That might prompt Sather to scrutinize former N.H.L. players like Dmitri Yushkevich and Richard Smehlik, who are playing in European leagues.
Goaltending is another shortcoming. The No. 1 goaltender, Mike Dunham, is sidelined with a concussion. LaBarbera recorded eight shutouts for the Hartford Wolf Pack before being recalled on Thursday, but the Senators seemed to solve him handily in his 20-minute relief stint on Saturday, scoring on three of six shots. The starter, Jussi Markkanen, fared no better, allowing 6 goals on 19 shots.
Goaltenders that Sather could pursue include Tampa Bay's Nikolai Khabibulin, who has a $6.5 million option for next season, and Sean Burke of Phoenix.
Several Rangers players declined to say whether they expect Sather, who is also the team's president and general manager, to shake up the roster.
''That's up to the G.M. to decide,'' forward Petr Nedved said. ''It's just our job to play the game.''
Eric Lindros suggested another tactic. ''When you're making mistakes, the worst thing that can happen to a player is to have his ice time taken away,'' he said.
HOCKEY
