CALL it what you will: Howard's Howl. The Whoop. The ''I Have a Scream'' speech. Howard Dean's Iowa battle cry -- relentlessly replayed, resampled and remixed -- quickly took its place last week in the annals of campaign-defining moments, right alongside Ed Muskie's tears, Richard Nixon's ''You won't have Nixon to kick around anymore'' and Michael Dukakis's leaden insistence that no, he would not favor the death penalty, even if his wife had been raped.
Emotion plays a vexing role in politics. It can cost candidates their elections; many say Muskie lost the 1972 Democratic nomination when he became overwrought, appearing to cry while defending his wife against editorial attacks by The Manchester Union Leader. But it is not necessarily an impediment to victory.
Bill Clinton waltzed to the White House feeling other people's pain. President Bush often tears up in public. Lyndon Johnson's temper was legendary; he climbed his way up the political ladder pushing and shoving and ordering people around. And the infamous Nixon ''kick around'' remark, which many thought would end his career, didn't keep him from winning the presidency.
''You can have a degree of pathology,'' said Robert Dallek, the presidential historian, ''but these people are brilliant in turning it in a constructive direction.'' Candidates quickly learn that emotion can cut both ways, and on the campaign trail, they often get mixed signals. Voters, and political handlers, expect them to be steady and solid, above undignified displays. Yet they are also told to be real and authentic, to let people see them for what they really are. But when they do they sometimes get into trouble -- especially if their emotions reinforce an existing negative perception.
That was the case for Bob Dole, the former senator whose tart reply during a televised debate in 1988 seemed to bolster a reputation for meanness. Likewise, Dr. Dean's Iowa speech -- which he regards as evidence of his passion -- feeds suspicions that he is too angry.
''Every campaign has a couple of these kind of moments,'' said Bill Carrick, the media consultant for Richard A. Gephardt, who cried as he withdrew from the race last week. ''Whether it's Bob Dole snarling at Tom Brokaw, or the Muskie Union Leader episode, these are indelible moments in campaigns. They are all the worse when they get combined with the existing perception of somebody's personality problems.''
So candidates try to rein themselves in, as if self-control would determine the outcome of a campaign. At Thursday's debate, politeness and decorum were the order of the day. But by Friday in New Hampshire it actually seemed that the pendulum was swinging back in the other direction as pundits and some voters complained that Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, who led the New Hampshire polls last week, looked wooden and had lost the fire that pushed him to the head of the pack.
In the 24-hour cycle of modern politics, where the cameras are always on, emotional displays can take on a life of their own, leading candidates to complain that their rough moments are blown out of proportion. The image of Dean pumping his fists was played so often on cable news channels that it became almost like wallpaper. But it also energized the former Vermont governer's supporters, who regarded the ubiquity of the video clip as unfair.
''Every reporter who comes by here, all they want to know about is the whoop,'' said Stella Miller, a 54-year-old supporter who attended a town hall meeting with Dr. Dean on Friday.
The backlash is reminiscent of the Muskie-tears incident, as George McGovern, who ran against Mr. Muskie in 1972, recalled it. He said his polls showed that the episode created sympathy for his opponent.
''We couldn't find evidence that it did anything but help him in New Hampshire,'' Mr. McGovern said.
Some say the constant whipsaw the candidates experience is to the benefit of voters. Campaigns are like crucibles, testing candidates. How well a candidate keeps a grip on his emotions might predict how much savvy he will show in using what is the greatest tool of a president -- access to the levers of mass communication.
''We want them to be emotional, but we don't want them to cross a line,'' said Elizabeth Ossoff, an expert in political psychology at St. Anselm College in Manchester, where Thursday night's debate was held.
The most successful politicians do not try to hide their unflattering traits, but rather find a way to use them to their advantage, said Mr. Dallek, who recently wrote a biography of John F. Kennedy. Kennedy, he said, harnessed his narcissism ''by being so charming, so quick-witted, so engaging with the press.''
Sometimes, a gesture or simple facial expression can hurt a candidate. In the 1992 campaign, the first President Bush famously looked at his watch during a town-hall debate with Bill Clinton and Ross Perot, giving the impression he was bored and wasting his time. During the 2000 campaign for the presidency, Al Gore sighed patronizingly several times during a debate with then Gov. George W. Bush -- an expression that some say sealed his reputation for being condescending.
''Saturday Night Live'' later parodied Mr. Gore, a spoof so deadly that the former vice president's advisers insisted he watch it as he prepared for a second debate.
Mr. Gore, however, was not the only candidate that year whose gestures worried his advisers; consultants for Mr. Bush tried in vain to get him to control his smirk. Still, the smirk slips out from time to time, as it did last week during the president's State of the Union address when Democrats clapped at Mr. Bush's warning that the Patriot Act, an antiterrorism law, would soon expire.
''Bush is vulnerable when that smirk rears its ugly head,'' said a Republican strategist, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''It comes across as not only cocky, but arrogant, and nobody likes an arrogant politician.''
Sometimes, refusal to show emotion can be just as damning to a candidate as emotion itself, as was the case in 1988, when Mr. Dukakis was asked if he would favor the death penalty, if his wife were murdered and raped. His response -- ''There are better and more effective ways to deal with violent crime'' -- was widely ridiculed by those who thought he should have been more passionate in defense of his wife.
The big question in New Hampshire now is whether Dr. Dean's trifecta of Thursday night appearances -- - the debate, an interview with Diane Sawyer of ABC News and a self-deprecating appearance on the David Letterman show -- can undo the damage from his Iowa loss and his disastrous concession speech.
Professor Ossoff of St. Anselm College is not so sure. ''He runs the risk of showing people that he either spins the dial and runs on 12, or he runs on 1. Tonight, it was 1,'' she said after the debate.
Ultimately, the voters will decide -- and it is not clear how much they care. On Friday, Dr. Dean met with dozens of them at a banquet hall in Nashua. The Iowa speech came up only once, when a woman told Dr. Dean she was outraged at the media's ''relentless replaying and distortion'' of it.
But the problem for Dr. Dean, some say, is not so much that he displayed emotion, but that it was the wrong emotion to display for a man who lost when he was supposed to win. Mr. Dallek, the historian, believes the speech ''will be remembered as his Waterloo.''
Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager, thinks otherwise. After Thursday's debate, he quickly ticked off a list of his candidate's accomplishments as Vermont's governor, adding, ''I don't believe New Hampshire is going to let 15 seconds of videotape erase that.''
Containing Themselves
