In a postscript to the Long Island Lighting Company era, Richard M. Kessel, the chairman of the Long Island Power Authority, announced last week that the authority was dropping property tax challenges that could have cost local governments and school districts up to $377 million.
Lilco had initiated the challenges in the early 1990's because the company said local assessors had levied excessively high property taxes on its generating stations.
The authority, a state agency, bought some of Lilco's assets, including its electric transmission and delivery system, in 1998, and it inherited the tax challenges as part of its purchase. Lilco's nonnuclear power stations became the property of the KeySpan Energy Corporation, which was formed by a merger of the Brooklyn Union Gas Company and Lilco.
As part of a separate settlement in 1992, Lilco transferred the Shoreham nuclear plant to LIPA for a symbolic $1 payment. Lilco's claims of $1 billion in excess assessments on Shoreham were settled for $620 million, with Suffolk residents repaying that amount in increased electric rates.
Mr. Kessel announced that the remaining tax challenges would be dropped during a speech to the Huntington Chamber of Commerce on Jan. 16. He said the action would relieve taxpayers in the Town of Huntington and the Northport School District from potential liability for $76 million in assessments for the Northport generating station.
''The financial liability that has been hanging over the heads of the town and the school district has been removed,'' he said. ''They can now breathe a collective sigh of relief.''
Other challenges that have now been dropped include $146 million on the E.F. Barrett power station in Oceanside, $68 million on the Glenwood Landing power station, $37 million on the Port Jefferson power station and $50 million on the transmission and delivery system.
Gordian Raacke, the executive director of the Citizens Advisory Panel, an energy watchdog group in Bridgehampton, said the action had two aspects. ''It's a significant decision, but, of course, one has to realize that the gain for the towns and schools could also be a loss to the ratepayers.''
John Rather
IN BRIEF
