OVER the last year, some of Suffolk County's historic sites have been protected from development by communities and conservation groups working with local municipalities to make them forever accessible to the public.
In Bellport, on the South Shore, a one-acre parcel with a skating pond that has been used by local residents for more than 100 years has been bought by the village in partnership with Suffolk County and the Town of Brookhaven, with community residents raising the money for the village's share of the purchase.
On the North Fork, 10 neighbors have raised the money for a conservation group's purchase of a small beachfront parcel with high dunes covered by an ancient oak forest.
Farther west in Islip, 69 acres of waterfront property that includes a mansion designed by a renowned architect is being bought by Suffolk County after a vigorous campaign by local residents.
''It was a grass-roots approach to legislation,'' said Joseph Migliore, the president of the 1,500-member Old South Islip Civic Association, which along with other community groups lobbied for the $4 million county acquisition of the Scully estate, which had been owned by the National Audubon Society for 25 years.
''The legislators knew we wanted it; there was a community outpouring at their meetings and 100 people were at the final vote,'' Mr. Migliore said. ''It was a great way to start the new year.''
In mid-December, the Suffolk County Legislature voted to buy the property and plans to maintain its wetlands and have the building used for a nature center, according to James M. Burke, deputy director of Suffolk's Division of Real Estate.
The property includes 20 acres of wetlands, some barns and a 5,000-square-foot three-story house built in 1919 and designed by the New York City architect Grosvenor Atterbury, who was the designer of Forest Hills Gardens in Queens and the American Wing of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in Manhattan. ''It is a spectacular building in good shape, with nice arched designs, coves and curved walls,'' Mr. Burke said.
A prime candidate to use the house is the Seatuck Environmental Association, an education group founded by Charles D. Webster, the last owner of a 196-acre estate across the road from the Scully estate that was deeded to the federal government more than 30 years ago for a nature preserve.
Seatuck had occupied a small house on that property and had hoped to lease offices in its 150-year-old manor house. But the house was demolished by the National Park Service in 2002 and Seatuck has since been temporarily situated in a Bay Shore office and operating its public programs in various locations.
''We are working with Seatuck on how much of the Scully house they would need, and the Parks Department may use some for offices,'' Mr. Burke said.
The Scully property was bequeathed without restrictions to the National Audubon Society in 1979 by its original owner, Hathaway Scully, who had envisioned it as a nature center, said John Bianchi, a spokesman for the 100-year-old conservation organization, which is based in Manhattan.
IN the 1980's, the society's Living Oceans program began operating from the house. The program was disbanded last year, however, after operating at a loss for 15 years, Mr. Bianchi said.
''It cost $50,000 to $100,000 a year to maintain the property, and the society decided it was untenable to operate for four employees,'' he explained. ''Suffolk County heard that we were trying to sell the property and approached us.''
The money for the purchase will come from Suffolk's Drinking Water Open Space Fund, which is generated from a quarter percentage point of the county's 8.75 percent sales tax.
According to Mr. Burke, in 2003, Suffolk bought, for preservation, slightly less than 1,000 acres valued at $30 million. An additional 600 acres, valued at $24 million, have been approved for purchase by the Legislature and are in the contract process.
The county's most recent acquisitions follow a slowdown in its land purchase program after a scandal two years ago involving disclosures that its former real estate director, Allan D. Grecco, had paid far more than county appraisals for some parcels.
Since then, new land purchase policies have been enacted, including a bill approved by the Legislature in December that permits the county to pay more than 10 percent above county appraisals for land, provided that at least 14 of the 18 legislators agree.
Two months ago, Suffolk became involved in the preservation of 46 acres of an East Setauket farm owned by the Society for the Preservation of Long Island Antiquities.
Suffolk and the Town of Brookhaven bought the development rights to 10 acres of the property for $800,000, with the county paying 70 percent. It is the site of the restored historic 18th-century Sherwood-Jayne House and includes a barn, corncrib, carriage house, orchards and a sheep pasture. The preservation society holds educational and historical programs at the farmstead.
In addition, the county alone bought the wooded 36-acre northern back end of the farm for $3.2 million. This area will be managed by the Parks Department and will be open to the public for hiking.
A short distance west, the county and the Peconic Land Trust, a nonprofit private conservation organization, reached an agreement in December to buy and protect the 32-acre Detmer family's working farm in Setauket, which dates to 1672. Under the agreement, the trust will buy the land for $6.2 million and the county will simultaneously buy the development rights for $5.8 million. A house surrounded by three acres will be retained by the Detmer family and is not part of the sale, Mr. Burke said.
''Now that we know it will be saved, we will look to opening the land to the public; it is a large open space with a historic property in the main part of the Three Village area,'' he said. The area is made up of Stony Brook, Setauket and East Setauket.
For more than 10 years, the county had tried to buy the property but could not reach an agreement with the family on the price. In 2000, the Brookhaven Town Board rejected a proposal to build a 380-unit housing complex on the land for people 55 and over. It was then that the county brought in the trust to negotiate a deal.
According to Marsha Kenny, a spokeswoman, the trust, which has bought 7,000 acres on Long Island since 1983, assisted in the public acquisition of 1,204 acres last year.
About 15 miles south of Setauket, a Bellport parcel known locally as the Peat Hole, which includes a popular skating pond, has been preserved through the combined efforts of the village, county and town. The parcel will provide public access to the pond, which until now had been through private property. The three municipalities have bought the $450,000 property, with the county paying $175,000, the town $75,000 and the village $200,000.
THE property, which includes wetlands that open to the Great South Bay, was sold by Sperry Lea, a Bellport homeowner who wanted it preserved, said Tom Williams, vice president of the Post-Morrow Foundation, a local historic and conservation group, which helped the community raise Bellport's share of the money.
The property will be managed by the village, which will add some benches and a chipped wood path, said Lee Snead, a village trustee.
The Peconic Land Trust considers a 0.929-acre parcel on Long Island Sound in Peconic known locally as the Piqui Preserve that it bought for $440,000 a ''small but truly wonderful place.'' It was named after the mother of Carmen Ramis, one of 10 neighbors who raised the money for the purchase.
The parcel is bounded on the west by Suffolk's Goldsmith Inlet Park and the trust is hoping to resell it to the county, Ms. Kenny said. ''It is pristine woodland to the soundfront and has a double dune that starts with tall oak trees that become low and thick as they get near the water,'' she said.
''I imagine a good part of Long Island was like this at one time. We've lost a lot through development. When you are standing in the middle of it, you are in awe.''
In the Region | Long Island
