WHEN Wachovia Securities sold two shares of my Microsoft stock to pay for an inactivity fee on my brokerage account last year, the transaction created a taxable event that I have to report to the Internal Revenue Service. Thank you, Wachovia.
The $15 tax that I owe is not the problem. Whether the tax bill is $15 or $15,000, I still have to come up with the cost basis, or what I originally paid for the stock, so I can prepare my income tax return. That may sound as easy as looking at the paperwork from 12 years ago, when I bought the stock. But that price isn't adjusted for stock splits, and Microsoft has had six since my purchase. Although I paid $116 a share, my cost basis will be much lower.
I went through this process a few years ago when I sold stock to buy a house. I spent an evening or two with a calculator figuring out the basis. It was no fun.
During the tax preparation season, many taxpayers may find themselves hunched over their own calculators, also having no fun. Few people enjoy this exercise.
''What if you bought 100 shares 10 years ago and it has had two or three splits?'' said William L. Trahan, a financial planner at Carroll Financial Associates in Charlotte, N.C. ''It would be quite a challenge for the shareholder to go back and recalculate it themselves. I get phone calls and they say, 'I give up; can you help me?'''
Forrest L. Harris, 48, a manufacturing representative from Charlotte, now gets his basis from Mr. Trahan, but he used to do the calculations by hand. ''Your brokerage statements, they tell you what you paid, but you didn't know where to go from there,'' Mr. Harris said. ''With splits and reverse splits, it was hard to keep up with it.''
Beth O. Truax, 52, a retiree from Wilmington, Del., also had trouble getting the numbers when she sold stock a few years ago. ''Those are the kinds of things where you don't know where to start,'' she said.
But the world of information has improved since the last time I hunkered down over cost basis. There are now Internet sites that, at no charge, will show the basis with just a bit of input from the investor. Ms. Truax's adviser, Donald W. Nicholson of Wilmington, steered me to www.bigcharts.com. Within a few seconds, I had my basis: $2.40. Nice. Others include http://finance.yahoo.com (just type in ''cost basis'' in the search section), as well as the sites of many public companies.
Notice, though, that I said ''with just a bit of input from the investor.'' That's the tricky part. To get the basis, you must have the date when you bought the stock, and that means keeping good records, which, in my experience, goes against human nature.
For many of us, even finding the car keys is a miracle. It took me a half-hour of searching through three file folders to find the Microsoft confirmation. I was amazed that I still had it.
As good as the Internet is, it isn't going to supply your purchase date. Your broker can help track down the information. But what if you have lost the paperwork and don't remember which broker you used?
Mr. Nicholson said the transfer agent, often listed on the stock certificate, can get the date. If you don't have a stock certificate, Mr. Trahan said the agent's name can be provided by the investor relations department of the company whose stock you sold.
To get the purchase date of my Microsoft stock, I needed to find just one piece of paper, my 1992 purchase confirmation. But establishing the basis can be messy, Mr. Nicholson noted, when people invest through dividend reinvestment plans. For a company that pays quarterly dividends, that's four purchases a year, and if the investor also buys stock directly from the company each month, the number can rise to 16. And if you own the stock for many years, it can climb into the hundreds.
Mr. Nicholson offers this advice: Make sure to save at least the year-end statements, which list all the transactions for that year. That way, you won't have to dig up every transaction record.
GETTING the cost basis can be a nightmare, but there are ways to completely beat the basis demon. One is to gift the stock to a charity and take a tax deduction. You're not selling the stock, so you don't need the basis, and the nonprofit group doesn't pay tax, so it doesn't need it, either.
The problem is also solved after you die. When you leave stock to your heirs, the basis date is simplified: it is no longer the date you bought the stock; instead, it's the date of your death.
So all that my heirs will have to do is remember the day I die -- a date that I assume my family will remember and hold solemn for generations.
Of course, that may depend on how much stock I leave them.
MIDSTREAM James Schembari is an editor at The Times. His column on the prime earning, spending and striving years appears the fourth Sunday of each month. E-mail: jimschem@nytimes.com.
