United Way Appoints Lawyer as President
Patrick J. Foye, a lawyer and real estate investment administrator, has been named the president and chief executive of United Way of Long Island, which has its offices in Commack. He will begin the job full-time on Feb. 1. He replaces Willie B. Edlow Jr., who retired.
The appointment was made Jan. 8 but was not publicly announced, Thomas F. Cruso, the organization's chairman, said Tuesday. Mr. Foye is currently an executive vice president of Apartment Investment and Management, a real estate investment trust based in Denver. A resident of Sands Point, Mr. Foye is also a deputy chairman of the Long Island Power Authority.
United Way has failed to achieve its fund-raising goals for the last two years. Mr. Cruso, who headed the search committee, said last year that the organization needed ''a total overhaul.''
Bank Asks for Nasdaq Listing
Smithtown Bancorp (STMB), the holding company that owns the Bank of Smithtown, has filed an application with Nasdaq to trade its stock on that exchange, the company said Tuesday.
Bradley E. Rock, chairman and chief executive of both the holding company and the bank, said the company, whose stock currently trades over the counter, was seeking to be listed on the larger market to accommodate growing investor interest in the stock.
''During the second half of last year, we had a two-for-one stock split, which was our third two-for-one stock split in the last five years,'' Mr. Rock said in a statement. ''Since that time, we have had approximately three million shares outstanding, and interest in our stock has widened, and the trading activity has increased substantially.''
Thje Bank of Smithtown has assets of $575 million.
Hilton Hotel Opens
Apple Hospitality Five, a real estate investment trust in Richmond, Va., has opened the Hilton Garden Inn in Westbury.
The 140-room hotel, the trust's second on Long Island, was acquired last month from the Briad Group of Florham Park, N.J. The deal was worth $19 million in cash.
Last year, the trust purchased the Residence Inn by Marriott in Hauppauge from Briad.
Compiled by Warren Strugatch
E-mail: libiz@nytimes.com
