THE asters and goldenrod have long since disappeared from the woods and fields near Mount Tremper, N.Y., a tiny town in the Catskills where Rita Schwab, a weaver and textile artist, has a quarter-acre garden. The plot is covered with snow now, but inside her studio, piles of blossoms and plants, gathered at their colorful peak, are being transformed into dyes for handmade fabrics. The process may offer inspiration for other gardeners who may want to keep summer alive in the darkest days of winter.
Born in Germany, Ms. Schwab, 51, earned degrees in fine art and fiber art before moving to western North Carolina, where she learned her craft 20 years ago at the intersection of traditional Appalachian and Cherokee Indian cultures. Artisans taught her to forage for yellow root (Hydrastis canadensis), black root (Veronicastrum virginicum) and walnut hulls, all used to dye grasses and other materials for making baskets. She learned to use wild plants like goldenrod and sassafras root as fabric dyes, and to manipulate and set them with acids and metallic substances, known among dyers as mordants.
As her interest grew, she began experimenting with an array of traditional and nontraditional plants, many of which were right in her garden. ''I learned by trial and error,'' she said.
She mixed carrot tops and tomato leaves to make a permanent yellow-green dye, and discovered that comfrey leaves could stain fabrics a deep green. Chamomile, meant to be brewed as a stomach-soothing tea, became the raw material for a permanent yellow dye.
Since then Ms. Schwab has applied the dyer's art not only to fibers -- cotton, raw fleece, spun wool, silk and linen -- but also to basketmaking materials like jute, hickory strips and sea grass.
Five years ago, she moved to a 100-year-old building in Mount Tremper that also serves as a workplace and gallery. Her new garden, planted from seed, cultivated intensively and fertilized with compost, supplies tomatoes, marigolds and other vegetables, flowers and herbs. Many appear on the table as well as in the dye pot.
At midsummer, when their colors are richest, she harvests buckets of blossoms, combines them with water and heats the mixtures over an outdoor fire. Dark maroon hollyhocks lend color to one dye, and madder and marigolds to another. She taps old-fashioned plants like lady's bedstraw, dyer's coreopsis, tansy, mullein and woad, and searches fields and hedegrows for goldenrod, Queen Anne's lace, elderberry, barberry, dyer's broom, dandelion and yarrow.
By mixing dyes and overdying (using two dye baths in sequence) and manipulating mordants, Ms. Schwab creates a broad palette. She prefers using traditional mordants, like sumac leaves and stems, which work best on cottons, and blackberry leaves, which produce good results with linen. For speed and ease when she is teaching, she uses modern metallic mordants, including powdered alum, tin, chrome and iron. Sometimes, she said, mordants are unnecessary because natural dye materials, especially tree barks, contain tannins that fix color.
In the fall, she collects black and yellow root, and sassafras root, which yields a light brown. She stopped harvesting bloodroot after learning that it is endangered in the wild. She also forages for bark that has fallen from hickory, birch, cedar, walnut and juniper trees, and keeps an eye out for berries and walnut hulls. Leaves are best harvested when they are fresh, but bark and hulls are better partly rotted, she said. (Along with producing a tan dye, cedar bark repels moths.)
Around the time she moved to the Catskills, Ms. Schwab founded Rita Schwab Fiber Arts. Working with three part-time helpers, she makes and sells table linens, scarves and throws. She also teaches natural dye-making techniques at craft schools in New York and Connecticut.
''You don't get rich,'' she said, ''but you pass on old knowledge.''
Help at Hand
''Wild Color: The Complete Guide to Making and Using Natural Dyes,'' by Jenny Dean and Karen Diadick Casselman (Watson-Guptill Publications, 1999) offers a comprehensive guide to garden dyes. Sources for old-fashioned plants include Richter's, in Goodwood, Ontario, LOC 1AO Canada; (905)640-6677 or www.richters.com.
Rita Schwab Fiber Arts sells hand-dyed napkins, scarfs and throws, $65 to $225, by phone and on the Internet: (845)688-2529 or www.ritaschwabfiberarts.com. The Web site has information on classes and demonstrations.
CUTTINGS
