Blaufrankisch, a red grape and wine notably successful in Austria and Hungary, has put down roots on the South Fork.
Channing Daughters, in Bridgehampton, is releasing its first bottling of the wine, vintage-dated 2002. ''We are the only winery on the East End of Long Island growing and producing this variety,'' the back label claims.
Both the grape and wine, also known as lemberger, are rare in New York and in the United States. They enjoy popularity in Washington State and in the Württemberg region of Germany.
The Channing blaufrankisch vines did not come from Europe, as one might guess, but from a long-established upstate New York nursery, the winery said.
Channing, where Christopher Tracy has succeeded Larry Perrine as hands-on winemaker, likes to experiment. Last year, it introduced a racy Tocai Friulano, a 2002 white. In addition to 1.5 acres of five-year-old blaufrankisch vines planted, Channing expects to plant two more in 2005, along with lagrein, a red grape identified primarily with the Trentino-Alto Adige region in Italy.
''Our 2001 and 2002 Vino Biancos'' were an ''initial wave'' of experimentation, said Mr. Perrine, who now carries the title of executive winemaker. ''From the 2003 harvest, we will follow it up with Sylvanus -- a field blend of muscat ottonel, pinot grigio and pinot bianco that will be the culmination of a long-term love affair with exotic muscat-based wines from northern Italy.'
''I planted blaufrankisch because it is an early-ripening variety that has sturdy clusters that can hang on the vine all fall and ripen slowly, producing wines with gamy and meaty aromatics on the South Fork,'' Mr. Perrine continued.
Channing's version ($22) is dark, fruity and spicy, resembling its Central European relatives.
A sizable number of the 91 cases made were allocated to members of Channing's wine club. The winery planned to release about 20 cases in its tasting room yesterday.
''There will be 170 cases of the 2003 vintage, which will most likely be released next summer or fall,'' said Allison Dubin, Channing's director of communications.
Coincidentally, Mr. Perrine's timing is perfect. Interest in Central European wines is stirring. In the last year, tasty versions of Austrian blaufrankisch and its Hungarian counterpart, kekfrankos, have entered the New York City market and been favorably received in restaurants and by questing consumers.
HOWARD G. GOLDBERG
LONG ISLAND VINES
