OUR stay in Tucson started, as most do, on the earth's surface. But over the next three days, we explored both the skies above the Sonoran Desert and the caves beneath it, on an itinerary that provided us with a many-layered appreciation of the region -- quite literally.
Tourists typically choose Tucson for its sunny climate, and in late October we enjoyed cloudless skies and the kind of dry, 90-degree heat that warms you to the core without ever making you sweat. But for myself and Scott Matthews -- my partner in traveling and most other things -- the real draw of the area was the nearby Kartchner Caverns and the Kitt Peak observatory. Their main activities may have taken place in the dark, but both spots shone in the sun's absence.
Before making our first vertical move, we took a horizontal foray west to visit the Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum in the Tucson Mountain Park, adjacent to Saguaro National Park. A Tucson acquaintance had said we would drive through a ''cactus forest'' on the way, and I was delighted when the improbable description turned out to be entirely accurate.
Almost as soon as we cleared the Tucson city limits, the stunning saguaros rose up on both sides of the road, stretching out as far as we could see. The cactus lives only in southwestern Arizona and northwestern Mexico, and can grow to 50 feet. Although its local pronunciation, suh-WAR-oh, never rolled easily off of our northeastern tongues, the cactus was the unrivaled star of our time on the terrestrial plane.
A guide at the museum told us that the Hohokam Indians, who long occupied the land around Tucson, believed the saguaros were closer to people than plants, and we couldn't help but feel a strange kinship with them. With their stubby arms, they seemed more cuddly than prickly, and it was impossible not to anthropomorphize them. To Scott, one with its hands up in the air was being mugged by another waving a gun.
''Museum'' is almost a misnomer for the two miles of outdoor paths that take visitors past 1,200 kinds of native plants and a zoo that includes parrots, wolves, otters, a butterfly garden and some truly adorable prairie dogs. But our favorite exercise was spotting baby saguaros, which, we learned, must start life in the shade.
Sun-saturated, we headed back to our hotel for the night, the Loews Ventana Canyon Resort, an upscale golf and spa destination on a plateau above Tucson, to deliberate on dinner. We'd heard that Mi Nidito had the best authentic Mexican food in the city, but it was not on the hotel's recommended list.
Two hours later, over excellent frozen margaritas, we congratulated ourselves for going anyway. Even at 8:30 on Sunday night we had to wait, along with two large families, but we passed the time perusing the photo gallery of famous visitors (former President Clinton has his own menu item). The inside was colorfully decorated with Mexican art and murals.
We shared a cheese tostada to start and indulged in a selection of Mi Nidito's signature flautas and enchiladas. Our bill was under $30, margaritas included.
Well fortified, we enjoyed a good night's sleep before our descent the next morning into the Kartchner Caverns, a 45-minute drive southeast of Tucson. The passageway from terra firma to what the two University of Arizona students who found the caves in 1974 dubbed Xanadu could easily have been missed. It was, in the practically-too-good-to-be-true discovery story, the smell of bat guano, a timely breeze and an adventurous spirit that persuaded the underworld to yield its secret.
Randy Tufts and Gary Tenen, the spelunkers who slithered through a small opening in the limestone that day, kept the secret to themselves for more than three years, fearful that random visitors would break off the delicate soda straw stalactites or deface the massive, multicolored columns. Eventually, they told the Kartchner family, whose ranch land sat on top of the caves, and approached state officials about turning the area into a state park.
That goal was realized in 1988, and then four years ago, Kartchner Caverns became the first major ''show cave'' to open in the United States in several decades. That it was also a rare living cave under a desert with easy public access had made me think it might be worth a visit.
Scott and I had both always been fascinated by caves, but not caves with cheesy colored lights illuminating an ecology damaged by crowds. Fortunately, at Kartchner elaborate precautions have been taken to allow the formations to continue their growth. Half of the year, half the cave is closed to visitors to make way for the 1,000 or so myotis bats who use it as a breeding ground.
Our group of about 20 was admonished a dozen times before entering not to so much as brush against anything. The trails, we were informed, are washed every night to trap skin flakes bearing alien bacteria.
''Lint,'' bellowed our guide, ''is the enemy of the cave.'' I had never been aware of how much I was shedding just by standing there.
If we needed any motivation, a glimpse inside the cave was more than enough to make us stand clear of the walls. The closest comparisons to the drip-castle kingdom we walked through may come from ''The Lord of the Rings,'' but even Tolkien's extravagant fantasies don't measure up to the strange, glimmering reality of the cavern.
In two rooms the size of football fields, lights that went on only as we passed through an area showcased orange-colored formations called shields, foamy popcorn formations, and an embarrassment of soda straw riches cascading down from the ceiling. The only hint of Disneyland came when we arrived at the 58-foot Kubla Khan column (named after the Coleridge poem that describes Xanadu and its ''caverns measureless to man''), and New Age music began playing as lights illuminated features.
No manufactured drama was necessary, though. As our guide explained at one point: ''There's outer space and there's inner space. Right now, we're in inner space.''
But not for long. The drive from the caves to Kitt Peak took about 90 minutes, and the climb up the mountain in the golden glow of late afternoon served as the perfect counterpoint to the enclosed darkness of the caves. We reached the visitors center around 4:30, just as participants in the nightly observing program began to collect their box dinners.
As (very) amateur astronomy geeks, Scott and I had decided to splurge on the observatory's advanced program. This allows visitors to stay up all night looking at sky objects with the assistance of a skilled telescope operator.
It costs $350 for one or two people, plus $55 each for a dormitory room where we would crash in the wee hours of the morning, just like the real visiting astronomers. A midnight lunch and breakfast are included. The program can accommodate just four people a night.
We dropped our bags in our spartan room, then joined the larger group with whom we would be spending the early part of the night. At a cost of just $36, the early nightly program takes advantage of the usually clear desert skies to offer an intimate glimpse of fantastically distant objects to as many as 34 visitors.
The Kitt Peak program is particularly extensive because it is one of of the few astronomical institutions financed by the National Science Foundation, and part of its mission is to engage the public in astronomy. Two of the 25 telescopes that dot the mountaintop are devoted to the public each night. The others are for working astronomers.
The evening program began with a short trudge up the rest of the mountain from the visitors center to see the sunset and Venus, to be our first planet of the night. As darkness fell, everyone in our group of about 30 was given a pair of binoculars and gathered on the patio.
Our guides were advanced amateur astronomers whose enthusiasm for the skies was infectious. With the help of a cool green laser pointer, they taught us how to turn the jumble of stars above us into a navigable map.
Suddenly, we could see that the triangular portion of Cassiopeia's brightest stars pointed toward Pegasus, which helped us locate the Andromeda Galaxy -- a small smudge, but hey, a galaxy! -- between them.
Then it was time to split into two groups and duck into a dome, where we took turns viewing a dazzling array of star clusters, galaxies and the billowing remains of exploded stars through a 16-inch telescope. We also saw Mars, our second planet of the night, still spectacular after its closest rendezvous with earth in 60,000 years.
I had seen some of the same objects through our starter telescope at home, but I was thrilled at their beauty as viewed through the high-quality equipment. The globular cluster in the Hercules constellation, 25,000 light-years away, seemed somehow mine.
After the early group departed at 9, Scott and I continued our night with the sightings of assorted stars, nebulae and galaxies. As our guide, Roy Lorenz, showed us the new sights constantly coming into view, we could practically feel the earth spinning. Since we were the only ones there that night, we benefited from the attention of another guide, Adam Bloch, as well, who helped us take two pictures of deep-sky objects with the observatory's fancy camera.
Both guides, Adam and Roy, were extremely knowledgeable and often seemed as excited as we were as the telescope revealed new mysteries for us, no matter if they had seen them many times before.
Over the course of the night, we saw Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune and Uranus -- the remaining planets, except for Mercury and Pluto. (Pluto was too small and far away, and many don't even consider it to be a planet anymore.) At 6 a.m., surprised at how quickly the night had passed, we headed groggily to our dormitory beds.
But first, pausing to watch the sun rise over Tucson, we spied a bright star on the horizon. It was indeed Mercury, our night guides confirmed, giving us just the sense of completion we needed to prepare for our return to ground level.
Three views of nature
The Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum, 2021 North Kinney Road, Tucson, (520) 883-2702, www.desertmuseum.org, is also a zoo and botanical garden, with two miles of paths through acres of native plants and animals, as well as indoor exhibits on natural history. It is open daily 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission is $12, $4 for ages 6 to 12.
Kartchner Caverns State Park (520) 586-2283, www.azstateparks.com, is in Benson, a 45-minute drive southeast from Tucson. It is open daily 7:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. Cave tours cost $18.95 (for the Throne Rotunda Room) and $22.95 (the Big Room), $9.95 and $12.95 for children 7 to 14, and must be reserved.
Kitt Peak National Observatory is 56 miles southwest of Tucson on the Tohono O'odham Reservation. The visitor center is open daily, 9 a.m. to 3:45 p.m., with tours at 10 and 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m., (suggested donation $2). The basic Nightly Observing Program costs $36, offering an introduction to the night sky, observation through telescopes and a box dinner.
The Advanced Observing Program, limited to four people a night, allows all-night observing with the assistance of a telescope operator. It costs $350 for either one or two people, plus $55 a person for room and board. Details are at www.noao.edu/kpno or from (520) 318-8726.
Where to Stay
The Loews Ventana Canyon Resort, 7000 North Resort Drive, Tucson, (800) 234-5117, fax (520) 299-6832, www.loewshotels.com, in the foothills above Tucson, has 398 rooms, two pools, two golf courses, a full spa, and marked hiking trails through the Ventana Canyon. Prices range from $109 a night in the summer to $350 in the winter for a standard room with a patio. The oversize bathtub and the availability of high-speed Internet access in the room were plusses.
Kartchner Caverns State Park offers 63 campsites for $22 a night. No reservations are needed. For more information, contact Arizona State Parks: (520) 586-4100.
Where to Eat
Mi Nidito, 1813 South Fourth Avenue, Tucson, (520) 622-5081, offers authentic Mexican food and excellent frozen margaritas. Dinner for two with drinks, $30. No reservations. Closed Monday and Tuesday.
AMY HARMON is a reporter for The Times.
Correction:  February 8, 2004, Sunday  An article on Jan. 25 about Tucson misspelled the surname of a guide at the Kitt Peak National Observatory. He is Adam Block, not Bloch.
