TOLKIEN fever can be so acute that readers of the ''Lord of the Rings'' books and viewers of the film trilogy emerge, groggily, from the pages or the theater surprised to find that they aren't actually dwelling in Middle Earth, and wishing that they were. Now they can: the hugely successful movies, shot over about a year and a half in New Zealand, spurred tour operators to see the Elvish writing on the wall: the movies were a natural travel poster, seen by millions.
''Lord of the Rings'' tours abound, beckoning fans to visit Hobbiton, or at least Matamata, the bucolic landscape on the North Island that stands in for it. Frodo isn't the only one whose footsteps can be followed; Harry Potter is also drawing fans to Britain, and other places used as film locations are also playing up their Hollywood connections, from Cold Mountain in North Carolina to the Tokyo Hyatt, setting for ''Lost in Translation.''
Among the signs in New Zealand of the Tolkien trilogy's effect is www.purenz.com, a Web site bannered with photographs from the movie that, when clicked, proclaim, ''Welcome to New Zealand, Home of Middle-Earth.''
In a recent survey of a small sample group by Tourism New Zealand (which could not say how many people had been questioned), 9 percent of respondents said the ''Lord of the Rings'' movies ''had been a factor'' in their decision to visit New Zealand.
Ian Brodie, a lifelong Tolkien fan whose day job is curator of the New Zealand Fighter Pilots Museum in Wanaka, approached New Line Cinema to suggest a guidebook to locations used for the films. His ''Lord of the Rings Location Guidebook'' (HarperCollins, 2003) to more than 100 sites has sold more than 205,000 copies, and a coffee-table version is in the works.
Tourism entrepreneurs, many of them longtime Ring devotees already, were not far behind.
Glenorchy Air, the company that helped fly cast and crew members to and from locations on the South Island, has trademarked a Trilogy Trail set of tours. The One Ring Trail is a day trip by road to locations around Queenstown used in the ''Lord of the Rings'' trilogy and includes a walk in Paradise, location of Amon Hen. The Two Ring Trail, a two-to-three-hour flight, visits such locations as the Kawarau River, the River Anduin in the movie, to Skippers Canyon, the backdrop to the Ford of Bruinen, where the Black Riders are swept away by a flood, and to Paradise, at the head of Lake Wakatipu, which was the base for scenes set in Lothlorien. The Three Ring Trail is a full day of flying, covering about a third of the South Island, with landings at movie locations for the Plains of Rohan, at Edoras and at the Pelennor Fields.
Whereas Glenorchy caters to individual travelers, Red Carpet Tours puts the emphasis on fellowship, for ''a shared journey through the breathtaking landscapes that we all know from the movies,'' according to the company's Web site. ''You will come as strangers to a distant land and part as a band of companions who have shared a unique experience in the country that has become Middle-earth.''
With 12-day bus tours departing monthly, a Red Carpet Lord of the Rings tour includes visits to both North and South Island sites like Hobbiton, the Mount Ruapehu sites of Emyn Muil, Mordor and Gollum's fishing pool, the Black Riders' ranch, Helm's Deep, Isengard and Lothlorien, Edoras, the Rohan and Fanghorn Forests (Mavora Lakes), and optional activities like a jet boat down the River Anduin. rafting past the Pillars of Argonath, or a helicopter flight to the Ford of Bruinen.
A California-based company, Pacific Pathways, offers a three-week trip for the Tolkien-obsessed. Its inaugural trip, Jan. 7 to 25, was led by Jan Coyle, the company's founder and a New Zealand native, and Michael Stanton, a Tolkien scholar who taught ''The Fellowship of the Rings'' at the University of Vermont for three decades and who is the author of ''Hobbits, Wizards: Exploring the Wonders and Worlds of J.R.R. Tolkien's 'Lord of the Rings''' (St. Martin's, 2001).
The Pacific Pathways tour follows the footsteps of Frodo and his companions (sometimes via helicopter) through both the North and South Islands, and will be joined along the way by people who participated in the film as well as by Ian Brodie, who wrote the guidebook.
One of those who signed on for the tour, jan howard finder (''all lower case, like e.e. cummings,'' he said), is a longtime Tolkien fan from Albany who has read all four books (the trilogy plus ''The Hobbit'') ''about 30 times, four or five out loud.''
The trip was a major expense, ''But I said to myself, 'What the heck! Life is short! Eat dessert first!''' Mr. finder said by telephone recently. ''I'm a scenery freak. The fun is in going to see the scenery with 15 other nut cases who are equally enchanted by the books and movies.''
Capt. David Lewen, a JAG officer stationed in Korea, and his wife, Julie, took a December tour with Anywhere-Anytime Tours out of Christchurch, New Zealand, which he said ''far exceeded my highest expectations.'' The two toured with the company's president, Rhys Warner, in a van for 10 days around the South Island, culminating with a viewing of ''Return of the King'' in Christchurch. The peak experience for them, he said, was at Kelvin Heights outside Queenstown. ''We walked precisely where the refugees of Rohan walked as they fled to Helm's Deep,'' Captain Lewen said. ''I stood exactly where Legolas stood as he fired arrows at the wild warg beasts and then did his amazing leap onto his horse. My wife perched herself on the very cliff that Aragorn was dragged over by the wild warg.''
Anywhere-Anytime Tours' three-day Lord of the Rings tour visits Lake Pukaki, Mount Cook, Milford Sound, and Kelvin Heights, with a jet boat excursion to the sites of Isengard, Nan Curunir, Methedras, Lothlorien, Amon Hen and forests reminiscent of ancient forests seen in the movie.
Although excitement surrounding ''The Last Samurai'' has been more subdued, one company, Maori Journeys, is happy to have a chance to show visitors the beauty of the Tanaki region, home of the mountain that stands in for Mount Fuji. Its three-day bus tour, A Mountain Like Fuji, includes mountain and marine activities, museums, parks, the Samurai Village film location, the Pukeiti Gardens and Maori culture.
Harry Potter has inspired children to visit the barrier between platforms 9 and 10 at Kings Cross Station in London looking for the Hogwarts' Express since 1997, when the first of J.K. Rowling's books was published. A number of tour companies have organized itineraries that include, if not the actual Diagon Alley or Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, then some of the sites, later enhanced by special effects, that were those imaginary settings on the big screen.
Elderhostel was among the first American organizations to come up with tours to Harry Potter sites. It normally requires participants to be 55 and older, but for the Harry Potter tours, which also include sites from other children's literature, Elderhostelers must be accompanied by a child 9 to 11 years old.
There are two Elderhostel programs, one 11 days, the other 13; both are based at Oxford University, where participants explore fantasy themes ranging from Grimms' fairy tales to Alice in Wonderland and Willy Wonka, and learn such skills as how to use of a Marauder's Map and how to play Quidditch (sorry, no flying broomsticks). There are field trips to Blenheim Palace Maze, an owl conservancy and a ride on a vintage steam train, as well as a magical banquet at Christ Church College.
Percy Weasley himself (in the person of Chris Rankin, the actor who plays him in the films) will make an appearance on three tours this spring put together by Beyond Boundaries Travel. In two of them, called Live the Legend, activities include a visit to the Tower of London and a treasure hunt throughout the city, with maps and clues given out by costumed guides, as well as a visit to Oxford, with a storytelling event that focuses on Tolkien. Participants also follow Harry's route on the North York Moors Railway from Pickering to Goathland and take a class in dragon-slaying with Britain's last licensed slayer of dragons.
Another Beyond Boundaries tour created by a trio of Harry Potter fans, will take place June 1 to 6, to coincide with the release of the third Harry Potter film, ''Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban.'' Beginning with trips to York and Oxford, the tour winds up with a weekend at the Royal Naval College in Greenwich, again with Chris Rankin joining in, for a final day of Harry Potter activities, culminating in a Hogwarts banquet. A special mystery guest is promised.
The Japan National Tourist Organization stands ready to help tourists locate sites featured in the film ''Lost in Translation,'' on www.japantravelinfo.com. The Park Hyatt Tokyo, where much of the film took place, has created a five-night Get Lost (in Translation) package, which, the hotel says, ''mirrors the adventures of the film's main characters (played by Bill Murray and Scarlett Johansson.)''
Some people in western North Carolina are hoping that the real Cold Mountain, from the film of the same name, will attract new visitors to their region. Never mind that the movie actually was filmed in Romania, which has dependable snow and fewer telephone poles. Casual excursions up Cold Mountain, in the Shining Rock Wilderness Area of Pisgah National Forest about 25 miles southwest of Asheville, are likely to be few, however: It's a steep 10.4-mile round-trip hike on an unblazed trail.
Nevertheless, Roger and Judy Winge, who own a bed-and-breakfast called October Hill in Waynesville, about a 20-minute drive to the mountain, are offering a two-night Cold Mountain package, which includes a picnic lunch, a copy of the novel or movie soundtrack and directions to attractions in the area, including the mountain.
Likewise, the Richmond Hill Inn, in Asheville, has a Cold Mountain Romance Package that includes two nights' stay, a $110 certificate for dinner at the inn's restaurant, Gabrielle's, directions for car touring in the Cold Mountain area, about 40 miles drive, a hardback copy of the novel, full breakfast and afternoon tea.
And finally, if you like to look at movie locations wherever you go, there is a book, ''The Worldwide Guide to Movie Locations,'' by Tony Reeves (A Capella, 2001), and a Web site, www.movie-locations.com. The book is more complete than the site, with details on approximately 1,600 films, and is illustrated with 1,000 original photographs.
The Web site beckons, ''You've seen the film, now do the holiday.'' Fans of ''The English Patient,'' for example, will find that the scenes set in Egypt, full of portent, hazy with desire, were in fact shot in Tunisia, although the ''Shepheard's Hotel, Cairo,'' is to be found in Venice. Ralph Fiennes' desert camp? It's beneath the Camel's Neck rock formation near Nefta, the Tunisian oasis not far from the sets of ''Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace.''
A movie lot where the stars float (and sometimes sink)
Fox Studios Baja was the set on which 95 percent of James Cameron's blockbusting ''Titanic'' was filmed, and, most recently, the seafaring epic ''Master and Commander.'' On 40 otherwise dry acres along the Pacific Coast on the Baja Peninsula of Mexico, the studio has several huge tanks that fill with water to reproduce seafaring conditions.
On a recent visit, the big tanks remained, waiting for their next big ship to come in, and the movies' ephemera -- sets, costumes, props, effects -- had been swept away. But not completely. As ''Titanic'' emerged as the top box-office film of all time, some of the flotsam from that film, and others produced here, was salvaged to create Foxploration, a park devoted to the art and artifice of movie-making.
Universal Studios it is not. There are no thrilling rides or moving animatronics. But it is a moderately entertaining roadside attraction about an hour's drive south of San Diego in an area that has fairly few, other than hotels, restaurants, bars and surf breaks.
On a recent visit, Foxploration was crowded, mostly with Mexican families, but also with a few Americans. With cannons outside from the filming of ''Pearl Harbor,'' and an entry that opens onto an avenue modeled on Canal Street in Manhattan, the park is a pastiche of eras, countries and modes of transport: a lifeboat from the Titanic, a Thai tuk-tuk and a caged cart from ''Planet of the Apes.''
To the right as one enters is Cinemágico, a warehouselike space that has interactive displays about filmmaking and special effects; the displays and guided tours are in both Spanish and English. My daughters, 8 and 11, liked the shadow theater, with fluorescent-paint walls and a strobe light, and the vortex tunnel, a passage through whirling lights, but decided against standing in line at the make-up area, where a technician painted ''victims'' with realistic wounds.
We obtained a first-class White Star Line ticket, dated 10/4/1912, for the sailing of the Titanic, and took a slightly claustrophobic but engaging tour, with a group of about 20, of recreated sets for Jack's third-class, four-bunk room, Rose's first-class stateroom and truncated versions of the boiler room and first-class dining room. We later saw a 3-D movie, ''Ghost of the Abyss,'' that showed the original filigreed-glass dining room windows and stateroom washstands as seen by robotic cameras from the bottom of the north Atlantic, nearly 90 years later.
There is also a play center for kids with lots of balls, called ''Xavier's School for the Gifted'' (from ''X-Men''), a gift shop and some other displays, but the whole park can be explored, at leisure, in under three hours.
We had a sunset dinner about two miles south at the Hotel Calafia, a mission-style building on a promontory with panoramic views of the Pacific. Its indoor-outdoor restaurant is decorated with parts of the ''Titanic'' set that weren't used at Foxploration.
Foxploration, (866) 369-2252, www.foxploration.com. Admission is $12, $9 for children 3 to 11. Open Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, 9 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Saturday and Sunday, 10 a.m. to 6:30 p.m.
Rooms at the Hotel Calafia, (877) 700-2093 phone and fax, www.hotel-calafia.com, start at $45 on weekdays and $64 on weekends. A winter lobster special includes a large margarita, soup or salad, half a lobster tail, rice, beans, and dessert for $13.95.
A bus company, Mexicoach, has shuttle buses and packages from San Ysidro, Calif., that go on to Tijuana and Foxploration for $18;l (619) 428-9517 or gototijuana.com/mexicoach.
MARTHA STEVENSON OLSON
The Middle Earth catalog
'Lord of the Rings'
Trilogy Trail, telephone (64-3) 442-2207, www.trilogytrail.com. The One Ring Tour is $84 a person (prices at $1.49 New Zealand to the U.S. dollar). The Two Ring Tour costs $191 and the Three Ring Tour is $446, with a minimum of two adults.
Red Carpet Lord of the Rings; (64-9) 410-6561; www.redcarpet-tours.com. A 12-day tour costs $2,349 and includes transport, guides, entry fees, hotels with breakfast, and at least two buffet dinners, as well as flights from Wellington to Christchurch and from Queeenstown to Auckland.
Pacific Pathways; (650) 595-2090; www.pacificpathways.com. A 18-day trip, $5,228 a person, includes the flight to and from Los Angeles and flights within New Zealand. A similar tour, a day shorter and $3,974 without air fare, departs April 19. and a third trip will be scheduled later in the year.
Anywhere-Anytime Tours; (64-3) 366-9427; www.new-zealand-tours.co.nz. A three-day Lord of the Rings tour, at $690 a person, includes pick-up from Christchurch Airport, two-nights' accommodation and visits to Lake Pukaki, Mount Cook, a boat excursion on Milford Sound, and a visit to Kelvin Heights, as well as a jet boat excursion to the mythical sites of Isengard, Nan Curunir, Methedras, Lothlorien, Amon Hen and forests reminiscent of ancient forests seen in the movie. .
There are myriad day and overnight trips throughout New Zealand to ''Lord of the Rings'' sites, and www.newzealand.com or www.purenz.com link to many of them by region. Modes of transport range from a Mercedes Unimog, used by a company called 4x4 New Zealand, (64-3) 693-8847, www.4x4newzealand.co.nz, to one's own two feet: ''In the Footsteps of the Hobbits'' is an ecologically sensitive hike in the back country organized by Tussocks &amp;Beech Ecotours, (64-3) 303 0880, or www.nature.net.nz, which has a permit allowing access to Mount Sunday, location for Edoras.
'Last Samurai'
Maori Journeys, (64-6) 751-3242, www.maorijourneys.com. A three-day bus tour is $597. Longer trips are available.
Harry Potter
Elderhostel, (877) 426-8056, www.elderhostel.org. Magical Worlds: Harry Potter and More 11 days, costs $2,315 a person ($2,982 including air fare from New York) in double occupancy. Harry Potter: Fact and Fiction, 13 days, is a bit more wide-ranging and is $2,589 ($3,343 including air fare from New York).
Beyond Boundaries Travel; (800) 487-1136; or visit www.beyondboundariestravel.com. The six-day Live the Legend trips, which start April 10 and June 20, are $1,789; $1,259 ages 13 to 16; $1,049 for those younger. The fan trip is $1,999; $1,399 age 13 through 16; and $1,199 for those 12 and younger.
The British Tourist Authority runs a Web site, www.visitbritain.com/moviemap, that has an interactive map showing various Harry Potter locations and also makes reference to ''Master and Commander'' and other movies.
'Lost in Translation'
The five-night ''Lost in Translation'' package at the Park Hyatt Tokyo, (81-3) 5322-1234, fax (81-3) 5322-1288, www.tokyo.park.hyatt.com, is $2,111 for a room or $2,944 for a suite (at 108 yen to the dollar) for one or two people.
'Cold Mountain'
October Hill Bed and Breakfast, in Waynesville, N.C.; (877) 628-4455, fax (828) 452-2780; www.octoberhillbedandbreakfast.com. The Cold Mountain package is $265 or $325, depending on room, for two people.
Richmond Hill Inn, Asheville, N.C.; (888) 742-4536, fax (828) 252-8726; www.richmondhillinn.com. The Cold Mountain Romance package, available Feb. 15 to March 31, starts at $390 midweek, or $490 on weekends.
MARTHA STEVENSON OLSON contributes regularly to the Travel section.
Correction:  February 15, 2004, Sunday  An article on Jan. 25 about tours of movie sites misstated the name of the region in New Zealand where ''The Last Samurai'' was filmed. It is the Taranaki region, not Tanaki.
Correction:  February 29, 2004, Sunday  An article on Jan. 25 about tours of movie-related sites misstated the main title of a book by Michael Stanton, a guide on a Pacific Pathways tour of New Zealand. It is ''Hobbits, Elves, and Wizards: Exploring the Wonders and Worlds of J.R.R. Tolkien's 'The Lord of the Rings''' -- not ''Hobbits, Wizards.'' The article also misstated the scope of subject matter taught by Mr. Stanton at the University of Vermont. It was all the ''Lord of the Rings'' books, not just ''The Fellowship of the Ring.'' An e-mail message from Mr. Stanton on Feb. 15 pointed out the errors.
A picture of the Hobbiton set carried an erroneous credit. The photographer was Susan Plewright. An e-mail message from Pacific Pathways on Feb. 13 pointed out the error. These corrections were delayed by an editing lapse.
