THERE she is again in another drop-dead outfit. The It Art Woman. Lady Look-at-My-Languor. Introduced to me at a friend's home a couple of years ago, she can barely be bothered to say hello as she looks for a means of escape. Maybe she's shy. Maybe she's trying to cultivate a mysterious air. Maybe she's so exhausted from being a boldface name that there's no energy left for giving off the genial vibe the rest of us associate with parties.
But what kind of person gets all dressed up to go out, only to be a downer?
Social depressives, that's who. They are guests who are so glum that you want to smack them or drop a few Zolofts into their drinks. They sulk, skulk and give off so little emotion that it feels like a form of assault. They won't include you in conversation or laugh at your jokes. Often they're on cellphones or sitting on couches, reading.
The Eeyores of the social world.
In his biography of the playwright Joe Orton, John Lahr describes a party given for Mr. Orton and his boyfriend to introduce them to London's literary scene: ''They sat on the sofa the whole evening and didn't speak to anybody.'' The party was a total flop.
''Guests like that just seem really unhappy,'' said Ira Silverberg, an affable book agent who sees more than his share of social depressives at publishing parties, especially these days. ''You feel like shaking them and asking, 'Why are you out?' ''
At a free show last month sponsored by a vodka company for an entitled downtown crowd, Sandra Bernhard was asking her audience the same question. ''Boy, do I see some pusses out there,'' she said. ''I'm going to get you people to react and come to life if it kills you! You're lucky to be here. You're lucky to be alive. Show some appreciation.''
Of course, sometimes being taciturn is professionally essential.
''When I go to a party,'' said Jared Paul Stern, the executive editor of Star tabloid, ''I'm there to absorb, not amuse. It's a subtle approach.'' In Miami, Tom Austin, a nightlife reporter for Ocean Drive magazine, wears a personal fragrance called disdain. ''And the more disinterested I am,'' he said about his beat, ''the more people want to talk.''
The social depressive has been around at least since psychoanalysis became trendy and Valium became essential for sophisticated housewives. ''In the 1960's,'' Holly Solomon, the late art dealer, once told me, ''a beautiful woman was an unhappy one.'' She probably meant that to be truly beautiful, you had to be politically or emotionally conflicted. On the other hand, Andy Warhol always looked glum for no particular reason. Wherever he'd go, and it was everywhere, guests would howl into the full moon of his blank face. He was not trying to be vague or rude.
''If you want to know all about Andy Warhol,'' he once wrote, ''just look at the surface of my paintings and films and me and there I am. There's nothing behind it.''
Maybe that's a good thing to keep in mind next time you find yourself hyperventilating in the presence of someone who won't be engaged at a dinner table.
''If I get seated with someone like that, I excuse myself early,'' said Leila Hadley Luce, a writer with a vivid social life. ''That's one of the benefits of having emphysema.''
Why do these social depressives prevail? Is it because William Styron and Elizabeth Wurtzel made depression acceptable? Is it because sought-after people never have to do very much to be fascinating? A few years ago, I spent an entire night interviewing Paris Hilton, and I got almost nothing from her except a cool ''Bye, Bill'' at the end of the evening. Today she's at the top of the anti-social register.
Meanwhile, in Germany, the hottest television star is Bernd the loaf of bread. A depressed counterpart to our SpongeBob SquarePants and dubbed ''the morose baked good,'' this cartoon character has become a cult figure. The director's explanation to Der Spiegel magazine about the success of such kitschy gloom?
''The current zeitgeist is a bad mood,'' he said.
Yes, it is. Even at parties.
THE AGE OF DISSONANCE
