ON a brutally cold winter day last week, Peter E. Bacanovic trudged up the stairs of United States District Court in Lower Manhattan. Passing through the clamorous gantlet of cameramen, Mr. Bacanovic, Martha Stewart's former broker, stared directly ahead, stone-faced and pale.
Minutes later, Ms. Stewart showed up. Unlike Mr. Bacanovic, she played to the crowd, offering up a demure smile as the morning sun caught the blond streaks in her perfect head of hair.
As always, the spotlight will be on Ms. Stewart this Tuesday when her high-powered legal team presents the opening statement in her defense. Less at ease in the public glare will be Mr. Bacanovic, a denizen of the Upper East Side of Manhattan, whose ties with Ms. Stewart and a roster of other wealthy clients made him a rising star at Merrill Lynch.
Once her broker, Mr. Bacanovic is now playing a far more crucial role as Ms. Stewart's chief alibi. From the beginning, he has contended that he and Ms. Stewart had a pre-existing agreement that she would sell her 3,928 shares in ImClone Systems if the stock breached $60.
Prosecutors will assert that no such agreement existed and that Mr. Bacanovic and Ms. Stewart conspired to concoct such a pact to defend themselves against what they thought would be insider-trading charges after her sale of the shares.
In many ways, the fates of Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic hinge on whether a jury believes Mr. Bacanovic's contention. Each could face a long sentence if found guilty of the charges against them, obstruction of justice and perjury.
Over the last months, Ms. Stewart, who has a net worth of close to half a billion dollars, has started a campaign to restore her public image with several television interviews, a public relations team and a Web site. Mr. Bacanovic, however, has remained a mystery, disappearing from the New York social scene that was once a central part of his life. He has granted no interviews and has spent much of the last year living in virtual seclusion, abandoning his Manhattan town house to live with friends in Los Angeles as he worked with his lawyers to prepare for the trial of his life.
Mr. Bacanovic declined to comment for this article, but a number of his friends and former clients did. Many of them complain that Mr. Bacanovic has been lampooned in the news media as a society lightweight, cited more for his squiring of Park Avenue grandes dames than for his considerable accomplishments as one of Merrill Lynch's top-performing brokers.
They say that Mr. Bacanovic, with his finely tuned social antennae, has been devastated by this portrayal. So much so that for the last two years he has run in fear from prying cameras; in the past, he often had a warm smile for the odd society paparazzo.
''It is as if they have created a cartoon character; it seems as if he is a glorified lap dog,'' said Pamela Clarke Keogh, an author and friend. ''There is much more to his life than escorting Nan Kempner to the ballet.''
And while it is true that he is close to Ms. Kempner, the Manhattan socialite (''He is like my fourth child,'' she said. ''He wouldn't hurt a fly.'') Mr. Bacanovic's friends paint a picture of him as a deeper soul, with interests and relationships that extend beyond his uptown stomping grounds.
By all accounts, the last two years have been traumatic for him. Although Merrill Lynch is paying his prodigious legal bills, he has not had an income since he was fired by the firm in October 2002.
In a search for a peaceful center amid the turmoil, he has taken up yoga. He has also expressed regret to friends that he never followed his first professional calling, which was to be a Hollywood agent. He worked briefly in the mailroom of William Morris, the talent agency, in the mid-1980's, and has talked wistfully about pursuing a career as a movie producer in Hollywood if he is acquitted.
''I can certainly see him in the film business,'' said Steven E. Tisch, a movie producer who has spoken with Mr. Bacanovic about his life after the trial. ''He would be a very good producer. He is a people person.''
For distraction, he has dusted off an old hobby, taking portrait photographs of close friends at dinner parties and other social occasions. ''He asks friends to sit for pictures,'' said Glenn Hinderstein, a friend and former client of Mr. Bacanovic. ''He likes taking pictures of women, or of me during my parties. His biggest regret is that he left the basement of William Morris.''
For someone so accustomed to being a man about town, the adjustment to his changed circumstances has been wrenching, friends of Mr. Bacanovic say. Starting in 1993, he built a thriving brokerage practice at Merrill Lynch -- he was in the top 20 percent of brokers at the firm -- by cultivating a small stable of well-heeled clients in Manhattan.
In many ways, Mr. Bacanovic's crowded business and social lives blended into one. On one night, he would attend a sumptuous benefit at the American Ballet Theater; on another, he would play host to an intimate dinner party for friends at a favorite restaurant.
At some of these events he would talk business, cornering a client to give a quick portfolio update, but in some cases he just basked in the glow of being surrounded by his many friends.
''You couldn't go to a party without running into Peter,'' said Patrick McCarthy, the chairman of Fairchild Publications and a former client of Mr. Bacanovic. ''He really enjoys the social life and loves talking to people. He was doing well for himself. He had bought his town house and decorated it. It makes you feel good when your stockbroker is successful.''
While glamorous on the surface, such a life was also arduous, with workdays that started early in the morning and often lasted late into the night. But for Mr. Bacanovic, a 41-year-old bachelor, it was everything he could have wished for, his friends say.
THERE are some striking similarities between Mr. Bacanovic and Ms. Stewart. They both come from immigrant families. Mr. Bacanovic's father was born in Serbia and his mother in Greece, while Ms. Stewart (née Martha Kostyra) has Polish-American roots. Through a combination of hard work and good looks -- Ms. Stewart was once a model and Mr. Bacanovic was once nominated for the International Best-Dressed List of the fashion publicist Eleanor Lambert -- they embraced a version of the American dream. In their worlds, they came to be seen as exemplars of how the potent mix of money and style could propel a career.
Mr. Bacanovic did not gain automatic entree into this elite world. His father, a midlevel banker at Bank of America, and his mother, an anesthesiologist, came to New York City in the 1950's and sent their two children to the Lycée Français, a private school on the Upper East Side.
It was there that Mr. Bacanovic met many of the fashionable friends who would form the core of his social circle, a cross-section of New York's moneyed classes. Some friends describe him as a Zelig of sorts, ubiquitous and ever adaptable. He was as quick to comment on a stylish pair of sneakers that a friend might be wearing as he was to discuss the merits of investing in the euro.
''He is not really part of the old-money or the new-money crowd,'' said Horace W. Brock, who runs an economic research institute and has known Mr. Bacanovic for more than 10 years. ''But he has an ability to relate to both sides, whether that be Marina Rust, the granddaughter of Marshall Field 3rd, or George Lindemann, who made a bunch of money in telecoms. It's a talent.''
Coming out of New York University business school in 1988, Mr. Bacanovic started his flirtation with Hollywood. But after a few months at William Morris, he jumped at an opportunity to be a junior banker for Asher Edelman, a 1980's-era corporate raider whose base in Switzerland appealed to Mr. Bacanovic's international sensibilities.
With his fluent French and Greek, he enjoyed the life, but the work was hard, and in the bear market of the late 1980's, the deals dried up. So he left Wall Street for a marketing job at ImClone Systems, the biological research company.
From 1990 to 1992, he worked in business development, searching for potential joint ventures and licensing arrangements. Mr. Bacanovic, who had an interest in molecular biology, also became a social friend of Samuel D. Waksal, the ImClone founder.
Mr. Bacanovic left ImClone in 1992, and after a brief stint at a start-up hedge fund, he took the advice of his brother, Paul, a Merrill Lynch banker at the time, and went to work as a junior-level financial adviser at Merrill.
His brother, who is two years younger and is now an investment banker at Lehman Brothers, was convinced that the combination of Mr. Bacanovic's ease with wealthy people and his financial smarts would make him the perfect private banker, capable of drawing a bead on the sacred assets, or the core wealth, of some of the richest people in New York.
''I told him he would be the best in the business, and he took the bait,'' the younger Mr. Bacanovic said. ''The biggest hurdle for him was to convert the people he had known for years into clients.''
Starting with just a cubicle, he built a substantial base of clients on both coasts. In addition to advising clients about stocks, he provided estate planning and tax advice. His approach to his business was subtle. At ease around people of wealth, he knew better than to go for the hard sell. He often let the business come to him, relying on referrals from friends and making few cold calls for new business.
''It was a soft-sell approach, strictly professional. It's not in his nature to be pushy,'' said Anne Corbin, an investment banker and a onetime client of Mr. Bacanovic. ''It's hard not to like Peter. People gravitated toward him.''
Friends became clients and clients became friends, and the boundary between the two would often blur. People who know him say that part of his success as a broker is his singular -- some say obsessive -- devotion to pleasing and caring for his seemingly endless roster of friends.
Whether it would be finding a date for a friend, counseling a friend who lost her husband or flying to Paris to spend time with one who had cancer, the stories of Mr. Bacanovic going the extra mile to accommodate those close to him are legion.
One former client even remarked that if Mr. Bacanovic was guilty of anything it was his deep desire to be liked. ''Peter is someone who has the burden of always being cheerful,'' said Nancy Novogrod, editor in chief at Travel and Leisure. ''He is the great extra man, attractive, intelligent and civilized.''
In one respect, it was the craving to make his friends happy and be constantly there for them that led him to hire Douglas Faneuil, his assistant at Merrill Lynch, who, according to the complaint filed by prosecutors, told Ms. Stewart that Mr. Waksal and his daughter were trying to sell their ImClone stock, thus precipitating Ms. Stewart's sale.
Mr. Faneuil will be the government's star witness. He is expected to testify that Mr. Bacanovic pressured him to tell Merrill Lynch and regulators that an agreement to sell the stock existed between Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic.
According to one person who knows Mr. Bacanovic and Mr. Faneuil, Mr. Bacanovic hired Mr. Fanueil only as a favor to his friend Nina Griscom, the stepdaughter to Felix Rohatyn, the well-connected former Lazard Frères investment banker.
Mr. Faneuil, who was working at D.E. Shaw &amp; Company, an investment firm, was looking to leave. Mr. Faneuil was a close friend of Robert Haskell, then a columnist at Women's Wear Daily. Ms. Griscom knew Mr. Faneuil through her friend Mr. Haskell, friends of Mr. Bacanovic said. Mr. Bacanovic took him on after Ms. Griscom's recommendation.
Now Mr. Faneuil, who, according to Mr. Bacanovic's lawyers, originally supported his boss's version of events, will be taking the stand against him.
Mr. Bacanovic's steadfast refusal to succumb to the relentless pressure from prosecutors and break ranks with Ms. Stewart is a further testimony to his loyalty, his friends say. While Ms. Stewart may have been Mr. Bacanovic's best-known client, their relationship was based more on business than friendship, people who know Mr. Bacanovic say.
IN many ways, the relationship symbolizes how Mr. Bacanovic conducted his business. He knew Ms. Stewart through her daughter, Alexis, who attended Barnard while he was at Columbia. And while he occasionally ran into Ms. Stewart on the society circuit, their relationship was at its core broker-client as opposed to broker-friend.
Mr. Bacanovic's testimony to the Securities and Exchange Commission sheds light on the give and take of their relationship as ImClone's stock began its plunge. In that testimony, he said that on Dec. 20, 2001, he made his pitch to Ms. Stewart that she should sell her remaining shares.
''How low does this go before you are prepared to part with this?'' he asked, according to his S.E.C. testimony.
''I don't know,'' he said Ms. Stewart responded.
''How about 60 dollars a share?'' Mr. Bacanovic countered.
''Yes, sure,'' Ms. Stewart said.
Seven days later, Ms. Stewart would sell her shares.
