In an interview to be televised Sunday, Senator John Kerry rebuked Gen. Wesley K. Clark for dismissing his military record as that of a junior officer in Vietnam.
''That's the first time I have heard a general be so dismissive of lieutenants, who bleed a lot in wars,'' Mr. Kerry told the CBS News program ''60 Minutes'' in an interview taped on Wednesday.
''I think the general is entitled to his feelings and opinions,'' added Mr. Kerry, who was highly decorated for his service in Vietnam.
The network made the excerpts public on a heavy day of campaigning in New Hampshire in which Mr. Kerry and General Clark sparred at separate events over leadership skills.
General Clark tried to walk a fine line on Saturday, asserting that his experience as a military commander would make him a better president than Mr. Kerry while making sure to praise Mr. Kerry's heroism.
General Clark was singed by criticism after he compared his military record with the senator's on the night of Mr. Kerry's Iowa caucus victory. General Clark said on the CNN program ''Larry King Live'' that ''with all due respect, he's a lieutenant and I'm a general.''
On Saturday, asked by a voter in Auburn, N.H., why he would be a better president than Mr. Kerry, General Clark answered, ''I like John Kerry and I've respected a lot of what he's done.''
He added: ''I admire his service in Vietnam. He was a hero there. He got a Silver Star, a Purple Heart, three of them. And he conducted himself with honor. He's had a great career in public service in elective office in the United States Senate.''
But General Clark went on to emphasize his own decades of military service, culminating in the position of supreme allied commander of NATO.
''My experience is the experience of leadership,'' General Clark said. ''When you look at what the presidency is about, the presidency is about doing, not debating. It's about taking action, not taking assessments. And it's about making decisions on issues of national significance and international significance and life and death.''
Asked Saturday about Mr. Kerry's statement on ''60 Minutes,'' General Clark again said he respected Mr. Kerry's military service and had meant no disrespect to lower-ranking members of the military.
''I know a thing or two about giving blood for the country too, because I was there,'' General Clark said. ''I took four rounds and came home on a stretcher. I think we were there about the same time. You know what I found in my military service and my leadership experience is the most difficult decisions you have to make are the decisions that put the lives of your men and women at risk. And I made those decisions and it's a heavy responsibility.
Mr. Kerry, who is from Massachusetts, speaks repeatedly of his leadership ability and on Saturday called himself a lifelong Democrat, an implicit contrast with General Clark, who is running his first campaign and has acknowledged voting for Richard M. Nixon and Ronald Reagan.
''I've been talking every day about what I bring in terms of leadership skill,'' Mr. Kerry said aboard his bus on Saturday.
''I have a 35-year record as a lifelong Democrat,'' he added, going on to list domestic issues he has championed, like opposition to drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
''I've been doing that, and I've also shown leadership for 35 years on foreign policy and national security affairs,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''So I'll continue to talk about my leadership record and my campaign, and others will talk about their own.''
Mr. Kerry gave a very different answer than Mr. Clark when asked whether he would have called President Bush a ''deserter,'' as has the filmmaker Michael Moore.
''That language was over the top, and I would not use that language,'' Mr. Kerry said.
In the Democratic debate on Thursday night, General Clark declined to scold Mr. Moore, who had made the remark while sharing the stage with him in New Hampshire recently. General Clark said that Mr. Moore had the right to his opinion and that the opinion was ''not relevant to me and why I'm in this campaign.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: MILITARY SERVICE
