''ONCE upon a time'' (or so the first title card declares), a man stood at the sink, stropping his straight razor, as clouds sliced across the full moon. And because this movie, in spite of being pulled nonsensically backward and forward by those arbitrary title cards, exists only in the present tense, what followed remains one of the most notoriously shocking images in the history of cinema. Nobody who has seen it has forgotten it, and many who have never seen it are nonetheless aware of it. The man, with studied casualness, applies his razor to the eyeball of a woman seated in front of a window. By means of a sleight of hand accomplished by one kind of cutting -- the snipping and splicing of pieces of film to create the illusion of continuity -- we see, in close-up, the results of another, more brutal kind. The eyeball (which belongs to a calf smuggled into the frame while we were looking at the moon) is neatly dissected, its inner matter squeezed out in a gelatinous glob.
The image, of course, is from ''Un Chien Andalou'' (1929), the 18-minute film directed by Luis Buñuel from a script he wrote with Salvador Dalí. The man with the razor is Buñuel himself, sharpening his weapons of sexual provocation, elegant visual aggression and mischievous humor for the assault on bourgeois propriety and narrative decorum he will carry on, with some interruptions and changes of scene, for another half-century.
''Un Chien Andalou'' and its sequel, ''L'Âge d'Or,'' both of which will be shown at Film Forum beginning on Friday (''L'Âge d'Or'' in a clean new 35-millimeter print), have long since taken up residence in the pantheon of modernist aesthetic scandals. Like ''The Rite of Spring,''  ''Les Demoiselles D'Avignon,''  ''Ulysses'' and Henry Miller's twin ''Tropics,'' these films have been sanctified for their sacrilege, as their initial aesthetic radicalism has become the guarantor of their ultimate cultural prestige. When ''L'Âge d'Or'' opened at Studio 28 in Paris in 1930, it provoked such intense hostility among right-wing religious and political groups that the police pulled it from the screen after less than two weeks. Buñuel himself, anticipating such a reaction, later claimed that he attended the premiere armed with rocks to hurl back at the audience, whose displeasure was clearly part of his intention. The most obvious incitements are a series of blasphemous images -- sharp pokes in the eye of the Catholic church that had dominated Buñuel's provincial Spanish childhood. These include a klatch of skeletons in priestly garb, and the teasing insertion of an actor resembling Jesus into the orgiastic criminality of the Marquis de Sade's ''120 Days of Sodom.'' (The orgy itself, featuring eight captive teenagers and four ''depraved women,'' is evoked only in voiceover.)
But the most overtly scandalous elements of Buñuel's early style have become, over time, the easiest to assimilate and the least costly to approve. Yes, there is occasionally a movie or other artwork that will ruffle religious sensitivities or inspire picket lines, but these ritualized culture-war skirmishes have all the spontaneity and unpredictability of Civil War re-enactments. To imagine the unhinged outrage of the squares -- or, even better, the repressive fury of church, state and the ruling class -- in the face of avant-garde art is, at this point, a nostalgic exercise in self-flattery. In his fight for imaginative liberty, Buñuel was perhaps more successful than he could have dreamed or would have admitted.
In Spain -- where, as Buñuel once observed, the Middle Ages lasted well into the 20th century and the religious and social tyranny of fascism expired only in the 1970's -- his exiled spirit has found a home in the work of Pedro Almodóvar, who began as a revolutionary and has since become an institution. The assault on bourgeois propriety, you might say, has become a cherished form of bourgeois propriety in its own right.
So if ''L'Âge d'Or'' was solely devoted to tweaking now-obsolescent mores (and habits of dress; you will see more tuxedos in this hourlong picture than in the seven hours of next month's Oscar broadcast), it would survive as little more than a historical curiosity. Instead, like other monuments of modernism, and like ''Un Chien Andalou,'' its durability lies less in its challenge to social norms than in its formal extremism. Its power to shock may lie not so much in its profligate images as in the way they are arranged.
Henry Miller called ''L'Âge d'Or''  ''the only film I know of which reveals the possibilities of the cinema,'' and this description retains a surprising aptness. To an extent unmatched even by his own later, longer work, Buñuel's early movies function according to dream logic, exploiting and subverting the stubborn linearity of film to create an oxymoronic atmosphere of calm terror, or rigorous anarchy. Because filmed images, like dream images, unfold before our eyes in chronological sequence, we assume that they are also linked by cause and effect, and thus part of what Miller wonderfully called ''the whole glittering web of logic and idealism that seeks to mask from us the real nature of man.''
In insisting that rationalism was an illusion, and a cinema could be erected, like the Imperial Rome of ''L'Âge d'Or,'' on nonrational foundations, Buñuel laid out an artistic program as influential as it was doomed. Traces of his dream syntax show up everywhere, from Hitchcock to Bergman, from Mel Brooks to David Lynch, but the gleeful utopian promise of his purest, most passionate Surrealism remains just that -- the opening salvo in a revolution that never quite took place.
The Golden Age of ''L'Âge d'Or'' thus remains permanently in the future, where it belongs, and the movie can still provoke, baffle and delight -- not that this would have pleased its maker. ''What I want is for you not to like the film,'' he once said, ''to protest. I would be sorry if it pleased you.'' But now, almost 75 years later, ''L'Âge d'Or'' offers not only pleasure but comfort: it reassures us that, as long as we have eyes, we will still be susceptible to shock.
FILM
