IN 1884, when major league baseball came to Brooklyn, it could be said that Brooklyn, even then jockeying for attention in the shadow of Manhattan, needed the team more than the team needed Brooklyn.
That was undeniable in 1957, when the last Dodgers home game was played before only 6,702 paying spectators, Gladys Gooding (the only person to play for the Dodgers, the Knicks and the Rangers) pounded out ''Auld Lang Syne'' on the Ebbets Field organ, and the Dodgers, like their fans before them, fled for greener pastures.
But now, nearly 50 years later, you could make the case that the Nets need Brooklyn more than Brooklyn needs the Nets.
Last week, the developer Bruce C. Ratner agreed to pay $300 million for the nomadic basketball team (they started as the Americans in Teaneck, N.J., moved to Long Island and then jumped around a bit more before heading back to New Jersey and the Meadowlands).
His proposals to install them in a glorious arena designed by Frank Gehry and to rename them not the New York Nets but the Brooklyn Nets (assuming the team keeps the Nets name) taken together produce a full-throated affirmation that ''Brooklyn Is Back.''
But Brooklyn was back a long time ago.
In the mid-1950's, with La Guardia and Idlewild (now Kennedy) having supplanted Floyd Bennett Field, and The Eagle having folded, Brooklyn was often derided as the nation's largest city without an airport, a daily newspaper or a regular left fielder (there seemed to be a new one every season).
But it did have a major league baseball team (the football Dodgers had disappeared by the late 1940's, Anthony Sogluizzo, a librarian at the Brooklyn Public Library, is one of the few to recall), and, as Michael Shapiro wrote in ''The Last Good Season: Brooklyn, the Dodgers, and Their Final Pennant Race Together'' (Doubleday, 2003), the Brooklyn Dodgers ''were the most local team in baseball.''
''They did not represent a city, as did each of the other 15 major league teams,'' he said. ''They represented part of a city.''
Despite the pretensions, (a sign at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge welcomed visitors to ''the fourth-largest city in America''), Brooklyn had been subsumed into New York City way back in 1898, and, besides the iconic bridge (called the Brooklyn Bridge because it went there from Manhattan), the borough had largely been defined by the underdog Dodgers, whose enduring contribution to the sport and the nation was their gumption (and marketing savvy) in hiring Jackie Robinson and integrating major league baseball.
But their departure, while traumatic, was less a cause of Brooklyn's decline than a symptom. After World War II , the arrival of blacks and Puerto Ricans in what were euphemistically called ''changing neighborhoods'' precipitated white flight along the highways that Robert Moses built to suddenly affordable and accessible dream houses.
But a half-century later, all over the country arenas and stadiums have helped to revitalize downtowns, if only temporarily. And it is no small vindication for die-hard Brooklyn Dodger fans that the new basketball arena would be built on the very site in downtown Brooklyn where the Dodgers had proposed to build their new stadium, but were thwarted by the Robert Moses vision of highways to heavenly Long Island and the other suburbs.
''That whole experiment -- white flight to the suburbs -- really did not work out,'' said the filmmaker Spike Lee, who grew up in Brooklyn and is a legendary Knicks fan. ''All the things they ran away from followed them to the suburbs.''
Mr. Shapiro concurred. ''What you have here is a closing of the circle,'' he said.
The pool of potential fans (2.4 million people live in Brooklyn alone), and the access to mass transit would benefit the Nets. But what could the Nets do for Brooklyn?
A lot, if tickets (and souvenirs and snacks) are affordable, if the team wins or, like the Dodgers, are lovable losers. If Mr. Gehry's arena becomes a destination in itself, it could bring with it redevelopment (and jobs and affordable housing) to the surrounding area. (Referring to another Gehry landmark, the Guggenheim Museum in northern Spain, the Brooklyn-born journalist Pete Hamill said: ''Bilbao is kind of the Newark of Spain, and that one building made it a tourist attraction.'')
FOR all the promise of economic benefits, though, the bigger payoff of a major league franchise is likely to be intangible, the communal rooting for a professional team playing the city game (especially against the Knicks, from Manhattan) and congregating, as Mr. Shapiro said, to fulfill ''a vague and powerful need: the company of one another not as friends but as strangers.''
Even the Heartland Institute, a libertarian research group that opposes lavish public subsidies to lure teams, acknowledges: ''Having a professional sports franchise in town gives fans something to talk about at work and homes, a place to go for wholesome family entertainment and a certain amount of pride in one's hometown.''
''What this is,'' said Marty Markowitz, the proud Brooklyn borough president, ''is the last nail in the coffin for Brooklyn being all about fires and crime. It's over.''
Spike Lee said he would continue to root for the Knicks, but maintained that the Brooklyn Nets would be an asset to the borough and to the hundreds of thousands of Brooklynites who could walk to the arena for basketball games, concerts and other events. Mr. Lee, who was born the year the last major league team left Brooklyn, had one suggestion, though. ''I hope they change the name to the Dodgers,'' he said.
Correction:  February 1, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about the impact of professional sports on Brooklyn misspelled the name of the organist who used to play for the Dodgers. She was Gladys Goodding, not Gooding.
