THE Securities and Exchange Commission recently proposed rules that would force most of the nation's mutual funds to replace their board chairmen and some directors with outsiders independent of the firms that manage the funds.
The proposal is one of the commission's main responses to mutual fund scandals that have shaken the industry since last fall.
Jeff Keil, vice president for global fiduciary review at Lipper Inc., which tracks mutual funds, discussed the pros and cons of the proposed changes last week. Following are excerpts from the conversation:
Q. What are the benefits of the S.E.C. proposal to make fund boards more independent?
A. I think the benefits are probably overstated. What proponents claim is that an independent board chairperson will raise issues that an internal board chairperson may not raise. And those issues will be more hard-hitting and more hard-nosed and may not be to the liking of the sponsor of the fund group.
I don't necessarily buy that argument. I think that during the board process the agenda can always go off into different directions; the independents can always raise issues whenever they wish, and they certainly have input into the agenda. So I don't know if this proposal necessarily or fully solves anything.
I think there are several cases where there are very strong board structures or boards which have internal chairmen which function very well. One is Fidelity and one is T. Rowe Price.
Q. Do Fidelity and T. Rowe Price stand out simply because they haven't been caught up in the scandals?
A. I think the fact that Mr. Spitzer [Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general] has not dug up any dirt on Fidelity or T. Rowe Price is certainly a good indicator. But it is our sense, when we review the different competitive benchmarks at Lipper, including expense levels, performance, volatility and our sense of shareholder servicing, that those funds measure up very nicely in the greater fund world. We also hear a variety of stories and talk to people internally at both groups, and we hear the sorts of discussions that take place at the board level, so we have some sense of the rigorous nature of the discussions and the strength of the independent board members.
Q. Would the S.E.C. proposal add to costs without helping shareholders?
A. In my opinion, the cost is quite minimal. Even if you are paying a trustee of a large fund group several hundred thousand dollars a year, in the big scheme of things, the benefits far outweigh the costs for an average shareholder. We are talking about a few dollars a year, maybe, not even that much.
Q. So would you support the S.E.C. proposal?
A. I would support it, but I think that it needs to be coupled with several other initiatives to really shore up the board structure. That, in and of itself, will not cure the problem.
Q. What other initiatives would improve fund governance?
A. One is to nominate a chief compliance officer who reports directly to the independent board members.
Q. What would chief compliance officers do?
A. They would oversee critical mutual fund functions, such as trading and brokerage, and make sure that shareholder interests are protected.
Q. What other steps would make independent directors effective?
A. I support another part of the S.E.C. proposal, which requires funds to allow the independent directors to hire a separate staff. Most boards do not have any administrative support, a group independent of the adviser which provides them with analysis, data and information about the fund managers in an unbiased fashion. Most of the support comes from the fund itself.
Q. Putnam Investments, which has made a settlement with the S.E.C. in relation to the mutual fund scandal, had an independent chairman and board. Does this suggest that the S.E.C. proposal will not help much?
A. I think it comes down to the people that are hired. It comes down to the morals and ethics of the people who are actually overseeing the fund group, whether they are independent or not independent. The caliber of the person has to be quite high to ensure that a correct balance is struck between the adviser's interest and the shareholders' interests.
Q. How do you promote high ethical standards in the boardroom?
A. That is the $10 million question. One way you can do that is to make very clear what specific fiduciary duties are required of board members. Then, there are legal ramifications if a board member makes decisions that are really not truly based on shareholder interests.
If you do expose directors more to suits, however, you run the risk of people not being willing to take on that exposure.
But on the opposite side of the coin, you certainly strengthen the governance structure and protect shareholder interests down the road.
MARKET INSIGHT
