The signature moment of the New England Patriots' current 14-game winning streak came in Indianapolis on Nov. 30.
Linebacker Willie McGinest blew around left end and wrapped up the Colts' running back, Edgerrin James, short of the goal line in the waning seconds. McGinest then sprinted to midfield to celebrate New England's 38-34 victory and the culmination of a goal-line stand in which the Patriots stopped Indianapolis four times from inside the 2-yard line.
His raucous celebration provided a telling picture; McGinest, a 10-year veteran, has shone in a season in which he had been expected to fade into the twilight.
McGinest, who has spent his entire career in New England, will play in the Pro Bowl next month for the second time. It's an impressive accomplishment, especially considering that the Patriots did not rely on him as a starter at the beginning of the season.
''People said he was too old and he couldn't do this and he couldn't run,'' Patriots safety Rodney Harrison said. ''I mean, time and time again he's shown what he can do.''
Linebacker Rosevelt Colvin, the jewel of the free agents acquired by New England in the off-season, was expected to star at outside linebacker, where it was expected he would rotate with McGinest and Mike Vrabel.
But Colvin fractured his hip in the second game, and he has not played since. In his absence, McGinest and Vrabel have thrived. Vrabel led the team with nine and a half sacks and McGinest finished the season with 5 1/2 sacks and 67 tackles.
''I am honored and I am happy and I am glad to be going,'' McGinest said of his Pro Bowl selection. ''But that is not my main focus right now.''
Not only did McGinest seal the Patriots' victory in Indianapolis, but the week before he also helped the team to a 23-20 overtime victory over the Houston Texans. He tackled running back Domanick Davis for a 5-yard loss late in the game, pushing the Texans out of field-goal range and forcing a punt.
In New England's gutsy 21-16 victory over the Jets in Giants Stadium on Dec. 21, McGinest picked off a Chad Pennington pass and returned it 15 yards for a touchdown.
His best game of the season may have come in New England's 17-14 victory over the Tennessee Titans in the divisional round of the playoffs on Jan. 10. He had three sacks, including a momentum-changing snuff of a trick play: McGinest stopped Titans tight end Frank Wycheck for a 10-yard loss before Wycheck could throw a pass.
''Willie has had a lot of different responsibilities he has had to fulfill,'' Patriots Coach Bill Belichick said. ''In the running game, the passing game, pass coverage, he has really been asked to do a lot of different things, and he has done them all pretty well.''
From his boisterous games of dominoes at makeshift tables in the middle of the locker room to his good-natured needling of rookies, McGinest's value to the team transcends his statistics.
The Patriots are a veteran team; 22 players on the opening day roster were 30 or older. Few people in the locker room, though, command more respect than McGinest.
''When I first got here,'' tight end Christian Fauria said, ''you could tell that Willie had a presence.''
McGinest has not always been so thoroughly appreciated in New England. He has been criticized throughout his career for being prone to injury, with some fans complaining that he did not play enough to merit having been selected by the Patriots with the fourth overall pick of the 1994 draft.
McGinest has long held the reputation of a dangerous player when he was on the field. By staying healthy and producing consistently this season, McGinest has transformed himself into the kind of player preferred by Belichick.
He is experienced enough to play both defensive end and linebacker, depending on the situation. He is savvy enough to have known by the Titans' formation exactly what play was coming, that Wycheck would attempt to pass in the playoff game.
And he is wily enough to have nicknamed Colts quarterback Peyton Manning ''Mr. Inhuman,'' to motivate his teammates last week.
Most of all, McGinest has been durable enough to flourish late in the season.
''The guy is just a pro's pro,'' Harrison said. ''It's just been awesome playing with him.''
The Super Bowl will be McGinest's third. After the 1996 season, his third, the Patriots lost to the Green Bay Packers in Super Bowl XXXI. After the 2001 season, the Patriots beat the Rams, with McGinest sacking Kurt Warner for a 16-yard loss. With the Carolina Panthers looming, McGinest is trying to cap his re-emergence with another championship ring.
''Our ultimate goal is to win,'' McGinest said. ''Losing is not really an option.''
PRO FOOTBALL
