ISRAEL GALVÁN fancies himself a flamenco rebel. To demonstrate his point recently, he performed a section of his ''Metamorphoses,'' which was inspired by the Kafka story and originally presented at Seville's Bienal de Flamenco in 2000. Lying down on the floor of the studio in his house here, he placed his feet on the wall and squirmed like a trapped bug. Slowly he writhed into a standing position and bent his right leg and extended it in front of him. He finished the sequence by spinning across the room in a series of slow pirouettes. Little of what he did seemed even remotely like flamenco.
''People call my movements new and grotesque,'' Mr. Galván said, ''but I copy many of them from photographs of great flamenco dancers from 50 years ago. I just use them differently. I strip the dance to essentials. I don't care if it's not as nice; it's purer. It's like taking all the ingredients of paella -- the chicken, the shrimp, the rice -- and tasting them separately.''
At 29, he has been called the Nijinsky of flamenco for his virtuosity by Spanish critics; his performances have earned him several major prizes in his homeland. His style both dissects and expands flamenco in a bold and analytic manner, a practice that is common in American modern dance but almost unheard of in this tradition-bound genre.
''I'm a pathological nonconformist,'' said Mr. Galván, who during a recent interview was wearing a scruffy leather jacket, orange sweater and black jeans. ''I love it when people applaud, but I'm also beginning to like it when they are against me. That gives me energy, too.''
On Thursday, Mr. Galván will perform works honoring one of his heroes, Salvador Dalí, and the renowned percussionist Manuel Soler at the City Center in Flamenco Festival USA. The program will include traditional dancers like Manuela Carrasco and Juan de Juan and the singer Chocolate.
Mr. Galván grew up in a flamenco family; both his parents danced, and his father, José, runs one of Seville's most prestigious flamenco academies. Eventually, the younger Galván said, he found such immersion in traditional flamenco oppressive and decided he had to bring something new to the art form. He began his career performing with a company run by Mario Maya, another adventurous choreographer. In 1998, Mr. Galván went out on his own at the Seville Bienal and shocked the public with ''Los Zapatos Rojos'' (''The Red Shoes''), by using puppets, industrial noise and heavy metal music. Audiences walked out, and critics panned him.
Undetered, he has gone even further. He has danced seated in a chair, and he has electronically altered his guitar accompaniments. Because of his willingness to experiment, he is often called a contemporary dancer. Nothing disturbs him more. ''I was born a flamenco dancer,'' he said. ''It's my language. I simply speak my own accent.''
VALERIE GLADSTONE
DANCE: THIS WEEK
