SEVERAL years ago, Newtown residents voted to purchase Fairfield Hills, the former state mental hospital situated in the center of town. But a series of delays -- including a setback last month -- has postponed the closing of the deal.
For more than a month, work crews have been removing contaminated soil from the property after a spill of 4,500 gallons of heating fuel on Dec. 8.
Town officials expect to take ownership next month, but not until the state Department of Environmental Protection completes its work, First Selectman Herb Rosenthal said.
Fairfield Hills, including 186 acres and buildings, was purchased for $3.9 million in June 2001. The town already owns 100 acres of the land.
Last August, voters rejected a proposed master plan for the site that called for demolition of seven to nine buildings and construction of a new town hall.
The Board of Selectmen is refining the master plan and expects to present it to the Planning and Zoning Commission soon.
''We're getting closer,'' Mr. Rosenthal said. ''The plan will be flexible. It will allow municipal and private use but not require anything. It will be implemented over a long period of time.''
The land was acquired by State Representative Julia Wasserman and her 1994 Task Force to Study the Re-Use of Fairfield Hills State. Ms. Wasserman has worked with Richard Nuclo of the State Office of Policy and Management on the future of Fairfield Hills for more than a decade.
With Mr. Nuclo's help, she recently raised a bill to acquire another 12 acres during the coming legislative season.
''It's a strategically important piece of property that connects with other land,'' she said. ''It could be used to build a north-south corridor to relieve traffic on Route 34 and Route 25.''
Dan Shea, who has lived near the former hospital for 36 years, would like to see the land used for municipal purposes and hiking trails.
''Fairfield Hills is an island of refuge from the chaos,'' Mr. Shea said. ''I'm in favor of anything that can reduce traffic in town.''
Meanwhile, a group called Friends of Fairfield Hills headed by Ruby Johnson, a longtime resident, said it would continue to press its position to keep the property for town use and encourage economic development elsewhere.
UPDATE
