STATISTICALLY the job picture in the New York area is brightening, but when it comes to the faces behind the figures the outlook is as varied as, well, New Yorkers.
For Steve Minucci, 42, of New Fairfield, Conn., the skies are turning sunny. He lost his advertising and marketing job at Reader's Digest in a cutback last year, but recently found a job with Golf Digest magazine, although ''the publishing industry is getting smaller and smaller,'' as he put it.
Derek Burnham, 37, of Brooklyn is another success story. He works at the new Mandarin Oriental in the Time Warner Center on Columbus Circle, which has a staff of about 400, all of them recently hired, said Sonia Rendigs, a spokeswoman for the hotel.
Mr. Burnham, a houseman, said that his experience at another luxury hotel in his native Barbados ''counted for a lot'' in his hiring, something that Ms. Rendigs confirmed. She added that his ''ability to relate to people'' was also very important.
But for others it seems the New York job market is under a permafrost that has yet to thaw. That's because the recovery of the local economy still seems somewhat tentative. Despite statistics indicating a decreasing rate of unemployment in the Greater New York area -- from 6.6 percent at the beginning of last year to 5.8 percent as of this past November, not seasonally adjusted -- some key industries, including financial services, actually suffered job losses for the period. Moreover, according to the most recent New York State figures, released last week, unemployment in the city proper actually increased to 7.9 percent last month from 7.7 percent in November, seasonally adjusted.
It's no surprise, then, that inconsistencies and contradictions in hiring abound, according to interviews with employers, employees and union officials.
Gena Casciano, 38, of Manhattan, for example, a marketing executive who fell victim to an American Express layoff in 2002 , has yet to find a new job. Instead, she just sees ''a lot of people applying for the same jobs.'' And that is true not only in fields like the marketing and publishing industries, which are still shedding workers, according to statistics; it is also the case in other industries that are thought to be improving, like the leisure and hospitality industry.
That industry's revival has been widely heralded as an indicator of the region's resurgence. A gain in the industry's employment of 2.3 percent -- more than 15,000 jobs -- was posted for the metropolitan area for the 12 months ended in November, according to the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics. And talk of new restaurant and hotel openings has some industry pundits and food critics all abuzz.
But many in the trade are not quite so sanguine. In the hotel industry, despite recent improvement, increases in occupancy rates are anemic and room rates are still far below what they used to be. Indeed, preliminary figures released by NYC &amp; Company, the city's visitors bureau, indicate a hotel occupancy rate for 2003 of only 76.2 percent, slightly higher than that in 2002 but far short of the 84.6 percent rate recorded in 2000. And the average cost of a room was also much lower, $191 as opposed to $237.
Moreover, although a spate of new hotels has recently opened, and total hiring is up, ''we still have about 1,500 members looking for jobs right now,'' said John Turchiano, a spokesman for the New York Hotel Trades Council, largely as a result of the closing of a number of established properties, among them the Regent on Wall Street and The Empire Hotel on Broadway, both of which were shuttered earlier this month.
E. Charles Hunt, the executive vice president of the Greater New York City chapter of the New York State Restaurant Association, said, ''Business may have increased, but profits haven't.'' Constant turnover means there are always jobs, he added, but usually ''at the bottom of the ladder.''
Tracy J. Nieporent, a partner in the Myriad Restaurant Group, which operates Nobu and the Tribeca Grill, among others, concurs. ''Business is picking up,'' he said, ''but in terms of hiring, things are not really different from what they were before.''
That means that every day dozens of people are still leaving résumés at restaurants, hoping to be hired as waiters and waitresses, according to John Newman, 33, of Brooklyn, who is a waiter at Sushi Samba in Greenwich Village. He said that very few of these people were ever hired. He attributed his own success in obtaining work to his experience at other restaurants and to the fact he was referred by a friend.
''When you have to go around and hit the pavement it's hard,'' he said, ''even with a good résumé. Employers like referrals.''
Of course, when searching for work, determination also helps. Take the case of Sara DiBenedetto, 23, who lives in Astoria, Queens. Originally from Buffalo, she came to New York in 2002 after graduating from the State University of New York College at Geneseo, her heart set on working in the nonprofit sector. Encompassing everything from hospitals and medical centers to libraries, zoos and local antipoverty groups, nonprofits employed more than 600,000 people in New York City alone during 2002, according to the New York State Department of Labor. That's 30,000 more than in 2000.
But finding and keeping a job wasn't that straightforward. A position with City Harvest fell victim to budgetary cuts after only a few months. It then took her a while to get her present job as assistant to Fran Barrett, the executive director of the Community Resource Exchange, an agency that assists nonprofit groups in the city.
According to Ms. Barrett, groups that serve the poor are still feeling the impact of decreased public and private support, even in an improving economy. That means ''that we are seeing more part-time positions and salaries that are flat,'' she said.
Ms. DiBenedetto credits hard work for her success in finding a job. She said she ''hit the papers'' and the Internet and ''sent out résumés everywhere.'' She also engaged in networking. In fact, networking is what got her to Ms. Barrett. A friend who had seen the position listed online told her about it.
''If you want to get a job,'' she said, ''you have to let everyone know you're looking.''
