JUSTIN'S in Hicksville has reinvented itself as J.D.'s (aka James Dean, after the owner's grandson, not the movie star). This was more than a name change. The décor, for one thing, is noticeably different. It now has a musical motif. Images of pianos are everywhere: printed on the fabric draperies at the entrance, in woven tapestries on the walls and as a keyboard logo on the menu and business cards. There's a real baby grand player piano in the middle of the restaurant, and musical notes and references to Mozart and other greats are lettered on the pale beige walls.
J.D.'s menu is nothing like Justin's. That was Continental. Gone are the crêpes suzette and filet mignon Rossini. Instead, a menu featuring steaks, chops and seafood, similar to that at the Mill Pond House in Centerport, is in place.
Dino Philippis, the principal owner of J.D.'s, also has an interest in the Mill Pond House and Piccolo of Huntington. Given that pedigree and the superb food of Justin's, its predecessor, I was disappointed on my first visit to J.D.'s.
That time, the experience was run-of-the-mill. We had a meal with more highs and lows than a roller coaster. The bread basket was the first indicator that this was no Piccolo or Mill Pond House. The bread was toasted, dried out and burned. The second strikeout was the shrimp bisque, a murky brew with no discernible shellfish taste. Then came the steaks, a porterhouse for one and a rib eye. Neither was of the high caliber of those at the Mill Pond House. The final blow was a crème brûlée served hot, turning it into soup.
We did encounter some good dishes that night, though: a standout steakhouse salad consisting of a wedge of iceberg lettuce, creamy dressing and a blizzard of crumbled blue cheese; a splendid cocktail of lump crab meat; a juicy double cut pork chop sparked by hot cherry peppers, mushrooms and onions; and a moist brownie à la mode.
I was stunned by how good the restaurant was when I returned for a second look. That time it was easy to see the Piccolo-Mill Pond House connection. Even the bread basket had been transformed. Especially noteworthy was the onion bread, which was warm, not dry or burned.
That night, the best openers were the cocktail of four gigantic shrimp on a bed of crushed ice, the soul-satisfying eggplant rollatini sporting a chunky tomato sauce and oozing cheese, and the classic Caesar salad.
I had my fears about ordering a seafood combination plate, so often a disaster, but they were unfounded. A flaky, perfect salmon fillet arrived with a crown of lump crab meat and a jumbo prawn platemate. The fish was enhanced by a light lemon-white wine sauce.
The steak we sampled also made the grade, two tournedos of filet mignon with a crunchy black pepper crust. The meat was cooked to order and fork-tender. Even better were the succulent and full-of-flavor loin lamb chops.
Unlike a traditional steakhouse, J.D.'s serves its entrees with a potato and vegetable. All the meats came with standard mashed potatoes and the vegetable of the night (julienned strips of mixed vegetables one time, chunks of carrots and summer squash the other). The only à la carte vegetable possibilities were spinach and asparagus, each offered two ways.
A steak served to another table was accompanied by French fries. We asked if we could order them à la carte, even though they were not on the menu. The kitchen complied. They were terrific: thin, crisp, satisfying.
There were no duds among the desserts our second time around. A rich chocolate layer cake with thick ganache frosting was super, as was a very creamy, custardlike rice pudding. And a favorite gelato remembered from the Mill Pond House was also offered here: malted milk ball.
That second night at J.D.'s showed that it was possible to have a very good meal here, as pleasing as those at its renowned sister restaurants. Still, a hallmark of a fine eating place is consistency, and that is lacking at the Hicksville restaurant.
J.D.'s  392 Woodbury Road, Hicksville (516)935-7330
Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Elegant surroundings with musical motif.  SERVICE -- Uneven: sluggish one night, on the ball another.  SOUND LEVEL -- Average.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Eggplant rollatini, Caesar salad, steakhouse salad, shrimp cocktail, crab meat cocktail, seafood combination, lamb chops, pork chops, filet mignon au poivre, French fries, rice pudding, brownie à la mode, chocolate cake, malted milk ball gelato.  WINE LIST -- Seven half bottles ($16 to $25) and 96 bottles ($18 to $125) with a third under $30.  PRICE RANGE -- Lunch, entrees $9 to $22. Dinner, appetizers $6.50 to $14; entrees $17 to $26; desserts $5.50 to $6.50.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards.  HOURS -- Lunch, noon to 3 p.m. Monday through Friday. Dinner, 5 to 10 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and to 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday.  RESERVATIONS -- Recommended.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- No steps. Restrooms not designed for the disabled.
REVIEWED BY THE TIMES -- Jan. 25, 2004.
RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING OUT
