THE WINEMAKER'S DAUGHTER
By Timothy Egan.
305 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.
THE worst thing Angelo Cartolano, the winemaker in ''The Winemaker's Daughter,'' can say about a new vintage is that it ''has no story.'' That's not a charge that can be made against this first novel, set mostly in the Pacific Northwest, by Timothy Egan, a national correspondent for The New York Times who lives in Seattle. Indeed, there's enough story here to provide an entire television season of adventures for the beautiful and feisty daughter of a Columbia River Valley vintner.
There's mystery. (What really caused those deaths in a forest fire that threatened the vineyard? Why is the region's water disappearing?) And there's romance. (Will something ever come of all that tension between Angelo's daughter and the Native American investigator from the Forest Service?) And both the mystery and the romance are set against a background of serious issues -- river ecology, Indian land rights, water rights (remember what Roman Polanski did with that in ''Chinatown''?), big-time real estate interests, commercial salmon fishing and the winemaking business. Perhaps best of all, there's also a good deal of knockout local color.
At the center of Egan's book is the Cartolano family, with its classic American saga. Angelo had been sent by his family from northern Italy to Brooklyn to avoid being drafted into Mussolini's army, only to be rounded up as an enemy alien and packed off to an internment camp in Montana. There he learned to cook and play baseball. And there he heard tales of the Grand Coulee Dam, the ''Eighth Wonder of the World,'' being built only a half-day's drive from Camp Missoula. He also heard of the utopian dream that water from the dam would create a ''planned promised land'' in a parched wilderness. After the war, he headed west to the Columbia River Basin, worked on the building of other dams and earned enough money to buy 600 acres that reminded him of the Italian Piedmont. With that land, eventually, came water that one day would be worth more than the land itself. Over the years, Angelo built a paradise of his own, a vineyard renowned for its wine. Since the death of his wife, however, he has lived there all alone.
Although Angelo and his wife produced three children, only one has shown much interest in the family business. Niccolo is the handsome younger son, who at the novel's outset seems to have guaranteed his father a happy old age by announcing that he has decided to return to the vineyard when he finishes his last year of college. But Niccolo has a summer job as a smoke jumper, fighting forest fires, and at his next fire things go terribly wrong. That leaves the other son, Roberto, who prefers to be called Bob and has gone off to Texas to work for a mutual fund, and Angelo's daughter, Brunella, named for an Italian wine. Even though she knows nothing about her father's business and has been trained as an architect, there's reason to suspect that, given time, Brunella will save the day. Why? She loves Italian cooking (the novel is peppered with wonderful descriptions of people enjoying Italian food) and, unlike smarmy Bob, she hasn't Americanized her name.
Admittedly, Brunella at first seems to have sold out just as much as Bob has. Living in a Seattle waterfront home that must have cost a fortune, she is a sought-after consultant who writes environmental and cultural impact reports. The one she is working on when the novel opens is for a mysterious and evasive real estate developer who turns out to be something of a cross between Bill Gates and the Wizard of Oz.
Brunella's assignment is to decide whether a proposal to build on the site of a rotting fishing pier in Seattle will have any ''significant impact'' on the salmon-fishing industry. (Presumed answer: no.) Which means that she has to decide whether there is in fact any existing commercial fishing going on at the pier. (Presumed answer: no.) Unfortunately for the real estate developer, she finds a raffish fisherman with a ramshackle boat. Does his activity constitute an industry that may be significantly affected? (Presumed answer: no.) But the fisherman, Duff Almvik, proves to be curiously persuasive.
Another strong male figure who fascinates Brunella is Leon Treadtoofar of the Forest Service. And if she learns the ways of the salmon from Duff, Leon educates her about the local Indians, whose presence is represented by a huge riverside building called -- depending on who is speaking -- either a cultural center or a gambling casino. In very different ways, these men and Brunella's father (each of whom, it is hinted, may well be the last of his kind) lead her to change her life.
It would be nice to report that Egan combines his impressive journalistic skills with the artifice of fiction to produce a book that draws effectively on both forms. But that doesn't happen. What makes the novel worth reading are its nonfiction qualities. Among these are a portrait of Seattle that tempts you to buy a plane ticket to see the place for yourself and a discussion of what has happened to the Columbia River Basin since the building of the Grand Coulee Dam -- a discussion that suggests the dream Woody Guthrie promoted when he sang ''Roll On, Columbia'' never came true.
There are some fictional high points involving several dramatic but also moving deaths -- especially one late in the novel in the snow near a mountaintop in the Cascades. But all too often the fictional flourishes seem forced and overworked. (As in a sunset that is described as daylight falling away ''like hair off a cancer victim.'')
A more serious problem, though, is the book's episodic nature. ''The Winemaker's Daughter'' is an unusually compartmentalized novel, with its basic subjects -- salmon fishing, winemaking, urban renewal, Indian casinos and so on -- standing in rather chilly isolation from one another. There is even a year-and-a-half-long side trip to Italy, which reads as if it were borrowed from a different book altogether.
If Brunella had been a more fully realized character, these hard divisions might have been softened. As it is, she remains a two-dimensional figure, more calculated and editorially useful than real, who moves through a vivid and vibrant landscape as she confronts some of the most pressing social problems in the contemporary Northwest. One can't help concluding that the wine and the country that produced it have more of a story here -- to use Angelo's phrase -- than the people who drink it.
David Willis McCullough's novels include ''Think on Death'' and ''Point No-Point.''
