No School, but Onstage
The snowy day meant no school for Teddy Mark, a sixth grader at Rye Middle School. But while his classmates were sledding or building forts in the snow, Teddy was keeping a grown-up appointment -rehearsing his part in ''Pippin'' at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck.
Almost everyone else in the musical, which opened Wednesday, is a professional actor, and many are members of the Actors Equity Association. Teddy, who plays Pippin's son, Theo, has had plenty of experience on stage himself, notably at the Emelin in the Missoula Children's Theater productions of ''The Pied Piper'' and ''Treasure Island,'' and at the Milton Elementary School in Rye last year in ''The Mikado.'' But ''Pippin'' was billed as his ''professional debut,'' and Teddy was thoughtful in the days leading up to the opening.
''I like it very much,'' he said of working with the cast. ''I get kind of treated like an adult.'' The show's director and choreographer, Brett Smock, said Teddy, in his audition, showed ''an uncanny ability to fearlessly dive into many different emotional realms.'' When asked to describe ''Pippin,'' which has music and lyrics by Stephen Schwartz, Teddy said it was about ''a boy that is always trying to find something he's good at, and finally finds something he's good at.''
''He finds out he's good at being a husband and father,'' he added.
The show can be seen through Feb. 1 on Wednesdays and Thursdays at 8 p.m. for $24; Fridays and Saturdays at 8 p.m. for $32; and Sundays at 3 p.m. for $28. Information: (914)698-0098.
Close-Up, in Concert
The Westchester Arts Council's latest folk arts venture is a series of three concerts, ''The Worlds of Westchester,'' which begin Friday at 8 p.m. at the new White Plains Performing Arts Center. The first concert, ''The Arts of Haiti: A Community Celebration of 200 years of Haitian Independence,'' will feature traditional and contemporary music, dance and theater. Performers include Feeling Mizik, a Haitian band from White Plains, as well as the Afro-Haitian Dance Company of Youth Theater Interactions of Yonkers. (Tickets, $10 and $7.50,)
''Music of the Arab-American Community,'' featuring Ali Hamideh and his ensemble, will be presented on March 6, while the all-female group Cherish the Ladies will perform Irish traditional music on April 16. Information: (914)328-1600.
One continuing role of the Westchester Arts Council is to help county artists connect with opportunities in their field. Francesca Samsel, a printmaker, sculptor and muralist who lives in Croton, credits her widening success to the council's early support. Ms. Samsel was closely associated with the council for many years after she moved to Westchester 12 years ago, teaching and painting murals at places like Croton Point Park and the Croton train station as well as in Peekskill, where she has a studio. The council, she said, provided a ''nurturing environment'' and helped ''get my legs under me professionally.''
Ms. Samsel has been working on her own for five years now, showing her work in Manhattan and Seattle as well as in Westchester. Her current solo show of graphics, ''Osmosis,'' which runs through Saturday, at Citibank on East 72nd Street in Manhattan, evolved from water imagery she explored in her Westchester murals.
''All my imagery is biological,'' she said in a phone interview. ''Whether it's a fossil or inside the brain, the shapes and patterns tumble down to be the same thing.'' Information: (914)271-8945.
Reach Out and Touch
The Murray Benjamin Electronic Library was established at the Neuberger Museum of Art on the campus of Purchase College in Purchase two years ago to provide a background of materials about the museum's changing exhibitions and permanent collection. Today, a new version of the library's touch screen kiosk, redesigned by Berlin Productions of White Plains, will be unveiled. It features a livelier look and a system that the museum says will be easier to use than the original one. Information: (914)251-6100.
ROBERTA HERSHENSON
