IT'S not exactly the Swiss Alps, this part of rural Texas, but for my purposes it was going to do just fine. And my purposes, as a Westchester father with two children going on three, were quite complex, or perhaps more accurately, slightly suspect.
There was, of course, the work portion of the trip. I had to be in Houston on a reporting trip for an article for this newspaper on the National Museum of Funeral History. It's a place with the largest collection of hearses, urns and coffins that it has ever been my pleasure to see. I spent precisely 5 hours and 32 minutes looking at them all and scribbling notes. Then it was time for the remainder of the trip, approximately 41 hours and 17 minutes.
I carved out that extra time (or, more accurately, padded it on) so I could visit a friend who used to live in New Jersey but then moved to this farm town, population 77, to share custody of his daughter with the girl's mother, who lives here. Unlike my friend, I wasn't uprooting my life, just taking a brief leave.
Since I became a suburban father, I haven't traveled much beyond day trips for work.
With kids to ferry and snow to shovel, getting a furlough at home for a few minutes, let alone hours, is a production. But folding a little bit of child-free rest and relaxation into a business trip seemed as natural as an up-back tray table. My wife knew I'd be killing a bit of time not with Carmelite nuns but rather with a friend with whom I had shared a rambunctious college experience, but what was she going to say? I had to be in Texas for work anyway.
I was so enthralled with my plan to mix business travel and play that I began to feel like I had invented the concept. I asked my parents, who both worked when I was growing up, if their business trips involved all business or if there were any occasions when they were tempted to take a touch of time for themselves, away from my brother and me.
''Oh, you have no clue,'' my mother answered. ''You know what a train commute is like? People might complain about it, but they have 40 minutes of peace and quiet, so they secretly love it. Well, how much better is a couple of day business trip?'' She paused. ''There's not a multiplier large enough.''
I took that as a yes.
Later, I posed the same question to my father, who laughed ruefully. ''This is going to blow my cover,'' he said, ''I'm supposed to be a hard-working guy.'' Trained in economics, my father said that when he began his career, 10 to 20 percent of his trips constituted fun. As my brother and I got larger and lippier, that proportion followed a linear trajectory upward, eventually surpassing 50 percent.
Scott Gober, a guy I grew up with in Armonk, had parents who were teachers and didn't travel for business. But these days he goes on the road for work as much as anyone I know, up to 15 times a year, an average of three days each, to just about every corner of the globe.
But he forewarned me that the freedom was illusory and that the novelty of business travel waned. ''It's all about people who try to do things they used to do when they were single but they aren't single so they can't,'' he said. ''Plus they're too tired.''
I was not tired but instead refreshed when I woke up in my friend's home. Then, when I came down to the kitchen there was a surprise in the form of a familiar sight spilling Cheerios and milk on the kitchen table. Plans had shifted and my friend had custody of his daughter for much of the weekend.
After sponging up the table, we took her on a walk, which unfolded at typical 2-year-old pace (underwater speed) as she stooped to examine every last rock and leaf. We ate dinner out at her favorite chicken-finger place, and I kept her entertained by turning a napkin into a hat, a trick I have turned into a science. The girl was adorable and wonderful, but still two. My friend and I were both in bed by 10, too tired to care that there were coyotes rustling in the woods outside the bedroom window.
In terms of a respite from family life, I may have done better staying with those Carmelite nuns.
Mr. Gober said that such an experience is typical, that he has learned his lesson and now considers himself a ''mercenary,'' flying in for meetings then flying right out. That's one line of thought. But apparently not all business travelers with children agree. As my mother advised: ''If at first you don't succeed, try, try again.''
COUNTY LINES
