''I am not unconscious!'' the seemingly comatose 19-year-old shrieks from her deathbed. ''I see and hear everything very clearly!''
The people caring for her might not agree, but the audience is inclined to accept the truth of anything this girl-woman says. She is Else, and moments ago she ran through a hotel lobby naked and babbling. And the audience understood.
Francesca Faridany brings extraordinary clarity to the complex title role of ''Fräulein Else,'' the exhilarating play at the McCarter Theater Center's Berlind Theater. ''Else'' is a co-production with the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, Conn., and had its East Coast premiere there last month. Its world premiere was a co-production of the Berkeley Repertory Theater and La Jolla Playhouse in California.
Ms. Faridany also wrote the play, an adaptation of a 1924 novella by Arthur Schnitzler. Her author's take on the tale is drenched in the Freudian-soaked subconscious detail of Else's tragic coming of age, but her actress's approach touches on the brain en route to the gut by way of the heart.
Else is a spirited young neurotic lodging at a northern Italian spa while flirting with her emerging sexuality. ''I'm certainly meant for a carefree life,'' she says, scampering about the colorful stage.
But that is not to be. Her profligate father needs money, and her mother writes desperate correspondence imploring Else to seek it from Herr Von Dorsday (Julian López-Morillas), another spa guest. Dorsday is a wealthy older man with, it appears, a soft touch for beautiful youth.
Else is compelled to meet her family's need, but she knows enough to suspect the cost of the favors she seeks. As she prepares for the solicitation scene (dressed in a ''sex and death'' outfit, a black dress with just enough scarlet to highlight her breasts), the jittery Else spews her thoughts in a stream of consciousness punctuated by humor and, occasionally, bouts of sudden silence, epiphanies of her fate. Still, she plows ahead, awake to her destiny, hurtling toward doom like an erratically driven car approaching a cliff. There is something unnervingly ecstatic in watching the crash.
Ms. Faridany gives progression to Else's breathtaking journey into madness, finding high gear in her high-stakes session with Dorsday, who is imbued with dignity and sexual hunger by the skillful Mr. López-Morillas. After this richly played scene, Ms. Faridany shares with the audience every one of Else's tormented or playful thoughts, even both at once: the girlish fantasies of how her family and friends will react to her infatuation with suicide.
She cannot accept the sexual terms of Dorsday's offer, nor can she avoid the reach of her mother (Mary Baird, a constant presence of gravity warning that ''all will be lost''). Other guests at the spa, the available young doctor Paul and the sophisticated Cissy, are no help. She has to choose her path alone in an adult world.
Ms. Faridany, an actress well beyond her teens, begins the play with a maturity that seems comfortably removed from a 19-year-old's unmediated passions. The very mediated approach of Ms. Faridany, in fact, seems somewhat over-considered at first, especially compared with the work of the young actress Tara Falk, who played the part with giddy enthusiasm in New Haven in alternating performances with Ms. Faridany.
Still, Ms. Faridany exposes many other sides of the rich psycho-theatrical creation that is Else. Her climax has uncontestable power; it is a show-stopping assertion of self that puts triumph in this tragedy, moving it beyond mere melodrama. Ms. Faridany, clearly, has the polished actor's skills to sell this role. She plays it throughout the McCarter run.
She is aided in her work by the unusually well-cast supporting actors and strong designers. Thomas Lynch's set is particularly striking, with a blue Alpine scrim and an inspired floor that works as a multicolored maze of surfaces for Else to negotiate.
But the hero of the evening is the director, Stephen Wadsworth. The production feels whole, earning its laughs, gasps, applause and post-show reflection. ''Fräulein Else'' is a satisfying night of theater.
''Fräulein Else'' is at the McCarter Theater Center, 91 University Place, Princeton, through Feb. 15. Information: (609)258-2787 or www.mccarter.org.
THEATER REVIEW
