In New York there are two kinds of successful chefs. There are those who work their ways up through the kitchens of elite restaurants like Daniel and Jean-Georges and then break out and form their own branding machines. For this, Tom Colicchio is the mold. After Gramercy Tavern, he opened Craft, then Craftbar and now 'wichcraft.
Then there are the stealth chefs, those who require dedicated diners to keep their ears to the ground, listening for their every move. They tend to move a lot, because they don't own their restaurants. They are the soul searchers, the gypsies who leave trails of abandoned jobs in their wakes as they seek their culinary voices and search out owners who will nurture their creative powers (i.e. leave them alone). They build followings and hope that some day the stars will align and investors will plunk wads of cash in front of them so they can open their own places. Scott Conant, the chef at the celebrated L'Impero, was once one of these. Before he got a stake in L'Impero, he cooked at a number of neighborhood Italian restaurants, each one more forgettable than the previous.
Sara Jenkins is another. Since she arrived in New York six years ago, she has worked at I Coppi, Il Buco, Patio Dining and Chez Es Saada. In August, she was hired by Paola Bottero, the owner of the restaurant 50 Carmine in Greenwich Village. Jenkins changed the menu from standard offerings like pumpkin ravioli and arugula salad and added the kind of uncomplicated but perfectly executed dishes she is known for: braised rabbit with chickpeas, ribollita, blood-orange olive-oil cake and hazelnut and lemon biscotti. The results were instantaneous -- the number of diners jumped from a mere handful to more than 100 a night. And now comes Phase 2: a shake-up of the kitchen staff.
''I'm in a bit of a campaign to get rid of them,'' Jenkins said one recent afternoon while mixing stuffing for veal. She was standing in the restaurant's narrow kitchen, which is so full of steel counters and shelves that it feels like the inside of a toolbox. A sturdy woman, she shifted her head in the direction of a cluster of cooks, whom she speaks to in Spanish. ''I'd move up one of these guys to lunch,'' she said, smiling. ''Then I'd break up their little mafia.''
There are boundaries to her domain. Of the dining-room décor, which features exposed brick and heaps of maroon, she said: ''I don't have any input. At one point, I tried and got smacked down.''
A gypsy chef like Jenkins, always working for others, has control of only the food -- and of the timing of her departure. At Il Buco, Donna Lennard, the owner, said: ''She got angry one day and walked out. We never had a fight before.'' Now Jenkins stops in for drinks at Il Buco's bar, and she and Lennard are friendly again.
''Sara is not an administrator,'' Lennard added. ''She's not the most organized person, not the neatest person. She does it out of love. She brings that to the kitchen.''
The first time I visited her, Jenkins told me: ''The thing is that I really like to cook. I don't really want to be a small-business owner. I don't want to spend my hours of the day crunching numbers. In that way, it's like, Why would you really want to have your own place?''
Well, Mario Batali is famous, and Sara Jenkins is not. However, if you go to Babbo or Esca for dinner, you are very unlikely to eat food that has been cooked by Batali; if you walk into 50 Carmine, Jenkins will be overseeing your meal.
''I love that I can serve spaghettini with red wine and I can run pappardelle with wild boar ragù,'' she said. The untraditional spaghettini was a dish she tasted last summer in Florence while traveling between jobs. It's prepared much like risotto. Garlic, chilies and anchovies are browned in a pan. An inch of red wine is added and brought to a simmer and then spaghettini, which has been blanched, is stirred in. The spaghettini cooks as the wine reduces. In an ideal world, both finish at the same time.
Jenkins has a special touch with pasta. Maccheroni with sheep's milk ricotta and mustard greens, a dish she made up, contains those three ingredients plus garlic, olive oil and Parmesan. The mustard greens are wilted in garlic and olive oil. Off the heat, ricotta is stirred in and then is tossed with the maccheroni. It's subtle and soothing. ''People send it back because they want it hotter, and I'm like, No,'' Jenkins said. ''Ricotta is a mild flavor. They don't understand it really.''
Or they don't understand her guiding principle. So much of Jenkins's cooking is about four or five great ingredients, layered thoughtfully but plainly. To explain herself, she told a story about Alice Waters. ''She's cooking at an event,'' Jenkins said. ''I don't know the menu, but what's in my mind is Laura Chenel goat cheese, Chino Ranch baby lettuces and, let's say, McEvoy olive oil. And some guy comes up and asks her what she's doing. He says: 'That's not cooking. That's shopping.' And Alice says, 'Now you've got it.''' Jenkins is a shopper, too.
Jenkins has chosen to live in a city where diners don't always grasp Italian food the way Italians do. But it's comforting in other ways. ''New York is the only place in the States that has kept my interest,'' Jenkins said. By the time she was 10, she had lived in London, Paris, Lebanon, Hong Kong, Rome and Madrid, twice. Her father, Loren Jenkins, was a foreign correspondent. ''I sometimes say that my palate was developed on the Newsweek expense account,'' Jenkins said. Her mother is Nancy Harmon Jenkins, who once wrote about food for The New York Times and is an old friend of mine.
''Change is definitely my easiest solution to any problem,'' Jenkins said. ''I get restless. I get bored. I want to try something new.''
After college at the Rhode Island School of Design, where she studied photography, she returned to Rome. ''I thought I could live the rest of my life in Rome and have a decadent life,'' she said, ''but I had things I wanted to do.''
Now 38, she has spent much of the past decade figuring out just what kind of cook she is, working in Boston for Todd English, in a pizzeria in Tuscany, making the rounds at small New York restaurants. Lennard calls her an organic cook -- ''even though she's not Italian or European, she has it in her blood.'' Jenkins said simply, ''I like to think of myself as humbly cooking away, getting closer and closer to cooking the kind of food I like to eat.''
She knows what that is when she tastes it. A few years earlier, she prepared veal liver with butter and sage and dandelion greens for her brother, Nico. ''He called it Teverina cooking,'' she said, referring to the town in Tuscany where her family has had a home since she was 5. ''It's what I cooked at the house. Just cooking. That's my goal.''
At another moment, she added, ''I want somebody to basically give me equity, let me be involved and listen to me but then just let me cook and they can crunch the numbers.'' If she's very lucky, it will happen at a place where she can also choose the napkins and set the lighting while someone else pays the bills. But then she might have to commit to a style of dining, give up her month of traveling every year, lose her easy out. She might have to stay put.
Braised Rabbit With Chickpeas  1 1/2 cups chickpeas, soaked overnight in water, or 3 cups canned chickpeas  1 branch fresh sage  1 head garlic  1 rabbit, cut into 8 pieces  Sea salt  Freshly ground black pepper
1/4 cup, plus 2 tablespoons, extra-virgin olive oil  4 branches rosemary  1 cup white wine  1 can (28-ounce) whole, peeled San Marzano tomatoes.
1. Drain the chickpeas and place them in a large saucepan. Add the sage. Remove 3 cloves from the head of garlic, peel them and reserve. Toss the remainder of the head in the pan with the chickpeas. Add enough water to cover by 2 inches and simmer until the chickpeas are tender, about 1 1/2 hours. Add more water if needed.
2. Meanwhile, preheat the oven to 300 degrees. Season the rabbit with salt and pepper. Heat  1/4 cup oil in a heavy casserole (enameled cast iron is best). When it shimmers, add the rabbit pieces and sauté until quite brown and crusty on both sides, 10 to 15 minutes in all. Remove the pieces as they finish. When all are finished, pour off the fat from the casserole.
3. Mince the reserved garlic cloves and the rosemary leaves. Add the remaining 2 tablespoons of oil to the casserole, place it over medium heat and gently fry the garlic and rosemary. When the mixture begins to color, add the wine and deglaze the pan. When the wine has reduced by half, add the tomatoes, breaking them up with a wooden spoon.
4. Return the rabbit to the casserole, cover it and place it in the oven. Cook until the rabbit is tender, about 1 hour. Taste the sauce and adjust the seasonings if necessary.
5. To serve, spoon a handful of chickpeas and some sauce into each of four shallow bowls, add two rabbit pieces and cover with more sauce.
Yield: 4 servings.
Note: Rabbit is available from www.dartagnan.com or 1-800-DARTAGN.
Maccheroni With Sheep's Milk Ricotta and Mustard Greens  Sea salt  1 pound maccheroni (Jenkins recommends artisanal brands like Latini and Pasta Setaro) or penne  3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil  1 clove garlic, slivered  2 large bunches mustard greens (about 12 ounces each), stems removed, cut into 2-inch strips  6 to 7 ounces sheep's milk ricotta, run through a food mill (about 1  3/4 cups)  Freshly grated Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese  Freshly ground black pepper.
1. Bring a large pot of generously salted water to a rolling boil. Add the pasta and cook until tender but firm at the core, about 8 minutes. Meanwhile, heat the olive oil in a large sauté pan. Add the garlic and cook until golden.
2. Add the mustard greens and about  1/4 cup of the pasta cooking water, just enough to steam the greens. When only a little liquid is left in the pan and the greens have wilted, remove the pan from the heat and add the ricotta, stirring with a wooden spoon until the cooking liquid is absorbed.
3. When the pasta is done, drain it, add it to the sauce and fold everything together. Sprinkle with a handful of grated cheese and fold together again. Season to taste. Serve with more grated cheese on the side.
Yield: 4 main- or 8 first-course servings.
FOOD
