TUCKED into an audit released earlier this month by the Nassau County comptroller, Howard S. Weitzman, which detailed disarray, excessive overtime, inefficiencies and obsolete equipment in the county's 911 system, was the startling news that nearly all of the burglar alarms investigated by the county's highly paid police are false.
The report cited police statistics for 2002 revealing that 129,834 of the 434,678 emergency calls the police went out on -- nearly 30 percent of their total emergency responses -- were for alarms going off in banks, warehouses, schools, apartments, government buildings, homes and local businesses.
Of these, the audit said, 99.4 percent, all but 779 alarms, were baseless, with the police reporting no signs of burglars or break-ins.
''It's awful,'' said Bruce Nyman, a spokesman for the Nassau county executive, Thomas R. Suozzi. ''And it's potentially life-threatening because if we have our police officers on wild goose chases when real 911 calls come in you just have to hope we are able to respond as quickly.''
The findings and similar problems with false alarms reported by the Suffolk County police come in a security-obsessed time when blaring business and home alarms, shrieking car sirens and all manner of beeping and wailing security devices seem more than ever a part of life on Long Island.
The findings raise questions about whether the cacophony makes much sense when it erupts so often for no reason, disturbing sleep, wasting police time and putting law enforcement officers and the public at risk as officers race to answer alarms.
The high percentage of false calls can also take the edge off police response, police officials said. ''The responding officers have to guard against getting complacent,'' said Sgt. John Abernethy of the Suffolk County Police Department, who described the rate of false alarms in Suffolk as ''overwhelming.''
Car alarms, the bane of suburban neighborhoods, barely show up in the false alarm figures because they are rarely reported except as noise complaints, authorities said. They said most of the false alarms that the police respond to involve commercial and institutional buildings, with residential alarms a distant third. Alarms are typically sent over phone lines to monitoring stations operated by private security companies, where human monitors try to screen out false alarms. If the monitors cannot immediately verify that an alarm is bogus, it is forwarded to the police.
Police and other officials said user error and improper installation were the most common causes of false alarms. They said that thunderstorms or other severe weather and power outages also triggered some alarms.
Stan Martin, executive director of the Security Industry Alarm Coalition, a Frisco, Tex.-based industry group formed about a year ago to address false alarms, said 80 percent of them resulted from consumer mistakes. ''They don't lock a door, they don't have a window secured, or they walk through a motion detector,'' Mr. Martin said.
Mr. Martin said the high number of false alarms reported in Nassau's audit did not surprise him. ''Nassau County is not unique,'' he said. ''Ten years ago we might have said the equipment needs to be worked on, but that's not true anymore. The equipment is extremely reliable if it's used properly.''
Anthony M. Cancellieri, a deputy county executive in Nassau, said a county study concluded that repeat offenders accounted for much of the problem. ''We found out that a very, very small segment of the alarm population is responsible for the majority of the calls,'' he said. He said the county ceased responding in cases where repeat offenders did not correct the problem.
Mr. Martin said the situation described by Mr. Cancellieri mirrored the national picture, in which about 10 percent of users turned in half of all false alarms. He said that 30 million security systems are currently installed in the United States, and that the total is growing by a million to 2 million each year.
With Nassau police procedures requiring that two police vehicles answer every alarm and with responses taking up to 45 minutes each, Mr. Weitzman estimated that false alarms were costing the county a minimum of $7 million annually.
The figure was based on officers' base salary, Mr. Weitzman said in the audit, but did not include ''vehicle wear and tear or the increased risk to both the responding officers and the public'' when police officers are responding ''in emergency mode.'' He said these costs were not nearly enough to offset alarm permit revenues, which were $1.2 million in 2002.
Mr. Weitzman said his office supported a county ordinance that would punish alarm abusers with fines. The audit noted that local ordinances that stiffened penalties had cut false alarms by 45 percent in suburban Montgomery County, Maryland.
Mr. Martin said the industry group supported ordinances that suspended police response to chronic abusers. ''Our studies have found that progressive fine structures are good and necessary,'' he said. ''But at some point it can't just become an issue of writing a check to the police department.''
In Suffolk, a local law enacted in 1999 set $500 fines and prison terms of up to one year for excessive noise. But the noise limits applied only on county-owned properties and exempted burglar and car alarms provided they stopped within 15 minutes and sounded no more than 15 minutes in any one-hour period.
In October 2002 the Suffolk police sent letters to the owners and managers of commercial buildings turning in the highest number of false alarms asking their help in addressing what the department called the ''urgent public safety issue'' of growing false alarms.
The department said that in 2001 it received more than 157,000 false alarms from within the county police district, which covers Suffolk's five western towns. Answering them accounted for about 25 percent of precinct workloads, it said.
It urged training for alarm users and testing of all commercial and residential alarms to see that they were operating properly. The department said that commercial businesses were often unaware they had alarm problems because the security company monitors did not inform owners or managers that multiple false alarms had been turned in. Meantime, car sirens that use loud tones intended to chase away thieves and alert owners are facing increasing criticism from people subjected to their noise.
The New York City Council is considering legislation that would silence car alarms for vehicles parked on city streets. But the measure lacks support from Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and similar initiatives have failed in the past.
Transportation Alternatives, an advocacy group in Manhattan that is backing the ban, said that the alarms, in addition to being a quality-of-life assault, also failed utterly to reduce thefts. The group cited a study by the Highway Loss Data Institute that found no evidence that cars with alarms were stolen less frequently than cars without them. The study by the nonprofit group was based on insurance claims filed in 1997.
Aaron Friedman, a project manager for the Transportation Alternatives, said that improperly installed alarms and alarms triggered by even small disturbances were overriding causes of the noise nuisance.
Mr. Friedman said that some alarms went off repeatedly because of vibrations from passing vehicles or even gusts of wind. ''The wind is not trying to steal your car, and neither are those passing trucks,'' Mr. Friedman said. But, he said, alarm owners frequently refused to adjust their alarm systems to reduce their sensitivity. ''They want to call attention to their cars,'' he said.
Mr. Friedman said car alarms were usually installed incorrectly, adding to the problem. Even when wires were properly concealed, he said, professional car thieves who account for the great majority of stolen cars easily disarmed them. ''The thieves know precisely where to look,'' he said.
''The problem with the alarms is that nobody believes they are going off because of a theft, because they are not,'' Mr. Friedman said.
Two companies, Directed Electronics of California and Audiovox of Hauppauge, dominate the car alarm industry and produce alarms under several brand names. Spokesmen for the companies said the alarms, augmented by new innovations, were highly effective in preventing theft.
Many devices allow car owners to select a sequence of tones that the owner will recognize when the alarm sounds. The devices also typically allow owners to adjust the sensitivity of the alarm.
Ken Gammage, the corporation communications manager for Directed Electronics, said some devices include keychain remotes that beep or vibrate in an owner's pocket or purse within half a mile of the car. But he said the company recommended that a car siren also be activated.
''The car alarm has two functions, to notify the owner and to kind of harass the car thief into leaving the vehicle alone,'' he said.
Asked how siren manufacturers justified the racket their products made and the public disturbance that resulted, Mr. Gammage replied: ''A car is an expensive item. It's a piece of equipment that can cost you up to tens of thousands of dollars and it is parked out on the street so really you need powerful protection against thieves.'' He said statistics showed 1.1 to 1.2 million cars were stolen annually.
Mr. Gammage also cited tests done several years ago by the magazine Car Stereo Review that showed it took thieves at least three minutes to bypass car alarms. ''Not too many thieves want to stay around that long when they could be stealing an unprotected vehicle,'' he said.
A spokesman for Audiovox, which started as a car stereo company in 1965 and entered the vehicle security market in 1981, also defended car sirens. ''I take a lot of pride in my car and I will do whatever it takes so no one attempts to steal it,'' said Steven Christmann, a product manager for the company. ''My insurance company gives me a discount for having an alarm in my car, and they don't do it because they like me.''
