Some people thought they knew what to expect of the Food and Drug Administration under President Bush: It would be attuned to business and sensitive to religious conservatives. It would put off difficult decisions and issue fewer regulations.
Its commissioner, Dr. Mark B. McClellan, is a Republican and the brother of Mr. Bush's press secretary. Traditional Republican supporters, like large drug companies, praise him, so it might seem predictable that he would take a strong stand as he is doing this week against importing prescription drugs from Canada, a practice that undercuts prices here. But the decision has also put him in conflict with several governors -- some of them Republican -- and legislators who want cheaper drugs from Canada.
A number of other decisions by Dr. McClellan have kept the Food and Drug Administration in the spotlight as one of the more activist agencies in the Bush administration. Granted, critics say that some of the rulings -- like banning ephedra -- were years in the making, but other people note that unlike, say, the Environmental Protection Agency, the F.D.A. has not seemed in retrenchment on regulatory matters.
The agency's announcement last month that it would prohibit the sale of ephedra was a move sought by liberal Democrats like Senator Edward M. Kennedy and consumer groups like Public Citizen's Health Research Group. It was just the beginning of a crackdown on supplements, Dr. McClellan promised.
''While most supplements are probably safe in the dose people take them, we are concerned about a number of other dietary supplements that are currently on the market,'' he said in a speech Tuesday. ''And we intend to do more to take a closer look at them.''
In another move that could be construed as hindering business, Dr. McClellan deferred a decision on whether to allow silicone breast implants back on the market after more than a decade-long hiatus. He said the F.D.A. needed more data on safety.
''I've been pleasantly surprised,'' said Cynthia Pearson, executive director of the National Women's Health Network, which wanted ephedra banned and more data on implants.
Other F.D.A. watchers were surprised when the agency signaled a willingness to consider allowing a prescription morning-after pill, called Plan B, to be sold over the counter.
Women's groups, like the National Women's Health Network, strongly support making Plan B available over the counter, but some religious groups strongly oppose it. Believing that pregnancy begins with fertilization, they say the pill can prevent a fertilized egg from implanting, and so it induces abortion.
But the agency put on its advisory committee people known to support offering the pill over the counter. And the committee voted overwhelmingly to make it available without a prescription.
''Miraculously, I was appointed to the committee,'' said Dr. James Trussell of Princeton University, who has always wanted the drug to be offered over the counter.
Some consumer groups argue that the Food and Drug Administration is too cozy with the industries it regulates. In fact, even industry groups that appear to have been hurt by some of Dr. McClellan's decisions speak well of his approach to the job.
He ''isn't what most people would have expected from a Republican administration,'' said Dr. Annette Dickinson, president of the Council for Responsible Nutrition, a trade group for the dietary supplement industry. But, she said, ''he's been a breath of fresh air.''
She said her group wanted the agency to stop supplement makers from making false health claims or flouting good manufacturing practices, and supported the ephedra ban.
Others regulated by the F.D.A. like the attention they are getting.
Dr. Rhona Applebaum, the executive vice president and chief scientific officer of the National Food Processors Association, said that in her 20 years in the industry, she had never seen an F.D.A. commissioner pay so much heed to food. ''So yeah, we're pretty excited,'' she said.
Part of Dr. McClellan's success, said Dr. Alan M. Garber, an internist and economist at Stanford, is that he is a pragmatist, not an ideologue.
He also has a style that can be immensely appealing.
''McClellan is so personable and comes across as a person of such great integrity that it's hard to find somebody who says something negative,'' said Wayne Pines, who was the agency's associate commissioner for public affairs under Dr. David A. Kessler, who is now a consultant to companies dealing with the F.D.A.
The same cannot be said of Dr. Kessler, who served under President Bill Clinton and the first President Bush and angered industry officials by halting the sale of silicone breast implants and seeking to regulate tobacco as a drug.
Dan Cohen, the new vice president for global government affairs at Inamed, which the F.D.A. told to do more research if it wanted to return its silicone breast implants to the market, said Dr. Kessler was ''overly political, capricious, and didn't seem to have science at heart as opposed to an agenda.''
Dr. Kessler would not discuss how his management style differed from Dr. McClellan's, but he did compliment his decisions on breast implants and supplements. ''He got it right,'' Dr. Kessler said.
In a telephone interview, Dr. McClellan said he was surprised to be so roundly praised.
''I thought I managed to tick everybody off,'' he said. ''It's one of the things that's kind of freeing about this job. We get criticized no matter what we do.'' But, he said, he wants to continue the agency's long tradition of ''getting the science right.''
''A lot of people have a pretty cynical view of Washington, but I really don't,'' Dr. McClellan said.
Some find him hard to pigeonhole.
For example, consumer groups objected and large drug companies applauded when he warned that it was illegal to import prescription drugs from Canada. But the opposite happened when he changed regulations to make generic drugs available sooner when a drug's patent expired.
With foods, Dr. McClellan and his staff examined whether nutritional science could justify new claims. In the first change to food labels in a decade, last year he announced a proposal for labels to list so-called trans fats, which can increase cholesterol levels, a move that angered some companies. But, in an action favored by food manufacturers, he would allow them to list qualified claims about the health benefits of foods and nutrients.
In the case of dietary supplements, Dr. McClellan's proposal last month to ban ephedra got most of the attention.
But that, he said, ''was just the tip of the iceberg.'' He said he had also issued 75 warning letters to supplement makers -- a fivefold increase from 2002, before he took office -- and seized millions of dollars worth of supplements that made false health claims or that were unapproved drugs masquerading as supplements.
At the same time, the agency's actions on contentious women's health issues have been watched closely from all sides.
For example, Dr. McClellan insisted that all hormone pills to ease menopause symptoms include hard-to-miss warning labels about their risks for cancer and heart disease. He also has not bowed to pressure from groups that say that mifepristone, a drug once known as RU-486 and approved in 2002 to induce abortions early in pregnancy, is unsafe.
But for all the examples of his attention to regulation, some consumer advocates say he should be doing more.
Dr. Michael F. Jacobson, the executive director of the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a consumer advocacy group, said he saw ''a real pattern of actions that undercut the public's health.'' He said of the plan to allow more health claims on food labels, for example, that Dr. McClellan was ''just ignoring the law.'' His group and Public Citizen, another advocacy group, have sued the agency over such labeling.
Mr. Pines, the former assistant commissioner, said that while advocacy groups had raised objections and sued the agency no matter who was commissioner, the striking and reassuring fact was that ''the F.D.A. continues to make decisions based on the public health.''
''Any administration coming in can certainly change some of the nuances,'' he said. ''But it's too big a ship to turn in a new direction.''
Correction:  January 27, 2004, Tuesday  A picture caption on Sunday about Dr. Mark B. McClellan, commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, with an article about his agency's increasing boldness, referred incorrectly in some copies to the setting of a meeting between him and President Bush. It took place in the White House when Mr. McClellan was appointed, not at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.
