In a second-floor workshop in Westchester Square in the Bronx that is crammed with boxes of tiny spare parts, a jeweler named Wayne Gray works miracles with a soldering iron, restoring sight to at least 50 people a day across the East Coast.
More specifically, he saves their glasses. Quick Care Frame Repair, the company that he and an optician named John Bonizio founded in 1998, is known from Maine to Maryland for the very specialized, very old-fashioned service it offers: fixing and customizing frames few others will tackle.
Every day, U.P.S. and various messenger services deliver 50 or 60 needy pairs of glasses from opticians, many so desperate they write ''Help!'' on the work orders.
Mr. Bonizio believes that his is the only such company in the New York region; and Michael Buenau, the vice president of the New York State Society of Opticians, acknowledged that he had never heard of such a business.
In recent years, eyewear -- often in the form of pricey frames -- has gained status as a fashion statement. So when fragile pieces of metal snap, when delicate spring hinges malfunction, or when the whole thing gets run over by a car, opticians turn to these craftsmen.
Quick Care got its start when Mr. Gray, 38, a jeweler in Westchester Square who soldered glasses on the side, approached Mr. Bonizio about setting up shop together. They sent a mass mailing to opticians from Connecticut to Philadelphia that included address labels, work-order forms and those all-important words: free shipping. Word spread quickly.
Mr. Gray works with tools like a soldering iron, tweezers, a ''sandbox'' of heated glass pebbles, and a lot of microscopic pieces. Mr. Bonizio, 47, runs the business side.
Quick Care usually charges opticians $15 or $20; the final cost to the customer is usually double. But money is typically not a client's main concern. ''People look at the glasses as part of them,'' Mr. Gray said. ''They say, 'If I lose this frame, I'm not going to look good in anything else.'''
His hardest job ever? An old-fashioned gold-colored frame beloved by a wealthy Manhattan woman. Its temples were mangled, its bridge snapped, its pad arms and eye wires broken: it had obviously been run over by something. The woman's optician called from Madison Avenue and said: ''We heard you can perform miracles.''
Mr. Gray kicked Mr. Bonizio out of the room so he could focus. Then, with his deceivingly big, remarkably nimble fingers, he fixed everything.
''They have repaired things that I thought could never be repaired,'' said Virginia Burton, a Washington optometrist who is a loyal customer. She cited a $375 frame with a broken spring mechanism that the manufacturer had told her could not be fixed. ''When it came back,'' she said, ''it looked like brand new.''
SETH KUGEL
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: WESTCHESTER SQUARE
