How well do you really know the one you love? Jodi Compton raises that disquieting question in her fine debut novel, THE 37TH HOUR (Delacorte, $21.95), an intelligent and challenging thriller that unsettles the mind of its heroine by undermining her faith in her husband. Sarah Pribek, a tall, athletic and seemingly nerveless detective with the Hennepin County Sheriff's Department, has been married for just two months to a Minneapolis police officer named Mike Shiloh when he vanishes while on his way to Quantico for F.B.I. training. Ignoring the probability that her sexy, enigmatic spouse has simply walked out on her, Sarah investigates his disappearance as she would any other missing-person case, following a trail that takes her back to his family roots in Utah and reveals a person she never knew.
Compton dignifies her characters by treating them like complex adults whose problematical relationships can't be resolved by straightening out a few loose facts. ''Everything I knew was wrong,'' Sarah says, after discovering the ''shadow self'' her husband couldn't bring himself to show her. With a murderer at large and Sarah working on her own in the dark, the suspense may be killing, but it isn't cheap. It's the profound terror of knowing you don't know a thing.
Lovejoy is on the lam again. The rogue hero of Jonathan Gash's comic misadventures on the crooked margins of the antiques trade has fled his old haunts in THE TEN WORD GAME (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's Minotaur, $23.95) and is hiding out from the law in Southampton when a gang of high-caliber crooks catches up with him and shanghais him aboard a luxury cruise ship bound for Russia. If he survives the gargantuan meals and the attentions of the women on board, Lovejoy will then be bundled off to the Hermitage, where his eerie talents as a divvy (''a divvy can tell if your antique is antique, or . . . isn't'') will be needed for an art theft of staggering proportions.
A likely story, you say. However outlandish, Lovejoy's tribulations are still more fun than what passes for entertainment on most cruise ships. And since Gash is writing with more restraint on this trip, having eased up on his usual frantic pace and cut down on the unintelligible slang, the reader is more at leisure to soak up Lovejoy's lively lectures on the antiques that make his divvy's heart go boing. Whether expounding on the fabulous history of the Amber Room or instructing us on how to fake an antique silver coffeepot from a lowly beer tankard, the rascal is without peer.
It isn't a hero, or even a villain, but the collective regional character of Michigan's Upper Peninsula that animates the vibrant scenes of rural life in HUNTER'S DANCE (Poisoned Pen Press, $24.95), the second mystery in a sturdy historical series by Kathleen Hills. When this densely plotted (O.K. -- overplotted) whodunit opens in 1950, wartime jobs have dried up and times are tough for the fishermen, farmers, miners and loggers who live in these parts. Being of hardy Scandinavian stock, people in the close-knit township of St. Adele still paint their houses in cheerful shades of yellow and blue and kick up their heels at the big social events. But when two teenage boys get into a brawl at the Deer Hunters' Dance -- and when one of them is found murdered and hideously mutilated the next morning -- the town constable, a stolid fellow named John McIntire, wonders how well he really knows his neighbors.
Germane or not, no political issue or social dynamic is overlooked in this story, from racial attitudes toward American Indians and the land-grabbing schemes of visiting city slickers to the ''competitive housekeeping'' habits of the womenfolk and the current craze for uranium prospecting. But while this plethora of detail diffuses the action, it also produces rich character studies of people you don't meet every day.
Good things always seem to come in the small, neat editions packaged in the City Lights Noir series. JOE'S WORD (City Lights, paper, $11.95) gets my nod for the wry wit of its author, Elizabeth Stromme, and for the amused affection she has for an unglamorous neighborhood at the losing end of Sunset Boulevard. As it presents itself here in 1995, Echo Park is a scruffy part of the city that attracts an immigrant population, marginal businesses and crime. The narrator, an amiable young guy named Joe who has set himself up as a writer for hire in an office on the ground floor of the Jensen Recreation Center, is on good terms with his neighbors. (''I knew the roperías and the Arab discount shops and the lines of dayworkers at the local hardware store.'') But the love letters and missives of grievance that emanate from Joe's desk produce a clientele that could break your head as quick as your heart, including a disappointed mail-order bride from the Philippines, a graphic designer who tries to take over Joe's life and maybe a murderer. While not dark enough to merit the ''noir'' badge of honor, ''Joe's Word'' is a mellow shade of blue.
''Hapless'' is a word that must have been invented just to describe Fred Fitch. ''I own miles of tickets to nonexistent raffles and ballgames and dances and clambakes and shivarees,'' he tells us in Donald E. Westlake's GOD SAVE THE MARK (Forge/Tom Doherty, cloth, $24.95; paper, $14.95). ''My closet is full of little machines that stopped working miracles as soon as the seller went away, and I'm apparently on just about every sucker mailing list in the Western Hemisphere.'' Fred is such a perfect pigeon that he's the unofficial mascot of the Manhattan bunco squad, but that doesn't stop every con artist in town from showing up on his doorstep when Fred's Uncle Matt dies (murdered, as it turns out) and leaves him $300,000. Unforgettable though he may be, Fred hasn't been seen much since this comic caper novel, which won the Edgar Award for best mystery of 1967, went out of print. It seems only fitting, then, that Otto Penzler, as editor of a new reprint series of Edgar-winning crime novels, should have chosen everybody's favorite loser to resurface as a winner.
Crime
