THE sounds of Prokofiev reverberated through an underground recording studio at the Performing Arts Center of Purchase College here, as Adam Abeshouse, his curly head bobbing to the ferocious beat, made notes in the score. Green lights danced on the recording equipment until an unprintable word from a player in the Recital Hall upstairs halted the music blaring through the speakers.
That ended the first take of Prokofiev's Sonata No. 1 in F minor for piano and violin, Opus 80, one recent morning. Then Anne-Marie McDermott, the pianist, and Ida Kavafian, the violinist, joined Mr. Abeshouse in the studio to hear a playback of the recording.
''It sagged a little here,'' Mr. Abeshouse said, indicating a measure in the score. ''And here -- was that crescendo too soon?'' Ms. McDermott agreed to ''hold it back a little,'' and the two musicians went back upstairs for another take.
It was the second of a string of days devoted to recording the complete chamber music of Prokofiev, played by members of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center. Mr. Abeshouse headed the project not only as a Grammy-winning producer and engineer but also as the president of the Classical Recording Foundation, a group he started six years ago to assure that such recordings would be made.
The foundation supports projects of high artistic merit but low commercial priority at a time when the music industry is searching for its footing and classical music is fighting for its life as a viable recording genre. ''It's essential,'' Ms. Kavafian said of the foundation, ''because the recording industry is in such dire straits.''
Ms. McDermott, who made news last summer with a marathon performance of all nine Prokofiev piano sonatas on two successive Saturdays at the Lincoln Center Festival, was equally grateful to the foundation. ''It's giving us the opportunity to record the repertoire we want to record,'' she said, rather than works decided by the record companies.
Mr. Abeshouse, a Pelham resident who is also a professional violinist, helps artists by granting foundation money to small record labels -- Bridge Records of New Rochelle is one -- for whatever aspect of the recording process is needed. He does not view himself as a martyr to the cause of high art, saying that a ''deeply flawed distribution system'' for classical music has obscured the true market for such records. He says the notion that classical music does not sell has not truly been tested, because record stores stock only one or two copies of a newly released classical CD.
After they are sold, he said, people seeking the recording are turned away. He said he started the foundation because ''I kept running into economic road blocks for so many projects of real value and real worth.''
So when Ms. McDermott took the Prokofiev idea to Mr. Abeshouse, her longtime friend (they knew each other as children at the Manhattan School of Music's preparatory division), he jumped in to help. The Arabesque label agreed to release the set of CD's of the chamber music from the finished master recording that Mr. Abeshouse provides, either later this year or in 2005. (He and Ms. McDermott said they were disappointed with Arabesque, though, because her recordings of the Prokofiev solo piano sonatas, which were completed last year, have not yet been released.)
Mr. Abeshouse, so unflappable that even the theft of his computer from the recording studio the day before did not dampen his enthusiasm, seemed to be having a wonderful time during the recording session.
''Unbelievable!'' he exclaimed, as the music blasted through the speakers. ''Just wake them out of bed and they can play like this!''
On stage, the players were in their socks, shoeless, so no sounds of foot-tapping or stomping on the pedals would be heard on the recording.
Each musician wore two sweaters, and Ms. McDermott put a padded red leather glove on her right hand to keep it warm between takes. They were enduring the cold temperature in the Recital Hall because the hot air blowers had been turned off to prevent background noise.
Ms. Kavafian, a resident of New Fairfield, Conn., described a good record producer as ''part psychologist.''
Mr. Abeshouse filled that role during one of the playbacks, when Ms. Kavafian was unhappy with her violin.
''It loses a certain beauty of sound when you get close to it,'' she said of the instrument, a J.B. Guadagnini violin made in 1752.
Mr. Abeshouse calmly reassured her, and the two musicians went back upstairs.
He made a slight but crucial adjustment to the placement of Ms. Kavafian's microphone, offered suggestions about certain measures to both players (''I want to get a rocking feeling here;'' ''I want that to sound like bones rattling,'' he said) and sat back to wait for the magic to happen.
He wasn't disappointed. ''Sometimes if you give them little clues,'' he said, ''it unlocks something and opens up new vistas for them.''
The foundation has staged ceremonies at Carnegie Hall for the last two years, where awards have also gone to Gilbert Kalish and Joel Krosnik to record the complete cello sonatas of Brahms for Arabesque; to the St. Luke's Chamber Ensemble (of which Mr. Abeshouse is a member) to record the complete Brandenburg concertos of Bach for Delos International; to Bridge Records for a recording of music by George Crumb; and to the Kalichstein-Laredo-Robinson Trio to record complete piano trios of Beethoven for Arabesque.
Those recordings have been released and can be bought by visiting the Web sites of the individual labels. In addition, a recording of the music of Martinu, Lutoslawski and Rachmaninov by Andres Diaz, cello, and Judith Gordon, piano, is scheduled for release in June by Arabesque.
Next month will bring new excitement for Mr. Abeshouse, who has been nominated for a second Grammy as producer of the year (he won his first for work done in 1999). On Feb. 15, a week after the Grammy award ceremony, which will be held Feb. 8 in Los Angeles, the foundation will sponsor a benefit concert featuring a solo recital by the pianist Garrick Ohlsson.
The event will take place at a private home in Mamaroneck. For tickets or other information, the number is (914)633-5323.
Correction:  February 1, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about the Classical Recording Foundation, which supports projects of high artistic merit but low commercial priority, gave its age incorrectly and, because of an editing error, misstated the form of its grants. The foundation is three years old, not six. It makes grants to artists, not directly to recording companies.
