BALLET is an austere art, and historically it has thrived under austere regimes. Even today, America's best ballet companies are stocked with principal dancers trained in Cuba and the former Soviet Union, where centralized governments created centralized ballet academies. In the absence of austerity, government sudsidies help. Today, students can still get coordinated ballet training from age 8 or so on at, among other places, the Royal Ballet School in London, the National Ballet School of Canada and the Paris Opera Ballet School, which was founded by Louis XIV in 1713.
America is different. Here, the free market has produced, in typical free-market fashion, a cacophony of options, which run the gamut from storefront academies to the School of American Ballet, the official school of New York City Ballet and the closest thing this country has to a state-sponsored school (it was actually sponsored by the Ford Foundation, back in 1963).
Enter American Ballet Theater, a company known for poaching dancers rather than training them. Ballet Theater recently took the first step toward creating a school.
Its Studio Company Associate Program is a year-round, preprofessional course for high school students, which includes classes in technique, character dance, pas de deux, repertory, Pilates and modern dance, taught by the company's own masters, including Susan Jaffe and Martine van Hamel. Tuition is $5,000 a year, though scholarships are available. Classes are held from 2:30 to 5:30 on Monday, Wednesday and Friday afternoons and from noon to 5 on Saturday and Sunday.
Kevin McKenzie, Ballet Theater's artistic director, hopes the program will eventually grow into a small, live-in ballet academy in New York City, along with several ''big ballet schools'' across the country that would offer both preprofessional classes and classes open to the general public.
Auditions for the Studio Company Associate Program were held on Dec. 8 in a hot, scuffed room at the Ballet Theater studios at 890 Broadway. It was mostly filled with pubescent girls. There was lots of pink: pink skin, pink tights, pink shoes and, as the minutes ticked by, pink cheeks. No one smiled. Ballet is hard, even if God has given you good legs and a soul that craves discipline.
One hundred and one dancers came to the audition. Ten would join the new program.
The mothers waited in a bleak adjacent studio strewn with metal folding chairs and music stands. A knot of five women discussed, among other things, the price of point shoes. (A shocking $60 for medium shank Grishko Ulanovas. Multiply that by eight pairs a month. The distress level was high.)
''If my daughter had been born in Russia, she would have been much farther along because she would have been identified early on as someone who had the physical attributes,'' said Deborah Santangelo, whose daughter, Dana, is 17.
Here, Ms. Santangelo said, she is ''always grabbing piecemeal to get her what she needs.''
It takes a decade, and in the United States anywhere from $30,000 to upward of $50,000, to train a ballet dancer, not counting summer program tuition or point shoes, though many students, especially boys, receive scholarships. The cost and inconvenience of ballet training -- years of shuttling to and from classes, rehearsals, auditions -- demand sacrifice, often of siblings. Dana's twin brother takes a back seat. ''We know it,'' Ms. Santangelo said. ''He knows it. She gets the lion's share of the attention and of the finances. But quote me as saying I plan to make it up to him.''
The Soviets had it so easy.
''Training in America is very different than it is in European opera houses,'' said Mr. McKenzie. ''If we are to view our peers as being, say, the Royal Ballet, the Paris Opera, the New York City Ballet, the Bolshoi and the Kirov, what's the one distinction? They all have schools.''
Not having a school has its pluses and minuses. ''The upside is that we are filled with a lot of different personalities,'' said John Meehan, Ballet Theater's artistic director of education and training. ''Not everyone looks alike.'' But he added, ''You have to work much harder to impose a uniform style on the corps de ballet.''
Ballet Theater has twice tried to establish programs that would groom dancers for the company, and twice it has failed. From 1952 to 1980, its Ballet Theater School attracted renowned dancers to its open classes, but it never coalesced into a formal ballet academy. In 1967, a scholarship class, a small group of advanced students being prepped for the corps de ballet, was added, but Mikhail Baryshnikov shut it down in 1982, not long after he became artistic director. Six years later, he started the School of Classical Ballet, which he hoped would grow into a European-style ballet academy. It didn't. He quit in 1989, and the school folded for lack of funds.
Mr. McKenzie maintains that he has something his predecessors did not: money. Specifically, an anonymous donation, about which company officials will say very little. ''We've got seed money in place for a couple of years,'' said Kelly Ryan, a spokeswoman. ''It's a nice safety net.'' Moreover, despite some recent turmoil, Ballet Theater has reduced its operating budget deficit from about $6 million in 1992, when Mr. McKenzie became the artistic director, to $1.1 million for fiscal year 2003. The company's endowment grew to $8.9 million in 2003, up from $6.6 million in 2002.
Mr. McKenzie has not yet secured financing for his longterm plans, but he has already taken two steps to establish a training and recruitment mechanism for Ballet Theater dancers. In 1997, he started the Studio Company, a group of 12 advanced young dancers, many of whom are promoted into the corps. In 1996, he started Ballet Theater's summer intensive program, which feeds dancers into the Studio Company and, in the last fiscal year, turned a profit of about $300,000. The associate program can be an intermediate step between the summer program and the Studio Company.
Ballet Theater officials emphasize that the main goal of establishing a school is to find and train dancers, but unlike the School of American Ballet, at which there are no open classes and tuition does not cover the costs of training, Ballet Theater hopes that, like its summer school, its year-round national schools will be profitable.
One huge question about the Ballet Theater program is how it will stack up against the rival City Ballet program. In 1933, Lincoln Kirstein asked George Balanchine, then in London, to come to America to start a ballet company. Mr. Balanchine is said, famously, to have replied: ''But first, a school.'' And so it was. The School of American Ballet was created the next year, the New York City Ballet in 1948.
Patricia Wilde, who danced for City Ballet from 1950 to 1965 and taught at the Ballet Theater School from 1967 until 1982, said that Mr. Balanchine ''had a real interest in developing dancers, which was not ever Ballet Theater's raison.''
After more than 60 years, that philosophical difference has had some unexpected consequences. Balanchine and Kirstein achieved their objective of creating an American ballet company because they first established a school to train American ballet dancers. Today, 24 of City Ballet's 31 principals and soloists were born in the United States. Ninety-two percent of City Ballet dancers are alumni of the School of American Ballet, including 17 of 22 principals and 8 of 9 soloists.
''There's nothing like homemade,'' said Peter Martins, City Ballet's artistic director. ''That implies that our aesthetic of classical ballet -- the company's and the school's -- is identical. We have the same view of what classical ballet should look like.''
Ballet Theater offers up a different vision of America. Twenty of the company's 33 principals and soloists are foreign-born. Mr. Meehan predicted that as the new school gets off the ground, the number of American dancers will increase. (Indeed, their pipeline looks pretty homegrown: 10 of the 12 members of the Studio Company are American.)
For now, Ballet Theater's demographics reflect the national norm for ballet companies. ''Principal dancers in U.S. companies are mostly coming not from the United States,'' said Kate Lydon, an assistant editor at Dance magazine.
That has to do with many factors, training among them. Even the School of American Ballet doesn't quite replicate the air-tight machinery of the old Soviet Union: many dancers come to it late. Only 14 percent of City Ballet's dancers trained at the School of American Ballet as children; the rest of the alumni came for polishing, as intermediate or advanced students.
The blizzard of ballet schools in the United States means that anyone -- pigeon-toed, flat-footed or fat -- can study ballet. It also means that the quality of instruction is uneven. Many of the most respected schools are affiliated with ballet companies, like the Washington School of Ballet, the San Francisco Ballet School and the Houston Ballet Academy. Many are not. Marcia Dale Weary's Central Pennsylvania Youth Ballet has an impressive alumni roster, as do the Universal Ballet Academy (formerly the Kirov Academy) and the North Carolina School of the Arts.
Because of their fragmented, self-directed training, American dancers are exposed to different styles at a young age. Whether purity or eclecticism breeds the better dancer remains an open question. Ballet Theater, unsurprisingly, advocates eclecticism. The breadth of its repertory means that its dancers must be extremely versatile. Style is something to be put on and taken off, says Mr. McKenzie, ''like a change of clothes.'' The big question for him and Mr. Meehan now is how to train dancers to be the unaffected, endlessly malleable vehicles for movement they dream about.
Jan. 7 was the first day of class for the current crop of students at Ballet Theater's embryonic school. They seemed happy to be in a highly focused environment.
''We're not wasting our time,'' said Alexander Dutko, 16. ''Everyone pushes everyone else.''
Eric Tamm, 17, added: ''The A.B.T. name will get you opportunity, hopefully. To be associated with the company is the next step.'' There were nods of hopeful concurrence from the group. Eric, sitting on the studio floor, pointed one of his feet in an offhand sort of way, and his toes grazed the floor. The shape was Roman perfection. Forget the Pont Neuf. That arch could carry you across the Seine.
''Wish us luck,'' said Mr. Meehan.
DANCE
