I am a single bisexual woman who works for a university with excellent spousal benefits. My gay male roommate has no health insurance. We have discussed getting married so he can receive benefits through me. I like the idea of subverting marriage, an institution that generally won't sanction the same-sex relationships my roommate and I have had. But is this tantamount to stealing from my employer? Is it ethical to marry for strictly economic reasons?
L.S., Queens
People have married for many reasons -- to gain a fortune, accumulate land, forge an international alliance, secure a dynasty, raise children -- and even on account of affection, a marital motive that became widespread rather late in human history with the rise of bourgeois society. (See Jane Austen or later, 19th-century novelists.) Marrying to obtain health insurance does not seem, historically at least, the most ignoble reason, particularly where same-sex folks are forbidden to marry for love. Recently, at least in Western Europe, more and more people have found none of these aims sufficient and have chosen to forgo marriage (but not family life) altogether.
We live in a country where more than 40 million people lack health insurance and thus reliable access to medical care. The solution to this problem is political reform, and so I hope you are working for that (if only by supporting candidates for public office who are). However, while awaiting utopia, your roommate might want to do something about that hacking cough (or whatever). If marriage is his best means to decent medical care, I see no ethical objections to you two kids' tying the knot. Nor would you be deceiving the university if you did.
It requires only marriage, not love. If it demanded the latter, many a married couple would lose their insurance. (And their privacy, when it came to the impossible task of verification.)
That said, what ethics doesn't proscribe, practicality might. Should you and your groom-to-maybe-be ever wish to part -- perhaps one of you falls in love in Massachusetts -- divorcing could be more complicated and expensive than getting married.
I am a state-certified mediator and arbitrator. Recently I mediated a serious dispute to the satisfaction of both parties. One of them, an American-born Japanese businessman, offered to send me a special fish, prepared for eating, as a token of appreciation. I humbly refused the gift as a violation of my code of ethics. He was hurt by my rejection of his Japanese custom, meant only to express appreciation. Was I wrong?
Abraham Best, Lauderhill, Fla.
You were right. Acceptable business practices vary from culture to culture, and you could argue that when in Tokyo do as the Tokyovians (Tokyoites? Tokyoons?) do. However, you are not in Tokyo; you are in Florida and are bound by the mores of that state (insert presidential-election joke here) and the ethics appropriate to your profession. What's more, from the American perspective, that code is reasonable. Your case is already resolved and you cannot be corrupted by that fish gift, but it would be unwise to promote the idea that in future cases (perhaps even involving this man), a gift is expected in exchange for a satisfactory decision.
While your duty is clear, that Japanese businessman's hurt feelings are worthy of consideration. (Why does our concern with conflicts of interest trump the Japanese business ethics of gratitude and strengthened social ties?) And so you must assure him that your actions reflect local custom; they do not imply cultural superiority and certainly not a personal criticism.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-25-04: THE ETHICIST
