Five days after his damaging third-place finish in the Iowa caucuses, Howard Dean said Saturday that the state should regulate discussion inside caucus rooms or lose its premier status in the presidential nomination process.
''I like the Iowa caucuses a lot and I think they should be first, but they have to have a process that is good for democracy,'' Dr. Dean said on his campaign bus as he headed to Dover, N.H., to knock on the doors of undecided voters. ''The kind of stuff that's going on with the phone calls and all that under the table is not particularly good for democracy, and I didn't know it went on inside the caucuses. And if it does it should not be permitted.''
Later, speaking after a packed forum at a picturesque coastal hotel here, Dr. Dean said he would not participate again unless the rules were changed to prohibit negative campaigning during the caucuses.
His complaints concern the internal debate that unfolds in each precinct after the initial round of voting, when supporters of different candidates try to sway one another. Dr. Dean said he had been surprised to learn that aides to one of his rivals, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, circulated booklets to Iowa precinct captains with instructions to paint Dr. Dean as ''an elitist from Park Avenue'' and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts as ''part of the failed Washington politics.''
Senator Edwards, who condemned the booklet when it surfaced on Wednesday, said Saturday that Iowans ''don't need instructions from me'' on how to run the caucuses.
''They've been doing it for a long time, and the process seems to be working,'' he told reporters. ''I respect the people of Iowa much the way I respect the voters of New Hampshire.''
Dr. Dean said he did not ''mean to impugn the results'' of the caucuses, and repeated his congratulations to Senators Kerry and Edwards, who placed first and second, even as he criticized the Edwards camp and hinted that Kerry supporters might have engaged in similar behavior.
''If you have a caucus and you go in and sit down with your neighbors,'' he said, ''and they are being coached by opposing campaigns -- which I think The Associated Press reported was the case in John Edwards' case and maybe Senator Kerry's -- I don't know about that. That is not the kind of neighborly, friendly arrangement that one is led to believe goes on in the Iowa caucuses.''
Dr. Dean's criticism of the caucuses, which most politicians with national ambitions are careful never to fault, came just two weeks after the broadcast of a four-year old interview in which he derided Iowa's delegate-selection process as dominated by special interests. In a January 2000 television talk show, Dr. Dean, then governor of Vermont, said that ordinary people lacked the time to participate in the caucuses.
After NBC News broadcast excerpts from the show, Dr. Dean said that he had not known much about the process at the time, and, as he repeated Saturday, that the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary were critical to candidates like him, who lack money or name recognition as the campaign opens.
The new comments about the caucuses came as Dr. Dean, finding his footing after a week dominated by concern over his concession speech Monday night in Iowa, mostly returned to his stump speech, including many of its red-meat -- or at least medium-rare -- attacks on President Bush and his Democratic opponents. Speaking to 122 volunteers heading out to knock on 6,123 doors of undecided Democrats and independents in Strafford County, a newly confident Dr. Dean said: ''Things are closing. We can win this.''
As part of the effort to show his softer side, his mother, Andree Maitland Dean, campaigned with him Saturday, and his wife, Judith Steinberg Dean, was scheduled to join him in New Hampshire on Sunday.
Dr. Dean declined to discuss his campaign's mistakes in Iowa, saying only that spending so long as the front-runner subject to attack had hurt. As for his growling, exuberant post-caucus concession, Dr. Dean said he thought the news media's ''obsession'' with what has become known as the ''I Have a Scream'' speech might have a backlash that brought people to his camp.
He continued to have a little fun at his own expense, telling a man here who praised his positions, ''You make me so happy I could scream.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
