Memories of Newark
The playwright and actress Enid Rudd has written for Broadway, television and regional theater. Early in her career, she appeared with Rita Moreno and Anne Frances in the 1950 film, ''So Young, So Bad.'' But in real life she was a nice girl from Newark who went to Weequahic High School. Her Aunt Rose taught penmanship at a Newark grammar school.
Ms. Rudd's new play, ''The Other Side of Newark,'' set in the 1930's, draws on these childhood memories. It is about the relationship between Rose, a teacher in a Newark school, and Dinah, her African-American student. The play, which opens Saturday night at Luna Stage in Montclair, is not really about her aunt, Ms. Rudd said, but is about religious and racial intolerance, and family relationships.
The playwright, who lives in West Orange, declined to give her age, but noted that when she was in high school, ''Those days, we didn't call it segregated.'' But, she added, ''It was rare to have a biracial school.''
Dinah is played by Dana Jones, an 18-year-old senior at Montclair High School. ''That role for me is a big stretch,'' Ms. Jones said. ''I'm used to musical theater. This is a more serious in-depth role.''
''Doing this role, you start to see that even though it was the 30's, a lot of things have not really changed,'' she added.
The play is in previews on Thursday and Friday and runs through Feb. 22. Information: (973)744-3309.
Paper Fantasies
Hou-tien Cheng of Freehold had few toys to play with when he was growing up in China. So his grandmother, following the traditions of many Chinese women who cut fanciful shapes from paper to make embroidery patterns for clothes, created dragons and horses from paper for him.
Her efforts inspired him, and he grew up to become a master paper cutter. In 1972, he brought his art to the United States. Now 59, he lives here with his family and travels around the country giving demonstrations and workshops in paper-cutting. He said that his life here has inspired him to cut new shapes, like football players and golfers.
On Saturday, from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., he will be at the New Jersey State Aquarium, for its celebration of the Chinese New Year. Information: (856)365-3300.
A Film Festival's Spring Season
The New Jersey Film Festival, presented by the Rutgers Film Co-op/New Jersey Media Arts Center and Rutgers University cinema studies program, has opened its spring season at Rutgers's New Brunswick campus. The festival, a kind of repertory film theater, presents revivals and new releases, as well as workshops and programs on documentaries, experimental films and other categories.
On Thursday the festival is showing ''Contested Territory,'' a documentary by Carolyn McGrath about a plan to build a controversial private housing development in the fields of West Windsor Township. The film, also shown last year at the festival, has a new ending, reflecting the fact that construction has begun. Information: (732)932-8482.
Margo Nash
