AFTER an extraordinary meeting last Monday at which priests of the Diocese of Rockville Centre directly confronted Bishop William F. Murphy about flaws many see in his leadership, participants said that what happens next will be what matters most for the future of the troubled diocese.
Priests who spoke about the five-hour meeting said it had aired priests' concerns. What will be crucial, they said, is how and when Bishop Murphy responds, and what steps, if any, he takes to resolve several smoldering issues.
''It's the first step, not the last,'' said Msgr. Peter J. Pflomm of Maria Regina Church in Seaford. ''Priests and laity are looking for the bishop to respond. I am hoping it will be in a reasonable period of time.''
Monsignor Pflomm was among 52 priests who requested the meeting in October, sending Bishop Murphy a letter that spoke of a ''general malaise and even an abiding anger'' within the diocese, a perception of ''a fairly widespread dissatisfaction with the way you have related to some clergy and the laity'' and ''a certain lack of confidence in your pastoral leadership.'' Priests honored a pledge not to divulge specifically what was said at the meeting, which was closed to the press and public. But the issues raised included Bishop Murphy's management style, his $1.1 million renovation of a diocesan building in Rockville Centre to serve as a personal residence and his ban preventing the Long Island Voice of the Faithful, a lay group with more than 1,000 members seeking reforms, from meeting on church property.
Sexual abuse by priests, the issue that has shaken the American Catholic Church to its foundations, was also a topic but did not appear to have dominated the session. Bishop Murphy has denied that he took part in protecting abusive priests while he was second in command in the Archdiocese of Boston, the epicenter of the crisis, before coming to Long Island in 2001.
His denials contradict a report by the Massachusetts attorney general last July that said Bishop Murphy and other top church officials ''placed a higher priority on preventing scandal and providing support to alleged abusers than on protecting children from sexual abuse.''
That report prompted the Voice of the Faithful to call on Bishop Murphy to resign. A director of the group, Thomas Myles of Ronkonkoma, said after the meeting that its position had not changed.
''We don't know what happened at the meeting and so we're waiting for the results,'' Mr. Myles said. ''We are also hoping that the dialogue between Bishop Murphy and the priests will extend out to the laity.''
There did not appear to be majority sentiment among priests that Bishop Murphy's role in Boston makes him unsuited to serve as spiritual leader of Long Island's nearly 1.5 million Catholics. No call for the bishop to resign was raised at the meeting, a participant said.
''They don't blame Bishop Murphy for all of that,'' said Msgr. James McNamara, the pastor of Church of the Holy Cross in Nesconset. After coming to Long Island, Bishop Murphy ordered changes to weed out sexual abusers and prevent a recurrence of the diocesan cover-ups that occurred before his arrival.
Monsignor McNamara is a supporter of Bishop Murphy and was not among the signers of the letter requesting the meeting. But he described it as ''a very positive experience.''
Other priests praised Bishop Murphy for agreeing to the meeting. ''It is to his credit,'' said the Rev. Christopher Aridas of St. Margaret of Scotland in Selden, who signed the letter. ''You really have to applaud the man because other bishops apparently have not done that when asked.''
The meeting, held at St. John the Baptist High School in West Islip and attended by at least 190 of the diocese's 390 priests, included remarks by Bishop Murphy, in which he acknowledged making mistakes, a compiling of lists of priests' concerns and comments by some 12 to 15 priests.
''Some people were quite direct, to the point of being blunt,'' said the Rev. Gerald Twomey of St. Anne in Brentwood, who signed the letter. He said the bishop had been ''frank, earnest, candid and forthcoming.''
The Rev. William Brisotti of Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal in Wyandanch, a letter signer, said a wide range of opinions was expressed. ''It was a very difficult meeting,'' he said. ''A lot of people spoke from the heart about their own experiences. Now we will just have to see what happens.''
In a brief statement to the press after the meeting, Bishop Murphy called it ''very helpful,'' but took no questions. A spokeswoman said he was not available for further comment.
Under procedures set forth in the meeting, a five-member committee of priests, including Monsignor McNamara and four priests who signed the letter, were to meet with Bishop Murphy to review the results. Monsignor McNamara said the meeting was tentatively set for mid-February. Priests said the outcome of the process was not yet clear. ''We are going forward,'' Father Aridas said. ''Where that is going to be, what shape that will take, that is what we are really going to have to see.''
