The thing about exciting advances designed to make city life easier is that they're not so exciting when you can't try them yourself. Case in point: FreshDirect, the trendy cybermarket that allows New Yorkers to order groceries online and have them delivered to their apartments.
While Upper West Siders are dining on beef Wellington and SoHo residents are receiving broccoli spears, many Lower East Siders have been shut out.
''I tried to place an order a few weeks ago,'' said Marcia Lemmon, who lives on Ludlow Street between Stanton and Rivington Streets. ''It took me two hours to fill up my basket, and when I entered my address it said they don't deliver to my building.''
Ms. Lemmon, who is 46 and homebound because of heart disease, hoped to place large orders with FreshDirect that would have saved her home aide the trouble of repeated shopping. When she found out she couldn't use the service, she said, ''I was extremely upset.''
Perhaps even more frustrating is that FreshDirect makes deliveries just two blocks away. ''They have to go through me to get to them,'' Ms. Lemmon said.
She took her complaints to Lockhart Steele, a fellow Lower East Sider who runs a neighborhood blog. Having been flooded with similar complaints, Mr. Steele decided to plug in roughly 50 addresses on the FreshDirect Web site, and he created a map highlighting areas where the service does and does not go.
Those who live on parts of Suffolk Street, for example, qualify for delivery; those on Allen don't. ''It's not science,'' Mr. Steele said of his mapmaking, ''but I'd say it's fairly accurate.''
Jason Ackerman, a founder of FreshDirect, said Ms. Lemmon's complaint was common. ''Since the day we opened, 16 months ago, we've been receiving nasty calls from people in neighborhoods where we don't yet deliver,'' he said. The business is based in Long Island City, Queens.
Before FreshDirect's delivery staff of 200 opens a neighborhood, Mr. Ackerman said, there must be sufficient demand to offset the delivery costs. Demand is measured by counting the number of advance registrations from an area.
''It's unfortunate, but there's always a street where we draw the line,'' he said. ''We don't want to fall prey to what everyone else does, which is to grow too fast.'' Mr. Ackerman added that he once lugged his groceries too, as his own neighborhood, SoHo, did not qualify for delivery until 11 months after the start of FreshDirect.
Still, many Lower East Siders feel left out. ''FreshDirect is this cool thing that other people in the city are trying,'' Mr. Steele said. ''You want to be able to talk about it at a cocktail party. They're cutting us out of cocktail conversation.''
STEVE KURUTZ
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: LOWER EAST SIDE
