WHEN the Naval Undersea Warfare Center in New London moved to Newport, R.I., in the 1990's, it took 3,000 high-technology research jobs with it. Private defense contractors moved thousands more jobs out of state to be closer to their customer.
Now with another round of military base closures planned for 2005, the region is worried about the naval submarine base in Groton. That base, with almost 10,000 military and civilian employees, is a much larger and potentially more tempting target for the Navy in its effort to pare down and close bases.
''I think we have to acknowledge that there's a chance we will be on that list,'' said John C. Markowicz, executive director of the Southeastern Connecticut Enterprise Region, an economic development agency. Mr. Markowicz is also chairman of the Subase Realignment Coalition, a group of local business and political leaders fighting to keep the base open. ''I don't want to give any odds, but I would have to say the chances are at least 50-50.''
Norbert V. (Bud) Fay, who owns a car wash, laundry and diner on Route 12 within a couple of miles of the base, rallied local businesses in 1993 when the Navy recommended pulling the submarines out of Groton. When members of the base closure committee visited Groton he had people lining Route 12 waving signs in support of keeping it open. And he said he's ready to do it again.
''I think the sense of the business community is that the loss of the base would be catastrophic, and the impact would be far greater than just the customers who would move away,'' Mr. Fay said. ''The base is the underpinning of the economy of the whole southeastern area.''
Adding to local fears are efforts by communities in other states to convince the Navy they would be a better place to do business. Some Rhode Island officials have suggested that the training centers at the base could be combined with the Navy schools in Newport, R.I., and officials in Georgia have said the base in Kings Bay, Ga., could accommodate some of Groton's submarines.
''Those Rhode Island folks, in particular, really did their homework the last time around, and they have Patrick Kennedy as a congressman, whose father is one of the most powerful men in the Senate,'' said Thomas A. Sheridan, a member of the coalition and head of a committee drafting an economic development strategy for southeastern Connecticut. ''They'd love to grab as much as they can, so we need to be just as aggressive about pointing out the synergies that exist here.''
The greatest synergy in Southeastern Connecticut, supporters of the base say, is between the base and Electric Boat in Groton, which builds and maintains Navy submarines. That means when a submarine is due for an overhaul, which can last more than 18 months, the Navy does not have to move the entire crew to a new state. But lately officials have begun to worry about the flip side of that synergy: if the base leaves, would Electric Boat follow.
Jeffrey Blodgett of the Connecticut Economic Resource Center agreed. He has completed a preliminary estimate that the regional economy could suffer as much as a $2.5 billion a year loss if the base is closed next year, including 24,000 lost jobs and $1.2 billion a year in personal income.
Mr. Blodgett said his analysis includes not only the jobs that would be lost on the base, but the spin-off effects. He said he figured that Electric Boat would eventually close if the base leaves.
''For a company that has a single customer, and that customer moves away, that's something you have to consider,'' Mr. Blodgett said. John P. Casey, president of Electric Boat, does not say the shipyard would put up for sale signs if the base leaves, but he does not entirely discount Mr. Blodgett's theory, either.
''The proximity of the shipyard to that submarine base is crucial to our future success,'' Mr. Casey said.
Electric Boat is also one of the key customers for smaller manufacturers in the region, Mr. Blodgett said, and if the shipyard closed, ''That could be the death knell, essentially, for manufacturing locally.''
Mr. Sheridan said it's not just the economic impact of the base that is important to the region, however. Navy sailors are tutors in local schools, coaching local sports teams, leading Scout groups, and otherwise very active in the community, volunteering uncounted thousands of hours to service organizations. And many former service members retire to the region, some of them starting companies there, others going to work for existing firms.
''Those are very bright people at the base, and they add a lot to our community,'' Mr. Sheridan said. ''It would be a horrible loss for us if it was gone. I don't even want to contemplate it.''
After a small round of base cuts in the late 1980's, the present system of base closure was developed in 1991, and repeated in 1993 and 1995. The Pentagon this month issued a lengthy questionnaire to each base in the country on which will be listed the assets and capabilities of each installation, which will allow for direct comparisons between them. Next, the Pentagon will develop a list of suggested closures.
The president, in consultation with Congress, will establish a formal base realignment and closure commission later this year that will review the Pentagon list and develop its own recommendations, which must be finished by Sept. 8, 2005. Those recommendations are then sent to the president, who can ask for changes. By November, the president and Congress get the final list of recommendations.
Navy personnel are prohibited from discussing base closure issues now that the process has officially begun. But Capt. James E. Ratte Jr., the commanding officer of the base, said last year that Groton, with 17 submarines, is already the largest submarine base the Navy operates and it will receive the first two Virginia-class submarines that are under construction at Electric Boat.
The base has about $100 million of construction under way, including $20 million of housing projects, and a decade-long project to improve the piers at the base (to accommodate modern submarines) is in the final planning stages and will begin next year. Captain Ratte is also in discussions with the Office of Naval Reactors about projects that could begin in 2007, 2010, and 2014 to construct simulators of submarine maneuvering rooms.
''I'm sprinting, and no one is stopping me,'' Captain Ratte said at the meeting last year. ''The naval submarine base, at least in my opinion, is here to stay.''
Captain Ratte, in a statement last week, said that for now he and the sub base ''will continue our focus on our waterfront and sailors. For as we always have, we remain committed to our mission: supporting fleet readiness by providing quality service and facilities to our submarine community and their families."
But nobody locally is taking the base for granted.
''This year, the danger is probably greater than ever, because Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld has said this is going to be the biggest of them all,'' said William D. Moore, who was president of the local chamber of commerce and very active in the process to save the base from the first four federal base closures from 1989 to 1995. ''We've heard the Navy has to cut about 25 percent of its infrastructure, which is a huge number.''
Communities across the country that are host to military bases are taking the threat more seriously this time. When Mr. Markowicz and the vice chairman of the Subase Realignment Coalition, Frank O'Beirne of Groton, a retired Navy captain, went to Washington last month to meet with Assistant Navy Secretary Hansford T. Johnson, they had the time slot between the governor of Hawaii, who was arguing for the bases there, and a delegation from Crane, Ind., which is home to a Navy research center.
''We didn't walk away saying we saved the base, and we didn't walk away feeling the sub base was on the list,'' Mr. Markowicz said.
One thing they did learn is that process next year will be weighted toward keeping bases that are in use by more than one service, such as a landing strip that can be used by Army, Navy, Marine and Air Force aircraft, or that provides training for multiple services.
Mr. Markowicz said that puts the submarine base at a bit of a disadvantage, because only the Navy operates submarines, but submarines also work closely with the joint Special Forces, which will be stressed at base closure hearings.
Mr. Johnson also told them that the emphasis next year will be on realignment, rather the closure of bases. There are some 70 tenant commands at the base that could be moved, such as the Naval Undersea Medal Institute, which trains medics, and the Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory, which investigates health threats to submariners.
''I don't think the process will leave the base entirely unscathed,'' Mr. Markowicz said. ''And there's a lot of concern that piecemeal realignment of various commands could, in fact, have the same result as closure.''
