The Sundance Film Festival, which wraps up tonight, offers a yearly opportunity to survey the state of independent film in America -- and also to punditize on the death of independent film in America, which may amount to the same thing. The subtitle of ''Down and Dirty Pictures,'' a new book by the film historian Peter Biskind that was probably more avidly discussed on the streets of Park City this year than any of the movies in competition, is ''Miramax, Sundance and the Rise of Independent Film.'' The story Biskind tells is a paradoxical one, in which every chapter in the rise of the elusive ''independent spirit'' is also an episode in its decline -- its corruption by money, celebrity worship and all the other elements of Hollywood business as usual. Such moments stretch back a decade or more, to Miramax's absorption by Disney, to the first time a distribution deal was made at Sundance, to the coronation of Quentin Tarantino as King of the Indies.
So have the institutions that pride themselves on offering intelligent, artistically uncompromised alternatives to the Hollywood mainstream -- Miramax and Sundance pre-eminent among them -- sold out their mandate? Have the men in charge of those institutions -- Harvey Weinstein and Robert Redford -- really killed independent cinema?
The answer ultimately may have less to do with chronology or personality than with semantics. Back in the twilight of the studio era, it was producers who were most often described as independent, a designation that conferred no special aesthetic or moral distinction on the movies they developed and sold to the studios. Later, in the 1980's, the adjective was transferred -- all too briefly, as it turned out -- to directors like Jim Jarmusch and Spike Lee, who managed, through pluck and perseverance, to make personal and challenging films on the margins of an industry dominated by a hunger for crude blockbusters. At present, the term refers primarily to distributors and secondarily to the style and scale of the movies they release.
Of course, the distributors in question -- companies like Miramax, Fox Searchlight and Focus Features -- are owned by the major studios, which has forced scrupulous writers to distinguish between them and ''true independents'' like IFC, Lions Gate and Newmarket Films. To confuse matters further, a few recent movies displaying some of the traditional hallmarks of indie-ness -- Spike Jonze's ''Adaptation,'' Wes Anderson's ''Royal Tenenbaums,'' Christopher Guest's ''Mighty Wind'' -- have been distributed by majors, while Miramax itself, since the surprising Oscar-night triumph of the 1998 film ''Shakespeare in Love,'' has increasingly devoted its resources to producing glossy, high-budget Oscar bait.
But do the distinctions matter? Don't moviegoers care more about the quality of movies than about who distributes them? Biskind's book -- as a matter of presentation rather than of argument -- suggests that we may not. In ''Easy Riders, Raging Bulls,'' his earlier study of the ''New Hollywood'' of the 1970's -- an era today's filmmakers routinely invoke as an Arcadian time of unbridled creativity -- the main characters were directors like Martin Scorsese, Francis Ford Coppola and Steven Spielberg. This time, though, few filmmakers -- Tarantino and Steven Soderbergh, mainly -- are featured players. The stars are Redford, Weinstein and assorted mini- or anti-Harveys like Scott Greenstein, Amir Malin and Bingham Ray. The book is thick with numbers -- budgets, grosses, uncollected shares of back-end revenue -- and footnotes unpacking the finer points of movie-industry financial jargon.
This bias toward the bottom line reflects perhaps the strangest legacy of the indie-film boom, which is that a movement passionately committed to defending the integrity of cinema as an art form has helped to spawn a film culture obsessed, as never before, with the arcana of commerce. The classic indie legends of the late 80's and early 90's involved film-school graduates (or dropouts, or rejects) who maxed out their credit cards, borrowed equipment, conscripted their friends and launched their careers with scrappy, personal movies. This was more or less the story of ''She's Gotta Have It,'' ''Clerks,'' ''El Mariachi,'' ''Reservoir Dogs'' and ''The Brothers McMullen'' -- films that, for better and for worse, encouraged the auteurist dreams of countless young people. The most memorable detail of any indie film's ''making of'' story (which was often more memorable than the movie itself) was invariably a sum of money -- a small one, measured in thousands rather than millions, which seemed at once to demystify and democratize the filmmaking process.
In the long run, though, these slacker-era Horatio Alger stories also helped to focus the attention of fans, as well as would-be players, on the mysterious and cut-throat economics of the film business. Thirty or 40 years ago, a sophisticated cineaste would spout the jargon of formalism; nowadays, especially on Internet film sites, you are more likely to hear speculations about production budgets, release patterns and box-office estimates than analysis of tracking shots, jump cuts or subliminal homages to Hitchcock and Welles.
Worst of all, the public -- often led, I'm sorry to say, by movie critics -- finds itself seduced into judging the success and failure of films according to the criteria of industry bean-counters rather than according to artistic merit. What was the first-weekend gross? What was the per-screen average? How did it perform against expectations? Like the political discourse, the cultural conversation is increasingly dominated by horse-race reporting, which, entertaining though it can be, ultimately threatens the only force able to preserve the always precarious artistic quality of movies, music and all our other down-and-dirty and exalted pleasures: an independent audience.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-25-04 A.O. Scott is a film critic for The New York Times.
