ANTON CHEKHOV wrote hundreds of short stories that most people never heard of. Few have been dramatized.
So where does one get the chance to see a Chekhov story, performed as a story, complete with third-person narration, and in Russian as well? The answer: in New Haven, at the Yale Repertory Theater, where a Russian troupe, MTYZ Theater/Moscow New Generation Theater, is presenting its production of Chekhov's ''Rothschild's Fiddle,'' adapted by the director, scholar and professor, Kama Ginkas.
The story is about Yakov, a forlorn, abusive, anti-Semitic coffin-maker who complains ceaselessly that not enough people in his town are dying, and that when they do, his artfully designed, hand-carved product is not necessarily in demand. Some of the solvent or the titled, having gone for better treatment to a big city, die there. How then can a poor man be expected to make a living? Yakov supplements his meager income by playing as a fiddler at Jewish weddings, in duet with Rothschild, the despised Jew, on flute.
The performance is in Russian and so super titles, less distracting than in many opera houses, are essential. Don't be put off by them, though.
Mr. Ginkas has magically distilled the famously elusive Chekovian style without emphasizing either its heartbreak or humor. And though the source of the play is a short story, theatricality is everywhere in the adaptation.
Dark screens are emblazoned by shafts of jolting bright light. Bursts of indigenous music signify life's mood swings, joyful and sad. For the sets, sculpted blonde wood in stunning arrangement illuminates peasant life with modern visual sensibility, at times starkly spare, as when a plank turns into a makeshift coffin on the cheap.
But all this would be an abstract creative vision if the four actors were not so extraordinary.
A dance of exultant madness by the scrawny, oppressed, unstoppably upbeat Jew (Igor Yasulovich) symbolizes affirmation, redemption and sorrow sublimated.
One is haunted by the two faces of Marfa, the 70-year-old, never-caressed wife to Yakov, flashed back from berated hag to sublime soul mate. Blankly peering out at the void, suddenly enlivened by the memory of their child who died, blissfully awaiting the escape only death offers, Arina Nesterova is eloquent in movement and in silences, sometimes mouthing words soundlessly. An actress of astonishing transformational gifts, her straight back alone imparts an elegant, transcendent air.
Aleksei Dubrovsky gives a chilly performance as a doctor's uncaring assistant. Yakov (Valery Barinov), ''never in a good mood,'' rages and bellows at life passing uselessly, ''a complete and utter waste.''
Yet an otherworldly tale of regret and loss emerges as an accessible ode to renewal and possibility. Mr. Ginkas is in communion with Chekhov, who had a direct line to the human soul.
''Rothschild's Fiddle'' is at the Yale Repertory Theater's University Theater, 222 York Street, New Haven, through Saturday. Information: (203)432-1234 or www.yalerep.org.
REVIEW
