AFTER she was laid off as a radio frequency technician in Silicon Valley and spent two frustrating years searching for a job with decent pay and security, Kimloan Dam realized that it was time for her to change industries.
Mrs. Dam, 45, is looking for a career that will keep her employed into her 60's. So this month she began training to become a certified nursing assistant, and she plans to become a registered nurse eventually.
Matt Lambiase, 34, lost his investment-banking job in New York just days before the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. While he was thinking about what to do next, his mother and stepfather experienced serious health problems. After spending a lot of time in various hospitals visiting them, Mr. Lambiase developed an interest in medicine, particularly surgery.
But to become a surgeon would have required a decade of training. Mr. Lambiase didn't think he could wait that long, so he entered an accelerated one-year nursing program at Columbia University in May. After he becomes a registered nurse, he hopes to start working and simultaneously continue his education to become a nurse practitioner, and eventually a surgical first assistant.
Nicholas Burgos, 48, lost his job as a network technician for Verizon Communications -- working on telecommunications at the San Francisco International Airport -- after 9/11. The company moved him to a desk job for a while, but he was laid off for good last March.
Mr. Burgos, who had always fantasized about being a chef, finished a vocational training program in culinary arts in December. He is looking for restaurant work, and hopes one day to open his own restaurant.
Meanwhile, to supplement his education he volunteers at a cooking school at Draeger's Market, a high-end food emporium in San Mateo, Calif. In return for getting the food and equipment ready for two hours before the cooking classes begin, he is allowed to participate in the program free.
Mrs. Dam, Mr. Lambiase and Mr. Burgos are all on the right track, according to job-market experts, who say that health care, education, construction and service-industry jobs, including food service are among the fields most likely to flourish in the years and decades to come.
What's more, all three have approached their retraining with what is known as a career ladder in mind: they are rapidly acquiring entry-level skills that will make them immediately marketable, so they can quickly start working in their desired industries even while they continue their educations.
Rather than looking to the next big technological advance for potential jobs, middle-aged job seekers should focus on industries that need workers now, says Stephen Levy, an economist who is director of the Center for the Continuing Study of the California Economy in Palo Alto.
''People often confuse or intermingle the objectives of pushing the region's economy forward by getting into the new hot industries with the mission of putting people to work,'' Mr. Levy said. ''In real life you follow the money, you follow the jobs.''
Aging baby boomers are expected to retire en masse from fields like teaching and nursing, and experts say they will leave gaping holes in the work force. What is more, as boomers age, their demand for health-care-related goods and services is expected to surge -- raising demand for workers in industries as far-flung as physical therapy, nursing care, plastic surgery, pharmaceutical technicians and medical billing professionals.
In many parts of the country, the construction and building trades are also expected to continue to flourish. And other fields that will see increasing demand are data storage and data security, financial advising, financial auditing and mediation, according to Rick Cobb, executive vice president of the outplacement firm Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas in Chicago.
Mrs. Dam and Mr. Burgos, both casualties of the Silicon Valley technology bust, are preparing for new careers through the Opportunities Industrialization Center West, a nonprofit organization in Menlo Park, Calif., that offers job training, counseling and job-placement assistance at little or no cost. The 40-year-old center has been through a big change in the job market since the technology bubble burst, and it quickly retooled to expand its offerings in a variety of health-care and service-related fields, including medical billing and coding, certified nursing assistants and pharmacy technicians.
''A lot of the people that we placed into the technology field came back to us when they lost their jobs,'' said Sharon Williams, the organization's executive director. ''They were network technicians, database managers and systems administrators. ''Their severances started running out, and they just had to start over.''
Although Mrs. Dam was offered other technology jobs, the new opportunities would have paid much less than the $98,000 a year she earned in her old position. And she wondered how long those new jobs would last. ''Maybe they will need me for another five years, and then I will be 50 years old, and it will be hard for me to find another job,'' she said.
Losing her job -- and her health insurance -- was a blow to Mrs. Dam. Although nursing pays less than her technology work did, she hopes to find a job with the county or state government so she can earn lifetime health benefits. ''I thought I'd better try something now while I'm not too old,'' she said.
AFTER the 11-week nursing assistant program, she will have to pass a state exam and then she can begin to work while she continues her training to become a registered nurse.
Mr. Cobb, the outplacement expert, says it is wise for people who are switching careers to find a quick way to enter their fields and start gaining experience.
''People tend to want to get the education in a field before they look at the opportunity,'' Mr. Cobb said. By getting to work in a new area right away, even at an entry-level job, they have the opportunity to impress future employers by demonstrating their ''sheer eagerness to participate'' in their new fields, he said.
Mr. Burgos knew it was important for him to start over quickly, before he became depressed about his situation. ''I was always attracted to cooking,'' he said. ''This is an opportunity to fulfill my procrastinated dream.''
He checked on various culinary schools, and found that a basic 15-month chef's training program would have cost him $50,000. The culinary arts program he attended instead might not land him a spot on the Food Network, but it gave him a springboard from which he could quickly start working and gathering experience. He also got the opportunity to work at the program's training restaurant in Redwood City, Calif., where the ahi tuna steak he created for the menu consistently sells out.
There is an unwanted side effect to Mr. Burgos's newfound culinary skills, though. ''At school they make me eat everything I cook,'' he said. ''I gained 25 pounds in four months.''
Correction:  January 26, 2004, Monday  Because of an editing error, the front page of the special expanded Job Market section yesterday carried incorrect continuation page numbers for four articles. ''A Rosier Picture for Hiring'' continued on Page 6; ''Changing Careers'' on Page 4; ''Honing Your Skills'' on Page 4; and ''Take to the Streets?'' on Page 3. The Times regrets the inconvenience to readers.
