FOR several years now, the increasingly popular notion of taking more than four years to earn a college degree has been either the punch line of a joke or the introduction of a tale about hitchhiking through Europe.
These days, college administrators are not amused.
In a ground-breaking study of graduation rates, the National Center for Education Statistics says preliminary data show that nationwide, of one million students who started school full-time in the fall of 1996, only 33.1 percent graduated in four years. In addition, 16.5 percent graduated in five years, and 5.1 percent finished in six years, said Andrew Mary, the director of the survey. Other students take even longer or never earn a degree.
In New Jersey, the picture is a only bit different. Of 19,443 students who started their college studies in 1996, 37.8 percent graduated in four years, 19.3 percent graduated in five years, and 5.8 percent earned their degrees after six years, according to the preliminary data.
A final report on the survey is expected in the spring, but many educators are not waiting for the ink to dry. They already see the trend as a matter of concern.
''At least half of all students who have entered a four-year institution have failed to realize the dreams and aspirations that led them there in the first place,'' Watson Scott Swail, president of the Educational Policy Institute, wrote last week in The Chronicle of Higher Education. He also said college presidents who had become preoccupied with fund-raising and development should refocus their attention on students and keeping them enrolled.
The New Jersey Commission on Higher Education would like more students to graduate in four years to make room for new students waiting for admission to the state's overcrowded schools.
The state wants to move students along because of capacity, said Jeanne Oswald, the deputy executive director of the state commission. About 361,000 part-time and full-time students are enrolled in the state's colleges and universities, and the commission wants to add 45,000 to 50,000 spaces by 2010, she said, by hiring more instructors and expanding on campuses. A shortage of spaces sends students out of state, with about 20,000 high school graduates leave New Jersey each year for college studies in other states.
''Four years isn't the standard anymore,'' said Sandra Lanman, a spokeswoman for Rutgers in New Brunswick. ''The lives of our students are more complicated'' these days, she said. She also quoted a colleague as having said that the idea of finishing in four years ''really reflects a time when all the college students were white males at small liberal arts colleges.''
At Rutgers, of the students who started in 1996, 53.5 graduated in four years. At Rowan University in Glassboro, 37 percent of the students who started in 1996 and 30.7 percent of those who started in 1997 earned degrees in four years. The rate jumped to 38.3 percent for students who started in 1999. At Montclair State, about 23 percent of the students who started in 1999 graduated last spring. And at the College of New Jersey, 61 percent of the students who started in 1999 received degrees after four years.
Today, more students work while in school, part-time or full-time, and many students change majors along the way, extending their course requirements. Moreover, more than a half million students switch colleges each year and more than half of college students get degrees at schools different from where they started, according to Dr. Leonard Krivy, a college consultant and former dean of Gloucester County Community College.
Dr. Krivy says that students he works with are more comfortable about taking a lighter credit load or a semester off to have experiences like an internship or a year abroad that will enhance their futures. ''A lot of what happens in the college experience happens outside of the classroom,'' he said.
Dr. Caroline Miller, dean of academic service at the College of New Jersey, says students sometimes find that they need just an extra part-time semester to graduate because they either changed their major or did not realize that they needed to take certain courses in a sequence.
''If you take one misstep you can mess up your sequence,'' Dr. Miller said. That is particularly true in majors like nursing, engineering or education.
It took Peter Drosos seven years to earn a degree from Rutgers, after transferring twice and changing his major. Mr. Drosos, 26, graduated from Cliffside Park High School in 1995 and spent a year working full-time before enrolling in Bergen County Community College. After a year there, he went to Hawaii Pacific University for two years, studying computer engineering.
''The cost was too high, so I decided to come home to New Jersey and cut my losses,'' he said. But many of his credits would not transfer to Rutgers. He switched his major to computer science and graduated in December. Now he works for Rutgers part-time in technical support and just interviewed for full-time work there.
''I've graduated now,'' he said. ''Thank God.''
Administrators say they are encouraging students to work with advisers and be mindful of what courses they need to take when certain required courses are offered.
''They need to know that they can finish in four years if they keep their nose to the grind stone,'' said Dr. Richard A. Lynde, provost and vice president for academic affairs at Montclair State.
At Rowan University, however, Robert D'Augustine, executive director of budget and planning, acknowledges that finishing in four years can be difficult for students who work and take 12 credits rather than 15 or 18, or those who change majors.
In addition, for many students, trying to go through school in four years when they are not certain what they want to do doesn't make sense.
Michelle Nees, who graduated from East Brunswick High School in 1999, plans to finish at Rutgers in May with a degree in psychology and a minor in history. She started as a history major but changed her mind several times, she said.
''I didn't take advantage of the advising facility,'' said Ms. Nees, a 22-year-old senior. ''In a bigger school you really have to be responsible for that yourself.''
Drew Biemer, 23, spent an extra year of high school at the Peddie School in Hightstown before heading to the University of Richmond in the fall of 2000. After two years, he decided he wasn't sure he needed a college degree for a good job and didn't know what he wanted to study if he stayed in school. He took a year off and worked odd jobs in New Jersey and New York City.
''Part of me thought I could make it without a degree,'' said Mr. Biemer, who is now back at Richmond studying history. ''I actually learned more in New York than I did any other year of my life.''
He plans to stay in school full time now and graduate in 2005. ''I want to get into the real world,'' he said, ''as soon as possible.''
Matt Campbell, a 23-year-old junior at Rutgers who is now a training for Olympic trials in July in 50-meter freestyle swimming, said he realized early in his college career that he would need extra time to graduate.
''When I hit my sophomore year I knew there was no way I would get out in four years,'' said Mr. Campbell, who trains from 6 to 7:30 a.m. each day and for several hours every afternoon. Part of the delay was Mr. Campbell's training schedule and part was that he was undecided about a major. He started in mass communications, but said he didn't enjoy the courses and knew he wanted to change.
''I didn't know exactly what I was going to do,'' he said. ''I had a lot of ups and downs my freshman year.''
Now, he plans to graduate in May 2005 with a degree in labor studies. He said he was concerned about taking an extra year, ''but I just got over that.''
ON CAMPUS
