STEVE DOMBROWSKI and his wife, Gail, of Coram watched with broad smiles as their grandson, who is almost 2, climbed into a toy Noah's ark. In another corner of the room, 2-year-old Dana Doong was putting together pieces of a Lego set as her mother, Shengi Doong, 39, of Centereach, watched quietly nearby.
No, this activity was not taking place at a nursery school or local Y, but at the striking new Middle Country Public Library in Centereach. When its renovations were completed in November, the 77,000-square-foot building became Long Island's largest public library. It also houses what its director, Sandra Feinberg, boasts is the largest children's room in a library in the United States.
''It's 18,000 square feet,'' she said. ''There are many libraries around the country that aren't that big.''
The children's room encompasses about three-quarters of the library's first floor. Robert T. Almodovar was the project architect for Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer, the Manhattan architectural firm. The $8.8 million project added about 26,000 square feet to the existing building, a new lobby with crescent-shaped wall of translucent glass and a theatrical new facade.
Daria Pizzetta of Hardy Holzman designed the interior. ''It's not the library of your childhood anymore,'' she said. ''It's someplace much more interesting.''
Ms. Pizzetta said she worked to ''creatively camouflage the existing building.''
''We put a whole new facade on the building, and for the interior we wanted to make what we call a 'wow space,' something that is memorable when you walk in,'' she said. ''That is how the entrance was developed -- very warm and welcoming. It makes you want to discover what the rest of the building is about.''
Ms. Pizzetta said she put children's material on the left and adult sections on the right so that patrons would know immediately which way to turn. Although the same carpet was used in both areas, the fabrics are different in each.
''The children's side has bigger patterns and richer colors,'' Ms. Pizzetta said. ''The adult side is more sedate and traditional.''
Mr. Almodovar, who is now a designer with NK Architects in Morristown, N.J., said in his concept for the building, he sought to capture the ''uniqueness and forward thinking of the library's programs.''
''The design was truly trying to reflect what was taking place inside and also to reflect an excitement about the programs that are offered the community,'' he said.
The area the library calls the museum corner, clad in red horizontal siding, is shaped like a pentagon. ''We wanted to maximize the wall surface,'' Mr. Almodovar said, ''and when you look at its location you can see that it almost acted as a knuckle for the other shapes to evolve from it.''
Mr. Almodovar was also the architect for the $5.5 renovation and expansion of the Middle Country Public Library's branch in Selden. It opened in September 2002.
Gerald Nichols, the director of the Suffolk Cooperative Library System, the coordinating agency for the county's 56 public libraries, said Middle Country has ''perfected the concept of a library as a community center.''
A 2,500-square-foot public room, just off the lobby, can accommodate meetings as large as 250 people.
Part of the added second floor houses a 4,000-square-foot business resource center with its own librarian, Elizabeth Malafi, and three career counselors.
The business people who use the center ''will ask about their competitors in the area or about prior companies that were here,'' Ms. Malafi said.
''They will also ask about grants they could apply for,'' she added, ''or about how to open a small business. We have a lot of small businesses in the community.''
Adjacent to the center is the Mid-Suffolk regional office of Literacy Volunteers of America, which moved into the library earlier this month.
The lower level of the library's north wing has a teen center, which is still being revamped, and an extensive video collection. ''We have 65,000 videos, plus CD's, DVD's and books on tape,'' said Ms. Feinberg, the library's director.
