With the news that the region's largest employer would again cut thousands of jobs, the mood here was one of disappointment, but not surprise.
Eastman Kodak said on Thursday that it planned to eliminate up to 15,000 jobs worldwide, including 4,500 jobs in Rochester.
''It's not news to jump up and down about,'' said Vincent J. Flow, a Kodak employee of 29 years who works as a research scientist. ''But those who survive will probably be better off, and the company will be better off.''
Many departments held meetings Friday to answer questions employees had about the layoffs, workers said. ''I think the overall reaction is people are disheartened,'' said an administrative assistant who spoke on the condition that she not be named, for fear that it might put her ''higher on the list.''
''I think they think they're doing what's right for the company,'' she added. ''But it's sad. You don't know what to expect.''
Rochester and Kodak were once intertwined, like many upstate cities and their corporate benefactors: Fulton and Nestlé, Schenectady and General Electric, Syracuse and the Carrier Corporation.
Kodak provided not just secure, high-paying jobs, but also its own culture. The city blossomed under its care. ''My dad was a Kodak shift worker for 30 years,'' one man wrote on the online message board of the local newspaper, The Democrat and Chronicle.
''My friends and I played K.P.A.A. softball and basketball,'' he wrote, referring to the Kodak Park Athletic Association. ''Watched movies in the Kodak auditorium. It was a way of life. And those days are gone.''
But since the company's and the city's heyday a generation or two ago, they have had to cope with continual layoffs. In recent years, announcements of layoffs, large and small, seem to have come with the regularity of quarterly earnings reports.
Timothy Kelly, a former research chemist, retired in 2002. He put in more than 32 years and did not feel pressured to leave. But in the end, he said he felt as if he were watching ''a slow death.''
''It's been going on a long time,'' Mr. Kelly said of the layoffs. ''I got to the point where I wanted to leave, so I just waited for a retirement incentive. But some didn't have a choice.
''They've skimmed all the people off the top and they're getting down to the bone now,'' he added. ''It's depressing.''
After the newest round of layoffs, which are expected to take place over three years, the film giant might not even be Rochester's largest employer. In 2003, Eastman Kodak had 22,000 employees. Comparatively, the University of Rochester, which includes a large research and health care system under its umbrella, employed 15,600, said Robert Kraus, a university spokesman. At the end of 2003, that number grew to more than 16,040.
After layoffs, Kodak's figures could be around 17,500. ''We're obviously very close to being the largest employer,'' Mr. Kraus said. ''I don't think it matters. When you're one of the top employers in a community, it carries a certain responsibility. The health of the institution counts a lot for the health of the community.''
While the university has grown some, Mr. Kraus said, its real strength has been its solidity. ''We've been steady while other companies have been shrinking.''
Rochester has been trying to stay steady, too, but with less success. Migration to the suburbs and economic decline have boosted crime, as in Schenectady and Fulton, which also can no longer count on the patronage of large companies.
Rochester's homicide rate, in particular, has been high for more than a decade. ''I don't think this will have a direct impact on violence,'' said John M. Klofas, a criminal justice professor at the Rochester Institute of Technology who has studied local crime patterns for 15 years. ''There is some trickle-down effect, but these are high-end jobs.''
Others still find reason to hope. Starting this May, a high-speed ferry will make daily trips across Lake Ontario, linking Rochester and Toronto.
City officials say they hope that the ferries will bring tourists.
''I really believe we're going to pull out of this,'' said Mary E. McCrank, the public relations director at the Susan B. Anthony House, a museum dedicated to the famous suffragist, who lived much of her life here. ''Rochesterians don't give up easily. Susan B. Anthony spent her entire life working for the right to vote for women. We'll pull through and be stronger for this.''
As for Mr. Flow, he said he was not going to worry about events he cannot change. ''The roles are going to be changing,'' he said, ''but the company and the city will always be bonded.''
