IT was Saturday night at the movies. On stage at the Bellmore Theater, Kenny Baum, 50, a singer from Long Beach, was crooning as filmgoers trickled into the 350-seat auditorium, popcorn and sodas in hand.
Mr. Baum had 15 minutes to squeeze in a few songs, strumming his guitar as advertisements flashed on the screen behind him before previews began.
''It's really like a concert,'' said Mr. Baum, who seemed delighted that his name was on the marquee outside, just above the single movie title. The booking was a welcome one for Mr. Baum, who makes his living playing at nursing homes, rehabilitation centers and private parties. Besides, it doubled as a movie date with his girlfriend, Donna Piperno, 51, a dental office manager from Long Beach.
For Henry and Anne Stampfel, owners of the neighborhood movie house, Mr. Baum's performance was part of last-ditch attempt to save the oldest theater and the last single-screen movie house in Nassau County. Since last spring, the couple have been bringing in musicians before the Saturday evening features.
''We started to go in the direction of live performances because they built so many screens around us in Bellmore,'' said Mr. Stampfel, 49.
When the Stampfels began operating the Bellmore in 1986, it was the only movie house on that sliver of the South Shore. Since the 1970's, theaters from Wantagh to Merrick were shuttered one by one. Situated across from the railroad station, the Bellmore bucked the trend.
''They all just faded out, and by 1986 they were all gone,'' Mr. Stampfel said, adding that the Bellmore survived because it was ''a low-cost operation.''
But then the multiplexes started to spring up: five screens opened at the Bellmore Playhouse around the corner about five years ago; two more screens were added later. Three years ago, a six-screen cinema opened three miles away in Seaford; last year a four-screen theater opened just across the railroad tracks in Merrick.
''That knocked us right out of the block,'' Mr. Stampfel said. ''For a while we were the only game in town. It went from one extreme to the other.''
Initially Mr. Stampfel had his own multiplex plans drawn up. When old-timers recalled that the Bellmore was the first place they had ever seen a movie, nostalgia stopped him.
''You just don't want to break something up,'' Mr. Stampfel said. ''Every year we have people come in who are coming back for their class reunion, and they want to see the old theater.''
Built around 1917, the Bellmore was a freestanding theater in its early days, surrounded by farm fields with houses in the distance. Playbills indicate that live shows before the movies were part of the ticket price, though the stage and the live entertainment disappeared over time.
While renovating the theater two years ago, Mr. Stampfel discovered the stage. He had ripped out the flat, creaky wood floors and the clanking radiators and was pitching the floor to redo it in concrete when he knocked into a cinderblock wall. He rebuilt a 32-inch high, 18-foot stage, installed a sound system, lighting and new seats, and overhauled the lobby and concession area.
Then the Stampfels decided to turn back the entertainment clock.
''It's to preserve history,'' Mrs. Stampfel said of the live music. ''The origin of film was single-screen. You always put on quite a show. Years ago with film you got acts.''
With musicians asking to be added to the Saturday night lineup, the Stampfels are hoping to expand the live shows to Sundays and increase the variety. Next Sunday, Jerry Carbone, a Sinatra imitator from Bellmore, will perform in the afternoon. Additionally, since October, Plaza Theatrical Productions, an Oceanside touring drama company, has also been renting the Bellmore's stage for arts-in-education performances for schoolchildren during the day.
''It is difficult to find theaters that are open for rentals,'' said Kevin F. Harrington, the executive producer of the touring company, who added that he was pleased to add 20 shows this year on the South Shore to the usual Port Washington and Islip offerings. ''The intimate theater works for our productions.''
While the Bellmore Theater gets first-run films - ''Cold Mountain'' opened Christmas Day - it's tough to find a movie that can fill the house.
''It's more a question of the choices,'' Mrs. Stampfel said. ''It used to be since we had no competition, we could look and see what's being released and pick a cherry.''
''The Pianist,'' ''Chicago,'' ''Gladiator,'' ''Road to Perdition'' and ''Seabiscuit'' were recent selections. ''We try to pick quality stuff,'' Mrs. Stampfel continued. ''At the others, they naturally go for the blockbusters.''
As movie buffs, the Stampfels are skilled at finding alternative choices. In 1996, they turned the four-screen Malverne Theater into Nassau's answer to the Huntington Arts Cinema. At the Malverne, which they still own, a smaller fifth auditorium is used by independent filmmakers, and meetings of the Long Island Film and Television Foundation are held there every other month.
The Stampfels met at the two-screen Oceanside Theater, when Mrs. Stampfel, now 43, was 18 and was working for the film booker upstairs. She took a second job in the evenings at the candy counter to earn extra money; Mr. Stampfel was the projectionist. Married 23 years, they purchased the Oceanside in 1994, which plays commercial and some art films.
They said that keeping the Bellmore as a single screen house was about more than box-office receipts and popcorn sales.
''I would love it if this theater became a local playhouse theater,'' Mr. Stampfel said. ''This is just one of those theaters you say, 'I want this to make 100 years.'''
He added: ''I can make it a triplex, but that wouldn't be my preference. This place can operate with live shows and special events. I am doing something different. If it works, so be it. I'll be happy.''
Tackling a Job Fair
Scott Everett, 19, of Seaford, a junior in computer information systems at Arizona State University, ticked off the jobs he had worked.
''I don't have a problem being the bottom man in any totem pole,'' Mr. Everett told Jeffrey Alexander, the interviewer in front of him, explaining his reasoning behind taking jobs as a receptionist and file clerk at a law office and working as an usher at his college stadium, where he sometimes has to escort rowdy fans off the premises. ''I want to get my foot in and start networking, the earlier the better.''
Mr. Alexander, of Plainview, nodded approvingly. Not that he had a job to offer Mr. Everett. Mr. Alexander is a counselor with Score, the Service Corps of Retired Executives. He was volunteering his time, not opportunities, at a mock interview session at the Long Island Works Coalition Internship/Industry Connection Fair held recently at the Huntington Hilton.
The dead of winter wasn't too soon for Mr. Everett to be handing out his résumé, collecting business cards from potential employers and angling for a summer position.
Fifteen hundred students attended the internship fair, arriving in waves of 20 to 30 for a quick briefing on scouring the job market. More than 65 businesses participated.
Cheryl Davidson, the executive director of Long Island Works, said that the fair, the seventh held on the Island in the past three years but the only one scheduled this year, was designed to introduce students to a variety of local businesses and prepare them for future careers on the Island.
''It's really a toe in the water,'' Ms. Davidson said. ''It's a safe environment for them to learn how to dress professionally, how to be interviewed, how to do résumés, and they also get to see their competition.''
Besides chatting with human-resources representatives, students attended 15-minute seminars on networking and getting the most from an internship.
Mr. Everett, who was at home on winter break, touted his computational skills. Wandering through the ballroom, he dropped off résumés at seven companies including OSI Pharmaceuticals, Invision.com and Computer Associates. He left hopeful but empty-handed.
''I'd like to be secure with what I am doing by the time I come back,'' said Mr. Everett, who plans to return to the Island at the end of May.
Katherine M. Rupp, marketing manager for the fair, said, ''A lot of students go away to school and don't have a chance to meet and network with Long Island companies.'' Internships for high school juniors, college and graduate students are also posted on the coalition's Web site, www.liworks.org/interns.
LONG ISLAND JOURNAL E-mail: lijournal@nytimes.com
