IN pet stores right now, all that glitters is not sold.
The nation's first genetically engineered pet has gone on sale: a tiny zebrafish with a gene from a sea coral that makes it red in normal light and causes it to glow under ultraviolet light. Some pet stores report that sales are going just fine, but others say they are mediocre at best.
The GloFish, as they are called, have opened a new chapter in a long-running rift between aquarium owners who favor only natural fish and those who find any technique acceptable in their quest for the colorful and the bizarre, including crossing unrelated species, breeding for traits like bulging eyes or even injecting artificial colors into fish.
''You have your hard-core hobbyists who say it's fish like this that will degenerate the hobby, and you have novices who are into color, and they want what's the latest out there,'' said Brian M. Scott, editor of aquatics for T.F.H. Publications in Neptune City, N.J., which publishes Tropical Fish Hobbyist magazine. Compared with some other fish, he said, ''GloFish are one of the very least man-made.''
Some store owners and sales representatives say slower-than-expected sales have nothing to do with larger philosophical concerns about genetic engineering. In fact, they say, the fish may need a little more genetic tweaking to really impress people. They suggest that the fish are not all that spectacular, considering the price. Stores generally sell GloFish for $5 to $10; an ordinary silver and black zebrafish may sell for 33 cents to about $3.
That is a ''pretty stiff difference for a fish which, in regular light, just has a pink cast to it,'' said Jim Walters, the owner of Old Town Aquarium in Chicago. He said the fish were selling reasonably well but would not be a huge hit.
The GloFish is another reminder that the technical problem of genetic engineering is only one hurdle to success in the marketplace. The first genetically modified crop - the Flavr Savr tomato - flopped not because of opposition to genetic engineering, but because of cost pressures in the tomato business. There was also a debate about whether the tomatoes, which had a gene to retard rotting, really tasted better.
Alan Blake, the chief executive of Yorktown Technologies, the company that is selling the GloFish, said that sales were meeting or exceeding expectations, except in stores where the fish were priced above the suggested retail level of $5.
''Based on all the feedback we've been getting, when the fish are priced at $5, sales are brisk,'' he said. Also, he and some others in the fish industry said that sales could climb this month, when many hobbyists cash in holiday gift certificates.
One problem, some retailers say, is that in normal light the fish do not look as colorful or shiny in the tank as they do in photographs.
''Right next to our tank we have a picture of what they are supposed to look like,'' said Alex Murphy, a salesman at New York Aquaria in Mamaroneck, N.Y. ''Looking at the picture and looking at the tank, they are different.''
Some consumers are disappointed when a fish called a GloFish does not glow in normal light or after the lights are turned off. ''It's not like a glow-in-the-dark sticker or poster or anything like that,'' said Chris Hardwicke, a salesman at the Wet Spot Tropical Fish in Portland, Ore.
The fish glow when exposed to black light, which emits ultraviolet rays. But most hobbyists do not use black lights because the light doesn't penetrate water well. Although the GloFish would show up in the dark, other fish would not, and ''you couldn't see your plants or decorations or anything like that,'' said Elizabeth Hollingshead, manager of F.I.S.H. Tropical, a store in Las Vegas.
After plans to sell the fish were announced in November, the initial questions were regulatory and environmental. If the fish somehow escaped or were dumped into rivers or lakes, would they have some harmful ecological effects, perhaps beating out native species in the competition for mates or food? And who would make that call?
Yorktown Technologies, based in Austin, Tex., says that zebrafish, as tropical creatures, have never been able to survive in the cooler waters of the United States. It said that adding a fluorescence gene would not change that, and might even make the fish easier for predators to spot.
The argument appears to have held sway. The Food and Drug Administration, despite protests from some environmental groups, said it would not regulate the fish because they were not meant to be eaten and because there was no evidence that they posed any more environmental threat than conventional zebrafish. The Center for Food Safety in Washington and another advocacy group associated with it, the International Center for Technology Assessment, sued the F.D.A. this month to require it to regulate the fish and to stop their sale until they have been evaluated more carefully.
California, which has a law regulating genetically engineered fish, denied Yorktown a permit, so the fish are not being sold in that state. But even in that case, the state Fish and Game Commission based its decision more on an ethical aversion to genetically modified pets than on environmental concerns.
''To me, this seems like an abuse of the power we have over life, and I'm not prepared to go there today,'' Sam Schuchat, a commissioner, was quoted by The Associated Press as saying when the vote was taken in December in Sacramento.
Aquarium hobbyists are divided over the same issues.
''I'm not that big on mutated and man-made fish,'' said Craig Beauchamp, director of freshwater fish at the Fish Store and More in Atlanta, who said that he would probably not carry GloFish. ''I can get fish from nature that are every bit as colorful or more bizarre.''
But some hobbyists said messing with nature should not bother people who keep fish behind glass walls rather than in their natural habitats. ''If you complain about this, then you're a hypocrite, plain and simple,'' one fish fan wrote on FishProfiles.com.
Some hobbyists say that GloFish, developed by researchers in Singapore who were hoping to make fish that would glow when they encountered pollution, are far less objectionable than fish that are injected with colors or dyed, because those processes can hurt or kill the fish.
''There's lots of other fish to make issues out of in the pet business,'' said Larry Tagrin, who breeds fish for a hobby but has not bought any GloFish because he considers them a gimmick.
To make GloFish, the gene for fluorescence was injected into zebrafish embryos. Once an initial group of fish was created this way, the rest could be produced through conventional breeding. The company said it expected to start selling green and yellow versions by the end of the year.
SOME backers say that because only one gene is added to GloFish, the process is less of an environmental risk than crossing two species and mixing all their genes.
''What we've been using in the past is a sledgehammer,'' said Michael E. Ronayne, a computer security officer who lives in Nutley, N.J. Mr. Ronayne said he was so intrigued by the GloFish that he bought eight of them and resumed a hobby he had dropped years before. He said the reddish color deepens as the fish age.
Mr. Ronayne said he was breeding the GloFish, trying to generate different sizes and color patterns just for fun. While some genetically engineered fish are sterilized so that they cannot reproduce if they escape, that precaution was not taken with GloFish because, according to Yorktown, the fish cannot survive in the wild.
Mr. Blake of Yorktown said that while hobbyists could breed fish for their own collections, anyone who tried to sell the GloFish they bred would be infringing the company's patents. He would not say what action would be taken if unauthorized fish were sold by individuals, but he said the company would try to enforce its patents if a business was doing the selling.
Mr. Tagrin, the fish breeder, said Yorktown would have trouble controlling GloFish distribution because many breeders would be children.
''You're going to have kids with dozens of dozens, maybe hundreds, of these that they've got no place to get rid of,'' said Mr. Tagrin, who lives in Montgomery Village, Md. ''They are going to be in aquarium auctions, they will be in club auctions, they will be trading them to their local pet store for a box of food.''
By autumn, he predicted, the fish will be selling for a dollar each because of oversupply, and Yorktown will be able to make money only by introducing new colors. ''I don't see this as being more than a flash in the pan,'' he said.
