THE face of shopping in this city is changing quickly.
Now that the $320 million City Center, built by the developer Louis R. Cappelli, is open for business, downtown White Plains is home to the county's first Target store, a 15-screen National Amusements movie theater and Circuit City, on a site that used to be home to Macy's before the old Macy's was razed and City Center built in its place.
And more changes for shopping are in the works in White Plains, a city that as recently as 1998 was in decline, with a falling tax base and a 30 percent vacancy rate in the central business district. Now, with a number of residential projects either in train or on the drawing boards, the retail environment is becoming more attractive for big stores.
Across from Mr. Cappelli's new retail, entertainment and residential complex, a three-story building that was occupied for 35 years by Sears is about to get a new tenant, the building's lease holders reported last week.
Sears moved several blocks away last summer to the Galleria mall, taking over space that was occupied by J.C. Penney until 2001.
Ivy Realty, one of the lease holders of the former Sears building, is talking with a number of major retailers, the company's chief executive, Anthony DiTommaso, said last week. Mr. DiTommaso would not identify the retailers, but he did not dispute confirmation from City Hall that one of those negotiating for space was Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the world's largest retailer. Another pair of reported potential tenants are the department store Kohl's and the housewares retailer Linens 'n Things.
''Whoever it is will be a tenant that will add positively to the mix already here,'' Mr. DiTommaso said. Ivy Realty, based in Montvale, N.J., and Barrow Street Capital, a pension fund adviser in New York City, last year took over Sears' lease of the three-story building and an adjoining six-floor parking garage, which are both owned by MetLife.
In addition to revamping the building for a new tenant, they are giving the parking garage its first face-lift since it was built in the 1960's. That includes new paint, new lighting and a more welcoming appearance, Mr. DiTommaso said.
Across the street from the Sears building, Ginsburg Development Companies, which is based in Hawthorne, announced late last month that it had teamed up with Ridgemour Meyer Properties of White Plains, to develop a residential tower on a 30,000-square-foot parcel of land in the downtown, next to the City Center redevelopment project. The site, along a stretch of small mom-and-pop stores, includes a vacant A&amp;P. Until five years ago, the block -- along Main Street, diagonally across from Sears and near North Broadway -- was a bustling area of delicatessens, nail salons, bars and other shops. The shops are still there, but they are now in the shadow of City Center, and foot traffic to that stretch has diminished since construction began.
Ginsburg Development and Ridgemour Meyer have hired the architect Michael Graves to design the project, a residential tower that will include some retail space. Mr. Graves is known for his multiuse urban developments, corporate headquarters, hotels, libraries, theaters, museums, high-rise condominiums and private residences. He is also known for designing kitchen and home products for companies as diverse as Target and Steuben Glass.
A plan for that project is to be presented to City Hall this winter. On the same city block as the site Sears formerly occupied, the owners of a 14-story office building, once occupied by Prodigy Services and largely empty for close to a decade, are signing a lease with a national restaurant chain for the first two stories, according to Glenn P. Walsh, a senior director for Cushman &amp; Wakefield of Connecticut. Mr. Walsh declined to identify the restaurateur.
The building, known as 445 Hamilton Avenue, is owned and partly occupied by MetLife. Mr. Walsh said he expected the establishment to attract workers from the many office buildings in the neighborhood, as well as new residents moving into the city. The first two floors of 445 Hamilton Avenue will be occupied by the restaurant. Other business potential business tenants, some of whom are already established in the county, are considering space in the building, Mr. Walsh said.
Many of them will be living in two 35-story towers -- one that is to have 311 apartments and another with 215 luxury condominiums -- that are being built by Cappelli Enterprises. Mr. Cappelli says he wants to open those units late this year or early next year. Cappelli Enterprises is building another 29 loft-style condos at the same site. Mr. Cappelli is also building a 60,000-square-foot health club and spa above a parking garage that serves City Center.
Another recent entrant into the White Plains shopping scene is Fortunoff, The Source at White Plains, the Long-Island based jewelry and home furnishings retailer. Last year, Fortunoff opened a 265,000-square-foot, four-story retail complex directly across from The Westchester, a million-square-foot mall built in the early 1990's and anchored by Neiman Marcus and Nordstrom. Fortunoff took over a site formerly occupied by Saks Fifth Avenue, which left the city after 52 years.
Also in the central business district, the new owners of the Galleria mall, first built in the 1960's and refurbished since, are planning to renovate it once again so it can compete in the changing retail scene.
The Mills Corporation of Arlington, Va., acquired the Galleria at White Plains last year. The company, a real estate investment trust that owns, develops, leases, manages and markets properties, plans to add a fifth floor, a single-screen movie theater, restaurants and a ''PBS Kids'' play area, among other things, to the 22-year-old, 885,000-square-foot Galleria. David Douglass, a spokesman for Mills, said last week that the company has already added entrances from the street outside the mall to some of the existing restaurants.
Colleen T. Quinn, a vice president for Northwest Atlantic Real Estate Services, is representing a restaurant chain considering locating in the Galleria. She observed that in the constantly evolving retail dynamics of White Plains, it is critical to find stores that ''instead of competing with what's already here, compliment the existing mix.''
She questioned whether a Wal-Mart store across the street from a Target and next to a mall with Sears and Macy's would constitute the right mix for White Plains. ''You have to build a synergy in the city and consider the needs of shoppers,'' she said.
But Mr. DiTommaso said that competing stores next to each other often thrive. ''You often find McDonald's and Burger King across the street from each other,'' he said, ''and they both do well, even though they both sell the same products.
''White Plains is a big city serving a broad demographic base,'' he added. ''There's room for a lot of players here.''
IN BUSINESS  Correction:  February 1, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about new stores in White Plains misstated the age and the construction date of the Galleria shopping mall in the city's downtown. It opened in August 1980, not in the 1960's; its age is 23, not 22.
