LINDSAY, JESSICA and ALI DENHOLTZ, sisters born 23 years ago this June, spent the last four years in colleges almost as far away from one another as the continent allowed -- Lindsay in Arizona, Jessica in Syracuse, Ali in Miami. For fraternal triplets who are the best of friends, separation wasn't always comfortable, they said, especially for Jessica and Ali. They'd call home each day: ''Mom, my heart is breaking. I don't think I can do this.''
This is why all three are living together in Murray Hill this year, in a new two-bedroom duplex apartment just west of the Midtown Tunnel that they've sliced into three bedrooms, creating an odd little jog of a space for a living room. ''What's this, the foyer?'' a grandmother wondered aloud on her first visit. But with three full bathrooms and a monthly rent of $3,900, the place fits like a glove.
The snow had just started falling one Wednesday evening as the sisters slid onto folding chairs, fixed a visitor with their six huge eyes -- you wouldn't know they were sisters but for those eyes -- and began munching snap peas and carrots with blue cheese dressing.
There was a bit of tussle -- Ali had bought the snacks but charged them on Jessica's credit card, Jessica doesn't like blue cheese -- but mostly the sisters were as solicitous of one another as the little women in ''Little Women.'' Conversation among them is a rapid-fire staccato, which produces tempting digressions and many loose ends.
''It's rare for sisters to be so close, like best -- '' Lindsay had almost completed her thought when Ali broke in.
''Nobody is lacking,'' she started to say.
''At least nobody is a nerd,'' Jessica concluded triumphantly.
Certainly not. The triplets were home that night from new jobs -- Jessica works for Sola, a fashion accessories showroom, Lindsay for the clothing store Intermix, and Ali is a page at ''The Late Show With David Letterman.'' They are well into their second month in the apartment, the search for which sounds like the pitch for a new reality television show: Can triplets, a boyfriend or two, and their parents find the perfect apartment?
''It had to have three bedrooms, three bathrooms, pass the lobby and hall test -- Ali and Lindsay had a thing about lobbies and halls -- and not be on a two-way street, because Lindsay doesn't like two-way streets,'' said Doug Kenner, a rental and sales broker at Citi Habitats. ''It had to have a doorman, rent for around $4,000 and be in a building that would accept guarantors. From the first showing, which Jessica liked but Lindsay didn't, I realized I had a fun group.''
The newish luxury high-rises in Murray Hill, Mr. Kenner said, have become post-college sorority/fraternities for certain Ivy League graduates and other young people. That bathtub in the kitchen/tenement thing is not for this generation, he said. They like 24-hour doormen, and to be able, as he put it, to walk up and down the stairs to watch ''Sex and the City'' together.
''Where else can you spend about $1,200 a person and get the same kind of services?'' Mr. Kenner asked rhetorically, explaining the calculus of this particular market. ''One-bedrooms in Murray Hill, which rent for about $2,400, are shared by two people; two-bedrooms, at about $3,200, are shared by three.''
Leases are for one year, and apartments tend to get passed down to friends. At $3,900, the sisters' rent is high, but the price reflects the apartments' amenities: three bathrooms, a granite kitchen and a washerdryer.
IN this market, fees have gone the way of the walkup. ''Nobody wants to pay, and for a broker that means working double,'' Mr. Kenner said, detailing the new structure. Until about a year ago, fees were paid by prospective renters, typically 15 percent of a year's rent, or about $7,000 for a $3,900 apartment like the one rented by the Denholtzes. Now a broker receives one month's rent, which is paid for by the landlord after the tenant moves in.
''Before, an apartment wouldn't last a day,'' Mr. Kenner said. ''The other day I had six appointments scheduled, and all of them canceled. People wait. They know they can take their time. I was fortunate enough with the girls that they stuck with me.'' Mr. Kenner, 30 -- ''I used to live in the 'dorms' too, in Lawrenceville Towers on 34th Street,'' he said -- was referred by a friend.
This apartment was the last of about 20 that were viewed by a shifting cast of Denholtz sisters and friends, and the first unanimously approved by all three sisters. Moving in, they drew numbers for the bedrooms. Lindsay won the biggest but gave it up to Jessica. ''You didn't have a very nice room in college,'' Lindsay explained, much to the chagrin of her boyfriend.
Each room, however, is nearly identically decorated, with silky bedding from DKNY, pedestal ''chandeliers'' from Pottery Barn, antique dressers -- each topped with an identical television and DVD player -- chosen by Lindsay and by Rori Denholtz, the sisters' mom, and paid for by Bobby Denholtz, their father.
He is the president of Durex Inc., a manufacturer of metal products in New Jersey, and has a sideline in housewares, which explains the identical talking clock radios next to each sister's bed.
The day they signed the lease, there was the usual crowd around the sisters. Mr. Denholtz shooed everyone away. ''I just want to talk to my girls alone,'' he said.
''He was gearing up to give them the big lecture,'' Mrs. Denholtz said, ''about how this is about responsibility, this is work.''
But when the four were finally alone in the building's office, he burst into tears. ''I just want to make sure you're happy with the apartment,'' he said. ''You can still get out of it.''
He talked about how proud he was of each, and how he couldn't quite fathom that 22 years ''were gone in a flash,'' Ali remembered.
''He said: 'This is a tough moment for me. I brought you guys up, three at a time,' '' Ali continued, piecing together the scene. '' 'Everything went so fast,' he said. 'I'm looking at you guys, and I can't believe where you're at. I'm so proud of you, and I know this is it, you're not going to come home any more. My babies aren't coming home.' ''
Habitats | Murray Hill
