HUMAN feeling, flickering like a firefly in the twilight, makes a surprise guest appearance toward the end of the very long first act of ''His Dark Materials,'' the National Theater's elephantine adaptation of Philip Pullman's popular fantasy novels about growing up, original sin and parallel universes.
Mind you, the first 80 minutes of this six-hour, two-part show, written by Nicholas Wright and directed by Nicholas Hytner, have been excruciatingly eventful. There have been mysterious child snatchings, acts of torture, a talking snow goose, a 10-foot-tall armored bear -- all rendered amid rotating changes of scenery and starry projections on the vast stage of the Olivier Theater.
Yet thus far the responses stirred have been not so much wonder, excitement or suspense as that pulsing ache that comes from having too much information crammed into your head at once. For each of these strange creatures and episodes -- not so different, after all, from the usual stuff of fairy tales and science fiction -- arrive dangling what amount to footnotes that explain their origins, their anatomies and their cosmic significance. It's like meeting a series of elaborately dressed-up strangers on a train who have barely told you their names before moving on to their full medical histories.
Hope arrives in the form of a simple dramatic confrontation. The scene takes place in a Frankensteinian laboratory, where cruel and unusual experiments are conducted on children.
And what has hitherto registered as an arcane, absurdly macabre scientific practice -- like the kind found in comic books about mutants -- becomes a matter of emotional urgency as the show's 12-year-old heroine, Lyra (Anna Maxwell Martin), defends the rights of children to Mrs. Coulter (Patricia Hodge), the mysterious older woman who has initiated the experiments.
The girl's indignation, which is greater than even her fear; the woman's sudden uneasiness; even in this exotic context, the generational conflict of wills rings heart-piercingly true. Yes, these are people to care about, to loathe or to love. Lyra may be, as we discover, a girl on whose shoulders the world's destiny rests. But right now, she is someone any teenager or survivor of adolescence is going to identify with.
Elements that previously seemed merely fanciful -- like the animal alter egos called daemons (embodied by a cunning series of puppets) that most of the play's characters possess -- assume their own poignant reality. And audience members unfamiliar with Mr. Pullman's writing may begin to glimpse the reasons for the enormous popularity of the ''Dark Materials'' trilogy. Savor this moment of enlightenment. Its like will not be seen again for another hour or so.
Adapting these novels of literally cosmic scope to the stage was a noble and quixotic pursuit for Mr. Hytner, the new artistic director of the National Theater. It has turned out, however, to be a commercially canny choice, and the production's initial run in the National repertory (through March 24) is already sold out. While critical reaction in London has been cool if respectful, the show, presented in two three-hour parts, has probably already lowered the median age of the National audience. (There were plenty of preadolescents at the Saturday double bill I attended and far fewer gray heads than usual.)
Pullman cultists should be pleased by the production's fidelity to its source. True, one major character, a research scientist, has been jettisoned. But Mr. Wright, the author of the play ''Vincent in Brixton,'' has crammed in as many subplots as six hours' traffic on the stage allows.
Well, to be honest, quite a bit more than that. The overall mood of the shows is less of enchantment than of exertion. (It feels appropriate that you can hear the multitiered scenery, designed by Giles Cadle, groaning as it shifts.) In his books, Mr. Pullman, like the best fantasy writers, created a self-contained, complex universe with its own rules and vocabulary, plus a whole secularist theology that he has described as a sort of '' 'Paradise Lost' for teenagers.''
This means there is a lot of self-explaining for the stage version to do. Boiling down a richly layered narrative voice to sound-bite dialogue inevitably makes the play feel both more didactic and more episodic, in sci-fi serial style, than the novel. Some of this is mechanical/spiritual detail typical of fantasy fiction. But there are also many quick conversations about weighty metaphysical topics, like the nature of free will and original sin.
These theological concerns are essential to the popularity of the books, which might be described as the brooding child's ''Harry Potter.'' Mr. Pullman's trilogy takes the old 60's credo that you should never trust anyone over 30 and extends it to those who are really over 30, like God. In this sense, ''His Dark Materials'' is indeed a ''Paradise Lost'' for adolescents, scaling the rebellious and questing spirit of those years to heroic proportions. The books are on the side of the fallen angels. And the revolution at the plot's center is a war against a tired old God, here referred to as the Authority.
All this is dutifully worked into Mr. Wright's script. But it is telling that when Lyra and her companion in adventure, a boy from another universe named Will (Dominic Cooper), finally meet the Authority, it doesn't seem like a big moment. Some audience members may not even realize what has happened. As is often the case with this production, it's hard to know where to focus.
Mr. Cadle's revolving, multilevel sets, accented by video projections and computer graphics, are remarkably efficient, though they sometimes suggest the flat astronomical environs of 1950's B movies like ''Forbidden Planet.'' Most of the visual epiphanies from Mr. Cadle and the costume designer, Jon Morrell, are reserved for the show's second part, when Lyra and Will make a truly haunted trip to the Land of the Dead.
By that time, if you've stuck it out, you'll find yourself engaged by the show in ways you may not have been before, because the dense, breathless storytelling has relaxed a little and you can actually pay attention to the characters.
The cast, by the way, includes such stalwarts of the British stage as Ms. Hodge and Timothy Dalton (the former James Bond, who is here indeed rather Bond-like as a God-defying explorer). They -- and most of the 30 ensemble members -- haven't quite found a comfortable midpoint between naturalism and operatic cartoonishness. On the other hand, Ms. Martin and Mr. Cooper, the adult actors playing Lyra and Will, are utterly convincing in charting their characters' developments into maturity.
The most memorable performances of all are provided by puppets, designed by Michael Curry (of ''Lion King'' fame), most of which are used to embody the characters' daemons. Lyra's, a shape-shifting ermine (manipulated by Samuel Barnett), is a particular charmer. If you're interested in the characters' psychological subtext, such as it is, pay close attention to these creatures.
By and large, though, the beings who populate the stage have the two-dimensional aspect of figures in a Japanese anime film. Mr. Pullman, speaking of that archetypal fantasy trilogy ''The Lord of the Rings,'' objected that it has ''nothing about people in it.'' He's right. It's more plot than personality that makes Tolkien's world move.
Unfortunately, plot also dominates the stage version of ''His Dark Materials'' at the expense of clarity, character and meaning. Mr. Hytner's production is undoubtedly a dizzying achievement. But it is not the kind of vertigo that great theater inspires. There is probably an affecting and profound stage narrative within this dense, crowded production. It is still waiting to be distilled.
THEATER
