FOR New Jersey's beleaguered commercial office market, developers and brokers see signs of hope in 2004. Many are pointing to what they call an unmistakable surge in the number of companies shopping for space and citing this as prelude to potentially healthy leasing activity within the next six months to a year.
''The office market has definitely taken a turn for the better,'' said the managing partner of the Kushner Companies, Richard Stadtmauer. ''Before, we had people just kicking the tires, brokers saying, 'A tenant may be interested, and maybe they'll come take a look.' Now, people are actually looking, asking for leases, and some of our current tenants are coming to us, looking to renew and expand.''
Mr. Stadtmauer mentioned two deals that Kushner closed this month in Florham Park as illustration: Ryan Beck &amp; Company, a financial advisory firm, signed a long-term lease for 48,802 square feet at 18 Columbia Turnpike, a building Kushner owns at Columbia Corporate Center, to expand and relocate headquarters from Livingston. Also, SKG Consulting, an executive search and recruiting firm, renewed its lease for the headquarters space it has occupied for 25 years at 30 Vreeland Avenue, expanding by 1,700 square feet to a total of 7,116 square feet.
''These are small to medium-sized deals,'' Mr. Stadtmauer said, ''but they are bread and butter to the market.''
Meanwhile, the chief executive of the Mack-Cali Realty Corporation, Mitchell E. Hersh, announced a 10,406-square-foot lease at Harborside Financial Center Plaza 5 on the Jersey City waterfront and said it indicated momentum. The 10-year lease was signed with the insurance firm DeWitt, Stern, Imperatore Ltd. and brought the occupancy rate at the newly built Class A building to 61 percent.
Nevertheless, the overall vacancy rate for office space in northern and central New Jersey rose slightly in the fourth quarter of 2003, according to real estate service companies; the figures compiled by GVA Williams put the rate at 20.1 percent, up from the previous quarter's 19.5 percent. And asking rents decreased for the third straight quarter, dropping to $22.80 annually per square foot for overall space -- that is, both direct lease and sublease space in all classes of office buildings.
Various year-end reports noted that more pressure to lower rents is being put on many landlords because a significant number of leases are expiring and space that was available for sublease is now going on the market directly. The percentage of direct-lease space available at the end of 2003 rose to 15.5, according to GVA. At the end of 2002, when sublease space glutted the market, there was only 12.5 percent of direct space available, it said.
''WE are not dealing with a super market,'' Mr. Stadtmauer said. ''We are not dealing with the kind of market we had four years ago before the bad cycle began. But we are dealing with a market where the shadow space, or sublet space, has been absorbed.''
Emanuel Stern, president of Hartz Mountain Industries, which controls more than one million square feet of office space on the New Jersey waterfront, concurred, saying, ''The erosion of the office market appears to be over.'' He said average asking rents are unlikely to sink lower, although effective rents might dip because of expiring leases.
Mr. Stern said that the ''velocity'' of deals for office space seemed to be picking up in New York City but that he did not necessarily see this yet in New Jersey -- adding that New York City always leads in trends. ''Clearly, the overall economy is improving,'' he said. ''Generally speaking, when companies start making money again, they like to add jobs and get more space.''
At the end of 2003, Hartz -- which built and developed 90 percent of its 35-million-square-foot portfolio -- surprised some observers with its purchase of 15 Exchange Place, a 145,000-square-foot building in Jersey City that has carried some vacancy for the past three years. But, Mr. Stern said, ''When the market returns in New Jersey, it will quickly absorb that and everything else that is available on the waterfront.''
Still, some real estate specialists are more wary about asserting that space will be snapped up. Advance Realty Group's regional managing director, Robert R. Martie, whose company has 160,000 square feet available at Gateway One in Newark and 200,000 square feet at its Park Place campus in Florham Park, said, ''With the stocks of space available, we need more significant job growth than what has occurred to obtain what we would call market lift.'' Mr. Martie conceded that the ''tenant pipeline'' does seem to have opened up. He said about eight potential tenants, seeking 25,000 to 200,000 square feet of space, are currently ''seriously looking'' at Park Place.
In terms of job growth, New Jersey has actually fared better than most other states, posting a gain of 41,200 jobs in 2003, according to the state Labor Department. At the end of last year, the unemployment rate in the state was 5.5 percent -- the lowest in 12 months. And for 2004, many analysts are predicting strong economic growth.
Patrick Murphy, the executive managing partner in charge of New Jersey operations for CB Richard Ellis, said that these development have led him to be bullish and to think that ''it's time to take advantage of where we are.''
''Forty thousand new jobs -- that's eight million square feet!'' Mr. Murphy exclaimed. He was using the broker's rule of thumb that companies typically seek about 200 square feet of office space per employee.
''I think New Jersey has gravitational pull for companies,'' he added, ''They want to tap into our educated work force, and know they can provide workers with a nice suburban lifestyle without losing the ability to tap into the New York City lifestyle.''
Mark Yeager, president of the Gale Company, another major developer, owner and broker of commercial space, said: ''Over the last 90 days, there has been a very different feeling about the way things are going, more positive than any period in the last couple years.
''There have been some seven-day runs, some 30-day runs, when it seemed the commercial office market was picking up,'' Mr. Yeager said, ''but it was never sustained. It always died out. It was burst, lull, burst, lull. After a while, people lost an overall sense of enthusiasm for the market. This has felt different -- as though there is potentially some traction in the market, some consistency in moving forward.''
A few weeks into the New Year, Mr. Yeager said, he has been ''very surprised, not just pleasantly surprised'' at the burgeoning activity -- including inquiries about space, showings of space, requests for proposals and signed leases.
''We have at least two, and potentially three, very noteworthy deals for spaces over 150,000 square feet in the works,'' he said. ''In addition, we are working on about 400,000 square feet total of the other stuff -- 5,000 square feet to 50,000 square feet range -- and there is good diversification in the types of clients and space.''
Last month, for example, Mr. Yeager said, one of the numerous law firms housed at Gale's One Newark Center renewed and expanded its lease, taking 36,000 square feet. This month, One Call Medical, an existing tenant at 20 Waterview Boulevard in Parsippany, renewed and expanded its lease, taking 41,000 square feet.
Mr. Yeager said he was highly encouraged by an expansion in the legal and accounting sectors in New Jersey. ''The entire field of public accounting is having to reinvent itself, because of the new federal legislation requiring greater accountability by corporations and better protection of shareholder interest,'' he said, ''and there is going to be tremendous expansion, not just among the Big Four accounting firms -- PricewaterhouseCoopers, Ernst &amp; Young, Deloitte &amp; Touche, and KPMG -- but for midtier firms as well. We're just now beginning to see the impact.''
CUSHMAN &amp; WAKEFIELD'S senior managing director, Christopher Kinum, said his company's analysts reported that law, accounting and consulting firms led New Jersey's office leasing activity last year -- and he expected that trend to continue.
Mr. Kinum asserted, however, that the most significant step taken to improve the economy, and thus the commercial office market, was state government's commitment last year to aggressively recruit high-technology companies. ''Our political leaders have enhanced New Jersey's Business Economic Incentive Program,'' he noted. ''They have proposed the investment of pension funds in the technology sector, and they plan to create business zones that will encourage R.&amp;D. partnerships between private business and educational institutions.''
This should generate slow but steadily increasing demand for office and laboratory and research and development space, Mr. Kinum said.
The Cushman executive also pointed to the continuing positive signs generated by the hot market for investment sales of office space, linked to still record-low interest rates, and a new trend he discerns of companies seeking to buy their own space, rather than lease, before rates rise.
Mr. Kinum noted the fledgling nature of the prevailing optimism about the office market and said, ''We don't need another major setback, such as a major chain going into Chapter 11.'' The fact is you never know if there is a left cross waiting for you out there.''
''But the market is feeling better,'' he summed up. ''Maybe not feeling good, but feeling better.''
Commercial Property | New Jersey
