TO paint from a photograph is one thing, but to establish a photographic vocabulary within the realm of painting is quite another. Eric Fischl has been doing this over the course of his career, beginning with ''Bad Boy,'' the painting that catapulted him to art-world stardom in 1981. In it, a young boy watches a lascivious woman lying naked in bed as he slips his hand into her purse on a table behind him. Mr. Fischl caught a moment in a way that photography catches moments -- as evidence, with observation, in stark existential relief.
Still, it isn't the ''decisive moment'' he is after, nor is it the optical precision a photograph can provide; it's the way photographic imagery reflects the contemporary world back to us that he has isolated in the formal characteristics of painting. The informality of his subjects, their physical relationships to one another and his organization of the canvas have the underpinnings of a 35-millimeter universe.
Never has the influence of photography on Mr. Fischl's work been more evident than in ''The Krefeld Project,'' a suite of new paintings commissioned by the Museum Haus Esters in Krefeld, Germany. These paintings depict scenes that the artist orchestrated in the museum, formerly a residence, designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe in 1928. Mr. Fischl brought in modernist furniture, hired two actors and photographed them over four days in 2002 as they staged unscripted domestic scenarios throughout the house. With more than 2,000 pictures, he moved the figures from one image to another in Photoshop, reimagining the domestic tableaus in a set of final constructed photographs from which he made this series of paintings. The paintings were exhibited last fall in the rooms in which the fictional scenes took place, and the photographs were shown at the Mary Boone gallery in New York last month. The catalog is just now being distributed in this country by D.A.P.
Over the course of its 165-year life span, photography has had a complicated relationship with painting. As photography in the 19th century depicted the world with greater visual accuracy, painting veered from realism to Impressionism. As the Post-Impressionists ventured back toward the representational, a group of photographers known as Photosecessionists experimented with a painterly, out-of-focus style. In the 1960's, the Photo Realist painters concerned themselves directly with optical precision, making bravura paintings that were daunting in their fidelity to the look of photographic imagery.
Mr. Fischl has engaged this history directly. In an interview last year with the writer Frederic Tuten, he explained: ''One of the reasons I looked to photography was that when modernism threw the figure out of painting, the figure went into photography. Where else would I go?''
You can see in his work the 35-millimeter vocabulary of photographers like Nan Goldin, whose subjects carry out their lives in between activities, sprawled on couches, lingering in bedrooms. He often places the viewer not parallel to the picture plane, but standing where a photographer might as he paused to capture the scene he'd just happened upon. His paintings are informed by the constructed imagery of Philip-Lorca DiCorcia and Tina Barney, in which staged pictures have the look of spontaneity, the people illuminated in midsentence, midaction, frozen in piqued alienation.
Still, Mr. Fischl is very much a painter. In ''Dining Room, Scene 2, 2003,'' a man and a woman linger at a table where something intimate seems to have just taken place. He looks like a socialized beast in elegant but unbuttoned evening wear, the belly of the animal exposed, his stance menacing, willful. She sits coiled, perhaps postcoital, hidden and protected by the chair, her gesture mirroring the neon spiral on the wall behind her. Light rakes the wall, highlighting the distance between them; Marilyn Monroe and another glamorous woman look over his shoulder -- fantasies of his, perhaps, conquests in his mind.
Mr. Fischl's work has always been an examination of the middle class. ''In a way,'' he has said, ''it is the most interesting aspect of American life. It's the biggest, filled with ambition, the class of transition that tries so hard to uphold the value of the culture. It's tragic and compelling.''
In the case of ''The Krefeld Project,'' the subjects -- with their elegant furniture, and Gerhard Richter (surely a visual nod to Mr. Richter's use of photography for his own paintings), Andy Warhol and Bruce Nauman on the wall -- hover at an elevated cultural plateau. But though the cultural signifiers might have changed, the chance we are given to peer into their (constructed) lives, into these most intimate, ambiguous, charged scenes, is familiar: in terms of the psychological terrain the paintings cover, the couple could be latter-day incarnations of John Updike's tony suburban characters, Joan and Richard Maple, or even Edward Albee's George and Martha. We seem to be intruding on very personal moments, privy to the aspects of this relationship that a novelist might describe or a hidden surveillance camera might record.
Mr. Fischl depicts real-life scenes that are quotidian in nature, photographic in dialect, but existential in the broadest sense, showcasing lives that are attractive and well-accessorized, but nonetheless appear hollow, purposeless. Mr. Fischl has tapped into that essential photographic quality -- the ability to harness the fleeting moment, to divide life into milliseconds of experience -- to make pictures that render not only how individual experiences feel, but how contemporary experience looks. It's hard enough for photographers to pull this off, but all the more impressive that Mr. Fischl has attempted it while undertaking a marriage of these two competing mediums.
ART
