The devil may wear Prada, but now subway passengers can wear Hermès.
For carriage-trade types who feel they simply must make a fashion statement at the turnstile, the Madison Avenue outpost of Hermès -- the Paris fashion house that sells $120 ties, $295 scarves and $5,500 purses like the ones Grace Kelly made famous -- is selling a MetroCard holder. The 3-by-2-and-seven-sixteenths-inch, bright orange sleeve, made not of ordinary leather but of goatskin, costs $150, or some 75 subway rides.
A helpful hint for those limousine-loving Hermès customers, whose only experience with the rails a-thrumming is on Ella Fitzgerald records: MetroCards, not tokens, are what turnstiles take nowadays.
As MetroCard sleeves go, this is not one for the masses: A Hermès spokeswoman said that only 250 were made in the company's workroom in Paris. The little pocket-on-a-cord is intended to be worn around the neck and is embossed, in English, with ''Subway Centennial 2004.''
The 100th anniversary of the New York subway is coming up in October, but Hermès did not wait for that. It introduced the MetroCard holder on Thursday at a party for ''Subway,'' the book by the photographer Bruce Davidson that was first published in 1986 and is being reissued by Saint Ann's Press. The latest edition features 42 photographs that were not in the earlier version, and a foreword by Fred Braithwaite, a onetime graffiti artist whose hip-hop fans know him as Fab Five Freddy.
So does anyone who shops at Hermès actually ride the subway? Maybe, maybe not. At the party on Thursday more than one person was overheard saying something like, ''This must be the first time in history that the words 'subway' and 'Hermès' have been used in the same sentence.''
But forget about Hermès shoppers: Hermès employees know the No. 7 line from the No. 1. ''I'm a subway rider, from Astor Place to 59th Street,'' said the company's chief executive, Bob Chavez. ''When we were talking about this, someone in the meeting said, 'Maybe some of the Hermès customers ride the subway,' and I thought, 'The C.E.O. is a subway rider, too.' ''
