I LEARNED about risk-taking in a high school football game in Michigan. We were tied in overtime, and my team had the ball first. We were on the 5-yard line, it was fourth down, and we decided to kick a field goal. I was the quarterback -- and the holder for field goal attempts -- and my best friend was a blocking back.
It was obvious that the other team was going to do everything in its power to block the kick. My friend turned and looked at me with wide eyes, and I just nodded. The center snapped the ball to me, I put it down, and then I jerked it away, just as Lucy always did to Linus.
I threw a pass to my friend, who had run to the end zone and was all alone. He scored a touchdown, and the coach got great press the next day for the great fake call.
My buddy and I were the only two in on the play. We were heroes because our plan worked. The lesson was that if you know you're right, go ahead and take the risk if there's no time to ask for approval.
I've always loved adventure. Four or five years ago, I went rafting on a river in Costa Rica with a bunch of buddies and a guide. We took a four-hour bus ride through the jungle just to get to the river, rafted all day and didn't see another soul. It's not like rafting in Colorado, where you see 400 or so other rafts during the day. The rapids were pretty wicked: we flipped our raft twice.
A year or so before that, my wife and I were visiting a friend in Fiji, who is a writer. Over dinner, he invited about 20 of us to jump off a bridge in life jackets and wet suits at 2 a.m., float inland for a few hours to a lake and watch the sun come up. You have to do it when the tide is rushing in, so the current will carry you inland, instead of out to sea. We said sure.
We drove to the bridge in the pitch dark. When we got out of our vehicles, we heard the water but couldn't see it. We held hands and took a 15-foot jump, were submerged in black water and finally came up again and started floating into the jungle.
My wife said it felt as if we were escaping; I said it felt as if we were an invading force. The stars were magnificent, better than what you see from a mountaintop. We reached the lake an hour before dawn and were bobbing up and down when all of a sudden thousands of bats flew over us on the way back to their caves. I've since learned that Fiji has the biggest bats on the planet; they were the size of chickens.
Last summer, I climbed Castle Peak in Colorado with a friend who is part of the Aspen mountain rescue team. It's over 14,000 feet high. The best part was the descent. Rather than climb down, we dropped into the saddle, part of the mountain carved out like a chute, and slid down a glacier for two miles.
It took half an hour, as opposed to three hours to climb down. It was so much fun I did it a second time, with another aging executive. I told him, ''You've got to do it with me now because in five years we'll be too old.'' He still hasn't stopped talking about the slide down.
EXECUTIVE LIFE: THE BOSS
