Pinnacle Ltd. and Toll Brothers are best known as builders of high-end suburban homes. But they are significantly increasing their presence in New Jersey's urban housing scene by joining forces to turn the former Maxwell House coffee plant site in Hoboken into a $500 million enclave of condominiums, stores, offices, a park and a beach.
Last week, Pinnacle Downtown -- a subsidiary of the private Pinnacle Ltd., which is based in Millburn, N.J., and the publicly traded Toll of Huntingdon Valley, Pa. -- closed on the $76 million purchase of the 24-acre site, which is along the Hudson River waterfront. The sellers include George Vallone and Daniel Gans, Hoboken developers who will remain in the project.
The plan is to replace the old plant, which closed in the early 1990's, with up to 832 condominiums and 206,000 square feet of commercial space in a clutch of five-  to 12-story buildings. The project, designed by Dean Marchetto Architects of Hoboken, will also include parking and a baseball field on what is said to be the site of the first organized game in 1846. And there will be a six-acre public park featuring, among other things, a restored beach on a site that was home in the mid-19th century to the New York Yacht Club's first clubhouse.
Brian M. Stolar, Pinnacle's chief executive, said his company teamed with Toll because ''it best understood the high-end condominium concept we intend to build.'' He said initial prices were expected to be $400 to $500 a square foot.
Douglas C. Yearley Jr., a Toll senior vice president, said the project was a chance to offer homeownership along the riverfront, where rentals predominate. He said sales would start by this summer for the first 180-apartment building.
Next month, the industrial hulks will begin to topple. But what of the famous Maxwell House ''Good to the Last Drop'' sign with its tilted coffee cup dripping neon drops into the river? All that remains is a last 12-foot-high drop, which is owned by the Hoboken Historical Museum and which Mr. Marchetto said could become part of a display of historic artifacts from the plant at the site.
RACHELLE GARBARINE
Postings
