Few sitting ringside at Boardwalk Hall on Saturday night expected the fight between Arturo Gatti and Gianluca Branco to last more than six or seven rounds, let alone go the 12-round distance.
But in a surprisingly close and dramatic fight, Gatti won a unanimous decision over Branco (32-1-1) to secure the vacant World Boxing Council junior welterweight title.
Despite the constant urgings for Gatti among the partisan crowd of 12,000, it was the Italy-based Branco, a former European champion fighting for the first time in the United States, who gave him a boxing lesson until the 10th round. But with 35 seconds remaining in the round, Gatti rocked Branco with a flush left hook to the chin and sent him to the canvas.
''I felt sluggish; I don't know why,'' said Gatti (37-6), who said he believed he rebroke his right hand in the fifth round. ''I won with the bout with my heart and my boxing skills.''
The judges Tom Kaczmarek of Brick, N.J., and Anek Hongtongkem of Thailand had it 116-111 for Gatti, while Guido Cavallieri of Italy had it 115-112 for Gatti.
In the earlier rounds, Gatti, a Jersey City resident, moved with the same fluidity as he did when fighting Micky Ward three times over the last two years.
But unlike Ward's roundhouse punches and hooks, Branco, who fights in a semi-upright European style, was able to catch Gatti with stiff left counter jabs -- often two, three, four in a row -- followed by straight right hands.
Frustrated in Round 5, Gatti reverted to his warrior instincts. Swinging in center ring, Branco seemed to get the better of the exchange, countering on the inside arches of Gatti's punches. Branco walked back to his corner, shrugging his shoulders as if to say, So what? Gatti replied to the taunt by sticking out his tongue.
In the seventh round, the taller Branco, 33, continued to put the pressure on Gatti, snapping the former junior lightweight champion's head back with sharp lefts and lead right hands while Gatti, 31, swung wildly into thin air.
The fight was Gatti's first since ending his series with Ward. Gatti won the last two matches on points with broken hands, and Ward, now retired and training amateur fighters in Boston, busted his eardrum.
In a close and at turns dirty co-feature, the hard-punching junior welterweight prospect Fransisco Bojado (15-1) peppered Emmanuel Clottey of the Bronx with double jabs and speedy uppercuts from all angles and went on to win a unanimous decision.
A tough-chinned plodder, Clottey (21-6) scored points in the middle rounds, but not enough to keep at Bojado at bay. The judges Paul Venti and Joseph Pasquale scored the fight 97-93 for Bojado, and Judge Luis Rivera had it 99-92 for Bojado.
BOXING
