ALLISON CHARNEY, a soprano with a laugh that sounds like bells, loves being center stage. Ms. Charney, 36, moves in the world of regional opera. Last summer, she sang the title role in ''Madama Butterfly'' with the Utah Festival Opera.
She found, however, that the 10 months she spent on the road each year, in places like Atlanta, Washington and Memphis, left her little time for a private life. ''I did want to get married, and I did want to have children,'' she said.
In January 2002, over dinner with her friend Judy Evnin in Manhattan, she lamented that while she had dated seriously, touring got in the way of marriage. Ms. Evnin, now the chairwoman of the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts in Katonah, N.Y., asked Ms. Charney to describe the man she was looking for.
''Smart, funny and Jewish,'' was the reply.
Ms. Evnin immediately thought of Adam Jonathan Fain Epstein, who was unattached, a Harvard graduate, like Ms. Charney, living in Manhattan and the son of her best friend from high school. Then she hesitated. She also knew he was more analytical than artistic. Mr. Epstein, 37, is a consultant on store locations for retailers and prefers Andrew Lloyd Webber and the Rolling Stones to Puccini.
But then, thinking of the law of opposites, Ms. Evnin suggested him anyway.
When Mr. Epstein phoned that week, the conversation flowed. Ms. Charney, however, was headed to Memphis to perform, and Mr. Epstein was leaving for India. By the time both were back in Manhattan, he was dating someone else.
On the theory, he said, ''that you can never have too many friends in New York,'' he invited Ms. Charney to lunch, but made it clear his intentions were only friendly. She agreed to this ''nondate,'' as she called it, but then had a premonition: ''If he takes me to Café Luxembourg, we're going to get married,'' she remembered thinking. When he left a message on her cellphone suggesting they meet there, she shrieked.
Over lunch Ms. Charney, who excels at games like Scrabble and Boggle, applied her dating test to the nondate: counting the minutes it took before the man asked a question with ''you'' as the subject. Mr. Epstein aced it.
Not long after, Mr. Epstein called to say that his relationship was over and to invite her on a real first date: a trip to the track to see the 2002 Belmont Stakes. They spent 11 hours together, at the end of which Mr. Epstein sang to her the score of Lloyd Webber's ''Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat'' -- unaware that singing show tunes is a favorite Charney family pastime. ''It was perfect to be sung to in this enthusiastic, passionate, yet talentless way,'' Ms. Charney remembered. Within weeks they were inseparable.
Visiting Ms. Charney at the Utah Opera Festival last June, Mr. Epstein suggested a hike. On it, he proposed. ''The last 55 weeks with you have just been amazing,'' he told her with characteristic precision. ''I hope the next 55 years of my life can be this great.''
Their wedding on Jan. 18 at the University Club was a Broadway-style, jewel-toned affair, led by Cantor Melvin Luterman and choreographed by the bride's mother, Nancy Cooperstein Charney, the director and producer of the play ''Talley's Folly.'' At one point the couple's college friends put on a skit. To the tune of ''Sunrise, Sunset'' from ''Fiddler on the Roof,'' they sang:
When did she turn her mind to baseball?
When did he learn 'Butterfly' by heart?
These are the things you do for true love
When you're smart.
''I can't believe you're all here and I don't have to sing,'' said the bride, who wore a cap-sleeved ivory ball gown. She glided on the dance floor like Violetta in ''La Traviata,'' holding the hand of her father, the actor Jordan Charney, who plays a judge on ''Law and Order.''
After the ceremony, Ms. Charney said, ''You never know when you can turn the corner and bump into the rest of your life.''
WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS: VOWS
