RON BUSH does not look like a man who made his living selling commercial and industrial real estate. With his scuffed boots and jeans, his border collie, Bronco, his straight talk and rosy cheeks, he looks like a farmer. He thinks like a farmer, too, eager to talk for hours about the machines and implements used to sow, grow and harvest crops; milk cows; and raise and trade cattle.
Mr. Bush, 70, looking fit and years younger, ran Ron Bush Real Estate Inc., on Main Street in Patchogue, until he sold it in 1999. But he spent much of his childhood and part of his adulthood working on local farms owned by his grandfather and uncle. There, he developed a passion for farming. And for years, he has channeled some of that passion into collecting farm tools, trucks, tractors and equipment, all of which he keeps in the scattered buildings of a former dairy and duck farm in eastern Brookhaven Town.
This private museum, the only one of its kind on Long Island, includes 53 trucks, some restored to mint condition, as well as tractors, cultivators, shredders, grinders, buggies, sleighs, churns and every conceivable kind of farm tool. Some are kept outside, some inside at his five-acre, 11-building ''Bush Farms'' preserve, tucked off Montauk Highway not far from Shirley. There is even a 19th-century outhouse, originally part of Richard Hendrickson's farm in Bridgehampton, which stands with a new roof at Bush Farms.
Up a steel spiral staircase in the former dairy barn, thousands of farmers' tools are on display in neat, well-lighted rows.
''No matter how many wrenches you've got, there's always another wrench out there,'' Mr. Bush said as he recently showed off his collection, sometimes bending down on a knee and commenting on the beauty of one tool or another. ''Every implement needs its own wrench,'' he explained, for repair and adjustment.
A favorite item, and one that helped spark his collecting, was a butter press from the Dune Alpin Dairy in East Hampton, owned by his uncle, Abe Katz.
Mr. Bush does not publicize the location of his collection, which he has been amassing since the death of his grandfather and uncle in the 1970's, when he cleared out their farms. It is open by appointment and is visited by about five or six groups of enthusiasts a year.
Most recently the Long Island Antique Power Association came for a tour and some tea in the former milk house, which has been converted into a kind of hospitality center with a kitchen and bathroom.
Until he was in second grade, Mr. Bush lived on a 40-acre farm in Holtsville owned by his maternal grandfather, Israel Katz. Later, he worked there after school and even when he was running his real estate company.
''I was up there every chance I got,'' as a boy, he recalled. ''Weekends, holidays. That's where my true home was,'' he said. As a broker, ''I'd leave the office at 3 p.m. and work until 6, 7 or 8 at night.''
There was also work to be done at his uncle's dairy.
His uncle's property was converted into a residential subdivision in the 1980's. After his grandfather's death, the Holtsville property was sold except for a 10-acre parcel that Mr. Bush and his daughter, Meghan, now 38, farmed until about five years ago. The Israel Katz farm is now the site of a cosmetics factory and the parking lot of the Internal Revenue Service's regional office.
But Mr. Bush has not given up farming. He and his daughter rent land in Yaphank where they grow the flowers and vegetables they sell at her farm stands on Fire Island and in Patchogue.
Collecting came as naturally to Mr. Bush as farming. He and his wife of 44 years, Nancy, who became a broker and appraiser in the Bush firm, bought their 1860's sea captain's house in Bayport three years after they were married. They have filled it with antiques. Whenever they take a road trip, it includes stops at antique shops, farm museums or a farm auction, where they find ''all this stuff nobody gives a hoot about,'' Mr. Bush said. He also attends collectors' conventions.
Mr. Bush bought the property that holds his collection in the 1980's, selling the development rights on most of its 100 acres to the county for preservation. Once a dairy farm, it had been converted in the 1940's into a duck farm, which went out of business.
Many local farmers have sold or given him their old equipment. Around the doorways in the dairy barn, he has hung snapshots of them, a kind of visual history of Island farming. The names are mostly Polish and Anglo-Saxon, like Frank Poje of Mastic who gave Mr. Bush an old still, used to make ''hootch,'' Mr. Bush said, during Prohibition.
Mr. Bush's heritage is different. His grandfather Israel came to America from Russia as a young man to escape military service under the czar. At first he sold vegetables door to door, which Mr. Bush has also done. In the 1920's, he bought his Holtsville place along what is now Barretts Avenue, and turned it into a cattle brokerage and feed supply center with its own railroad siding and loading dock off the Long Island Rail Road's main line.
His son, Abe, moved out on his own in the 1930's, first renting, and later buying, the Dune Alpin farm. In 1930, his daughter Sara married Mr. Bush's father, Jacob, who was also born in Russia. The elder Bush became a dentist. Mr. Bush's parents lived at Israel Katz's farm until moving to Patchogue in 1941.
Before Mr. Bush sold the last bit of his grandfather's property, he brought some of the rich, fertile soil to his backyard in Bayport. There he grows horseradishes that are direct descendants of those his grandfather planted. Mr. Bush donates the crop to Temple Beth-El in Patchogue.
''Farming was an eight-day-a-week job, twice a day,'' said Mr. Bush, recalling the hours he put in at the family farms as a boy after school, on vacation from Cornell University, and after a three-year stint as a Navy diver in San Diego. ''There was no time off for Christmas or New Year's or because someone was coming by for a visit.''
Mr. Bush said he did not want to go into real estate; he wanted to farm. But the endless chores and long hours of the farmer's life were the reason both his grandfather and uncle rebuffed him as a partner, he said.
''Abe and my grandfather were very tough people, and that was it,'' Mr. Bush said.
His real estate brokerage still does business under his name, although with new owners. But he has also made a name for himself with his efforts to preserve the Island's farming history. He is making an inventory of his collection and trying to find ways to help preserve it for generations to come.
PRESERVATION
