ITALIAN food is as much a part of the American culinary lexicon as bacon and eggs, a B.L.T., and turkey and cranberry sauce. If there is a town or hamlet in Connecticut without a neighborhood Italian restaurant, I haven't found it.
Part of the reason Italian food is so popular is its accessibility. Even an ordinary cook can turn out an acceptable pasta dish. But ubiquitous as Italian cooking is, it doesn't mean that every Italian restaurant is above the ordinary. Finding one that is, like the new Luca Ristorante Italiano in Wilton, makes me want to dance the tarantella.
Not only is the regional food at Luca way above average, but the restaurant itself is a pure delight. By day, the compact dining room (formerly Bistro Le Trocadero) is bright and sunny; by night, with three different types of small amber lights, it is one of the most glowingly romantic dining rooms I have been in ages. Make your Valentine's Day reservation now.
The sizable menu abounds in regional dishes, with very few oldtime restaurant clichés. Even familiar dishes, like frittura di calamari, are prepared with great care. The squid were tender, lightly and perfectly fried (not thickly deep-fried and greasy). They didn't even require the mildly spiced tomato dip served with them.
As a lover of good pasta, I was pleased to see a few on the menu besides the usual threesome of penne, ziti and linguine. My favorite dish at Luca is probably cavatelli alla Toscana, a delicious assemblage of the al dente short shells, cherry tomatoes, diced prosciutto, meaty procini slices and black truffle, finished with shaved parmigiano in a simple garlic-extra virgin olive oil mix.
Another pasta delight was tagliarini neri mare e terra, paper-thin black noodles sautéed with sea scallops and roasted sweet peppers in Tuscan extra virgin olive oil with garlic. Gnocchi caprese -- house-made spinach dumplings that melt in the mouth tossed with plum tomatoes and fresh basil and dotted with diced buffalo mozzarella - was another winning combination. Even my husband, who has a low tolerance for gnocchi, was clamoring for more.
Luca offers a lot more than pasta dishes, superior as they are. Ossobuco alla Milanese was a winter-perfect veal shank braised with Barolo wine, carrots, celery, onions and fresh herbs, served with a creamy saffron risotto (though the saffron was overdone). Spigola alla Siciliana - filet of Chilean sea bass - was sautéed with capers, cherry tomatoes, artichoke hearts and Gaeta black olives in a subtle Chardonnay wine sauce; it was a congenial combination of textures and flavors.
Zuppetta di scoglio al cartoccio was a bit unusual: a generous medley of sea scallops, cockle clams, squid, mussels and Maya jumbo shrimp in an herb-tomato broth was sealed in foil, baked and delivered in the foil shaped like a silvery peacock. All in all, it was an aromatic pleasure.
Of all the dishes I tried, scaloppini alla boscaiola was the only disappointment. While the veal escalope was fork-tender - sautéed with porcini, artichoke hearts and black truffle -- it suffered from a heavy-handed brandy sauce in which the liquor shouted instead of whispered.
Appetizers were uniformly rewarding and the one I tried (del pastore) was a savory arrangement of tender baby spinach, goat cheese, pear slices and toasted pistachios in a raspberry vinaigrette. Breads - an assortment of olive, country and foccacia - were uniformly tasty, especially dipped in olive oil or with a tangy black olive tapanade.
Luca's one weak link is desserts, which are nothing special. Best are the fruity sorbets, gelatos and tortino di mele, a flattened base of puff pastry topped with fresh apples and vanilla ice cream. Luca is too special a place to use the canister whipped cream that adorns each dessert plate.
With its romantic look, lovely food and obliging -- if sometimes slow -- service, this new place promises to be a Wilton magnet.
Luca Ristorante Italiano  142 Old Ridgefield Road, Wilton  (203)563-9550
Very Good
Atmosphere -- Romantic, with well-spaced tables, flattering lighting, soft background music.  Noise Level -- Lively, but conversation still possible.  Service -- Friendly, willing, but understaffed and can be slow.  Recommended dishes -- Frittura di calamari, bresaola della Valtellina, gamberoni in salsa di arancia, salad del pastore, gnocchi caprese, cavatelli alla Toscana, tagliarini neri mare e terra, zuppetta di scoglio al cartoccio, ossobuco alla Milanese, spigola alla Siciliana, tortino di mele.  Price range -- Lunch appetizers $7 to $14, entrees $15 to $26; dinner appetizers $7 to $15, entrees $14 to 35, desserts $7 to $12.  Credit cards -- All major cards accepted.  Hours -- Lunch: noon-3 p.m., Monday through Friday; Dinner: 5 p.m.-10 p.m. Monday through Thursday, 5 p.m.-11 p.m. Friday and Saturday. Closed Sunday.  Reservations -- Accepted.  Wheelchair accessibility -- A ramp to restaurant level; restrooms at dining room level.  Reviewed by The Times Jan. 25, 2004.  Ratings -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING
