This 30-second advertisement began running this weekend in New Hampshire for Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut. It is the first Democratic advertisement to celebrate Saddam Hussein's fall.
PRODUCER -- Integrity Minded Media.
ON THE SCREEN -- The spot opens with the now-famous shot of a Hussein statue crashing to the ground in Baghdad and then in writing, ''We are safer with Saddam Hussein in prison, not in power.'' The next image is of Mr. Lieberman speaking to voters from a podium, an American flag behind him. The spot then intersperses images of Mr. Lieberman addressing voters and the written statements ''Joe Lieberman warned about Al Qaeda before George Bush knew who they were'' and ''Think about Joe Lieberman's courage and conviction.''
THE SCRIPT -- An announcer: ''Saddam Hussein. Only one candidate was clear we are safer with Saddam Hussein in prison, not in power. Joe Lieberman -- a national leader in the fight against terrorism and tyranny. Joe Lieberman forced George Bush to create the Department of Homeland Security. He was warning about Al Qaeda long before George Bush knew who they were. When you think about the dangers facing our country, think about Joe Lieberman's courage and conviction. It just might make all the difference.'' Mr. Lieberman: ''I'm Joe Lieberman and I approved this message.''
ACCURACY -- True, Mr. Lieberman is the most hawkish of the Democratic candidates, and he does have a long history of having called for the end of Mr. Hussein's reign. As Howard Dean has made clear again and again, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts voted for the Iraq war resolution, and all of the candidates have referred to Mr. Hussein as a horrible tyrant. But Mr. Lieberman has taken ownership of the issue. And he did call for a version of the Department of Homeland Security as early as October 2001. His campaign did not provide information to support the claim that Mr. Bush did not know what Al Qaeda was when Mr. Lieberman was warning about it.
SCORECARD -- Mr. Lieberman has made his candidacy very much about national security, and in that respect, this spot is in keeping with a main thrust of his campaign. Still, it is unclear how effective this spot will ultimately be. Many Iowa voters told pollsters that Mr. Bush's handling of the Iraq war did not form the basis of their votes, an indication that antiwar sentiment is no longer the galvanizing force with primary voters. But that does not mean that Democratic primary voters have come full circle to support the war. Then again, New Hampshire goes its own way and, as Iowa made clear, voter sentiment is very hard to determine this season.
JIM RUTENBERG
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE AD CAMPAIGN
