When Christopher Hackett failed to show up yesterday with the confetti gun that was to be fired to start the Idiot Race, a shopping cart chariot run of sorts, his Madagascar Institute colleagues used a bullhorn instead.
No one was aware that a few miles away, the gun had somehow exploded as Mr. Hackett put the finishing touches on it, burning him seriously enough to require hospitalization and drawing a horde of police officers and fire marshals to his Brooklyn loft.
Neither confrontational nor subversive but driven by a counter-consumer urge and a sensibility for fun that involves elaborate props, the Idiot Race drew nearly 200 participants. Wearing costumes -- many were dressed as dogs and bears -- and shackled to supermarket shopping carts, they raced through city streets from the Brooklyn waterfront to Union Square Park in Manhattan, emulating the Alaskan Iditarod, the annual race from Anchorage to Nome in which dog teams pull sleds across 1,150 miles of forbidding terrain.
While that event was inspired by a heroic effort to bring serum to diphtheria-stricken children, yesterday's challenge was to navigate the streets of New York without getting run down in traffic or arrested.
''I'm doing this because it's boring here, New York is too passive,'' said a racer, Tim Corrigan, 33, a technology consultant and Madagascar member who said he had once piloted a dog team in Alaska at a fund-raising event organized by the group that runs the Iditarod. ''The dogs are completely guided by voice commands,'' he said. ''They're more focused. We're fat and lazy and out of shape.''
Hollering ''mush'' and wielding a leather cat-o'-nine-tails, a friend of Mr. Hackett's, Tara Ball, 34, guided four teammates lashed to a shopping cart across the oil-slicked cobblestones of an industrial portion of Jay Street, crossed the torrent of traffic approaching the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway and made the tight left dogleg onto the pedestrian path of the Manhattan Bridge.
When the colorfully costumed racers stopped at the first of two checkpoints -- Winnie's, a Chinatown bar in the shadow of the Tombs jail -- they were mistaken for Chinese New Year celebrants. There, as most racers knocked back beers, thrilled at having traversed the bridge, word of Mr. Hackett's accident spread.
Ms. Ball, a veteran of similar Madagascar events like last summer's Condiment War -- which left the police scratching their heads at how yellow mustard had gotten splattered along the Manhattan Bridge abutment 50 feet above the roadway -- became downcast. She and her team members gravely crossed the finish line in the plaza of Union Square Park.
The race generated no arrests, and despite some charioteering worthy of Ben Hur, no injuries. At the Village Idiot, the final bar visited, the winners of the race divvied up their prize -- a box of fireworks -- and began planning their next event.
