'Howard Dean was saying publicly,'' said Time's Karen Tumulty on ''Meet the Press,'' ''that the Democratic Party has to quit talking about 'guns, God and gays.'''
I was on the panel that day, saluted the alliteration and raced to the office to get the earliest citation. It is a Dean favorite; at the Peabody Hotel in Little Rock, Ark., on Aug. 16, 2002 -- back when he was a cloud on the political horizon no bigger than a man's hand1 -- he said, ''I think it's time in this country that we stop talking about guns, God and gays and start talking about health care and education and balancing the budget.''
It became part of his stump speech even before he officially hit the stump. Dr. Dean was still using the provocative guns-God-gays phrase as 2003 ended, when he appeared in an interview with Chris Wallace on Fox (substituting ''jobs'' for ''balancing the budget'' in the subjects he felt should be talked about, though he has not dropped God from the alliterative trio).
Where did Dean get this surefire attention-getter? Earliest use I can find on the Dow Jones database Factiva -- which sometimes out-googles Google -- is in 1996 at the A.F.L.-C.I.O. convention held annually in Bal Harbour, Fla. A Wall Street Journal reporter quoted ''one official'' as saying that the '96 election should be about ''jobs and wages, not guns, God and gays.'' My guess from reading the tea leaves in the article was that the official was Steve Rosenthal, then the political director of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. He now proudly asserts his coinage.
(An aside: President Nixon was once stiffed at that annual Florida labor conclave; the next time he was asked, his counsel Charles Colson put his advice in a slogan: ''Remember Bal Harbour!'')
The three G's are known in phrase-coining circles as the alliterative hat trick.2 When Democrats were about to select Senator George McGovern as their nominee in May 1972, the Republican's Senate floor leader, Hugh Scott, branded him ''the acid, abortion and amnesty -- the triple-A -- candidate.'' This catchy summation infuriated Democrats (and troubled the American Automobile Association).
Its roots, we were told at the time, were in the Eisenhower campaign of 1952. ''The three major issues of the campaign,'' James Reston wrote in The Times, ''- outside of the time-for-a-change issue -- as officials on the Eisenhower campaign see it, are Korea, communism and corruption.'' That was the first campaign I worked on; our issues were ending the Korean Conflict (the Pentagon refused to call it a war), rooting out Communists in high places without being McCarthyite and despairing at corruption's ''mess in Washington.''
Sloganeers at Ike's ad agency, Young &amp; Rubicam, liked the alliteration but were stuck on the unfortunate spelling of Korea. Although the Asian country's name was originally transliterated in English as Chosn Kuk and later Corea with a C (and is still spelled with a C in French, Spanish and Italian), Americans in the mid-19th century adopted the name of Korea with a K. Though their beginning sound was the same, the first letters on the three words did not match up on a bumper sticker. It may have sounded alliterative, but it didn't look that way.
I think it was the Eisenhower political aide Thomas Stevens who solved the print problem by turning it into a mock chemical symbol: K1C2. This became our bumper sticker, and the campaign image-makers were convinced it was responsible for the defeat of Adlai Stevenson. (The idea was adopted in 1964 by supporters of Barry Goldwater who spelled their candidate's name on bumper stickers AuH2O.)
Do not scorn the political power of the alliterative hat trick: in 1884, it boomeranged to determine the outcome of a presidential election.
James Blaine, senator from Maine, headed the G.O.P. ticket against Grover Cleveland of New York for the Democrats. The Tammany leader, John Kelly, was said to have secretly arranged for many Catholic voters, usually Democratic stalwarts, to switch to the G.O.P. candidate. Blaine's backers in the Protestant clergy set up a New York City banquet for several hundred pastors and divinity students in the state who would decide the close election. At the dinner, the Rev. Samuel Burchard, pastor of the Murray Hill Presbyterian Church, concluded his talk with the ringing line, ''We are Republicans, and we don't propose to leave our party and identify ourselves with the party whose antecedents have been rum, Romanism and rebellion.''
Blaine rose to speak and did not disavow the Burchard line. He later told Justice John Marshall Harlan that the minister's final words ''went through him like a knife,'' and that he did not respond because he thought most people did not hear Burchard's voice; this was before public-address systems.
All the press at the dinner, including The Times, missed the story, perhaps because the reporters didn't hear it, but The New York World published the anti-Catholic crack with an editorial asking how the Irish of New York liked that bigotry, which had not been promptly disclaimed by Blaine. According to Harlan, the Tammany leader told Blaine ''all is over,'' and it was. Catholics took offense, and Cleveland squeaked through.
FOOTNOTES
Don't you hate footnotes? They force your eyes down to the bottom of the page, you lose your place and it's usually not worth it. Newspapers never use them. So here are two:
1 From the Hebrew Bible, 1 Kings 18:44, ''Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand.''
2 A hat trick in cricket is the taking of three successive wickets by a single bowler. In horse racing, it is the winning of three races in a day by a single jockey; in hockey, soccer and lacrosse, the scoring of three goals by one player. Origin may be the prize of a new hat given the player, but more likely, it was the device of securing a spectator's seat in the House of Commons by placing one's hat on it.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-25-04: ON LANGUAGE
