LESS than four years ago, Congress paid $101 million to buy an 89,000-acre ranch in northern New Mexico of such grandeur and scientific richness it's been called the Yellowstone of the Southwest. The nation's backpacking cognoscenti laced up their hiking boots in anticipation. Here, finally, was the chance to tramp across a landscape so iconic of the American West that it appeared for years in Marlboro Man ads and on Stetson hatboxes.
Then the government promptly locked the gates. Managers of the newly renamed Valles Caldera National Preserve needed time to create a plan to safeguard the place from the surge of interest that was sure to come. (When a few ''sneak peek'' hikes were announced in September 2000, 50,000 people telephoned in one day to snare the 1,500 spots.) But the managers also needed time to digest the mandate Congress had handed them. The preserve is ''an experiment in land management'' that is run neither by the Forest Service nor the National Park Service but by a trust that is governed by presidential appointees. Valles Caldera is to remain a working ranch while also protecting the environment and accommodating hikers, hunters and other users. As if that wasn't challenging enough, Congress asked the preserve to try to become financially self-sufficient by 2015, whether by charging fees for cattle grazing and recreation or perhaps even permitting some logging. It is a complex, at times contradictory charge and one that makes Valles Caldera a good symbol of the many issues the nation's public lands grapple with today.
In the last 18 months the gates to Valles Caldera have finally opened a crack. But as my friend Tan and I discovered when planning a trip here last fall, this is one patch of public land where you don't simply pull up and hit the trail. Managers strictly limit the number of visitors -- there were well under 100 on the preserve each of the three days in early October when we visited -- and restrict them to designated trails to minimize impact and to preserve the isolated feel of the place. The dozen or so spots available on each hike must be reserved, and they fill up fast. Four hikes were available this summer and fall, but many only on certain days (the park is generally open four days a week). Backpacking and camping are not permitted yet. So creating an itinerary that let us see as much of the preserve as possible became a brainteaser.
The main gateway to Valles Caldera for most visitors is Los Alamos, 18 miles to the east. (For those coming from the south, Jemez Pueblo, 15 miles south of Jemez Springs, also serves as a gateway.) Birthplace of the atomic bomb and home of a national laboratory, Los Alamos is a beige little company town whose main appeal is its proximity to recreation and its apparent lack of irony. We drove past Bikini Atoll Road and Oppenheimer Drive, followed a sign that said ''Explosive Trucks This Way'' and soon entered the mountains outside of town.
Our hiking reservation form said the hike's ''start time'' was 10:30 a.m. We arrived at 10:45 at the temporary visitor center, now simply a yurt with Porta-Potty and sink. The other hikers were gone. Apparently, the start time was no suggestion; to avoid the R.V. logjams like those at Yellowstone, the preserve's shuttle vans transport visitors en masse to and from their hikes.
''No sweat,'' said a staff member at the yurt. ''We're all learning out here.'' His words would become the theme of our visit. He helped us into an S.U.V. and set out on a pitted dirt road toward the trailhead.
Some of the West's great vistas thrust themselves on you with a beauty that is almost oppressive. Valles Caldera is not one of these places. Beyond the windshield, steamship clouds dragged their shadows across Valle Grande, a treeless, harvest-colored valley that ran to a horizon of ponderosa and green peaks. A bull elk lounged in the valley with his harem, his chandelier of a rack rising above the grama grass. This is not the awe-demanding West of Albert Bierstadt but the welcoming West of an Aaron Copland score -- a big-hearted landscape, heroic, promising, completely American. Seeing it, you realize that you know Valles Caldera from billboards and ads and untold westerns. You feel at home.
The awe comes in knowing what happened here. Two volcanic eruptions, 1.6 million years ago and a little over a million years ago, exploded with blasts that threw 600 times the volume of the 1980 Mount St. Helens eruption into the air. Each time, the spent volcano collapsed on itself, finally leaving a near-perfect ring almost 15 miles in diameter. A lake akin to Crater Lake in Oregon formed inside the ring and then drained, leaving an empty cauldron with walls more than 1,000 feet higher than today's valley floor. Magma burped upward, forming more than a half-dozen small peaks that chop the flat caldera floor into a spraddle of several grassy valleys. Geologists covet the place. In 1964, evidence was found here that helped confirm the theory of plate tectonics, now a unifying tenet of geology.
One of these burps was our hiking destination. The truck wended its way through 400-year-old ponderosa pines, past the faux-dilapidated Wild West homes built for a 1994 made-for-TV movie called ''Buffalo Girls,'' and eventually dropped us at the foot of Cerro del Abrigo (Shelter Hill).
We were already at an elevation of 8,800 feet, so our sea-level lungs were grateful that the supposedly seven-mile trail that encircles Cerro del Abrigo was shorter than advertised and gained just 700 feet. Our trail was a logging trace that was slowly being reclaimed by Parry's thistle and aster; though the preserve appears untouched from a distance, more than 1,400 miles of unpaved roads carve through it.
On each side of the mountain blue spruce and aspen occasionally parted to reveal a new savannah below. Thunder growled in the north, then was joined by a strangled call. Fall is the mating season for the estimated 4,500 to 6,000 elk that wander these mountains. The call of a ruttish bull elk sounds like a bugler being garroted in midblow. Returning to the trailhead we discovered a drawback of the preserve's shuttle system: Hikers walk at different rates. As the youngest in our group, we finished more than an hour before the bus was to arrive to take us back. Later that afternoon we joined 20 others in the vans again and proceeded, safarilike, on a three-hour tour to view elk. Hundreds of cow elk stood in the veldt of the Valle Grande in the slipping light, each clump herded by a dominant bull. ''Satellite males,'' males without females, loitered about the periphery, trying to sneak a tryst while other suitors challenged the bull.
It could have been a great show. But our tour had an improvised, seat-of-the-pants flavor that characterized much of our experience at Valles Caldera. Our driver was new to the preserve, and despite his friendliness, he couldn't tell us much about the preserve or the elk. The vans stopped erratically, and then only briefly. Rain had begun to fall; thunderstorms wrack the Jemez Mountains almost every afternoon in July and August and, fearing that the rain would make the dirt roads too slick, the lead driver turned our caravan around early.
That ''we're all learning'' comment floated to mind. For visitors, Valles Caldera is a work in progress. A more polished, predictable operation will surely emerge with time. In any case, I would probably skip the tour next time, since we would see plenty of elk during our other van rides on the preserve.
Any disappointment from the previous night was redeemed by a good day of fishing. From May through mid-September fishing is permitted four days a week on one of the creeks that wind through the valleys. A fisherman who manages to snag a spot gets a one-mile ''beat'' along the San Antonio Creek, to share with a companion.
Armed with deli sandwiches, a fishing friend from Santa Fe and I met others at the yurt in early morning darkness. An employee gave out walkie-talkies in case of emergency or lightning, then explained the rules. (''Don't wander more than 50 feet from the river.'') We climbed into the vans again, drove deep into the preserve's north end and began dropping off fishermen along the east fork of San Antonio Creek.
Valles Caldera's non-native brown trout, never hooked much while the ranch was privately owned, were said to be plentiful and brainless. My lack of skills, and the terrain, handicapped the contest. Our beat in Valle Toledo was the first mile below the creek's headwaters. The creek was usually narrow enough to step across. In these yawning valleys, no trees lined the bank to disguise a fisherman. To crouch at 20 feet and cast a No. 16 elk-hair caddis into a pinched drip of water requires a jeweler's hand. I spent much of my day snagging the bushy sedges along the stream, and occasionally snagging a trout.
Even so, I have yet to spend a more pleasant day with a rod in my hand. We stood in the yellow grass of our valley, alone for hours, sometimes speaking but often not talking for long stretches, waving rods while the mist lifted off the mountains and the unseen elk bugled from their beds in the forest. Even those who don't fish should tag along, with a book and binoculars.
We didn't plan our trip far enough ahead to secure reservations for any hike on our third and final day, so Tan and I headed for the only remaining option: a free one-mile walk from a trailhead on Highway 4, which cuts across the southeast corner of the preserve. At trail's end the woods abruptly stopped, and we were again on the edge of the great splay of the Valle Grande. Two coyotes trotted past. We sat on rocks and ate sandwiches and looked at the new snow on the highest peaks. Sitting there, even a noncowpoke longs to saddle a big bay and ride across that valley and into the embrace of the mountains.
I'm not a smoker, but I suddenly had the urge for a Marlboro.
Hiking, fishing, birdwatching and no crowds
Valles Caldera National Preserve is 75 miles north of Albuquerque, N.M. (unless you take the longer route, through Santa Fe), and 18 miles west of Los Alamos.
Activities
This summer Valles Caldera National Preserve will offer six to a dozen hikes (the number has not been determined), on a rotating menu. Limited fishing is available May 13 to Sept. 20. In summer the preserve offers elk-viewing van tours, wagon rides in the Valle Grande, night sky tours, bird-watching walks, fly-fishing clinics and nature-writing classes; in winter, horse-drawn sleigh rides, cross-country skiing and snowshoeing Friday, Saturday and Sunday, depending on the weather. All but one hike, and all activities, restrict attendance and require reservations and a fee, so planning is crucial. Reserve spots at least a month in advance, and more if possible, to ensure a spot. Fees range from $10 (hiking) to $100 (fly-fishing clinic). Many activities start in the morning because of frequent afternoon storms. Information and reservations: (877) 851 8946 or (505) 661-3333 or www.vallescaldera.gov, a guide to the sometimes dizzying restrictions.
An excellent side trip is the 33,000-acre Bandelier National Monument, 10 miles east of Los Alamos; (505) 672-0343 or www.nps.gov/band; $10 a car. The monument has back-country trails and cliff ruins once inhabited by ancestors of today's Pueblo peoples. Summer crowds can be quite large, with hourlong waits to park. Los Alamos is of limited interest to the tourist but does offer glimpses into its atomic heritage at the Bradbury Science Museum, at 15th Street and Central Avenue, (505) 667-4444, www.lanl.gov/museum, and the Los Alamos Historical Museum, 1921 Juniper Street, (505) 662-6272, at www.losalamos.com/historicalsociety/museum.asp. Both are free and open daily.
Where to Stay
Los Alamos hotels are few and drab; look to B&amp;B's instead. We stayed at the Pueblo Canyon Inn on the outskirts of town, 199 San Ildefonso, (505) 662-9200 and www.liferesources.com, which has few amenities but is adorned with artwork and has trails out the back door. Some of the six rooms (two in an adobe guesthouse) have private baths; $70 to $120 with Continental breakfast.
We also stayed at the adobe-style Adobe Pines Bed and Breakfast, 2101 Loma Linda Drive, (505) 661-8828, www.losalamoslodging.com, on a cul-de-sac with views of town and the Jemez Mountains. The inn has five basic, comfortable rooms; $71 to $78 with Continental breakfast.
There are abundant campsites in the surrounding Santa Fe National Forest, (505) 438-7840, www.fs.fed.us/r3/sfe.
Where to Eat
Dining options in Los Alamos are limited. For lunch on the trail, Allied Fine Foods Deli, 751 Central Avenue, (505) 662-2777, has good grilled panini and subs, $5 to $7.
Dinner's only bright spot is the Blue Window Bistro, 813 Central Avenue, (505) 662-6305, which serves New Mexico Caesar salad with queso fresco and red chili croutons, and other surprises. A three-course dinner for two with drinks and tip is $75.
Reading
A new guidebook to the history of the preserve is Craig Martin's ''Valle Grande'' (All Seasons Publishing, Los Alamos); $15.95, available at Los Alamos bookstores.
CHRISTOPHER SOLOMON
CHRISTOPHER SOLOMON lives in Seattle.
Correction:  February 15, 2004, Sunday  A picture caption on Jan. 25 about the Valles Caldera National Preserve in New Mexico gave an incomplete name for the river that runs through the preserve. It is the East Fork of the Jemez River, not simply the Jemez River.
