As the editor of Gizmodo, a Web log that traffics in the latest news about gadgets from cellphones to laptops, Peter Rojas is bombarded with e-mail from people who want to hear (or spread) the latest gossip about this or that device or innovation. But the anticipation around one particular gizmo stood out over the past year: a so-called smart phone known as the Treo 600, made by PalmOne. The buzz started in June, months before the phone became available in the United States, when a certain photograph was posted on online message boards. The photo of company executives at a press conference had been blown up to highlight a prototype of the device that one of them was holding. ''People were going crazy,'' Rojas says.
It's startling that anybody could be excited by the appearance of yet another cellphone -- particularly one that costs around $500. But the Treo 600 is a kind of Swiss Army knife of gadgetry: it's a phone; it's a text-messaging device with a full (if teensy) keyboard; it's a personal digital assistant; it has a camera; and you can use it to surf the Web. It weighs about six ounces. Advertising Age named it the No. 1 ''must-have'' product for 2004. In a December online poll by M.I.T.'s Technology Review magazine meant to gauge the gift cravings of its readers, smart phones like the new Treo trailed only the iPod.
The practical explanation is that the Treo 600 is so handy, packing enough functions into one package to let users reduce their gadget count. (Which is also a rationale for that high price.) This, after all, is what's probably driving a broader shift toward ''converged devices,'' as Kevin Burden, an analyst at the research firm IDC, calls them. But Rojas, who has a Treo 600 himself, identifies a less quantifiable appeal of this particular device: it's a hit at parties. ''I show the phone to everybody,'' he says. ''People see it, and they're like, 'Oh, I want one.'''
''I'm not talking about goofy people,'' he quickly clarifies. ''It does things that will impress your nontech friends. It's hard to impress people by saying, 'It syncs with my exchange server.' You know, who cares? But it does things that people understand.'' So he has, he says, literally stood around at social gatherings demonstrating its instant-messenger function, playing the new OutKast video or showing clips of the infamous Paris Hilton sex tape.
Treo maker PalmOne came into being through a merger between the hardware division of Palm Inc. and Handspring, both known as makers of personal digital assistants, or P.D.A.'s. According to the company, it shipped about 100,000 of the new devices between its mid-October debut and the end of November -- an impressive start given both the high price and the fact that it was compatible only with Sprint's mobile service for the first few weeks. (It now works with several big carriers.)
Gadget status seems easy to understand. When a new device becomes a hit -- like the BlackBerry pager that made it clear how important e-mailing is to ''mobile professionals'' -- the first people to buy it are referred to as early adapters, which sounds bold and exciting, lending an I-discovered-this-secret-first prestige factor. (Of course, if it doesn't become a hit, they are referred to as ''gadget freaks'' -- or even ''goofy people.'') But there's more to it than that. If conspicuous consumption is about showing off an item that's needlessly expensive (a $6,000 shower curtain that doesn't keep water off the bathroom floor any better than the one from Kmart), the promise of a gadget like the Treo 600 takes this idea in a different direction: it implies almost limitless functionality, practicality and maybe even a certain technical wizardry on the part of the owner. (Surely there's some skill involved in tracking down and installing the third-party applications that make this little bundle live up to its full potential, right?) This is conspicuous utility.
It's been said that mobile devices are about saving time (getting that crucial message when you're in a cab) or killing time (listening to OutKast when the cab stalls in traffic). The clever thing about the Treo is that it does both. You only have to take the thing out of your pocket, and everyone can tell that your mobile professionalism is unsurpassed. And with that out of the way, you can take another look at Paris Hilton.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-25-04: CONSUMED
