IN the video for OutKast's ''Hey Ya!,'' André 3000 sings and dances, backed by a band of seven digitally replicated Andrés.
The effect may have helped to make the video one of the year's most popular. But to fans of the outsider filmmaker Sidney N. Laverents, the computer graphics trickery looked familiar. Mr. Laverents, an engineer and self-taught film hobbyist, created a primitive version of the same effect in ''Multiple SIDosis,'' a nine-minute film from 1970. Working at home in suburban San Diego, he used a reel-to-reel, two-track Roberts recorder, a retrofitted 16-millimeter Bolex camera and eight musical instruments from his vaudeville days as a one-man band.
The star of the film? The paunchy, middle-aged Mr. Laverents -- a square with a comb-over and ample musical talent.
Shot over four years with the help of his third wife, Adelaide, ''Multiple SIDosis'' went on to win dozens of awards at amateur filmmaker conventions all over the world. In 2000, it became the first amateur work included in the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress. And now, 34 years after it was shot, a 35-millimeter version (cleaned up by by Ross Lipman, who also has restored films by John Cassavetes and John Sayles) is the centerpiece of ''The Wonderful World of Sid's Cinema,'' a retrospective to be held on Friday at the American Cinematheque in Los Angeles.
Now 95, Mr. Laverents is a distinctively American artist: a rec-room tinkerer with the can-do optimism of someone who got through the Depression and found comfort in the suburbs. Following his own whims rather than any cultural movement, he turned himself from a one-man band into a one-man independent movie studio. Mr. Laverents makes multitalented feature filmmakers like Robert Rodriguez and Steven Soderbergh look like slackers.
On film, Mr. Laverents has tackled everything from snails to trains to dinosaurs, not to mention his own eventful life. Running through all 25 of his movies is his sense of humor, which braids vaudeville, Looney Tunes slapstick and the drollery of old New Yorker cartoons. (It's also evident in his self-published 2002 memoir, ''The First 90 Years Are the Hardest.'') Mr. Laverents cites Robert Benchley as an influence; James Thurber's ''The Secret Life of Walter Mitty'' comes to mind, too.
Fans of Mr. Laverents's quirky films purchase VHS copies directly from him (his e-mail address is sidchar@cts.com) and celebrate him on Web sites and in zines like the Chicago-based Roctober. (Mr. Laverents was on its cover last summer.) ''What's appealing is that it's so personal, and so sincere,'' says Kim Cooper, the editor of Scram Magazine and the co-organizer, with Al Guerrero, of the Los Angeles retrospective. ''Sid is someone who spans the whole 20th century. He starts out doing this one-man band shtick on the vaudeville stage, and when film becomes something that anybody, for a price, can pick up and work with, he integrates his career up to that point and uses the new medium to express that same kind of vision.''
That vision is articulated in the coda of one of his films: ''We are surrounded by wonderful and interesting things if we will just take the time and trouble to notice.''
Mr. Laverents's first completed movie, ''The Wonders That Surround Us: Snails'' (1966), is a 26-minute nature film set in the least exotic of locales: his backyard. Shot -- at what must inevitably be described as a snail's pace -- over four years, the film captures its subjects with magnifying lenses Mr. Laverents designed himself. Playful and informative, it is somewhat reminiscent of Disney educational filmstrips. (Mr. Laverents sold ''Snails'' and several of his other nature films to the California Department of Education for classroom use.) One thing that differentiates ''Snails'' from Disney movies like the 1954 ''The Vanishing Prairie'' (aside from hundreds of thousands of dollars) is Mr. Laverents's wit. On the sticky subject of snails' mating habits, for example, he tells us: ''A snail's love life is considerably simplified by the fact that they are hermaphroditic.'' We see two snails press together. ''So, no matter who meets whom, it's always 'boy meets girl.' ''
In ''The Butterfly With Four Birthdays'' (1965), a caterpillar sheds its skin to slinky rumba music. ''This is sort of like trying to get out of a girdle with a belt on and your hands tied behind your back,'' we're told as the caterpillar wriggles suggestively. In another scene, a praying mantis attacks a caterpillar and sadistically licks its chops to the sound of horror-movie violins -- it's as frightening as anything in a David Lynch movie. In fact, these films call to mind the opening sequence of Mr. Lynch's ''Blue Velvet'': beneath the ticky-tacky houses of suburbia rage Darwinian struggles.
In addition to his nature films, Mr. Laverents created broad comedies. ''It Sudses and Sudses and Sudses!'' (1963) depicts a surreally eventful day in the life of a man (Mr. Laverents) whose wife (Adelaide) stacks too many shaving-cream canisters in the medicine cabinet. During his morning ablutions, the husband knocks the cans into the sink, toilet and bathtub, creating a foam tsunami that fills the tiny bathroom, blowing him out the window. (''It Sudses'' belongs in the tiny ''shavings gone awry'' genre, along with Martin Scorsese's 1967 film-school short ''The Big Shave.'')
Mr. Laverents's magnum opus, ''The Sid Saga'' (1985-2003), tells his life story in four segments. Part Horatio Alger narrative, part screwball comedy, the 106-minute movie is Mr. Laverents's version of a Ken Burns-style documentary. We see all: from his career in vaudeville to his forced retirement from an engineering job; from his uneventful World War II military service in India to the making of his movies. There's also a lot of his personal life: his two early marriages, the death of Adelaide, in 1989, and his decision, at 81, to have plastic surgery in order to win the hand of Charlotte, his fourth and current wife. Replete with brushes with fame (his shot at vaudeville in New York is thwarted by an act of God -- a catastrophic flood stranding him in Alabama) and triumphs minor and major, it's an intimate look at a long and wildly varied American life.
Does Mr. Laverents, who is still active and involved in distributing his work, feel it took too long for the public to recognize his films? ''I'm surprised they ever did!'' he says with a laugh. ''It's just one of those things that grew and grew and grew.'' And was he ever tempted to work in Hollywood? ''It's a little late in my lifetime to start a profession,'' he said dryly. ''But I probably would've done real well at it.''
FILM Matt Haber writes for www.lowculture.com, where he has previously written about Sidney N. Laverents.
Correction:  February 8, 2004, Sunday  An article on Jan. 25 about the amateur filmmaker Sidney N. Laverents credited his ''Multiple SIDosis'' incorrectly with a first. In fact it was the fourth amateur work included in the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress -- after the Zapruder film of the Kennedy assassination; home movies of a World War II internment camp for Japanese-Americans; and film of the Tacoma Narrows bridge collapse in 1940.
