It spread through the locker room like a germ, from the mouth of one Oakland Raider to the ears of the next.
Did you hear what Coach said?
The words arrived at the locker of Terrance Shaw, a cornerback who was among the last to hear how Raiders Coach Bill Callahan classified the intelligence of his players to reporters after the Raiders' 22-8 loss to the Denver Broncos in Oakland on Nov. 30.
''Jerry Porter came up to me and said, 'Hey, dumb guy,' '' Shaw said in a telephone interview last week from Dallas. ''I said, 'What did I do?' He said: 'You didn't hear? Coach called us the dumbest team in America.' ''
Shaw recalled what happened next.
''Everybody started walking around the locker room saying, 'Hey, dumb guy,' to each other,'' Shaw said. ''Guys just shut it down. When Coach said that, it was a lost cause. Guys just cut it off.''
It was the nadir for a team that arrived as royalty for Super Bowl XXXVII a year ago and left San Diego forever changed.
A team respected for the integrity of its veterans became consumed by losing, by a steroid scandal and by the highly visible breakdown of the bond between the players and Callahan. Callahan was fired by the team's owner, Al Davis, on Dec. 30, two days after Oakland's regular-season finale.
In recent interviews, several Raiders players said the discord of the 2003 season did not stem from a single incident.
This was a monster with many tentacles.
The disappearance of center Barret Robbins on the eve of Super Bowl XXXVII ranked low in significance compared with the problems of the season, several Raiders said.
Of greater import was how the Super Bowl loss to Tampa Bay shaped the team and the psyche of Callahan, whose offense was shredded by the Buccaneers and Coach Jon Gruden, Callahan's predecessor in Oakland, in a beating seen by more than 137 million television viewers.
Injuries pounded the Raiders' roster. Linebacker Bill Romanowski pounded a teammate in training camp.
Players openly questioned Callahan's tactics.
First Loss Was Control
''There are two sides to that story,'' a scout for a team that played the Raiders this season, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said of Oakland's implosion. ''You had the inmates running the asylum. When that happens, and things start to go south, you get a snowball effect.
''You had so many veterans on that team that if they decided to take a vacation and run a guy out of town, it can happen and it's not fair to the guy,'' he said, referring to Callahan.
''You can't say Callahan took the Raiders to the Super Bowl one year and then suddenly became the worst coach in the league the next. It's just an old team that hasn't drafted real well the last few years.''
Callahan, who had never been a head coach before 2002, lost segments of his locker room early in the 2003 season.
When the Raiders embarked for training camp in July, Callahan, the son of a vice-squad officer who once battled organized crime in Chicago, had changed his motivational style, players said.
Once beloved in the locker room for being a quieter alternative to the showy Gruden, Callahan seemed different.
''It started wrong in training camp,'' Shaw said. ''He made a comment like he didn't need any friends and he didn't want to be our friend; he only needed to coach. Crazy stuff. Guys were looking around like, 'What?' I think he got a little beside himself and lost a lot of people's confidence.''
Of the training camp incident, linebacker Eric Johnson said in a telephone interview from Oakland, Calif.: ''That's where all of this started. I know what he was trying to do, but a lot of people took that to heart when he said that. You can do that with younger guys, but with older guys, you can't. We're all grown men here.''
Callahan and Davis did not reply to telephone requests to be interviewed.
At different points in the season, Callahan's words irked some Raiders.
Cornerback Charles Woodson, in an interview with ESPN in October, said Callahan's ego was a main culprit in the Raiders' 2-5 start, which ultimately culminated in a 4-12 season, the worst record by a team after a trip to the Super Bowl.
Woodson also said Callahan failed to listen to his veterans. Woodson's words could be viewed as the ravings of a 21st-century athlete, if he had been the lone Raider to voice displeasure.
Even some Raiders on offense, where Callahan had made his mark as Gruden's offensive coordinator for four seasons, questioned Callahan's interpersonal skills.
As the losses mounted, Callahan let loose with barbs the players believed should have stayed in house. In a players-only meeting midway through the season, they tore into Callahan.
One of his strengths as a teacher became clouded by his failure to stand in lockstep with his players, Raiders guard Corey Hulsey said.
''The biggest problem was when Callahan would go public with things and not deal with the team,'' Hulsey said Thursday by phone from Gainesville, Ga. ''After that Denver game, everybody was calling me, family and friends. Callahan needed to take care of things with us. We know we messed up. Tell the media we need to get better instead of telling them what they don't need to know. We are 53 men in that room, and we are the only ones who needed to hear that. But that was who Bill was.''
Hulsey added: ''You're considered a man at 18. You've got guys 39, 40 and 41 years old that took offense to what he said. I never had any quarrels with him, but that was the biggest thing: he didn't treat the guys like men.''
Rejecting a New Playbook
As early as the preseason, some players rejected parts of the new playbook even while they studied it.
Then the games began for real. Oakland quarterback Rich Gannon yelled at Callahan and his offensive coordinator, Marc Trestman, during the Raiders' 31-10 loss in Denver in Week 3. An offense that had ranked first in 2002 looked predictable in 2003, prompting Callahan to tell reporters after the defeat: ''I think teams have caught up to us. I would freely admit that.''
One Raiders defensive player, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said Callahan tried to junk too much of an offense that the team had used, with success, for years, and that the loss to Gruden in the Super Bowl was the catalyst.
''The whole offense was changed, and that made Rich uncomfortable,'' the player said of Callahan's retooling. ''We were coming out just throwing the ball, not running the ball, even on third-and-inches. I got the sense that he was saying, 'Look, I'm running my stuff and nobody else's stuff.'
''I think he could have changed a couple of plays at a time, which would have kept Rich in a groove. That's why a lot of people were jumping offside. They were used to something else.''
Although Callahan's calling the Raiders dumb rankled players, the comment didn't come out of nowhere. The Raiders led the N.F.L. in penalties this season, with 134, and penalty yards, with 1,120.
At times, good plays were offset by mindless actions: Phillip Buchanon celebrated a long punt return by taking off his helmet, costing the Raiders a 15-yard penalty in a 27-24 defeat to Kansas City on Nov. 23.
Still, the atmosphere of losing did not stop the players from bonding, even in volatile times.
When Romanowski, an immensely popular player in the locker room, punched the second-year tight end Marcus Williams in training camp, breaking Williams's left eye socket, some Raiders gathered for a discussion on the racial elements of the incident.
Romanowski, who was suspended for a day of practice and fined one game's pay, is white; Williams is African-American.
Johnson said: ''Some guys said: 'Oh, this white dude jumped on this black dude and nothing happened. If that had been a black dude jumping on a white dude, there would have been consequences.'
''Other guys said, 'If it was Jerry Rice who punched Marcus in the eye, he would have had the same slap on the wrist that Romanowski got.' ''
Some incidents had less serious overtones. As the rift grew among Callahan and the players, Shaw, who won a Super Bowl with the New England Patriots in the 2001 season, became a locker-room arbitrator of sorts.
''I would be the last guy to walk into the defensive-backs meeting,'' Shaw said, ''and all of the players would stand up and say, 'All rise, Judge Terrance Shaw presiding.'
''I then said somebody's jersey number. If a player had gotten into it with a coach at practice, I'd say, 'Case 0033: Anthony Dorsett versus the Raiders' or 'Case 0024: Woodson versus Callahan.'
''It was like Judge Wapner every morning on 'The People's Court.' At the end, things were bad and we were just trying to get some humor from it.''
Benchings and a Backlash
In Callahan's final meaningful gesture as Raiders coach, he benched Woodson and running back Charlie Garner for the season finale in San Diego after they missed a team meeting. Woodson and Garner packed their belongings and left. Shaw said several Raiders considered leaving with them.
''We were all deciding what to do; we were willing to sit it out,'' Shaw said. ''It hurt us not to play the last game with Wood, the last time we were ever going to play together as a group.''
The Raiders ultimately played, losing by a touchdown to the Chargers on the same field where the Buccaneers humiliated them last January.
In the ensuing days, Davis told reporters in the Bay Area that the Raiders were not a team in disarray, but Gannon took a different view.
''I wouldn't say I'd take a torch to the place, but it wouldn't be far from that,'' said Gannon, who missed the final nine games because of a shoulder injury. ''We all have to accept responsibility. I have to demand more out of people around me. I ask for more out of our coaches. Stuff needs to get fixed, and it didn't. It just continued to get worse to the point where it was disgraceful.''
Ten days after being fired, Callahan was named the coach at Nebraska. He left the Raiders with two distinct images.
''That one year, we loved playing for Coach Callahan,'' Shaw said of the Super Bowl trip. ''We ran through the wall for that guy. But once this season started, guys felt like they were jilted without explanation.''
PRO FOOTBALL
