The National Track and Field Hall of Fame was dedicated yesterday at the New Balance Track and Field Center at the Armory in Upper Manhattan before an all-star cast seldom found except in television specials. There were 17 of the 197 members of the Hall. In the back row on the stage during the ceremony, Frank Shorter sat between Mal Whitfield and Alberto Salazar. To their left, Al Oerter sat between Billy Mills and Coach Mel Rosen.
Jim Beatty, Chandra Cheeseborough, John Carlos, Bob Beamon, the racewalker Ron Laird, Grete Waitz and Hal Davis were there, as were three Villanova heroes: Don Bragg, Larry James and Charlie Jenkins. The widows of Mike Larrabee and Greg Rice also attended.
In the audience of 200 were other heroes of the past like Ted Corbitt, Derrick Atkins and Benn Fields.
The Armory, at 168th Street and Fort Washington Avenue in Washington Heights, was built in 1912 and staged its first track meet in 1914. Before its spectacular remodeling in the 1990's, it served as a dingy home of track meets, a National Guard Armory and a shelter for homeless men.
The $8.8 million Hall of Fame covers 15,000 square feet on the first three floors of the Armory (the track is on the third floor). Displays include Whitfield's and Charlie Dumas's Olympic gold medals, a javelin used by Jim Thorpe, a uniform Steve Prefontaine wore, a singlet that was Wilma Rudolph's, shoes and starting blocks used by Carl Lewis, a bamboo pole that was Dutch Warmerdam's and Marion Jones's body suit from the 2000 Olympics.
In the middle of the first floor is a case with a running shoe from two legendary Olympic gold medalists: a heavy leather model worn by Babe Didrikson Zaharias in the 1932 Olympics and the 5-ounce model worn by the gold medalist Michael Johnson in the 1996 Olympics. Also on that floor is a theater that will show a Hall of Fame film by Bud Greenspan.
A video gallery on that floor shows interactive interviews with Jones, Maurice Greene, Gail Devers, John Godina and Alan Webb. There are also shoes from Jackie Joyner-Kersee, Lewis, Bob Mathias, Dick Fosbury, Khalid Khannouchi and Joie Ray.
The second floor features Fred Lebow Marathon Hall. On the third floor is a 40-foot glass wall inscribed with the names of all Hall of Fame members. It looks out on the 200-meter banked Mondo track, which holds 100 meets each winter involving 300,000 athletes. In addition, 75,000 college and high school athletes train there annually.
The first Hall of Fame opened in 1974 in Charleston, W.Va. In 1985, it moved to Indianapolis, where it occupied a passageway next to the RCA Dome. The space was so small that most of the artifacts were in storage and the library was at Butler University.
When USA Track &amp; Field, the sport's national governing body, decided to move the Hall, it asked for bids. There was interest from the Armory and from Eugene, Ore.; Tampa, Fla.; Houston; and Kansas City, Mo.
The Armory won.
The Armory expects strong interest from visitors, especially because so many athletes pass through. Yesterday, for example, before, during and after the Hall of Fame ceremonies, 5,000 high school boys and girls competed there in the New Balance Games.
The hall will be open Tuesdays through Saturdays from 10:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. Admission is $5 for adults and $3 for students and seniors.
For athletes like Oerter, Beamon and Carlos, who competed at the Armory in their high school days, this was a sweet homecoming. As Carlos said, ''We're home now.''
FINISH LINES
In the most exciting of the elite races in the New Balance Games, ELKANAH ANGWENYI of Kenya won the men's mile by inches over ANTHONY WHITEMAN of England, 4 minutes 1.78 seconds to 4:02.73. James Thie of Wales, the defending champion, finished 2 feet back in 4:02.89. HAYLEY TULLET of Wales won the women's mile in 4:27.28, and PATRICK NTHIWA of Kenya the men's 3,200 meters in 8:39.50.
TRACK AND FIELD
