The last time Lindsay Davenport and Justine Henin-Hardenne met in a tennis match, Davenport was the favorite with the history of Grand Slam success to shore up her confidence.
One year later, as they prepare to face each other in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open, Henin-Hardenne has transformed herself into the player to beat, taking two Grand Slam singles titles and rising to No. 1 in the world.
''I probably would not have guessed that at the time, 12 months ago,'' Davenport said.
Davenport played a major role in Henin-Hardenne's evolution. Their match in the fourth round here last year was one of the most dramatic of 2003, with Henin-Hardenne conquering her demons by rallying from a 1-4 deficit in the third set and fighting through cramps to win, 7-5, 5-7, 9-7. Until then, Henin-Hardenne had been considered too psychologically brittle to keep her nerve under the greatest pressure, but that victory was the reassurance she needed.
''It for sure gave me this confidence I was missing, because I had never beaten Lindsay, and that was such a problem,'' said Henin-Hardenne, who lost their first five matches.
Without considerable self-belief, the top-seeded Henin-Hardenne might have lost on Sunday, too, against the surprising Italian qualifier Mara Santangelo, whose unorthodox game and deft touch at the net caused Henin-Hardenne considerable consternation in the second set.
Santangelo served for the set at 5-4. She had a set point at 40-30, which she lost by knocking a forehand half-volley out. The score was soon 5-5, but instead of folding, Santangelo kept attacking, pushing to 4-4 in the tie breaker before Henin-Hardenne finally took control, closing out a 6-1, 7-6 (5) victory with a clean forehand winner and a huge sigh of relief.
Davenport had a less stressful afternoon. Although she had been irritable on court in earlier rounds, dissatisfied with her level of play, on Sunday she produced a high-quality match to defeat 11th-seeded Vera Zvonareva of Russia, 6-1, 6-3.
''Today was a big improvement from the last matches that I've played,'' said the fifth-seeded Davenport, who has returned from foot surgery. ''But it's going to have to be at a different level if I plan to win. She's No. 1 for a reason. I'm not going to be able to afford any letdowns.''
The other quarterfinal in the top half of the draw will match No. 4 Amélie Mauresmo of France against No. 32 Fabiola Zuluaga, the first Colombian woman to reach this advanced stage of a Grand Slam event. Mauresmo defeated Alicia Molike, 7-5, 7-5; Zuluaga defeated Aniko Kapros, the Hungarian with one of the slowest serves on the circuit, 6-4, 6-2.
While her elders were busy on court, Tatiana Golovin was busy celebrating her 16th birthday. Although she had been expecting to spend the day practicing intensely for the start of the junior tournament here on Monday, Golovin has now withdrawn from that event.
That is because she has another commitment on Monday: a match in the fourth round of the main tournament with Lisa Raymond, the 30-year-old who upset Venus Williams on Saturday.
Golovin arrived here with a ranking of 354 and gained entry into the tournament only on a reciprocal wild card that the French tennis federation receives for giving the Australians a wild-card spot in the French Open. But she has taken full advantage, defeating 14th-seeded Anna Smashnova-Pistolesi and 23rd-seeded Lina Krasnoroutskaya.
Born in Moscow, Golovin moved to France as an infant when her father, Gregori, was hired as a hockey coach in Lyon. She later moved to the United States and trained from age 7 to 14 at the Nick Bollettieri Tennis Academy in Bradenton, Fla.
But in September, Golovin and her parents and two sisters moved back to Paris, lured by the prospect of French tennis federation support and the opportunity to train at Roland Garros Stadium, the site of the French Open, and work with Pierre Cherret, the longtime coach of Cédric Pioline, a United States Open and Wimbledon finalist.
As for Raymond, she no longer has to worry about dividing her attention or energy. Only a few hours after upsetting Williams, she went back on court with her doubles partner, Martina Navratilova, and lost, 6-3, 6-0, in Davenport and Corina Morariu. After all these years of doubles success, Saturday was Raymond's day to be a singles specialist.
MATCH POINTS
Fourth-seeded ANDRE AGASSI exacted a measure of revenge over No. 13 PARADORN SRICHAPHAN of Thailand on Sunday with a 7-6 (3), 6-3, 6-4 victory. It was Agassi's 25th Australian Open victory in a row, and it came against the player who upset him in straight sets in the second round at Wimbledon in 2002. Agassi saved five set points in the opening set. . . . On Saturday, ANDREI PAVEL of Romania and GUILLERMO CAÑAS of Argentina each rallied from two sets down to reach the men's fourth round. Pavel beat 14th-seeded JIRI NOVAK of the Czech Republic, 4-6, 3-6, 7-5, 7-6 (3), 6-4. Cañas dashed the hopes of Britain's resurgent TIM HENMAN, seeded 11th, 6-7 (5), 5-7, 7-6 (3), 7-5, 9-7.
TENNIS
