Of all the leisurely outdoor activities affected by cold and awful weather -- jogging, picnicking, sunning yourself on a beach -- flying trapeze would seem to be high on the list. Jonathon Conant would certainly agree.
Mr. Conant operates Trapeze School New York, a popular high-flying venture in Hudson River Park a few blocks south of the Holland Tunnel. Just when his students have limbered up and the school, which consists of giant outdoor rigging, is bounding along, Mr. Conant has to shut the operation down because of cold weather. And any day it rains between April and October, the rigs lie empty.
''If you create a need for something but it's seasonal, it's frustrating for both clients and staff,'' said Mr. Conant, who brought the school from upstate New York two years ago. Because of the unusual space requirements of a trapeze school -- at least 10,000 square feet of floor space and 35-to 40-foot ceilings -- finding affordable indoor space in Manhattan has proved difficult. But he has come up with a potential solution.
Mr. Conant hopes to erect mesh netting that would go over the top of the rigging and let his students use the trapeze when it rained. During the winter, sides would be attached, encasing the space in a protective, climate-controlled womb.
This week, Mr. Conant will take the idea to members of Community Board 1 in hope of getting permission to move ahead with his plan. But Judy Duffy, the assistant district manager of the board, is pessimistic.
''Even though we like the trapeze school, I suspect this is going to be shot down,'' Ms. Duffy said. ''As an example, we just had a proposal for a skating rink, which was half the size, and it was denied. To put a structure like that on the river is difficult. View corridors are very important to people on the river.''
Mr. Conant agreed that ''people who have waterfront views are going to be concerned,'' but he said he had worked with engineers to create a structure that was semi-translucent and as unobstructive as possible. Residents who live on a building's ground floor or second floor, for instance, would not have their views compromised while only the mesh netting was in place, he said.
''I don't want to push this on the community,'' he said. ''We want something that's both beautiful and workable.''
What if the proposal were shot down? Mr. Conant paused and answered, ''I've been reluctant to do this, but we might have to look for indoor space in Brooklyn.''
STEVE KURUTZ
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: LOWER MANHATTAN
