Anselmo Marshall, 90, was recently in the cafeteria of the Central Harlem Senior Citizens Center, laughing and talking with friends, when Coral Aubert ran into him. At first blush, he seemed carefree, said Ms. Aubert, a volunteer at the center. But when she probed a little deeper, she found that he was actually anything but. He told her his visiting nurse was no longer tending to him daily, just once a week.
Ms. Aubert said that Mr. Marshall had asked her, '' 'Do you know how long it takes me to get dressed?' ''
Mr. Marshall has depended on a wheelchair for more than a decade. His right leg was amputated as a result of gangrene, a complication of triple-bypass surgery. His plight worried Ms. Aubert.
''If he falls -- and is by himself -- he could really hurt himself,'' she said. ''I told him he had to come see me.''
That afternoon, she began making phone calls about his case. ''He is like many of my seniors,'' she said. ''If you don't pull it out of them, they will never ask for help.''
Situations like Mr. Marshall's are part of a routine day for Ms. Aubert. She is a volunteer entitlement specialist at the center, on West 140th Street. Those at the center know that when she arrives each Thursday, the Problem Doctor is in.
When she is not with a client, she is on the phone with city welfare agencies, or poring through documents, trying to dissect a needy retiree's problem.
At 68, Ms. Aubert, a retired bank executive from Manhattan, could have chosen a less emotional assignment. She could have chosen not to volunteer. But her exchanges with peers in distress, she said, are more rewarding than any paying job.
''Community service is where my heart is,'' she said. Through the volunteer program, she feels useful, and has once again found a way to apply her skills in service to others.
She found her position through ACES, or Advocacy, Counseling and Entitlement Services, a branch of R.S.V.P., the Retired and Senior Volunteer Program, which was started 33 years ago by the Community Service Society. The society, also known as C.S.S., is one of the seven charities supported by the New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. The fund is in the final days of its annual fund-raising campaign.
Like other Neediest Cases charities, C.S.S. recognizes the value of volunteerism, to the volunteers as much as to the people they help. With that in mind, these agencies have used money received from the Neediest Cases Fund in support of volunteer programs.
According to C.S.S. officials, close to $200,000, or 15 percent, of the money it received last year from the Neediest Cases was used to cover travel and meal stipends for close to 9,000 volunteer professionals and technicians. These volunteers come from many fields -- business, social service, education, publishing and the arts. The volunteers have working relationships with more than 600 municipal departments and nonprofit agencies around the city.
This year, the Neediest Cases campaign is lagging in donations compared with the previous year's fund-raising effort. Among officials at the charities, there is particular concern about how this could affect volunteer programs. This is because the dip in donations coincides with city cutbacks in social service positions and programs.
''Volunteers bring value added over and above the staff'' by extending an organization's services, said Alina Molina, director of voluntary initiatives for R.S.V.P.
''Volunteers have the luxury of focus,'' she added. ''The staff in social services and agencies have to juggle many types of activities, while volunteers can focus on one and see it through.''
A Sense of Purpose
Volunteer initiatives involving senior citizens can be found in settings as diverse as retirement homes and public schools. The help that these programs provide to neighborhoods in need -- and the renewed sense of purpose they offer to older Americans -- provide the opportunity for a valuable form of volunteerism, many officials say.
R.S.V.P. provides prospective volunteers with extensive training.
Ms. Aubert, a divorced mother of two grown sons, attended an ACES/R.S.V.P. orientation in the fall of 2001. After that, she said, she was hooked. She learned about many public benefits programs -- Medicare, Medicaid, food stamps, Social Security.
By January 2002, she was placed at the Central Harlem Senior Citizens Center. The next month she was also giving her time at the Stanley Isaac Center on East 93rd Street in Manhattan, lending her skills to help people through the tax season. She helped recently widowed senior citizens as they faced filing returns by themselves for the first time.
At the Central Harlem Senior Citizens Center, Ms. Aubert enjoys uncovering the missing pieces of puzzles. She speaks to older people on fixed incomes. In many cases, they do not know what they are entitled to or what to do if their benefits are cut. All too often she hears about how they must choose between paying for medication or groceries.
She tries to ease these frustrations and find solutions. She has even gone to court for some elderly people, while accompanying others to hospitals.
''She has been a godsend,'' said Rita Carrington, executive director of the Central Harlem center. In particular, Ms. Carrington said, Ms. Aubert has earned the trust of the retirees, who often feel they are prey, and are sometimes cautious with strangers.
''When they have problems and they need to talk, I don't like to rush them,'' said Ms. Aubert, who sees up to six people a day. Sometimes, she said, they need nothing so much as a hug.
Her passion for helping others is inspired by her late mother and her faith, Ms. Aubert said.
She can remember her first act of charity. She was just 6 years old when she and her younger sister, Cecile Boatright, then 4, brought a neglected little girl to their Bronx apartment for supper.
''She looked so disheveled and sad -- we couldn't help but reach out to her,'' Ms. Aubert said.
Since then, she has never stopped. As an adult, she started a community dance workshop for at-risk children and a training center for the underprivileged.
A pivotal point in her life, Ms. Aubert said, was her sister's death from lung cancer in 1995. Watching a loved one die, she recognized her own mortality, she said.
Every day at the center, she is reminded of how quickly time passes. Through her clients, she learns a lot about programs that she may need some day.
Sometimes, their stories can be hard to hear.
To her, success is when she can change he quality of someone's life, allowing them to remain active and feel better.
But there is something even more basic, she says, to her enthusiasm for helping the elderly: ''I love them.''
Busy, Not a Burden
Ms. Aubert's work as an advocate for senior citizens is only one example of how retirees are giving their time to causes with support from the Neediest Cases and its beneficiary agencies. Others involve programs that serve children.
In the United States, 51 percent of 83,983,215 people 50 and older, volunteer in an organized program, according to the AARP. Of that volunteer population, almost half choose to work with children.
Shirley Banton is among them.
In November 2000, Ms. Banton became a volunteer with R.S.V.P.'s Experience Corps, a program focused on tutoring at-risk children. The intergenerational program is currently in place in five elementary schools in the South Bronx and four elementary schools in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, and will soon expand into all five boroughs.
''I didn't want a corporate or 9-to-5 job,'' said Ms. Banton, 58, who retired in September 1995 after more than two decades as a police officer and detective in the New York Police Department.
''I wanted to be busy, not a burden,'' she said. Her grown son, Shawn, 36, and two of his three children live with her in Co-op City in the Bronx. It was important that her late afternoons and evenings were free.
For Ms. Banton, the Experience Corps program was a perfect fit. She enrolled in the three-week orientation focusing on literacy and classroom assistance, including how to work with teachers to improve team building, and school safety policies and procedures.
She has volunteered at Public School 277 in the South Bronx, and in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, at Public School 81.
She is now at Public School 154 in Harlem, along with eight other volunteers who tutor four hours a day, four days a week in a classroom. The camaraderie is a bonus, she said.
This past fall, Ms. Banton met four new youngsters, among them 6-year-old Elijah Yates Nelson. Elijah was placed with Ms. Banton because of his low scores on reading and writing tests.
Ms. Banton said she was immediately taken with the boy and his one-front-tooth grin. But he was shy. She broke the ice with questions from one of his workbooks.
This was a simple beginning to a mutually beneficial relationship.
Elijah has discovered a love for reading. Through Ms. Banton's guidance, he has also developed a sense of pride.
''It makes you feel good,'' she said.
The one-on-one attention requires children to focus, instead of losing themselves in daydreams in the back of crowded classrooms. While she was a police officer, Ms. Banton saw just how easily children who dropped out of school got into trouble.
''When you spend days with them they warm up,'' she said. ''I like to see the kids when they catch on. Their faces light up and they say, 'I can read, I am getting it.' ''
Showing His Gratitude
Not all acts of kindness occur in organized programs. The AARP estimates that apart from the the 51 percent of people 50 and older who volunteer in organized programs, another 36 percent donate their time to others on a day-to-day basis in a less structured way.
Sometimes volunteering can be as close as an elevator ride.
When Yooman Chang, a social worker, needs to distribute her memos to the residents of the Scheuer House, a housing development for the elderly in Bayside, Queens, she knows who to call -- Jack Fontus.
Mr. Fontus, 78, lives on the third floor. A native of Cuba, the slight, petite man is more than happy to be her right hand.
''I started volunteering because she helped me,'' said Mr. Fontus.
Volunteering is his way of showing his gratitude.
It was a year ago that Mr. Fontus fell six months behind in rent after his marriage fell apart, and received a letter from the management office threatening eviction. In April, he turned to Ms. Chang, whose office is located on the main floor of Scheuer House, which is operated by Self Help Community Services. Self Help is, in turn, a beneficiary of UJA-Federation of New York, another of the charities supported by the Neediest Cases.
Ms. Chang, an employee of Self Help, was able to secure emergency cash assistance to cover his utilities and groceries. From January through July of last year, he received $1,400 provided by UJA-Federation through the Neediest Cases.
With his living expenses covered, Mr. Fontus paid his $156 monthly rent and the back rent in installments. Every two weeks he receives $110 from a no-fault insurance claim awarded to him since a car accident in 1984, and $344 monthly in Supplemental Security Income. The accident impaired his ability to earn a living as a cabinetmaker.
''I could do it, but not like when I was all right,'' he said. Since the accident, he has had trouble keeping his balance. He also suffers from persistent lower back pain.
More recently, he separated from his wife last January, amid tensions that led to restraining order against her for verbal and physical abuse in January of last year.
But despite his hardships, Mr. Fontus, a father of five, maintains a cheerful manner.
Ms. Chang said they have developed a real friendship. To show his appreciation for her help, Mr. Fontus began offering to take care of errands. ''I have 180 tenants in the building,'' said Ms. Chang. ''I communicate with them by memo. He comes down. I give it to him and he circulates it.''
''After all his problems, this makes him more relaxed,'' she said.
He has also become more outgoing. ''I used to spend my day in my apartment,'' he said. ''I played my music and I watched my TV.'' But by making his door-to-door visits, he has made new friends.
''I love to associate, to be nice and be helpful,'' he said.
Another older person who can relate to Mr. Fontus's impulse to volunteer is Barbara Gray, 82. She is a volunteer for the Tenants Advisory Board of her residence -- the Catherine Sheridan House in Astoria, Queens -- although she came to this role almost by accident.
Just as she was moving in a decade ago, she saw a flier on a bulletin board promoting an arts and crafts class. When she showed up, the instructor asked her about her talents.
Proudly, Ms. Gray showed off samples of crocheting and knitting. ''Before you knew it I was teaching the class,'' she said.
Over the last decade, she has seen her class grow and shrink from year to year. But no matter how low the attendance, she is in the crafts room each Monday, 1:30 to 3:30 p.m.
The handcrafted baskets, dolls, knitted sweaters, and napkins holders made by her and her students are not for their own pleasure. Instead, they are sold through either an Easter and Christmas boutique organized by Ms. Gray.
This past Christmas, Ms. Gray made $592. The money, and in addition to thousands she has raised, is used by the tenant board for parties and field trips -- outings that enhance the quality of life at Sheridan House, an independent senior housing supported by Catholic Charities, Brooklyn and Queens.
Catholic Charities is another of the charities supported by the Neediest Cases. Recently, in support of Ms. Gray and her volunteer effort, it drew $400 from the Neediest Cases to buy additional yarn and plastic canvas for the boutique.
Ms. Gray's volunteering goes beyond arts and crafts. Each month, she prepares monthly Mass at Sheridan House by carefully laying out the priest's vestments. ''The red wine has to be chilled,'' she said with a smile.
Meanwhile, she welcomes other tenants to drop by her one-bedroom apartment just to talk. ''Some people have lost a mate,'' she said.
If other older people in the building need a hand with simple activities, like going to grocery store, she'll happily add to her load on her next visit.
She lives alone and has never married. Cupid's arrow just never struck, she said. Perhaps it is because she has just been too busy.
''I am never bored,'' she said.
She has the mobility to be of help, and has not been slowed by illness. She even comes close to forgetting to mention that she had polio as a child that caused curvature of the spine, an ailment that she once worried might keep her from qualifying for her most valued volunteer experience. She was a machinist mate for the Naval Reserve unit called the Waves, Women Accepted for Voluntary Emergency Service.
''I went in Nov. 30, 1944, and I got out April 11, 1946,'' she said.
Before retiring, Ms. Gray worked for 34 years as part of the clerical staff at Blue Cross/Blue Shield. But much of her identity comes from her other life, as a volunteer.
Through her volunteer efforts, she has acquired a long list of nicknames. She has been called ''the toy lady'' by the hospitalized, terminally ill children for whom she delivered holiday toys. She has been an Apple Aide, or information guide, at La Guardia Airport.
Her good deeds were recognized October 2002, when Catholic Charities honored her with the Monsignor Thomas F. Cribbon Service Award.
''I volunteer because I enjoy it,'' she said. ''I think anyone who does not volunteer is really missing out.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,496,076.03  Recorded Thursday: 6,800.00  Total: $7,502,876.03
Last year to date: $7,682,882.89
