WITH signs of an upturn in employment, job hunting has suddenly become a more promising activity. But that does not mean it is simple: The economy's rate of job creation still lags behind the growth necessary to keep up with all the men and women who attempt to enter the work force each month. Making matters tougher still, plenty of today's job hunters have problematic résumés, because they have been unemployed, underemployed, or employed in positions where they have languished, along with the economy.
What is the most effective way to pursue a job, in a market that is still far from robust? Stephanie L. Marks, the principal consultant for Human Resources on Call, a firm in Ashland, Mass., that provides executive recruiting and career coaching for job hunters (hr-oncall.com), discussed strategies that work. Following are excerpts from the conversation:
Q. This is clearly a job market in which applicants need to stand out from the pack. But if your résumé is less than perfect, how can you make that happen?
A. No matter what the state of the job market or your résumé, some truths are timeless. Job candidates stand out when they make the extra effort to establish a relationship with the person who's doing the hiring. I've handled staffing searches for many companies, and I can tell you that the people who make the biggest impressions are the ones who follow up by phone or e-mail to thank me and to reiterate their strong interest in the job and the company.
It's particularly effective when people manage, in a 20- or 30-second message, to make a connection between something specific in their work experience and key details relating to the job opening. I'm impressed by people who make an effort to stay in touch, even if the original job they applied for wasn't the right one for them.
Q. But don't such people run the risk of seeming annoyingly persistent or even desperate?
A. I don't think so. I respect it when a job hunter asks me to keep him or her on my radar screen and works to make that happen. It's a matter of behaving professionally. If someone sends me an e-mail every couple of weeks or telephones me once a month to stay in touch, it's a sign of real interest.
Q. But so many job searches seem to take place on the Internet these days. How can an applicant make that personal connection?
A. For one thing, you can't just sit at your computer, look for online job postings, e-mail your résumé and wait for something great to happen. Most e-mail résumés just disappear into a black hole. Sometimes the job hunters whom I'm coaching will tell me, ''I e-mailed 30 résumés today.'' My response is, ''To whom? What do you know about the company? What's your strategy going to be for following up in a meaningful way?'' Job hunting through the Internet can be a waste of time, unless you do it the right way.
Q. What do you mean by that?
A. Well, think about the numbers. If I'm handling a job search for, say, a marketing position, I might list it on the Internet and receive 300 or more résumés. Who am I going to remember? The person who picks up the phone and calls me to leave a quick voice mail message: ''Hi. I'm John Smith. I saw your ad online, and I'm extremely interested. I've just e-mailed you my résumé.'' Hopefully, John will end with a quick sentence or two about how he believes he can make an impact on the company. True, I can't call back, at least not at that stage. But I've heard his name, and I can tell you that I'm going to make a point of looking for his résumé.
Q. But what about all those job postings that do not list anyone's name? Aren't they really encouraging job hunters to keep their distance?
A. You've got to work harder in those cases to make that personal connection, but it's every bit as important. The person who stands out will be the one who spends the time to do some due diligence, to research the company and try to find out who in human resources might be involved with the search. Maybe this will take some phone calls or a visit to the corporate Web site. I encourage job hunters to send e-mails to any Internet user groups or other networks they belong to -- maybe someone out there will be able to come up with a contact name or other useful advice about a particular company.
Q. What about the fear factor associated with personal contacts, especially when job hunters feel less than confident about their prospects?
A. I'm the first to admit that job hunting can be frightening. But you've got to take risks. As a coach, I try to help people see this as a time of change and of growth. If you don't come out of your comfort zone, you're probably not going to be able to make something good happen.
Q. What's the worst mistake a job hunter can make, besides hiding behind the computer?
A. Lack of preparation. I warn people, every time you answer the phone, you've got to be ready -- it could be a hiring manager on the other end. You've got to be prepared to communicate effectively, every minute of the day. One good technique is to keep index cards, alphabetically organized, about each job you've applied for. Keep notes on everything connected with your application, as well as what you've learned about the company. Write down a phrase describing how you could make an impact. That way, you'll be ready to make your best case, any time you get the chance.
Q. The big risk, of course, is sounding glib, rather than persuasive.
A. That's right, which is why people need to develop what I call a communication strategy for every job application. After all, every job and company is different. This becomes easier after you perform some due diligence. Let's say you read in a recent article or the latest annual report that the company is diversifying into a certain geographic region or new client base. You might want to prepare a sentence or two that reiterates your expertise in this area.
Q. Any words of advice for people who have been either unemployed or underemployed for a long stretch, now that employers have started hiring again?
A. It's important for them to take a step back and assess their past job searches. Have they been aggressively networking or just relying on a click-and-send approach? Are their résumés up to speed? Have they been looking for jobs at the wrong level? To some extent, people need to rely upon their instincts about this. The problem may be something permanent within their industry. Or maybe something needs to be changed about the way that they're presenting themselves.
Q. Give us some examples.
A. I often conduct mock interviews with my clients. I've seen people who are unable to make eye contact with an interviewer, or they slouch when they're asked questions. When people get nervous, irritating habits might surface. One of my clients kept clicking a pen. Another was a foot-tapper. You can change those habits, if you really work at it. It's a question of learning how to project self-confidence and enthusiasm.
Q. What else can be done?
A. That depends. Maybe you need to take some classes to refresh and upgrade your job skills. Maybe you need to work with a career coach to learn some more effective communication techniques. Or maybe you'll figure out that you need to reinvent yourself by finding ways to transfer your skills and interests into a more robust industry or job category.
Q. That sounds intimidating.
A. On the contrary, it's often invigorating and exciting for people to get to the point where they feel they have a positive plan for moving forward. What's frustrating is going around in circles, when all your job searches end in rejection and you don't know how to break the pattern.
Q. &amp; A.  Correction:  January 26, 2004, Monday  Because of an editing error, the front page of the special expanded Job Market section yesterday carried incorrect continuation page numbers for four articles. ''A Rosier Picture for Hiring'' continued on Page 6; ''Changing Careers'' on Page 4; ''Honing Your Skills'' on Page 4; and ''Take to the Streets?'' on Page 3. The Times regrets the inconvenience to readers.
