Five years ago, when James R. Van de Velde was publicly identified as a suspect in the killing of a Yale student, he watched his reputation incinerate. This month, when the Connecticut university he sued for libel agreed to a financial settlement, a small but integral piece of his name was restored.
Last week, Mr. Van de Velde settled the libel suit against Quinnipiac University in Hamden, winning $80,000 in damages for its false claim in 1998 that he was fired from two television internships after the university dismissed him from a graduate program in broadcast journalism. He is also married and has been working in the intelligence field.
The Quinnipiac dismissal of Mr. Van de Velde, a lecturer at Yale University and a former Navy intelligence officer, followed the stabbing death of his student, Suzanne Jovin, on Dec. 4, 1998. Her body was found in the East Rock section of New Haven, a quiet neighborhood of stately homes not far from the Yale campus and less than half a mile from where Mr. Van de Velde was living.
The killing of Ms. Jovin, 21, a smart, attractive senior from Germany, panicked the Yale community. She was stabbed 17 times in the back and neck; the police said she knew her attacker. The crime remains unsolved.
A little more than a month after the slaying, the New Haven Police Department publicly identified Mr. Van de Velde, her thesis adviser, and said he was in a pool of 5 to 10 suspects. No other suspects were identified. Yale officials canceled his classes and did not renew his contract. Mr. Van de Velde, who once hoped to be a network foreign affairs analyst, did appear on television: identified as a potential murderer. He had yearned for high-profile success, and now he was infamous.
And yet, Mr. Van de Velde, 43, a Yale graduate who lives outside Washington, has never been charged with the crime. He was interrogated for four hours after Ms. Jovin's death. In February 2000, he passed a lie detector test. He hired a detective to find the killer but said the New Haven police refused to share evidence with the investigator. In October 2001, Michael Dearington, the state's attorney for New Haven, announced that DNA from skin cells found under Ms. Jovin's fingernails belonged to a man but did not match that of Mr. Van de Velde.
Five years after Ms. Jovin's death, the police, who have announced no new leads, have yet to declare that Mr. Van de Velde is no longer a suspect. ''I don't think we've ruled out anybody completely,'' Bonnie Winchester, a department spokeswoman, said on Tuesday. She said Mike Quinn, a New Haven police detective, was investigating the case; neither Mr. Quinn nor Lt. Herman Badger, who directs the detective division in the department, returned several phone calls.
In addition to the Quinnipiac lawsuit, Mr. Van de Velde's lawyer and high-school friend, David T. Grudberg, has filed two others: a defamation suit against The Hartford Courant that is pending and a federal lawsuit against the New Haven Police Department and Yale University. That lawsuit charges Melvin H. Wearing, the retired New Haven police chief; four detectives; and Yale officials with causing Mr. Van de Velde to be publicly branded as a suspect in the Jovin killing.
But Mr. Van de Velde wants something money cannot buy: his good name. His lawyer said Tuesday that although the lawsuits can ''hold people accountable for what they've done to Jim, he isn't sure the Police Department will ever recant its statement implicating him.''
''I hope someday the New Haven Police Department will have the integrity to admit it wronged James Van de Velde,'' he said. ''I have real doubts whether that is going to happen.''
Short of taking out billboards, there are few outlets available to proclaim one's innocence. The billboard route would hardly suit Mr. Van de Velde, who most recently worked as a senior analyst for the Joint Intelligence Task Force for Combating Terrorism at the Defense Intelligence Agency after passing numerous background checks. Hence, he said, the lawsuits.
In the meantime, he has reached the sobering conclusion that he can never regain the time and opportunities lost after he was named a suspect. More than four years ago, a quote by Mr. Van de Velde in a New York Times Magazine article revealed his determination to do so: ''I want the life I had completely back. And I see no reason why I shouldn't be able to get it.''
But his comments last week suggested that he had gained a different perspective. Although he was cautious about releasing any details of his personal life, Mr. Van de Velde revealed that he had gotten married and that the experience had caused him to re-evaluate his goals.
''I discovered I have to achieve happiness as something personal,'' he said, in the deliberate phrases characteristic of the academic he once was. ''I can't expect it as a result of some achievement, status or wealth. I've found happiness in other ways.''
