IT took more than a year and a move to Detroit. But Lisa Rosevear finally has a job.
And that means the three creators of WeWantWork, a marketing campaign by and for a group of 43 jobless New Yorkers, are all gainfully employed at last, as are 27 other members of the group.
You may remember the WeWantWork campaign. A group of white-collar types, who had been unemployed for months started it back in September 2002. Tired of sitting at home answering the few help-wanted ads that seemed suitable, they decided to turn things around by advertising their very available selves, using guerrilla marketing, which emphasizes direct contact with those you're trying to reach.
The people who joined agreed to post their résumés on the group's Web site, WeWantWork.com, and to participate in the group's marketing events -- dressing up in business suits under placards saying ''We Want Work,'' for example, and handing out fliers on Manhattan street corners.
Their motto: ''We could be your most motivated employees!''
At the time, employment prospects in the city were pretty bleak; the jobless rate hit 8.3 percent in October 2002 and stayed at least that high for six months.
As an illustration of stubbornly high unemployment, the WeWantWork campaign was irresistible to reporters, and the group turned up in many newspapers, as well as on television and radio shows in the United States and overseas. The group also inspired similar self-help efforts in other cities, including Boston. Marc Seago, 34, one of WeWantWork's organizers, said he believed the group even had European imitators.
In addition to the 30 members who have found jobs, Mr. Seago said, some of the remaining 13 have found consulting or freelance work, though they are still looking for full-time jobs. The site is still online, but the original group did not accept new members, a decision it now regrets.
The group members' success in finding jobs may be partly attributable to the improving economy, though in New York City that improvement has been slow.
The city unemployment rate, which was edging down, turned back up to 7.9 percent seasonally adjusted last month, according to figures released by the state Department of Labor last week.
There was an uptick in employment in the city in late 2003, according to the city comptroller's office, but there were still 24,200 fewer jobs in the five boroughs in November than a year earlier.
So perhaps it is not surprising that many of the group's members moved. One went as far as Australia, Mr. Seago said.
The third organizer, Emily Malatesta, 36, found a marketing job in Washington late in 2002. Leaving New York ''was not necessarily my first choice,'' she said recently, ''but you do what you have to do.''
Her success at finding a new job was not directly related to WeWantWork, Ms. Malatesta said. Rather, she got the lead that panned out by going to a trade show that she used to attend when she was employed.
But the campaign helped her emotionally and mentally, she said, by giving her something positive to do and to talk about when she went on interviews. Mr. Seago said that his involvement in WeWantWork actually opened doors for him, because people were so intrigued by the group.
At one interview, he recalled, he spent an hour talking about a potential consulting job involving a corporate newsletter for a financial firm and the other discussing WeWantWork. He got the newsletter job, which eventually turned into a full-time position as marketing director.
''What's actually most interesting is that I don't have financial experience,'' Mr. Seago said. But he added that one reason the firm was willing to take a chance on him was because WeWantWork ''shows initiative, and that you can actually produce something.''
WeWantWork led directly to a new job for Ms. Rosevear, 36, but in an offbeat way. She had worked at Hill &amp; Knowlton, a big public relations firm, representing technology companies -- her résumé lists Microsoft, Olympus and Motorola, among others -- and was laid off shortly after 9/11. Her boss eventually left, too, and the two lost touch.
But last year, the former boss, Jeanne-Marie Baron, was chatting with an acquaintance in New York, who asked if she had been reading about Ms. Rosevear's exploits with WeWantWork. That prompted Ms. Baron to track down Ms. Rosevear and offer her a job at a publicity firm that she and a partner had started in Detroit.
''She recruited me to come in and work with her -- the person who had to lay me off,'' Ms. Rosevear said. ''It feels good.''
Correction:  January 26, 2004, Monday  Because of an editing error, the front page of the special expanded Job Market section yesterday carried incorrect continuation page numbers for four articles. ''A Rosier Picture for Hiring'' continued on Page 6; ''Changing Careers'' on Page 4; ''Honing Your Skills'' on Page 4; and ''Take to the Streets?'' on Page 3. The Times regrets the inconvenience to readers.
