NO one trying to settle the fortunes and future of classical music will argue against education. It might even end up saving the day. Fewer and fewer people know less and less about Beethoven and Brahms. They need to find out.
But putting education on the front line of classical music's fight for survival is both a good and a dangerous thing. It assumes that listeners, once their ignorance turns to enlightenment, will return music to health. In some cases it may, but do not confuse knowing with loving. Education generates light but not always heat.
Schools have not done a good job of passing classical music along, and popular culture has grown hugely powerful. Mozart's music remains central for the enclaves that still embrace it. But set against the avalanche of rock recordings and concerts, Mozart is for the world at large -- despite wishful thinking -- a fringe, not a center.
Music, for the last two generations more than at any earlier time, has become for lawyers and day laborers alike almost an expression of current events, a form of self-definition both moral and political. It is perfectly reasonable to argue that music 200 years old possesses qualities that bear deeply on our immediate world. It still does for a lot of us, but tell that to the young people pouring into rock concerts around the country.
Several generations have been lost, and the classical music world hopes that education will set young people and their parents right. But what does education mean? If we can agree that it is learning to understand, ''learn'' seems to mean two things. The two things go together.
First meaning: Learning to understand equals getting to know. Joe across the street is weird. His clothes are funny. He speaks the way people spoke 200 years ago or in new languages no one has ever heard of. Spending time with Joe gets me past his strange habits; and when I begin to understand what he is saying, Joe and I become fast friends.
Second meaning: Learning to understand equals finding out how it works. I walk out in a field and see a lot of colors and shapes. It's not unpleasant, but it's out of focus. I don't know a spruce tree from a pine, ferns from moss, or daisies from day lilies. But I want to see and smell my field more acutely, so I learn the names of things and where they grow and don't grow.
Naming things gives my senses better aim. Just knowing the names of what is under the hood of a car is a big step toward appreciating how the engine works. Knowing how sonata form functions in a Mozart sonata helps me hear it better. When a Bach fugue gets really busy, I know we are at the stretto and getting close to the end. Knowing that Messiaen's ''Turangalila Symphony'' operates with layers piled on one another -- in other words, more vertically than horizontally -- clears the head, makes a passageway for all the strange new sounds to come inside my mind.
Both ways do a lot of good, but at the end of the process, there is a gap: I have learned to understand by 1) getting to know and 2) figuring out how things work. Now I am ready for appreciation (and what a cottage industry ''music appreciation'' has become). I read books, go to lectures and classes, ponder required reading by way of recordings. I analyze. I learn a little history. But do I ''appreciate''? Sometimes, but not necessarily.
That leap from ''understand'' to ''appreciate'' is long and blind. Respectful cognizance and enlightenment through diligent listening tell me that Ralph Shapey was a brilliant composer, but at the end of a long day, how many of us take home his string quartets to cuddle with affection? The word ''understand'' remains elusive. I don't understand an elm tree, but give me the right one, and I like to sit under it. Knowing its biology may help, but the heart is not a biologist.
An implicit contract has been signed but is not necessarily being honored. It states that if I understand a piece of music, I'm likely to like it, too. This is not true. No amount of experience and analysis can by itself induce the stab of communication between art and its beholder.
General audiences are paradoxical personalities. They lapse into enthusiasms over Three Tenors schlock and Lang Lang histrionics at the keyboard. But in the long run, general audiences are reliable critics. They can be momentarily scammed, but they eventually go toward what is good and away from what isn't.
Anecdotal experience and considerable travel tell me that audiences of doctors, lawyers, teachers and sociologists do not like most of the music being written in their time. This is readily quantified by the sound of fleeing footsteps at the concert hall, silence at the box office and vacant spaces in front of certain record bins of your local music store. Calling these people cultural rabble, needing to be bathed in enlightenment, is not helpful. It is also not true. Knowing all about a piece of music and not liking it might not be the fault of the knower, if in fact it is a fault at all.
The principle of music education shines bright, but the devil has had a good time turning it to his purposes. Where, indeed, can composers of large ambition and smaller talent more easily explain away their lack of fame and fortune? Listeners lack education, it is said. Ignorance must be turned to understanding; afterward how can they help but ''appreciate'' my last tone poem?
Sitting passively in the dark, audiences make nice scapegoats. They have been intimidated and lectured to, and they respond with remarkable sweetness and humility. In the face of new pieces they do not like, audience members with bold opinions on Middle East politics and viable stock purchases twitch uncomfortably. ''That was interesting, wasn't it.''  ''I haven't heard it before, so it's hard to say.''  ''I'd like to hear that some more.''
One passes these gaggles of equivocaters longing for an expression of joy or an outburst of loathing. Let them be wrong, and sometimes -- perhaps often -- they are, but grant them an opinion. How can music prosper without a listenership that has some kind of feeling, good or bad, about what it is hearing?
For listeners swayed in the right direction by music education and music appreciation courses, I am deeply grateful. The downside of music education is not only that it confuses understanding with love; it threatens an arrogance that classical music can ill afford. If we put it in the wrong hands with the wrong motives, we end up with a superior class charged with remedying the illiteracy of the unwashed. The consumer, it would seem, bears the fault. The product is rarely held accountable.
MUSIC
