JOE LAURO is a Long Island man, born and raised in Massapequa. Although he founded his company, which collects film footage and stills of musical and other performances, in Manhattan in 1991, the next year, he moved it to East Hampton.
In 1993, he moved fulltime from Manhattan to Shelter Island, where he had been spending weekends for 10 years. The 47-year-old Mr. Lauro lives there still, with his wife and 5-year-old son. In December 2001, he moved the company, now called Historic Films Inc., to Greenport.
For his latest project, he has produced a documentary, directed by Don McGlynn, about the blues singer Howlin' Wolf. The movie, ''The Howlin' Wolf Story,'' is to have its East Coast theatrical premiere on Tuesday at the Cinema Arts Center in Huntington.
Howlin' Wolf was born Chester Arthur Burnett on a farm in West Point, Miss., in 1910. He had a hard childhood, running away from home when he was 13. People called him ''Howlin' Wolf'' because he was frightened by stories his grandfather told about a wolf who would eat young boys who misbehaved.
He learned to play the guitar at 13, and until World War II, performed in small towns throughout the Deep South. After serving in the war, he moved to Memphis, where in 1951, he made his first record. Wolf later became part of the seminal blues scene in Chicago that also featured Muddy Waters, Willie Dixon, B.B. King, James Cotton and others.
The recordings Wolf made in the 1950's and '60s, and his tours in Europe in the latter decade, made a huge impression on younger performers, particularly in England. The documentary includes footage of Wolf's only national television appearance in the United States, in 1965 on the ABC show ''Shindig.'' The headliners were the Rolling Stones, who insisted that the producers hire Wolf. As he performed, the five Stones sat at his feet.
In 1971, five years before he died, Wolf recorded the ''London Sessions'' album with members of the Stones, Eric Clapton, Ringo Starr and Steve Winwood.
The documentary includes clips of Wolf performing and interviews with his two daughters, admirers, sidemen in his various bands and blues luminaries. The performance footage complements the biographer Mark Hoffman's comments: ''He was a wild man on stage. He was like a feral beast. He was the Wolf.''
Mr. Lauro, who plays bass in the local band the Lone Sharks, which is performing at Mister Beery's in Bethpage on Saturday, said, ''I've always been involved in music, and I've especially loved roots music.''
''I've always been blown away by Wolf,'' he added. ''There's been nothing long and intense enough done on him and his impact. But what made the difference is that when Don and I started searching around, we found we had a lot of footage to really make Wolf come alive.''
Historic Films, which was in business as A.R.I.Q. Footage Inc. until 1995, has collected over 40,000 hours of performances of blues, country, jazz, rock and disco, as well as television programs and commercials, feature films, newsreels and other footage filmed between 1925 and 1995. It is essentially a film library, licensing the footage for a fee.
Mr. Lauro graduated from the State University of New York at Plattsburgh and earned a master's degree in cinema studies at New York University. He has produced one other documentary, ''Louis Prima: The Wildest,'' about the jazz trumpeter and singer. Also directed by Mr. McGlynn, the film is available on video.
For his next project, Mr. Lauro is considering making a documentary on the Harlem Festival, held in the summer of 1969. Historic Films has footage of the all-day and -night event, which featured performances by Stevie Wonder, Sly and the Family Stone, Moms Mabley and the Staple Singers.
Mr. Lauro said he was comfortable living and working on the Island.
''I'm a homeboy, and I know how to do things and how to deal with people on Long Island from having grown up here,'' he said. ''It's much different here from the way Nassau County has become, but I'm reminded a lot of Massapequa when I was 10 years old.''
''The Howlin' Wolf Story'' will be shown on Tuesday at 7:30 p.m. at the Cinema Arts Center, 423 Park Avenue, Huntington. Information: (631)423-3456.
FILM
