THE résumé, career counselors say, is one of the most vital elements to the job search, especially when so many people are looking for work and applicants are lined up for every opening.
Résumés, they say, should be clear, in a traditional, plain-vanilla format: name at the top; a summary of one or two sentences; then a succinct review of employers and jobs held, in reverse chronological order.
They should be one page, tops; usually, you have to account for only the last 10 years. You should look at your résumé the way employers see it: Is there continuity in your work history? Have you jumped around too much? Be prepared to explain what you did, what you accomplished and why you changed jobs.
''The first thing I look for is a concrete, concise statement that covers their objective, as well as some essence of their experience,'' said Charles O'Neill, the owner of Diversified Management Resources, a recruiting firm in Peterborough, N.H. ''Don't expect people to understand what you've accomplished unless you tell them. General résumés just don't work.''
Mr. O'Neill and Stephanie A.R. Shirit, the founder and chief executive of Resource Associates, a job-search firm in Las Vegas, suggest that job seekers create résumés for each position they want, emphasizing strengths and interests particularly geared to the specific job. Do not lie, and avoid smarmy phrases like, ''I could make a real contribution,'' or ''I'm a people person.''
''Everybody's a people person,'' Ms. Shirit said. ''How are you different? You could say, 'I'm a people person because I'm very positive, focused, cost effective, a team player.' They don't care about your children, religion, or community activities. You can put these things down as additional activities because they show what kind of a person you are, but you don't have to list every single thing. Try and keep it professional.''
Discussing people who have been out of work, Ms. Shirit said: ''What were you doing? Why were you unemployed? You got laid off, but then what did you do? Were you trying to change careers? Did you volunteer? Go back to school? Start a business?
''Emphasize the positive things you did,'' she added. ''People have to have some kind of income; unemployment runs out. You probably weren't home eating bon-bons.''
Ms. Shirit recently advised a client hoping to change her job as a retail executive to public relations, a move the client feels she could make with relative ease. Ms. Shirit agreed that it was a possible transition but that the client's résumé needed updating to reflect her new goals. ''One of her bullet points,'' Ms. Shirit said, ''was 'executed overall boutique operations.' That's good -- executed is a good word. But then she had things like, 'Hiring and training of entirely new team.' That doesn't tell me anything. Accentuate what you did. Be specific. You have bullets there for a reason: to highlight your skills.''
John Karras, director of graduate and Web-based career services at DeVry University in Chicago, calls the years between jobs the ''trade-off factors'' or ''value added,'' when a job seeker can develop extra assets like international travel, fluency in a foreign language, advanced degrees or strong technical or computer skills. ''Focus on the day-to-day activities that may be transferable from position to position,'' he said. ''Companies are often asked what they look for, and they say, 'A leader, a problem solver, someone who is dependable.' They rarely list job experience.''
It is also important to focus on job responsibilities rather than job title, because titles can be ambiguous. ''Take an inventory of the responsibilities you've had over the course of your careers and prioritize them in terms of points of marketability for the job sought,'' Mr. Karras said. ''List the most relevant point first, even if it relates to something done many years ago.''
What's more, you don't have to put your age on your résumé, or list your year of college graduation. Employers in many industries -- especially those that do not require a special degree, like law or medicine -- enjoy hiring older people because they are often more focused and know what they can and cannot do.
However, ''If the issue is really breadth of experience rather than age -- if, for example, you have more experience than your potential supervisor -- address the issue head on, turning a potential negative into a positive,'' Mr. O'Neill said. '''As you'll see, I've managed teams of people before. I understand the challenges you face. I can help you succeed. I look forward to the chance to roll up my sleeves and get the job done.'''
