It is easy to make a nickname in a housing project where people know their neighbors: Just cut a name in half and repeat the first syllable.
And like that, Timothy Stansbury Jr. became Tim-Tim, a diminutive term of affection that belied a life full of grown-up responsibilities.
In the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood where Mr. Stansbury lived, that simply rhymed childish name was used mostly in his grandmother's apartment, where he had a room.
There, in the hours after Mr. Stansbury was shot dead by a police officer early yesterday, was what remained of a busy life ended at age 19 -- neatly stacked compact discs, two video-game systems and a stereo -- a teenager's things. Above them, on a dresser, were the trappings of the adult he was becoming, a man who needed a backup everything: three cellphones, and toiletries in pairs.
There were pictures, too, of the sort that made the subject look more like a Tim-Tim. They were taken years ago, when his smiling was done clownishly and produced dimples and lines on his face. ''This is when he was a baby,'' said Timothy Stansbury Sr., his father.
The younger Mr. Stansbury was no longer that. His more recent fun was found composing rhymes or competing on the basketball court in the Louis Armstrong Houses, where he was a point guard, to the extent that positions matter in street ball, his friends said.
Basketball time was a luxury for a young man with a steady job, so Mr. Stansbury usually just dressed like a player, one from long ago. He favored throwback jerseys, new shirts made to look like those worn by the professional athletes of decades past, said Carl Johnson, 18, a neighbor and onetime schoolmate who goes by the name Cash.
On Friday afternoon, Mr. Stansbury showed up in a basketball jersey at the McDonald's restaurant at 1275 Fulton Street and changed into his uniform, said Shamecca Hayes, 20, a manager. Mr. Stansbury was a quiet worker, but he knew what he liked.
''He liked being on the register,'' Ms. Hayes said. It was a steady job, but demanding, and the rewards were few.
His shifts began right after school, Monday through Friday from 3 to 10 p.m. After 17 months and eight days in the employ of McDonald's, Mr. Stansbury was paid $5.15 an hour, the federal minimum wage, according to computer records at the restaurant.
His mind seemed to be on another source of income on Friday night, Ms. Hayes said, this one a one-time gain: ''All he would talk about,'' she said, ''was doing his income taxes.''
Mr. Stansbury stayed a half-hour late to help clean that night, and made his way home walking east on Lexington Avenue, according to Mr. Johnson, who said he spoke to Mr. Stansbury inside 315 Lexington Avenue, another of the Armstrong Houses' four-story brick buildings.
That route would have taken him past sights he had seen much of his life -- abandoned shopping carts and murals honoring slain young men, a brightly painted rendering of a young man in a blue cap looking off to nowhere, a picture of Jamal, with the dates 1973 to 1999, on a motorcycle surrounded by big red hearts representing the fondness and grief of people named Tiffany and Lil Pop.
Somewhere in the neighborhood yesterday, Mr. Stansbury's father and Mr. Johnson said, a 17-year-old girl named Patrice was in mourning, bereft of a boyfriend she had been dating ''for a minute,'' Mr. Johnson said, using a slang term that means a long time.
Word of Mr. Stansbury's death was spreading quickly through the housing complex, where people know one another, where they make up goofy, rhyming nicknames for their friends, where they move fluidly from one building to the next, as Mr. Stansbury and his friends were doing when he was killed, the police said.
Mr. Stansbury had described this aspect of life in the Armstrong Houses in one of his rhymes, said Jason Walker, 21, a friend and a McDonald's co-worker.
Mr. Walker repeated the rhyme, which started out using a slang term for a place to live. It went like this:
I got two cribs,
One for the getaway,
So I could see the better days.
