THE PERFECT WIFE
The Life and Choices of Laura Bush.
By Ann Gerhart.
Illustrated. 206 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
FROM the very beginning, Laura Bush has been presented as the un-Hillary: a traditional wife and mother, who embraced only the most uncontroversial causes in public policy -- like the importance of early reading skills. A woman more likely to throw herself into decorating a presidential getaway in Texas than reinventing the American health care system. Modest, unambitious, dedicated to her man.
And yet, just as Hillary Rodham Clinton was more complicated than her feminazi image, surely Laura Bush has a few currents, a little tension, in her inner life. After all, as Ann Gerhart writes in ''The Perfect Wife'' this is a bright, educated, exceedingly well-read woman, with many liberal friends who cannot abide her husband's conservatism. She has a separate intellectual life that leads her to opera and poetry and serious literature -- a life that, well, seems an odd match with the interests of her husband. Beneath her placid exterior, Gerhart sees ''an independence that seems almost subversive.''
But there are limits to it, Gerhart suggests: that separate intellectual life cannot veer into the issues of the day, or cause her husband any problems. Mrs. Bush's plans for a poetry symposium, for example, came to a screeching halt when some of the invited poets threatened to showcase their opposition to the war in Iraq. ''The deal always has seemed to be this: Go off to the ballet, Laura, or read Dostoyevsky, but don't expect that George will follow,'' Gerhart writes. ''Through much of her married life, she has managed to do this delicate dance: She will have her friends and her interests, and she will support her husband expertly and never embarrass.''
To Gerhart, a Washington Post reporter who presents herself as the archetypal overextended working wife and mother, Mrs. Bush's deal ''presents an excruciating tension.'' But does it feel that way to Mrs. Bush?+The first lady, who declined to cooperate in this biography, remains sphinxlike on this and many other questions, aided by a White House message machine that sometimes seems determined to drain not only controversy but also content out of any public statement. At one point, an aide to Mrs. Bush scolded Gerhart for suggesting the first lady had undergone a transformation after the attacks of 9/11. ''Don't use that word,'' the aide said. ''She hates that word, 'transformation.' ''
Despite those obstacles, Gerhart has written an interesting book that at times makes Mrs. Bush seem a modern version of those 19th-century Edith Wharton wives, finding their own rich private lives amid the hard conventions of marriage and motherhood. Gerhart does what any good reporter does when her subject declines to cooperate. She talks to friends, acquaintances, others who grew up in the same world of Midland, Tex., in the 1950's and 1960's.
By Gerhart's telling, that world had many of the virtues of a small town, but it was also rigidly segregated, bound by strict gender stereotypes and so ideologically polarized that the diners at one of the best restaurants in town burst into applause when the owner announced that John F. Kennedy had just been shot.
The central drama of Mrs. Bush's youth, and the one that perhaps more than anything else accounts for her extraordinary reserve, came when she was 17. She drove her parents' car through a stop sign and collided with another car. The boy in that other car, who was killed in the accident, was a good friend and a popular high school athlete. Gerhart talks to old friends of Mrs. Bush who say that nobody talked to her about the accident when she returned to school, a few weeks later. She herself has talked about it very little -- at least publicly -- ever since.
Pretty, popular, now quieter, Laura soldiered on. She went off to Southern Methodist University, settled on teaching, ''a conventional and perfectly acceptable choice for a West Texas girl to make,'' and built a single life -- working as a teacher and librarian in underprivileged schools, hanging out with friends in Austin, many of them liberals. Then, suddenly, at the age of 30, she began dating the rakish man known to his Midland friends as ''Bush boy.'' Six weeks after their first date, they were engaged.
The advantages of the match for George W. Bush seemed apparent. ''Golly, she can calm him down,'' his father, George H. W. Bush, declared. Her mother-in-law, Barbara Bush, described her early on as ''first lady material.'' As for Laura Bush, she had acquired her life's work. ''She knew with assurance that he needed her,'' Gerhart writes. ''And she wanted to be needed.'' She made a home for him, helped him quit drinking and occasionally reined him in. When he declared he wanted Osama bin Laden ''dead or alive,'' she ''sidled up to him and said, 'Bushie, are you gonna git 'im?' ''
She also softened his conservative image. In Austin, ''people who knew Laura socially or worked with her on projects came to assume she was far more liberal than her husband,'' Gerhart writes, although ''there was never any hard evidence for this.'' In fact, Mrs. Bush's independent streak can seem very well hidden. She knows firsthand the problems of public schools, the difficulty of imposing new standards without the resources to meet them, but deferred, again and again, to others, Gerhart says. ''In the end, she is an old-fashioned first lady. She moves in the directions she is asked to move. Goes where she is told. Nobody urges her to do otherwise.''
Of course, she holds an impossible job -- unelected, ceremonial, but laden with all the conflicts attached to the role of women these days. Nancy Reagan's steely definition of traditional political wifedom is as offensive to many Americans as Hillary Rodham Clinton's aggressive policy making is to many others. The position of Dr. Judith Steinberg Dean, Howard Dean's wife, makes more and more sense; she has tried to stay out of politics, and has said she intends to maintain her medical practice if her husband wins the White House -- although tellingly she was pushed into the familial political tableau during the New Hampshire primary.
Laura Bush's survival strategy as a political wife may be found in the comment attributed to her many years ago, when she was brought, as a young bride, to one of the Bush clan's athletic gatherings at Kennebunkport. According to Barbara Bush, Dorothy Walker Bush, the family matriarch at the time, demanded of Laura, ''And what do you do?'' Laura Bush supposedly replied, ''I read, I smoke and I admire.''
Of course, Laura Bush later denied saying that. A little too subversive, perhaps.
Robin Toner is a senior correspondent in the Washington bureau of The Times.
