THE announcement earlier this month that almost a quarter of the faculty at the private Ross School in East Hampton will not be rehired for the next school year has set off shock waves. ''I guess the most upsetting thing is all the changes in the staff,'' said Amanda Kyser, whose 16-year-old daughter, Gigi Anson, has been at Ross for three years.
Gigi, a sophomore at Ross, said, ''We don't need a statue of the 'Winged Victory,''' a reference to the enormous statue outside the school's main entrance. ''We need good teachers.''
Eight full-time and 10 part-time teachers will be cut, out of a total of 66 full-time and 20 part-time faculty members. The current enrollment is 278 students.
Debra McCall, who has taught at Ross for nine years, said it would be hard to see colleagues go. ''I love all these people, but we had been living another kind of existence,'' she said. ''We had been very engaged in a lot of initiatives and experimenting, and all of sudden we have to think about sustainability.''
Ross, an experimental school for grades 5 through 12, was founded by Courtney and Steven Ross in 1991. Mr. Ross, who died in 1992, was the chairman of Time Warner. His widow, now Courtney Ross Holst, has been the school's principal supporter, subsidizing about half of the cost of schooling. Tuition ranges from about $16,000 to $18,000 a year, depending on the grade.
According to tax records for the 2000-01 school year, the most recent records available, the school received about $25 million in donations. Mary Ann McCaffrey, a public-relations consultant for the school, confirmed that most of that money had come from Mrs. Ross Holst.
Ken Jackson, the head of Ross's Upper School, denied reports that Mrs. Ross Holst was planning to withdraw her support now that her daughter, Nicole, had graduated. ''I have spoken to Courtney, and she wants to position the school so it can continue but not be founder-based,'' he said. ''I have no basis for believing that Courtney is going to be withdrawing support.''
A spokesman for Mrs. Ross Holst said that she was traveling in Europe and that she would not agree to an interview. Steve Schapoff, the school's chief financial officer, would not discuss the cuts and would not say how much Mrs. Ross Holst intended to contribute in the future.
For the first time, Ross parents are being asked to make contributions beyond their tuition payments. In December, the school had its first fund-raiser, a dinner dance that raised $100,000. A golf outing is planned in the spring, with a goal of raising $150,000.
Ross is supplementing its budget in other ways. For example, the Bridgehampton public school pays $20,000 a year to have breakfast and lunch delivered from Ross's innovative cafeteria, and 20 East Hampton High School students take classes at Ross in culinary arts and landscaping, which brings in $120,000.
The school is also cutting back. Courses in music, philosophy and drama have been pared. Latin has been taken out of the regular curriculum but is available to students at an extra charge. Trips abroad are fewer and are an added cost for tuition-paying parents.
Despite the cuts, Ross could face more financial hurdles next fall, when the Hampton Day School at the Morriss Center, a private school in Bridgehampton, plans to open a high school in East Hampton. Janet Stork, the executive director of the Morriss Center and the Hampton Day School, said: ''I think there is room on the East End for good educational programs. We overlap, but it's not competition.''
Correction:  February 22, 2004, Sunday  A picture caption in the Long Island section on Sunday with an article about the elimination of 18 teaching positions at the Ross School in East Hampton reversed the numbers of full-time and part-time jobs to be cut. As the article said, it is 8 full-time and 10 part-time jobs, not 10 full-time and 8 part-time.
