ARTHUR RUSSELL -- For much of his short professional life, the cellist-singer-composer Arthur Russell looked likely to be the next great thing, but he died of complications of AIDS in 1992 basically unrecognized. An Iowan who had studied classical and Indian music in California, he came to New York in the mid-70's and had his mind blown by disco. He found not only the almighty drone in it, but also its sweetness and humanity. He probably figured that the rhythm could serve as a platform for everything he was interested in. The subtle funk tracks on ''Calling Out of Context'' (Audika Records) -- including some of his last work, songs from an unfinished album called ''Corn'' -- are framed by his own sad story, but ultimately it forms a heroic one, about ambition and redemption through sound, pleasure and ideas.
FRANK HEWITT -- Speaking of dying unrecognized: there is a romantic conception that this happens to great jazz musicians. If that were the case, it would mean that greatness is common in jazz, which isn't particularly true, or that lots of great musicians don't seek recognition, which is even less true. But the pianist Frank Hewitt played frequently at the West Village basement club Smalls until his death at 66 in 2002, and he was the exception: a genuinely high-level, genuinely unrecognized jazz pianist. (Incidentally, he was never reviewed in The New York Times.) Hewitt was a bebopper and a ballad player who was exceptionally talented, if lacking sufficient originality to make people forget the competition. The evidence is on ''We Loved You,'' a posthumous recording on the newly formed Smalls Record label and -- hard to believe-- his first record. He chose lovely, relaxed tempos and improvised flowingly and casually; when he plays standards, they come with curiously dramatic solo introductions, improvised verses and a young rhythm section that knows his moves.
FLY -- A cooperative jazz group that in an earlier incarnation was known as the Mark Turner-Larry Grenadier-Jeff Ballard trio (with Mr. Turner on saxophone, Mr. Grenadier on bass and Mr. Ballard on drums). By either name, it represents a new kind of tenor-saxophone trio music, partnering Mr. Turner's astringent thinking and clear tone with the rhythm section's grooves. It reflects a new attitude of jazz, too: instead of scrambling to fill the space, Mr. Turner lays back trustingly, demonstrating a kind of reticence that you hardly ever hear among serious jazz tenor players. The tunes on ''Fly'' (Savoy Jazz), the group's first album -- all originals except for Jimi Hendrix's ''Spanish Castle Magic'' (not the greatest choice) -- are so simple, stark and moody that any chordal instrument played above a whisper would have utterly changed the balance. The threesome are boiling their music down to its essence, which has long been a ploy of avant-gardist jazz but only rarely of the mainstream..
JENNY SCHEINMAN -- A cool-headed violinist and composer who's worked with Bill Frisell, she shares his wide range of expression: in her case, jazz and nearly anything else that has included violin. Her third album, ''Shalagaster'' (Tzadik), hops all over, from harmonized violin-and-harmonium lines as streamlined and neat as a Michael Nyman string quartet to something that sounds like a triple-meter Turkish dance (''Wisacre'') to a lovely piece of bucolic-Americana classicism (''New View of the Horse'') to tango to elegiac Middle Eastern music. All these elements are filtered through her imagination and come out with her own unifying sensibility.
PACO DE LUCÍA -- This great flamenco guitarist sounds as if he's from Andalusia; he also sounds as if he's from Mars, with sudden runs that flash up the neck and have the (seemingly divinely inspired) speed of improvisations of Indian music and the clarity of the best Baroque guitarists. On his new album, ''Cositas Buenas'' (Blue Thumb/Verve), confirming that outer-space feeling, some of the singers' voices are digitally processed to sound like machines. You can hear the physical closeness of Gitano music-making: the musicians are almost in each other's skin, yelling at each other on a particularly devastating rhythmic snap. At the same time it's got a little post-production chill; he has included the voice of Camarón de la Isla, the incomparable flamenco singer who died in 1992, from old studio tapes they made together. In all, it's a tense, peculiar album, with fascinating details and alarming virtuosity.
MARY LOU WILLIAMS -- ''There's so many different forms of jazz, it isn't even funny,'' she says between numbers, on ''Piano Jazz: McPartland/Williams,'' the latest in the CD series of Marian McPartland's radio broadcasts. (The original broadcast was in 1978; the CD is released by the Jazz Alliance and distributed through Concord Records.) So after some soulful free improvising -- the new sound, circa 1978 -- on a piece called ''Baby Man,'' by John Stubblefield, Williams plays her own ''What's Your Story, Morning Glory?,'' which was a hit in 1940, a great, expansive strolling blues with old-fashioned upholstery. And later, introducing ''Rosa Mae'': ''I'd like to play this little rock thing I wrote. It has a rock rhythm, but I put the blues back on top of it.'' It's a commonly held belief that the best jazz players should play the music from all eras, but few have been interested enough to do it.
MUSIC: PLAYLIST
