CROFTON'S FIRE
By Keith Coplin.
275 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. $21.95.
When the flaxen-haired dandy and Indian fighter George Armstrong Custer rode out of Dakota Territory toward Montana in the spring of 1876, no one expected him to gallop into legend in the fashion that he did. It was the country's centennial year, Manifest Destiny was in full flower and Custer had even been bruited as presidential material.
It is a curiosity of history that we know little about Custer's final moments at the Little Bighorn, where he and more than 200 troopers of his Seventh Cavalry were annihilated. The only witnesses were Indians, most unable to identify Custer even if they had been aware of his presence, which they weren't at the time of the battle, as Evan S. Connell makes clear in his wonderful ''Son of the Morning Star'' (the name some Indians applied to Custer). This has left the door open to novelists like Thomas Berger, in whose farcical frontier novel, ''Little Big Man,'' Custer spends the end caviling against James Fenimore Cooper's idea of the noble red man, and at one point picks up the Seventh's guidon to wave in great semicircles, ''basically invulnerable even in defeat,'' as Berger has it.
But was the end, perhaps, more ignoble? Enter Keith Coplin with his jaunty first novel, ''Crofton's Fire,'' the tale of a soldier who survived not only the Little Bighorn but went on to fight Spaniards in Cuba and the Zulu in South Africa with the British -- a sort of übersoldier of empire who is fully aware of its contradictions.
''We all disliked Custer, a braggart, a malefactor, a hound for glory,'' Lieutenant Michael Crofton tells us. ''But, oh, the man cut a figure on horseback.'' Crofton, who narrates this tale of military adventure and misadventure, was part of a support group that had been ordered to find a trail for Custer's supply wagons. When his commanding officer asks him to look over a rise to see what's happening to Custer, who was surrounded, this is what he observes:
''Custer was in the middle, standing, arrogant to the end, aiming and firing his long-barreled pistol deliberately. And then he was hit. In the back. Then hit again. And I saw it was his own men shooting him. One, two, then a third. They fired their rifles at him. . . . One trooper, a tall, lanky fellow, walked up behind the fallen commander, put his rifle to the back of his head, and fired.''
Custer was fragged, in other words, something that seems possible only in a post-Vietnam novel. But then many aspects of ''Crofton's Fire'' graft 20th-century sensibilities onto 19th-century settings. It's a book that owes a debt to Berger and perhaps H. Rider Haggard's ''King Solomon's Mines,'' the model for much adventure writing (and whose narrator, Allan Quatermain, avoided death at Isandlwana in 1879, where the Zulus killed some 1,300 British soldiers, by leaving the battle site in charge of some wagons just before the fighting began). In its interplay of fictional and historical characters -- Grant, Sherman, the Confederate general James Longstreet and President Rutherford B. Hayes are among those who cross Crofton's path -- Coplin's novel is reminiscent of E. L. Doctorow's ''Ragtime'' as well, and carries a similar freewheeling sense of history.
Crofton is both antiheroic in sentiment and heroic in act, and in a subtle way the novel attempts to be a tale of each, shot and recoil. It is partly a critique of the idea of empire, a thread common to most of its violence -- but then its protagonist always does, albeit reluctantly, empire's bidding. The narrative itself is pared of the detail that bogs down many historical novels, but this gives it a wispy, ethereal feel at times, without much anchor to the particulars of the times it chronicles.
In part the novel exudes that feeling of ethereality because the main battle is not one that our good lieutenant engages in a physical sense. A quotation from George Washington alludes to the real life-and-death struggle: ''Labor to keep alive in your breast that little spark of celestial fire, called conscience.'' That, through many testings in war, is what Coplin's book is about.
The Little Bighorn was only the beginning of a roller coaster military career for Crofton, who, like Custer, was educated at West Point. And there is of course a romantic back story, in which Crofton is pulled between hearth and hellation, called off to action as successive children are born to him and his wife, Louise, a former prostitute. ''I had devoted myself not only to the Army but to the notion of the Army: duty, honor, country,'' Crofton says -- as he is sent on a black-bag mission by Sherman to assassinate a Cuban rebel leader. ''To disobey the order was to be a criminal,'' he reasons, but ''I honestly didn't know if I could do this, to kill a man in cold blood, simply because somebody, somewhere high up, wanted him dead.''
The apogee of Crofton's military exploits comes when he is sent to Natal to observe the British fight the Zulus. En route to Africa, Crofton and the King's Guard troops he accompanies learn of the disaster at Isandlwana -- an eerie parallel to the Little Bighorn. ''The general feeling,'' Crofton says, had to that point been ''that the technology of the British would make short work of suppressing a tribe of backwoods savages.''
Shortly in battle alongside Britain's troops, Crofton wins their highest military honor, the Victoria Cross. Sherman, in a sly compliment on this and uttering the best line of the book, says to Crofton, ''Aren't you the shine on the minnows.'' Yet the shimmer of glory is one thing that never bedazzled Crofton. ''No one should be given an award for what I did. All that killing. It's mad,'' he confides. Asked in a debriefing how the British did on the battlefield, he answers: ''They slaughtered. At the end, at Ulundi, they murdered.''
Keith Coplin's book is engaging, but never quite resolves the conflict between its protagonist's aversion to killing and his readiness to be in positions where it is required. Crofton entertains the moral questions involved, tries to avoid romanticizing, admits to doubt and fear and suffers bad dreams over what he has seen, but he's no Hamlet. He's matter-of-fact, humorous at times, somewhat skeptical of modernity and has an appreciation for the paradoxes in life. After one battle, he is asked by a youthful soldier, ''Did we win?'' Crofton pats his shoulder and replies, ''We're still alive.'' Which is more than Custer could say.
Art Winslow, a former literary editor and executive editor of The Nation, writes frequently about books and culture.
