INSIDE the stained-glass pyramid, a gentle, foamy snow fell on the animatronic polar bear. To a pulsing salsa beat, the man at the keyboards warbled ''I wanna wish you a merry Christmas,'' as parents, including some mothers in Islamic headscarves, lined up to conduct their children into Santa's village for a photograph with the man himself.
It was indeed a merry Christmas in Dubai, the tiny, striving Arab emirate that, year round, expresses something of the all-Santa-no-manger essence of the modern, secular holiday: lightheartedness, panting consumerism, glittering shallows and, for those who seek them out, depths as well.
My wife, Sarah, and I were in the Pharaonic-themed Wafi Mall, but we could have been in a polished-marble-and-Starbucks shopping complex anywhere in the world, right down to the way our 17-month-old, Ike, burst into tears when he came face to face, ho-ho-ho, with Santa himself.
That generic, anyplace quality is part of the public face of Dubai, which some of its many foreign residents tend to compare to Disney World, or even Las Vegas. It is Middle East lite, as a friend living here puts it. It is less complicated, less densely layered and, as a result, maybe less unnerving than destinations in the region like Istanbul, Cairo or our home base, Jerusalem.
To any tourist, it might seem odd to pass over those other, ancient Middle Eastern cities for Dubai. Yet one can get quite enough of layers, thank you. There is something to be said for the surfaces of things: for the setting sun glinting on the faceted Persian Gulf; for the shimmering reds, blues and greens in the avian cacophony of the bird market in the neighboring emirate, Sharjah; for the shiny chrome noses of the white Bentleys parked at the doors of the Burj al Arab Hotel.
For, yes, we did splurge and stay at the Burj, the soaring luxury hotel that opened in 1999 and is already so cherished by Dubai as a symbol of its splendor that its image adorns every license plate. Well, we stayed there one night, and were careful not to run up the bill with extras like sampling the ''bath menu.''
The rest of our trip we stayed with Jason Davis, the American consul general in Dubai, and his partner, Matt Smith, and benefited from their considerable local knowledge. And so, though we kept up a frantic pace and stayed 12 days, far longer than most tourists stay, we left feeling we had barely glimpsed the many surfaces of Dubai and its close neighbors.
Much has been said about the economic miracle of Dubai, one of the seven desert microkingdoms -- altogether, at about 32,000 square miles, they are just about the size of Maine -- that make up the United Arab Emirates. Particularly given the region's chaos, it is impressive when seen up close: The cranes operating at all hours; Internet City and Media City, where companies like Microsoft and CNN make their regional homes in what was desert five years ago; the colossal island development, shaped like a palm tree, that is being built out into the gulf.
They say you can see the palm from space. After the island opens for visitors next year, planners say it will more than double Dubai's beachfront and eventually include 49 themed hotels (Balinese, Sicilian, Mexican, etc.).
Developers here have also announced plans for an underwater resort, Hydropolis. Others intend to build ski slopes in a mall.
There was a time, my grandmother tells me, that my great-grandfather traveled to Dubai to buy shells to make mother-of-pearl buttons in his factory in Warsaw. Those were the days before cultured pearls, when pearling thrived here. Traders sailed their bulky dhows from Dubai's Creek, its historic port, to India and beyond.
As pearling collapsed, the city also faded. In one of Dubai's museums, the Sheikh Saeed al Maktoum House, archival photos reveal the ramshackle condition of the city in the early 1950's, with the Creek silting up.
Oil has enabled the current boom, but it does not entirely explain it. Iraq has much more oil, and, according to the government, tourism actually contributes more than oil to Dubai's economy. About 4.4 million visitors, many from Europe, came last year. (They stayed on average just 2.5 days -- enough time for a mall safari and a dip in the sea.)
Hustle, imagination, a willingness to indulge a degree of hedonism and a determination to fulfill a romantic conception of itself have helped Dubai prosper.
The Burj -- Arabic for ''tower'' -- is in many ways a fitting emblem for Dubai, with its 22,000 square feet of gold leaf and its many foreign workers. Most residents are foreign workers, not natives, and most of those workers are Indian. Like Dubai itself, the Burj is crying out for an enterprising Indian documentary filmmaker with a hidden camera.
Built on a manmade island a short distance from the beach, the hotel is a stirring sight. It is more than a thousand feet high and shaped like a white spinnaker billowing landward in an onshore breeze. Yet step inside and at first startling glance, you feel as though the interior decorator and the designer never met: the two-story lobby is a jumble of fabrics, textures and colors, with a particularly Gulden's-mustard sort of gold predominating.
The first time we entered the hotel, on a tour, Sarah broke our stunned silence by saying, ''It's really sort of cheesy.'' My eye sought refuge farther up, where the cupped balconies of the suites alternate with pastel bands to give an appearance of stacked clouds receding skyward in the triangular atrium, more than 50 stories high.
All the rooms are two stories, beginning with the mere deluxe suite, at 1,830 square feet, for which the rate was $972 -- not including taxes and other fees, which raised the price to $1,143. The largest, the royal suite, is 8,396 square feet and rents for $9,719 night -- taxes and breakfast not included -- at 3.75 dirhams to the dollar.
That's on paper, anyway. I suggest you haggle. I'm no good at it, but over the telephone, I persuaded them to cut our rate, including taxes, to $915.
Not to lose a minute, we arrived 15 minutes after the appointed check-in time, only to discover that our room was not ready. As we waited in the lobby for almost half an hour, and a clerk studied my credit card and passport, I began to wonder at the Burj's reputation for service. A guest was offered fresh dates; we were offered only a cool towel.
The wait gave me a chance to appreciate the lobby, which, with its vividly colorful intricacy, has some sense of imagination and fun. There are two appealing fountains, formed by many arching five-foot jets of water. At intervals, the jets are cut off into shortened segments that leap through the air like fish, then into even smaller globs of water that jump like frogs through the same arcs and slap out a staccato rhythm as they land.
At either side of the lobby, flanking the escalators to the second floor, are giant aquariums, like windows onto coral reefs. Inside one, a scuba diver was scrubbing the glass, clinging to the side with a suction cup.
When we were conducted to our floor -- the ninth by the Burj's count but actually the 18th -- we were introduced to our butler. (Each floor has its own.) Sheldon, a delightful young man wearing tails and hailing from Bombay, gave us a tour of our room: The laptop with free Internet connection; the spectacular floor-to-ceiling views of sea and strand; the 42-inch plasma television screen, set in a sort of giant gold bulb, which could also open the door and curtains and, to Ike's delight, included ''Bob the Builder'' cartoons.
A bottle of wine was waiting for us. The only nod to religion that we noticed was a small decal stuck to one tabletop, a green arrow pointing toward Mecca.
Up the curving marble staircase, Sheldon showed us the giant, tiled bathroom, with his and hers sinks and multiple Hermès products, and the gaping Jacuzzi that we would later fill with Hermès soap bubbles and all three Bennets.
You may be thinking that it is not sporting to test a luxury hotel's amenities against the base tastes of a 17-month-old boy, or perhaps even those of his father. Yet when you stay at a place like the Burj, you are entering Eloise territory, a different realm of service and clientele. There were many families with children. At the seaside pool, Sarah overheard one girl asking another, in British-accented English, if any new rides had been added at the nearby Wild Wadi water park since her last trip to Dubai.
Once we got past the lobby, the staff could not have been warmer. The restaurant at the top of the hotel, al Muntaha, was happy to provide a highchair at dinner, and on a proudly upraised palm a smiling waitress bore Ike's warmed bottle on a tray.
I was less entranced by the menu. There we were, hovering over the Persian Gulf, and not a single local fish could be found. In place of local squid and prawns, they offered North Atlantic lobster and salmon. Even the pigeon, served with white truffle risotto, was described as ''French.''
And it dawned on me that that was the point: As with Dubai's malls, this could have been a pricey restaurant anywhere in the world. It was certainly not that our mostly excellent dishes -- that French pigeon, the cannelloni with leeks and mushrooms, the pan-fried halibut with saffron hollandaise -- lacked flavor. They were bland purely in a geographic sense.
For my money, I'd recommend dining next door at the new Chinese restaurant beside the manmade lagoon of the Mina al Salaam hotel. You can eat wasabi-glazed prawns, you can hear the roar of the surf, and you can admire the architecture of the Burj, its most magnificent, generous feature, one that can be enjoyed free.
Our stay at the Burj al Arab showed us that one could have the most pleasant, least geographically specific of vacations in Dubai, shopping, learning to kite-surf, or perhaps going four-wheeling in the desert for a dash of local color. But there are also simpler pleasures to be found, ones that convey a spiced sense of place.
For a mere 15 cents or so, you can cross the Creek on an abra, a crowded, low-slung ferry, and stroll through the giant gold souk. There, you can bargain for elaborate earrings in sunshine-yellow 22-carat gold; or just wander the market and guess at the national origins of the faces, in their amazing range; then walk along the Creek and guess at the destinations of the dhows, docked six deep waiting for their loads of kitchen appliances or grain or mysterious sacks, all jumbled on the sidewalk.
Dubai's many restaurants demonstrate its modern ethnic richness. Our favorite meal was at the modest al Maskoof al Iraqi. We had Iranian river fish in an Iraqi style, split down the middle, propped up and roasted slowly against an open fire that left its flesh fluffy and sharply flavorful.
Aside from Christmas Day on the beach in an exhilarating surf, our most memorable experience came when our friends took us on an excursion to the Musandam Peninsula, an easy drive north across the border into neighboring Oman. Because of its deep, rocky inlets, the area bills itself as the Norway of Arabia. Less than three hours from Dubai, it is where the Persian Gulf meets the Gulf of Oman, forming the Strait of Hormuz. A short hop from Iran, until recently it was a closed military area.
Across the border, we stopped after dark by a rocky beach where the surf was crashing phosphorescent green, because of bioluminescence in the water. Flung pebbles touched off fireworks in the waves. As we waded in, our hands dragged flaming green torches beneath the dark surface.
We spent the night at the new, straightforward Golden Tulip hotel in the port town Khasab, and the next morning rented a motorized dhow. The captain escorted us for the day through a stark, gorgeous wilderness of towering brown and red cliffs crumbling into blue water.
We tied off to a mooring near Telegraph Island, named for a 19th-century British outpost, and snorkeled along the teeming shore. On the way back, we tailed a group of dolphins. Arab boys, like the children of Maine lobstermen, raced past us in outboard skiffs.
By this point in our trip, I was not surprised to find that there were more, and more basic, satisfactions to be found here than I had guessed from the cable news network advertisements of the wonders of the duty-free at the Dubai airport.
That was evident to me by the second day, when we had lunch at the Venetian-themed Mercato Mall, where Ike drove the toy cars in the BMW store and we had a nice time admiring an animatronic pink poodle yapping outside the Hallmark store.
We drove from there to the nearly empty beach. Out in the Gulf, two dhows were racing, their lateen-rigged sails stretched in bold, white curves as they reached southward, toward the declining sun. We played with our naked, giggling baby in the amniotic surf and then, in my empty Starbucks cup, we collected seashells -- tinted pink, dappled brown, ridged in white -- for his great-grandmother.
A meeting of old and new
Where to Stay
Burj Al Arab Hotel, Post Office Box 74147, Dubai, U.A.E., (971-4) 301-7266, fax (971-4) 301-7001 www.burj-al-arab.com, has 202 two-floor suites. At 3.75 dirhams to the dollar, official rates start at $1,069 for a one-bedroom suite and go to $9,719 for the royal suite, not including 10 percent service charge and 10 percent tax, and not including breakfast. But Internet rates can be less.
The new Golden Tulip Resort, Post Office Box 434, Khasab, Oman; (968) 830-777, fax (968) 830-888, www.goldentulipkhasab.com, has 60 rooms, a pool and a view of the sea and cliffs. Rates are $96 for a standard room to $187 for an executive suite, not including 17 percent tax, but with breakfast, at 3.85 rials to the dollar.
Where to Eat
Al Muntaha, at the top of the Al Burj, (971-4) 301-7600, offers modern European cuisine at lunch and dinner daily. But it is best to go for lunch or tea, when the astonishing view can most be enjoyed. Dinner for two with wine averages about $400.
Al Maskoof al Iraqi, at al Monzer shopping mall, (971-4) 297-2288, offers appetizers like fatoush and hummus and entrees like kebabs and chicken tikka. The excellent fire-roasted Iraqi fish is about $11 per kilogram (2.2 pounds). Dinner for two costs about $25. Lunch and dinner daily.
At Zhen He in the Mina al Salaam Hotel, (971-4) 366-8888; email: reservations@madinatjumeriah.com, you can sit outside by the lagoon and enjoy the sea air and the view of the Burj, next door. Appetizers include wasabi glazed prawns, entrees, black peeper beef, Dinner for two $80.
Things to Do
Khasab Travel, Khasab, Oman, (968) 830-905, fax (968) 830-364; email: khastour@gto.net.om, arranges dhow tours of the Musandam Peninsula for about $80 a person, less for large groups. The trips include refreshments and lunch. The area has only recently opened up and tourists may find amenities basic. Our boat had no safety lines or adequate life preservers, and the restroom was primitive.
Sheikh Saeed al Maktoum House, Shindagha, Dubai, (971-4) 393-7139, displays historical documents and photographs of Dubai. Open daily 8 a.m. to 8:30 p.m. except on Friday from 3 to 9 p.m.. Entry, 55 cents.
JAMES BENNET
JAMES BENNET is chief of the Jerusalem bureau of The Times.
