MAYOR DANIEL J. GALLAGHER of South Plainfield grumbles about the Starbucks coffee shop that is about to open in his Middlesex County, N.J., borough. ''Starbucks, Olive Garden, they're too high class,'' Mr. Gallagher complained. ''We've always been a simple, Dunkin' Donuts kind of town. Now, property values are rising so high that our young people can't get a foothold, and our old Victorians on large lots are being torn down and replaced by six large new homes. Traffic is increasing. Our simple lifestyle is threatened, and I don't like it.''
The 8.3-square-mile no-frills, largely blue-collar borough is undergoing an unsettling postindustrial redevelopment, ending an era that began in the late 1870's when the Lehigh Valley Railroad built a storage and service yard for its trains that hauled Pennsylvania coal to New York City.
For more than a century, scores of factories hummed alongside the tracks, turning out products used in the development of the country. Early universal joints were produced at Spicer Manufacturing at the beginning of the automobile age; condensers for the growing radio industry were developed and manufactured at the Cornell-Dublier plant in the 1930's; and Harris Structural Steel was one of the largest World War II steel producers.
The population exploded after World War II. According to Mayor Gallagher, the influx started with the arrival of hundreds of families of servicemen who had seen the borough while they were stationed at nearby Camp Kilmer, the country's largest military embarkation center. A decade later, South Plainfield's industrial base had become a magnet for factory workers, who more than doubled the population in one year, from 8,000 in 1959 to 18,000 in 1960.
Over the past 15 years, nearly all of the factories have closed. Some have been redeveloped into housing or shopping centers, but dozens, including a National Gypsum plant on Spicer Avenue that has been declared a federal Superfund site, remain empty shells.
The Lehigh Valley Railroad terminal has been closed and its tracks are now part of the Conrail freight system.
One factory currently slated for redevelopment is the Tingley Rubber Corporation plant, off Coolidge Street near Interstate 287, which manufactured rain gear for three quarters of a century. A developer has proposed building 488 homes on the site for older residents, but the mayor says that all redevelopment will have to take into account traffic, which is a hot political issue in the borough.
Most of South Plainfield's approximately 8,000 housing units are postwar and were built in distinct phases, according to Joseph Diegnan, a sales associate at Century 21 Moretti Realty on Maple Avenue. ''Just after the war, they built Capes on Geary Drive and nearby streets,'' in the town's northwestern section, he said. ''In the late 1950's and early 60's, it was all split levels. In the '70's and '80's, they built bilevels, and now everything is colonials.''
At the beginning of February, 57 houses were on the market, ranging in price from $184,900 for a small two-bedroom ranch on South 11th Street up to $525,000 for a five-bedroom two-and-a-half-bath colonial with a two-car garage on Somerset Avenue. According to Mr. Diegnan, ''properly priced'' homes sell within six weeks, especially in the $250,000 to $350,000 range.
Many of his customers are the sons and daughters of South Plainfield residents. Lately, however, commuters to Manhattan have discovered the borough, which has excellent transportation links. Interstate 287 cuts through the southern section and Route 1 and Route 22 are within five miles.
Among the new residents are Tito and Damaris Corsino, who purchased a four-bedroom bilevel on Tremont Avenue and moved in from Staten Island in July. A specialist clerk at the New York Stock Exchange, Mr. Corsino said his commute had doubled to slightly more than one hour, but the house on a 100-by-87-foot lot cost less than the couple received for their three-bedroom town house on Staten Island. The South Plainfield house was purchased for $282,000 and, according to Mr. Diegnan, it has already appreciated about 15 percent.
''The schools are good, the houses are affordable and there's very little crime,'' Mr. Diegnan explained. ''So we have more demand than supply.''
JERRY WILLIAMSON, owner of Williamson Realty in Piscataway, said that although South Plainfield's industrial base is gone, the borough still appeals to working people. ''It has that small-town feel that many people want, and it is centrally located within an hour of New York City, New Jersey's pharmaceutical industries and Rutgers University in New Brunswick,'' he said.
Because of its rapid development as a single-family-home community in the 1950's and 1960's, subsequent restrictive zoning and a 10-year sewer moratorium that limited most construction in the southern section of town until 1995, South Plainfield has only three multifamily housing complexes. All were built within the last five years and all are in the southern section near the Edison line.
In the 330-unit Traditions condominium complex off New Durham Road, prices range from about $220,000 for some two-bedroom units on one floor up to about $325,000 for a three-bedroom town house style unit with a one-car garage, according to Mr. Diegnan. ''Lately we've seen some two-bedroom units listed at $259,000,'' he said. ''I'm not sure the market will support that price, but I've been wrong before.''
The larger of the borough's two major rental complexes is the Highlands on Durham Avenue, with 252 units. Listed rents on apartments in the gated 12-building complex range from $1,355 for some one-bedroom units up to $1,720 for the most expensive two-bedrooms. But the complex is currently offering one-bedrooms for $1,225 a month with two months free rent on a 14-month lease. The borough's other apartment development is Woodland Manor, a 157-unit complex on Pomponio Avenue.
There are about 15 new homes now under construction. Half are in Stacey Estates, an eight-home development of 2,300- to 4,000-square-foot colonials that are replacing a single large Victorian that fronted on Park Avenue. The builder, Nicholas Ferraro, said that the homes, which are to be completed shortly, had already sold in the $450,000 to $500,000 range.
The borough has four supermarkets and four shopping centers. The largest is the Hadley Center, on the site of the former Hadley Airport, off Stelton Road. It is anchored by Kohl's, Pathmark and a Bennigan's restaurant. There is an abundance of fast food shops and a number of low and moderately priced restaurants, including Flanagan's, an Irish pub and restaurant on Plainfield Avenue that dates back to the Prohibition era.
The 3,800-student South Plainfield Public Schools consists of four elementary schools offering kindergarten through fourth grade, Grant Elementary School for Grades 5 and 6, the South Plainfield Middle School for Grades 7 and 8 and South Plainfield High School. One of the K-4 schools, the 365-student Roosevelt School, opened this year as the centerpiece of a $20 million construction and renovation program that the superintendent of schools, Robert J. Rosado, said would ensure that the system has adequate capacity for the next 5 to 10 years.
Dr. Rosado terms the system ''a throwback to a more innocent time,'' where children, teachers and principals are particularly close. He maintains that drug and gang activity in the schools is virtually nonexistent, despite efforts by gangs from neighboring Plainfield to recruit. ''Police patrol our high school campus, students report suspicious cars and the parents are watching their kids to make sure they don't get involved with gangs,'' he said.
Yet, South Plainfield's students consistently underperform the state average on proficiency tests and on the SAT reasoning tests. Last year's seniors scored a combined verbal and mathematics average of 980, which is 36 points below the state average.
''We have to push more and expect more,'' said Dr. Rosado, who took over as superintendent a year ago. In part, he cites the educational level of the parents; only about 20 percent of parents in the district have college educations. ''Because the parents are not well educated, many don't have high expectations of their children,'' he said. ''And many families can't afford tutors or don't see the value of SAT preparation courses for their children.''
SOUTH PLAINFIELD HIGH SCHOOL currently offers 11 advanced placement courses in the sciences, computer science, English, math and history, and next year, it will add two foreign language offerings. It will also offer an SAT preparation course and college-level courses in partnership with Kean University in nearby Union. Of last year's 249 graduates, 48 percent went on to four-year colleges and 30 percent went to two-year schools.
The borough is also home to the 278-student Sacred Heart School, a Roman Catholic school. Tuition is $2,900 annually for kindergarten through eighth grade for parishioners at the Sacred Heart Church; nonparishioners pay $1,000 more. Full-time prekindergarten costs $300 monthly.
The largest recreational area in the borough is the 121-acre county-owned Spring Lake Park, which includes a five-acre fishing lake, a gazebo, four tennis courts, three basketball courts and a playground.
The most widely used recreational facilities are the Community Center and the Community Pool, opposite each other on Maple Avenue. The Community Center houses an indoor basketball court, a meeting room and a weight room. The pool complex includes an Olympic-sized pool, three wading pools, a picnic area, a miniature golf course and volleyball and basketball courts. Family memberships in the pool cost $250 per season; residents receive free passes to use the community center.
If You're Thinking of Living In | South Plainfield
