THE CLOSING OF
THE WESTERN MIND
The Rise of Faith
and the Fall of Reason.
By Charles Freeman.
Illustrated. 432 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
IT is a rare tome of theological and intellectual history, awash with obscure heresies, ponderous monks and unedifying doctrinal squabbles, that ends with a story about herrings. When St. Thomas Aquinas lay dying, in 1274, it was said that he asked for herrings, which were unknown thereabouts. Yet sure enough they soon obligingly turned up at the local fishmongers. Even in the early 14th century, when Thomas's candidacy for sainthood was under investigation, and at least two miracles were required for admission, this unlikely tale did not wash -- not least because it emerged that the witnesses had no way of telling whether what they had seen were herrings or not.
The significance of this little story for Charles Freeman, a British historian who has written on ''The Greek Achievement'' and on ''Egypt, Greece and Rome,'' lies in the adjudication of Pope John XXII. John wisely remarked that each article of Thomas's masterpiece, the ''Summa Theologiae,'' was a miracle, and waved him through on that account. ''Thus,'' Freeman writes, ''the power of words and independent thinking were once again given a status that they had almost lost.'' For Freeman, the work of Aquinas, who played a major part in reinstating the rationalist tradition of Aristotle and the early Greek scientists, by intertwining it with Christian theology, marks the end of the West's long sleep of reason from the time of the early Christians through the Dark Ages.
Freeman's main thesis has two parts. First, that the Greek intellectual tradition did not simply fade away but was actively suppressed by the rise of Christianity, especially in the fourth and fifth centuries. Second, that the main reason this happened was political. The Emperor Constantine and some of his successors thought that by throwing the weight of the state behind Christianity, and institutionalizing it, they could turn it into a weapon of mass distraction: it would act as a unifying force, at a time when the empire was under threat from marauding invaders, and be an effective means of social control. It was, according to Freeman, because the bishops acquired political power, and were given a rich and powerful institution to operate, that dissent and the tradition of free inquiry were crushed.
Each part of this argument is highly questionable, but Freeman tells an entertaining story, and on the way produces an excellent and readable account of the development of Christian doctrine. It is not easy to make an interesting or even comprehensible subject out of the angry controversies about the Trinity that preoccupied early Christians. But he manages it. Faced with the paradox inherent in the notion of God-become-man, Christians explored dozens of ingenious theories to explain the relationship between Jesus and God. In each dispute, one theory became orthodoxy (for East or West) and the proponents of the rest were demonized or even persecuted as heretics. Epiphanius, bishop of Salamis in the late fourth century, enumerated a grand total of 80 heresies to be condemned by all right-thinking children of God. He was sure that his list was complete because 80 was, after all, the number of concubines in the Song of Songs.
Speaking of concubines, one of Freeman's finest portraits is of St. Augustine, who he argues was not the debauchee of (largely self-promoted) legend, but rather a man racked with guilt about minor peccadilloes. Freeman manages to combine an investigation of Augustine's ''deeply pessimistic, isolated and guilt-ridden mind'' with an account that does justice to his genius. Augustine was a poor scholar: when he could not understand a passage (he had no Hebrew, little Greek and often had to rely on bad translations), he concluded that God had made it baffling in order to humble the learned. But his thought marks the cornerstone of the Western Christian tradition: ''There is no other Christian theologian (Origen possibly excepted) who shows such uninhibited philosophical curiosity.'' The tragedy of Augustine, and (according to Freeman) the West, was his intellectual decline. The ''gradual subjection of reason to faith and authority'' in the course of his life presents a microcosm of what happened to Christianity as a whole. One example of this is the collapse of Augustine's early skepticism about miracle cures into a gullibility that embraced tales as silly as Aquinas's herrings.
The other main figure in Freeman's story is Constantine. The novelty in his account of the man who made Christianity kosher, as it were, and did more than anyone to turn a religion of outcasts into one of wealthy insiders, is its revelation that Constantine had little knowledge of, or interest in, the Gospels or of the requirements for Christian living. He largely maintained the Roman tradition of brutality, and there is no evidence that he ever attended a church service. His embrace of Christianity seems to have been mainly a matter of political expediency.
All of this treatment of the turning points in the evolution of Christianity is well done. The book is particularly good on the development of the biblical canon: it is always a useful reminder, and not just for fundamentalists, to see how happenstance and politics determined the shape of what many now take as immutable holy writ. Freeman is judicious, too, on the origins of early Christian asceticism and abhorrence of sex. (St. Jerome's theory that the main purpose of marriage was to produce virgins sounds too funny to be true, but apparently is.)
Yet the book does not make its case, and indeed barely tries to. Its catchy title, with its echo of Allan Bloom's ''Closing of the American Mind,'' is misleading, since it is only in the last couple of chapters that Freeman engages directly with his declared theme of the decline of reason. He is right to emphasize the colossal ignorance of the Christian West in the second half of the first millennium. By the year 1000, all branches of science, and indeed all kinds of theoretical knowledge except theology, had pretty much disintegrated. Most classical literature was largely unknown. The best-educated people (all of them monks) knew strikingly less than many Greeks 800 years earlier. And the few mathematical writings from the time were for the most part downright stupid. Freeman notes tellingly that the last recorded astronomical observation in the ancient Greek world was made by the Athenian philosopher Proclus in 475, and it was more than 1,000 years before the science made significant steps forward once more.
But the Greek rationalist tradition was fading away of its own accord, and would probably have taken its long sleep even if Christianity had not come along. The religious and mystical strains in Greek and Roman thought had been growing ever stronger, and at the expense of the robust skepticism and empirical open-mindedness that mostly characterized Greek thinkers from Thales in the sixth century B.C. to Aristotle in the fourth. Freeman does not mention that Proclus himself, who was a pagan and uninfluenced by Christianity, was in fact just as interested in magic and oracles as he was in astronomy.
Although the most important Christian thinkers, from St. Paul to Augustine, did everything they could to stifle the rationalist tradition they sought to displace, as Freeman effectively demonstrates, it is impossible to lay the aptly named Dark Ages entirely at their door. Just why the lights went out when they did remains something of a mystery.
Anthony Gottlieb is the executive editor of The Economist and the author of ''The Dream of Reason: A History of Philosophy from the Greeks to the Renaissance.''
