THE Schaghticoke Tribal Nation's reservation in Kent is rattlesnake territory and in the summer it's eight full-time residents walk in wide circles around the reptiles' dens. In a painting of the town and the sweeping Housatonic Valley hanging in Kent Town Hall, the 400-acre reservation is almost an afterthought: the brambly rock outcropping of Schaghticoke Mountain looks uninhabitable and, aside from the residents and five homes, no one lives there. But the town is worried it will have to commission another painting soon, and this one might not be so scenic.
When the Schaghticokes (pronounced SKAT-a-cokes) won federal recognition from the Bureau of Indian Affairs last month, residents of the quiet towns of northwestern Connecticut began having visions of traffic jams, bulldozers and backhoes and, most of all, of a casino.
The ruling was a shock to many people in the state who have followed the Schaghticoke's application for federal recognition. The tribe, which has claimed 273 enrolled members and 42 unenrolled members, is based in the tiny Litchfield County town of Kent, though its offices are in Derby. A little more than one year ago, the bureau denied the tribe's application in a preliminary ruling, giving hope to organizations and individuals that have fought Schaghticoke land claims for decades.
But the tribe sent hundreds more pages of documentation to the bureau to support the claim. The ruling approving recognition was announced on Jan. 29 and was immediately denounced as a sham by state officials.
Richard L. Velky, chief of the Schaghticokes, said he was disappointed by the state's response.
''The Schaghticoke Tribal Nation has lived in harmony with its neighbors for almost 300 years, while all the time enduring efforts to eliminate our people from the landscape,'' Mr. Velky said.
Europeans wrote about the Schaghticokes as early as 1699, according to the tribe. The reservation was ''established by the Colony of Connecticut in 1737 and confirmed in 1752,'' according to the bureau. The tribe fought with the Continental Army during the Revolutionary War, a period when many American Indians sided with the British. But its population declined throughout the 19th century as overseers sold off reservation land, the Schaghticokes charged.
Claims of abuse at the hands of local, state and federal governments continued throughout much of the Schaghticokes' modern history. In recent years, those claims have resulted in a series of lawsuits aimed at getting land back. For the last 23 years, the Schaghticokes have sought federal status that could expedite those claims.
Federal recognition establishes more than just the authenticity of a group's heritage. It opens the door to economic opportunities for tribal members, including special federal scholarships and loans. It can also help tribes win land claims, some of which have been languishing in courts for decades. But, perhaps most significantly, federal designation opens the door to ''economic development opportunities,'' including the casino gambling industry. Federal law allows Indian tribes to operate casinos in states that already permit gambling.
The tribe, which has reportedly already lined up wealthy backers, has not yet said it wants to open a casino and will not disclose its plans for economic development. But to many people who have studied Connecticut's tribes, the Schaghticoke's plans are a foregone conclusion.
''In Connecticut, seeking federal recognition is tantamount to seeking a casino,'' said Brett D. Fromson, the author of ''Hitting the Jackpot,'' the story of how the Mashantucket Pequots built Foxwoods casino. ''This story is fundamentally about money.''
That bureau announcement brought harsh condemnation from state officials, including the governor and Richard Blumenthal, the attorney general.
''The state is determined to challenge and reverse the B.I.A. decision because it is so fundamentally flawed,'' Mr. Blumenthal said. ''They lack evidence for as much as 150 years of continuing existence as a community and continuing internal political authority and governance.''
Mr. Blumenthal has since met with representatives from about a dozen cities and towns concerned about the implications of the ruling. Some of those municipalities, including Danbury, plan to file their own appeals or join the state in its appeal.
Mr. Blumenthal said he expected that the appeal process will take years, during which time the tribe cannot move forward with new development projects. The state's decision last year to repeal its ''Las Vegas Nights'' gambling law may also slow or stop any plans for a casino.
Kent itself is less concerned about a casino than about the land claims that the Schaghticokes have made on more than 2,000 acres adjacent to the existing reservation. Except for one town road and a section of the Appalachian Trail, that land is privately owned and maintained. Among the owners are the private Kent School and the Preston Mountain Club, a fishing club.
Though the town is an unlikely site for a casino, the tribe still planned to develop any new land it gets in the Kent area if it wins the suit. That possibility has residents on edge.
''My concern is that they can do anything zoning-wise that they want,'' said Sabina M. Gibson, a 33-year resident who attended a public meeting with the town's lawyer at Town Hall shortly after the tribe was recognized. ''They could build a 10-or 15-story retirement home.''
Indeed, many people in the town fear they've lost control over their future, that the money and time they've put into keeping developers and fast-food restaurants out of the area is all for naught. Kent has steadfastly avoided the kind of strip-mall development of its neighbor to the south, New Milford.
Buildings in Kent can occupy no more than 9,000 square feet. In a casino, one resident said, ''the men's rooms are 9,000 feet.''
Mr. Velky wants to reassure residents that the tribe doesn't want to plant skyscrapers next to the Housatonic River. He also said he thought the implication that Indians don't know how to preserve land is ridiculous.
''I find it ironic that the townspeople feel that way, given that the land was full of trees and rivers before it was taken away from us,'' he said. ''I don't think they need to be concerned about things of that nature.''
The tribe placed a moratorium on building on the reservation in 1975, while its land claims were being challenged. The 400 acres now in tribal hands were not suitable for tribal elders and others who wish to move back, he said.
''You need to be a mountain goat to enjoy the better part of it,'' Mr. Velky said.
If the tribe wins the lawsuits, 80 families plan to move back to the reservation, setting up single-family houses on the 2,000 acres. The tribe may file more land claims in the future, after it finishes researching them, Mr. Velky added.
Mr. Velky has not received a good reception in the town. The one time he showed up to a meeting here, it devolved into a ''not amiable situation,'' residents said.
At least he was invited to the Kent meeting. In Danbury, the mayor won't even talk to the tribe's leaders.
''I refuse to sit down with them. The community is pretty united that they're opposed to it,'' Mark Boughton, the mayor, said referring to a casino.
Residents feared that the tribe is eyeing about 550 acres that used to house Union Carbide headquarters. The tribe indicated an interest in that land in late 2001.
Mr. Velky has said the tribe will not build a casino in any city that does not want one. But cities and towns in western Connecticut aren't taking any chances.
''They've kind of talked both ways,'' Mr. Boughton said. ''They say they won't go where they're not wanted, but then they put out a list of properties they're interested in and Danbury was at the top.''
A casino doesn't fit into Danbury's economic development plans, Mr. Boughton said.
''We certainly would rather have corporate executives and clerical assistants than blackjack dealers and cocktail waitresses,'' he said.
But Douglas Koenig, the general manager of the Sheraton Danbury Hotel, which sits next to the Union Carbide site, said he thought a casino could entice those corporate executives to hold conferences in Danbury.
''They could come here to work and do business and then go out to the casino on the weekends,'' he said.
Other cities have been more open to the idea of a casino.
The day before Gov. John G. Rowland said he opposed new casinos in Connecticut during his State of the State address, gambling was getting a different reception in another corner of the state.
In his State of the City address on Feb. 2, Bridgeport Mayor John M. Fabrizi said he was willing to entertain the idea of a casino.
''If it's good for Bridgeport, if it creates jobs, and contributes to our general fund, then it's on the table for discussion,'' he said of casino gambling, emphasizing his point with a word that hadn't been written into the speech. ''Period.''
In an interview afterward, Mr. Fabrizi acknowledged that he had met with tribal leaders, but said the city is still far away from opening a casino.
''It's still way, way too early to start to get into a casino debate,'' Mr. Fabrizi said. ''It all depends on what's in the details.''
Michael J. Jarjura, the mayor of Waterbury, has also met with tribal leaders to discuss the possibility of a casino.
''Like anything else, I'm not going to dismiss it out of hand,'' he said. ''There's a lot of negative social impacts, but there's also a tremendous economic upside for the city in terms of 5,000 to 8,000 new jobs.''
Mr. Jarjura said the casino question would have to go to a referendum. Unlike Danbury, he said, the city isn't in a situation to close the door on economic development.
Stephen R. Sasala, president and chief executive of the Greater Waterbury Chamber of Commerce, said the promise of a casino will likely be more enticing to a struggling city than a prospering one. Danbury, he said, ''is in a stronger position to dismiss it out of hand.''
''In a city like Waterbury, it would be very tempting to look at a gaming operation and think this could be a panacea,'' he said. ''What you need to take into consideration is that while you may have new job opportunities, you have to look at what kinds of jobs you will create.''
Mr. Sasala, who previously worked for New Jersey's Department of Community Affairs overseeing Atlantic City, said casinos often drive out existing businesses. Right now, Waterbury, which was all but abandoned by the brass industry decades ago, is focusing on expanding skilled metalwork and health care businesses in the city.
Even the experts are conflicted about the economic impact of casinos.
A 2000 study by the Connecticut Center for Economic Analysis at the University of Connecticut that was commissioned by the Pequots, called Foxwoods an ''economic growth marvel for the state and the immediate region.''
The study found that the casino upped the gross state product by $1.2 billion and directly or indirectly generated more than 41,000 jobs. Lincoln Dyer, an economist at the State Department of Labor, said about 23,000 people work in casinos in the state, making $27,000 to $30,000, on average.
But Representative Diana Urban of North Stonington said the study suffered from a lack of empirical evidence. Though millions pass through Foxwoods and Mohegan Sun's doors every year, few leave the casino to explore southeastern Connecticut, she said.
''You would hope that there would be some kind of economic web that would develop around a casino,'' she said. ''But the problem with casinos is that it's like going to Oz. People want to get there. They don't want to stop along the way and buy a dress or go to a restaurant. They want to go to the casino.''
Connecticut
