On the morning of Dec. 30, 1953, my first wife, Barbara, and I were married at a friend's apartment on Morningside Heights. Then, with the wedding guests following behind, we sped down the West Side Highway beside the sparkling Hudson under a brilliant wind-swept sky to the pier where the stately old Ile de France was preparing to sail at noon. We had booked a first-class cabin. Neither of us was rich, but two years previously I had suggested to the publishing company where I worked a better way of selling books. My plan succeeded. The profits were immediate, substantial and certain to increase. I had precipitated what would thereafter be called ''the paperback revolution.'' This trip was one of the rewards.
In those prejet days, when most trans-Atlantic travelers sailed to Europe, it was customary for publishers to go first class. Book publishing has never been lucrative, but for me (and probably for many others), the work we did in those years was itself payment enough. The annual scouting trip to England and the Continent by sea was a traditional perquisite, compensation for monastic wages. Barbara and I were going to meet the important postwar European writers. I was 25 and fearless.
First-class passengers boarded from an upper level of the pier and crossed a broad red-carpeted gangplank. There were confetti and streamers; bellboys in pillbox hats with chin straps delivering bouquets; porters in berets and the French Line insignia on their blue sweaters maneuvering steamer trunks through the swirl of passengers and friends; pages shouting names and waving telegrams; chimes warning that visitors would soon have to go ashore. Did I imagine or did I see Van Johnson, the actor, a camel's-hair coat over his shoulders, retreating down the gangplank backward, waving? I remember the buttery aroma of croissants that I have ever since associated with that voyage: the Ile de France would prove to be a seagoing pastry shop.
Our cabin was not large, but it was spacious enough not to be overpowered by its walls of silk brocade, the Louis XV furniture or the pink lampshades. There is a photograph of Barbara in a gray suit, hat and veil sitting on the arm of a chair, with me standing behind her. Barbara seems stunned. I'm smiling. My confidence was not ill founded. Our generation of Americans had every reason to trust the future. The marriage proved to be bountiful. When, after many years, it ended, the love that we celebrated on that December day remained intact.
By the time we found our way to the cabin, our friends had arrived and spilled out into the corridor. I remember orchids and Champagne, bits of conversation. Then they left, and I was alone on the afterdeck, looking down at the tugs as they backed the ship away from the pier.
The next day was stormy. By late afternoon, the ship, which had seemed so sturdy when its old-fashioned perpendicular bows towered over the West Side Highway, was laboring though messy seas. A friend, the critic Edmund Wilson, was also aboard, on his way to Israel to write about the Dead Sea Scrolls. He and his wife, Elena, joined us at the New Year's Eve gala in the grand first-class dining room with its high ceilings and double staircase. We had been assigned a table for six, and when the four of us arrived, we found the great comic actor Buster Keaton and his wife in the other two seats. Keaton seemed uncomfortable in his old-fashioned tuxedo, but oblivious to the pitching and rolling ship. He was as deadpan as the character he played: mouth a horizontal slit; eyes straight ahead, unblinking. He barely spoke. But when Wilson, an amateur prestidigitator who was juggling a half-dozen of those festive balls of cotton handed out at ships' galas, suggested to Keaton that he might perform for the passengers, Keaton replied politely, ''No props.'' I remember crêpes suzette aflame as the ship heaved, the waiters struggling beneath their trays and fox trots, dancers sliding across the floor. No props, indeed.
By midnight, many passengers had gone to bed. The Keatons were no longer in their seats. A group of stalwarts had gathered at a window looking out at the storm-swept deck. I remember walking over and seeing, out on the deck, Keaton, drenched, with a napkin in his hand, wiping the window clear of spray and then being soaked again as the ship dipped into yet another trough.
In Paris, we lived in a vast, gloomy apartment off Avenue Foch. Someone had told us that the Grand Véfour in the Palais Royal, which had reopened after the war under the famed Raymond Oliver, was the best restaurant in town, so almost every day Barbara and I went there for lunch or dinner or occasionally both. With American money, everything was cheap. The Grand Véfour, which had opened in 1784 as Café de Chartres, is still the most beautiful dining room in Paris, with its gilt mirrors and red velvet upholstery. The menu was classic: quenelles de brochet, sole Véronique, coulibiac Colette, named for the great writer who lived in the Palais Royal and took her meals in the Grand Véfour from time to time but whom we never managed to see. One day at lunch, we were each offered an ortolan, a tiny bird eaten whole that has been a delicacy since before the Roman invasion. These birds are an endangered species and may not be served legally, but we had become regulars, and this infraction was the manager's way of thanking us.
When we tired of the Grand Véfour, we tried more modest places: Laperouse with its cabinets particuliers or Chez Allard in the Sixth with its rustic menu. It was there that I first had braised duck with olives, one of the few Parisian dishes of the period not covered with béchamel or velouté or allemande. I asked for the recipe and for years made it at home in New York.
From Paris we flew to Berlin, which by then had begun to dig itself out of the wartime rubble, both physically and emotionally. Bricks from ruined buildings were stacked neatly along the Kurfürstendamm. The cabarets were open all night. The best restaurant was, oddly, in the Russian zone. It served thick soups, black bread and sausages and fried potatoes in many versions. Some writers we met in the American zone who were helping the C.I.A. warned us to avoid the Russian zone. The cold war had begun, and in Berlin the ground rules were not yet clear. We ignored this advice and returned often for soup and sausages, reluctant to admit that with the war so recently ended, our species was preparing to go at it again.
We were happy to leave this bleak, largely ruined city and drift off to Italy for a few weeks. We had been gone nearly three months, far longer than the usual publisher's tour. It was time to go home.
We arranged passage on the Andrea Doria from Naples. In the Azores, the cheerful little ship became fogbound. We arrived in port a day late, the larder bare. On deck, as we approached our pier, an Italian father was holding his two small sons in his arms, pointing to the skyline and shouting: ''Fantastico! Bambini, fantastico!'' Despite the rumblings in Berlin, this was how it seemed to us, too, in the early spring of 1954.
Braised Duck  With Olives  1 Pekin duck, about 3 1/2 pounds  Salt and pepper  5 branches fresh thyme  5 stalks fresh rosemary  2 cups chicken stock  2 cups pinot noir or similar red wine or port  2 medium carrots, scraped and sliced  1 stalk celery, chopped  1 small onion, quartered  2 bay leaves  Thinly peeled rind of 1 lemon  8 ounces picholine or similar green olives, pitted.  1 teaspoon flour (optional)  1 teaspoon butter, melted (optional).
1. Preheat oven to 300 degrees. Remove the duck's wings, giblets and neck; rinse inside and out and dry. Prick the skin of the breast and thighs with a fork. Lightly season the inside with salt and pepper; stuff with thyme and rosemary.
2. Place duck, breast side down, in a large Dutch oven (preferably enamel-lined) over medium heat and brown on all sides, spooning off the fat as it renders.
3. Bring stock and wine to a boil in a small pan; pour over the duck. Add the vegetables, bay leaves, lemon rind and several grindings of pepper. Cover; braise in oven until the leg meat is firm and the breast brown throughout, about 1 hour.
4. Remove duck and cover loosely. Strain the stock, discard the vegetables and spoon off the fat. Boil stock until reduced to about 1 cup, about 10 minutes.
Add the olives for the final 3 to 4 minutes. (You may thicken stock slightly with a roux of flour and butter.) Adjust seasonings.
5. To serve, thinly slice the breast lengthwise. Separate legs from thighs. Pour on sauce.
Yield: 4 servings.
Magret de Canard With Colonel Hawker Sauce  Colonel Hawker is said to have been Wellington's fowling officer. His recipe was given to me by my friend, the late Angus Cameron.
1 magret (2 boneless breast halves)  Salt to taste  1 cup chicken stock  1 tablespoon mushroom ketchup  1 tablespoon Harvey sauce  1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice  1 shallot, chopped  4 whole cloves  1 teaspoon ground mace  1 teaspoon cayenne pepper  1 cup port wine.
1. Score the duck by drawing a sharp knife at a slant diagonally through the skin and fat in rows  1/4 inch apart without penetrating the flesh. Do the same in the opposite direction. Salt the breasts on both sides.
2. Heat a large cast-iron skillet over medium-high heat until hot. Place duck breasts skin side down and reduce heat to low to render the fat without overcooking the meat, which should be served pink. Cook slowly until the layer of fat all but disappears, about 30 minutes. Increase heat to medium-high, turn breasts over and sear until browned, about 1 minute. Let duck sit for 10 minutes to reabsorb its juices. Remove breasts and cover loosely. Save fat for another purpose.
3. Combine stock, sauces, lemon juice, shallot, cloves, mace and cayenne. Heat to boiling; then simmer 10 minutes. Strain and discard solids. Return sauce to the cleaned pan, add port and reduce to about 1 cup. Adjust seasonings. (If desired, thicken sauce slightly with roux, as in previous recipe.)
4. To serve, thinly slice breasts lengthwise and accompany with the sauce.
Yield: 4 servings.
Note: Magret means the breast of any duck, boned and sautéed. The best magret is from the Moulard duck. You can order moulard breast from D'Artagnan, 1-800-DARTAGN (1-800-327-8246). Harvey sauce and mushroom ketchup can be ordered from Ketchupworld, 1-866-KETCHUP (1-866-538-2487), or substitute Worcestershire.
FOOD
