LANGUAGE VISIBLE
Unraveling the Mystery of the Alphabet
From A to Z.
By David Sacks.
Illustrated. 395 pp. New York:
Broadway Books. $24.95.
Just for fun, I didn't start at the beginning. Eager to learn more about the letter that begins my name, I headed straight for Chapter J of David Sacks's ''Language Visible,'' certain that my fantasies of J as an important, well-loved letter would come true. (Think: Jesus, jewel, Julius Caesar.) The letter has a certain je ne sais quoi, with its thin, curvy shape and romantic pronunciation, no? (Try making the ''j'' sound without just a bit of a pucker.)
That chapter, however, revealed quite a different picture. First, I learned that J was one of the last letters added to our alphabet. (Along with V, J is but a baby, both having been accepted as full-fledged letters just two centuries ago.) The ancient Roman alphabet had no letter J. Classical Latin had no ''j'' sound. Julius Caesar was called Iulius. A Roman jewel was actually a gemma (with a hard g). Worse still, Sacks quotes one alphabet scholar as calling J ''inferior in design to other letters, lacking the balance, boldness and dignity of the classical Roman monumental letters.'' And about the only example Sacks gives of J in popular culture is an unsatisfying explanation of ''jaywalk.''
So, back to the beginning. The 42-page introductory chapter on the history of the alphabet felt long, but ended with the fascinating discovery of the earliest known alphabetic writing along an ancient Egyptian desert road, where John C. Darnell, an Egyptologist at Yale University, found carved inscriptions that placed the invention of the alphabet around 2000 B.C. -- ''about three centuries earlier (and in a different country) than previously thought,'' Sacks writes. Semitic-speaking people working in Egypt had simplified about 27 hieroglyphs and assigned them tiny sounds of speech. Around 1000 B.C., ''this ancestor produced a prime descendant: the Phoenician alphabet,'' Sacks says, the ''great-grandmother'' of many Roman letters used today in about 100 languages worldwide.
''Language Visible'' is based on a 26-week series Sacks wrote for The Ottawa Citizen in 2000, covering one letter a week. But his passion for letters originated while he was writing his first book, the Encyclopedia of the Ancient Greek World, which included a section on the origin of the Greek alphabet.
In addition to tracing the evolution of the sound and shape assigned to each letter, Sacks answers teasing questions: Why is A -- ''like the fair-haired son of a wealthy family'' -- almost always better than B? Why is K nearly as erotic a letter as X and O are? How did the lower case i acquire her distinctive dot? (Since we have learned in chapter J that the letter I was J's ''mother,'' it is clear why I is a ''she'' and why the lower case j also has a dot.)
Sacks's quirky style makes the book as fun to read as it is enlightening. For instance, he notes that C is a pesky letter, as any parent of a toddler knows. Besides the ''k'' sound of cat, there's the ''s'' sound of cereal. That alone is confusing to my 3-year-old. But Sacks reminds me that C is far more complicated than that. There are a number of different-sounding ''ch'' combinations: church, choir. The ''sh'' sound has various spellings: champagne, ocean. There's a silent c: indict. The soft ''ch'' sound of chump being the only unique sound of C, the letter could easily be replaced by S, K or Q. Sacks writes, therefore, that C occupies ''a big-title job of patchy duties, jealously on guard against her colleagues. Sure, she still looks great, especially when she wears serifs. . . . But does that justify her salary?''
There is an occasional groan. Illustrating the similar sounds of ''brothers'' T and D, Sacks writes, ''we all know what happened when the cow tried to jump over the barbed-wire fence: udder disaster.'' And while the writing is often clever, Sacks ends some chapters with a clumsy tic. The end of Chapter L: ''And so farewell to L.'' Chapter O: ''Let's now say OOO and go.'' (The O's are hugs.)
Charts showing each letter's evolution are fascinating, but the book has design flaws: a map of the route letters took across languages, from Greek to Etruscan to Latin, in only a century might be visually compelling, but it is hard to know for sure, because no magnifying glass comes with the book. Also, captions are too small and sidebar typefaces are oddly inconsistent. Such poor designs are unfortunate in a book that begs for an inviting visual presentation.
The idea of illuminating the alphabet one letter at a time has been done often in formats ranging from children's primers to Alfred Kallir's book on letters as ''procreative symbols.'' One recent example of the letter-biography approach is Richard A. Firmage's ''Alphabet Abecedarium'' (1993). But since Firmage's book was published before the discovery in Egypt was made public in 1999, ''Language Visible'' is a necessary update. Sacks also refreshes the lore to include modern developments like ''the crooked E'' of Enron and the explosion of lowercase e's at the beginning of words (e-mail, eBay) as symbolic of the digital communication revolution.
''Like the wheel or the telephone,'' Sacks writes, ''the alphabet was an invention to change the world.'' While it's true that billions of people use writing based on phonetics every day, not everyone believes the invention was an advance in literacy. Darnell, who discovered the earliest known alphabetic writing, told me in an e-mail message that combining ideographic and phonetic symbols, as in ancient Egyptian writing, ''provides much more information than an alphabetic system, and allows for additional levels of poetic expression'' compared with phonetic letters alone. Indeed, as most e-mailers know, when pictographs known as ''smileys'' -- horizontal images that hint at facial expression -- are added to text, the nuance of a sentence can change. A wink-smiley -- ; ) -- added after ''you are bad'' changes its meaning entirely.
Still, Sacks's obsession with language is contagious, and I can imagine few readers whose lives would not be enriched by what he calls his ''voyage of discovery.'' When he verbally painted a picture of Phoenician children memorizing letter shapes and sounds with their parents 3,000 years ago, I stopped reading, and pictured the scene with him. That image comes to mind when I see my toddler noticing letter shapes in the clouds or on his hands. Staring at the backs of his hands recently -- fingers extended, thumbs at right angles -- he said: ''Look. L and J. See?'' I can now report with confidence: a Phoenician child would not have seen a J.
Julie Walton Shaver is a staff editor for news graphics at The Times.
