IF getting there is half the fun, tell it to the person dodging elbows in the middle seat, the one next to the woman who refuses to turn off her cellphone or the one who was just told by a snapping gate agent that he must pay for his own hotel room because the airline is not responsible for stranding his flight in Pittsburgh.
Tom Waterman, arriving at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago on a recent winter morning from his home in Tampa, Fla., put it this way: ''People who don't fly a lot and haven't seen the service go where it has today, they're all expecting that they're going to get on the plane, and here comes your nice warm meal.'' Instead, said Mr. Waterman, who flies about 50,000 miles a year, they will find a plane full of people nearing the limits of their patience.
Airline employees, he said, ''are frustrated because of the uncertainty of it all and second, everything they used to do to keep the customers happy -- as for food and amenities -- I mean, they've gotten rid of everything.''
''It's basically bare bones,'' he said. ''What do you keep people happy with? Coffee and peanuts?''
Actually, a number of forces have eroded civility in travel, according to consumers and industry experts.
Travelocity, the Web site, recently asked its members whether rudeness and disrespectful behavior were a serious problem in travel. Of the 1,000 or so who chose to respond to the online survey, two-thirds said they were, and more than half said they were a major cause of stress. As for likely causes, the one cited most often was that crowds and long lines strained tempers, followed by ''too many parents are failing to teach respect to their kids'' and ''values and morality are in decline in our society.'' While those responding were a self-selected group, and no definitive studies have been conducted of passengers' attitudes about civility, in interviews with some 30 travelers at airports serving Los Angeles, Atlanta, Newark, Philadelphia and Chicago, disgruntlement -- over service, crowds and manners -- was in plentiful supply.
''We get better service in Kenya and South Africa than we do here,'' said Chad Owens, cellphone in hand after about 20 minutes of efforts to reach an airline supervisor at O'Hare. Mr. Owens and his wife, Wendy, who fly often to Africa, were trying to get Ms. Owens and their 1-year-old daughter, Brielle, on a flight to Cleveland; having arrived an hour and a half before flight time, they waited for an hour in a line of eight people to check bags, only to be told they were too late. ''They basically wrote us off,'' Ms. Owens said. Although the plane had not left, Mr. Owens said, ''Nobody will even try to make an effort, say, 'Let's see if we can.' It's 'No, this can't be done.'''
Peter Bennett, also at O'Hare, said that when his flight from Bradley International Airport outside Hartford was canceled the day before and he asked if the airline could get him to Chicago on another carrier, a ticket agent told him: ''Those days are over. We're going bankrupt. That's your problem.''
''I could cut him some slack,'' Mr. Bennett said. ''Hey, I understand people are stressed. It's tough, obviously, to give bad news to lots of people. But that's no excuse for the whole attitude.''
At Los Angeles International Airport, Kim Canedy recalled asking a flight attendant for milk for her 2 1/2-year-old son on a trip to Hawaii. ''She told me I should have brought milk,'' Ms. Canedy said. ''She finally brought some milk over for him, but she gave me a dirty look.''
Some travelers cited a sour atmosphere perceptible from curbside to cabin. ''All the pressure of the extra security has made people working here more snippy,'' Edith Logan of Exton, Pa., said as she waited to meet her daughter at Philadelphia International Airport. ''You always feel on edge.''
Kevin Lowe, waiting there for his flight home to Knoxville, Tenn., said, ''Where I see it more than anywhere is at the fast food restaurants at the airport.'' Mr. Lowe said he was thinking of the short tempers behind the counter at a certain McDonald's at O'Hare: ''Everybody's shouting out. There are always five lines, eight people deep, and these people are just frazzled.''
Yet there are indications that some aspects of flying have actually improved in the last few years. Many travelers who were interviewed date the age of stress to the September 2001 attacks and the stringent security measures that followed, although many also recall a surge in cooperative spirit that fall.
And since the federal Transportation Security Administration hired and trained employees to replace the low-wage, high-turnover security staffs used by contractors, some travelers said, the screening process seems easier.
''If anything, I think since they put more security staff on, civility has risen,'' said Pauline Pastore of Liberty Corner, N.J., who flies from the Newark Liberty International Airport at least once a week on business.
One telling pattern appears in the federal Department of Transportation's records of complaints from airline passengers, especially those classified as customer service complaints, which include rude or unhelpful employees, inadequate cabin service and treatment of delayed passengers.
Customer service complaints about domestic carriers ran well into the hundreds each month before Sept. 11, 2001, and then plunged. The department received 306 complaints in July 2001, for example, and 62 in November 2001. Then the number climbed very quickly, reaching 179 in July 2002, before tapering to its lowest levels in years. In November 2003, the last month for which figures are available, customer service complaints numbered 39.
But when industry experts note a decline in civility, among both service employees and passengers, it has paralleled an increase in airline passenger loads that began a decade or more ago with deregulation, fare wars and consolidation.
''On busy business flights, that means all the seats are full,'' said Kevin Mitchell, the chairman of the Business Travel Coalition, an advocacy group based in Radnor, Pa. ''The middle seat is always taken, and that means the overhead bins are full, and that means those checking you in are frustrated and flustered, because none of these airline systems put in place were ever designed with these kinds of load factors in mind.''
The squeeze apparently brings out the worst in travelers, too. While a large majority of respondents in the Travelocity survey said they were ''likely to be treated with courtesy and respect'' by travel-industry employees, just under half said the same for their fellow passengers.
''We're a lot more comfortable in public than the society of the 50's,'' said Amy Ziff, Travelocity's editor at large in New York. ''Along with that is a breaking down of certain boundaries.''
Many of those interviewed at airports mentioned tantrum throwers, line cutters and personal-space invaders in their midst.
At Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Luis Natal talked about passengers who insisted on dragging overnight bags aboard. ''It's very common for people to flat-out refuse to check these rollers, as if making a big-enough scene will cause additional space to appear,'' he said.
Rupert Barkoff, also at Hartsfield, said that ''space can become very territorial on an airplane.''
Recalling an on-board fight that he saw when one passenger pushed his seat back into the lap behind him, Mr. Barkoff, a lawyer, said, ''It raises interesting questions about what the duties and respectful rights of passengers are about the right to recline a seat.''
Dick Lighty of Kennett Square, Pa., at the Philadelphia airport with his wife, Sally, mentioned sharp elbows at the gate when seat numbers are called. ''You're supposed to board in order, and people would just charge through,'' he said.
But Mr. Lighty said that behavior had improved as gate agents had become more willing to hold back those who cut ahead. And he added that ''people who travel are all in the same lifeboat -- we seek comfort in others' misery.''
Waiting nearby, Mrs. Logan recounted a ''horrible, horrible'' trip that her daughter had at Christmas, flying from Phoenix and being trapped overnight in Chicago. ''Because it was caused by weather, they wouldn't put her up,'' Mrs. Logan said. ''She had some real rude people to deal with.''
But the stranded passengers pulled together, Mrs. Logan said: ''One girl said, 'I have goodies for Christmas in my bag,' and opened it up and shared with everybody.'' For a young man who had less than $20 in his pocket, everybody chipped in so he could get a hotel room.
Most of those interviewed also said they could understand the strains on both passengers and airline workers. Mr. Waterman at O'Hare said that he at least was not being overcharged for the experience: ''To get here from Tampa it was, like, 200 bucks. What do you want for $200?''
LAURA MANSNERUS is a reporter on the metropolitan staff of The Times.
