Just as there are Oscar speeches, there are Oscar songs: big, weepy numbers like ''My Heart Will Go On'' from ''Titanic'' and ''Can You Feel the Love Tonight?'' from ''The Lion King.'' And yet one of the contenders this year is a small, unprepossessing song that serves as a satiric touchstone in ''A Mighty Wind,'' Christopher Guest's mockumentary about the 60's folk revival.
Oh when the veil of dreams has lifted
And the fairy tales have all been told,
There's a kiss at the end of the rainbow
More precious than a pot of gold.
''A Kiss at the End of the Rainbow,'' which is punctuated in the film with a gimmicky kiss, was not intended as a parody. ''It's more of an affectionate pastiche,'' said Michael McKean, who plays a member of a folk trio in the movie. He wrote the song with his wife, Annette O'Toole (she plays Martha Kent in the WB series ''Smallville''). ''We looked at it as an experiment to write something that could have been 150 years old,'' he said, ''that could have been written by Stephen Foster or one of his contemporaries.''
In tales of ancient glory,
Every knight and maiden fair shall be joined when the quest is over,
And a kiss is the oath that they swear.
The song functions as the emotional climax of the film, a moment of genuine depth and reflection amid devastating send-ups of the shallowness of commercialized folk music. Mr. McKean and Ms. O'Toole said that when they wrote the song, they had no idea that it would play such a prominent role in ''A Mighty Wind.''
''When I saw the film for the first time,'' Ms. O'Toole said, ''I was shocked at how much Chris used the song.''
My sweet, my dear, my darling, you're so far away from me.
Though an ocean of tears divides us,
Let the bridge of our love span the sea.
Mr. McKean and Ms. O'Toole, who were married in 1999, bear responsibility for another of the movie's musical gems. ''Potato's in the Paddy Wagon,'' their first joint effort, is a pseudo-hillbilly number performed in the film by the smoothly cloying New Main Street Singers.
But there's nothing pseudo about ''Kiss,'' its authors said. Mr. McKean and Ms. O'Toole said they wrote it for themselves as much as for the movie.
''We have to like it in order to pitch it correctly,'' Mr. McKean said. ''That's really the bottom line: sincerity. Once you can fake that, you're covered.''
BEN SISARIO
OSCAR FILMS
