ICELAND'S BELL
By Halldor Laxness.
Translated by Philip Roughton.
425 pp. New York:
Vintage International. Paper, $15.
''AN old woman wants to make a journey.'' With these simple words, Halldor Laxness opens Chapter 5 of his epic novel ''Iceland's Bell,'' now published in English for the first time. They inaugurate one of the classic set pieces of Icelandic literature -- an inspired lyrical foray whose American counterpart might be, say, the meditations on the whiteness of the whale in ''Moby-Dick,'' or the Midwestern train ride in ''The Great Gatsby.''
Initially, the woman isn't identified, but loyal readers of Laxness know never to bet against the ultimate ascendancy of one of his elderly women, particularly when she is, like this one, penniless and ignorant to boot, and when she brings to her errand nothing but a scrappy moral urgency. And we soon guess who she must be, this old widow who totters down to the shore each day, begging passage from a fishing boat. She's the mother of Jon Hreggvidsson, who is scheduled to be executed for a mysterious death, discovered after a night of widespread drinking. Nobody -- not even Jon himself -- seems to know if he's actually responsible.
Whether or not Jon committed murder ''in a black bog on a black autumn night in the black land called Iceland,'' undeniably he's a scoundrel and a scapegrace. Still, his mother is determined to win a pardon for her son, and it's one of the prime pleasures of this elegant novel -- a centerpiece in the career of one of the 20th century's greatest novelists -- to watch how the old woman's apparently doomed pilgrimage yields such an intricate, unlikely string of events. Not only is Jon set free, but Iceland's government and cultural heritage are, in time, shaken as a result. Careers topple and irrecoverable riches go up in flames.
''Iceland's Bell'' is set at the turn of the 18th century, a time of surpassing suffering in a country whose history is ravaged by hardship, where ''emaciation is the most common cause of death during the spring.'' Laxness, who won the Nobel Prize in 1955, often disconcerted his countrymen by the harshness with which he portrayed them in their struggles, and ''Iceland's Bell'' may well offer his bleakest depiction of his homeland. Iceland at the time of the novel is essentially a place administered by crooks -- the colonial Danish masters who monopolize its trade and plunder its few resources -- and populated by a drunken, despairing, loafish lot only fitfully energized by the pleasure of watching some act of public cruelty. More than any other novel I know, ''Iceland's Bell'' recreates a world where Pieter Bruegel would have felt right at home, not merely in its fascination with bumblers (petty thieves, purblind watchmen) and grotesques (faceless lepers, hanging corpses), but also in its unearthly ability to find beauty in a landscape of destitution, wisdom in a congress of fools.
Across this blasted backdrop of the misshapen and the misbegotten wanders the book's true hero, Arni Arnaeus, who has devoted his life and resources, up to the brink of bankruptcy, to the preservation of medieval Icelandic manuscripts -- the golden works of the Saga Age, which forever secured for Iceland a place in world literature. Arni moves steadily, quiet-spokenly through a fallen society whose inhabitants are not only unequal to the high art of their forebears but indifferent to it. He unearths invaluable scraps of manuscripts in sheds, under beds, even tucked among wall slats, ''to keep the snow from drifting in.''
Arni Arnaeus is based upon an actual figure, a famous book collector and scholar named Arni Magnusson, and many of the novel's climactic events reflect the historical record. But Laxness has shaped his story with a free hand, and in the end ''Iceland's Bell'' is a fabulistic tale of two contrary immortals. Time and again, Jon eludes the executioner's stroke; in his rat-witted way, his mixture of schemery and serendipity, he has the born escapee's genius for survival. (There's a winsome homeliness to Jon's thinking, as when a Danish woman inquires about his health: ''Jon Hreggvidsson replied that he'd never had any physical or spiritual health, neither good nor ill -- he was an Icelander, after all.'') Arni, too, will endure, even if the passing years sap his industry and idealism: the fruits of his collecting, though ultimately diminished by a tragic fire, ensure the durability of his life's work.
Both men's lives are colored by Snaefridur, daughter of a magistrate, a woman of such spectacular beauty that she evokes constant allusion to the legendary age of the sagas and regularly reduces men's brains to mush. (She is commonly referred to as ''Iceland's sun.'') She's a wonderful character who, while amusedly aware of her fatal attractiveness, delivers many of the book's most hardheaded, stringent lines. (While negotiating with the Danish governor about a legal case, she declares, ''It may be that the most victorious race is the one that is exterminated: I will not plead with words for mercy for the Icelanders. We Icelanders are truly not too good to die. And life has meant nothing to us for a long time.'') When, at the close of this disturbing novel, she chooses to marry a poisonously pious archpriest, all light seems eclipsed over the rain-pummeled, sun-hungry land of Iceland.
It would be hazardous to speculate whether modern-day Icelanders are more closemouthed and indwelling than the rest of us, but there's no gainsaying that taciturnity has held a place of special reverence in Icelandic literature and folk tale for something like a millennium. Devotees of the sagas appreciate the brooding patience of both characters and narrator, all the undiscussed mulling that goes into some sudden, catastrophic action or announcement. ''Iceland's Bell'' echoes the sagas in a variety of forms, not least in the way its crucial events are often graspable only retrospectively, through inference or by offhand remarks. The full horrors of Jon's various imprisonments, Snaefridur's hopeless love for Arni and her eventual nervous collapse, Arni's despondent growing reliance on alcohol and brothels -- these are largely left to the reader's imagination.
''Iceland's Bell'' was first published in Reykjavik in two parts in the 40's. Many of Laxness's books long ago made it into English, and the long delay in translating so marvelous a novel seems puzzling, though I gather there were some commercial worries that the book, with its connections to saga conventions and its late-17th-century setting, might be ''too Icelandic.''
Too Icelandic? For American Icelandophiles -- whose numbers appear to be mounting rapidly -- the phrase seems faintly absurd. One might just as well complain that a soufflé is too light, a diamond too hard, a peacock too showy. Nonetheless, ''Iceland's Bell'' calls for more extensive notes than any previously translated Laxness book. The many learned characters frequently resort to Latin, German and Danish phrases, and the internal politics -- the ways in which Denmark squeezes its colony in the guise of solicitude -- are complex. The scrupulous and insightful notes to ''Iceland's Bell'' are provided by its translator, Philip Roughton, who has done a commendable job over all, marred by occasional solecisms. (Even the most educated and elevated characters use ''like'' as a conjunction, making them sound like poseurs.)
In one of the novel's most transfixing moments, Arni locates a fragment of a lost volume he has been seeking for many years: a medieval manuscript in which ''the most beautiful poems in the Northern Hemisphere have been collected.'' To his glittering collector's eye, it is ''the most precious treasure in the Nordic lands.'' This jewel is exhumed from the bottom of Jon Hreggvidsson's mother's bed, where she, in her pauperdom, hoards all sorts of junk she cannot bear to throw away:
''Dust and poison gushed up from the old and moldy hay within the woman's bed as they began their search. Mixed up in the hay was all kinds of garbage, such as bottomless shoe-tatters, shoe-patches, old stocking legs, rotten rags of wadmal, pieces of cord, fibers, fragments of horseshoes, horns, bones, gills, fishtails hard as glass, broken wooden bolts and other scraps of wood.''
It's a breathtaking coming-to-the-surface, the emergence of deathless medieval poetry from such a muddled midden. But much the same thing might be said of ''Iceland's Bell,'' emerging so tardily into English. The new publishing season, like every season before, will no doubt bring us its share of books that are like shoe-tatters, shoe-patches, old stocking legs. Yet now we also have, brought forth into the light, this darkly magnificent novel.
Brad Leithauser's most recent book is ''Darlington's Fall,'' a novel in verse. He teaches English at Mount Holyoke College.
