To quell rumors emanating from Paris, the Michelin Guide announced its latest ''star'' restaurant ratings early -- on Feb. 5, three weeks before the date fixed for the release of the 2004 Guide Rouge to France on Feb. 27.
As any food lover knows, the Michelin rating system runs from one to three stars, which represent, respectively, ''a very good restaurant in its category,'' ''excellent cooking, worth a detour,'' and, finally, ''exceptional cuisine, worth a special journey.''
The new edition bestows three new three-star ratings, for a total of 27 in France. The only true newcomer is Michel Trama's Loges de l'Aubergade in Puymirol, near Agen in the Aquitaine region in the southwest. The two other restaurants had been on the three-star summit previously: Marc Meneau's Espérance, outside Vézelay in Burgundy, which lost its third star in 1999; and the Lorain family's Côte St.-Jacques, in Joigny, in northern Burgundy, which lost its third star in 2001.
More surprising, perhaps, was the demotion of Les Crayères in Reims from three to two stars. (The new guide lists 67 two-star restaurants in France.) This downgrading may only mark the passing of the mantle from Gérard Boyer, the chef who retired last July, to Thierry Voisin, who has been behind the stoves at Les Crayères for 10 years.
Indeed, what the new edition reveals more than anything is the restless movement of top chefs, including Yannick Alleno, a rising star who moved from Les Muses in the Hôtel Scribe near the Opéra in Paris to head the kitchen at Le Meurice, the sole restaurant promoted to two stars this year.
Six restaurants were downgraded from two stars to one, notably Les Muses, which won its second star when Mr. Alleno officiated there. It has since hired as chef Jean-François Rouquette, formerly of Le Bourdonnais. Also known as Cantine des Gourmets, Le Bourdonnais was one of 33 restaurants to lose its sole star.
Thirty restaurants earned one star, making a total of 410 throughout France. They include La Braisière, in the 17th Arrondissement of Paris, which showcases the skills of Jacques Fassat, formerly of Au Trou Gascon, and Seize au Seize in the 16th Arrondissement whose kitchen is run by Frédéric Simonin, the young chef who had worked in this kitchen in its previous incarnation as Ghislaine Arabian. Named after its controversial chef, that restaurant had earned one Michelin star, which was removed when Ms. Arabian decamped. The renowned chef Joël Robuchon is reportedly scheduled to take over this April, which could mean yet more changes in the star ratings in 2005.
JACQUELINE FRIEDRICH
TRAVEL ADVISORY
