WHEN Altogether Different began in 1986, it was an attempt by the Joyce Theater to showcase the work of young and frequently experimental choreographers. For three weeks in January, young dance makers who normally perform in small downtown spaces are featured for two or three nights on one of the city's most influential mainstream stages. The festival has been credited with helping the careers of Mark Dendy and David Parsons.
But in recent years, the programming for Altogether Different began to shift away from emerging artists. One of the first signs was the inclusion in 2001 of Karole Armitage. Ms. Armitage's reputation, as the punk rock ballerina, was already internationally established, and she had previously appeared at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Even more surprising was a program called ''Black Tie Optional: Irene Hultman &amp; Friends,'' which consisted of several conventional solos set to popular songs.
This year the festival was whittled to two weeks. Only two of the five choreographers, Ben Munisteri and Rebecca Stenn, were making Joyce debuts; neither Mr. Munisteri, with his melding of classical vocabulary and club moves, nor Ms. Stenn, formerly a member of the crowd-pleasing Momix, could be considered experimental. The three others, Margie Gillis, John Kelly and Peter Pucci, have solid reputations and all had presented solo seasons at the theater.
Now downtown choreographers are questioning whether the festival has strayed from what they see as its original intent and thereby given up on its role in nurturing young choreographers. ''I certainly think people in the community look at the programming each year and go, 'Duh?' '' said Keely Garfield, a choreographer. ''They're not seeing what the through line is and are very confused about who is eligible and who is not.''
Martin Wechsler, the director of programming at the Joyce, acknowledges some change in emphasis. ''We allowed the festival to evolve to include mid-career artists who were doing special projects or they wanted to perform at the Joyce but didn't want to take the risk of performing for a full week,'' he said. ''When we were coming up with the title, we were searching for something that would be compelling to audiences, but we didn't want to impose any sort of aesthetic limitations. We have carefully avoided saying these are cutting-edge artists. In programming, we're conscious to find artists that are doing work that is different from each other to fit into the title of the festival.''
This year it was difficult to discern such differences, however. Each of the programs presented by Ms. Gillis, Mr. Kelly and Mr. Pucci were essentially unadventurous solo shows with a retrospective flavor. But even if the Joyce's goal is to be inclusive, where does such a perceptible curatorial shift leave a new generation of downtown choreographers? For many of them, eager to break through to the next level, Altogether Different seems like yet another loss in a rapidly dwindling field.
Both Caitlin Cook and Maria Hassabi, two promising choreographers who recently presented exceptional dances at the Kitchen's Dance in Progress series, say they are no longer interested in participating in Altogether Different. When Ms. Hassabi moved to New York from Cyprus 10 years ago, she was an usher at the Joyce; she also performed with ChameckiLerner in the 2001 festival. Now her disenchantment isn't limited to the festival. ''When I walk by the theater, I don't even turn to see who is performing,'' she said. ''It used to be that Altogether Different was the next step; then, maybe you would get a week at the Joyce, but that's no longer a goal.''
Ms. Garfield, who was part of Altogether Different last year, described the experience as ''fabulous,'' even though it didn't really help her career. ''It used to be that you thought you would go to Altogether Different, tour, do three weeks at the Joyce and be a superstar,'' she said. ''I think those days are dead and gone, and it's not really the Joyce's fault. There's virtually nowhere even sideways to move, let alone up.''
She viewed her Altogether show as just another gig. ''There is a sense that Altogether Different is a little bit like a one-night stand,'' Ms. Garfield said. ''You wake up the next day and go, Oh! That was fun. But you're not really sure about where your relationship is going. There really should be a commitment on the part of presenters to nurture artists.''
What's frustrating is that Altogether Different could reflect the exciting experimentation that is happening in New York. Along with Ms. Cook and Ms. Hassabi, other choreographers like David Neumann could give the festival a more diverse, experimental scope.
Tere O'Connor, an established choreographer whose company performed at Altogether Different in 1996, would like to see the festival return to being a showcase for the young and unproven. ''It would certainly be a good time to take another look at what the festival could offer,'' he said. ''How it could remain a barometer of what's actually happening that's different.''
Guy Yarden, a composer and arts administrator who has worked for Dance Theater Workshop and Movement Research, a service organization for artists founded in 1978, expressed little surprise at the festival's current programming. ''I never thought that Altogether Different or Next Wave'' -- the Brooklyn Academy's annual fall season -- ''were anything but marketing tools,'' he said. ''It's unfortunate that a lot of people in the community, especially artists, think that because theaters have these programs they're nurturing innovative work. A place like the Joyce doesn't pretend to be anything else than exactly what it is -- a very middle-of-the-road presenting institution. It gives $50,000 a year for commissions -- in a budget of $5 million, that's 1 percent. They are not in the business of nurturing creation. They're in the business of selling and marketing.''
Mr. Wechsler said that choreographers participating in Altogether Different had been asked to present one New York premiere. Each artist receives $5,000. ''In Altogether Different we package companies as a way of introducing them to the Joyce audience,'' he said. ''It does help to introduce some artists to audience members who may not be familiar with them.''
The festival's publicity campaign, however, has also been the subject of some derision. The sexy, out-of-focus photographs of the five choreographers were a departure from the zany group shots of previous years that seemed to say: ''Look at us! Dance is fun!'' Instead they hinted at slick soft porn. ''The marketing looks quite polished, like it is trying to get people there,'' Mr. O'Connor said. ''It doesn't seem artist-selected.''
Unfortunately, young choreographers see little reason to be optimistic about the producing side of avant-garde dance. For them, the recent resignation of Mark Russell, the executive director of P.S. 122 who was widely known for his risk-taking, is devastating. But Mr. Yarden doesn't think that type of foresight is irreplaceable. ''It takes one person to change things,'' he said. ''People are always talking about vision, right? It's an often-used word by executive directors, and I've always hated it. What change requires is one executive director working for a large institution to take the reins and say, 'We need to step back, look at what we're doing and change it.' I think we need to stop having vision, see what's in front of us and take some risks.''
DANCE Gia Kourlas is the dance editor of Time Out New York.
