AN ALMOST PERFECT MOMENT
By Binnie Kirshenbaum.
321 pp. New York:
Ecco/HarperCollins Publishers. $23.95.
THE 1970's, a vacuous decade if ever there was one, is the perfect setting for ''An Almost Perfect Moment,'' Binnie Kirshenbaum's darkly comic novel about a Jewish teenager in Brooklyn who thinks she's the Virgin Mary.
Why the 70's? Because in that spectacularly bland era, a combination of the earnest and the silly, nothing seemed out of the question. It was in the 70's, after all, that a housewife in New Mexico spotted the image of Jesus on a flour tortilla she was making for her husband's lunch. That famous apparition -- out of the frying pan and into the roadside shrine -- was the first of several sightings of Christ on tortillas, both flour and corn. So is it such a stretch to imagine the Virgin Mother walking into Enzio's Pizzeria on East 103rd Street in Canarsie to order two slices and a Diet Pepsi?
The action in ''An Almost Perfect Moment'' takes place in the very heart of the 70's, post-Roe v. Wade but pre-Saturday Night Fever.'' (Elvis, not quite dead, was unavailable for postmortem sightings.) Our heroine, 15-year-old Valentine Kessler, the prettiest girl at Canarsie High, has ''no obvious talents, no rare gifts,'' and seems ''as shallow and superficial as the next teenager.'' She dots her i's with tiny hearts and wears a vacant, almost moronic expression, ''as if she were a plastic doll with wide eyes painted on and a hollow head.'' But Valentine has two secrets.
First, she's obsessed with Our Lady. It's not that Valentine is spiritual; the only thing she does ''religiously'' is read Seventeen magazine. But she's discovered that she looks just like ''the Blessed Virgin as she appeared to Bernadette at Lourdes.'' She gazes at pictures of Mary not out of piety but out of narcissism. ''Whenever Valentine looked in the mirror, the Blessed Virgin Mary looked back at her.'' (Nobody else seems to notice this likeness, however, until near the end of the book. As the author explains, ''Who would ever think to look for a resemblance between Mary, Mother of God, and the Jewish kid from the house next door?'')
Valentine keeps a library copy of ''The Lives of the Saints'' under her bed and reads the more salacious passages while licking the filling from Oreo cookies. Alone in her room on Ash Wednesday, she secretly smudges her forehead with cigarette ash because she thinks the sooty mark ''looks kind of hot.'' She hears the Ave Maria in her head, as rendered by the Vienna Boys Choir. She gets progressively weirder and her popularity at school nosedives.
Valentine's other secret, meanwhile, is that she has a major crush on her geometry teacher. Not unusual, perhaps, except that the object of her adoration is a geek of the first magnitude. John Wosileski, 24, is ''passive and bloblike,'' a spineless, pasty-faced loser who ''resembled a pig except that he lacked a pig's expressiveness.''
As Kirshenbaum says, ''The sad parts of his life were the sum total of his existence.'' Mr. Wosileski, of course, fantasizes about this luscious nymphet as he commits acts of self-pollution in his grubby apartment, acts he will later confess to his priest (minus the parts about Valentine). Resignedly, he begins dating the repellent Joanne Clarke, a biology teacher whose ''mean streak'' is about to become a lot meaner.
The real miracle here is that Kirshenbaum, the author of two story collections and the much-admired novel ''Hester Among the Ruins,'' manages to bring these disparate threads together in a believable way. Valentine and Mr. Wosileski have a brief, fumbling tryst, during which Valentine, though still technically inviolate, becomes pregnant. Yes, the stage is set for a virgin birth. More I will not reveal.
As Valentine floats blissfully through the novel, leaving destruction and misery in her wake, it's her mother who provides the ballast the story needs. Miriam Kessler, the most interesting and sympathetic figure in the book, still loves the charming and feckless husband who left her years before, when Valentine was a baby.
''Miriam had given up. She had traded a chance at happiness for the midmorning Danish she sank her teeth into, and as she savored the cherry preserves and the cheese and the buttery crust all lolling across her taste buds, she told herself, I put my life aside to be a mother, but really Miriam put her life aside because she loved Ronald Kessler with all her heart and soul, with every fiber of her being, and the loss of him was an eternal void. Without Ronald, she might as well eat.'' So the hefty, muumuu-clad Miriam fills her emptiness with Entenmann's cakes, Freihofer's doughnuts, a passionate devotion to her daughter and games of mah-jongg with her three best friends.
Miriam and her friends don't practice their Judaism. (Who needs practice?) They nevertheless inhabit ''a bifurcated world,'' where every place, every person, every thing is either Jewish (doctors, books) or not Jewish (politicians, guns). Even verbs can be categorized, as in ''walking'' (Jewish) and ''skydiving'' (not). Yet God is largely ''a figure of speech,'' as in ''God forbid,'' ''God help me'' and ''Thank God for the plastic slipcovers.''
Valentine's Jewish education is strictly cultural. ''Names that end with field, baum, stein, farb and berg are Jewish,'' Miriam tells her. ''Anything from the Bible, the Hebrew Bible, is Jewish too. You know, like Isaac or Solomon. If the name ends with an a or an o, they're Italian, but Shapiro is an exception. . . . Italians are always Catholics. The American names, the plain ones, Jones, Smith, Anderson, like that, those are your Protestants.''
These mother-daughter talks, along with the chat around the mah-jongg table, provide some of the funniest riffs in the book, even if the humor sometimes takes on a broad, borscht belt flavor. (On the subject of nuns: ''Romantic? No. Meshugge? Yes.'')
If there's a message to ''An Almost Perfect Moment,'' it probably has something to do with faith and love and the inadvisability of putting all your eggs in one basket. But it's also about what people see, and why. In the author's words: ''You either see or you don't, but even the most cynical can understand how the desire to see, the need to see, can produce the vision.''
Patricia T. O'Conner is the author of three books about language and writing, ''Woe Is I,'' ''Words Fail Me'' and ''You Send Me'' (written with Stewart Kellerman).
