THE comedian George Carlin has observed that all the other drivers on the road fall into one of two categories: idiots or lunatics. The former are the slowpokes blocking you; the latter are the leadfoots zooming past you.
As unscientific as that conclusion may be, it does demonstrate one speed bump facing any assessment of the state of manners on American highways: while it may be easy to discern what constitutes rude behavior in an airport or on a plane, speed limits, along with a lot of unwritten traffic laws, vary not by state but by driver.
Some things do seem clear. For instance, the fabric of social interaction is a lot less frayed when it has a lighter traffic load running over it. And that which qualifies as rude on the roads in one part of the country can simply be a rule of the road elsewhere.
Consider California, where traffic ranges from the sleep-inducing in rural San Joaquin Valley in the state's heart to the rage-raising in Los Angeles. ''We've noticed that the level of frustration that may prompt some less-than-courteous behavior is more likely to occur in those urban areas than, let's say, driving along Interstate 5 in the Central Valley,'' said Tom Marshall, a California Highway Patrol spokesman.
''I don't think manners are as good in terms of letting pedestrians cross,'' said Officer Reid Thompson, with the California Highway Patrol in Woodland, west of Sacramento. ''People seem a lot busier and more concerned with their own business. But when there's an accident, you still see good Samaritans.''
To Mr. Marshall's eye, there appears to be some improvement in the state. Although he has no statistics to back it up, he believes that the state's notoriety as birthplace of road rage (in which drivers would lose control of their emotions and, soon after, their cars, or even start shooting) has subsided. ''I base that on the fact that I get a lot less calls from the news media asking for comment on it,'' he said. ''Whether that means it's improving or just isn't noticed as much, I'll leave that up to you.''
One survey indicates that at least things may not be getting much worse. David McMillen, a psychology professor and senior research fellow at Mississippi State University's Social Science Research Center, has conducted a series of telephone surveys with questions about driver behavior. They sampled 1,500 people nationwide, chosen by random dialing, with a margin of error of plus or minus 4 percentage points. Participants were asked, for example, whether in the previous 12 months a driver had used a vehicle to make a threatening move toward the one they were in. ''In 1999, 28 percent said yes,'' Professor McMillen said. In spring and summer of 2003, it was 29 percent.
''Of course, that's open to interpretation,'' he said. ''You could be driving down the road, and someone could just not be paying attention and drift into your lane.''
Rude gestures are also holding steady, according to Professor McMillen's polling, with 49 percent reporting they or the cars they were in were a target in the previous 12 months in 1999, 41 percent in spring 2003 and 42 percent last summer. These results, he said, don't reflect the relative shock value of the universal signal of disdain, depending on the neighborhood you're in.
''I think the interpretation and the implied threat is different down here,'' he said, referring to his fellow Mississippi drivers. ''They probably see that as a more aggressive threat.'' (No, the word ''months'' was not replaced by ''hours'' when the rude-gesture question was posed to New Yorkers.)
Professor McMillen's polling shows that, under the wrong circumstances, holding a cellphone to your ear is also a gesture that upsets other drivers.
Last summer, the survey asked motorists if they use a cellphone while driving in heavy traffic; 20 percent said often or sometimes. And we know how all the rest of them feel about it: 80 percent agreed with the statement ''When I see other drivers on cellphones, I think they are being unsafe.'' Professor McMillen observed, purely on anecdotal evidence: ''Some people are doing it more and more, and others are becoming more and more upset about it.''
His findings also echo the aforementioned Carlin idiot-lunatic paradigm: ''Half the people think traffic is moving too slowly and the other half think that it's moving too fast,'' the professor said.
The AAA Mid-Atlantic office, which covers Delaware, Maryland, Washington and parts of Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Virginia, found out what was bugging drivers in its area last year. It hired R/S/M, professional pollsters, who called a random selection of 1,258 licensed drivers from Philadelphia to Richmond.
Only 11 percent listed drunken drivers as the greatest worry, a fact that worries the AAA, which sees alcohol impairment as the leading danger to drivers.
National Highway Transportation Safety Administration statistics show that alcohol was a factor in 41 percent of fatal crashes and that there were 17,419 alcohol-related traffic deaths in 2002 nationwide. But the largest number of those questioned, about 43 percent (with a 2.8 percentage-point margin of error), said that the greatest threat on the roads was aggressive driving, defined as tailgating, reckless speeding and darting across lanes.
The survey respondents seemed to know where some of the fault lies. About 36 percent (versus 27 percent in 1997) said they were driving at least 20 miles an hour over the limit more often than a few years ago. Another 25 percent or so admitted to tailgating, weaving or abrupt lane changes.
About 20 percent (up from 8 percent in 1997) confessed to having made a rude gesture in the previous 12 months. So how do we reconcile that with Professor McMillen's poll, which showed twice that percentage on the receiving end?
Either someone's lying, or we're not all driving on the same roads. Or some people are just too darn sensitive.
JOSEPH SIANO is an assistant to the editor of the Travel section.
