THE wacky Nut Museum that made its Old Lyme proprietor famous on late-night television has risen from the depths of a storage unit and come to life in three galleries of the Lyman Allyn Museum in New London.
The exhibition, ''The Nut Museum: Visionary Art of Elizabeth Tashjian,'' opened Friday and will run through June 6. The show will include a replica of Ms. Tashjian's Old Lyme dining room, the museum's heart. Another room will air her television segments.
An art history and architectural studies professor at Connecticut College has been working with his students to catalog Ms. Tashjian's paintings, sculptures, masks and tapestries depicting nuts.
Prof. Christopher B. Steiner, who heads a museum studies program at the college and is the interim director of the Lyman Allyn, thinks Ms. Tashjian, who is 91, was ahead of her time as a performance artist.
Ms. Tashjian was a trained artist and musician who moved to Connecticut from New York City in 1950 with her mother. She never married nor held a formal job. But she occasionally made money as a Christian Science healer and by selling paintings. In her old age, she struggled to pay taxes and bills.
In 2002, Ms. Tashjian became ill, collapsed and almost died. Last year she lost the house on Ferry Road where she had lived since 1950 and run the museum since 1972. The Old Lyme Probate Court awarded the collection to Connecticut College.
Ms. Tashjian is now living on the third floor of Gladeview Health Care Center in Old Saybrook, where she is surrounded by some of her art. But she is still haunted by the loss of her house. Ms. Tashjian said she was drafting letters to state officials seeking to be declared competent to handle her own affairs.
Last year, the lawyers assigned to her case sold the house to an Old Lyme resident, Elizabeth Karter. Ms. Karter restored the house, which is up for sale.
Ms. Tashjian remains active. This winter she cleaned one of her paintings and went outside in the snow with one of Dr. Steiner's students to spray paint five papier-mâché nut masks for the show.
''It was so windy that the spray had to be close - rather than the 18 inches away recommended - so it was not effective,'' she said. ''We got around it, but it was not to my liking.''
UPDATE
