One slave, though barely out of childhood, spoke with the wisdom learned through years of suffering: ''I ain't know I was any different than the children of my mistress. We ate and played and fight together like children is bound to do all over the world. But something always happen, though, to remind me I was just a piece of property.''
Another recalled: ''When we were very young we often played with white children and had good relations. And then the time must come when friends become a slave to their master.''
Though recited by contemporary teenagers, these words are from the 19th century, when close to half of America's slaves were younger than 16.
Slavery was abolished more than 100 years ago, but the aftereffects linger, sometimes stirring emotions of anger, shame and sorrow, and affecting race relations among adolescents today, said Linda Ellerbee, the producer and host of ''The Legacy of Slavery,'' a ''Nick News'' special shown tonight at 8:30 on Nickelodeon.
''Last year, when we did this episode, we discovered something disturbing,'' Ms. Ellerbee said of the show's annual tribute to Black History Month. ''We discovered that one of the hard things for kids, both black and white, to talk about was slavery in America.''
It was particularly difficult for Patrick, a black teenager who had been reared on tales of servitude by his grandparents. ''It made me very uncomfortable to talk about slavery,'' he said of his prickly reaction last year to Ms. Ellerbee's suggestion that ''Nick News'' examine the topic. ''Sometimes it really hurts.''
Spurred on by Patrick's remarks, Ms. Ellerbee turned to Dr. Cornel West, a professor of religion at Princeton University who has lectured on slavery for the last 21 years. They decided to present a historical overview to the 11 teenage participants in tonight's show -- from the black indentured servants who arrived in the 16th century and earned their freedom after seven years, to early colonists' attempts to enslave both whites and American Indians before settling on Africans. Then they encouraged the teenagers to examine the ways racial identity affects their lives, consciously or not.
The answers, Ms. Ellerbee said, were often surprising. ''We put our kids together when they're small these days, and they become friends until they get to be 11 or 12, and then in both cultures, the peer pressure sets in,'' she said, noting the special's segment on Charlotte, a white 14-year-old, and Erin, her black classmate, who watched their childhood friendship disintegrate when they hit adolescence.
''I don't think we could really have a relationship again,'' Erin said. ''She doesn't talk to my friends, and I don't really talk to her friends.''
Charlotte agreed: ''Most of the people do drift towards their own race. I mean, they don't even realize it, but it might come to them naturally.''
In a recent telephone interview, Dr. West said the solution was ''to have courage to think for yourself.''
''What racism has been is an attempt to get us distant from each other's humanity, all our beauty and our intelligence and our imagination but also our bad stuff,'' he says in the show. ''Because if you're human, you've got good and bad, right? You've got virtues and vices, no matter what color, no matter what culture.''
Kathryrn Shattuck
Taking On the Chin
When Timmy Turner is disappointed by neighborhood do-gooders, he wishes for a world in the image of his favorite comic book, The Crimson Chin. In ''The Fairly OddParents Big Superhero Wish,'' tomorrow at 8 p.m. on Nickelodeon, Wanda and Cosmo transport Timmy and his friends into the lair of the Chin, whose voice is supplied by Jay Leno. But even with their cool costumes, the neophyte heroes can't withstand the supervillains of their parallel universe. When ordinary heroes like Milkman, Janitor and Firewoman step in to save the day, Timmy learns that it's not what you wear but who you are that really matters. The Presidents' Day special is preceded by a 12-episode ''Fairly OddParents'' marathon, beginning at 2.
FOR YOUNG VIEWERS
