THE health-care sector was the bright light in the local economic firmament last year, producing some 3,000 new salaried jobs in Nassau and Suffolk and nosing past retail as the region's biggest employer. Employment swelled to 161,400 jobs in December 2003, up from 158,400 in December a year ago. No fewer than 7 of the State Labor Department's 15 ''hot jobs'' on Long Island -- the most-advertised positions --were in health care. In first place, to no one's surprise, was nursing.
Yet a reading of the sector's overall health gives mixed signals. The Long Island Association, which publishes an annual report on the local health-care sector every February in its Business Long Island magazine, delivered this year's results with a note of caution.
''Although the health-care sector is growing, it is an industry sector in crisis,'' Pearl Kamer, the association's chief economist, wrote.
These are some of the problems she identified. ''Local hospitals are under intense financial pressure,'' she wrote. ''The burgeoning cost of medical malpractice insurance is forcing some practitioners to leave the profession; the cost of prescription drugs is skyrocketing; and rising health insurance premiums are becoming increasingly burdensome for employers and employees alike.''
These problems are particularly worrisome, considering that the Island's largest employer is the North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, with a payroll of 33,000 people. Its work force is expected to grow by some 2,500 jobs this year, said Michael Dowling, its chief executive.
The average annual wage of Long Islanders working in health care is $38,260, and their ranks constitute 13.5 percent of the work force, according to the State Labor Department. Add the people who work in related fields -- those who make medical devices, for example, or who administer insurance plans and health-care accounts -- and that accounts for nearly a third of the Long Island labor market.
Yet behind this growth are some troubling questions. For example, health care is a relatively low-paying industry. How many people took jobs in the field last year when better-paying jobs failed to materialize (and will leave when they do)? And why, at a time when the country's spending on health care continues to outpace inflation, are so many hospitals in financial trouble, including the Nassau University Medical Center in East Meadow?
And how will smaller institutions, some chugging along with outdated computers, comply with federal mandates to automate medical records and drug disbursement?
Those in the trenches describe serious systemic problems, including a turnover rate for nurses approaching 20 percent and agreement that they provide free services to the indigent.
It isn't all pathology. Capital projects now under way at the region's two largest hospitals will total $600 million over the next three years. North Shore recently began a $120 million modernization of the Long Island Jewish Medical Center, which straddles the Nassau-Queens border. The project will add a new main entrance, 120 patient beds, a new emergency department and a garage for 1,200 cars.
Stony Brook University Hospital is in the middle of its own $300 million project. This fall, the hospital opened a new orthopedic unit, and over the next three years, it will also build a new ambulatory-care pavilion with a cancer center, an enlarged emergency department, a heart center, a neonatal intensive-care unit, larger quarters for the radiology department, a new obstetrics and maternity unit, and expanded operating rooms.
These projects will allow the hospitals to use new technologies, and they will have to hire people to operate the equipment and train others to operate it.
With Long Island's two largest medical centers beginning capital projects, other local hospitals will need to do the same, said Kevin Dahill, the president of Nassau-Suffolk Hospital Council. ''Hospitals don't want to be seen as being outdated,'' he said. ''Physicians are going to put pressure on the hospitals, because hospitals want doctors to be pleased.''
Many hospitals have deferred improvements for years. ''Many of the facilities were built on average 35 years ago when the focus was on in-patient stays,'' Mr. Dahill said.
Today, in 70 percent of the medical procedures, patients are discharged on the same day, he said, prompting hospitals to shift their emphasis from constructing and maintaining towering hotel-like buildings to opening smaller clinics spread out geographically. The need to restructure is particularly acute for smaller institutions. ''The challenge for smaller hospitals is to find the money needed to convert and update the facilities,'' he said.
Jane Franz, the chief planning officer at Stony Brook University Hospital, said that new technology is also changing operating rooms. For example, as more and more imaging equipment becomes available, the traditional 500-square-foot operating room is now too small, Ms. Franz said. Now hospitals need operating rooms twice that size, and the floor needs to be able to support two to three times as much weight as before.
Although the newest technology may take up more room, having it helps in hiring, said Kathy Gallo, whose title is chief learning officer at North Shore. ''Generation X and Generation Y are looking for learning opportunities at work,'' she said. ''The people we're looking for are the people looking for challenging assignments.''
One big advantage for the health-care sector is that consumers need, or feel they need, what's being sold, said Thomas McAteer Jr., the chief executive of Vytra Health Plan, a managed-care provider in Melville.
''People always complain about the health plan, or the physician or the ancillary provider,'' he said, ''but at the end of the day, it boils down to economics, what we as a society are willing to pay for. We want to live long, healthy lives. There is a cost attached to that.''
L.I.@WORK
