Sean Penn
''A working-class hero is something to be,'' John Lennon used to sing; he might have been surprised to learn that in the movies, these days, working-class villain is a pretty nice gig, too. As Jimmy Markum -- grieving father turned coldhearted avenger -- in Clint Eastwood's ''Mystic River,'' Sean Penn gets to be both working-class hero and working-class villain, more or less consecutively: an Oscar-ready role if ever there was one.
Mr. Penn, who has never been afraid to go over the top (see, for example, ''Fast Times at Ridgemont High,'' ''Casualties of War,'' ''Carlito's Way''), knows he doesn't have to here, that held-in sorrow and hooded rage are enough to do the job. He refrains from chewing the scenery, but something very peculiar happens in ''Mystic River'': Mr. Eastwood's camera decides to chew it for him. Beginning with an attention-getting overhead shot of Jimmy's anguished reaction to the discovery of his daughter's body, the movie keeps nudging us to notice Mr. Penn's acting, to be blown away by its understatement. After a while, every nuance seems to have the weight of a soliloquy.
The actor probably doesn't actually have more close-ups in ''Mystic River'' than he does in his other 2003 movie, Alejandro González Iñárritu's ''21 Grams,'' but it sure feels as if he does, because Mr. Eastwood tends to linger on him, as Mr. González Iñárritu -- the more agile director -- does not. Mr. Penn's intuitive approach is much better served by the on-the-fly, cinéma vérité style of ''21 Grams'': it's a great performance that you seem to catch out of the corner of your eye, like a landscape seen from a speeding train.
But it's Mr. Penn's work in ''Mystic River'' that the academy, in its wisdom, has chosen to honor with a best-actor nomination, so I guess Mr. Eastwood knew what he was doing. It's not easy to get Oscar voters to pay attention to subtle, restrained acting. (If it were, Jeff Bridges would be nominated every year.) The elbow-in-the-ribs technique of ''Mystic River'' may be the only way to turn that trick. And if this wonderful actor wins his first Academy Award for something less than his most satisfying work, so what? That's the most venerable Oscar tradition of all.
TERRENCE RAFFERTY
OSCAR FILMS
