Samantha Morton
Like many of Samantha Morton's admirers, I have often found myself amazed at her ability to incarnate odd, inarticulate and sometimes downright freakish characters: the mute laundress in ''Sweet and Lowdown,'' the pre-cog in ''Minority Report,'' the dreamy addict in ''Jesus' Son,'' the changeling raver in ''Morvern Callar.'' But I have also often wondered what would happen if she were to deploy her compact, attentive features and half-swallowed voice in the role of an ordinary person. The answer can be found in Jim Sheridan's ''In America,'' in which Ms. Morton plays Sarah, the hard-working, grief-haunted mother of an Irish immigrant family -- someone you might walk past on the street without a second glance.
And for much of the movie, Sarah seems, if not quite peripheral to her own family as it tries to reinvent itself in New York, then at least its most self-effacing member. Her husband, Johnny, is an actor, and Paddy Considine shows us how Johnny uses his performer's natural jollity to defend himself from the world and his own emotions. The couple's two surviving young daughters, Christy and Ariel, beguile us with precocity and cuteness. At first glance it may seem that ''In America'' is principally the story of a father and his daughters -- which, in a literal sense, it is, since Mr. Sheridan wrote its loosely autobiographical screenplay with his two daughters, Kirsten and Naomi.
It is not exactly that Ms. Morton steals the movie from them. Rather, in a gesture of breathtaking technique and maternal generosity, she gives it to them. Christy may declare that she's been carrying the family, but it is Sarah's nearly imperceptible determination that keeps them going. She suffers most acutely from the death of their toddler son, and the complexity of her suffering -- it is at once selfish and self-sacrificing, a way of punishing herself and also of protecting the other survivors -- is what lifts the movie beyond melodrama. So, when Sarah decides to risk her own life to have another baby, her unquestionably reckless, unassailably practical choice might stand as a metaphor for what Ms. Morton does to the movie: she gives it life.
A. O. SCOTT
OSCAR FILMS
