Jude Law
In ''Cold Mountain,'' Jude Law, wounded at the Battle of the Crater, wanders through a nightmarish Southern landscape populated by desperate and heavily accented movie stars. He encounters the likes of Philip Seymour Hoffman, Jena Malone, Natalie Portman and Giovanni Ribisi, but they do not recognize him as one of their own, because of his heavy growth of beard and his taciturn manner. Of course, a flashback has revealed to us what they cannot know, which is that he -- Inman, reluctant avenger and deadpan ironist -- was once a movie star even greater than they, before his neck wound and gaunt posture and unruly facial hair obscured that glittering fact. And not only that: in those smooth-cheeked days before the Civil War broke out, when the filters on the camera bathed the world in a honey-hued glow rather than in dusky melancholy, he flirted and canoodled with one of the loveliest movie stars of all, back home on Cold Mountain.
She waits for him now, in the company of another dressed-down movie star, with occasional visits from an itinerant rock star. Inman, to find his way back to her, and to reclaim his rightful status, tramps through the wilderness with his worn copy of Bartram's ''Travels,'' diligently treading the path of understatement and watchfulness.
And it is Mr. Law's diligence that holds ''Cold Mountain'' together. In spite of coming from England, he is the one person in the picture who gives a plausible impression of belonging to the hills and hollows of western Carolina. His quiet, humorous backwoods manner also makes him intriguingly unmodern, a figure who has wandered not out of late-20th-century bestsellerdom but out of the murder ballads and tall tales of the 1800's.
And then, after appearing in the snow like a revenant from another world, Mr. Law shaves, washes his face and is miraculously transformed into a movie star once more. The winter light retrieves its amber glow and he disrobes for the tasteful movie-star sex montage that has been the object of his long and arduous journey, and the thing we paid our money to see. At that point, he has done his duty, and he can die a happy man.
A. O. SCOTT
OSCAR FILMS
