THEY were two plain-Jane office buildings, sitting right across the street from the swank Mall at Short Hills and next to the five-diamond Short Hills Hilton -- ''B assets in an A location,'' as Todd Rechler of the Reckson Associates Realty Corporation put it. ''We knew what we had to do.''
Over the past two years, 101 and 103 JFK Parkway have been given total makeovers -- and quickly began attracting some prestigious tenants.
The ''repositioning'' of 103 JFK Parkway came first. After a boxy pedestrian bridge to its sister building was eliminated, an elegant-looking plaza and landscaped courtyard were created, a two-story glass lobby featuring French limestone and wood veneer was built, and new heating and air-conditioning systems, new elevator cabs and added covered parking were installed. Before work was complete, the financial services company Dun &amp; Bradstreet leased the entire four-story 123,000-square-foot building for its world headquarters, relocating from Murray Hill at the end of 2002.
Last year, after American Express moved out of 101 JFK Parkway, Bollinger Insurance signed a lease for 69,500 square feet on the top two floors of the six-story structure, and extensive renovation work began immediately to give the building the same sort of impressive lobby provided for D.&amp;B. and amenities that include a health club, cafe and conference room -- as well as shuttle service to the Hilton and the mall.
At the end of the year, Citicorp North America leased 14,078 square feet at the building, relocating an office from Metropark in Iselin.
Last week, Reckson said it was in final negotiations on another 55,000 square feet on the bottom two floors, which were to be taken by a financial services company for its headquarters. Mr. Rechler said that deal and another one pending would bring the building up to 73 percent occupied. Considering that New Jersey's office real estate market has been exceedingly sluggish for the past two years, Mr. Rechler said, ''These are great results, representing a validation of our repositioning strategy and a flight to quality at our buildings.''
Mr. Rechler is the managing director for New Jersey at Reckson, a large real estate investment trust founded by his family on Long Island and and now publicly traded. He said Reckson's working formula is to create ''distinctive office environments that appeal to tenants' aesthetic and operation needs, as well as the bottom line.''
''Our tenants spend 50 percent more time in their office than in their homes,'' Mr. Rechler said, ''and it is our desire to make them as comfortable as possible there.''
WHAT has sold tenants on the Short Hills site so far is a combination of high-quality architecture and amenities, and its location, he asserted. Reckson groups three buildings along JFK Parkway -- Nos. 101 and 103, and its flagship office property at No. 51 -- as the Reckson Office Center.
The buildings are just off the interchange of Route 24, near the convergence of the Garden State Parkway, Interstate 78 and Interstate 287. Newark Liberty International Airport, the Holland and Lincoln Tunnels and rail transit stations are all within 20 minutes away.
Douglas Gaffney, a broker with the Schultz Organization/TCN Worldwide who handled the lease deal for Bollinger, said, ''The added amenities were critical.''
''The buildings have a new energy management system that saves tenants money,'' he said, ''and a conference center and gym that save employees' time in terms of getting there and back, and shuttles to the mall and the local train station.''
''All this is very unusual for a suburban office building,'' he added, ''and that has been well-received.'' About 30,000 square feet of space on the third floor of 101 JFK Parkway remains vacant, he said.
Reckson is determined to be ''a higher class of landlord,'' according to Mr. Rechler, and Mr. Gaffney said his clients had been impressed by ''nearly seamless'' transition between signing a lease and moving into office space finished to meet their needs.
Mr. Rechler said, ''Clients moving into this neighborhood want to be treated very well, and we want to be the landlord of choice for quality tenants.'' He said the access to the Hilton for business lunches and to the mall for employees and guests ''gives us a leg up,'' but day-to-day attention to service -- like maintaining high-quality artwork on the lobby walls and the landscaped plaza between the two buildings -- is critical to keeping tenants for the long term.
Reckson, founded 45 years ago in Melville, N.Y., has its own design and development group whose job it is to come up with ''innovation'' in both architecture and amenities. The firm, which owns and manages more than 20 million square feet of office space in the tristate area, houses a gallery for the Gordon Parks photographic collection at its building at 919 Third Avenue in Manhattan.
Mr. Rechler, who oversees the company's 2.3-million-square-foot, 21-property New Jersey portfolio, said Reckson was committed to using the arts to enhance all its properties. In the new conference room at 101 JFK, for example, artistic photographs of details from Reckson buildings around the region decorate the walls.
Mr. Rechler said that so far all leases at the two buildings have 10- to 15-year terms. Initial rental rates were adjusted downward to meet today's market, Mr. Rechler said, without specifying numbers. ''In the short term, it is the tenant's time to benefit, but the leases all have good bumps built in,'' he said, with annual increases written into one of the leases and the others featuring staggered rises.
''We are very high on the Short Hills market,'' the Reckson executive said. ''The company's core growth strategy is focused on the markets surrounding and including New York City. This is about as prestigious an address as you can get on this side of the Hudson.''
SHORT HILLS, which is just west of Newark between Millburn -- which like it, is actually part of Millburn Township -- and Chatham, is considered a highly exclusive real estate market, for both commercial and residential property. The Mall at Short Hills offers designer clothing shops and top-of-the-line home furnishings stores.
The Short Hills Hilton is the state's only hotel with the AAA rating of five diamonds, and its restaurant the only five-diamond restaurant. While Dun &amp; Bradstreet has its own cafe, Mr. Rechler said, clients are brought almost daily to the Hilton for business lunches, and in turn, the firm's employees are given cut-rate package deals for mini-vacations. Employees of companies at the Reckson buildings also receive discount cards and holiday gift packages from the mall on a regular basis, he said. The private Canoe Brook Country Club is also within walking distance.
Commercial Property | New Jersey
