WAR PAINT
Madame Helena Rubinstein
and Miss Elizabeth Arden:
Their Lives, Their Times, Their Rivalry.
By Lindy Woodhead.
Illustrated. 492 pp. New York:
John Wiley &amp; Sons. $30.
BEAUTY has always been a business that has rewarded the disenfranchised and the marginalized. Its heroes have been, variously, black, immigrant, Jewish, female. Elizabeth Arden and Helena Rubinstein were self-made millionaires before many American women had the right to vote. Their stories are American dream stories, though Rubinstein's begins in Poland, by way of Australia. Last year, in this country alone, the business they largely invented enjoyed almost $45 billion in retail sales. Tyrannical and insecure, erratic and brilliant and utterly focused on their work -- Rubinstein and Arden, you could argue, were the first brand builders -- these two women shared similar talents and foibles, and enjoyed a zesty rivalry, though they never met face to face. Most piquant is the dissonance between their glowing public lives and their quite painful personal ones -- both had failed marriages, and Rubinstein lost her younger son, Horace, in an automobile accident.
Today, the companies they made are owned by even bigger ones -- L'Oréal owns Helena Rubinstein; FFI Fragrances bought Elizabeth Arden from Unilever four years ago, and changed its corporate name to hers. Still, the brands they built, the stories they told about themselves and the products they made have faded. Once upon a time, however, Elizabeth Arden and Helena Rubinstein played Homer and Virgil to a rapt public. Lindy Woodhead, a former journalist and fashion public relations executive, is their Heinrich Schliemann in her history, ''War Paint.''
Helena Rubinstein's story is the most vivid. Her myth describes a moneyed childhood in Krakow and studies for a medical career, quickly derailed by Rubinstein's squeamishness. There was a passage to Australia, where an uncle lived, with 12 pots of her mother's ''Krakow cream,'' made from a secret recipe, and a business tailor-made to a female population drying up in the sun.
The facts are more dramatic: Rubinstein, the daughter of a kerosene dealer, was the first of 12 children, four of whom died, and sailed for Australia when she was 24. The story about university training was apocryphal, but one Rubinstein mined during most of her career and from which she created a role for herself as a ''beauty scientist,'' in wonderfully stilted photographs of herself in a white lab coat, squinting into beakers, her famous chin aloft. Rubinstein ended up in Coleraine, a rough outback town, and had a pretty rough time with an uncle. ''What's a bugger?'' local legend quotes her as saying to a schoolteacher. ''My uncle calls me that.'' By 1903, Rubinstein, then 31 years old, was on her own in Melbourne, where she opened her first shop.
Her success seemed to be instantaneous. Shops followed in New Zealand, in London and Paris and finally New York. Newspapers carried glowing advertisements and features, and along the way, Rubinstein became known simply as Madame. She married Edward Titus, a Jewish immigrant like herself, who had been living in Melbourne and handling her advertising; the two moved to London, and had two sons, Roy and Horace. It was a notoriously troubled marriage and ended in the 1930's; he liked books and women, she was impatient with intellectual culture and hideously insecure about her own powerful position as breadwinner. He collected people -- a who's who of 1920's intelligentsia -- and she collected things: houses and apartments, jewelry, art, clothes. By the late 20's, Titus had his own imprint in Paris, which published ''Lady Chatterley's Lover'' in 1929. Years later, Rubinstein said to her long-suffering assistant, Patrick O'Higgins: ''How was I to know all those writers were worth a sou? I never had a moment to read their books. To me, they were meshuga -- and I always had to pay for their meals!''
Seven years after Rubinstein opened her Melbourne shop, a Canadian with a talent for massage named Florence Nightingale Graham opened her first store on Fifth Avenue; she was 29 years old and sold creams called Venetian in pink-and-gold packages. She painted the door of her shop red, named the place Elizabeth Arden, and before too long that also became her own name. Arden took elocution lessons to erase her flat accent and found success by pampering New York society types. While Madame bought art, Arden bought horses, hiring and firing trainers like Silent Tom Smith of Seabiscuit fame. Her heart was broken in 1946, when her barn at a Chicago track was torched, killing 22 thoroughbreds.
''War Paint'' is exhaustingly, admirably researched, which makes it an exhausting book, as Woodhead has poured the lives of these two women into a compressed history of the 20th century. It's all here: two wars, Oskar Schindler, labor laws, the birth of advertising, the Food and Drug Administration, early feminism and ''The $64,000 Question,'' which was sponsored by their rival Charles Revson. Woodhead's style is rather rushed; you can sense the presence of hovering editors, eager to whack the manuscript down to its present size of nearly 500 pages. Still, the personalities fascinate, though Rubinstein comes off best, her grit and toughness more appealing than Arden's breathless phoniness.
Anecdotes about Madame are now the stuff of legend -- the night when she, at 4-foot-10 and 92 years old, rebuffed three burglars in her apartment; the famous declaration, ''There are no ugly women, only lazy ones'' -- but in the end, Rubinstein's face is her strongest history. The sharp eyes and pugnacious chin speak volumes, and so her best biographers may have been the artists who made her portraits. From Cecil Beaton to Graham Sutherland, these are collected to riveting and poignant effect in ''Over the Top,'' a visual memoir put together by her stepgranddaughter, the design editor Suzanne Slesin, and published last year.
Arden and Rubinstein relaxed their grip on the businesses they loved only in death, after which there was much impish dancing on coffins. Three weeks after Rubinstein died in 1965, Arden led a little group past the Rubinstein salon on Fifth Avenue. ''Poor Helena,'' a journalist quoted Arden as saying, reporting that ''her voice was sad but her eyes were triumphant.'' When Arden died a year later, Estée Lauder wore diamonds and black to the funeral and doled out sound bites to the press. An Arden employee observed Greer Garson sobbing through the service, while ''Mrs. Lauder spent the entire time with a smile on her face.''
Penelope Green contributes the Habitats column to the Real Estate section of The Times.
