There's a Civil War hymn whose refrain goes:
Jesus loves the little children,
All the children of the world.
Red and yellow, black and white,
All are precious in his sight,
Jesus loves the little children of the world.
I always found it embarrassing; I have never known a person who was any of those colors. The literalness gives the well-meaning writer away. These lurid reds, yellows and blacks were going to be more easily loved by Jesus than by any mortal who laid eyes on them.
Is the visual our most primal sense? Or do we just value it above all others, put too much trust in the information it gives us? The idea of race has generated enormous legal, political and cultural systems. What does it mean that visual signs of physical difference have been used to justify them for centuries?
''Only Skin Deep: Changing Visions of the American Self'' is a big book in every way. It takes up these questions as part of an exhibit of the same name at the International Center of Photography in New York, running through Feb. 29. To call it a catalog is unfair. The essays are intellectually expansive. They interpret and question ''racialized'' photography from the 19th to the 21st century. There are obscure and celebrated images, abstract, obscene and parodic ones. The reader gets a sense of the photograph as racial history, as racial entertainment and as racial criticism. The reproductions are arranged in startling ways. What we read changes what we see. Our associations become visual and intellectual.
The strong introductory essay comes from the artist and critic Coco Fusco, one of the show's two curators and one of the book's 17 contributors. Race is a myth that has been treated as fact, she points out. The visible (skin color, hair texture, bone structure) was made the index of the invisible (intellectual capacity, sexuality, temperament). In the 19th century -- the golden age of social Darwinism -- photography was a favorite tool of scientists bent on proving that people exactly like themselves (white, male and Christian) were the superior race. Race was entertainment too: pictures of exotic folk on postcards and visiting cards were as popular as minstrelsy and Wild West shows.
Once we're in the realm of desire and pleasure, the photographer's motives get more complicated. So do the subject's. What does one make of the tradition of black male erotica: F. Holland Day's 1890's photograph of a boy scantily clad as an Ethiopian emperor or Robert Mapplethorpe's 1980's ''Isaiah,'' with his spear and leopard tunic? The gorgeous, muscled bodies of Paul Robeson and Francisco Moncion posed in a jungle-classical style? (We don't see their faces, but Moncion's head is pressed against a white Greco-Roman disc. Photographers loved to play white art objects against black subjects or do the reverse.)
Erotic photographs of women -- African-American, Hawaiian, Asian, Native American -- are more furtive; they pretend to a kind of aesthetic innocence. The women are always in some semblance of native dress -- a woven skirt, a headdress, jewelry. Native undress too: their breasts are either bare or lightly accessorized. In an 1880 photo three longhaired girls from the Yuma tribe stare into the camera. They wear full-length print skirts, and no tops; they have been instructed to lean forward a bit and put their hands on their knees. It's a standard ''fetching little girl'' pose, and the photographer, Elias Bonine, specialized in carte de visite photos. It's as if, five years before ''The Mikado,'' he were trying for an American Plains version of ''Three Little Maids From School.'' But the faces of these girls look anything but fetching or provocative. They are strong-boned and very somber.
Certain poses keep recurring too. A ''Three Little Maids'' variant shows up 55 years later in ''The Secret Museum of Anthropology,'' a book that gave titillation a gloss of scholarship. This time the Indian women are shown from the waist up. They are still naked, but they've been made to look sweeter and gentler. Their heads touch. Their eyebrows have been plucked. Their hair is curled and pinned on top of their heads in a ladylike fashion.
An academic title like Howard Winant's ''Theoretical Status of the Concept of Race'' becomes literal -- visceral -- when we look at the picture on the opposite page. A dark-haired white man sits in an armchair. A big Confederate flag hangs on the wall bearing the words ''I Ain't Coming Down.'' A woman perches next to him. Her shorts are pink, her strapless top is white and pink. Her hair is blond and her features are clearly Asian. There must be a lot of conceptual race theory going on in that house.
Soon we are putting white people in the same kinds of racial and social categories. Take the 1887 composite photos of two graduating classes, one from Harvard, one from the Harvard Annex (later Radcliffe). Both faces are quintessentially WASP, and they have the same expression of tasteful restraint. They look almost identical.
A few pages later we see Lewis Hine's 1913 composite photo of child laborers in a cotton mill. They are younger, of course, and both are girls. They are white too. But immediately we see -- and look for -- differences. One girl's nose is broader and her lips are fuller. Did she come from a different part of Europe? We see the marks of class. These girls look tired; their faces have lines already. The Harvard faces are totally unlined.
The once-secure myth of race is being visually dismantled in various ways now. The objects have become subjects. Those who were once gazed upon have turned the gaze back -- on themselves and on notions of white superiority. Lyle Ashton Harris punctures the codes of black male erotica with his whiteface femme makeup and blond wig. Roger Shimomura's panel of photos shows Asian men of all ages with every kind of haircut and outfit. In the panel's center are the words: ''24 People for Whom I Have Been Mistaken.'' ''People,'' not men? Yes, there's a woman in the group too.
Ana Mendieta distorts her face, crushing and broadening her features, making her skin tones look almost striped. It's an image from a dream that asks us: Where do you draw the line between racial appearance and freakishness? Which side do you think you're on? And do you really think you can stay there?
ON WRITERS AND WRITING
