IN a move that could scuttle the proposed Stew Leonard's grocery store in Farmingdale, officials at Republic Airport said last week that the State of New York is laying claim to 6.2 of the 18 acres the store planned to build on. The site is just across the street from the airport.
Republic, which the state also owns, has opposed the Stew Leonard's store for safety reasons. Hugh D. Jones, the airport's director, said that the 6.2 acres in question had once been used as a sump to handle airport drainage. It was sold to Fairchild Industries in the 1970's with a stipulation that if it was no longer used as a sump, it would revert to the state.
The sump was filled in by Fairchild in cooperation with the state in the 1990's, at which point, Mr. Jones said, the state automatically took possession. ''How could it now sell something to Stew Leonard's it doesn't own?'' he said.
But Donald E. Miller, Fairchild's corporate counsel, said the issue of ownership never came up in his discussions with the State Department of Transportation and the State Department of General Services.
''The state has never asserted its right of reverter,'' he said. ''The airport is trying to stop the project by claiming the state would assert its right to the property, but the state has never said it would.''
He cited a Jan. 21 letter from Kenneth J. Ringler Jr., the commissioner of the Office of General Services, who said that his office and that of the Department of Transportation were against the Stew Leonard's store because of safety concerns. Mr. Ringler wrote that building the store along the centerline of the airport's runway protection zone was counter to the purpose of the zone, which is meant to be a buffer in case a plane crashes.
Mr. Miller pointed out that the letter did not mention state ownership of the property. He said that Fairchild has paid taxes on it ever since it bought the land and continues to do so.
Maureen Connelly, a spokeswoman for Plunkett &amp; Jaffe, an Albany law firm that represents Fairchild, said Mr. Ringler's letter was prompted by her firm's request that the state remove the clause giving the state title to the property.
Alfred DelBello, a lawyer for Stew Leonard's, said his client believes the contention that the grocery store building ''would interfere with navigation is just a tactic the airport is using to defeat the construction of the store.''
''This store would be located in an area zoned for the store,'' he said. ''The town zoned this location for retail use years and years ago. We went before the town Planning Board and Zoning Board, and all of these safety issues were raised, and it was found that there would be no endangerment to the public.''
Mr. DelBello pointed out also that the Federal Aviation Administration ''made a determination in writing that there is no significant hazard'' if the store were built.
But William McShane, the chief executive of Long Island Jet and the president of the Long Island Business Aviation Alliance, pointed out that the F.A.A. had expressed concerns about a store at that location.
Mr. McShane shared a copy of a letter from Sabra W. Kaulia, the F.A.A.'s program director for air-traffic airspace management, who said that the store would not be a hazard to air navigation safety. But she added that ''structures which will result in the congregating of people'' within the runway protection zone ''are strongly discouraged in the interest of protecting people and property on the ground.''
''In cases where the F.A.A. can control the use of the property, such structures are prohibited,'' she wrote. ''In this case, the F.A.A. has no such control, so can merely advise the sponsor of the inadvisability of this project with regard to the safety of persons and property on the ground.''
Mr. Miller said Fairchild would continue negotiations with the state in the hope of working out a ''fair and amicable resolution.''
