TEN THOUSAND LOVERS
By Edeet Ravel.
284 pp. New York:
Perennial/HarperCollins
Publishers. Paper, $12.95.
The heroine of this novel -- and she is one, a brave, scared, stubborn young woman -- notices that ''the Bible is full of frightened people. Practically on every page someone is afraid. And even though the Bible is not big on synonyms, it has five different words for fear.''
More than two decades after leaving Israel, Lily, now living in London, writes about the ecstatic and terrible events that befell her there. She'd arrived in 1973 to attend Hebrew University in Jerusalem and fled, broken, in 1977. The mature Lily is stoic. The young Lily is a reckless girl who walks through the Arab quarter and catches rides at the soldiers' hitchhiking booth.
She knows almost nothing about Israel when she arrives, although she was born on a kibbutz to Canadian parents with grand ideals and not much love for their children. It suited them to have their children raised communally, mostly by other people. Passed over for a job, Dad moved the family back to Canada. Edeet Ravel doesn't explain why his daughter returns ''home'' to Israel; maybe the girl doesn't know either.
Lily meets the love of her life, Ami, while hitchhiking to Tel Aviv. Because Ravel allows Lily to be prickly and perverse and Ami to react with impatience, the strength of their intense affair is deeply moving. They're an endearing couple: advancing and retreating, teasing, quick to anger and also to reconcile.
Lily has quite a bit to sort out. Her sensitive, sexy Ami is an army interrogator. He gets the serious cases: Palestinians who might have crucial information about conspiracies and bombing plots. He's good at his job because, unlike cruder operators, he relies on conversation and charm. Lily struggles with the fact that her lover is doing work she can't stomach. Ami is stoic and, not surprisingly, cynical, even as he tries to protect some of his interviewees. Israel, he tells her, has become psychotic and corrupt and there's nothing he can do about it. Conquering the territories, hauling in more and more suspects -- ''Do they really believe that you can just bully people out of existence?''
The novel starts out fast and smart, with repartee between the glamorous lovers, but Ravel never forgets that ordinary life stubbornly persists, even when the television news readers are rabidly excited by army raids and suicide bombers. Lily hangs out with her university friends, visits her aunt. And it is a fine ploy to have Ami, a basically decent and principled man, provide the link between domestic life and the self-delusional public rhetoric that is staining and perverting it.
I wish Ravel had restrained Ami's habit of lecturing Lily, and us, on the decaying soul of Israel. Power corrupts, especially when you're wielding it over ''inferior and malevolent'' people. We nod dutifully. When, however, Ami's friend Ibrahim, a mechanic in Tel Aviv (and an Israeli citizen), is hauled into court on a customer's accusation that he's a thief, the scene is more than sufficient to make Ami's point.
Lily's narrative alternates between memoir and linguistic meditations on ancient and modern Hebrew. It is in these passages, conveyed in a quiet and almost lyrical voice, that the full tragic dimension of Israel's character emerges. Words have ominous ways of changing. ''If you want to say 'go to hell' in Hebrew,'' Ravel writes, ''you say lekh leazazel or 'go to Azazel.' '' Somehow the phrase was shortened to lekh le'aza, or ''Go to Aza.'' But as Ravel explains: ''Aza is Gaza. Aza is a real place. So what you were saying was 'go to Gaza.' . . . And the pun made sense. As anyone who had been to Gaza knew.'' Most chilling, Lily notes that Hebrew has no word for ''occupy.'' So when Israel occupied the territories after the 1967 war, there were only two possible words: ''liberated'' or ''conquered.''
''Ten Thousand Lovers'' is both a curse and a lament. It is immensely to Edeet Ravel's credit that this novel, far from being a rant, balances deep bitterness with an abiding tenderness for the country she once called home.
Brigitte Frase is writing a family memoir about immigration to the United States from postwar Germany.
