THE efforts of two lesser-known suffragists to get women the vote may not be the typically sexy stuff of TV movies these days. The main characters -- Alice Paul and Lucy Burns -- do not have the name recognition of Susan B. Anthony or Elizabeth Cady Stanton. The plot involves imprisonment and a hunger strike. The high-collared costumes prevent any glimpses of cleavage.
But Paula Weinstein, an executive producer of the film, felt strongly that ''Iron Jawed Angels'' was a movie worth making. ''For the first time, it gave me the image of young women fighting for their rights,'' Ms. Weinstein said. ''Women who could say, 'We are now going to chain ourselves to the White House,' who could take politics and action to a level of personal danger. I thought it was really important to see.''
Hilary Swank, who plays Alice Paul, said she did not hesitate to sign onto the project. ''I was sent the script and I read it and I was crying and I was moved and I was inspired and I wanted to call my girlfriends,'' she said. ''I felt reconnected to them.''
Created almost completely by women, the film also stars Frances O'Connor as Lucy Burns, Anjelica Huston as an older, more conservative suffragist and Julia Ormond as the beautiful figurehead of the movement.
Ms. Weinstein said she had even made a point of hiring a predominantly female crew, which she tries to do no matter what the project. ''If you aren't intentional about it, you'll end up with all white men,'' she said. ''We're still at a point where you have to say, 'I want to see all women assistant directors, grip, camera operators.'''
The concentration of women on the set gave those involved a sense of sisterhood, a notion that in portraying these activists they were also honoring them and one another. ''I think we felt we were telling a story that we were passionate about,'' Ms. O'Connor said. ''There was a great energy.''
The film is about the battle waged by Paul and Burns to pass the 19th Amendment through a radical wing of the suffrage movement. ''People have no idea what these women went through,'' said Katja von Garnier, the film's director. ''They were thrown into jail, force-fed.'' (Their resistance to the force-feeding earned them the nickname ''iron jawed angels.'')
Although Ms. von Garnier had never directed for television before -- she is best known for the 1997 feature film ''Bandits'' -- Ms. Weinstein said she had chosen her because ''she had a sense of women and their love for each other and camaraderie.''
''I wanted to give the women their friendship,'' Ms. Weinstein said.
The bond the film portrays between Paul and Burns was strengthened by the actresses themselves, Ms. von Garnier said, adding ''Hilary and Frances had a great chemistry from the first moment on.''
Ms. O'Connor said that bond was part of what had drawn her to the role. In the film, Paul and Burns are confidantes as well as comrades. ''I like the relationship,'' she said. ''There was a very ying and yang quality. Together they made a whole person.''
The challenge was trying not to make the movie feel preachy or academic. ''There is nothing trickier than making a movie whose core is politics,'' Ms. Weinstein said. ''You don't want to become in any way polemical or agitprop.''
The greatest antidote to historical subject matter, the creators said, is character. ''One always tends to look at people in the past and lose their humanity and leave them as icons,'' Ms. Weinstein said. ''Alice Paul then becomes what she did rather than a woman who made the choice to do what she did.''
While no facts were changed, the personal stories were given depth. Ben Weissman, apolitical cartoonist played by Patrick Dempsey, becomes romantically interested in Paul. Emily Leighton (Molly Parker), wife of a senator, defies her husband to join the movement. ''The main goal here was, 'Let's make these people come alive,''' said Sally Robinson, who wrote the final draft of the screenplay. ''Let's not make this a history lesson.''
The script went through several writers -- Ms. Robinson is one of four who are credited. Each draft was an attempt to make the characters more human, more sympathetic. Ms. Robinson said she mined historical documents for personal details, finding them in recorded interviews with Alice Paul, Paul's letters to her mother and suffragists' letters to one another. ''It is immediately apparent when you go to source material like that that they have all the feelings we have in the present,'' she said. ''They're not stick figures from the past.''
The film's creators came to believe that this particular suffragist chapter had been unjustly buried by most history books and deserved to be better known. ''I think we all felt this was our particular piece of history,'' Ms. Weinstein said.
At the same time, Ms. von Garnier wanted to make clear that these women were not one-dimensional and humorless but rather multilayered human beings. ''The clichéd women who fight for their rights don't have a sense of humor; they're these gray mice,'' she said. ''In fact, they're intelligent and, apart from their political consciousness, they can laugh at themselves.''
Ms. von Garnier said Ms. Swank infused Paul with complexity and warmth, which wasn't easy. ''She brought a great deal of likability that wasn't necessarily on the page,'' she said. ''Paul is single-minded. It was hard not to dislike her for that.''
Ms. Swank said she identified with Paul: ''I don't think I've played a character as close to me.'' At the same time, she said, Ms. von Garnier kept urging her not to soften Paul or try to make her more palatable. ''She'd come up to me and say: 'You're pulling back. You need to step back up.'''
Watching the film, one cannot help thinking how unusual it would be to see women picketing or protesting like that today. ''That's good news and bad news,'' Ms. von Garnier said. ''That there isn't an issue of that degree is obviously good. But the Equal Rights Amendment hasn't passed. There are still issues that are out there.''
Ms. Swank said the film made her think about her own activism. ''I think as Americans we take for granted what the people before us helped to gain -- whether it be our freedom or the rights women now have,'' she said. ''It's important to keep making the world a better place for women. Because we still have a ways to go.''
As to whether or not the film will appeal to viewers besides women, Ms. Weinstein said she was not worried about that. ''Do I think 14-year-old boys are going to watch this? No,'' she said. ''But it wasn't made for them.''
COVER STORY
