WASHINGTON'S CROSSING
By David Hackett Fischer.
Illustrated. 564 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $35.
BEST to begin with the Emmanuel Leutze painting, probably the most recognizable picture in American history. The central figure is George Washington, standing with preternatural stability in what appears to be a whaling boat crossing an ice-choked river. Beside him, clutching an American flag, is a young James Monroe, the future president. They are surrounded by an early advertisement for American diversity: a fur-hatted frontiersman; a New England seaman in slickers; a colorfully attired African-American fending off the ice; even a woman, or what appears to be a woman, pulling on her oar. It is not clear where they are going. But the drama of the scene is palpable. Whatever the destination, this representative crew of Americans is defying the current, the ice and the odds to get there together.
Leutze's ''Washington Crossing the Delaware'' is a highly romanticized rendition of a pivotal moment in American history, Christmas night of 1776, painted 75 years after the event. David Hackett Fischer's new book, ''Washington's Crossing,'' is a highly realistic and wonderfully readable narrative of the same moment that corrects all the inaccuracies in the Leutze painting but preserves the overarching sense of drama.
The centerpiece of Fischer's story is the daring attack across the Delaware by 2,400 soldiers in the Continental Army, who routed the Hessian garrison at Trenton, then fought two additional battles at Trenton and Princeton the following week. Though the sizes of the armies were small compared with the numbers that fought at later battles like Gettysburg or Normandy, Fischer argues convincingly that the actions at Trenton and Princeton were the most consequential in American history, for these stunning victories rescued the American cause from what appeared to be certain defeat and thereby transformed the improbability of American independence into a distinct possibility, eventually an inevitability.
Along the way, Fischer, university professor at Brandeis University, demolishes several myths and misconceptions. Art historians, for example, have argued that Washington could never have been standing up as the Leutze painting claims, since anyone so doing would have tumbled headlong into the ice. But in fact everyone was standing up, because the boats used to transport the troops, horses and artillery were high-walled barges, early versions of the amphibious landing craft employed in World War II. The claim that the Hessian troops were drunk that Christmas night is also wrong. They were exhausted from being on round-the-clock alert for over a week. Finally, several historians, yours truly included, have described Washington's victory at Trenton as a merely symbolic or psychological triumph, akin to the Doolittle raid on Tokyo in 1942. Wrong again. Fischer shows that Trenton altered the strategic chemistry of the war by eroding British troop strength, which was never fully replaced, and winning back the countryside in New Jersey, which was on the verge of capitulating to British control.
Fischer actually begins his story in the spring and summer of 1776, as Washington watched the British unload 33,000 troops onto Staten Island in preparation for a massive blow against New York designed to crush the American rebellion at its inception. He spends over 200 pages describing the American debacle on Long Island and Manhattan, and then Washington's headlong dash across New Jersey with the surviving remnant of his army. Some readers might find this an excessively long windup to the pitch across the Delaware, but these chapters allow Fischer to assemble his cast of characters and to recreate the truly desperate situation facing the Continental Army on the eve of the crossing. As one of America's first embedded journalists, Tom Paine, so famously put it, these were ''the times that try men's souls.'' Fischer concurs with recent scholarship that the British commander, William Howe, could probably have won the war and ended the American Revolution in November of 1776 with more aggressive tactics. The Delaware crossing thus becomes a sudden reversal of fortune, as if an American mouse, chased hither and yon by a British cat, brazenly turns about and declares itself a lion.
Fischer has devised a storytelling technique that combines old and new methods in a winning way. Old-fashioned military history featured the set-piece battle, viewed from headquarters, as a panoramic clash of generic markers on a map, moving bloodlessly across the contour lines like toy soldiers in a game. The more modern military history, pioneered by John Keegan in ''The Face of Battle,'' and before him by Tolstoy in ''War and Peace,'' aims at recovering the fog of war, the chaos and confusion on the ground experienced by ordinary soldiers in battle. Fischer has managed to combine the two approaches, providing an overarching picture of the way armies move, with a genuine sense of what it looks and feels like to face a bayonet charge or to witness the man abreast of you disemboweled by a cannonball.
This is not easy to do. It requires pasting together the grand narrative of generals with hundreds of memoirs by officers and soldiers on both sides of the struggle, operating at different altitudes simultaneously. In Fischer's case, it has also meant walking the battlefields with an odometer, measuring the ice flow on the Delaware River in December, assembling weather records for the Delaware Valley in 1776, calculating accurate casualty rates against the forged figures subsequently provided by both sides. It also means recreating the distinctive character of combat on an 18th-century battlefield, where lethality was less but the face-to-face killing produced greater emotional trauma. In my judgment, Fischer's ability to combine the panoramic with the palpable is unparalleled in giving us a glimpse of what warfare back then was really like.
He gets somewhat carried away toward the end, perhaps driven by the momentum of his own powerful narrative and the urge to trace all the strands of the eventual American victory at Yorktown back to the winter campaign of 1776-77. He argues, for example, that American leaders had invented what he calls ''an American way of war,'' by which he means a new kind of working relationship between the Continental Congress and the Continental Army. There are two problems with the term. First, it was originally coined by the military historian Russell Weigley to describe the strategy of a total war of annihilation adopted by Grant and Sherman against the Confederacy, so Fischer's new usage is confusing. Second, Washington went to his grave convinced that the eventual American triumph over Britain was, as he put it, ''a standing miracle,'' because the Congress lacked sovereign power over the states to compel them to provide the men and money needed to compete on equal terms with the British leviathan. This chronic problem only got worse as the war dragged on for nearly five long years after Trenton, which Fischer is correct to see as a pivotal event, but more the end of the beginning than the beginning of the end.
But this is a mere quibble when measured against the larger achievement of Fischer's riveting narrative. For reasons beyond my comprehension, there has never been a great film about the War of Independence. The Civil War, World War I, World War II and Vietnam have all been captured memorably, but the American Revolution seems to resist cinematic treatment. More than any other book, ''Washington's Crossing'' provides the opportunity to correct this strange oversight, for in a confined chronological space we have the makings of both ''Patton'' and ''Saving Private Ryan,'' starring none other than George Washington. Fischer has provided the script. And it's all true.
Joseph J. Ellis is completing a biography of George Washington.
