''NOBODY in Dayton will believe this,'' said Kathleen Hanover, 38, last year on Oscar night. It was almost midnight at the Hollywood Athletic Club, and Ms. Hanover, a public relations consultant from Ohio, had just met Sean Astin, the actor who plays Samwise Gamgee in Peter Jackson's ''Lord of the Rings'' trilogy. ''At my office, I was like, 'Wouldn't it be awesome if I got to go to this party and talk with the stars?' And they were like, 'Sure, you keep thinking that.' ''
She took a deep, steadying breath, smoothed the folds of her homemade Byzantine-style dress (''It's what I would wear to Aragorn's coronation if I were invited'') and said, ''Now I'm just going to cackle madly for the rest of the evening.''
Ms. Hanover and about 800 other ''Lord of the Rings'' fans had made the pilgrimage to Hollywood for a ''Lord of the Rings'' fan party, where they mingled until the wee hours with the films' performers and creative team. It was the second such gathering organized by TheOneRing.net (known as TORn), the Internet's most popular ''Lord of the Rings'' fan site. (Since its founding, in 1999, the site has been regarded as the best source for breaking news about the ''Lord of the Rings'' films.) For this year's Oscar party, 750 tickets sold out within 15 minutes.
The TORn Oscar parties demonstrate a singular attribute of ''Lord of the Rings'' fandom: the uncommonly close relationship between the films' creators and their most fervent admirers. Such relationships are unusual in Hollywood, where fans are often viewed with some disdain. (Try to imagine a similar event for, say, ''Titanic'' or ''The Hours.'') But the TORn Oscar parties express the distinctive status of the ''Lord of the Rings'' films, a mix of critical prestige and cult following.
These fans aren't just pressing their noses against Hollywood's front window. In return for their dedication, they are recognized by the trilogy's cast and creative team as important participants in the movies' success. Guests at last year's party included three of the film's four hobbits (Elijah Wood was out of town), Andy Serkis (Gollum), John Rhys-Davies (Gimli the dwarf), the producer Barrie M. Osborne and the Academy Award winners for the film's visual effects and sound. Most of them circulated in the crowd for at least an hour, and at the end of the night they took the stage like football players at a pep rally. Mr. Jackson spoke to the crowd by phone from New Zealand, and although he was about as audible as the teacher in a Charlie Brown television special, his words were frequently punctuated by roaring, screaming and applause. Alan Lee, one of the films' conceptual designers, received an ovation that seemed for a moment as if it might never end. Mr. Astin was visibly moved by the crowd's enthusiasm. ''I wish I could take all the love in this room and bottle it up!'' he exclaimed.
The first TORn Oscar event, called One Party, took place in 2002, when ''The Fellowship of the Ring'' was nominated in 13 categories. It was a relatively small affair for 300, on the second floor of the Hollywood Athletic Club, with amateur security provided by ''some big guys who volunteer on the Web site,'' according to Carlene Cordova, who is making a documentary film about ''Lord of the Rings'' fans and who was one of the party's organizers. By the end of that evening, Peter Jackson, Sir Ian McKellen and many others involved with ''The Fellowship of the Ring'' were hanging out there. ''I had such a good time, I just skipped the Vanity Fair party,'' Mr. Jackson recalled.
Their attendance was something of a mixed blessing, according to another of the party's organizers. Chris Pirrotta, 29, a Web master from Newhall, Calif., said: ''With the second party, people had a higher expectation. 'Oh, we're going to see celebrities.' And then you start getting weird people who are obsessed with a certain actor or whatever.'' For Two Towers: One Party, TORn rented the entire club and, with a budget of $75,000, transformed it into a landscape of swamps, forests and fields corresponding to the topography of Middle Earth; they also hired 60 professional security guards.
This year's bash (The Return of the One Party), at Hollywood's American Legion on Feb. 29, will be the most elaborate yet. A $125 ticket grants admission to a Tolkienian wonderland that includes a Hobbiton bar (''We're going to have oversize furniture, so you feel like a hobbit,'' said Mr. Pirrotta) and, in the game area, ''a ring toss into the Crack of Doom.'' Dress code is ''black tie and pointy ears optional,'' and the Web site warns costumed partygoers to ''leave the knives, axes, arrows and swords at home.'' Shoes are required, ''even for hobbits.'' And there's a stiff penalty for fans who act like, well, fans: ''Any attendee caught asking for autographs will be immediately removed from the party.'' At the end of the evening, everyone will go home with ''gift Baggins'' full of ''Lord of the Rings'' memorabilia.
The plans for pun-filled fun, however, don't quite salve a couple of burning thorns in TORn's side. For one, New Line, the studio that made the ''Lord of the Rings'' films, has refused to sanction the Oscar parties or the Web site, a corporation owned by four fans who say they donate its profits to charities in the United States and New Zealand. New Line's hands-off policy does not sit well with the party's organizers . ''They request V.I.P. tickets,'' said Ms. Cordova, who lives in Los Angeles. ''But they don't bother to help pay for it.''
Gordon Paddison, a New Line marketing executive, explained the company's position: ''We have provided them with things that are unique and have value for their auctions and their raffles and goodie bags. If there were a cash component to our support, it would just seem like we were paying for their participation.''
The TORn fans are also rankled by a competing Web site that does have a link to New Line. The official ''Lord of the Rings'' fan club (www.lotrfanclub.com), licensed by New Line and run by a private Virginia corporation called Decipher, is helping to sponsor a rival Oscar party this year. (Membership costs $29.95 a year and includes a quarterly magazine and a 10 percent discount on Decipher's bulging catalog of ''Lord of the Rings'' merchandise.)
Nanette Gagnon, who prefers to be called Rosie (after the hobbit who marries Samwise Gamgee at the trilogy's conclusion), is organizing that celebration. A 30-year-old mother of six in Coudersport, Pa., she works as a freelance writer and painter. She was one of about 500 fans whose ticket orders arrived after the TORn party had sold out, so she approached the planners about adding an overflow event. In a telephone interview, she explained, ''I said, 'We'll raise money for your site, and we won't go after any cast members,' but they wouldn't support it.''
Ms. Gagnon said that all proceeds from her party would go to charity. (Proceeds from TORn's party will go to maintain its Web site.) But TORn party organizers believe the rival event is tainted because the official fan club is a corporate venture. ''We are doing everything completely free, with just real fan passion,'' said Mr. Pirrotta. ''The fan club is profiting off fans' passion.''
In response, Ms. Gagnon spoke softly and carefully: ''I think it should be an evening for all fans regardless of their Web site affiliation. Especially because we're relatively intelligent adults, not like Trekkies or something.''
Although Sir Ian and Mr. Jackson both say they plan to make the TORn party their first stop after the Oscars, Mr. Pirotta fears that the second fan party will deflect attention from his own. ''Unfortunately, there will be celebrity confusion and media confusion,'' he said.
Such strife may appear petty to outsiders, but to dedicated fans, this year's Oscars will be, after all, a seriously stressful event: the last chance for the ''Lord of the Rings'' films, and ''Lord of the Rings'' fans, to get the recognition they feel is deserved.
At last year's party, Kathleen Hanover took a moment to explain why Sean Astin means so much to her: ''Sam is a regular person, a normal person. He'll never live in a palace or marry a queen. But he has a part to play in the grand drama of the world. He goes and he does that, but he'll come back to an everyday life in the end. That's what a hobbit is.'' In a quiet, confident voice, with a gesture around the room full of fans, she said, ''That's what we're like.''
Moments after she spoke, Mr. Astin walked by. ''Oh, my God, I love you so much,'' she told him. He hugged her, wrapped one arm around her waist, and introduced her to his wife, Christine. Ms. Hanover asked, ''What was the most profound thing you learned about yourself making these movies?'' After thinking for a minute, he said, ''I learned that I do have an imagination, and I have just begun to scratch the surface of it.''
Remembering that night almost a year later, Ms. Hanover said: ''If I could have written a script for that evening, I could not have ended it in a more magical way. I had my little tape recorder with me, and I listen to it again sometimes, so I know that it really happened.''
OSCAR FILMS Michael Joseph Gross is working on a book, ''In Person,'' about stars and their fans, to be published by Bloomsbury USA.
