Former Chief Executive Leaves Global Payment Technologies
Martin Kern, the former interim chief executive of Global Payment Technologies (Nasdaq: GPTX) of Hauppauge, has quit as a director. The company said Monday that he had resigned to pursue other interests and would not be available for comment.
Mr. Kern served for 10 months as the temporary chief executive, resigning on Jan 15. He was replaced by the company's president and chief operating officer, Thomas Oliveri. Global manufactures products used in gaming, beverage and vending machines.
Mr. Kern, a former supermarket executive, succeeded Stephen Katz last March after Mr. Katz resigned, saying that he wanted to spend more time with his family and wanted to do other things.
The company said in a statement, ''Mr. Kern, who specializes in 'turnaround' situations, indicated that now that the transition had been completed, it was appropriate for him to pursue his many other interests.''
But in an interview, Thomas McNeil, the company's chief financial officer, acknowledged that the turnaround was still incomplete. Global posted a loss of $5.7 million for the 2003 fiscal year, which ended Sept. 30, compared with a loss of $633,000 the prior year. Sales for the year slipped to $26 million from $27.7 million in fiscal 2002.
Mr. McNeil said the company took a charge of $2.6 million as a reserve for future tax payments. He attributed the 2003 loss in part to the company's failure to successfully market its personal currency card called the Smart Card.
The company also took a write-down of $650,000 on inventory that became obsolete last year after newer versions were introduced.
Aeroflex to Sell Subsidiary
Aeroflex (Nasdaq: ARXX) of Plainview, which manufactures test equipment and microelectronics for the aerospace, defense and broadband communications markets, said it was seeking a buyer for its circuit board business known as the thin film interconnect manufacturing subsidiary. Its plant is in Pearl River.
Aeroflex posted an operating loss of $841,000 for the quarter that ended Dec. 31. The company took a charge of $10.3 million for the thin film business for the same period.
Compiled by Warren Strugatch
E-mail: libiz@nytimes.com
