Q: You have a big museum show that just opened at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, but I hear you are very ill.
I had a stroke a year ago, and then I had a second one six months after that, so I am still trying to piece myself together. My right side is semiparalyzed.
But doesn't your show include art you've made in the past year?
I would go crazy if I couldn't work.
The paintings in your show, ''Current Scenarios,'' are based on photographs. Can you take photographs without your right hand?
No, because to take a picture you have to have one hand to hold the camera and some other hand to punch the button. I have anyone else take my pictures. If anyone is in the room and going out, I tell them to take a camera, and they do it for me.
What sort of photographs do you prefer?
I like photographs of anything uninteresting. Maybe just two doors on a wall.
How interesting.
You failed! The point is to be uninteresting. But you can have a second chance.
For half a century, you have been America's premier poet of the ordinary. The imagery in your latest paintings is culled from traffic signs, newspapers and billboards. What is so great about the ordinary anyhow?
It usually is ignored. It is overlooked. Most artists try to break your heart, or they accidentally break their own hearts. But I find the quietness in the ordinary much more satisfying.
Aren't you having another show now at Yale?
Yes. I am not happy with it. It was organized by the gay studies department, whatever that is. It's not an approach that makes sense.
I refused to give them permission to reproduce the works in a catalog.
Now that you're 78, do you find yourself brooding on death?
No. Not at all. I am too old for that. There once was a rich and crazy woman who was sitting nervously at a dinner party of mine next to John Cage. And she was just terrified because she couldn't figure out anything to open a conversation with him. So she said, ''What do you think about death?'' He looked right at her and said, ''I can't wait!'' She didn't have a second thing set up to say.
Are dinner parties as good as they used to be in the bohemian 50's?
Of course not. The art world isn't interesting anymore, because when I lived in New York, the problems in the art world were my fault. But they no longer are. They're the fault of dealers, who are influencing the quality of art.
Why did you leave New York in 1970 to live in Captiva, Fla.?
It was a very messy time, when it seemed to me that everybody was leaving their spouses, and I got to feeling responsible for my friends.
I felt I was a jinx. So I went to a fortuneteller and got a reading, and he said that it wasn't my fault but that I should go to sunshine and water. And I should stay away from mountains. I was pleased with that.
What do you have against mountains?
They block the view. I like to see my distance. I think everyone has landscapes that are sympathetic to them. I have lived on water all my life. I was born in Port Arthur, Tex., and then I lived in New York, and now Captiva. It makes me happy to look at the ocean.
How would you define the secret to happiness?
You tell me first.
O.K. I think if you want to be happy, you have to be willing to give more than you receive.
That's a good idea. Also, if you expect unrealistic things, they are unlikely to fulfill you. But if you enjoy something simple, like just looking at the ocean, then you have it. Particularly if the ocean is in the neighborhood. You shouldn't have fixed goals, because then you will have disappointment.
But surely you had and still have goals as an artist.
No. I don't think so.
Didn't you want to be a great American artist?
Not particularly. I just didn't want any other artist to be better than I was.
Deborah Solomon
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-15-04: QUESTIONS FOR ROBERT RAUSCHENBERG
