JESUS IN AMERICA
Personal Savior, Cultural Hero,
National Obsession.
By Richard Wightman Fox.
Illustrated. 488 pp. San Francisco:
HarperSanFrancisco. $27.95.
ABOUT halfway through ''Jesus in America,'' which is roughly chronological in scheme, Richard Wightman Fox invites the reader to be ''an anthropologist from some distant planet'' who has landed in the United States a decade before the Civil War. You, the alien, observe that once a week the humans lay down the pronged instruments with which they worry the soil in order to discuss someone named Jesus Christ, who lived and perhaps died almost 2,000 years earlier. The humans disagree about the nature of this Christ. As an alien, ''you note that all of these Christs appear to be socially useful for people attempting to establish their personal legitimacy.'' You read ''Democracy in America,'' by Alexis de Tocqueville -- you are the kind of alien who is unafraid of guidebooks -- and learn that the ''cultural program'' of Christ is thought to assist in holding society together. You notice, however, that the humans talk about Christ to exclude one another almost as often as to include, and you infer that the unifying power of this cultural program may be on the wane, particularly where disagreements over slavery are concerned. Now, as history, this is a conventional analysis of antebellum America. Upon reading it, I had only one doubt. Why did I have to be an alien?
I suspect it was a ploy to hold my attention. At times, however, I wondered if Fox might have written all of his book with an alien reader in mind -- someone with no prior knowledge of Jesus and no previously declared opinion about him. Barring the unforeseen, most of the readers Fox actually gets will be otherwise. They will expect to learn something about Jesus that they could not learn elsewhere, and they will hope either to be challenged or reassured in their faith, perhaps both. They may be disappointed.
The aim of Fox's book is generous. In fact he seems to have conceived of it by asking ''What would Jesus do?'' if Jesus were a cultural historian of himself. ''My guess,'' Fox writes, ''is that he would listen in wonder, joy, confusion and dismay to all the things Americans have said about him for 400 years.'' Fox's avowed goal is just as ecumenical in spirit: ''to keep my ear open to that collective cry for Christ while throwing some light on the basic historical patterns and particularities of Americans' devotion to Jesus.'' There are very few representations of Jesus that anger Fox. He is equable about the Apple Collection Web page that put the slogan ''Think Different'' on an image of Christ praying in the garden of Gethsemane, and he can't bring himself to look down on even the slick celebrity preaching of Aimee Semple McPherson in early-20th-century Los Angeles. He seems to admire the philosophic rigor of Reinhold Niebuhr, who thought it wrong for Christians to make their religion into social policy, but he also admires the charisma of the evangelist Billy Graham, one of Niebuhr's antagonists. The closest he comes to losing his temper is over Mel Gibson's upcoming movie ''The Passion of the Christ,'' which some scholars worry will be anti-Semitic, but even that he doesn't quite condemn. He merely fears that it will be too graphic for children, regrets that theological dispute has been pressed into the service of prerelease publicity and hopes that parents will take the opportunity to explain what is and isn't known about the crucifixion.
Unfortunately, the book is as general as it is generous. At the end of one of his chapters, Fox, who teaches history at the University of Southern California, concludes of Jesus that ''his name has been spoken continuously, earnestly and hopefully by a vast and diversified body of interpreters.'' This is true, but it is not a thesis. And like chapter, like book. Nor has Fox focused on Jesus as narrowly as his title might imply. ''Jesus in America'' is in fact a history of Christianity in America.
This is an ambitious undertaking. The overall story is familiar. In the beginning, the Catholics were better than the Puritans at converting the Indians, but the Puritans weren't trying very hard. Artists of existential anxiety, the Puritans believed that even those who wanted to be saved rarely were. Confidence in salvation was usually a sign of perdition. The best state was a high fret, distrusting one's faith incessantly without tumbling into actual despair. After the 17th century this discipline was sustained by few. Milder Protestants decided that salvation came naturally with belief; Roman Catholics, who came to America in significant numbers in the mid-19th century, had never doubted it. Around this time, scholarship raised questions about the historical authenticity of the Gospels and forced Protestant denominations to choose between a creeping humanism and a withdrawal into literalism. In the 20th century, that theological split deepened and became politicized, though Martin Luther King Jr. was able to bridge it briefly. If there is a moral to the story, as Fox tells it, it is that liberal Christians were imprudent to stop asking ''What would Jesus do?'' of political questions. They needlessly surrendered the name of Jesus to opponents of science and social progress.
Fox does not tell this story from a new angle. He has synthesized an inordinate amount of American religious history, however, and this will be of use. Unfortunately, he seems to have written in a hurry, and his prose has glitches. For example, the Puritan minister Thomas Shepard and his peers are described as ''walking a thin edge.'' The theologian Jonathan Edwards was suspicious of Christians who believed that a person could initiate his own salvation; Fox writes that Edwards saw such people as ''virtual Trojans inside the church gates.'' Fox can also be heavy-handed with his interpretations, which are sometimes highly idiosyncratic, as when he writes that ''modernists did not invent the ironic sensibility. The ancient Jews knew all about it, and the Calvinists got it ultimately from them. [Benjamin] Franklin secularized the ironic mentality that his childhood Calvinism had imbued in him.'' And I thought the Greeks had something to do with it.
He also has a tendency to collapse his theological arguments into summarizing adjectives and nouns, which he then strings together, somewhat impenetrably. Consider, for example, his explanation of what strict Calvinists thought about the liberal evangelical Horace Bushnell: ''his anti-creedalism rested upon an explicitly organicist rejection of individualism.'' I flipped back a few pages and determined that Bushnell's ''anti-creedalism'' consisted of a willingness to accept almost all creeds as well-intended approximations of a Christian truth that could never be pinned down, but I never got to the bottom of the ''explicitly organicist rejection of individualism.''
In an epilogue, Fox recalls a friend from his undergraduate days named Michael R. Peterson, with whom he traveled in Europe and who later became a doctor and Roman Catholic priest. Fox describes him as a saint. In 1981, years after they fell out of touch, Peterson founded the St. Luke Institute, which treated priests struggling with alcoholism, drug addiction and sexually abusive behavior. Peterson died of AIDS in 1987. Although Fox doesn't say so, his was among the first deaths by a priest acknowledged by the Catholic Church to have been HIV-related. Fox compares him to a 17th-century Quebec nun named Marie de St. Joseph, who also died of a lingering illness, and wonders if he ''felt his body's decline as a gift.'' Perhaps he did, and yet the style of Peterson's sainthood may have been less meek than Fox's comparison might imply. In 1985 Peterson was a co-author of a report that warned American bishops to confront sexual abuse by clergy aggressively, and in 1986 he called publicly for the Catholic church to reconsider its teachings on homosexuality.
Caleb Crain teaches English at Columbia University and is the author of ''American Sympathy: Men, Friendship, and Literature in the New Nation.''
