When they were boys, Joe and Gavin Maloof used to attend the games of a minor league baseball team called the Albuquerque Dukes, but they didn't really care who won. They kept score their own way -- by spying on the beer vendors and counting how many people bought Coors over Schlitz. They did this because their father was the Coors distributor for the state of New Mexico, a job, his sons knew, that he considered an essential public service. ''If somebody needed a keg of Coors beer at 1 in the morning, he would go open the warehouse and deliver the keg himself,'' Joe said. ''I saw that happen. He'd go crazy if a customer wasn't taken care of. I mean, he'd go nuts.'' For two of his young children, then, it was the least they could do to keep an eye on sales at the ballpark.
From that humble start the Maloofs have built an empire that stretches west from Albuquerque, through Las Vegas, where the family lives and runs the wildly popular Palms casino, and on to Sacramento, where the best and most thrilling team in the N.B.A. so far this season has improbably taken root under their care.
The Maloofs' success is a strange synthesis of old-style Western ambition (go out and conquer new lands!) and new-style instinct for what people want. Their business, in all its various iterations, boils down to hospitality, and their genius lies in the way they align their customers' interests with their own. ''We don't try to outsmart anyone,'' Joe said. ''We're service people. We see stairs and think, 'Let's put an escalator in there.''' (The top of the escalator is where they'd put the frozen-martini kiosks.)
To understand the Maloofs, you must first know who is who, and it's not always easy to keep them straight. The ones who are most relevant here are the four brothers. At 48 and 47 respectively, Joe and Gavin are the oldest, and they run the Sacramento Kings; even in middle age, they are as inseparable as when they were kids shoveling beer cans at their father's warehouse. George, 39, operates the Palms, and another brother, Phil, 36, is about to take over a new Maloof music venture with Interscope Records. None of the boys have ever married, and they lead lives that readers of any lad magazine must dream about -- an everyday mardi gras of cleavage, fast cars and front-row seats.
Their sister, Adrienne, 43, is different, at least in the sense that she is married, to a Beverly Hills plastic surgeon, and has a child, which delights their mother, Colleen, who feared she'd never have a grandchild if she had to rely on her boys. Colleen and Adrienne stay out of day-to-day Maloof business affairs, but they are full-stake partners in the private holding company that owns all the properties, and they are consulted on major decisions.
Right now, as the Kings are establishing themselves at the top of the league, basketball is the family's fixation. Joe and Gavin Maloof are like other owners of sports franchises -- the team is an outlet for their competitive impulses and a dependable way to make themselves the center of attention. But the Kings are also the sequel to an obsession that started with their father, George Sr. After all that worrying about what other people wanted, the elder Maloof bought himself something he wanted, a basketball team, the Houston Rockets. That was in 1979. Two years later, the Rockets went to the N.B.A. finals, but George Sr. was not there to enjoy it. He died in 1980 of a heart attack, at age 57, a loss that still hangs heavily over his family. If nothing else, the Maloof brothers have devoted their lives to making up for their father's missed opportunity.
The story of the Maloofs in America starts in another Las Vegas, a dusty, heartbreak of a town in New Mexico two hours northeast of Albuquerque. George Maloof Sr. was the son of Lebanese immigrants who ran a general store there, a place that supplied local ranchers with the necessities of life. The family moved to Albuquerque to focus on beer distribution just before George Sr. went off to the University of Colorado. He had to hurry home to take over the business after his father suffered a heart attack.
In a relatively poor state like New Mexico, being a beer distributor makes you a very important person, particularly if your brand has 50 percent market share, which Coors did in its heyday there. So when one of Albuquerque's major banks was ailing in 1976, George Sr., a member of its board, was asked to take over. ''My dad got puffed up and flattered and he came home and told my mom, You know, such-and-such wants me to be the chairman of the board,'' Joe said. ''And my mom looked at him -- and this was the statement that probably saved us -- and she said: 'Are you crazy? Why do you want to work so hard for someone else? Why don't you just buy it?'''
Colleen's intervention would be worth $140million (the amount in stock the bank was sold for in 1993) and underwrite the dreams of the entire Maloof family. But in the meantime, there was work to be done. George Sr. dictated that the proper age to start helping out in the family business was 10. This, the boys admitted, was a bit hard on them. ''We tried anything to get out of that warehouse,'' Gavin said. ''It's not like you want to work when you're 10, 12 years old and everybody's out playing.''
George Sr. also used beer money to buy hotels, and then in 1979, the Rockets, for $9 million. The price was low because the N.B.A. was a listing ship. Salaries were escalating -- the Rockets had one of the first $1-million-per-year players in Moses Malone -- but the arenas were deserted and television interest was so minimal that CBS showed the games on tape delay, if at all.
The boys, though, were overjoyed. No more stinking beer cans. Joe and Gavin were in their early 20's then, and their father brought them in on everything, including league meetings. David Stern, at the time a top N.B.A. executive whose destiny was to become commissioner in 1984, a post he still holds, remembers the young Maloofs as ''wide-eyed and respectful and good listeners.'' (That would come in handy later.)
After George Sr. died, Joe took over the beer business and the 24-year-old Gavin installed himself as president of the Rockets; six months later, the team lost in the N.B.A. finals to a Boston Celtics team led by the young Larry Bird.
The celebratory mood did not last. According to Gavin and Joe, George Sr.'s two sisters, Helen and Mary Jean, doubted that Colleen and her children were up to managing the family's complex array of businesses, which included beer and liquor distributorships, hotels, a trucking firm and the bank. The aunts demanded that everything be liquidated. To keep the peace, the brothers parted with their beloved Rockets. But that wasn't enough. The aunts filed suit, naming Colleen and Joe as defendants.
This ordeal, which still eats at Joe, was the shared experience that cemented the ties among the brothers. The lawsuit dragged on for a decade, to be settled finally when the aunts were bought out, just as the Maloofs were contemplating a casino. ''It's the worst decision they ever made,'' Joe said. The aunts themselves declined to comment, citing the terms of the settlement.
While Joe learned about running the bank, the other brothers branched out, always with the family's backing. Obsessed with getting back into pro sports, Gavin spent two frustrating years in Birmingham, Ala., operating a World League of American Football franchise. Phil entered politics and served seven years as a New Mexico state senator (''Politics was a tough business for our family,'' Joe said. ''We're used to everybody liking us, and in politics, half the people hate you no matter what you do.'') And George Jr. was behind the casino. While attending hotel school at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, he spent every night playing craps and learned an important lesson: If you gamble regularly, you are guaranteed to lose. That didn't stop him -- the Maloof boys still treat themselves to an occasional tear through the Vegas strip -- but it opened his eyes to the advantages of being the house.
Breaking into the industry is not easy, though. Good locations are expensive, and banks don't much like lending money to newcomers with no experience. But George had an idea: put the operation out in North Las Vegas and market it not to tourists but to locals. The Fiesta Casino Hotel opened in 1994 and set a new Vegas standard -- high-roller treatment for ordinary people. This is how their father might have done it, an updated version of going overboard on customer service. Six years later, the Fiesta sold for $185 million, and the Maloofs put the profits into constructing a far glitzier establishment, the Palms, 42 stories tall and loaded with over-the-top places to dance, drink and eat, not to mention gamble. Gavin proudly showed off his favorite feature, a nightclub with private ''sky boxes'' above the dance floor, like the ones at a sports arena. ''People love these,'' he said.
The Palms opened two months after Sept. 11, 2001, when the Vegas strip was one of the loneliest places on earth. But George pulled off an extraordinary coup -- he built a lavish penthouse suite specifically for the Las Vegas edition of ''The Real World,'' MTV's long-running reality series. That installment was by far the raunchiest in the show's 12-year history; in the very first episode, after the cast members meet and jump immediately into a hot tub, there's a three-way sex scene. ''The Real World'' was a soft-porn infomercial for the Palms. It branded the casino as the youngest, hippest, hottest spot in Vegas (which conferred privileges: George befriended Britney Spears and would later help get her marriage annulled). No Maloof would ever have to shovel a beer can again.
In the mid-1990's, Joe joined Gavin's hunt for a team. They did not care where it was or even what sport. (They nearly purchased the N.H.L.'s debt-ridden Tampa Bay Lightning.) ''I like anything, as long as there's a team,'' Joe said. They seemed willing to pay any price for an N.B.A. team. ''I wanted them back in the league, but they would sometimes get involved in situations that were not right for them,'' Stern said. ''Once I had to yell at them.''
Joe remembers it vividly. While he and Gavin were talking to the representatives of the Toronto Raptors, Joe stepped out of the room to take the commissioner's call. ''Then I went back in, white as a ghost, and whispered to Gavin, 'We got to get the hell out of here; David's really mad at us,''' Joe said. ''So we just split, left the guys right there.''
When the Sacramento Kings came up for sale, the Maloofs had their chance. The team moved there in 1985 from Kansas City, and it was not one of the N.B.A.'s model franchises. The market was small, and after years of lousy play and ineffectual management, the fans had vanished. Players didn't like it, either. Practices were held in a Salvation Army gym.
The Maloofs took over full control of the Kings in 1999, not long after the league had instituted a salary cap that enabled small-market teams like theirs to hold onto their best players without bankrupting themselves.
The Maloofs repackaged everything. They turned dowdy Arco Arena into a semirespectable place and built a beautiful practice facility next door. They also ordered up a new logo and devoted themselves to customer service. In one of the first games he attended, Gavin missed an entire quarter waiting in a beer line. Knowing his father would have gone nuclear, Gavin arranged to have 20 minibars installed throughout the arena. Nobody waits for a beer now. The Maloofs also improved the lighting and sound, to elevate the games from mere athletic contests into a show.
What the Maloofs did not do was meddle with the player management. They inherited not only the general manager, Geoff Petrie, but also the coach, Rick Adelman, who is Petrie's old friend. The two of them are well-respected basketball lifers who, in sharp contrast to their employers, abstain from any display of emotion. (''I would love to see Geoff clap at a game, just once,'' Joe said.) Petrie methodically built a contender from a hodgepodge of parts: a star with a questionable reputation (Chris Webber), an unknown European (the sharpshooter Peja Stojakovic), a flame-out (the electrifying sixth man Bobby Jackson) and a hoary veteran with more gas left in the tank than everybody thought (the center Vlade Divac). And then there was a brilliant draft-day deal in 2001 that brought the point guard Mike Bibby. The Maloofs backed up Petrie's smart moves by giving all the main players lucrative long-term contracts.
At a recent home game against the Los Angeles Lakers, the Kings' chief obstacle to a championship, the Maloof family showed up in force -- all four brothers in front-row attendance, as well as Colleen and Adrienne and what seemed to be hundreds of close personal friends.
This was how the ''game presentation'' went: Vince Neil, the heavy-metal singer, murdered the national anthem, to the rapturous delight of the crowd. At every break in play, there was some kind of competition or entertainment -- a hip-hop dance troupe, a putting contest, a dog race, a one-minute romp through the team store for a lucky fan. Such spectacles are common throughout the league, but nowhere are they are as rigorously programmed as this. Stern credits the Kings with having the best ''game presentation'' in the league.
Gavin, dressed in a black Kings sweatshirt, lapped it up, cheering the running dogs and the dancing girls as if he were seeing it all for the first time. Joe, on the other hand, volleyed about the arena with a worried expression, as if concerned that somebody might not have something he or she needed, and it would be his fault. Victory, though, provided the ultimate in customer satisfaction, and Joe finally relaxed. After the Kings crushed the injury-depleted Lakers, he and Gavin received a chorus line of well-wishers, old friends and people who wanted to be new friends, many of them young women in low-slung jeans. Pictures were taken, hugs exchanged, and the word was spread: party at Gavin's house!
The next day started late. Joe and Gavin were due in Las Vegas that night to film a scene for a new reality show MTV was shooting at the Palms, and they gathered around 3 p.m. at Joe's house. In Sacramento, Joe and Gavin live across from each other on a brackish man-made lagoon; their look-alike houses are part of a large gated community.
While a chef fixed hamburgers in the kitchen, Joe and Gavin sank deep into a big couch, idly watching N.B.A. highlights on a big TV. ''So this is our life,'' Gavin said. ''We never stop working.''
Some new friends were joining the brothers for the trip to Vegas, two women who, according to their business cards, specialize in ''Tandem Transformation Massage Therapy.'' One of the Kings' minority owners had met them in Hawaii and suggested that they might get along with the Maloofs. So they'd shown up the day before toting their portable massage table and brought it by Gavin's house for the postgame party. It was a big hit, apparently.
Once on the seven-seat Learjet, Joe curled up and went instantly to sleep, while Gavin took the women up on their offer of a tandem foot and hand massage. He confirmed that their work was transformational.
On the ground in Las Vegas, bellmen in green Palms jackets met the plane with a pair of Cadillac Escalades. ''Here's someone I want you to meet,'' Joe said to me, standing next to one of the men. ''This is Sam, the guy who gave Britney away.''
I shook Sam's hand and asked him, ''Did you think it was going to last?''
''No,'' he said cheerfully. ''Nobody did.''
''Not even the groom?''
''Well, I guess he had a lot more riding on the whole thing.''
At the Palms, MTV was set up at the in-house steak restaurant. It was Saturday night, and the place was mobbed, the atmosphere like a locker room after a championship game; you half-expected people to start pouring Champagne all over one another. For many, the evening was no doubt going to end with them sitting alone at a $5 minimum blackjack table, trying to ease the pace of their losses. But for now, everybody felt like a victorious hero, and the $38 filet mignons seemed like the most irresistible bargain. This was Maloof magic at work.
At the very center of it, of course, were the Maloof brothers themselves, all four of them, seated at a banquette, illuminated by the klieg light of an MTV camera. Lisa Falcone, an MTV producer, explained the show to me: ''The idea is 'The Love Boat,''' she said, ''and the Palms is the ship.''
I was shown to a nearby Table of Assorted Friends, where I dined next to Lindsey, a Los Angeles model whom George is dating, and J.J., a prospective rapper from Orange County whom Phil is cultivating for the music venture. Also at the table were the two masseuses, a couple of guys who work for Reggie Jackson and a firefighter visiting from Florida. Conversation centered on the Maloofs and their superhuman generosity. And everybody agreed that the free food was top notch.
When dinner had been cleared, I went by the Maloofs' table, which was surrounded by a swarm of people. While Joe was talking to Pat Croce, a former president of the Philadelphia 76ers, his face was locked in a perma-grin as Croce told him about the pirate museum he was opening in Florida. Gavin, meanwhile, was alone in the banquette, a bit dazed and staring blankly into space. Until, that is, two women, overwhelmingly tall in spiky heels, noticed him. ''Gavin!'' they cried, splitting to either side of the banquette and then shimmying in toward him. As if flipping a switch, Gavin was alert and back on duty. These were, after all, customers, and they needed personal attention. His father would not understand the jobs his sons have these days, but he'd no doubt be proud to see the boys are working hard.
Hugo Lindgren is an editor of the magazine.
