WHEN I WAS COOL
My Life at the Jack Kerouac School:
A Memoir.
By Sam Kashner.
Illustrated. 318 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers. $25.95.
Sam Kashner's new memoir begins with a familiar tale of the freewheeling 1960's: Kashner, a longhaired 19-year-old, has had it with his parents' square, conformist, suburban head trip. Bummed out by the cramped upper-middle-class confines of Merrick, Long Island, and turned on by ''Howl'' and ''On the Road,'' he drops out of his preppy upstate college and sets out to find the Beats and dig their scene.
Just one problem: when Kashner hit the road, it wasn't 1960. It was 1976. Twenty years had passed since Ginsberg wrote that he'd seen the best minds of his generation destroyed by madness. He and what remained of his Beat generation -- writers like William S. Burroughs, Gregory Corso and Anne Waldman, as well as a menagerie of hangers-on who went by names like Calliope and Antler -- had set up shop in Boulder, Colo. There, together with Ginsberg's guru, a Tibetan Buddhist named Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, they established, in 1974, the Naropa Institute for the study of meditation, art and life, as well as its literary offshoot, the Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics. On the day Kashner arrived in Boulder, the Kerouac school had enrolled precisely one student: Sam Kashner.
''When I Was Cool,'' then, is a school-days memoir, although the education Kashner received in Boulder was an unconventional one. Sure, there were classes, after a fashion. Peter Orlovsky, Ginsberg's boyfriend, taught Kashner to wash his face with ice water to get rid of his acne, and Kashner took a seminar from Burroughs for which the required reading was top-secret government reports about the existence of flying saucers. But for the most part, Kashner seems to have majored in Hanging Out with the Beats, as their combination mascot, muse and houseboy. On any given day, Kashner's assignments might include reading ''Gilgamesh'' aloud to Corso's wife and infant son while Corso was off with his girlfriend, apparently scoring dope; vacuuming the floors in Trungpa's mansion or driving up to the mountains to help Burroughs harvest his secret marijuana plot.
When Kashner first met Trungpa, the enlightened one sagely instructed him that the real reason Kashner had come to the Kerouac school was not to worship his heroes but to be released from their spell -- ''to find out the truth about them and be free of them, to be able to live my own life.'' And indeed, the portrait Kashner draws of his professors, though generally affectionate, isn't a particularly attractive one. In exchange for their past-its-prime company, the Beats not only worked Kashner to the bone, they also yelled epithets at him (Corso), made frequent and unwelcome passes at him (Ginsberg), kidnapped him briefly and tried to force him to shoot heroin (Corso again) and made him pick up tab after tab with his father's Diners Club card. At one point, Corso demanded $500 from Kashner in exchange for telling him the story of Jack Kerouac's funeral. (Kashner paid.) And on a road trip to Denver, Corso talked him into simply handing over his watch, a farewell gift from his parents. ''It was hard to deny those guys anything,'' Kashner explains meekly.
Half the time you pity young Sam; the other half you envy him. The moment he longed to be a part of had passed, and the Beats, by the time he arrived, had grown ''long in the tooth, cranky, full of bowel complaints and the perils of advanced age.'' And he couldn't deny that the crowd he worshiped was letting him inside only because he was paying tuition (and paying for dinner). But still, Kashner got to spend the bicentennial Fourth of July with Ginsberg, the man he called ''the father of my country,'' watching fireworks and writing poems. And there he was, the third man at the table when Ginsberg and Burroughs held a ''dream lunch,'' during which they sipped hot cider through straws and recited their dreams. Kashner even wrote a funny poem about a ''Donny &amp; Marie'' lunchbox and delivered it at a reading with Corso and Ginsberg -- and the audience loved him.
Although it seems hopelessly uptight to point it out, the book rambles and loops and veers off track more than once. There's not much dramatic tension, and young Sam didn't go through any momentous transformations in Boulder. Even after two years of Beat school, he writes: ''I was unable to give up my Sammy Davis Jr. records. I was still going back to my apartment and listening to 'Sammy at the Cocoanut Grove.' ''
Still, there are plenty of downright magical moments, as when Kashner's strait-laced parents, to his keen embarrassment, took Kashner, Ginsberg and Orlovsky out for a nice kosher dinner at Ratner's, on the Lower East Side, where Ginsberg offered stories of hallucinogen trips and casual sex with soldiers, and then made Sam's mother swoon by telling her that she reminded him of Mitzi Gaynor.
In fact, Kashner's parents turn out to be the coolest characters in ''When I Was Cool.'' When Kashner and Ginsberg were in New York for Christmas vacation in 1976, Marion and Seymour made the trek from Merrick to the East Village to see Ginsberg perform his new poem ''Birdbrain'' with a rock music accompaniment, and Ginsberg, out of the blue, invited Seymour, a window-shade salesman, onstage to play harmonica. ''By the time Seymour took the stage, dressed like he was going to work in a brown suit and tie with a fedora and his plastic shoes, looking like nothing so much as a precursor to one of the Blues Brothers,'' Kashner writes, ''the rumor had spread that my father had just come off the road with Johnny Winter.''
On the way out of the club, the Kashner family passed Joe Strummer of the Clash, smoking in the doorway.
''That was beautiful, man,'' Strummer said to Seymour.
Awestruck, Sam Kashner asked his father, ''Do you know who that was?''
Seymour's guess: ''A bum?''
This is a book, in the end, about aging -- not just the aging of the Beats, which Kashner witnessed firsthand, but the aging of the author, too. Kashner is now in his mid-40's, the same age Corso was when he described himself to the teenage Sam as a ''toothless old man.'' In a somewhat mournful coda, out of step with the spirited and generous good humor of the rest of the book, Kashner recounts the deaths of Corso, Burroughs and Ginsberg, and also of his own poetry career. (He now writes magazine articles for GQ and Vanity Fair.) ''As a poet you become bitter,'' he writes of his decision to abandon poetry altogether. ''I knew no one was reading it, not my poetry at any rate.''
Kashner offers no particular explanation for having chosen 2004 as the moment to return to the events of 1976 -- there's no anniversary, no sudden reconciliation. But you can hardly blame the grown-up Kashner for wanting to spend a few hundred pages with Sam the Beat apprentice and his hero, Allen Ginsberg. Back then Sam was cool (even if peripherally, and briefly), and Sam's first love, poetry, was even cool then too.
Paul Tough is an editor at The New York Times Magazine.
