A BUSY shopping mall developer in the Northeast, the National Realty and Development Corporation, has just broken ground here for a 275,000-square-foot, one-story horizontal 16-store mall to be built near two existing shopping strips off Exit 9 of Interstate 91.
The company, a 40-year-old family firm based in Purchase, N.Y., with a portfolio of 14 million square feet of retail space in 14 states, has nine projects planned for the next two years in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Vermont. The North Haven project is one of three in Connecticut.
Another that recently started is a free-standing Target discount department store that is being built behind the company's Hawley Lane Shopping Center, an enclosed mall in Trumbull. Still in early stages, National Realty is working in partnership with Howard and Edward Milstein, New York City developers, to prepare a presentation for a major apartment and vertical retail complex in downtown Stamford.
The National Realty site in North Haven may not be the last commercial project along the I-91 corridor, where 769 acres of vacant land are available: 200 acres behind the National Realty site, 23 acres between the site and another shopping plaza, and 546 acres between Exits 11 and 13, all zoned for retail, office and light industrial use. ''It's probably the largest chunk of land available for commercial-industrial development in the area,'' said Kevin Kopetz, North Haven's first selectman, or mayor.
North of the three retail plazas, land along I-91 zoned for commercial use is buffered from residential areas by freight rail tracks on the east and the Quinnipiac River to the west.
National Realty's 24.3-acre property had been a warehouse for the Stop and Shop Supermarkets, said Robert C. Baker, the developer's chairman and chief executive, ''producing little income and few jobs.'' His company bought it a year ago for $12.5 million and demolished the warehouse.
''Many of our projects today are built by demolishing existing industrial buildings,'' he said. ''The days of taking an old cornfield and building a retail center are gone.'' Construction costs for the project, called North Haven Pavilion, are put at $20 million.
Situated on the west side of Universal Drive North on a broad two-mile stretch of road with direct access to Exit 9 off I-91, it is several hundred yards north of North Haven Crossing, a shopping plaza formerly owned by CBL &amp; Associates Properties of Chattanooga, Tenn., and sold early last month to Galileo America Real Estate Trust of Australia, according to Taylor Laney, leasing agent for CBL. Its stores and a 10-screen Showcase Theater occupy 45.6 acres and are anchored by Office Max, Sports Authority and Barnes &amp; Noble; the other stores include the music retailer Coconuts, Petco, and Subway.
OPPOSITE them, on the east side of Universal Drive, is a cluster of 18 stores including TJ Maxx, Payless ShoeSource, Nextel, Sleepy's, Game Stop, Xpect Discount, and Cingular, anchored by BJ's Wholesale Club and Home Depot and called Home Depot Plaza. The strip covers 31.7 acres and is owned by the Kimco Realty Corporation of New Hyde Park, N.Y.
National Realty's anchors will be Target, Sports Authority and Michael's, a craft supply store. Target will build its own 125,000-square-foot store; the rest will be built by National Realty. Sports Authority will vacate the 44,000-square-foot store it has operated for 10 years at North Haven Crossing and move up to a new 53,000-square-foot store on the National Realty site. Payless ShoeSource and Sleepy's will move to North Haven Pavilion from Home Depot Plaza.
''Some retailers who are already here,'' Mr. Baker said, ''want new stores, a more modern layout and more space. The old stores will be sublet to someone else.'' Tenants of the National Realty project that will be new to the area are Bombay, a furniture and accessories store; Lane Bryant, a clothing store for large-sized women; two more clothing stores; T-Mobile; two restaurants; EB Gameworld; and a one-price store called 99centPower.
One 4,830-square-foot space and another 2,500-square-foot space are available. Rents will be in the mid-$20's a square foot and $15 a square foot for larger tenants. Sports Authority and Michael's will be in one building; Target, Bombay and Joyce Leslie, a women's clothing store, will occupy another. The two uncommitted spots are free-standing; the remaining tenants will be in a single long building. Surface parking will be provided for 1,375 cars.
North Haven, incorporated in 1786, has no recognizable downtown and a median family income of around $65,000. Its commercial base, decimated in the 1970's by the loss of most of its industrial plants, is led by U.S. Surgical, Marlin Firearms and Anthem Blue Cross/Blue Shield. Retailers on Universal Drive draw from a population of about 418,000 living in North Haven, New Haven, East Haven, Branford, Hamden and Wallingford.
''The town had a forward-thinking selectman back in the 80's who saw to it that an outdated industrial section turned into a retail section,'' Mr. Baker said. ''North Haven benefited from the mall wars.'' He was referring to rival attempts to build or expand malls from the 70's to the mid-90's in several Connecticut towns, including New Haven and North Haven.
''We added quite a bit to the Universal Drive corridor when the mall went down in New Haven,'' said Mr. Kopetz, the first selectman.
T HIS is a good project for the town,'' he said. ''National Realty is at the front end of 200 acres of vacant land to which access has been a problem. They are willing to upgrade the entrance to town road standards, install utilities and take the sewer system into the project, providing a road and sewer system all the way back to the vacant property. We have received a grant from the federal economic development department to do a feasibility study for that site.''
The Bakers say they have no interest in developing the 200 acres, and the 23 acre parcel, Richard Baker, National Realty's president and Robert's son, noted, ''has some environmental problems, so for the present we are not interested.''
Back in the 1970's, North Haven had plans for its own 1.2-million-square-foot mall when a private investment group involving town residents bought 196 acres at the intersection of I-91 and Route 22. But that effort ended after New Haven raised objections and the Army Corps of Engineers ruled that the acreage was in an alluvial river valley and the project would have a negative impact on the economies of New Haven and surrounding towns. The land, part of the 546 commercial acres between Exits 11 and 13, remains vacant.
As for the million-square-foot New Haven mall, it was proposed for a site overlooking the harbor at Long Wharf in the mid-90's. The city had been seeking to offset the decline of its downtown retail district ever since Macy's and Malley's department stores closed in the 80's. They still cover one square block each, adjacent to each other on Church Street, while the city negotiates with the state for the construction of a new community college to replace the stores.
A lawsuit against the prospective developers of the Long Wharf mall, the Fusco Company and New England Development of Newton, Mass., was brought by the Westfield Corporation, owner of a mall in Milford. Westfield claimed that Milford would suffer economically from another mall less than 10 miles away. The suit was ultimately dropped, and Westfield eventually bought most of the site. Eighteen months ago, it sold the property to Ikea, the Swedish furniture emporium, whose new 310,000-square-foot store is under construction for a June opening.
It will be some time before the $300 million proposal by the Milsteins and the Bakers for the long-vacant parcel known as the ''hole in the ground'' in downtown Stamford materializes. ''They have not submitted anything to the city as yet,'' said Robin Stein, Stamford's land use planner. ''They are working on strategies for a presentation.'' The four-acre excavated site at Greyrock Place and Tresser Boulevard has been vacant for more than 20 years. ''The Milsteins will build 550 apartments,'' said Robert Baker, ''and we will build 450,000 square feet of vertical retail.'' Wal-Mart and and its warehouse-store sibling, Sam's Club, are committed tenants and will have 150,000 square feet each, he said.
Big box stores, once relegated to outlying areas for fear they would destroy downtown retailing, have reshaped themselves and gone upscale for positioning as tenants in vertical urban malls and as good-looking anchors in landscaped horizontal malls in the suburbs.
''Target,'' said Geoffrey Booth, director of retail development at the Urban Land Institute in Washington, ''laid the groundwork for going into traditional malls, and big boxes are complying with customers' demands for nice-looking stores.''
''These days, not a lot of malls are being built,'' Mr. Baker said, ''and many tenants are moving out of malls to locate in strip shopping centers where they pay less rent, have better visibility and parking at the front door.''
In the Region | Connecticut  Correction:  February 22, 2004, Sunday  An article in Connecticut and Westchester copies last Sunday about shopping mall construction misstated the year that Macy's closed its New Haven store. That was 1994, not in the 80's. The article referred imprecisely to plans for a community college campus on the site of the old Macy's and an adjacent block. It entails consolidation of two existing Gateway Community College campuses, not construction of a new institution.
