Long Islanders visiting the Whole Foods Market's wine store in the new Time Warner Center on Columbus Circle in Midtown Manhattan will find two East End labels on display. More are likely later, the management indicated.
In the emporium's first days, Schneider Vineyards and Wölffer Estate are represented on the shelves -- an attention-getting coup of sorts. The shop in the 59,000-square-foot supermarket -- Manhattan's largest -- promises to be a destination for local residents and out-of-towners, possibly a national and international showplace for New York wines.
Almost certainly the center, with five upper-floor restaurants run by famed chefs, will attract food-and-wine aficionados from abroad for the same reasons that travelers stop at Fortnum &amp; Mason in London and KaDeWe in Berlin.
Schneider's 2002 Potato Barn Red, a red blend, was placed prominently among down-priced wines in the center of the shop and also on a shelf. On that shelf was Wölffer's 2001 La Ferme Martin chardonnay, its 2000 La Ferme Martin merlot and 2001 reserve chardonnay.
''It's great that Whole Foods has done that,'' said Marco Borghese, president of the Long Island Wine Council, a trade association. ''Finally somebody in New York is taking a great opportunity to showcase what New York should be proud of -- its wines -- with a varied choice of regions and superb choice of varieties.''
The wine store's manager, Melanie Mann, said, ''The prospects for New York State wines in the store are outstanding.'' Otto Han, the assistant manager, said the shop's goal was to make good, approachable, food-oriented wines available to shoppers at prices commensurate with those of other products in the market, situated in the concourse.
Like Long Island wineries' tasting rooms and Vintage New York, with two Manhattan stores specializing in New York wines, the Whole Foods wine shop will be open on Sundays, a six-day-a-week option made possible by legislation last year. The shop will close Wednesdays.
HOWARD G. GOLDBERG
LONG ISLAND VINES
