PITY the wives of the candidates for president. They must endure intrusive interviews and muster up forced smiles. But it could be worse. Imagine what it must have been like to date Adolf Hitler. Or to have married Chairman Mao. By coincidence, there are currently two plays in New York about the lives of women in love with dictators.
''The Ladies,'' by Anne Washburn, which runs through Feb. 29 at Dixon Place at Chashama, investigates the lives of Elena Ceausescu, Imelda Marcos, Eva Perón and Madame Mao, the onetime first ladies of Romania, the Philippines, Argentina and China, respectively. This wryly self-conscious show -- in which the playwright and director are characters -- is the latest project by the Civilians, a talent-rich downtown troupe whose work includes last year's docudrama about lost objects, ''Gone Missing.''
Meanwhile, ''Summit Conference,'' by Robert David MacDonald, a more conventional play, running through March 6 at Urban Stages, imagines a tea party between Eva Braun and Clara Petacci, the mistresses of Hitler and Mussolini.
In the following monologues, taken from each play, two characters express the rationalizations required to live with corrupt and murderous leaders.
JASON ZINOMAN
'THE LADIES'
IMELDA MARCOS: I think that there is an idea that people who are so very beautiful they are unmoved somehow by their own beauty but I assure you this isn't so. I look into a mirror and I take my own breath away. Vanity? Oh, no. God made my face this way. He made it so that when people look at me they feel a catch in their chest, they are drawn to me. When I speak, they will listen to me; when I feel, they will feel with me.
Jesus said take this cup away from my lips. He said I don't want to drink from this anymore because the will of God -- even Jesus felt this! -- can be bitter. And there was a time, yes, early in my marriage, when I said take this cup away from me. I don't want to drink anymore. I would go into my bedroom and I would shut the door and I would climb onto my bed and I would kneel, on the coverlet, and I would hit my head, my beautiful, beautiful head, that God gave me, I would hit it against the wall. [She mimes driving her head forward.] Over and over and over. I hit it into the wall, so many times, so hard, that I had dented the plaster, there was a kind of [she raises her hand and pushes it forward against the air slightly to indicate] crater, in the plaster. And once I saw I had damaged the wall, that was where I would aim my head. For that spot. And if I made another tiny crack, if I dented the plaster deeper, then I felt that I had accomplished something.
My husband took me to the States, to the N.Y.U. Medical Center and they did an examination and afterwards they took me aside. They said, Imelda, you have to make a decision. Do you understand? I looked up and my eyes were full of tears. I said tell me what this decision is. They said you have to understand that this is the life your husband has chosen. If you want to live, you will have to leave him. Or. You will have to change.
And so I began every morning to say affirmations. I said: ''My life is beautiful.''  ''I love my life.'' The men in the living room, very early in the morning or late at night, the dirty feet, the cigars and loud voices and bags of money, I said, ''This is all part of a higher, idealistic purpose.'' When my husband said to me: ''Stand this way, no, this way, sing, you have to dress like this and go here and say this, not like that, like this, wave your arm that way, sing, didn't anyone ever teach you to think? Sing, that isn't how you cut a ribbon, my God.'' I put aside my laziness and I said I will listen to him, and I will understand. ''I believe in this, I will become this, I am going to be this, my life is beautiful. I love this life. I love my life.''
And one morning I wake up, I go to the mirror, I look into my beautiful, beautiful face and I say, ''I love myself'' and I realize, suddenly, I realize . . . that it is true.
'SUMMIT CONFERENCE'
EVA BRAUN: The whole world knows I am here, and nobody knows who I am. I sometimes wonder myself. Who I am. Fraulein No-Private-Life. My friend promises me when the war is over I shall go to Hollywood to play myself in the film of his life -- but they will probably say I am too tall for the part. Part. What part? I make a frame to go round something that isn't there. I watch American films that are forbidden, I listen to American jazz, which is forbidden, to convince myself I am privileged to be unlike other German women. And to make myself even more unlike them, I smoke, I drink, I wear makeup, I shave my armpits. I make lists of my jewels and pretend ignorance of the bodyguards who are set to watch me -- at least they know I am there -- and nightly I receive the greatest man in the world, and that is very nice, even if he leaves me afterwards so as to be found in his own bed by his masseur in the morning. Also I have tried to kill myself; three times, so far. The courtiers court me, and their wives hate me, and laugh at me behind my back, because I am not even allowed to arrange the meals at the Berghof. Which are disgusting. My parents ask me, in concerned and quiet tones -- ''Why doesn't he marry you?'' -- and I tell them they are ridiculously conventional for the modern age, and that marriage with a dictator can only be morganatic at the best: but I am conventional, too. I matchmake for my sisters, for their dogs even, I whistle ''Tea for Two'' with obvious intent, and my friend tells me I have got the tune wrong, and I end up saying he is too dedicated, too ascetic, married to Germania, but it hurts me all the same, when he says -- ''After the war there will a German husband for every German girl'' -- and I cannot even have the same as my sisters, or any other wide-hipped Aryan, Bavarian cow. Do you know my greatest moment of triumph? As I watched the special train pull out taking that English lord's daughter, the one who shot herself for . . . taking her back to England before they could accuse us of having had her assassinated. The foreign press even got a picture of that, but there was no picture of me. Then I came home and took out my 23 albums of photographs. And there I was. And all those important people whom I am never allowed to meet. When the Duchess of Windsor came I had to stand on the lavatory seat to get a shot of them. I wish it had been a gun. But the pictures are there, and the future will know who I am . . . was.
DANCE: EXCERPT
