FOR nearly 40 years, it seemed that whenever a group of artists, writers, theater people and other creative types gathered to socialize in the Hamptons in the summer, the painter Syd Solomon, who died on Jan. 28 at age 86, would be there. Often he was the host or the instigator of events that hindsight would raise to legendary status.
''I think he always had a gregarious nature,'' said his son, Mike, who is also an artist and lives in East Hampton. ''But when he and my mother came out here and settled, it just flowered.''
Beginning in the mid 1950's, the Solomons divided their time between summers in East Hampton and winters in Sarasota, Fla. They continued that schedule until the early 1990's, when illness forced them to move permanently to Florida.
Mr. Solomon, known for his multilayered abstract paintings, which are in many museums and private collections, found that both locales provided him with the maritime environment that became his primary subject matter; his works capture the essence of reflected light, humid atmosphere and shoreline scenery natural to both the East End and Sarasota.
But Mr. Solomon did not come to East Hampton just for the scenery. He was equally attracted to the company.
In 1959, Mr. and Mrs. Solomon rented the gatehouse at the Creeks, Alfonso Ossorio's remarkable Georgica estate -- where Clyfford Still, Grace Hartigan and other artists had also been tenants -- while they looked for property of their own. When the Solomons found the land they wanted, on nearby Baiting Hollow Road, Mr. Solomon built a house and studio that became the scene of many a memorable happening.
The artists Jim Dine and Conrad Marca-Relli were neighbors, as were the collectors Robert and Ethel Scull and the songwriter Jerry Lieber and his wife, Gaby Rodgers, an actress and Off Broadway producer. Their daytime hangout was Georgica Beach, where they and their wide circle of friends would meet to plan the evening's festivities.
Bored by cocktail parties, Mr. Solomon and Ms. Rodgers began to organize performances, using the Solomons' decks as outdoor stages. Hundreds of people might turn up to feast on hot dogs catered by the local beach wagon or whatever potluck was available, fortify themselves with Mr. Solomon's lethal ''artillery punch,'' and take in the show.
One of the more notorious occasions, complete with fireworks, live rock music and go-go dancers, celebrated Neil Armstrong's moonwalk in the summer of 1969. Dressed in a silver Mylar space suit made by the sculptor Bill King, Mr. Solomon descended a ladder from the roof onto the second-floor deck and sprayed the startled audience with water from a hose mounted between his legs, declaring his act to be ''a giant leak for mankind.''
In 1966, the Solomons' lawn was the site of the first officially organized artist-writers softball game, precursor of the star-studded charity match that is now a staple of summers in the Hamptons. The first pitch was fouled through an upstairs window, and the batter, an artist who had never before played the game, ran triumphantly from home plate to third base. When a home run was hit into the Sculls' yard, they refused to return the ball, which then entered their renowned collection of Pop art.
In the 1970's, the Solomons moved to Sagaponack, where their house boasted a croquet court on which Mr. Solomon was famous for his cutthroat tactics and shameless cheating. One dispute became so heated that his neighbor, the writer and Zen master Peter Matthiessen, stormed over to complain that the noise was disturbing his mediation.
Another Sagaponack neighbor, Kurt Vonnegut, enjoyed Mr. Solomon's colorful stories of his service in a camouflage unit during World War II. Several of these anecdotes are incorporated in the résumé of Rabo Karabekian, the protagonist of Mr. Vonnegut's 1987 novel, ''Bluebeard,'' which is set in the area and features a cameo performance by Mr. Solomon.
Mr. Vonnegut places him at a generic Hamptons soiree, where he is charming an attractive young woman. ''How can you tell a good painting from a bad one?'' she asks him. ''All you have to do, my dear,'' Mr. Solomon replies, ''is look at a million paintings, and then you can never be mistaken.''
ART: AN APPRECIATION
