CIVIL WARS
A Battle for Gay Marriage.
By David Moats.
288 pp. New York: Harcourt. $25.
UNTIL recently, Vermont embodied the small-town Republicanism familiar to readers of the old Saturday Evening Post (Norman Rockwell lived in Arlington) and devotees of Frank Capra (Longfellow Deeds came from the mythical town of Mandrake Falls). The first state to banish slavery, Vermont routinely gave its tiny cluster of electoral votes to the Republicans until 1992, with the exception of the 1964 Johnson landslide. To this day, it has elected only one Democratic senator (Patrick Leahy). Its other senator, Jim Jeffords, would still be Republican if the Bush administration had not broken with the old Lincolnesque idea of what the party stands for (Lincoln's son Robert was also a Vermonter).
Rockwell's Vermont still exists, but recent events have shown another side of the state -- a Vermont that can seem so progressive and Volvoid that National Review calls it ''the American Sweden.'' The Dean insurgency began there, and four years ago the gay marriage movement -- electrified by a supportive decision from the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court last November -- came of age during an extraordinary public debate.
In 2000, the Vermont legislature passed and Gov. Howard Dean signed the most advanced legislation in American history on same-sex relationships, creating ''civil unions'' which grant many but not all of the legal rights of marriage. The process was wrenching for everyone involved. Fortunately, an able journalist was on the scene, recording his impressions and shaping the debate with eloquent editorials for The Rutland Herald (which earned him the Pulitzer Prize). Now David Moats has written a moving book about the experience. ''Civil Wars'' comes at the right moment. With its modesty and quiet moral suasion, it may calm the polarizing national debate to come.
Moats begins with the 1999 state Supreme Court decision that established the right of three gay couples to unite as legal couples, but left it to the legislature to work out the details -- a result that disappointed advocates on both sides, but led to a year of searching public testimony. In April 2000, after extensive hearings, the legislature approved civil unions. Passions still ran high, but what is impressive about Vermont's story is how well, in the end, the system worked. This was anything but a case of ''activist judges'' imposing their views, as President Bush characterized such developments in his State of the Union address last month. Defenders and opponents of gay marriage were given ample opportunity to express their views. Politicians negotiated, compromised and then voted according to their consciences. Certainly, there was bitterness -- the election that followed turned the state into something like a ''war zone,''+Moats+says: 16 incumbents lost, the House changed hands and Governor Dean was barely re-elected. But by this year, he reports, ''the high tide of the anti-civil unions backlash . . . had receded'' and most people moved on.
Moats succeeds for many of the reasons that the debate succeeded. He tells the story on a human scale, writing about individuals rather than trends, and wisely avoids the ideological ukases that have been issuing from both left and right lately. The Republican leader in the Vermont house, Bob Kinsey -- whose yes vote cost him his seat -- is not just a conservative, but a farmer who was disturbed by an act of anti-Semitism in his youth, and wants to make sure that no kinds of discrimination are allowed in Vermont. A prominent Democrat, Bill Lippert, is not just a liberal, but a well-respected member of the House judiciary committee, a homosexual so private about his life of commitment with his partner that he never reveals his name. The book's emotional crescendo comes with a beautiful speech near the end of the debate by Lippert, who'd stayed quiet for most of the process to give fellow legislators time to make up their mind. One is reminded of Rockwell's ''Freedom of Speech,'' the painting he did from a Vermont town meeting, which -- crucially+- depicted the expression of an unpopular point of view.
Moats is generous to both sides, but over the course of the book, the reader senses his growing support for civil unions (he is heterosexual, for what it's worth). He respects the arguments of opponents, including the thoughtful Roman Catholic bishop of Burlington, Kenneth Angell. He is harsher to the busloads of outside agitators who tried to disrupt the process, including Randall Terry, the founder of Operation Rescue, who prowled the State House in a dark fedora and snakeskin shoes, whispering biblical injunctions. At the end, the reader feels what we're supposed to feel after a Capra movie: we may be flawed, but we're all in this together. Moats is right to call this a ''historic moment in a small place that echoed widely with a lesson of courage and compassion.''
Readers seeking clarification of the legal concepts involved can profitably turn to Evan Gerstmann's ''Same-Sex Marriage and the Constitution'' (Cambridge University Press). Less of a story than ''Civil Wars,'' it capably explains the ideas in contest. Gerstmann+concludes that ''gays and lesbians are simply entitled to the same fundamental freedom to marry as everybody else,'' noting that they are not asking for ''special rights,'' but are now deprived of hundreds of marriage-related benefits, ranging from health care to tax breaks.
In an election year, it is probably optimistic to expect an elevated discussion. But we can hope that we ultimately live up to the democratic standards of Vermont's painful but thorough debate. It is not entirely accurate to suggest, as Moats does, that gay marriage offers a modern civil rights movement; there are many important cultural differences. But it is even less true to insist that marriage is immutable, or reserved for those who procreate, or that gay couples are unfit for parenthood (in ''Civil Wars,'' a state Supreme Court justice puts forth the theory that advances in genetics will someday allow same-sex couples to conceive children).
Near the end of ''Mr. Deeds Goes to Town,'' the Vermonter played by Gary Cooper dishes out a series of homespun metaphors for how government is supposed to treat people, from helping to push a car up a hill to saving a swimmer who's drowning. Obviously, life isn't quite that simple. This will take time. But in the long run, the question will be answered in the vast middle where most Americans live, and where they privately decide what is right and wrong.
Ted Widmer directs the C. V. Starr Center for the Study of the American Experience at Washington College in Chestertown, Md.
