FOR more than three hours, with his trademark mop of salt-and-pepper hair bobbing and swaying, his right hand marking the beat and his left providing cues and color, Seiji Ozawa led singers and musicians of the Vienna State Opera through the twists and tunes of Mozart's ''Marriage of Figaro.'' Then, after receiving the loudest cheer of the curtain call, he was off through the January drizzle for a late dinner of red wine and spaghetti alle vongole.
At 68, the stocky conductor is a man on the move. Eighteen months ago, after 29 years as music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, he embraced the twin challenges of a new country and a new repertory, becoming music director of the state opera, one of the world's most prestigious houses. This week, he returns to the United States to lead the Vienna Philharmonic in three concerts at Carnegie Hall. He and the orchestra then travel to Asia.
Mr. Ozawa seems energized by all the change. Some critics and musicians felt that he had overstayed his welcome in Boston, that 29 years was too long a marriage for any conductor and orchestra. He acknowledges that it was a long time, adding that his style is to work slowly and methodically. But now he finds himself living in an even more musical city, associated with two of Europe's great musical institutions. And already Vienna has adopted him as its own. Last month, the Austrian postal service issued a one-euro commemorative stamp featuring three images of Mr. Ozawa.
''America is completely different,'' he said recently in his office in the 19th-century opera house. ''One thing, for people here, the opera and the orchestra are so important in their lives. If you take a taxi, the driver knows what's being performed tonight, what opera, who is singing, who didn't sing last time, that kind of thing.''
Not that Vienna was entirely new to him. Over the years, he had conducted occasional opera performances and concerts here. Still, he was surprised to be offered the post of music director at the opera, not only because it had been empty since Claudio Abbado left in 1991 but also because Mr. Ozawa was best known as an orchestral conductor. Indeed, he accepted a five-year contract here precisely to fill the opera gap in his career.
''I always loved voice,'' he said, harking back to his youth in Manchuria. ''When I was young, my three brothers and I sang. My mother was Christian, and we sang English hymns in Japanese. Then, after the war, one of my brothers was given a book of songs by the Golden Gate Quartet, and we sang these, you know, gospel.'' He smiled at the memory and performed a few bars: ''Babylon, falling, falling, falling, Babylon, falling, falling . . .''
But during his musical training under Hideo Saito, a cellist in prewar Germany who later helped promote Western music in Japan, there was no opera. In fact, Mr. Ozawa recalled, it was only in 1964, five years after he had moved to the West, that Herbert von Karajan instructed him, ''Seiji, you must start opera now.'' That year he assisted Karajan in ''Don Giovanni'' at the Salzburg Festival. The next summer he returned there to conduct his own ''Così Fan Tutte.''
In the years that followed, first as music director of the San Francisco Symphony, then, from 1973, in Boston and finally at the Saito Kinen Festival in Japan, which Mr. Ozawa founded in 1991, he conducted many semistaged operas as well as a few full productions, including the premiere of Messiaen's ''St. François d'Assise'' at the Paris Opera in 1983. Yet only now has opera moved to the center of his attention.
''It's all opera,'' he said, taking time to joke about his still somewhat improvised English. ''Also the Vienna Philharmonic. Since I am here, we work together with the orchestra. If I were not here, I'd probably just do New York. But since I am here, I also go to Asia. But all others are opera. My life has become completely opera, which I thought I would like and I'm kind of enjoying.''
Six months before moving here, he conducted a new production of Janacek's ''Jenufa.'' In his first season, 2002-3, he took on a new production of ''Jonny Spielt Auf'' by the Austrian composer Ernst Krenek and revivals of ''Così Fan Tutte,''  ''Don Giovanni,'' ''Le Nozze di Figaro,''  ''Salome'' and ''Tosca.'' This season he has already led a new production of ''Der Fliegende Holländer'' and revivals of ''Le Nozze di Figaro'' and ''Don Giovanni.'' And next season he will tackle a new production of Puccini's ''Manon Lescaut'' and revivals of ''Elektra'' and ''Fidelio.''
The sheer turnover of operas here -- more than 40 titles per season -- makes the Vienna State Opera unlike any other house in the world. The building closes in July and August, but otherwise there is a performance of opera or occasionally ballet on all but five evenings of the year. This abundance gives Mr. Ozawa considerable leeway to pick what he wants to conduct of revivals and new productions. So far he has favored works by Mozart, Puccini and Strauss.
But perhaps the most unusual feature of the state opera is its relationship with the Vienna Philharmonic. To put it simply, most of the same musicians perform as both opera house employees and members of a proudly self-governed orchestra with no permanent conductor. Since the Philharmonic takes its members only from the opera orchestra, it also has an important role in selecting new players at the opera through a demanding series of auditions aimed at conserving its renowned ''Vienna sound.''
''At the Boston Symphony,'' Mr. Ozawa said, ''there was a committee, but the final decision was made by the music director. Here I don't have that power, because the state opera hasn't had a music director for so long that a different system is now in place. Here I am a member of the committee, and I attend the final auditions, but I do not have the final word.''
Still, he hopes to exercise influence in one area that has brought the Vienna Philharmonic reams of negative publicity: its longstanding resistance to admitting women into its ranks. True, in 1997 it voted to admit women through the existing audition process. But even today, it has just 3 among its 148 members: a harpist, a violist and a cellist. Other women occasionally play with the orchestra as substitutes.
''I think they are going to change more,'' Mr. Ozawa said. ''Not because of me. People may say because of me. It's true that since I came here, more women have come for auditions, because the record says that some 60 percent of the musicians I chose for the Boston Symphony were women. But I have to say, the auditions I have seen have been fair.''
Still, there is no disguising the potential for conflict between the Philharmonic and the music director of the state opera, as occurred when Mahler held the post at the turn of the last century and Karajan some six decades later.
''Every music director will face situations of tension with the musicians,'' said Clemens Hellsberg, a violinist and the Philharmonic's elected president. ''That's normal. If you have to deal with the same musicians as members of a labor union in the morning and of an independent orchestra in the afternoon, that's a strange psychological situation.''
But, Mr. Hellsberg went on, although the opera's general manager, Ioan Holender, did not consult the Philharmonic before naming Mr. Ozawa, ''he knew we had a good relationship.''
''He did not need to consult us, because he knew we would agree,'' Mr. Hellsberg added. ''The Philharmonic members knew what they were getting.''
For the Philharmonic to invite Mr. Ozawa to lead it in New York and Asia is one sign of its continuing approval. Typically, they worked out the Carnegie programs together: on Wednesday, Strauss's ''Don Juan,'' Mahler's Rückert Lieder, with Thomas Hampson as soloist, and Schoenberg's ''Pelleas und Melisande''; on Thursday, Schubert's ''Unfinished'' Symphony and Bruckner's Second; and on Friday, the Bach-Webern Ricercare from ''A Musical Offering,'' Stravinsky's ''Pulcinella'' Suite and Beethoven's ''Eroica'' Symphony.
Even with an apartment 10 minutes' walk from the opera house, Mr. Ozawa, who speaks only rudimentary German, has not gone entirely native. He prefers Japanese food and Italian pasta to Wiener schnitzel and Viennese sausages. And though he welcomes the chance to ski in the Alps, he has installed a satellite dish at his home so he can keep up with football, basketball and baseball in the United States.
When he has a break from work, he heads for Tokyo to join his wife and their two grown children. It is also in Japan that he is building perhaps his most lasting musical monument. He founded the Saito Kinen Orchestra, named after his revered teacher, Hideo Saito, in 1984 and followed eight years later with the Saito Kinen Festival, held annually in Matsumoto. Then, in 2000, he created the Seiji Ozawa Ongaku-juku, an academy for young musicians.
But, he noted, Western music still has far to go in Japan.
''There is imported opera and symphony up here,'' he said, holding his hand high, ''and Japan-made opera and symphony down here. The gap is big, and audiences pay 10 times more money for up here, even if they play the same music in the same hall to the same audience. Even if the quality is close, the public does not recognize this. That's why we created the orchestra and the academy. But older people have strong views and cannot change them.''
Normally affable and outgoing, Mr. Ozawa suddenly looked sad. ''It will take 20 to 30 years,'' he said. ''Maybe I won't see it.''
Vienna Philharmonic  Carnegie Hall.  Wednesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 p.m.
MUSIC
