IN his review of Patty Jenkins's ''Monster,'' Roger Ebert of The Chicago Sun-Times declared that Charlize Theron's performance as the executed serial killer Aileen Wuornos, for which Ms. Theron has since been nominated for an Oscar, was ''one of the greatest performances in the history of the cinema.'' Such hyperbole on the part of a critic is always apt to raise an eyebrow or two -- not least among other critics -- but in this case my own brows are not budging. This is partly because I, too, admire Ms. Theron's work in ''Monster'' -- her intensity, her empathy and her ferocious dedication to expunging all vanity or irony from her performance. But it is also because for me to mock such a grand historical claim would be blatantly hypocritical. A few months before Mr. Ebert unleashed his praise on Ms. Theron, I was similarly extravagant in heralding the achievement of one of her fellow nominees, when I called Sean Penn's portrayal of Jimmy Markum in Clint Eastwood's ''Mystic River''  one of the definitive pieces of screen acting in the last half-century.
In quantitative terms, I was perhaps more modest in my estimation of Mr. Penn's work than Mr. Ebert was in his judgment of Ms. Theron's -- a matter of 50 years as opposed to 100 or so. Anyway, what's a few decades between friends? In 2003, Mr. Penn and Ms. Theron provided the most striking -- you might say the most dramatic -- evidence that we are living in an extraordinary period, one we will eventually look back upon as a golden age of screen acting.
I can almost hear the eyebrows shooting skyward. It has long been an article of faith among movie lovers of all tastes that the present -- any present -- is but a pale shadow of the past. Back in the studio era, after all, we had movie stars -- Cary Grant, Bette Davis, Katharine Hepburn, Humphrey Bogart and so on -- the likes of whom we will surely never see again. And then, in the postwar decades, the Group Theater, the Actors Studio and the heroic age of American serious drama brought forth a generation of powerful emoters in sweaty undershirts and ripped stockings. More recently, the New Hollywood of the 1970's spawned a crop of latter-day Methodists who burrowed so deeply into each new role that they all but disappeared (at least until awards season came around). The old-time movie stars seduced their public by remaining, from picture to picture, essentially the same. Whomever else he was pretending to be, and whether he was pretending at the behest of George Cukor or Alfred Hitchcock, Cary Grant was always and splendidly Cary Grant. The newer breed, whose exemplary figures were Robert De Niro and Meryl Streep, achieved their status by transforming themselves utterly from one role to the next -- learning new accents, gaining and losing weight and refracting their charisma through the prism of authenticity. THESE earlier phases suggest the long evolution of American moviemaking away from polished and stylized theatricality toward an ever rawer and more unmediated naturalism, which was itself often highly stylized. At a certain point, perhaps when Marlon Brando stormed the stairs in Elia Kazan's adaptation of ''A Streetcar Named Desire,'' psychological realism -- minimally filtered access to the inchoate, agonized psyches of often inarticulate individuals -- began to supplant crisp diction and physical grace as hallmark of the actor's art. You can follow this development, among men, from Mr. Brando to Warren Beatty and Paul Newman down through Al Pacino, Mr. De Niro, Dustin Hoffman and Robert Duvall. Among women, from whom we continue to expect glamour as well as grit, the tradition is harder to trace, but it winds through the careers of Natalie Wood, Faye Dunaway, Sally Field and Ms. Streep.
Certainly Ms. Theron and Mr. Penn, in their nominated roles, represent a further push in the direction of realism, as they labor furiously to disappear into the skins of the violent and troubled people they play. There has always been a certain amount of ostentation in this kind of fiercely concentrated self-effacement, which is one of the grand paradoxes of realist acting: the less you notice it, the more notable it is. Even if Laurence Fishburne's character did not point it out, you would surely take note of the prison yard hunch of Mr. Penn's -- that is, of Jimmy Markum's -- shoulders in ''Mystic River.'' And, similarly, nobody who has suffered through the saccharine drip of ''Sweet November'' or the fluffy inanity of ''The Legend of Bagger Vance'' will be able to suppress a gasp of astonishment at seeing the lovely and self-confident Ms. Theron so utterly metamorphosed, not just outwardly but inwardly as well. Mr. Penn and Ms. Theron, who achieve the kind of raging grandeur that wins awards and transforms careers, are in that respect somewhat unusual. One of the things some of the most memorable performances of the past year have in common -- nominated or not -- is a kind of meticulous quiet, a wary avoidance of overstatement. Chiwetel Ejiofor, the English stage actor who plays an exiled Nigerian doctor in Stephen Frears's ''Dirty Pretty Things,'' rarely raises his voice above a whisper; his character's pain, watchfulness and weary decency reside in the actor's eyes, and in the muscles of his jaw. There is a similar reserve at work -- it is too emotionally thorough and too gripping to be called minimalism -- as Peter Sarsgaard plays the former New Republic editor Charles Lane in Billy Ray's ''Shattered Glass.'' You have the uncanny feeling, observing Lane observe the behavior of Stephen Glass, that you are watching the character think. And the identification in this deft intellectual thriller becomes so complete that you almost forget that he's there, as if you were watching the movie from his perspective, and through his eyes.
Mr. Sarsgaard owns ''Shattered Glass'' without being its star, and his performance might serve as a textbook example of anti-movie-star acting. Nowadays, the scarcity of certified movie stars -- defined not only as those actors who can guarantee a box-office return, but as those whose presence is greater than the sum of their movie parts -- is often lamented. (Nobody can quite agree on just how scarce they are, but there may, pending final box-office numbers, be as few as a half-dozen currently working.) Movie stars may, indeed, be on their way to obsolescence: the popular culture, awash in more celebrities than it knows what to do with, has less and less use for them and the movies themselves don't seem to need them much either. A curious fact about this year's best-picture nominees is that three of the five -- ''The Lord of the Rings,'' ''Seabiscuit'' and ''Master and Commander,'' which were, not coincidentally, among the most expensive to make -- received no acting nominations, and of them only ''Master and Commander'' with Russell Crowe could be called a star vehicle. Tucked alongside these grand spectacles are a handful of smaller movies -- too modest in scale, perhaps, to qualify for best-picture consideration -- that dominate the acting categories. They include ''In America,'' ''House of Sand and Fog'' and ''21 Grams.''
Those films, along with ''Mystic River,'' with its three acting nominations, suggest that the current acting renaissance may be subverting the star system in other ways -- by insisting on the primacy of the ensemble and by ignoring the invidious tradition of separating true or potential stars from character actors. It is difficult, in any of these pictures, to single out an individual actor without noting how enmeshed he or she is in a collective enterprise -- how interdependent the performances are. This is nowhere more true than on television, where the hourlong dramatic series, especially in HBO shows like ''The Sopranos'' and ''The Wire,'' has replaced the serious play as the showcase and proving ground for acting talent.
Nobody on those shows looks like a movie star. And neither do many of the film actors who are -- or should be -- stealing an ever larger share of movie glory. At this point, I am tempted to jettison argument in favor of list making, to tear open a sheaf of metaphorical envelopes and recite names not mentioned elsewhere in this section (or at the Kodak Theater on Oscar night). I would most likely begin with Maria Bello and William H. Macy in ''The Cooler'' and then remind myself of Hope Davis and Campbell Scott in ''The Secret Lives of Dentists.'' Of course, I wouldn't forget Ms. Davis and Paul Giamatti in ''American Splendor.'' But then I might find myself lost in a free-associative reverie in which these actors and others -- the prolific and consistently marvelous Patricia Clarkson, Billy Crudup, Samantha Morton, Mr. Scott and Paddy Considine -- pop up again and again, in earlier movies like ''Far From Heaven,'' ''Jesus' Son,'' ''Roger Dodger'' and ''Last Resort.'' With actors like these, who needs movie stars? But actors like these need more -- and better -- movies.
BECAUSE, more often than not, their work stands out against a drab backdrop. At times -- on the hectic, thickly populated episodes of ''The Wire,'' for instance, or in Tom McCarthy's quiet three-person chamber piece ''The Station Agent'' -- the writing, the acting and the mise-en-scène mesh perfectly, so that you very nearly lose sight of the boundary between art and life. More frequently, though, the work of the ensemble seems independent of the picture itself. ''21 Grams,'' for instance, has struck me more and more on each viewing as a thoroughly preposterous story without a single credible character, and yet the acting is so thoroughly convincing that this objection almost seems trivial. These people -- a math professor with a heart transplant (Mr. Penn), his donor's widow (Naomi Watts) and her husband's accidental killer (Benicio Del Toro) -- seem, as written, utterly incredible and yet, as acted, excruciatingly real.
Similarly, the flaws of ''In America'' and ''House of Sand and Fog'' -- a soft edge of sentimentality and a too-schematic idea of tragedy -- are transcended by the dense, believable humanity of the people who inhabit the stories. This is true even of movies that are more -- or less -- than merely flawed. ''Pieces of April,'' its faux-gritty digital video cinematography notwithstanding, never really breaks out of the tired confines of dysfunctional-family melodrama -- except when you are watching it, and feeling the bruising stickiness of the bond between the feckless title character (Katie Holmes) and her dying mother (Ms. Clarkson). You can watch Mr. Crudup in ''Big Fish'' or the nonstar starlets in ''Mona Lisa Smile'' and marvel at their partial escape from the dreary screenwriting clichés in which they are trapped, even as you wish they could escape altogether. Which may be to say that we are not, or not yet, in a new golden age of movies. There are always more good performances than there are awards and nominations (not that there is any shortage of those), and there will always be more good actors than there are worthwhile parts. But as the winners take the stage one by one on Feb. 29, it is worth considering that they stand, momentarily, at the head of a crowd, and that the stage -- or, rather, the screen -- could easily be filled with their peers.
