THERE is a scene in ''S.O.B.,'' the bitter anti-Hollywood satire written and directed by Blake Edwards in 1981, in which Julie Andrews, playing a very Andrews-like movie star, snatches an Oscar statuette from a shelf and hurls it at the head of her husband, a very Edwards-like filmmaker played by Richard Mulligan. She misses, and the statuette (perhaps Dame Julie's own, won for ''Mary Poppins,'' in 1965) smashes through a picture window in their Malibu beach house, apparently on its way to the bottom of the Pacific Ocean.
To date, that scene has been Mr. Edwards's closest brush with an Academy Award, apart from a 1983 nomination for his adapted screenplay for ''Victor/Victoria.'' But on Feb. 29, Mr. Edwards, 81, will receive an honorary Oscar from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, in recognition of his writing, directing and producing an extraordinary body of work for the screen.
It is no less than Mr. Edwards deserves. Since he made his debut as a director, in 1955 (with the Frankie Laine musical ''Bring Your Smile Along''), he has been one of America's most personal and accomplished filmmakers. His box-office hits include ''Breakfast at Tiffany's'' (1961), ''The Pink Panther'' (1963) and ''10'' (1979), and he has gathered a stable of critical admirers on both sides of the Atlantic for such movies as ''The Great Race'' (1965), ''The Party'' (1968) and ''Darling Lili'' (1970).
But in Mr. Edwards's own darkly comic sensibility, a stroke of good fortune like a late-life Oscar can be followed only by a debacle. In a Blake Edwards film, the director's dignified acceptance speech would end with an accidental tumble into the orchestra pit.
For Mr. Edwards is, as Andrew Sarris wrote in his 1968 book ''The American Cinema,'' a director who gets his biggest laughs with material that would be too grisly for most horror movies. Whether he is working in physical comedy (as in the eight ''Pink Panther'' films built around the figure of Peter Sellers's bumbling Inspector Clouseau), romantic melodrama (''The Tamarind Seed,'' 1974),thrillers (''Gunn,'' 1967), westerns (''Wild Rovers,'' 1971) or sex farces (''Micki and Maude,'' 1984), Mr. Edwards retains a profound sense of the fragility of happiness and the permanence of pain.
His characters often seem to be shell-shocked survivors, teetering through a landscape of calamity. Keeping their balance is a continual challenge, both literally, as they reel about, stunned by a surfeit of alcohol, drugs or sex, and figuratively, as they try to make their way through a world of deceptive, seductive surfaces that hide, however briefly, the omnipresence of death and disaster. ( Lying on the beach of ''S.O.B'' is the undiscovered corpse of a jogger, felled by a heart attack.)
There is a brief sequence in ''A Shot in the Dark'' (1964), the second of the Pink Panther films, that neatly illustrates Mr. Edwards's basic themes and style. The first shot shows Clouseau hovering outside the closed door of a Paris apartment in which, he has reason to believe, one of the principal female suspects is hiding. A snatch of quaintly melodramatic piano music is heard on the soundtrack, suggesting a cliffhanging moment in a silent serial. Suddenly, a woman's scream rings out and Clouseau bursts through the door and into the second shot, which reveals that the scream has come not from a damsel in distress but from a soprano hitting a high note. Clouseau enters the shot from the right and, propelled by his own momentum, continues across the room and straight out the window on the far left. Cut to the third shot: an exterior view that shows Clouseau plunging through the window and into the murky Seine below.
The three shots are so perfectly matched that they give a sense of a single, continuous movement from right to left (no easy task in itself, given that Mr. Edwards has to match an interior studio shot to a location exterior while keeping his actor -- and probably a couple of stuntmen as well -- in a line of constant velocity). Each of the three separate gags (the silent film reference, the revelation of the music recital and the plunge into the river) leads right to the next, creating a magnificently sustained single laugh that begins as a titter and builds to a guffaw.
This is brilliant craftsmanship, but it also has something to say. Here is another of Mr. Edwards's literally unbalanced characters, careening his way from disaster to disaster. Like so many of the falls in Mr. Edwards's films, Clouseau's plunge, from the clean, well-lighted space of the recital room into the muddy depths of the river at night, conveys a whole metaphysics of comedy: the descent from light and reason into darkness and confusion.
The sequence also portrays a subtle shift in point of view. When we first hear the music, we are asked to identify with Clouseau as he sees himself -- a dashing, heroic figure. The cut to the interior of the apartment, with an audience watching a performance of which Clouseau becomes an unwitting part, moves to an external view of the character -- he now looks like a bungling idiot. And the plunge into the river suggests, too, how Clouseau must be feeling at that moment when he suddenly becomes aware of the judgmental glare of others -- he sinks out of sight, diving into embarrassment and despair.
In ''A Shot in the Dark,'' as in almost all Mr. Edwards's films, it is sex that keeps his characters keeping on. Clouseau falls under the influence -- almost hypnotic, it seems -- of the pretty chambermaid (and prime suspect) played by Elke Sommer. But sexual attraction, based on appearances, often deceives. In the much later ''10,'' the Dudley Moore character capitulates to the Bo Derek character the moment he glimpses her emerging from the sea; but his lust blinds him to his true soul mate, another of the warm figures played in Mr. Edwards's films by Ms. Andrews, his wife of some 35 years.
Still, Mr. Edwards is no simple-minded moralist, preaching against the sin of lust. In ''Victor/Victoria,'' the swaggering macho gangster King Marchand (James Garner) finds himself irresistibly drawn to Count Victor Grezhinski, a transvestite nightclub performer. So strongly does he trust his feelings that he is ready to come out as gay, to the considerable detriment of his career. It is with only marginal relief that he discovers that Victor is actually Victoria, a woman passing as a man passing as a woman (and played, of course, by a radiant Ms. Andrews). Lying surfaces can sometimes reveal deeper truths.
In the 80's, Mr. Edwards's films became more overtly autobiographical -- ''That's Life,'' about an architect's midlife crisis, was shot in Mr. Edwards's own home -- as well as more insistently didactic. Instead of bringing audiences to moral realizations through laughter or emotion, Mr. Edwards too often seemed to be delivering a lesson (albeit a sincere and hard-earned one) in films like ''The Man Who Loved Women'' (a 1983 remake of François Truffaut's 1977 French film), ''Skin Deep'' (1989) and ''Switch'' (1991). With age, and perhaps diminishing energy (he has said he suffers from chronic fatigue syndrome), his comic edge wore down as well, and the tight construction of the early films degenerated into the uneven tones of ''Sunset'' (1988, his final and only really affectionate look at Hollywood), while the clockwork timing mechanism turned into the rusty gears of the 1984 ''Son of the Pink Panther,'' Mr. Edwards's last film to date (featuring Roberto Benigni as the son and heir of Peter Sellers's inimitable Clouseau).
Mr. Edwards angrily left Hollywood and moved to Europe, in 1973, after his expensive 1970 musical, ''Darling Lili,'' proved a disaster at the box office. His films ''Wild Rovers'' and ''The Carey Treatment'' (both released in 1972) also suffered the indignity of uncomprehending re-edits by James Aubrey, then the president of MGM. Mr. Edwards put many of these experiences into his screenplay for ''S.O.B.,'' which he wrote shortly after his departure for Europe; he was unable to film it until 1981, after the unexpected success of ''10'' made him a hot property again.
As an American filmmaker, he has seen both the best that the Hollywood system has to offer -- the casts, the crews and the technical resources -- and the worst, in the form of the rampant philistinism that ruled Hollywood then and rules it still. One suspects that for him, the Oscar must be an ambiguous honor, a belated tribute from the industry establishment that once tossed him aside. But no one will blame Blake Edwards if, as he crosses the stage on Oscar night, he graciously accepts his little gold man. After all, since ''S.O.B.,'' there's been an empty place on the shelf for it.
OSCAR FILMS  Correction:  February 15, 2004, Sunday  An article on Page 26 of Arts &amp; Leisure today about the director Blake Edwards misstates the year in which his movie ''Son of the Pink Panther'' was released. It was 1993, not 1984.
