PATHS OF DESIRE
The Passions of a Suburban Gardener.
By Dominique Browning.
237 pp. New York:
Scribner. $24.
''DEFERRED MAINTENANCE'' might have been a better title for this slender volume, in which Dominique Browning takes on that scourge known to most homeowners and every middle-aged woman: decay. She makes for an especially appealing adversary in that she is something of a connoisseur of the ''domestic magnificence'' of erosion; there is no chirpy, up-by-the-bootstraps domestic goddess in this tale of suburban renewal. ''There is always that tantalizing challenge,'' Browning reflects, ''buried just beneath the surface of your lassitude, that tempting question: How bad can it get?'' Some of us will always be putty in the hands of an essayist who confesses at the outset that she can be
as hopeless with the names of plants as with those of her children. Within a matter of pages it's fairly clear that Browning is exaggerating, at least on the first count; the editor in chief of House &amp; Garden, she seems in no immediate danger of mistaking a Japanese for a Chinese wisteria. Otherwise her credentials are sound. She cops to snooping, petty theft, impracticality and hysteria, and I have her pegged as a born procrastinator.
Browning's domestic erosion began one book ago, when -- laid low by her divorce -- she discovered that it was easier to minister to a needy house and its neglected grounds than to a broken heart. ''I took care of the garden, then the garden took care of me,'' she wrote in ''Around the House and in the Garden.'' ''Paths of Desire'' finds her a few recuperative seasons down the road, venturing a little farther afield, preoccupied by a different set of problems. Both her Westchester garden and she were aging. And, frankly, Browning was doing a better job of it.
What prompts these discursive musings is, at least incidentally, another natural disaster. Early one summer morning Browning steps out into her back garden, coffee cup in hand. Before she has quite registered that she is sloshing half-dressed through mud, a 100-year-old retaining wall -- a massive, unloved slab of concrete, one to which even the most aggressive, invasive ivies took with reluctance -- cracks, groans and tumbles to her feet. What could cause such a thing? Can a wall grow tired of standing up? The collapse sets off a series of highly contained chain reactions, the most potent variety; both practically and emotionally, the floodgates burst open. For years Browning had resisted making sense of her garden, having built up her own rampart of intimidation, laziness, ignorance. At long last she finds herself grappling head-on with her suburban garden, by its very definition an unnatural entity, like airplane meals or Ivy League football. As Browning observes, the most prominent feature in any such garden will always be a house.
And so she sets out, in midlife, to find what landscape architects know as ''desire paths,'' those well-trod ruts that defy the officially ordained geometry of any public park or college campus. Browning's is a long and treacherous road of small and fierce adventures, one that entails a ''House That Jack Built'' causality: the collapse of the wall brought the roofer who found the termites who cohabited with the skunks who failed to outwit the exterminator. In imposing her will on these much-loved grounds, in planting the scilla and tending the sassafras, Browning encounters all the depredations of wildlife, including that hardiest of suburban perennials: the neighbors. In this case they are evenly divided between those possessed of offices in white-shoe law firms and those curating collections of distressed auto parts. It is the former who live upstream, so to speak, of Browning's defunct wall, and it is the former with whom she collides. Maybe she shouldn't have asked them to chop down their encroaching, edge-of-lot maple. But how else to acknowledge that bright plastic play gym, installed as far as possible from the neighbor's windows, which is to say as close as possible to Browning's?
That swing set stands as a visual affront, but to Browning's vantage point eyesore and heartsore are never far apart. ''The sound of swing sets is the sound of lost childhoods -- those of my sons, and mine, too,'' she writes. In her quest to conquer her garden she hits hard against the untillable imagination, the rocky soil of the mature years, all of them minutes around the corner from her own formative days. When her stately hemlocks fall sick she is devastated; ''I wanted my trees back'' she cries, a wail that joins together the uncomprehending 5-year-old with the too-wise 40-ish-year-old. Suddenly she finds herself at that age when everyone in sight -- the plumber, the electrician, the mason -- seems young enough to be her child. We are beyond the land of diets now, into the forest of plastic surgeries; just over the hill from deferred maintenance lies depreciation. In the process of taming a plot of land that has as much capacity to resist as to restore, Browning hints at what may be the finest definition of middle age. It is that time of life when the people who catch you smoking behind the garage happen to be your own children.
She also illuminates more than a few tenets of the natural world. Unlike everyone else in the family, ''raccoons cannot wait to take out the trash.'' There is no such thing as a clear boundary, at least between neighbors. There is such a thing as a clematis emergency. Skunks are (at least in Browning's diagnosis) narcissistic and passive-aggressive, prone to Borderline Personality Disorder. Teenage sons are full of surprises. And single middle-aged professional women can develop a thing for men with tools, capable men, mechanically minded men, men who speak the language of furnaces, shingles, drainpipes.
In itself that proclivity might be inoffensive, but in Browning's world -- she admits to a certain labeling compulsion -- the nursery owner, the arborist, the contractor become the ''Helpful Men.'' A friend who rises to the rescue during the preplanting ''Winter of Last Daydreams'' turns into ''the Artist.'' Discretion is always admirable, but it is other things too when it sticks a thumb in the reader's face, or tricks the innocent out in the verbal equivalent of rabbit ears. A teetering romance hangs over Browning's pages; I could handle ''Mr. Big,'' but ''the True Love'' left me cringing. This is a lousy way to repay someone who has been unerringly polite about the asphalt crumble that passes for your driveway.
The Helpful Men and the True Love will tip you off; yes, this is a postfeminist book. You could point out that Browning resolved to do something about the sinking slab of asphalt that led to her house only when she twisted her ankle in the midst of it, late one night, in heels and ball gown. At which point she did what nearly every self-sufficient woman would do. She called the Helpful Men. She also paid their bill. I rest my case. Especially as no one could wring more mileage out of driveway drama than Browning. Most vocally after having seen their father, her boys petition for a renovation. ''You don't feel it, Mom. Your car is higher. Dad scrapes the bottom of his car every time he comes up the driveway,'' the younger urges. ''Your father never was a good driver, boys,'' Browning airily replies, defending, among other things, her God-given right to slouch toward decrepitude.
The driveway is repaved; the Winter of Last Daydreams comes to an end; the garden goes in; the garden blooms. This isn't the kind of restoration romance you would wish on everyone; it makes you wonder if all of Jane Austen might have been lost had the Smith &amp; Hawken catalog existed. But as a bittersweet account of one woman shaping her world, it is a tale of few illusions and many delights, unerringly wise about two afflictions to which most of us, at one time or another, aspire.
Stacy Schiff is at work on a book about Benjamin Franklin's years in Paris.
