I own a team-autographed baseball from an obscure summer league. One signer is a player in the Baseball Hall of Fame. I could donate the ball to the hall, the player, the player's major league team or a historical society. Or I could sell it; it may be of substantial value. I am torn between economic self-interest and sharing what may be a unique artifact. How should I dispose of the ball?
A.O., Montpelier, VT.
I agree that artifacts of genuine historic or cultural significance should be available to the public and to scholars, not hidden away in private collections. I don't think this autographed baseball -- or, for that matter, any autographed baseball -- is such a resource.
The personal library of Abraham Lincoln, its books and papers marked by his hand, can give us genuine insight into that great man. Those homely objects in the vitrines at Ellis Island, modest belongings our forebears carried with them to start a new life, say something profound and moving about our past and about ourselves. But Fonzie's jacket and Archie Bunker's chair on display at the Smithsonian do not tell us much of anything: they offer nostalgia, not illumination.
Your keepsake falls into this class of thing. One baseball is much like another. And while yours has symbolic value, it is indistinguishable from every other ball, save for its having been touched by the gods of the game. It is not so much a significant historic object as a fetish. Evocative? Perhaps. Edifying? Unlikely. And thus you are free to sell it to anyone willing to pony up the cash -- a wealthy individual who shares your enthusiasm or a well-endowed baseball organization.
Your zeal for the game might lead you to proffer this ball to any of those you've mentioned, perhaps beginning with the Hall of Fame. And since the lords of baseball tend mostly to be fabulously wealthy (made all the wealthier by having their teams mostly play in publicly financed stadiums), I don't see why the hall shouldn't be able to offer you a tidy sum if this ball is deemed worthy to rest among all those other balls.
I am an Episcopal priest. My diocese permits priests ordained by our previous bishop to bless same-sex unions, as was that bishop's policy, but it does not allow more recently ordained priests like me to do so.
I welcome homosexual people in my church, and I wish I could do more to include them. Restricted as I am, how can I best -- and ethically -- serve my parishioners?
Anonymous
Certainly not by resigning, if that is the implication of your question. You need not endorse every doctrine of the church to participate in it honorably. While there are practices so odious and organizations so impervious to reform that one would be ethically obliged to leave them, that is not your situation. Indeed, your gay parishioners have chosen to remain, and your church is in the midst of much debate and some change on these issues.
Your task is to make your gay parishioners feel welcome in your congregation, encouraging them to become involved in all aspects of church life, from the choir to the vestry. And you can speak out from the pulpit to ensure that everyone understands your bishop's policies and your feelings about them.
(If a religious leader can't speak from conscience, who can?) In addition, you can work for reforms within the church and urge your parishioners to do likewise.
Lastly, when a same-sex couple is eager to have their union blessed, you can bring in an older priest, one ordained by your previous bishop, and have him perform that happy task.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-15-04: THE ETHICIST
