THE house on the northeast corner of 129th Street and Fifth Avenue had been famously empty for almost two decades -- a neighborhood landmark. Its slate, mansard-style roof gaped and slumped; its brick face was blurred; its windows were blanked out with concrete blocks and plywood. It was the sort of house that Willie Suggs, a veteran Harlem broker, describes as a screamer. ''You know, you open the door and it's so awful you go, 'Aaaahhh!' '' she said, pantomiming a cheerful agony.
But for years, you couldn't even open the doors of 2099 Fifth. That privilege has only lately been extended to its new, exhausted owner, Dr. Gitta Rott. Dr. Rott, a Manhattan optometrist with a slim figure and a steely constitution, has been wrestling with her new house for two and half years. It isn't clear yet whether she or the building has the upper hand.
Here are a few of their skirmishes: There was the day last May when her house was broken into, her Dumpster caught fire, the police ticketed her for a sidewalk violation, and she locked herself out in the pouring rain. There was the ice storm last March that clogged the drains on her terrace the day the Sheetrockers came. While the rain sluiced through the flapping plastic on her windows, a river of water coursed from the third floor to the basement, turning the Sheetrock into gum.
There was the day early on, when a contractor loaded scaffolding with garbage, toppling it, and then walked off the job. In a classy coup de grace, he slapped a lien on the place (happily, he got the address wrong).
Under Ms. Rott's stewardship, the house has been through four contractors, four architects and four banks. If houses have personalities, however, this one is less of a malevolent spirit than an obstreperous teenager, clearly raised on hard knocks.
''It's the kind of building that's constantly kicking you back,'' said Dr. Rott, who grew up in Germany and attended optometry school in Boston. ''Sometimes I go to sleep and I pray to God, 'Please, I don't need to control the house, I just need to hold it still, just for a minute!' ''
In July 2001, Dr. Rott had a tiny income from her private practice and almost no savings; a portfolio studded with tech stocks had lost all but $10,000 of its value.
Still, she wanted her own house -- a big one, with rental units to offset a mortgage. She'd been living in an apartment in North Bergen, N.J., and had house-hunted all over Manhattan, where she has her practice, as well as Brooklyn and Westchester.
She looked at a bordello in Chelsea and shells in the East Village. Deals fizzled with a sort of sickening regularity. And seven years had gone by.
WALKING though East Harlem that July, Dr. Rott saw this house, which was wearing a belt of blue scaffolding and was so decrepit the address had worn off its brownstone door surround. It was Friday the 13th.
''I stood on the corner and said, 'This is it!' '' Dr. Rott said. ''You can fall for anything, a person, an animal. I fell in love with a house.'' It would be seven months before she even opened its doors.
First she had to find its owner. Good detective work unearthed the nonprofit owner, the Federation of Puerto Rican Organizations of Brownsville, and an agreeable lawyer who parried an offer of $220,000 into a deal at $250,000.
Ms. Rott's own real estate lawyer turned balky and sat on a contract for weeks. When she fired him, she said, she was truly on her own, save for a construction consultant named Alonza Lloyd, a calm and courtly man who favors black polo shirts and moleskin fedoras and has an unusual talent for 11th-hour rescues.
It was Mr. Lloyd whom Dr. Rott called on when she locked herself out or fired a contractor. This is not to suggest that she couldn't handle things herself, as she did recently, when she discovered that someone had vented the dryers in her rental units into insulation wrapped the wrong way around her pipes. (It should come as no surprise that her pipes froze in December. But we're getting ahead of ourselves.)
The next step was to find a mortgage, a complicated process when you don't have a high income and want to buy a wreck. In an effort to revitalize communities and assist those who might not always qualify for a traditional loan, the Department of Housing and Urban Development administers and guarantees loans, offered by banks, in a program called Section 203K.
Eighty percent of his clients, Mr. Lloyd said, choose this program. The closing costs can be high, but you can put as little as three percent down for a purchase.
Dr. Rott's annual income, under $50,000, and the condition of 2099 Fifth Avenue made her and it an ideal match. Which is not to say that Dr. Rott had an easy time finding a bank that would play. By April 2002, she still had no loan, and the nonprofit's lawyer had stopped answering calls.
She ran a title search on the building and unearthed a folder of violations as thick as your arm is long, with some dating as far back as 1917. (Today, a sidewalk violation from 1940 is still plaguing her, Dr. Rott said.)
In June 2002, Dr. Rott learned that the building had been foreclosed on that past December and was at that moment owned by a bank, US Bank Home Mortgage. By July 31, however, she had a loan of $457,000 for the purchase and the renovation, and she had a building. Though it must said that this version of events has been rubbed smooth of many of its actual bumps and crevasses -- the umpteen visits to the Department of Buildings, the checks written, the unanswered phone calls.
Then the work began, and it thrilled her. When the fourth contractor failed to show, Dr. Rott took on that job herself. The workers called her ''metro,'' Spanish for ''meter,'' for the retractable measuring tape she wielded like a billy club.
She bought the lumber herself, and when she found a man to restore the facade, she made him attend a day of restoration school, to learn how to apply brownstone properly. (Dr. Rott went with him, and is now an expert. The facade man has since vanished.)
She bought clean white kitchens at Ikea and trucked them to the building herself, in a rented van. She arose at 5 a.m. in North Bergen to arrive on 129th Street by 7, in time to clean the sidewalk beside the Dumpster of the dead refrigerators, sofas and mattresses from the neighborhood that would appear each evening like lumpy carrion.
At 5:30 each evening, she was in her office on East 66th Street, where she saw patients until 9 p.m. Mr. Lloyd came to the house every day. ''Gitta,'' he'd say, ''don't despair.''
THE house, grand when it was built in 1880, had finished its life as an SRO. There was no thought of restoration, because there was nothing to save. Instead, Dr. Rott planned four new floor-through apartments, with central air-conditioning and washer-dryers and bright pine floors. Her own would be a duplex, with a garden and space for her car out the back.
Two weeks ago, this vision was largely realized, though the interior doors had to be repainted, a plumber had installed the shower surrounds upside down and a neighbor may or may not have been siphoning electricity from an outside outlet. Still, the three rental apartments were beautiful -- the sun poured in, burnishing the bright floors -- though as yet tenantless.
''She's a little bit high,'' explained Marvin Johnson of Benjamin James Associates, one of the brokers listing her two-bedroom units, which Dr. Rott hopes to rent for from $2,300 to $2,500 a month. ''But she's put a lot of her sweat equity into them, and she's proud of what she's done.''
Dr. Rott is also worn out, she said, daydreaming about a full night's sleep and a long vacation. ''One day I can calm down and look back and realize what has taken place,'' she said. ''But not yet, not now.''
Ms. Suggs described the relationship between an owner and a house such as Dr. Rott's as ''possession.''
''We have one client who calls his house 'Precious,' like Smeagol'' in ''The Lord of the Rings,'' she said. ''It's beyond reason.'' Ms. Suggs offered a rough estimate of 2099 Fifth's worth today as well over $1 million.
Would Dr. Rott take it? Not a chance, she said.
Habitats | Harlem
