IF I needed proof that travel has lost its glamour, I got it by watching the first few episodes of ''Airline,'' A&amp;E's new reality series. One happy young couple in shorts and tank tops are judged a little too happy (inebriated) and denied boarding. Instructed to wait for a later flight, they head for the bar. A quiet, bearded man is denied boarding because he smells bad. A patient overweight passenger, required to buy two seats because of his size, ends up waiting 10 hours for a flight home. He observes the airport crowds -- sitting, standing, sleeping, pacing -- and says, ''Is this a zoo or what?''
Longing for the days when air travel wasn't a zoo is nothing new. (When exactly were those days?) While ''Airline,'' which shows the tribulations of airline staff and passengers on Southwest, is a defiantly inelegant ''reality'' show, a look at fictional travel on screen over the years can be instructive. The glamour waxes and wanes over the years, depending on the journey and the mode of transportation.
Ocean liners are almost always good. The passengers on ''Airline'' could take a few cues from Jeremy Irons and Diana Quick in ''Brideshead Revisited,'' who are unfazed when their ship runs into rough seas. While Jeremy's seasick wife takes to her bed, they stroll the wind-swept decks, dress for dinner and have a discreet, tasteful affair.
That part of ''Brideshead'' is set in the 1930's, when some of the screen's most fabulous travel images were made. Consider Charles Boyer and Irene Dunne in ''Love Affair'' (1939), having champagne cocktails and strolling on deck in stunning evening wear. Yes, cruise passengers of 2004, let's remember that there was a time when every night was formal night.
The 1957 remake, ''An Affair to Remember,'' stuck to ship travel, but when Warren Beatty made the 1994 version of ''Love Affair,'' he knew how unlikely it would be for his contemporary characters to be traveling by ship. He involved his lovers-to-be in a plane's forced landing so they'd have an excuse to be at sea.
Today, ships are for recreational cruises, as ABC first showed us in the late 1970's with ''The Love Boat.'' Each week a new group of passengers boarded the Pacific Princess, destined to be involved in a cruise romance or at least a wacky situation. It must have been sad for guest stars like Janet Gaynor and Greer Garson, who remembered the good old days.
The ultimate good ship travel/bad ship travel movie, of course, is ''Titanic'' (1997). The first half of the film shows us opulently furnished suites with private promenade decks and grand dining-room entrances at the head of a spectacular staircase, good enough for Astors and Guggenheims. Even steerage passengers are having a good time, drinking and dancing and, in quieter moments, gazing at the stars.
The film's second half, after the ship strikes an iceberg, is not a good travel experience. The life-saving effort is run by inept, panicked employees who manage to doom hundreds of people who could have fit into the lifeboats. Leonardo DiCaprio is outraged. ''I intend to write a strongly worded letter to the White Star Line about all this,'' he tells Kate Winslet just before he freezes to death in the North Atlantic.
On the other hand, the orchestra does continue playing through it all.
Trains used to look good, too. Have you ever seen a classier group of killers than the ones in ''Murder on the Orient Express''? Once, rail travel was assumed to be so smooth and enjoyable that it could just serve as a pleasant background for a mystery. In ''The Lady Vanishes'' (1938), Dame May Whitty says, ''It's rather like the rush hour on the Underground,'' but she's talking about having to hide in a closet. The compartment she disappears from is nicely appointed with big picture windows, and at teatime the formal dining car is filled with proper Englishmen.
By ''Before Sunrise'' (1995), a lot has changed. At first this looks like a story of young love on a European train, but its plot relies on the trip's unpleasantness. Ethan Hawke and Julie Delpy first make eye contact when both are being driven nuts by a loud, bickering German couple. American Ethan asks French Julie, who is on her way back to Paris, to spend the day and night in Vienna with him. So all the so-called romance takes place far from the tracks.
Bus travel has never had a fabulous image. But if you go back to ''It Happened One Night'' (1934), there was Claudette Colbert, madcap heiress, jumping off daddy's yacht and running off on a night bus to New York.
These are just people getting from place to place in the course of their normal lives. When you add sightseeing to the mix, the image of the American tourist has long been dismal. In ''If It's Tuesday, This Must Be Belgium'' (1969), a busload of American tourists see 9 European countries in 18 days. The travelers are repulsed by Venice's garbage-filled canals, nauseated at the Dutch cheese market and unimpressed with the Swiss ''fondue fling,'' and the worst parts of the trip are the bus rides. Some passengers sleep; others stare blankly, exhausted to the point of stupor.
Which brings to mind jet lag.
Air travel movies started out dealing with drama and danger. In ''Airport'' (1970), the all-star-cast drama about a Boeing 707 with a bomb on board, the bomb explodes in the lavatory, and the pilot (Dean Martin!) tries desperately to land his damaged aircraft. If only the runway they need weren't occupied by a plane stuck in the snow.
Although ''Airport'' strives for grittiness, it's a well-mannered product of a passing era. The Customs agent stops a passenger who has hidden an expensive bracelet underneath her little white dog's collar. (Much nicer than a packet of drugs inside a body cavity.) Even the stowaway (Helen Hayes) wears a hat and gloves.
''Airport'' was satirized as ''Airplane!'' (1980), in which all the passengers who have the fish for dinner get food poisoning. That includes all three men in the cockpit.
"Airplane!" acknowledges some annoyances that aren't the airlines' fault. Before Robert Hays, who has a war-trauma induced fear of piloting, bravely goes into the cockpit, he plays the seatmate who won't shut up, moving from row to row to tell his sad story to various passengers. A couple of them hang themselves.
Sure, you could run into blustering fools on a ship, too, but you'd have plenty of room to get away from them.
Maybe that's the only way we can look at travel today. Instead of reveling in the elegance on screen, we enjoy the fact that we're not going through this stuff ourselves. At least not until our next trip. That could account for the popularity of ''Airline,'' which is already in talks about a second season. Eventually, we have to accept that we're all in this together, folks.
What else are you going to do about rigid (but necessary) security procedures, airport restaurants (which have deteriorated into fast-food stands), long flight delays, tiresome stays on the runway, and a $4 glass of screwtop wine and a bag of pretzels in economy instead of a meal?
If you're looking for a dazzling image of contemporary air travel, you may have to turn to a very bad movie, ''View From the Top'' (2003). In it, Gwyneth Paltrow escapes trailer-park life by becoming a flight attendant for a tacky regional airline; she works her way up to the majors and the New York-Paris route. On her first day of that job, she puts on her understated uniform with the pride of a general. In the terminal, sunlight sparkles through the skylight ceiling, the floors gleam like marble, and even the travelers seem polished and exotic.
Maybe if we all started dressing up again?
Essay ANITA GATES reviews film, television and theater for The Times.
