DOLORES MALONE said the long aisles at the Dix Hills Pathmark were too much for her arthritic knees. Ms. Malone, who admits only to being over 70, said she would lean on the shopping cart as an aid, a trick she learned from her aunt. But while grocery shopping one day five years ago, she saw a scooter-like vehicle, something of a cross between a motorized wheelchair and a golf cart, in the front of the store. Customers could borrow it and ride around the store, loading groceries into the attached basket.
Five years later, Ms. Malone owns her own scooter and uses it everywhere. ''They're very, very freedom giving,'' she said. ''The scooter is unbelievable.''
Many scooters seem user-friendly. In the hands of one first-time scooter operator at a Kmart in Huntington, an Amigo Smart Shopper handled something like an old-fashioned bumper car, with jerky starts and stops. But a practiced driver can make the scooter glide.
A typical scooter can travel up to eight miles per hour, three times the speed of a brisk walk, and carry a person weighing as much as 400 pounds. Some of the ones in retail stores have sensors in their bumpers that trigger a kill switch when they hit something.
Some models are portable. For instance, a Fold &amp; Go can be recharged at any regular household electrical outlet, folds down much like a baby carriage and weighs about 85 pounds fully assembled. That's still too heavy for a frail person to hoist, but a mechanical lift can be installed on the rear of a car, making the scooter quite mobile.
Ms. Malone said she drives her Golden Allante scooter onto a motorized lift attached to the back of her car, then raises the platform off the ground with the push of a button. She has taken the chair on vacations to Hawaii and on a cruise, to catering halls where she rides from the parking lot into the building and to the ceramics shows she often attends. ''It makes things so much easier to scoot around,'' Ms. Malone said.
But the motorized scooters cannot be operated unassisted by people who cannot walk at all. Scooter users have to be able to step into the seat, step out of the car and walk from the parking lot to the building, or at least to the back of the car to unload a personal scooter.
So while personal scooters may be a boon to many, they can also be a tool with which marginally mobile people deny themselves the exercise they need to maintain or improve fitness.
''To use these for convenience, I don't think is appropriate,'' said Dr. Charles A. Cefalu, a professor of geriatric medicine at Louisiana State University. Short walks, he said, help keep muscles from atrophying. ''We tend to shy away from wheelchairs in general,'' he said, ''because the geriatric philosophy is to promote independence.''
Dr. Richard W. Besdine is president of the American Geriatrics Society and interim dean of medicine at Brown University. ''The question is not whether the scooter is useful, but who should be using it,'' he said. ''We are strident advocates for exercise for all older adults. The question is how much exercise can each adult do?''
''If someone lacks the strength and doesn't have access to restorative treatments,'' Dr. Besdine said, ''then it's kind of a hollow argument.'' He also noted that a morbidly obese person would benefit from more exercise, but that ''many of those tragically burdened people can't walk.''
''Such persons are often totally disabled,'' he said. ''To get around a store, it probably makes sense.''
To qualify for Medicare payment for a motorized scooter, a patient must have trouble walking and be too weak to propel a regular wheelchair. Also, the person must be able to operate the controls on a power chair.
''Medicare will not cover the cost of a power wheelchair if the use of the power wheelchair primarily benefits the patient in their pursuit of leisure or recreational activities,'' according to a pamphlet prepared by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. In September, the agency said that inspectors from the Department of Health and Human Services were investigating the proliferation of fraud cases involving falsified documents used to qualify for unneeded medical equipment.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services said that in New York alone, Medicare covered about $15.4 million in power wheelchairs in 2001. By 2002, that figure rose about 50 percent to about $23.9 million.
Loaner vehicles are also much more in evidence. Battery-powered wheelchairs seem like a regular amenity in Long Island big-box stores and supermarkets. Statistics are difficult to come by, but some individual companies keep count. Faith Weiner, a Stop &amp; Shop spokeswoman said that all 342 of its stores in its six-state Northeastern region have the scooters, and that 42 of the scooter-equipped stores are in Nassau and Suffolk. Lena Klofstad, a spokeswoman for Target, said the company's nine stores on Long Island are all scooter equipped.
A Home Depot spokesman, John Simley, said the scooters made their debut in some of its stores about five years ago. As new locations open now, he said, the scooters are typically included among the standard startup necessities, like the ubiquitous Home Depot forklifts. ''It's all about creating access and providing an option,'' Mr. Simley said.
Short of shooing away the obvious joyrider who is aiming to do wheelies, the big-box stores make no effort to decide who really needs to borrow one of their scooters and who is merely taking advantage of a convenience, Mr. Simley said. The only requirement, he said, is that a borrower leave a driver's license or other piece of identification with customer service.
Handicap accessibility can be traced to the Americans With Disabilities Act, enacted July 1990. The act mandated that public places accommodate those with wheelchairs, among other things. Donna Fredericksen, a spokeswoman for the United Spinal Association, said that by providing scooters, retailers are going beyond the requirements of the law.
''I think stores are becoming more savvy that people with disabilities are consumers,'' she said. ''You want them to be a loyal customer and come back again.''
Mr. Simley disavowed any commercial motive behind the scooter service, saying the average Home Depot customer spends a little over $50 but that the company doesn't track spending by scooter operators. ''The scooters aren't there to drive sales,'' he said. ''They're there to improve access. It's not like we said, 'Oh, we can sell more if we do this.''' But he acknowledged that ''we probably wouldn't be able to secure those purchasers if we didn't have the scooter.''
Stacey Robinson, an operations manager at the Home Depot Expo Design Center in Westbury, said the store's two Mart Carts are frequently used in the warmer weather when senior citizens are better able to get about without the fear of falling on the ice. When she first arrived at the store three years ago, two or three times a summer day customers would borrow the scooter, she said. Now, that figure has risen to as much as 20 times a summer day. Sometimes, there's even a wait of maybe 30 minutes or so, until the previous shopper finishes, she said. And sometimes, a store employee will even bring the scooter out to the parking lot for a customer, Ms. Robinson said. Given the increased demand, Ms. Robinson said she's hoping that the store will expand its fleet of scooters. ''That would top off the list,'' she said.
Ms. Robinson recognizes the physical limitations of her aging customers. ''This is a really huge store,'' she said of the 150,000-square-foot building. ''Years ago, you didn't have big stores like this. To walk around and shop is really hard.''
Daniel P. Meuser, president of Pride Mobility Products, a Pennsylvania manufacturer of motorized wheelchairs, said he partly attributes the increased demand to decreasing prices. In the early 90's, he said, many personal scooters sold for $2,400 to $4,000. Today, he said, models are available for as low as $1,400.
''There's very favorable reasons to think the market is going to grow,'' Mr. Meuser said.
Mr. Meuser estimated that about 200,000 units were sold annually in the United States last year, compared to an estimated annual sale of 80,000 in the 1990's.
Medicare payments for motorized wheelchairs increased from $280 million in 1999 to $538 million in 2001. By 2002, the number rose to more than $845 million, and for 2003, the projected figure is $1.2 billion. The number of Medicare beneficiaries who submitted at least one claim for a motorized wheelchair also rose from more than 55,000 in 1999 to almost 159,000 in 2002.
Mary Ellen Buning, an occupational therapist and principal investigator for wheelchair.net, an Internet consumer guide, said that as the scooters have become a familiar sight, it has helped to ''greatly reduce'' the stigma around aids and win over children of the Great Depression and World War II era, who she said often feel shame about their physical condition. To them, using a wheelchair is a sign of weakness, she said. Now that so many stores have them, she said, many have reconsidered.
''They now think, 'Oh yeah, that's just how you get around a big store like that,''' Dr. Buning said. ''I think that's a pretty cool thing, because it's not something people do easy.''
Frieda Farina, 84, said she isn't much of a fan of the scooters in stores. ''They're a little on the clumsy side,'' she said. However, she'd seen a television commercial about five years ago, selling personal portable models. The thought stayed with her until last September, when she decided to buy. Mrs. Farina paid about $3,000 for the Fold &amp; Go, a shiny black chair manufactured by UltraLite Vehicles in New Jersey. Once the weather warms up, she said, she is planning to ride it to the pharmacy and other convenience stores rather than walk the block. But so far, she's only ridden between the living room and the bedroom in her Greenlawn home. ''If you're sitting and you're driving you feel better,'' said Mrs. Farina, who has arthritic knees. ''You're not putting any pressure on your knees.''
Susan J. Harty, the division head of the Town of Huntington's Senior Citizens Office, said the scooters help promote independence. One regular at the town's senior center recently purchased one, she said. As Ms. Harty sees it: ''It really makes a difference. It really has given her more independence. She doesn't have to wait for her son.''
Long Island
