IN the Lieberman family's newly built home in Dix Hills, 7-year-old Matthew has his own bedroom suite. This is not something that every child in his neighborhood is guaranteed. Rather, it reflects an option that Matthew's parents, Steven and Tracy Lieberman, added when they contracted for the house.
Builders of new homes say they are offering more and more options in their developments, and like the Liebermans, more buyers are accepting.
The Liebermans' 4,700-square-foot home on 1.7 acres is one of 42 houses being custom built by Spectrum Communities in a 52-acre development called Legends at Half Hollow. The unsold homes currently range in price from $1.6 million to $2.8 million.
Mr. Lieberman, 40, said he had paid $1.29 million for his house and an extra $100,000 for options, which included adding a fifth bedroom that he incorporated with an adjoining bedroom with its own bathroom.
''We knocked down the wall partway between the two bedrooms and gave Matthew a mini-suite, which is part bedroom and part open space with a desk, table and play area,'' Mr. Lieberman said. There are two other bedrooms for Matthew's 5-year-old twin sisters, Sydney and Jamie.
The Liebermans' other options include a gym, nine-seat theater with a 100-inch screen, a 2,500-square-foot stone patio and a 3,600-foot concrete sports court.
The couple does not hold a mortgage, thanks to a fortunate string of home purchases in the last decade, said Mr. Lieberman, who is a principal in two Manhattan clothing companies.
He explained that in 1993 he purchased a 1,200-square-foot apartment on East 32nd Street in Manhattan for $375,000 and sold it five years later for $600,000. He then purchased a four-bedroom ranch on an acre and a quarter in Sands Point in Nassau County for $900,000 and sold it five years later for $1.8 million.
''This allowed me to buy this house with no mortgage,'' he said. ''I have peace of mind and there are plenty of children for my children to play with. This house is probably the plateau; it is a beautiful house and the comfort level is incredible.''
While the mortgage-less Liebermans are a rarity among home buyers, their decision to add thousands of dollars worth of custom features is typical of an increasing number of new home buyers.
Long Island's major builders of single family homes, which have their own design centers, say there are more options available today than just two years ago. And these are not limited to very upscale developments; builders of lower-priced new homes are also offering more choices.
Depending on the size and sophistication of equipment, options like entertainment centers and exercise areas have become common in all price ranges, while features like hidden ''safe rooms'' are primarily offered in the luxury market range.
Mitchell C. Hochberg, chief executive of Spectrum Communities, which is based in Valhalla in Westchester, said, ''The options are a convergence of many things; people are focusing on home more, staying at home more and working from home more.''
The home theater option can cost as little as $5,000 for a plasma screen television with a high-tech sound system and as much as $250,000 for a room with 18 velvet theater-style seats and a 12-foot screen, Mr. Hochberg said.
At Spectrum's Encore at Atlantic Shores in Eastport -- a gated community of 240 attached two-unit buildings for people 55 and over that are selling for $450,000 -- home theaters are being put in family rooms or in expanded loft space.
''Philosophically,'' said David Dubinsky, the principal of D3 Architecture in Hauppauge, ''you could say that the television media age has come of age, and now there is a dedicated room for the television.''
Mr. Dubinsky designs single-family homes that range from 7,000 square feet to 19,000 and from $1.5 million to $10 million, with customization that could add another $500,000 to $1 million, he said.
ACCORDING to builders, another commonly chosen option for all market levels is exercise rooms. ''Depending on the equipment, they can range from $25,000 to $250,000,'' said Gabe Pasquale, Spectrum's chief marketing officer. ''Each year, more people are doing it. At Encore, there is a spa in the clubhouse, but many people like to do some exercising in privacy and use the clubhouse for its equipment and social venue.''
In the past two years, 25 percent of the home buyers at the Westbury-based Holiday Organization's newest community -- the Hamlet at Willow Creek -- have added a large number of extras, said Ron Bloomfield, Hamlet's director of sales. The community of 177 single-family homes priced at $650,000 to $750,000 is being built around an 18-hole golf course in Mount Sinai.
''There are considerably more things available, and personalization is a very effective sales tool,'' he said. ''More people are putting in ponds and the newest feature is the 'outdoor living room,' '' with barbecue pits built onto patios that are up to 20 by 30 feet and sometimes with glass walls so they can be seen from inside the house.
The newest development by the Jericho-based Beechwood Organization, which builds homes for all price ranges, is Country Pointe at Coram: 240 town house units averaging 2,000 square feet each, which sell for $320,000 with monthly maintenance fees in the low $300's.
''Many of the residents are upgrading the interiors,'' said Kathy Sheck, director of merchandising and design. ''The options people are choosing often reflect their travels, such as the limestone floors seen in Arizona or Florida. Also, many are working from home and turning loft space into offices and want built-in work stations.''
At Country Pointe at Dix Hills, a community of 73 homes of 4,500 to 5,800 square feet and selling for up to $1.7 million, homeowners are adding two-sided indoor-outdoor fireplaces, lap pools and fountains and spending up to $150,000 to upgrade their kitchens, Ms. Sheck said. ''The many new cooking shows on television have inspired more people to cook, so some homes now have two kitchens in one, with men's and women's sides, including two dishwashers and two stoves,'' she added.
A popular option at Beechwood's Lake Grove community of 27 single-family homes, which sell in the mid-$500,000's, is a 12-by-16-foot glass sunroom with a basement. More than half the buyers are putting in the $25,000 addition, said Joyce Skarka, the director of sales and marketing.
Beechwood will start work this spring on Country Pointe at Medford, where 74 single family homes will sell in the high $300,000's.
An option that is increasing in upscale homes is a ''safe room,'' which is outfitted so that people can lock themselves in for safety, Mr. Hochberg said. The rooms, which have no windows, are sometimes as large as 15 by 20 feet and cost $100,000 to $300,000. They have telephone lines, refrigerators and heating and cooling systems.
''The trick is that no one knows that it is there,'' Mr. Hochberg said. ''It can be located within a closet, in the basement or hidden over a garage. It has a steel door and only the owner has a key.
''We are getting a lot of people asking about them. It's the world we live in these days with planes canceled because of terrorism and also affluent clientele afraid of kidnapping and burglary,'' he said.
OTHER popular features noted by builders include alcoves set aside for special purposes, like computer stations, and climate-controlled wine storage areas, including rooms built like stone caves.
Closet organizing systems, which have evolved over the years, now transcend many markets, ranging from $4,000 for an 8-by-10-foot closet to $75,000 for a 20-by-20, Mr. Hochberg said. At the high end, they may have islands with granite tops and built-in safes.
According to Mr. Bloomfield, another new option trend is ''built ins'' -- wood cabinetry that serves as entertainment and wine centers. ''They are not just furniture anymore,'' he said.
Builders say lots of trim and custom moldings have become popular, a feature that is a sign of the times, according to Mr. Dubinsky. He explained: ''There was a period in history between World War II and 1970 when design was not as indulgent, there were a lot of modern tract houses. Then things in the 1980's switched to modern with a historical twist, which was stunning and original but didn't age well.
''So we are moving back to the 19th century, where the old homes aged nicely with gaps covered by detailed moldings. Today, many people want authentically historic houses, which require features such as intricate crown moldings and detailed tiles.
''The retail market is responding and putting a lot out there, and the amount of accouterments available now that were not just a few years ago is phenomenal,'' he said.
In the Region | Long Island
