BISTRO M has put Glen Head on Long Island's culinary map. The restaurant's stylish, contemporary American food has turned a cozy cafe situated in a quaint cottage alongside the railroad tracks into a dining destination. That food is among the best being served on the Island today.
The man responsible for this diners' delight is Mitchell SuDock, the chef and co-owner. (Neil M. Frank is another owner.) Most recently, Mr. SuDock was the chef de cuisine at Mirabelle in St. James. Before that he cooked at Gotham Bar &amp; Grill and Gramercy Tavern in Manhattan. He learned his lessons well at those renowned spots, and now, at his own place, is pulling out all the stops.
The tiny Bistro M has a simple, straightforward décor featuring dark wood wainscoting, creamy stucco walls, a few large mirrors and pictures of Parisian street scenes.
The service staff looks casual in their blue shirts and bistro aprons tied at the waist but is a hardworking, professional crew, and these agreeable, efficient waiters were mere acolytes for the food and the pleasant, cozy atmosphere was a backdrop for it. Superb food is the headliner at Bistro M.
Each dish was a present, slowly unwrapped to reveal a variety of delights. Take the appetizer of grilled quail. The small, succulent birds were only part of the story. They were placed upon a terrific frisée salad laced with creamy goat cheese and marinated oyster mushrooms in a smoky, bacon vinaigrette.
Another pleasure was the starter of house-smoked trout. The fish was perfect, as was everything else in the salad: pickled beets, watercress, endive, paper-thin slices of quince, a touch of onion-sour cream and a pecan vinaigrette. One evening, when a diner requested the pecan dressing on the side, the kitchen sent out a second sauce boat holding a lemon vinaigrette, which also married well.
Even the mixed green salad was not a bore. It contained sprigs of dill and other fresh herbs, turning every other bite into a taste sensation.
The chef punctuates a number of dishes with citrus at this time of year. A blood orange and pomegranate marmalade was a tangy foil for a rich foie gras appetizer. Golden beets and crisply fried shallots added other flavors and textures.
Thin slices of Meyer lemon fried in a filigree tempura batter were a garnish for a splendid slab of black sea bass, which fell into ivory flakes at the touch of a fork. The crispy roasted chicken sat upon a bed of creamy polenta given a flavor boost by lemon. A memorable black pepper-glazed rack of lamb was enhanced by a clementine marmalade and accompanied by homey smashed rutabaga and Swiss chard.
A ramekin of braised beef short ribs and caramelized onions paired with slices of sirloin steak and a roasted garlic potato cake had a meat-and-potatoes-man singing its praises, but the dish I'd go back for is the roasted monkfish. There was nothing wrong with the fish, but it was its accompaniments that pushed this creation into greatness. The fish was perched on a warm-the-heart hash of short ribs, bone marrow and potatoes. Parsnips and whole roasted shallots dotted its Bordelaise sauce. A topper of lighter-than-air salsify fritters completed this winner.
All the desserts got thumbs up. Meyer lemons put in an encore appearance in a lush lemon-raspberry parfait. The raspberry component consisted of a gelatin with the texture of Jell-O but the intense flavor of fresh berries. It was covered with a tangy lemon mousse and a sprinkle of toasted almonds. The satiny goat cheese panna cotta sitting on a shortbread cookie with a warm dried fruit-red wine compote got high marks, as did a gooey chocolate-caramel tart placed upon a passion fruit coulis.
I have only a few quibbles. Some tables set for two are situated in snug corners and are cramped. And the noise level, which is usually comfortable, walks the line between tolerable and intrusive when the restaurant is full.
Bistro M  70 Glen Head Road, Glen Head (516)671-2498
Excellent
ATMOSPHERE -- Small, simple, cozy cottage with contemporary American food.  SERVICE -- Just right.  SOUND LEVEL -- A bit loud when full.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Grilled quail, smoked trout, mixed green salad, foie gras, short rib-sirloin combination, roast chicken, rack of lamb, black sea bass, roasted monkfish, all desserts.  WINE LIST -- Nine wines by the glass ($7 to $13). An international list of 40 still wines ($22 to $96) with a quarter at $30 or lower.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers $7 to $18 (foie gras); entrees $21 to $29; desserts $7.50.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards.  HOURS -- 5:30 to 10 p.m. Sunday, Monday, Wednesday and Thursday, till 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday. Closed Tuesday.  RESERVATIONS -- Essential.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- One step at entrance. Restrooms not accessible.
REVIEWED BY THE TIMES -- Feb. 15, 2004.
RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING OUT lidining@nytimes.com
