''AT 62, it had never occurred to me to date,'' Terrence McNally said, ''but God had other plans.''
And that was only one of them.
Mr. McNally, now 65, is one of the theater's most acclaimed, and durable, playwrights. His first play, ''. . . And Things That Go Bump in the Night,'' opened on Broadway in 1965, and in the last 10 years he has won four Tony Awards -- two for best play (''Love! Valour! Compassion!'' and ''Master Class'') and two for best book of a musical (''Kiss of the Spider Woman'' and ''Ragtime''). Tomorrow, his ''Stendhal Syndrome,'' two one-act plays about the transformative powers of art, starring Isabella Rossellini and Richard Thomas, will open at Primary Stages.
If the transformative powers of art sounds a bit grand, then you have probably never seen a play by Mr. McNally. His characters are the ones on a field trip who can't wait for lunch. They love Maria Callas, but love to fight even more. They make jokes and mistakes and, whether gay or straight, have plenty of sex, or at least try to. Last season, in a Broadway revival of ''Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune,'' Edie Falco and Stanley Tucci spent some of their time onstage completely nude.
In his own life, Mr. McNally had been lucky in love -- from his first serious relationship, when he was 19 and a sophomore at Columbia University, with Edward Albee, which lasted seven years, to more recently, his loving 10-year partnership with the playwright Gary Bonasorte, until his death from AIDS-related lymphoma in November 2000. Since then, Mr. McNally has embarked on quite a journey -- as they say in acting class.
In 2001, using the tickets he and Mr. Bonasorte had bought together, Mr. McNally fulfilled a lifelong dream and traveled to Macchu Picchu. Before he left, he participated in a panel discussion, ''Theater From a Gay Perspective,'' at Guild Hall in East Hampton, N.Y., with Mr. Albee, Lanford Wilson and Tom Kirdahy, a public-interest lawyer.
Within three months of his trip, three things happened. Mr. McNally's mother died. Mr. McNally and Mr. Kirdahy began a relationship. And Mr. McNally was diagnosed with lung cancer. In the two years since, he has survived two major surgeries and is currently cancer-free. Last December, he and Mr. Kirdahy went to Vermont and affirmed their partnership in a civil union ceremony.
For someone who is a lifelong opera buff (he has appeared regularly on the Metropolitan Opera radio quiz for the last 25 years), Mr. McNally's life had gotten a little too operatic. On a gray day last month, he sat in his Greenwich Village apartment and talked for more than two hours about where he finds himself now. He looked as handsome as ever, with his big baby blues and broad cheekbones, and his color was vibrant and healthy. For the first 20 minutes, his words came in a rush and he spoke without stopping -- a variation on a monologue, it is easy to imagine, some character will one day speak. Or sing.
''As far as the doctors are concerned, to be cancer-free you have to wait five years, that's the magic number,'' he began, seated in front of the fireplace in his two-story living room. ''I did smoke very heavily and I stopped 25 years ago. No doctor will ever say absolutely, but mine was the cancer most commonly associated with heavy smokers. They found it during a routine physical. They told me it was malignant, and I was so startled. I never felt healthier in my life. I had to be at Sloan-Kettering at 6 a.m. for surgery and I took the subway. I was trying to make it a normal day.
''Was it a life-changing experience? Yes, it was. I think I'm more overwhelmed now than I was at first. You go into such a survival mode. Was I scared? No. I want to get well. I know nothing about the human body so I do what the doctor says. That's a point of maturity, realizing other people know what they're doing. I now leave directing to the director and acting to the actor. I'm aware of being a cancer survivor but it hasn't changed my view of life. Not once have I thought, 'What is the point, I won't be here next year.' My new role model is Lance Armstrong.'' His smile was wry.
''His first book, 'It's Not About the Bike,' was very helpful,'' he went on. ''The surgery, the hospital, is the easy part. But then every time you get a chill, you think, 'Is it coming back?' I lost one partner to AIDS and a lot of friends, but I never understood my own mortality. I do think of death in a way I didn't before. I'm still afraid, though maybe a little less so. I'm afraid of the sheer pain of it.''
''After the second surgery, I went to London for the opening of 'The Full Monty,' '' he continued, referring to the Broadway musical for which he wrote the book. ''It was way too soon. I wanted to get away from cancer, from Sloan-Kettering. But it was less than two weeks, and the minute we landed, I went to the hospital. A lung had collapsed on the plane. A couple of times I thought I would suffocate. My father died of emphysema 20 years ago. That's a horrible death. I love life so much. I'm so happy to experience the beauty and wonder and the people. How can you not want to be here forever? I don't mind growing old. Well, I'd like my hair back.
''I may be in the first scene of my third act. I thought it had all been first act but I guess there was a second act in there somewhere. I have a fear that I won't go with dignity and grace. I'm afraid of being afraid.''
A HUGE cracking sound permeated the apartment. Mr. McNally, who sat facing the window, didn't flinch. ''They're doing work on the parapet, and rocks or cement is hitting the air-conditioner,'' he said. The sounds went on as Mr. McNally spoke, providing an otherworldly soundtrack to the Perils of Terrence. Sometimes, there were only slight showers of gravel. Or louder, more contained explosions. Then big, booming crashes. That was some air-conditioner.
In the wake of his illness it is hard not to think of the characters in ''Love! Valour! Compassion!'' who collectively face the audience while each one says how he will die. ''That is no longer an act of the imagination,'' Mr. McNally said slowly. ''I can empathize as a writer with a lot of things. Now I own my own mortality. I was with Gary for 10 years, I worshiped Gary. Then, at 62, I met a wonderful man. I believe Gary sent Tom to me somehow. There has to be some purpose. Everything is conspiring to say, 'Get well and be a cancer survivor, not a cancer victim.'
''When Tom and I got married in Vermont, I was so struck at how different it made me feel about him and us. We went up there as a political gesture, but I never thought I would feel more committed, more deeply in love, more safe. When you read classic wedding vows, they're pretty profound. I said, 'Let's have an ad-lib section but limit it to 250 words apiece.' That was more for me. I could have gone on and on.''
Nathan Lane, a longtime friend of Mr. McNally's, who has appeared in many of his plays, said by phone: ''Considering what he'd already been through emotionally, with Gary dying, I couldn't believe the illness came on top of it. But Terrence is a very classy guy and got through it amazingly. I mean, he came out of it with a boyfriend, he's rather resourceful. No, really, he had met this great guy, what, a few months before he was diagnosed, and he said, 'You may not want to go through this with me,' and Tom being the person he is said, 'Of course I want to.' I think they bonded in a way that would probably take other couples years to do. Terrence has great strength, and I think he displayed remarkable grace in a very difficult situation.''
The bliss Mr. McNally had experienced in his professional life during the 1990's was similarly interrupted in 1998 when the Manhattan Theater Club canceled its production of his play ''Corpus Christi,'' in which Mr. McNally (who was raised a Roman Catholic) portrayed Jesus and his apostles as contemporary gay men. After vociferous protests by theater artists -- Athol Fugard withdrew his own play -- the theater reinstated the production.
''Ward Morehouse wrote in The New York Post that Christ was onstage having sex with the apostles, and that there was nudity,'' Mr. McNally said. ''The play never had either, so it was an unfair controversy, based on a total lie. It's a rather sexless play, but it said that gay men and women can be a part of this story, which traditionally excludes us. I did not think it was an act of blasphemy. No one admits to homophobia, so they have to say something else.''
Still, the death threats Mr. McNally received were significant enough that, during the run of the play, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's office provided him with security. Since then, however, he seems to have lost the security he enjoyed for 15 years as the unofficial playwright in residence at Manhattan Theater Club. ''The Lisbon Traviata,''  ''Lips Together, Teeth Apart'' and ''Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune'' were all produced there first. But after ''Corpus Christi,'' Lynne Meadow, the theater's artistic director, rejected Mr. McNally's new play, ''Dedication,'' which she had asked him to write to open the theater's inaugural season in its new home at the Biltmore Theater on Broadway.
''It's a touchy subject,'' Mr. McNally said. ''Our phone call was very short and very emotional for me. I said, 'That's pretty serious,' and she said, 'I'm sorry, that's how I feel.' ''
A theater executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that after the play's rejection, Mr. McNally wrote a ''scathing'' letter to Ms. Meadow.
Mr. McNally would not comment on the contents of the letter.
Ms. Meadow, whose season at the Biltmore so far has been tabloid fodder -- losing Jasmine Guy from ''The Violet Hour'' after she became disoriented onstage; Mary Tyler Moore quitting ''Rose's Dilemma,'' a play that Ms. Meadow directed, in a dispute with its author, Neil Simon -- said by phone: ''I really don't want to talk about 'Dedication.' I read a draft and did not feel it was ready for production. But I'm on the record as looking forward to working with Terrence in the future.''
Mr. McNally responded: ''Every first draft I know of needs lots of changes. But Manhattan Theater Club is not high on my radar screen right now.''
Indeed, ''Dedication,'' about high school teachers who run a children's theater in upstate New York, will be produced at the Williamstown Theater Festival next summer. Mr. McNally has also taken a commission to write a play for the New Conservatory Theater in San Francisco, and he is developing a new play at the Sundance Institute.
''The Stendhal Syndrome,'' directed by Leonard Foglia, will inaugurate the new home of Primary Stages, 59E59 Theaters, on East 59th Street. (The title refers to an erotic, rather than intellectual, response to art.) The first play, ''Full Frontal Nudity,'' written in 2002, follows a tour guide in Italy (Ms. Rossellini) who takes a group of Americans to see Michelangelo's ''David''; the second, ''Prelude and Liebestod'' (written in 1993 and extensively reworked since then), reveals the thoughts of a world-famous conductor (Mr. Thomas), as he reviews his life while conducting excerpts from Wagner's ''Tristan and Isolde.''
''The Stendhal Syndrome'' will be the first production that neither of Mr. McNally's parents will see. Originally from New York, they relocated to Corpus Christi, Tex., where his father was a beer distributor. ''When I was growing up, they went every year to Manhattan and I knew theater was something special,'' Mr. McNally said. ''There were always cast albums in the house.''
As for his own plays, he said: ''They got through them and didn't disown me. My father could never say anything was great. And my mother had the ability to make everything about herself. When I complained after the bad reviews of 'Corpus Christi,' she said: 'Well, how do you think I feel? I'm so embarrassed by the reviews, I can't even go out of the house.' Not, 'How are you feeling, can you go out of your house?' '' He threw up his hands and laughed. ''Oh, parents,'' he said, though he added, ''Actually, when she saw 'Corpus Christi,' she said she was very moved by it.''
The daylight had begun to fade and after talking for so long, Mr. McNally seemed a bit tired.
He doesn't think the catastrophic year, as he calls it, has had much impact on his writing. ''I became aware when I was listening to 'Stendhal Syndrome' that there has not been a sudden change,'' he said. ''It's death, sex, love, loss, maybe a little more differently felt. When I'm writing I try not to think in terms of themes. But I think I write about the difficulty of people connecting as they're trying to find hope, trying to find their way to real love and commitment.''
''Hope,'' he repeated, looking out of the window, where the crashes had stopped. ''I'm trying to find my way to a sincerely earned hope.''
THEATER
