ONE of Long Island's enduring struggles is the defense of nature and vestiges of our rich agrarian heritage against the inevitable march of suburban development.
I strongly favor preserving our precious pine barrens, shoreline and dwindling farmland. But I must confess that my preservationist spirit masks another, less apparent but equally righteous natural urge: a male predilection -- indeed, a dad's imperative -- to take his children out for a Sunday drive and show them the countryside. To my mind, it's a fundamental American right, up there with bearing arms and paying below retail.
My love of the idyllic country drive goes way back. Growing up in Pennsylvania's Amish country, my siblings and I were packed into our Plymouth station wagon on many a Sunday and driven around countryside where farmers had all too recently cleaned out their pig sties and spread the residue thickly over the fields.
''Pee-yoo!'' my sister and I complained from the rumble seat.
''That's just fresh country air,'' our father replied with a peaceful smile, his window wide open. ''Fresh country air.''
When I became a dad in the early 90's, I could hardly wait to strap baby seats into our Honda Accord and continue this family tradition. It was understandably more difficult to simulate the countryside experience in Nassau County, but with the help of a map, some location scouting and a few strategically timed distractions and commentaries, I found it could be done.
Our Sunday drive ''through the countryside'' began in our vinyl-sided neighborhood in Syosset, but as we entered Jericho and turned onto the meandering Old Jericho Turnpike, we really turned the clocks back. Our first stop was the Jericho Friends Meeting House and cemetery, set in a lovely grove of oak trees. Never mind that the bucolic grounds were sandwiched between a motel and a complex of modern office buildings. It was a magical place to search for the gravestones of the Quaker preacher Elias Hicks (d. 1830) and his wife Jemima (d. 1829), of the prominent local family that put the Hicks in Hicksville. The graveyard was also a great place for collecting acorns and their little hats.
Next we ventured down the lane to the Malcolm family farm. We parked by a red barn with a wavy roof, a picturesque structure that begged to be captured in oil on canvas before the next stiff wind sent it tumbling to the ground. There, in a sun-dappled meadow, was a menagerie of cows, horses, goats, ducks and chickens, all commingling in a utopian vision of the harmonious barnyard.
''We're here!'' I shouted. ''This is the farm!'' We unleashed our daughters, who had a ball petting the inquisitive goats that stuck their necks through the fence, mooing at the poker-faced cows and chasing the clucking chickens as they scurried about. ''Ah, country life!'' I exclaimed.
Our next stop was the aromatic Jericho Cider Mill, just up the road. Apples have been pressed there since 1820, though today their craggy apple trees are just for show (employees gladly tell you their apples come mostly from the Hudson Valley). Still, there's no mistaking the country freshness of their Winesaps and Macs, nor the crisp flavor of their cider, which is pressed in small batches every two days.
''Taste this cider!'' I urged my daughters. ''You don't get that kind of sweetness anywhere but here in the country.''
In fact, the Cider Mill with its wonderful sign (''Live Happley Appley'') lies on a busy stretch of Route 106, but if you screen out the heavy traffic along with the McMansions popping up on the east side of the route and direct your children's attention westward to the remaining horse farms on the Old Brookville side (''Horsey, horsey, nei-ei-ei-gh!''), you can all but imagine that you're part of a Currier &amp; Ives scene.
Several years into our ''country drives,'' we ventured off Route 106 into the web of small lanes on the Muttontown side to the east. Muttontown is named for the sheep that were raised there in great numbers, and once, while riding my bike past spacious homes with horse paddocks and tennis courts, I had spied two sheep grazing. Now fuzzy on the exact location of the ''last of the Muttontown flock,'' I stopped to consult my well-worn local map from the Syosset Fire Department. My wife and daughters were increasingly impatient.
''I think this may be the place,'' I said, tentatively.
''Dad, we're in someone's driveway,'' said one daughter.
''Oh, they don't mind,'' I replied. ''Out here in the country, folks are mighty friendly.''
''Country?'' remarked our other daughter. ''They have a security camera. Can we, like, leave?''
''There were sheep here, I tell ya, sheep!'' I insisted, though I began to wonder if my woolly sighting had been a side effect of a ''pedaler's high.''
We never found the Muttontown sheep that day, and the petting farm now is sadly animalless. But despite the growing skyline of McMansions along our well-worn route, we still venture out for hot mulled cider and then explore a country road. And, tuning out the complaints of daughters who now are older, more blasé and less game for a ''ride in the country,'' I open my window and breathe in. ''Yep!'' I say, my voice lost under the thumping beat of Z-100. ''That's fresh country air!''
OUT OF ORDER E-mail: liorder@nytimes.com
