'Inner Self'
Omni Gallery, 333 Earle Ovington Boulevard, Uniondale, (516)589-3093. Through Feb. 27.
If art reflects individual preoccupations, why should others be interested?
This question was asked of the abstract expressionists, whose subjective imagery was often considered too personal to be universally relevant. By re-framing the problem in the context of the human body, the artists in this group show -- Felicia Megginson, Pam Cooper and Naomi Grossman -- aim to use the inner self as a metaphor for broader concerns to which others can relate.
In Ms. Megginson's chromogenic and gelatin silver prints, photographs of her own feet, face and hands are superimposed on landscape details to emphasize the unity of her spirit and that of natural elements. One example from her ''Permutations'' series equates tree roots emerging from the soil with her toes; both extremities support the unseen structure above. Another shows her face amid flowering tree branches, and another compares her breath to clouds.
Each image reinforces the notion that human development cannot be separated from the forces of nature.
Ms. Cooper's mixed-media collages rely on memory to trigger recognition. Old dress patterns, their ephemeral tissue fastened with rusted pins, are templates for conformity to family and social norms.
In ''Mementoes: Party Dress,'' a fabric pattern is etched in rusty pin heads that both define the image and anchor it like a butterfly specimen. By actually pinning down what she wants to examine, the artist exposes it to deeper scrutiny, inviting viewers to compare their histories to her own.
Ms. Grossman's wire constructions might be described literally as body language. Woven into the shapes of figures and domestic objects, they comprise words and phrases that express unspoken thoughts and feelings. They symbolize neural networks transmitting a barrage of data aimed at communicating fundamental needs -- for love, comfort, attention -- that resonate even when all externals have been stripped away.
'Un-ordinary Forms'
Icehouse Gallery, 414 First Street, Greenport, (631)477-0745. Through Feb. 28.
Why not call them extraordinary forms? Perhaps because the three artists in this group show -- David Melrose, Trefny Dix and Bengt Hokanson -- base their work on mundane objects and common materials, keeping them recognizable but assigning them new roles.
Mr. Melrose uses chemical beakers, wire grids and other simple equipment to force plants into unnatural growth patterns. His witty ''Biospheres for Examining Adverse Occupancy'' pair desert cacti with plants that normally grow in less arid zones, obliging them to coexist, however uncomfortably, in close quarters. His wall-mounted ''Untitled, Portrait No.2,'' requires grass to grow at right angles to the wall, jutting out like a green beard that is periodically trimmed.
Mr. Melrose's work tests the limits of manipulation, questioning how far humans can push nature in artificial situations.
Like ''Gift,'' Man Ray's tack-studded flatiron, Mr. Dix's improbable objects seem at once playful and subversive. Based on combs and brushes, they look vaguely useful from a distance, but up close they reveal their true character. With bristles made of pencil points, nails and birthday candles, and bodies of translucent textured glass, they have an otherworldly quality that is both curious and captivating.
Mr. Hokanson also works in glass; his scale is far from intimate. His largest piece is an untitled triptych of hanging cubes -- one metal, one wood, one glass -- that expresses the same form in three different materials.
Two wall-mounted constructions expand on the theme by contrasting strips of twisted glass with the organic solidity of old barn beams. The glass spirals nestle like burnt offerings in the wood's charred hollows. The elements themselves may be ordinary, but the combination lifts them into another realm.
'Artists at Play'
Solar Gallery, 132 North Main Street, East Hampton, (631)907-8422. Through March 31.
To brighten the short winter days, the gallery has assembled a group of works intended primarily for amusement and delight.
Patricia Quevedo's acrylic paintings are derived from the game of dominoes, in which rectangles are arranged in linear strings. But here the format provides a loose framework for vibrant variations, using brilliant colors and nervous lines to create eccentric patterns that lead the eye in a merry dance across patchwork surfaces.
A series of watercolors by Abdul Vas endows chickens with personality traits that are both whimsical and slightly menacing. Stylized to the point of caricature, the birds puff up their elaborately decorated bodies and stick out their forked tongues in displays of barnyard bravado. Reinaldo Crespo's drawings of cavorting roosters, on the other hand, are rendered with minimal strokes that emphasize the creatures' innate vitality.
Moses Ros reduces the forms of tree trunks, branches and leaves to a few geometric elements. His ''Tree of Hope,'' a small welded bronze sculpture, recalls a stabile by Alexander Calder, who also knew how to translate organic forms into abstract equivalents. Pier Capecchi's ''Playful Insects,'' made of recycled found objects, hark back to toys like ''Mr. Potato Head,'' in which unlikely combinations yield fanciful results.
ART REVIEWS
