WHEN did travel become such a bleeping ordeal? And a jingling, and chirping, and William Tell-Overturing ordeal, too? It seems that wherever you go, someone's phone is ringing, someone is talking, and the civility of daily life is evaporating in the grating, one-sided cell chatter.
''The obliviousness of a few to the fact that they are the only ones within shouting distance who are shouting the details of their meeting, commute, children's homework and other fascinating personal minutiae never ceases to amaze,'' said Phillip Pillar, a tax consultant who lives in Philadelphia and is a regular passenger on Amtrak's Acela trains to Washington.
Increasingly, museums and galleries are telling visitors to turn their phones off, and ''quiet cars'' are catching on for train travel. In 1999, regulars on the early-morning train from New York to Washington asked for a place where they could nap in peace, said Dan Stessel, a spokesman for Amtrak. Designated ''quiet cars'' were put into service in January 2000.
According to a recent study released by the Lemelson-M.I.T. Program, a nonprofit organization that celebrates inventors and inventions, nearly a third of adults call the cellphone the invention that they most hate but cannot live without. Cellphones took the top ranking in the program's annual Invention Index study, edging out the alarm clock (25 percent) and the television (23 percent).
On the other hand, Mark Rasch, a computer security consultant who lives in Washington, said that being able to use a cellphone is a large part of the reason that he takes Amtrak to New York. ''I do business on the train,'' he said. ''You never know when your phone is going to ring.''
Although many commuters take the train for similar reasons, Amtrak has recently taken steps to ensure that travelers can find a quiet car on every Acela train, Mr. Stessel said, and on Metroliner and regional trains on weekdays. There are also quiet cars on trains between Sacramento and Emeryville, Calif., near Oakland.
Incivility runs both ways, however, and sometimes rules are enforced tyrannically, with glares and shushing that can be as rude as cellphone chatter. Last July -- during Cellphone Courtesy Month, deliciously enough -- a passenger on an Amtrak train grabbed another passenger's cellphone and smashed it to pieces, Mr. Stessel said. Still, he insisted that such extreme cases are rare: ''I can count those incidents on one hand,'' he said.
Mr. Pillar said that he often takes the quiet car because it has more seats available, and finds that he can answer an occasional call by quietly using his earphone, ''without incurring the wrath of fellow passengers,'' he said.
On airplanes, too, some passengers push cellphone use to the limit. Federal regulations require that users turn the devices off when the plane door closes, and not turn them on again until the plane has landed.
But many passengers keep talking long after the door has shut, said Sara Dela Cruz, a spokeswoman for the Association of Flight Attendants who works for United Airlines. ''Sometimes it's innocent,'' she said. ''They are oblivious to what's going on, because they are wrapped up in the conversation. Other times they are blatantly disregarding the announcements, and the law.''
She recalled a passenger several years ago who got into a loud argument with a flight attendant who told him to turn off his cellphone at the beginning of a flight. But that was only the first sign of trouble from that passenger, who also smoked in the bathroom during the flight and, at one point, began to strip. ''As it turned out later, he was under the influence of several different things,'' she said.
That incident occurred in the friendlier skies before 9/11, Ms. Dela Cruz said. These days, much smaller infractions can lead to trouble. ''People who do not comply with the direction of the flight attendants are putting themselves in jeopardy of being looked at as a person who is a risk to the flight,'' she said. That means that when a passenger refuses to hang up, ''flight attendants are going to take this behavior seriously,'' she said.
On the ground, the volume of cellphone conversations continues to soar. But some museums say that they have been able to keep the problem under control with a well-placed sign and a gentle word.
At the Alamo, for example, there is a wordless sign with a picture of a cellphone in a slashed circle at the hostess's desk.
''Most of the time, it's not a problem,'' said Kathleen Carter, the chairman of the Alamo Committee of the Daughters of the Republic of Texas, which runs the site. ''It is a shrine,'' she said. ''It has that whole aura about it.''
New Yorkers, apparently, do not easily come by that sense of awe. So the City Council stepped in last year, passing a law banning the use of cellphones during public performances, including plays, movies and concerts, and in galleries and museums. Silence isn't merely golden -- it's the law.
JOHN SCHWARTZ reports on business news for The Times.
