FOR those monitoring the health of beaches on the East End, this has been the winter of deepest discontent. The seasonal onslaught of winter storms has been especially damaging to some of the Hamptons' prime stretches of oceanfront, particularly west of the Shinnecock Inlet, including the Village of Quogue, where some beachfront houses are within 50 feet of the high tide line and have lost decks and walkways. Residents fear the houses may be the next to go.
''The northeaster in early December hit us hard, and that started the downward spiral at the shore,'' said Quogue's mayor, George Motz. ''About 12 or 15 homeowners got pretty nervous at the bad start winter had, then January turned out to be worse.''
Mr. Motz contacted the State Department of Environmental Conservation, which offered to allow the installation of a sandbag barrier on the dunes as a temporary erosion barrier. But permission was also required from the town trustees, who administer the town's waters and beaches and are armed with a town law, passed last year, that bans beachfront pilings, bulkheads and other shore-hardening barriers. Mr. Motz applied for a trustee permit to allow temporary barriers. ''We have gone through a seasonal transition that has been extreme, if you want to compare it to the last 10 years, and that's saying a lot,'' said Scott Strough, president of the town trustees. ''One part of this is the storms. The other part is that during last spring and summer, when beaches have an opportunity to replenish and catch their breath, across the face of Southampton and certainly parts of East Hampton, we had very little residual benefits from the summer season of beach build-up and not much dry beach left. Mother Nature left us lacking with defenses for this winter.''
The Quogue destruction is far from being an isolated case. ''We're losing more than three feet a year of the Montauk Point bluff, after the rate was one foot for 150 years,'' reported Larry Penny, who heads the East Hampton Town Natural Resources Department. ''Eventually that's going to catch up to some of those houses on the beach in Montauk and Napeague.''
Very little of the Southampton Town shoreline has escaped this winter. ''If you look at the dune system right across from Sagaponack to Westhampton, the entire system has been cut by a third,'' Mr. Strough said. ''Some places, like Sagaponack, have been cut in half. Dry beach offers a defense against waves and wind. When that's gone, the dunes themselves are left helpless. Once the dunes go, then the storm energy is going to attack roads and whatever is on the other side of the roads.''
Receiving more scrutiny than ever before this winter are the three groins at Georgica Beach in East Hampton constructed by the Army Corps of Engineers in the 1960's. Over the years the shoreline to the west through Bridgehampton has experienced heightened erosion which has accelerated during the last few years. ''The town feels strongly that the beaches would be better off if those Georgica jetties were to be removed,'' Mr. Kenny said.
But the federal budget presented to Congress by President Bush on Feb. 2 offers little hope that the Corps of Engineers will soon be able to undo its work. The Army Corps of Engineers faces cuts of up to 80 percent in its $4.6 billion civil projects budget.
One of the seven New York State projects to be endangered is the long-awaited erosion-control plan for the 83 miles of shorefront from Fire Island to Montauk Point. The study was to be completed in early 2005, and was to be a sort of game plan for future erosion control.
But it may never see the light of day. Representative Tim Bishop, whose House district includes the East End, said that for 2004 Congress had approved $121 million for New York State shoreline-protection projects, but that the president's budget calls for $63 million in 2005, a cut of almost 50 percent.
''What's illogical in the extreme is that the president's budget eliminates the final year of funding for the study after we've already spent years and $20 million on it,'' Mr. Bishop said. ''We're going to fight this and try to restore the money, but if this budget survives it deals a significant cut to shoreline protection.''
Gary Ireland, a Bridgehampton lawyer who has a three-year-old lawsuit pending against the Corps of Engineers, last month began a petition drive to persuade it to make interim amends for the groins by pumping sand onto the beaches west of Georgica and replenishing the area for 30 years. The petition has already received the support of Mr. Bishop, the Southampton trustees and the environmentalist Group for the South Fork.
''They knew erosion was going to happen if those groins went in, and the Army Corps and Suffolk County did it anyway,'' Mr. Ireland said. ''You know that if this was happening at the Bush compound in Kennebunkport, General Flowers, the head of the Army Corps, would be out there today with a shovel.''
Mr. Ireland said that he is passionate about this issue because of the impact of erosion on his family. An oceanfront cottage that his mother still lives in was built in Sagaponack in 1938. It weathered the great hurricane that year but has not been able to withstand erosion. Twice it has been moved back, and his mother, threatened again by the waves, is running out of property.
The petition has received the support of the actor Roy Scheider of Sagaponack, who also backed the campaign to form a separate Village of Dunehampton so that oceanfront owners could have more say in beach preservation.
''If everyone knows that the Georgica groins are causing this, why in the world after all these years and all the studies and all this destruction hasn't something been done about it?'' Mr. Scheider asked.
The concept of anything being done to curb erosion using government funds raises the issue of who benefits most. ''There is the attitude of 'they shouldn't have built the houses where they did,''' Mr. Motz said. ''But my answer is, 'O.K., we see that now, but at the time they built the houses legally and no one knew the long-term impact of erosion.' I don't think it's right to turn our back on these people.''
Even if financing of the Army Corps' study is restored, it may be too late. ''While we're waiting the beaches are disappearing, and by the time the study is done it will reflect what was, not what is, which is a whole different ecosystem,'' Mr. Strough said. ''It will be yesterday's news. Today's news is the waters are washing over the roads, and that will require a new study.''
And the season is far from over. ''The winter has been unusual because there has been a number of northeasters, one right after another,'' said Jay Tanski of the Sea Grant Institute at SUNY Stony Brook. ''A lot of the beaches are not in as bad a shape as you would have expected considering the storm activity. Of course, that could change. Traditionally, the strongest northeasters take place in November and March.''
