New York hoops fans, especially those who follow the game as it's played on this city's scruffy asphalt courts and playgrounds, have had much to cheer about this winter, with Stephon Marbury, the N.B.A. All-Star and local legend, coming home at 26 as a newly minted Knick and Sebastian Telfair, a nationally ranked 18-year-old phenom, bringing glory to his high-school team in Brooklyn. As it happens, Marbury and Telfair are cousins; Marbury attended Abraham Lincoln High School, where Telfair is now; and Marbury grew up in the same high-rise housing project in Coney Island where Telfair lives. The confluence of their stories has given rise to much comment not only about their individual successes, but also about the game's success at delivering its young players -- predominantly poor and African-American -- to a better life.
Earlier this season, when ESPN2 featured the Lincoln team in its first nationally televised high-school game of the season, viewers heard the details of Telfair's daily encounters with his environment: how this high-topped Horatio Alger rises at 5 a.m., runs wind sprints up the 15 flights of his project stairwell, then gets busy on the battered playground outside his building shooting 500 jump shots before going off to school. Meanwhile, Lincoln High was said to be taking care of the educational component -- ''keeping their guys eligible, keeping them doing well in school as well as playing basketball.''
Hard work on the court, dedication in the classroom: it conjured an image of the projects and the public schools operating in concert as an effective farm league for college and the pros. And even if a $105 million contract like the one Marbury just brought with him to the Knicks isn't in the cards, surely a player could expect a four-year college scholarship, a decent job after graduation, a chance to liberate himself once and for all from the grinding daily privations of the inner city.
In 1991, when Marbury was just entering high school, I spent a year with the Lincoln team, then as now the best in the New York City public schools, for a book I was writing. Marbury may have been the one true prodigy among them, but the team was full of gifted young men who were told each day -- by the street agents, by the college recruiters, by the sneaker-company reps who courted their brand loyalty at their corporate-sponsored summer camps -- that their talent and tenacity would buy them a one-way ticket out.
After Marbury, the player who seemed likeliest to succeed was the team's center, Tchaka Shipp, not only because at 17 he was already 6-foot-8 and 240 pounds -- all elbows on the boards, with an insatiable appetite for the ball -- but also because he possessed the sharp, winning manner that made you think he'd turn his athletic success down the line into a nice career in coaching or the front office. At the end of his junior year, Shipp was selected as one of 120 players nationwide to attend the prestigious Nike all-American camp, where his dominance and energy in the paint drew the attention of almost every Big East coach. It was something to watch: P. J. Carlesimo of Seton Hall, Rollie Massimino of Villanova, Rick Barnes of Providence, Jim Boeheim of Syracuse all journeying to Coney Island to promise Shipp playing time and a shot at the pros.
Eventually Shipp chose Seton Hall, but the moment he entered the college basketball mill, the dreams he'd developed for his future began to slip away. Despite Carlesimo's promises of ample playing time, Shipp soon discovered that he'd been recruited as a backup player. Frustrated by his bench-warming role, bridling under what he calls Carlesimo's ''verbal abuse,'' Shipp, after two years, transferred to the lower-level University of California at Irvine, looking for a starting spot. He never set foot on the Irvine court. One night, after a long day of practice, Shipp was driving back to campus when he fell asleep at the wheel. The ensuing wreck left him with myriad life-threatening injuries to his skull, lungs, leg and hands.
Car accidents can happen to anyone, of course, but if your principal training has been in the manipulation of a basketball, the damage gets compounded. After months of intensive physical therapy, Shipp recovered. But he has never functioned on the court at the same level since. In 1996, he transferred again, this time to an even lower-level school -- C.W. Post on Long Island -- where he lost his starting position to continuing problems with catching and balance. After graduating from Post in 1998, Shipp tried out for the Salina Rattlers, a semi-pro team in Kansas, but with a left knee only half as strong as his right, he failed to make the final cut.
Shipp's degree was in broadcast communications, but most of the work he has been able to find has been manual labor -- loading and unloading trucks at J.F.K. airport, building scaffolding at oil refineries. ''Life is harsh,'' he told me recently. ''I've decided not to waste any more time on the game. I'm just working, trying to stay above water.'' Now 29, Shipp lives in Las Vegas with his fiancée and his 2-year-old son, where he does building maintenance, plumbing and electrical work for $8.50 an hour.
Corey Johnson never indulged in fantasies of going pro. A Division I prospect at Lincoln High, he had other goals: to use basketball to become a writer. Johnson had a great slashing, ball-to-the-basket game and an impulse toward creativity in all its forms: tomahawk dunks, poetry, rapping, singing and dancing in the school talent show. He also had a woefully inadequate education, and this kid who dashed off sonnets in the back of a chaotic study hall couldn't negotiate his way through the complexities of a standardized test. When he fell 10 points short of a combined 700 on his SAT -- the N.C.A.A. eligibility requirement to play Division I ball -- he packed his bags for a junior college in Texas. There, demoralized by what he calls the ''meat market'' atmosphere of the ju-co leagues, unchallenged in the classroom, Johnson failed several classes, lost his eligibility and dropped out of school.
Over the years, living back in Brooklyn, he has managed to keep alive the dream he first nurtured in high school: he has just completed a book manuscript of ''inspirational poetry and memoir,'' which he is hoping to publish. Meanwhile, he's gone through dozens of jobs -- working for his father's plumbing business, doing store decorating, getting occasional work as a model -- and staying at times just one step ahead of eviction. ''I've been down and out, living paycheck to paycheck, in need of help,'' said the 29-year-old Johnson, ''but I do have faith things are going to work out.''
And then there was Darryle Flicking, perhaps the team's finest all-around player, a shooting guard with a deadly outside shot and harassing moves on defense. Anxious and sensitive, so desperate to leave Coney Island that he refused to read his recruiting mail lest it distract him from his schoolwork, Flicking used to strengthen his shooting touch by heaving one-handers while sitting in a chair and would practice his defensive footwork while holding a 10-pound brick in each hand. He also tried to compensate for an entire childhood's worth of bad schooling by carrying vocabulary flashcards in his pocket wherever he went, in preparation for the dreaded SAT. ''Maybe I might make the N.B.A.,'' he told me in 1991, ''but to be honest with you, I'm using basketball to go to a four-year school. What I really want is to graduate from college, start me a nice little family and get me a nice little job as a registered nurse.''
In the spring of his senior year, Flicking signed with Temple University, but on his final SAT attempt, he, too, failed to pass, Temple withdrew its scholarship offer, and Flicking, heartbroken, ended up at a junior college near Los Angeles. There, for the next two years, he became one of the most electrifying scorers in the ju-co leagues, averaging 32 points per game and setting the state community college scoring record with 1,991 career points. Once again, dozens of Division I coaches came to recruit him. This time, suspicious of their promises, Flicking turned down all their offers and accepted a scholarship at the University of California at Riverside, a Division II school where he thought he would study better and be sure to earn his bachelor's degree.
Flicking did graduate, earning a degree in sociology in 1996. But many of the emotional problems he struggled with in adolescence continued to haunt him. While he was still in college, Flicking married, and within a year he was arrested on charges of striking his wife. Two years later, he pleaded guilty in a separate incident to spousal abuse. After college, he started attending church regularly and enrolled briefly at the Claremont School of Theology, before dropping out and beginning to minister to the homeless in Riverside. Over the next few years, Flicking lost touch not only with his wife and young son in California, but also with friends and family back in Coney Island. Without a home or job, he began traveling the Southern California coast, collecting aluminum cans for redemption, helping other homeless men and women and living in tents and cardboard shelters. In January 1999, in an incident that many of his friends say they believe was intentional, he was walking along some train tracks next to the beach in San Clemente, listening to his Walkman, when he was struck from behind by an Amtrak passenger train. He was thrown 75 feet and died instantly. He was 26.
Of course, it's impossible to control the experiment -- to factor out individual strengths and weaknesses that have undoubtedly shaped these young lives. You could argue that Shipp, Johnson and Flicking were no worse off than their friends who didn't play ball, that they merely suffered the disadvantages of poor people the world over -- the terrible narrowing of possibility so early in life; existences so fragile that all of life's cruelties, not to mention the self-destructive impulses that afflict us all, hit with extraordinary force.
The question is whether basketball, instead of strengthening their immunity to misfortune, only weakened it further. When they were in high school, Shipp, Johnson and Flicking had the boundless energy that comes from the expectation of great things. Twelve years later, Johnson could hardly find words to express the exploitation he'd experienced in the ju-co leagues, or the dissonance he felt when, broke and facing eviction, he rode around Coney Island one day in Stephon Marbury's limousine. Shipp, meanwhile, was laughing at his naïve belief that the college coaches would have his best interests at heart, and wincing at the memory of watching his Seton Hall teammates take their places in the pros while he hobbled around on busted knees.
And basketball, instead of widening their horizons, seems only to have narrowed them further. In the wake of his accident, Shipp kept returning to the game until -- having slid from top-ranked Seton Hall to second-rate C.W. Post to third-rate semi-pro ball in Kansas -- he finally abandoned the sport altogether. Flicking, too, was full of regret. In a letter to The Press-Enterprise, a newspaper in Riverside, published not long before he died, Flicking wrote: ''While I was still playing basketball, I was miserable. The pressure of living up to people's expectations of going to the pros was unbearable. When I stopped playing basketball, I found myself excluded by others. I was portrayed only as an athlete, nothing else.''
Even Johnson, the most freethinking, iconoclastic kid to put on a Lincoln uniform in years, rues the way the game encouraged him to betray his ''real self,'' his ''writing self,'' as he puts it, because of the social pressures to play ball. ''Growing up in the projects, all you ever heard about was the fast money you could make dealing drugs or in sports. The options were so limited. I used to tell people I wanted to be a writer. They'd look at me, like, 'You can't be serious!' Now I think about it all the time, especially late at night: what would have happened if I'd gotten as much support and encouragement for my writing as I got for playing ball? Would it be as much of a struggle for me today?''
Each year, 500,000 or so young men play high-school basketball in this country. Each year, less than 1 percent of them get a Division I scholarship. The bitter disappointments of players like Shipp, Johnson and Flicking are the norm, but you wouldn't know it from reading the sports pages or from tuning in to ESPN. There, the myth of basketball as the Great Way Out continues to thrive, uncomplicated by the stories of the young men who never made it. Those players are quickly forgotten, left to show up at the playgrounds where they curl their fingers around the chain-link fencing and peer at their younger selves out there on the asphalt, wondering what happened to them at such a tender age in their lives.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-15-04 Darcy Frey, a frequent contributor to the magazine, is the author of ''The Last Shot: City Streets, Basketball Dreams,'' which is being reissued this month in an updated version.
