Excerpts from the nominees for best original screenplay were chosen by Polly Shulman. Stage directions have been condensed.
Written by Denys Arcand
Nathalie (Marie-Josée Croze), a heroin addict and the daughter of one of Rémy's old mistresses, comes to the hospital where Rémy (Rémy Girard) is dying in order to give him a dose of heroin as a painkiller.
RÉMY -- You don't care much about living, do you?  NATHALIE -- Not really, no.  RÉMY -- I was like you at your age. I was ready to die at any time. I didn't care. That's why young people make the best martyrs. It's paradoxical, but the older you get, the more you want to live. When you begin to subtract: I've got 20 years left, 15, 10. You realize you're doing things for the last time: I'm buying my last car, this is the last time I'll see Genoa or Barcelona ----  NATHALIE -- I won't live that long.  RÉMY -- How do you know?  NATHALIE -- Overdoses are pretty frequent, you know.  RÉMY -- But you never can tell. You may kick it one day and live to a ripe old age. We can't even decipher the past, how do you expect us to predict the future? No one ever knows what'll happen to them. Except me. I know.  NATHALIE -- Are you scared?  RÉMY -- Sure am. And I don't want to stop living. I loved life so much, you can't imagine.  NATHALIE -- What was it you loved?  RÉMY -- Everything. Books, wine, music, women, above all women. Their smell, their mouths, the texture of their skin.  NATHALIE -- Were there many of them?  RÉMY -- Yes.  NATHALIE: -- Don't they eventually begin to resemble each other?  RÉMY -- A bit, yes . . . But I never tired of them.  NATHALIE: -- Are you still the great seducer?  RÉMY -- No, not anymore. With age, it's not the same thing ----  NATHALIE -- Do you still enjoy wine?  RÉMY -- Unfortunately not. Not now with my liver ----  NATHALIE -- The trips you dreamed of, did you take them?  RÉMY -- Anyway, these days there are tourists everywhere ----  NATHALIE -- In fact, it's not the present you don't want to leave, it's your past life.  RÉMY -- Perhaps.  NATHALIE -- That life is already dead. You're ready.
