IN the guest conductor's dressing room at Avery Fisher Hall, three items adorn the walls. One is a part for the flute from Dvorak's ''New World'' Symphony. The other two are pages from the scores of ''La Mer,'' by Debussy, and Beethoven's Symphony No. 7. All three bear liberal markings and alterations from two conductors who led those works with the New York Philharmonic: Gustav Mahler and Arturo Toscanini. Visitors are reminded that not only were both gentlemen music directors of that august institution, but they also altered what composers had written, a practice much in vogue for most of the last century.
Throughout music history, from the time the standard repertory developed, performers have added their own personal touches to past masterpieces. This comes under the heading ''interpretation.'' The conductor most identified with the practice of altering printed scores was Leopold Stokowski. But you have only to trace the performance history of Beethoven's symphonies to find all sorts of subtle as well as drastic changes. Conductors like Richard Wagner, Richard Strauss, Wilhelm Furtwängler, George Szell and Leonard Bernstein, to name a few, have all contributed to the reorchestration of many works by old masters.
In Mahler's case, it is particularly important to understand the dual nature of his musical life. More respected during his day as a conductor than as a composer, he was one of the few who actually advanced the musical art on both fronts. It is his work as a composer that most people know now, but it is clear from the pages on the wall that his creativity was not limited to his own works.
Mahler prepared editions of the symphonies of Beethoven, Schubert and Schumann. The term he used was ''Retuschen,''  ''retouchings,'' more or less. Mahler never intended for his editions to be thought of as in any way his own compositions, but these changes did not go unnoticed.
''Erroneous'' and ''barbaric,'' screamed the Neue Freie Presse in Vienna. The Wiener Abendpost reported: ''Each note is lighted up, the darkest pathways are illuminated, nothing is lost; the voices that murmur in the shadows are exposed to the glare of the sun, airy lines are weighed down, every nervous fiber of the melody is detached and isolated from the sound fabric as if with a scalpel.''
The New York Times remarked after a performance of the Ninth Symphony: ''He uses for some passages two pairs of kettledrums, which make a noise that passes beyond the bounds of musical effect. Elsewhere he accentuates the stroke of the drums with nerve-racking results, as in the scherzo, especially at the very beginning, where the rhythm is marked as by the shots of a rifle.''
These kinds of alterations came in for renewed attacks as the early-music aesthetic of ''authentic'' performance took hold in the 1970's and 80's. But the editions are authentic artifacts of Mahler's era, if not Beethoven's, and valuable indications of what Mahler's performances must have sounded like.
On a tour that begins in Charlotte, N.C., on Wednesday and ends at Carnegie Hall on Feb. 27 and 28, the National Symphony will perform Beethoven's ''Eroica'' and Ninth Symphonies in editions prepared by Mahler. For listeners who have come to expect ''historically informed'' performances, these versions will come as a shock.
So what did Mahler really do, and why?
For a concert in 1900, he wrote, ''Owing to an ear complaint that ultimately left him totally deaf, Beethoven lost his indispensable and intimate contact with reality and the world of physical sound.'' In addition, Mahler cited the changes that were occurring in his day in instruments and in the size of the orchestra.
He used the expansion of the orchestra to supplement and clarify many textures. In Beethoven's time, the string section might have had as few as six or eight first violins and perhaps a single double bass. Mahler could have 20 or more first violins and certainly would have competed with Strauss in using 10 to 12 basses. Such a body of players would have drowned out several passages in the woodwinds. So Mahler frequently ''doubled'' instruments or added others to make sure that a particular figuration was heard. In the ''Eroica'' Symphony, for example, to a line that Beethoven had assigned to a solo flute Mahler added a second flute and an E flat clarinet.
Then there are the changes in the instruments themselves. The French horns in Beethoven's orchestral works would have been ''natural'' instruments. Lacking valves, they could not perform chromatic passages. Mahler, like many before and after him, simply filled in places where notes were missing. The range of most of the woodwind instruments had increased, too, so Mahler used the added notes to keep the flutes, say, from having to drop an octave for a note or two.
Beethoven used blocks of dynamic levels in his orchestral writing. So if a passage is marked fortissimo, the whole orchestra sees the indication. Conductors commonly adjust levels in these places. After all, the trumpets and timpani playing at full force can often drown out an important melodic line in the strings. Mahler is scrupulous in this matter. He makes sure that all of Beethoven's lines are heard clearly.
It is less clear how Mahler interpreted the pieces himself. Reports vary wildly, and we know that he was a spontaneous musician. Yet there are places in the scores where one can recreate Mahler's conducting style. At the start of the finale of the ''Eroica,'' for example, Mahler notes that the pizzicatos represent a child trying to take its first steps and stumbling. To achieve this effect, Mahler added a slight accelerando, as if to exaggerate the child's attempts. The portamentos and Luftpausen (slides and silences) indicated in the parts will come as a shock to many.
It is also illuminating to see what Mahler does not change. No melodic lines or harmonies are altered. In the Ninth, the choral parts remain unchanged, but there are unusual breathing indications for the soloists. Most surprising, Mahler does not comment on the one thing that has caused the most controversy over the years, Beethoven's metronome markings, indicating the speeds of individual movements. Mahler himself abandoned metronome markings after completing his Second Symphony, so he may simply not have considered them important. Indications like ''allegro'' and ''adagio'' were enough.
Today we have moved toward a musical ethic that considers the printed text sacred. But most composers would have welcomed the advances in the development of instruments. Mahler realized that for his own music to survive, it would have to undergo interpretation by others. Great art flourishes precisely because it can be construed in different ways by succeeding generations. Seeing those pages on the wall with the markings of Toscanini and Mahler, we are reminded that music is a constantly evolving creative process. Hearing how those pages sound, no matter what alterations have been made, reminds us of the durability of those masterpieces.
MUSIC Leonard Slatkin is the music director of the National Symphony Orchestra in Washington.
