BATHED by the Sea of Japan but controlled by Moscow, Vladivostok has always presented two faces to the world.
Its open face was that of Russia's San Francisco -- a rollicking, cosmopolitan seaport that was the childhood home of Yul Brynner.
Its unfriendly face began in the 1860's with its name, which means ''To Rule the East.'' Planted as Russia's flag in Asia, Vladivostok was a ''maritime fortress'' under the czars and a closed city under the Soviets.
But now Vladivostok, a neighbor of China, Japan and the Korean Peninsula, is regaining its natural worldliness, opening its doors to tourists and investors. Korean Air flies here four times a week from Seoul. Negotiations are under way to start flights from Tokyo and from the West Coast of the United States.
''Our dream is to make Vladivostok a powerful international center,'' Victor V. Gorchakov, the region's vice governor for economy, said in his office overlooking city docks where United States Navy ships now routinely make good will port calls. Vladivostok's new openness can be seen up and down the hilly streets overlooking Golden Horn Bay.
At night, the neon and twinkling lights signal new shopping centers and a lively night life, transporting the city far from the terrible power shortages of the late 1990's.
By day, English-speaking guides lead tourists, largely Chinese, Japanese and Korean, through once-closed coastal artillery emplacements and into long-secret networks of catacomb defenses. Above ground, on shopping streets, where new boutiques sprout from Soviet decay, A.T.M.'s accept American bank cards and crank out rubles at the push of a PIN.
Bilingual English-Russian menus are increasingly the norm at restaurants like Nostalgia and Del Mar, which specialize in Pacific seafood cooked with New Russian flair. Now that tourism is in vogue, restorers have worked their magic on the 1912 railroad station, the stately terminus of the Trans-Siberian Railroad, whose line stretches 5,768 miles to Moscow.
Two blocks away, at the Beaux-Arts Hotel Versailles, glossy brochures proudly boast of ''our English-spoken waitress.'' Up a hill, at the Hyundai, a favorite hotel of business travelers, room televisions carry the BBC (marked ''USA'').
''About 45 percent of our guests are Americans,'' said Alex M. Petrollini, from Alberta, Canada, who manages the Vlad Inn, a Canadian-owned hotel. In a parklike setting halfway between Vladivostok's airport and the city, the inn has become a favorite for American couples who come here to adopt Russian babies.
This year, three international cruise ships docked. American eco-tourism companies have started to take groups to explore the mountains, forests and nearly empty Pacific beaches of the Primorye region, which has the population density of Maine but is twice the size.
While still in its infancy, Primorye's tourism industry ''is gaining strong support from the U.S. Northwest states and Alaska as the realization dawns that the majority of U.S. visitors come to the Russian Far East from the West," William S. Lawton, commercial officer for the United States Consulate here, said after lunch at the Del Mar. The new bay-view restaurant is run by a Vladivostok woman who recently returned after seven years in California.
But it is a wave of tourists from China that explains the new services and tourist-friendly attitudes here, down to the courteousness at Vladivostok's newly renovated international air terminal.
Every summer for the past three years, about 100,000 Chinese tourists have come to Vladivostok, largely by bus across the border; about 10 percent come on direct flights from three cities in Manchuria. The big attraction is the new casinos here, since gambling is banned in China. Judging by sauna advertisements, a fair number of Chinese men also come for sex.
''Chinese people are attracted by the opportunity to meet European culture on the Asian continent,'' said Sergei A. Pysin, chairman of the regional tourism committee, echoing views commonly held here that the largely Caucasian Vladivostok is the closest European city to Asia.
According to local tourism officials, 126,500 foreigners visited the city in 2003. In the first nine months of the year, 1,019 Americans visited. April through October is the busiest period for Vladivostok.
The Chinese -- gamblers, sexual adventurers or families -- have given Vladivostok hoteliers the economic justification to upgrade Soviet-era facilities.
''Initially most tourists were from northeast China, and they were poor and they did not require high-class hotels and accommodations,'' Mr. Pysin said. ''Now people from southern China are coming. They are wealthy people. They require higher-class service, including hotels.''
Also, as attested by the march of new billboards from the airport highway, businesses increasingly base their regional headquarters here. Three floors of the Hyundai are devoted to company offices, and the occupancy rate averages 95 percent, according to Nadia V. Dubinina, marketing manager for the hotel, a South Korean-Russian joint venture.
Yet Vladivostok can still surprise. On a recent Saturday, at a fur shop where mink coats were $9,000, I approached the cash register with a modest white fox hat and a Visa card. No cards. Only cash. It was December and a frigid wind was blowing off the Sea of Japan. After the first two A.T.M.'s yielded nothing, the third had cash. It offered electronic menus in Russian, English and Chinese. I got the hat.
TRAVEL ADVISORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT
