THE YOM KIPPUR WAR
The Epic Encounter That Transformed
the Middle East.
By Abraham Rabinovich.
Illustrated. 543 pp. New York:
Schocken Books. $27.50.
THE EVE OF DESTRUCTION
The Untold Story of the Yom Kippur War.
By Howard Blum.
Illustrated. 350 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers. $25.95.
ISRAEL'S brief history falls into two periods. Four heroic wars shaped its first quarter-century. Defeat in any could have brought the end of the Jewish state. Yet Israel emerged victorious from all of them, each time extending, even if only temporarily, the amount of territory under its control. The second period, still under way, has been less dangerous but more frustrating as Israel has struggled to translate military strength and territorial gains into real security and diplomatic recognition by its Arab neighbors.
The Arab-Israeli war of October 1973 forms the hinge between these two periods. Never did the prospect of Israel's destruction seem more imminent than in the first days after Egypt and Syria's devastatingly effective surprise attack. Israel rallied its reserves, recovered its losses and added new territory along the critical Golan frontier. But Egypt, a country humiliated and demoralized by Israel's crushing victory in June 1967, regained enough of its pride to pursue peace. A direct line runs from the Egyptian Army's crossing of the Suez Canal in 1973 to Anwar Sadat's historic visit to Jerusalem four years later, and then on to the first formal peace treaty between Israel and an Arab state. Underscoring those connections, Islamic opponents of that treaty assassinated Sadat at an October 1981 military parade marking the anniversary of the 1973 war.
Sadat's example challenges the lifetime belief of Ariel Sharon, Israel's current prime minister, that Arab nations will not make peace with Israel unless they have been so thoroughly beaten and humiliated that they internalize the certainty of defeat. But in the absence of extraordinary leaders like Sadat, recovered Arab pride is no sure formula for peace. Consider President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, whose armies did as well as Egypt's during the early days of the Yom Kippur War, but who never followed Sadat's path to peace. The lessons of the war point in no single direction, but they have much to teach Israelis, Arabs and all who yearn for a comprehensive Middle East peace.
Two new books re-examine the events and lessons of the war. Abraham Rabinovich, the author of ''The Yom Kippur War,'' is an American who moved to Jerusalem in 1967 and covered the 1973 war for The Jerusalem Post. Howard Blum, who has written ''The Eve of Destruction,'' is a contributing editor of Vanity Fair. Both aim to knit together the military, strategic and political levels of the war much as Michael B. Oren's ''Six Days of War'' did for the June 1967 war. Neither fully equals Oren's magisterial achievement. But these authors are working with more difficult material. Sixteen days of grueling back-and-forth combat is not as inherently dramatic as six epochal days in which large Arab armies seemed to melt miraculously before Israeli arms. On their own terms, both of these books offer lively and informative accounts of a pivotal conflict.
Because Israeli society is far more open than either Egyptian or Syrian, richer source material is available from the Israeli perspective. Both authors try to look through Arab eyes as well, but Rabinovich does so more satisfactorily. He is especially good at explaining how Sadat and his army chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Saad el-Shazly, understood the limits of Egyptian military power and therefore planned a sharply delineated incursion on the Sinai front designed to create leverage for broader diplomatic gains. Sadat eventually achieved those gains, though he foolishly abandoned General Shazly's highly successful military strategy in midwar, insisting on a deeper Sinai offensive that played into Israel's strengths. Ariel Sharon was a division commander in Israel's Sinai counteroffensive. Both authors well convey his signature mix of tactical boldness, reckless daring and rampant indiscipline, which made superiors sputter but won adulation from many of his troops.
On the Golan front, there were desperate days when the Syrians seemed poised to recapture the strategic heights and sweep into Israel's minimally defended Jordan Valley and Galilee regions. Defense Minister Moshe Dayan feared the worst and made no secret of it. As Blum tells it, Prime Minister Golda Meir contemplated suicide and mused about using nuclear arms not just to deter Cairo and Damascus but, far more shockingly, to bring down the rest of the Middle East along with a defeated Israel. In the end, a far more elemental weapon, the raw courage of an overwhelmingly outnumbered force of Israeli tank soldiers, turned the Syrians back.
Since one of the crucial questions of this war is why the Arabs fought so much better in 1973 than they did in 1967, Rabinovich's extra efforts to get inside the minds of Arab generals are especially welcome. Blum doesn't neglect this dimension altogether, but is more interested in portraying the emotional lives of a particular group of Israeli fighters than in explaining the radical change in Arab military performance. Perhaps as a result, his account of Israel's unpreparedness in the war's early days relies too much on ambiguous messages from a high-level Egyptian informant who may have been a double agent. Egypt conducted a clever campaign of deception. Yet Israel would not have been fooled if it had not been so overconfident.
Rabinovich also delves more deeply and interestingly into the relevant international diplomacy, including the thinking of Leonid Brezhnev's Kremlin and Richard Nixon's White House. And he is more acute in his military analyses. Occasionally, though, his narrative gets bogged down in excessive battlefield detail. That never happens in Blum's faster-paced book, although the vivid personal stories that form its core tend to obscure the larger context.
The story of the Yom Kippur War has been told before, but after 30 years, additional documents and added historical perspective permit a fuller, more satisfactory account. In their different ways, both ''The Yom Kippur War'' and ''The Eve of Destruction'' shed light on a conflict that altered the psychology and diplomacy of the Middle East down to the present day.
David C. Unger writes editorials on international affairs for The Times.
