WHEN the Experience Music Project opened here in June 2000 with a blaze of parties and big-name concerts, the creators offeredextravagant promises. Its education programs were going to be revolutionary, its Web site would be a resource for musicians everywhere and the museum itself would help give focus to the Northwest music scene, not to mention providing Seattle with a significant new piece of architecture.
The very building, a swoopy droopy riot of color and curve wedged into the periphery of Seattle Center and designed by Frank Gehry, was touted by museum officials as a physical evocation of the raw energy of music. Inside, visitors would experience a new relationship with familiar sounds. But three waves of layoffs in three years, a complete turnover of the founding curatorial staff and fitful changes in program direction have left the museum struggling to define itself. In December, museum officials hired a new chief executive, who promptly laid off 129 workers, signaling still more change to come. Attendance, brashly predicted at the opening by E.M.P. staff to be about 800,000 annually, a figure it came close to reaching. But each year since, attendance has dropped -- to 433,000 in 2003. The museum now employs just over 200, down from more than 500 in its first year.
Conceived and financed by the billionaire Paul Allen as a tribute to Jimi Hendrix, a Seattle native, the museum ran into early rights troubles with the Hendrix estate. By the time it opened, the $240 million project had broadened its scope to include all of pop culture. (By comparison, the country's other major rock music museum -- the I. M. Pei-designed Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland -- opened in 1995 and cost $84 million).
The museum's shows have been uneven -- thoughtful and informed explorations like the evolution of the electric guitar, album cover art and the local grunge poet Jesse Bernstein have alternated with poster art shows and agglomerations of rock memorabilia sometimes more notable for their celebrity than their curatorial value.
Staff turnovers, including a complete changeover of the founding curatorial teams, have contributed to the confusion about the museum's purpose. Most recently, it has announced that a significant portion will be used to create a museum dedicated to science fiction. Why science fiction? As Robert Santelli, the museum's director of programs, put it, ''science fiction is a major interest of Paul Allen's.'' Mr. Allen, a co-founder of Microsoft, was listed as the fourth richest man in the world in last year's ranking by Forbes magazine -- paid the entire construction costs for the museum and subsidizes its annual budget.
That budget, Mr. Santelli said, has shrunk to $22 million this year from $45 million two years ago. He added that this year the museum would earn 53 percent of its budget, up from 39 percent the year before, and is beginning to attract money from foundations and sponsors. He said Mr. Allen would cover he deficit, which will probably amount to just over $10 million this year.
The perception that the music museum is a rich man's vanity project has been hard to shake. Its supporters point out that it is intended to be an experimental institution. ''We're still learning what works and what doesn't,'' Mr. Santelli said.
DOUGLAS McLENNAN
MUSIC  Correction:  February 15, 2004, Sunday  Because of a production error, a picture on the bottom of Page 14 of Arts &amp; Leisure today, showing a display at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland, is duplicated at the top of the page in some copies, and a picture mentioned in the top caption has been omitted. It shows a display at the Stax Museum in Memphis and is online at nytimes.com/corrections.html.
