Excerpts from the nominees for best original screenplay were chosen by Polly Shulman. Stage directions have been condensed.
Written by Jim Sheridan, Naomi Sheridan and Kirsten Sheridan
A penniless Irish family has come to New York, where Johnny, the father (Paddy Considine), hopes to find work as an actor. Their youngest child, Frankie, died before the film begins, and the mother, Sarah (Samantha Morton), pregnant again, has been told it would be dangerous for her to carry the baby to term. The two young daughters, Christy and Ariel (Sarah and Emma Bolger, respectively), have learned their mother is expecting.
ARIEL -- I thought the doctor said you couldn't have any more babies.  SARAH -- Well, sometimes, Ariel, doctors are wrong. (Softly) There. It just kicked.  CHRISTY -- Oh my God!  SARAH -- Johnny, feel it. I remember the first time you kicked, Christy. It was in one of your dad's plays. Every time he spoke, you kicked. Like you were applauding him.  ARIEL -- Did I ever kick?  SARAH -- You? You kicked like a mule, night and day. There it is again. Johnny, did you feel it?  JOHNNY -- I can't feel anything.  (Next scene. Johnny and Sarah in living area.)  JOHNNY -- Do you want me to lie?  SARAH -- So you're the only actor in the world who can't lie, Johnny? Not even for the sake of your kids?  JOHNNY -- What does that mean?  SARAH -- If you can't touch somebody you created, how can you create somebody that'll touch anybody?  JOHNNY -- What are you going on about?  SARAH -- Acting, Johnny. And bringing something to life, it's the same thing. That's why you can't get a job acting, Johnny. Because you can't feel anything.  JOHNNY -- This baby's not Frankie, Sarah. Look at me. Look at me. Why don't you look at me? You've gotten over him.  SARAH -- I had to get over him, Johnny, for the sake of the kids.  JOHNNY -- So you're gonna put your life on the line for the sake of the kids?  SARAH -- Yes.  JOHNNY -- That's a total contradiction.  SARAH -- How?  JOHNNY -- You know what the doctor said.  SARAH -- I don't care what they said. What do they know about us? And my baby?
