FOR schools around the state, the announcement last month that results of the Connecticut Mastery Tests would be delayed because they were graded incorrectly has created all sorts of problems.
Platt Regional-Vocational Technical School in Milford, for example, has had to delay filling the next freshman class, something that is usually well under way by now. The school, which had 650 applications for 240 available slots for its 2003-2004 freshmen class, uses scores from the eighth-grade Mastery Test in math and reading as part of its admissions criteria. By February, admissions officers typically have interviewed students, received Mastery Test results and are processing applications. This year, everything is on hold.
It's a horror,'' said Gene LaPorta, the principal. ''Without the Mastery Test scores, I'm between a rock and a hard place. Now we have to rewrite this protocol that has served us well, and not panic parents when they don't get results on a timely basis.''
Unlike in the past, when states used a variety of measuring sticks to see how schools were performing, a greater focus has been placed in recent years on standardized tests. The federal No Child Left Behind Act that was signed into law in January 2002 upped testing requirements even further, calling for annual testing of third-through eighth-grade students. Testing companies are busier than ever before, and errors , already an issue before No Child Left Behind went into effect, have been increasing, according to a Boston College study released last year. It found that from 1976 to 2002 there were more than 100 grading errors in tests, taken by hundreds of thousands of students, in the United States, Great Britain and Canada.
The errors on the Connecticut tests were discovered weeks after they were given last September. The Mastery Test included an essay that must be hand-scored, and employees from the testing company, CTB/McGraw Hill, were not scoring the essays consistently, said Thomas Murphy, a spokesman for the education department. Five testing employees scoring the same essay did not arrive at the same result and scores also fluctuated greatly, both high and low, from previous years, typically an indicator that all was not right, he said.
The tests are being rescored by CTB/McGraw Hill, which beat out the former contract holder, Harcourt, this year for the testing contract. A long-established testing company but new to Connecticut, CTB/McGraw-Hill was struggling with the scoring from the outset, Mr. Murphy said.
''For us to see precipitous drops, even tremendous jumps, sets off flares,'' he said. ''It became clear that there was a disconnect between the scoring patterns and approaches from 18 years of Mastery Tests. It was like using a Celsius thermometer to take the schools' temperatures one year and a Fahrenheit thermometer the next.''
The State Department of Education has assured educators that no student will need to retake the test.
The Mastery Test is the primary marker Connecticut schools use to determine a range of eligibility, from admission to high schools to both honors and remedial programs. A state law also requires that fourth-and sixth-grade students who fall below remedial levels in reading receive alternative programs after school, Saturdays and during the summer. ''Programs are in place,'' Mr. Murphy said. ''But they need to place the students in them.''
The delay has certainly affected struggling schools. Districts such as Bridgeport, which have a higher percentage of failing students than other systems, wait anxiously each January for the results of the test. The information allows them to profile students and devise strategies for intervention, including placement in various special programs.
''We can't afford to wait on this data,'' said Sonia Diaz-Salcedo, the superintendent of Bridgeport schools. ''Because of the achievement gap, because of our low scores, we want to do as much as possible to support higher student achievement. These are critical pieces of data we are missing and need.''
Higher-performing districts also are distressed with the wait. West Hartford uses the Mastery Test data as one of several criteria for placement in honors and gifted programs. Without it, those decisions are held up.
''We're making a lot of decisions now, especially from eighth to ninth grade'' said Dr. Karen List, assistant superintendent for curriculum and instruction in West Hartford. ''Course decisions are all being made now, we have to determine staffing, meet with parents. This complicates it, because we don't have one of the indicators we would normally use to recommend placement. We'll look at other data, but this is important because it is standardized. It just slows everything down.''
Although the testing company had acknowledged in its sales pitch to the state the idiosyncrasies of Connecticut's test (it requires essays, for example, unlike many other states), it evidently underestimated the challenge of dealing with them, Mr. Murphy said. The education department has asked that the test be rescored, including 130,000 essays that require hand-scoring. State officials and a company spokeswoman were unsure when that would be accomplished. The scores usually are available in January; projections now are for mid-March and beyond.
The Mastery Test is also key to meeting the requirements of No Child Left Behind. Without information from the Mastery Tests, officials cannot determine if schools are meeting adequate yearly progress. The federal government does provide waivers, however, if the secretary of education finds extraordinary circumstances affected the requirements of No Child Left Behind.
''We're not even contemplating that possibility,'' Mr. Murphy said. ''But we will have to see what happens.''
The Boston College study detailed various errors by testing companies, with a variety of effects that ranged from unjustly denying graduation to 50 Minnesota students, a decrease in SAT scores by almost 100 points for 1,500 high school students and the mistaken assignment of 9,000 New York City students to summer school. The study showed that CTB/McGraw Hill scored tests incorrectly in six states, including New York and Indiana, in 1998.
''It was a nightmare, an absolute nightmare,'' said Mary Tiede Wilhelmus, the director of communications at the Indiana Department of Education.
The department demanded an audit and also passed a regulation that any company responding to the department's request for proposals must reveal any errors or past practices that could affect its choice of contractor.
At least Indiana's test scores were not used for student placement. In New York City, 9,000 students were assigned to summer school based on incorrect test scores. That has not happened in Connecticut, where the education department discovered the errors before scores were released to schools.
April Hattori, a McGraw Hill spokeswoman in New York, said Connecticut's testing errors were the result of the staff's lack of familiarity with the test. The company has added staff to resolve the problem, Ms. Hattori said, and is building software specific to Connecticut's tests.
Mr. Murphy of the education department said the timing of the results were not as important as their accuracy.
''It doesn't help us to get it fast, but wrong,'' he said. ''Fortunately, we caught this early, before score reports were issued. We've dodged the bullet and averted the problem, even though some local officials are saying the information is less useful because it is so late.''
