IT was a good problem to have, if a huge one, and its name was Harvey Fierstein.
On paper, ''Hairspray'' was about how youthful dance crazes and beehive fantasias helped to integrate Baltimore, circa 1962. Onstage, though, the man playing the obese hausfrau Edna Turnblad -- a role far smaller than that of her chubby-go-lucky daughter, Tracy -- had somehow become the heart of the evening. Giving an over-the-top performance that couldn't be contained by its camp quotation marks, Mr. Fierstein had walked off with the show. Which was fine, except that its creators and producers would one day need it back.
Leave aside the eventual end of the star's contract; almost as soon as the show opened in August 2002, Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman, who wrote the songs, began to worry about Mr. Fierstein's vacations. ''For my birthday,'' Mr. Wittman said, ''I begged Nathan Lane to play the role for two weeks if Harvey was out. And he said yes -- but there may have been too many chardonnays involved.'' Still, the imaginary threat of a Broadway superstar waiting in the wings solved the immediate problem. ''From then on, whenever Harvey mentioned a vacation,'' Mr. Shaiman said, ''we'd just say 'Nathan Lane,' and suddenly the vacation would go away.'' Out of more than 600 performances at the Neil Simon Theater so far, Mr. Fierstein has missed one-half of one -- and then only because he was so sick he couldn't return to the stage after intermission. Still, as it became clear that ''Hairspray'' might be profitable enough to sustain a long run, the problem of finding Mr. Fierstein's successor grew more pressing.
It was hardly a unique problem, though. Because it now takes more than a year for most Broadway shows to turn a profit (though the $10.5 million ''Hairspray'' is expected to double recoup by summer) and because few major performers agree to stay in their roles as long as Mr. Fierstein, most moderately successful productions now find themselves living or dying on the strength of their second casts. Often this means importing celebrities from other venues, but it's an imperfect science at best and the rules are changing drastically. ''Nine'' sold out as long as Antonio Banderas was in it; after John Stamos took over, it expired in two months. And whether ''The Boy From Oz'' will survive the rumored transition from Hugh Jackman to Ricky Martin later this year is anybody's guess.
Hovering more immediately over the ''Hairspray'' decision was the specter of the replacement disaster unfolding at ''The Producers,'' where Mr. Lane was succeeded by the British classical actor Henry Goodman, who was immediately trashed for a series of Lane-alikes. These casting misjudgments knocked that box-office champ into a torpor from which it has only recently (and temporarily) recovered, thanks to the three-month return engagement of its original stars. For the producers of ''Hairspray,'' several of whom had money in ''The Producers'' as well, the difference between, say, a respectable two-year hit and a seven-year juggernaut therefore seemed to lie in how well they handled this transition. Or in how long they delayed it: Mr. Fierstein was persuaded to extend his contract twice. But last fall he decided that after the performance of May 2, 2004 -- more than two years into the role (or four, if you count the numerous workshops) -- he would hang up Edna's housedress for good.
BY the time Mr. Fierstein announced that decision, Bernie Telsey, the show's casting director, had a master list of possible replacements that ran to some 75 names. They ranged from unknowns to dead-on mainstream stars like John Goodman to dark-horse comics like Horatio Sanz to out-of-left-field personalities like Dr. Phil. Aside from the obvious musical and physical skills, Mr. Shaiman and Mr. Wittman were looking for actors with the right off-kilter perspective and comic chops. Jack O'Brien, the show's director, wanted to see in an Edna the kind of ''blithe incongruity'' that arose when a man, without mincing or Hasty Pudding self-consciousness, played a woman sweetly and tenderly. Partly this is a matter of the actor's having ''a couple of low notes in his back pocket,'' Mr. O'Brien explained. (It's a bass-baritone, not a tenor, role.) And partly it's a matter of scale. ''You need an actor who can take the padding,'' he said. ''He doesn't have to be fat'' -- John Lithgow was a prominent name on the list -- ''but the comedy is best served when it's that big mother and that little girl. Which means he has to have a certain amount of aesthetic weight.'' Indeed, John Waters, on whose 1988 movie the show is based, had often said that Anthony Hopkins could play the role.
''Aesthetic weight'' was a broad enough mandate to include almost anyone, which was perhaps a smart way to start the process. ''When we met Eddie Izzard at the Tonys,'' Mr. Shaiman said, ''we put him on the list. Drew Carey does musical numbers on his show sometimes. We put him on the list. Or Louis Anderson, I saw him on 'Family Feud' one day. We put him on the list.'' Another name that resulted from Mr. Shaiman's television-watching was Dan Aykroyd; they pursued him vigorously, but it didn't work out.
''You have to understand that most people in TV and movies aren't interested in doing Broadway,'' Mr. Telsey said. ''They're not available, they're hanging out for pilot season, they've got family on the West Coast.'' The eight-performance-a-week grind is another deterrent to actors accustomed to the relative luxury of Hollywood schedules. (For the even more grueling national tour, it was hard to get any major names to audition, and the part of Edna in that company went to Bruce Vilanch, a comedy writer with limited theatrical experience.) But of course there was something even more central and off-putting about the role. ''Many turned it down,'' Mr. Telsey said, ''because they didn't want to play a woman.''
That Edna could in fact be played by a real woman -- Lainie Kazan, for instance, or Roseanne -- was an idea that Mr. Shaiman and Mr. Wittman considered from time to time, even though they agreed that this basically violated the ''template'' of the material. ''The template is Divine,'' Mr. O'Brien said, referring to the 300-pound female impersonator who created the role in the movie. ''By having a big man playing the mother, right away you know you're not poking fun at a woman. If you put a large woman in the part -- or if you padded a small woman -- I don't think you'd feel quite as comfortable sitting back in your chair and letting the show go where it wants to.''
For all these reasons, the 75 actors on Mr. Telsey's master list had by last month been reduced to a dozen. One was Michael McKean. At 56, he is somewhat older than Mr. Fierstein (who is 49), let alone the role as written (Edna is meant to be in her mid-30's), but Mr. Shaiman and Mr. Wittman nevertheless thought he was a ''fantastic'' idea. He seemed to meet or surpass all the requirements: he was an established comic personality, having appeared as Lenny in the sitcom ''Laverne and Shirley'' from 1976 to 1983 and on ''Saturday Night Live'' in the mid-90's; a good singer (though you wouldn't necessarily know it from his role in the 1984 spoof rockumentary ''This Is Spinal Tap''); and even, since his appearances in recent Christopher Guest films like ''Best in Show'' and ''A Mighty Wind,'' a quasi-celebrity, with both a cult following and Hollywood status. More than that, Mr. McKean's screen personality reads as both warm and theatrical. On the downside, everyone noted, he is not fat -- and he has ''cross-dressed professionally'' (as he put it) only rarely. Still, at 6 feet, he seemed capable of giving the illusion of hugeness, and judging by the brittle unrealness of many actual drag performers, his lack of experience with wig and cleavage was arguably an advantage.
But Mr. McKean, who maintained all along that he was interested in the part, could not be pinned down. ''He had a movie, he didn't have time -- all the usual, understandable stuff,'' Mr. Telsey said. On top of that, some of the show's producers had never even heard of him, and so were unwilling to fly him to New York for an audition. Still, Mr. Telsey persevered, and Mr. McKean was eventually scheduled to try out for the creative staff and producers at the final casting session on Jan. 19.
He never made it. On Jan. 14, Mr. McKean's mother, who lived on Long Island in the house where she had raised her family, had a major stroke.
At least two performers -- one a working but not famous New York actor, the other a mostly unknown comedian -- had given auditions that were polished enough to suggest that either could succeed in the role. Convinced that a decision could not be delayed any longer, the producers were ready to choose one of them.
That willingness to hire a non-name actor was one of the things that made the ''Hairspray'' replacement drama different from the norm. Many Broadway shows extend their lives by importing star after star into their casts, almost regardless of fit. The roster of performers who traipsed through the recent Roundabout Theater Company revival of ''Cabaret'' made that long-running musical seem like a Weimar Celebrity Roast. The Broadway producers Fran and Barry Weissler mastered the technique with their mid-90's revival of ''Grease,'' in which Betty Rizzo was played by Rosie O'Donnell, Debby Boone, Mackenzie Phillips, Sheena Easton, Joely Fisher, Deborah Gibson, Jasmine Guy, Brooke Shields, Lucy Lawless, Joely Fisher and Linda Blair, among others. The Weisslers' revival of ''Chicago,'' still going strong in its eighth year, took the idea of stunt casting to new heights, managing to elicit big box office for Melanie Griffith, a visiting guest star who -- even according to her rave reviews -- could neither sing, dance nor act.
On the other hand, some musicals have thrived without ever hiring a major name to take over. The most famous Phantom in ''Phantom of the Opera,'' now in something like its 175th year on Broadway, was its first, Michael Crawford. And ''Mamma Mia!'' has spawned vastly profitable armies of touring ABBA replicants without ever hiring Liza to don the disco pantsuit.
Perhaps, the ''Hairspray'' team convinced themselves, their show would be better off with a knock-your-socks-off unknown as Edna.
But this is a Broadway story, so of course there were last-minute reverses. One came in the form of a surprise auditioner, a person who was intimately familiar with the role but whom no one knew whether to take seriously; he said he had snagged the audition by sleeping with the composer. He was, indeed, the composer himself: Marc Shaiman.
''I don't think they were prepared for just how serious I was,'' Mr. Shaiman said. ''I could really see myself doing this someday. It's not like I'm going to always see myself in any show I write, but here was a case where I could.'' He read the scenes and sang ''Timeless to Me,'' the Act II duet with which Mr. Fierstein and Dick Latessa (as Edna's husband, Wilbur) regularly stop the show. He even sang a new lyric for the song. Even so, the reception was not ecstatic. ''It was tough for me to deal with the stunned silence,'' he said.
Mr. Wittman said, ''Marc was too slight, I'm afraid.''
Mr. Shaiman protested, ''I'm chubby!''
As anyone who saw their best-original-score victory kiss at last year's Tony Awards knows, Mr. Wittman is not only Mr. Shaiman's collaborator but also his life partner. ''I thought it was very brave of him to audition,'' Mr. Wittman said gently.
Mr. O'Brien thought it was more like a fantasy run amok. ''In the immortal words of Cher,'' he said, ''snap out of it! I'm cross because Marc's a fantastic writer and I need his scores pumping life into musical theater. I don't need another actor.''
While Mr. Shaiman was auditioning in Manhattan, Mr. McKean was on Long Island, tending to his mother. She died two days later, on Jan. 21.
''It's a little lesson on how life goes sometimes,'' Mr. McKean mused. ''The folks from 'Hairspray' called and said, 'If you want to blow it off, we understand.' But it really was a very welcome diversion, because, while I'm juggling all the funeral stuff and this house full of things my mother never threw away, I said, 'Let me go meet with them anyway.' ''
MR. McKEAN auditioned in New York on Jan. 24. ''He was spectacular,'' said Mr. Shaiman. ''Very different from Harvey, sort of channeling his aunt, a smoker's voice almost, but with great takes and line readings.'' Mr. Telsey described him as ''rubber'': clownish yet resilient. Mr. Wittman pointed out that his style, while wholly original, seemed to fit the material. ''It's not like Henry Goodman, a famous Shylock, going into 'The Producers,' '' he said. ''Michael comes from the same off-kilter kind of world as 'Hairspray' -- you could imagine him in a John Waters movie.''
A week later, at a meeting in San Diego, Mr. O'Brien offered Mr. McKean the job. After a month of rehearsal, he will take over the role of Edna on May 4, and is signed to appear through Oct. 3.
''Harvey has left some big cups to fill,'' Mr. McKean said. ''Seeing him do the part for the first time, I just wanted to shoot myself.'' It was not so much the physical performance, though Mr. McKean takes a bold stance in seeking to differentiate his approach from Mr. Fierstein's. (''I will have to shave my legs and arms,'' he said, ''but the eyebrows are not contractual.'') The real challenge for Mr. McKean will be to give the jokes their full due by finding the womanliness in his maleness. It's a job that seems timely to him. ''I keep thinking about that lovely quote from Wilde,'' he said. '' 'All women become like their mothers. That is their tragedy. No man does. That's his.' So this gig is for my mom. She would have loved it.''
Meanwhile, backstage at the Neil Simon, Mr. Fierstein is reportedly beginning to dismantle his shrine-like dressing room, a few items each week. (Through a spokesman, Mr. Fierstein declined to be interviewed.) The other actors await his departure, and Mr. McKean's arrival, with mixed feelings, as a family might await a new stepmother. So does Broadway, which can ill afford to lose another hit show to tacky stunts, pale copies or grandiose misfires.
Still, the mood is optimistic. ''I haven't met him yet,'' Mr. Latessa said. ''But as long as he'll allow me to be affectionate with him, we'll be fine.''
THEATER Jesse Green is a contributing writer to Arts &amp; Leisure.
