I have been ice fishing all my life. I'm 67, and I've done it since I was a kid. When I was old enough to have my own vehicle, I started going out on Lake Erie. I know the lake well, but you get reckless at times. Three years ago, I was stranded about 300 yards out in open water. We had wind that came up and pushed the ice we were on away from shore. Friends out there had one of those swamp boats that they have down in Florida -- guys use those for ice fishing, too -- and they took us into shore.
I was the one that organized the trip last February. There were three guys. I said if there was no wind and the forecast was good, we were going fishing. It was a very still morning. We left about 7 and went to Catawba Island, down by Port Clinton, Ohio. It's 50 miles away. They do good walleye fishing there; some people call them pickerel. That's the reason we drove that far. And for perch. The fishing wasn't bad, but we paid a price for it. That time, I did not have a cellphone. There was one in the car that was the wife's, but we didn't take it on the ice. You get cocky if you do this stuff a long time.
It took us close to an hour to walk out to where we were fishing. We had a little mush sled with all our gear in it -- some buckets and a little heater, fishing rods, a compass and a power auger. It bores a hole through the ice; within 15 seconds, you can get through 14 inches. We were out probably three and a half miles on the ice. One guy passed us on a riding lawn mower, pulling a sled. Some people take snowmobiles out. Others take A.T.V.'s, but that's not too safe, because if the cracks do open up, you can't get back across them with those vehicles.
We fished for three hours and noticed that the wind was starting to come up. No idea why. It was probably blowing 40 miles an hour. I said, ''Man, we better pick up and head on in.'' Then it started to snow, and the snow started blowing. We had a white-out. We didn't know that was going on. Unbeknown to us, the ice was already starting to open up in places. Lake Erie very seldom freezes across. And when the wind gets into that open water, it'll move it, force it under the ice, and it lifts the ice and creates cracks. A lot of times you're out in that big body of water, and the ice is shifting, you don't realize it. You don't hear anything. You don't feel anything. You're at the mercy of the weather, and there's no place to go.
It takes days of 50 degrees to crack the ice. But worry when that wind blows. We thought we had an hour to get to shore. But it was already too late. The ice had shifted and broken off in large pieces. In one place, we had to take some frozen chunks of ice and make a little bridge to get over one of the cracks. It was probably three feet wide. We got some big pieces that we piled on, maybe 8 or 10 of them. You hope that it doesn't collapse when you walk on it.
One friend told me, ''Next time you want to go ice fishing, forget my phone number.'' We were joking most of the way in and cussing out the weather guys, because things happened that weren't supposed to. There were one or two cracks, a foot wide, that we jumped across. We walked as far as we could. But between us and Catawba, it was open water. There was just no way we could get in. The wind had pushed the whole ice floe away from shore. If the wind changed direction and blew that ice out farther, we might be floating for quite a while.
We were kind of disgusted and frustrated when we saw we couldn't get in without assistance. We sure got ribbed by friends about not being too smart. Walking in, we saw the Coast Guard circling in a copter. At that point, we didn't know there was open water in front of us. We figured there were people behind us who were stranded. Somebody with a cellphone called them, I guess. The snow lasted probably 25 minutes. Then the Coast Guard could see a long way and saw us. The copter was about 40 feet off the ice, picking people up. They dropped a cable down and a basket. You climb in, and they lift you up.
Rescues happen just about every year there's ice. The Coast Guard doesn't encourage you to go out; they say it's never safe. People don't pay a whole lot of attention to them. There have been ice fishermen since time began. We didn't know what to expect when we climbed into the copter, but there was no reaming us out or anything. When you have to depend on somebody to pull your tail out of the fire, you feel kind of sheepish about it. I don't know if the Coast Guard saved our lives, but they sure made it more convenient than standing out there.
I can't get real enthused about going out again. I think about it, about the good times we've had on the ice. But you start to wonder if it's worth it. I miss it. There's something about competing with nature -- that's what you're doing, really, when you hunt or fish. It's something that gets in your blood. As I said, I've lived along the lake, fished on it all my life. Still, I haven't been out this year.
LIVES
