THE HAVANA ROOM
By Colin Harrison.
385 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $24.
''WAS it inevitable that Allison Sparks and I would fall into conversation?'' asks Bill Wyeth, the protagonist of Colin Harrison's new novel, ''The Havana Room,'' about 50 pages into the book.
Of course it was! For while Allison -- the manager of an old-time Manhattan steakhouse that Wyeth frequents, a ''long-legged'' brunette of ''humor and fury and sexual need'' -- has only just been introduced, she is instantly recognizable to even the most casual reader of noir as the woman-in-need who will enlist our reluctant hero's help and then proceed to make his life very, very complicated.
In fact, Allison is simply doing the bidding for her part-time boyfriend, Jay Rainey, who is looking for an attorney, any attorney, to close a last-minute deal to swap his prime piece of waterfront property on Long Island for a small, run-down office building in Lower Manhattan. Wyeth happens to be a Yale-educated real estate lawyer -- albeit a disgraced, out-of-work one -- and after a little arm-twisting he agrees to take a look at Rainey's contract, as long as Allison promises to take him to the Havana Room, a private bar beneath the steakhouse where some unknown ritual takes place several nights a month. (Ushering the leading man into a peculiar new subculture can also be part of the woman-in-need's mandate.) Thus is the plot of this stylish and meticulously researched, if ultimately limited, novel set in motion.
By now, we are already familiar with Wyeth's back story, a Tom Wolfe-worthy social parody of one man's fall from corporate grace. In brief, Wyeth, a 39-year-old partner at his white-shoe firm, is living comfortably on the Upper East Side, getting richer every year with his lovely wife, when his young son's slumber party goes terribly awry. One of the other boys wakes up thirsty in the middle of the night, and Wyeth fetches him a glass of milk that turns out to be tainted with microscopic traces of peanut oil -- just enough to send the pillow-headed little fellow, who is allergic to nuts, into anaphylactic shock. The boy is lying lifeless in his sleeping bag come morning. His father, a bigwig at one of the city's largest investment banks, promptly sets about ruining Wyeth's career and, tangentially, his marriage.
In a matter of months, Wyeth's suddenly middle-class wife and child are gone -- ''We're becoming poor,'' she complains. ''Poor!'' -- with scarcely an objection from Wyeth himself, and he's living in a dump of a third-floor walk-up in the garment district, drifting aimlessly through the city's anonymous streets. ''I did not quite become one of those chattering philosophers with matted hair and blackened fingernails but I was patrolling the perimeter of sanity,'' he explains.
Quite a comedown from his Park Avenue days, but Wyeth is still wearing his fine suits, a vestige of his former life that enables him to blend in among the prosperous-looking men -- ''my old self . . . as well as versions of my former future self'' -- when he discovers the aforementioned steakhouse, one of those well-worn, wainscoted Manhattan restaurants that the winds of fashion, culinary and otherwise, have somehow left untouched.
New York provides more than the backdrop for the action in ''The Havana Room.'' Harrison goes to great lengths -- at times too great -- to thread New York history through his narrative. (An entertaining but ultimately irrelevant abbreviated history of Manhattan real estate, from grinding glaciers to falling towers, comes to mind.) Far more effective are his kinetic descriptions of the city as seen by Wyeth, who, having completed that real estate transaction for Rainey, is soon enmeshed in his client's messy affairs.
Here, for example, is Wyeth driving west on the Long Island Expressway toward the big city: ''Soon the yards shrink as the borough of Queens approaches and the buildings become squat and dense . . . and then you are in Queens proper, facing the sheer wall of Manhattan, a thousand-foot stone tapestry hung from the sky, and then you're whizzing downward under the East River into the halogen-mad tunnel, daring and dared by the other vehicles to pass at 80 miles an hour, then up onto the island proper, the city that night a muffled village of snow.''
It's not every day that a corporate lawyer, even one as down on his luck as Wyeth, is cast as the hero of a thriller -- Harrison opted for an ex-fighter pilot and a tabloid newspaper columnist in his two previous books -- and there are moments when Wyeth's calm in the face of danger stretches credulity. On the other hand, our protagonist's well-honed fact-finding skills are ideally suited to the urgent task at hand: piecing together the strange story of Jay Rainey. Why was he so eager to make that lopsided real estate deal? Who is the 14-year-old girl he goes to watch play basketball every Thursday night in her school's gym? And what is that hyperbaric oxygen chamber doing in his apartment?
When he begins shuttling between the North Fork of Long Island, Manhattan and Brooklyn in search of answers, Wyeth is just trying to get himself out of trouble, to disentangle himself from his client, not reconstruct his own shattered sense of self. But it happens all the same, inadvertently, vicariously really, through Rainey, a man as desperate to keep his past alive as Wyeth has been resigned to having lost his. It is here that Harrison departs, admirably, from the gloomy nihilism that pervades so much literary noir.
Harrison is a cinematic writer, and the combination of his fast-paced plotting and graphic imagery can give ''The Havana Room'' an almost comic-book feel -- and I mean that in the best sense. It's technicolor noir, as it were. Frames linger for days in the reader's imagination, like the picture of Rainey, a former professional baseball prospect whose career was pre-emptively destroyed by the sudden onset of a severe breathing disorder, smashing 95-mile-an-hour fastballs in a Brooklyn batting cage, sucking deep breaths from an Adrenalin inhaler in between cuts.
Harrison is also an inventive writer; despite all the buildup, and there is plenty, when the mysterious goings-on in the Havana Room are eventually revealed, they manage to meet expectations with their weirdness. So it's unfortunate when the author conjures the occasional adolescent-fantasy image better left to the likes of Quentin Tarantino, including that of an outsize owner of a downtown hip-hop club being serviced beneath his desk as he threatens our leading man.
Such disappointments are rare in this energetic novel, which frequently flirts with transcending its genre. In the book's final pages, Harrison strains too hard to give his hero a shot at redemption. But by this point, the author has good will to burn.
Jonathan Mahler, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is completing a book about New York and baseball in the 70's.
