A BURST of loud swearing caused José Gomez to glance up from his computer terminal at a US Airways gate at the Charlotte, N.C., airport on Nov. 1. A burly, red-faced passenger who looked about 40 was rushing through the concourse, using every profanity imaginable to express his dissatisfaction with the airline, Mr. Gomez said.
Having his ears assaulted with foul language has become part of a day's work for Mr. Gomez, a passenger service agent who works at boarding gates.
''We see that sort of thing on a daily basis,'' he said. ''I have been in this business 33 years, and customers' attitudes have definitely gotten worse.''
It's a problem that doesn't always stop with profane words, as Mr. Gomez was about to witness. Still cursing and not breaking his stride, the customer swung his bags in an arc and purposefully knocked over a trash receptacle, spewing its contents across the floor. According to Mr. Gomez, the man yelled, '''You people need to pick up the [expletive] garbage around here.'''
At that point, one of Mr. Gomez's colleagues, Conrad Puckett, who was at the gate nearest the spilled rubbish, picked up his telephone to call security. The passenger rushed him, took a swing and missed, then grabbed Mr. Puckett and slammed him into the podium, bruising two of his ribs.
The passenger, William Edwins of Wilmington, N.C., was charged with disorderly conduct and assault, both misdemeanors. According to David Maloney, an assistant district attorney for Mecklenburg County, N.C., Mr. Edwins agreed in mid-January to a program called deferred prosecution that will require him to undergo an anger management evaluation, perform community service and report to a probation officer. In return, the charges will be dismissed.
The case was the fifth incident of violence against passenger service agents in six months at Charlotte Douglas International Airport. Other occurrences included agents being pushed, shoved and spat at.
''I don't know what gets into people's heads when they travel,'' Mr. Gomez said. ''Could you even imagine someone swearing at or assaulting a department store clerk if they had run out of the right size pants? You'd say the customer was mentally unstable. But in airports, such behavior is almost viewed as normal.''
It is not only Mr. Gomez who feels that travelers are becoming increasingly rude and disrespectful to employees. In a survey of 875 airline, bus, train and highway employees late last year, the nonpartisan public opinion organization Public Agenda found that 54 percent of travel workers feel that passenger rudeness is a top cause of job-related stress and tension. Nearly half said that they had seen a situation where disrespectful behavior threatened to escalate into a physical confrontation, and 19 percent said they had observed violent acts.
''As a society, our manners are simply getting worse,'' said Pam Terry, who has been a passenger service agent for US Airways at Reagan National Airport in Washington since 1992. ''We don't have as many controls on our behavior as we used to. We don't think we have to respect authority.''
Ms. Terry said she had never been physically assaulted, although a cup full of cola and ice cubes hurled at her by a passenger upon learning that his oversized bag had to be checked landed a few feet wide of its mark. A passenger who arrived at the gate too late for his flight told her: ''I hope you get cancer and die. Slowly.''
She has also seen, she said, a passenger slam a gate agent's hand in a Jetway's heavy steel door, and because she is a union official knows of cases of a 14-year-old girl slapping an airline worker in the face as her mother urged her on, and of a group of passengers flipping over the bench seats in the waiting area when it was announced that a plane was late. Throwing staplers, she said, is a particularly common way for unruly passengers to vent.
''Rudeness can definitely ruin your day,'' said Ms. Terry, president of her local of the Communications Workers of America, which represents about 6,000 US Airways agents. ''And it doesn't have to involve violence. When a passenger becomes vocal or menacing, you get gun shy knowing that there's a chance they might go over the edge. It causes me enormous stress even when they don't get physical.''
Ms. Terry, who is 5 feet 2, said she had seen fewer incidents of rudeness when she has worked beside a large male colleague.
Once they board airplanes, passengers seem to regain some of their civility, according to George Price, a Dallas-based flight attendant for American Airlines and the communications coordinator for the Association of Professional Flight Attendants, a union representing American's flight attendants. Federal Aviation Administration actions against unruly passengers aboard planes -- fines of up to $25,000 -- more than doubled to 299 in 2001 from 146 in 1995, but then declined to 270 in 2002. (There were 195 in 2003, as of Dec. 4, the latest figures.)
''Since Sept. 11, the number of incidents of outright air rage has really dropped,'' Mr. Price said. ''But there is still a group out there that doesn't understand that rude behavior has no place in aviation.''
Mr. Price said that a favorite approach of ill-mannered passengers is to berate the flight attendant profession.
''They sneer and say, 'You're nothing but a flight attendant, don't get uppity with me,''' he said. ''They don't know that I have been trained to defibrillate, do C.P.R., apply first aid, even deliver a baby.''
Nancy Sargent, who has been a flight attendant for Delta Airlines for 34 years, said: ''When I started in the business, flying was glamorous. It was a luxury. Men wouldn't think of boarding a flight unless they were wearing a coat and tie. I can remember standing in the aisle carving a rib roast.''
''Now all that has changed, and we are dealing with a very different group of passengers,'' she added. ''There's not the level of sophistication and understanding, so you have passengers getting on the plane, dropping their bag at your feet and saying, 'Find a place for this.'''
Occasionally, Ms. Sargent said, a passenger's bad behavior can be attributed to excessive drinking. ''We will cut off passengers who have had too much,'' she said, ''but sometimes it's not liquor they have consumed on the flight that's the problem, but what they drank in the terminal.''
In 2001, after hearing numerous complaints about passenger inebriation, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, considered initiating legislation that would impose a two-drink limit on airline passengers, according to her spokesman, Howard Gantman. ''Flight attendants told her horrible stories'' about drunken passengers, Mr. Gantman said.
He said the senator still favored the limit, but had not proceeded with legislation because other issues of airline security had taken priority since the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon.
Respondents to the Public Agenda survey cited several causes for passengers' rudeness. Nearly 70 percent of workers said that a general decline in values and morals has led customers to be less polite and respectful. A similar number of both travelers and workers blamed the long lines and the generally hectic conditions at airports, caused in part by a lack of staff and resources.
Sheer numbers may also account for the increase in airborne rudeness. According to the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, a federal agency, the number of domestic passengers on United States airlines rose by 32 percent from 1990 to 2002 -- to 552 million from 417 million.
Some railroad workers say they also see a trend toward rudeness.
''I have seen a diminution of respect toward our crews in general,'' said Gary Hopson, a conductor on Amtrak's New York-to-Boston route. ''And in the last six months or so, the level seems to have picked up, but most of it is still limited to loud words. I think that the quasi-military look of conductors' uniforms generates a certain respect. Perhaps that's why our incidence of furious passengers is not as bad as is at airlines.''
Some travel industry employees and their unions feel that travel companies' management bears part of the responsibility for the increasingly bad attitudes of passengers.
''Sometimes it seems like the enemy is not the passengers but senior management,'' said Ms. Terry, the US Airways customer service agent and union local president. ''On the issue of passenger disrespect, management does not want to support us. They prefer to avoid conflict and possible litigation and put their heads in the sand.''
Amy Kudwa, a spokeswoman for the airline, disputed that assertion. "We have had a history of supporting both our ground agents and our flight crews when it comes to instances of air rage," she said. "We rigorously pursue and prosecute passengers who engage in such activities."
In the case involving Mr. Puckett in Charlotte, the airport police did not charge his attacker, and Mr. Puckett said he had to go to county authorities and swear out his own complaint.
Ms. Kudwa, of US Airways, said its legal department had contacted the Mecklenburg County district attorney's office to emphasize the airline's desire to seek prosecution. She also said that Mr. Edwins would be denied future travel on US Airways.
Any reluctance to act, though, is particularly vexing to airline employees because since Nov. 1, 2001, there has been a federal law providing for a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison for passengers who interfere with the performance of an airline employee's duties. But the law has never been applied, according to Rick Braswell, administrative assistant to the president of the Communications Workers of America.
In December, Senators John F. Kerry of Massachusetts and Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina, both Democrats and sponsors of the 2001 bill, urged Secretary of Transportation Norman Y. Mineta to raise awareness of the law.
After a survey of 400 US Airways workers conducted by Lauer Research of Takoma Park, Md., in October 2003 found that 49 percent of agents had seen or experienced rage in the previous six months, the Communications Workers of America increased efforts to have signs outlining the provisions of the law posted in areas where passengers encounter agents, just as notices now are posted near security checkpoints. The union wants the same information on ticket jackets. ''So far, we haven't made that happen,'' Mr. Braswell said.
So what's the best way for a disgruntled passenger to get satisfaction from a travel industry employee?
''Be very pleasant, very proactive and very persistent,'' Ms. Terry, the US Airways agent. ''And if all else fails, say, 'I really need to speak to a supervisor.' Remember, we're human, too.''
BARRY ESTABROOK contributes to the Travel section regularly.
