AFTER you get past the stunning news that Alex Rodriguez will most likely join Derek Jeter in the Yankees' infield, the question that arises is why.
The deal the Yankees are about to conclude would send Alfonso Soriano to the Texas Rangers, perhaps along with a prospect, and move Rodriguez to the Yankees.
Now the fun begins.
The simple story behind the news is that third baseman Aaron Boone tore up a knee; the Yankees needed a star infielder and went after Rodriguez. A-Rod would play third, and his good friend Jeter would stay at shortstop.
But there is something more to this, a larger question: Whose head is George Steinbrenner throwing at now? I think it's Derek Jeter's head. Again.
About a year ago, Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, publicly criticized Jeter for lacking focus and keeping late hours. Steinbrenner said all of the charity work and the bachelor lifestyle had been affecting Jeter's performance on the field, and he also singled out Jeter's defense.
Jeter took offense and said that the Boss had crossed the line by questioning his integrity. Jeter also defended his work ethic.
Ultimately, Jeter and the Boss made amends. They shot a couple of Visa commercials together and the Yankees reached the World Series.
But if Steinbrenner's comments before last season were a brushback pitch, the latest move is a knockdown.
Rodriguez is the best all-around shortstop in baseball -- not just the best in the American League, but the best in baseball. Yet he would go to third in deference to Jeter.
How long do you think that arrangement will last? Jeter missed six weeks last season after dislocating his shoulder in the opener on March 31 in Toronto. He also injured his thumb during the American League Championship Series against Boston. If Jeter is injured and Rodriguez fills in splendidly, the debate over who should be playing where will be unimaginable.
From the Yankees' view, this replacement scheme would be great: they would substitute for their captain, Jeter, with the league's most valuable player, Rodriguez.
But from Jeter's perspective, this is a little like the Boss hiring an assistant to look over his shoulder. The point is that nobody on the Yankees is above having his chain yanked -- Jeter included.
Jeter played poorly in the decisive Game 6 of the World Series, going 0 for 4 and making a crucial error. That's how the 2003 season ended, and the 2004 season may begin with A-Rod at third.
But for all the talk and anticipation of Rodriguez in pinstripes, the Florida Marlins proved by beating the Yankees in the World Series that a team doesn't need big-name stars to win a championship.
After Game 6 in the Series, Jeter spoke of losing not being an option. In his mind, losing means not winning the World Series. The Yankees have gone three straight years without a World Series championship; they will probably go a fourth season without winning because of all their new faces, questionable chemistry and an unproven pitching staff.
The funny thing is that, after a tumultuous season, Jeter said he anticipated more tranquillity this season.
No way.
Andy Pettitte is in Houston. Roger Clemens, who retired from the Yankees, also signed with the Astros. Boone tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee during the off-season, setting in motion the push to bring Jeter's friend Rodriguez to New York.
Oh, about the friendship. Three years ago, A-Rod had some choice things to say about his good friend Jeter for an article in Esquire, questioning Jeter's leadership, his ability in the clutch and the belief that he was the foundation of the Yankees' offense. In another interview, Rodriguez said that Jeter was inferior to him in power and defense.
But that was about baseball and about personalities and about the Yankees.
In another sense, however, this trade isn't really about the Yankees, but about the Red Sox.
If you even had a thought that the Curse of the Bambino was over, guess again. The curse is alive, insidious as ever.
The Red Sox tried mightily to trade for A-Rod, making it clear to Nomar Garciaparra and Manny Ramirez that they were not part of the team's plans.
Boston nearly acquired Rodriguez in December, but the deal that would have sent Ramirez to the Rangers fell through; the players association blocked Boston's attempt to restructure Rodriguez's contract.
Now the hated Yankees are swooping in to grab A-Rod and will probably beat Boston over the head with him. The Red Sox will play the 2004 season with egg on their faces.
Still, the Yankees will play with a star-studded, jewelry-laden team that will be hard pressed to get off the ground. Every year recently, the situation has become more desperate for the Yankees. They had the highest payroll in baseball last season at $184.5 million. The A-Rod deal will pump it up millions more. And they still won't win the Series.
With or without A-Rod, the Yankees begin spring training on Tuesday.
Let the madness begin.
Sports of The Times
