PETER MARKAVAGE -- a 57-year-old product manager at Lucent Technologies -- was only five years from retirement when he was thrust into the harsh job market of 2001.
''I was going to job interviews, and wherever I went there were more people waiting in line than there were jobs,'' said Mr. Markavage. ''I was at the back of the line one day and I said, 'I have to do something else.'''
So Mr. Markavage became ManualMan. For years, as a hobby, he had refurbished vintage radio equipment and collected out-of-date manuals at flea markets. Now he sells copies of some 12,000 manuals in his inventory to other hobbyists over the Internet at ManualMan.com.
Despite a new brisk business and his Lucent pension, Mr. Markavage is making only about half his former salary. But he likes what he is doing, there is no vast bureaucracy to contend with, and his morning commute is just one flight down the stairs from the kitchen to his office in his split-level in Sayreville.
Like Mr. Markavage, New Jersey has weathered the economic downturn -- with some scars -- and is slowly rebounding. According preliminary federal figures, the state added 37,100 jobs last year, the sixth best job-growth performance in the nation and the only state in the Northeast to make the top 10.
Looking ahead, the value of goods and services produced in New Jersey is expected to rise 5 percent in 2004, to $413.7 billion, according to the latest figures compiled by the New Jersey Council of Economic Advisors, and personal income is expected to grow 4.5 percent, to $364.4 billion.
''Going into 2004, I'm looking for a very good year -- a year that's going to be a significant improvement on 2003 and probably the best year since 2000,'' said Joseph Seneca, a professor of economics at Rutgers and chairman of the governor's Council of Economic Advisors.
Nonetheless, the economy has been forever altered in ways that has put New Jersey's workers into a constant state of insecurity. Corporate downsizing is now an entrenched business strategy; guaranteed pension plans and health benefits for retirees are disappearing, and competition from low-wage workers overseas is a looming threat to highly educated professional workers as well as blue-collar employees.
''There is a great deal of anxiety out there,'' said Carl Van Horn, director of the John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University. ''It's a combination of reality and perception. Not everybody is going to be laid off, but everybody is working scared because they know somebody down the road who was.''
What is more, Mr. Van Horn said that the anxiety -- present in high levels even in surveys he conducted in the late 90's at the peak of the last economic boom -- seems here to stay.
''The number of scared and anxious workers has gone up, but they were high to begin with before this recession,'' he said. ''This is the new normal.''
In addition, Mr. Seneca cautioned, the psyches of New Jersey workers could be rattled at any time by global events far beyond their control, like a sharp rise in oil prices, a bad turn in Iraq or another large-scale terrorist attack on the United States.
Moreover, an unprecedented boom in mortgage refinancing that put billions of dollars into the pockets of consumers is drying up, he said, and double-digit appreciation of home values is likely to level off.
Another potential problem could also be lurking just beyond the November election. Mr. Seneca warned that some of President Bush's economic policies, including tax cuts, may lead to an economic blowback, with the budget deficit in the current year projected at $477 billion and the nation's trade deficit expected to be about $450 billion.
''Those two deficits are enormous and unsustainable, and the effects will be felt in the form of higher interest rates, increased taxes and more realistic living within our means.'' Mr. Seneca said. ''Maybe not in the near future, but these are fundamental issues that have to be faced.''
For the moment, job growth in the state is presenting a surprisingly bright spot.
''The trend in New Jersey is pretty promising and it's been counter to what's been happening in the rest of the Northeast,'' said Brian Lego, an analyst at Economy.com, of West Chester, Pa., an economic consulting company that specializes in regional economics.
The robustness of New Jersey's job recovery is a result of a diverse employment base that relies less on manufacturing than the rest of the nation, said Mr. Seneca. For instance, in New Jersey 8.8 percent of employment is in manufacturing, compared with 11 percent nationally. Nationwide, he pointed out, the manufacturing sector lost jobs for 41 consecutive months through December 2003.
As the nation's wealthiest state in terms of household income -- median household income was $55,146, compared with Connecticut, in second place with $53,935 -- New Jersey was able to maintain high levels of consumer spending, protecting local retailers and service companies from losing too many jobs during the economic downturn.
In an interesting touch of irony that will play out in this year of presidential politics, Mr. Seneca noted that the Bush tax cuts, sharply criticized by the Democratic candidates, had a more salutary effect on New Jersey -- which in the last half-dozen years has placed itself firmly in the Democratic column -- than other states because they benefit wealthier taxpayers.
Still, there are pockets of economic problems. For instance, New Jersey's job growth in 2003 fell below its typical annual average of 50,000 new jobs a year. Mr. Lego said New Jersey's shrunken telecom industry may have hit bottom, but is still struggling with more employees and equipment than the market can support.
Health care is also troubling, he said, noting a rash of layoffs at institutions like the Hospital Center of Orange, where 800 jobs are in peril, and General Hospital Center in Passaic, which faces the loss of about 1,000 jobs, a circumstance driven in part by shortfalls in Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements because of tightening state and federal budgets.
For now the all-important pharmaceutical industry is holding its own, Mr. Lego said, although it remains vulnerable to continued consolidation and a decline in the number of new drugs winning approval to go on the market. For instance, Merck &amp; Company, with headquarters in Whitehouse Station, said last year that it planned to lay off 4,400 workers after two key drugs failed in the late stages of clinical testing.
The key to future growth, at least for now, is expected to be in the financial services industry. After the attack on the World Trade Center on Sept. 11, 2001, many companies temporarily relocated to New Jersey before filtering back to New York City. But with a bear market under way at the same time, the investment industry was contracting overall.
Now, as the financial services industry appears ready for another expansion, Mr. Lego said, New Jersey is likely to be a prime spot for new job growth. Many trained employees already live in the state, he said, and while the cost of doing business in New Jersey is not low, it is still cheaper than in Manhattan.
''New Jersey has managed to attract some of those jobs from New York, and I think it's going to continue going forward,'' he said.
Indeed, the state treasurer, John McCormack, said that economic development officials were seeing an increasing number of inquiries from firms interested in moving to New Jersey, particularly since recent guidelines put out by the Securities and Exchange Commission on providing backup facilities for crucial financial activities after the terrorist attacks of 9/11 make the state attractive to those firms.
New Jersey's location -- within 50 miles of 25 million people -- has helped it continue to grow as a warehouse and distribution center, and supports travel and tourism spending at the shore, said Mr. Van Horn at Rutgers.
''We have these building blocks that are very stable and helps explain the positive story about our job growth,'' he said.
New Jersey is also positioned to take advantage of the global economy, said Mr. Lego. For instance, he said that the Newark area, with its shipping ports and international airport, has generated new jobs even as American exports rose with a weaker dollar. Imports coming into the country, fed by continued strong consumer demand, also generate business at the ports.
Yet the global economy is taking its toll in other ways as well. State Senator Shirley Turner, a Democrat whose district includes Trenton, became enraged last year when she learned that a call center for the state's welfare and food stamp recipients, operated by a private contractor, was going to move from Wisconsin to India.
Ms. Turner quickly introduced legislation that would have barred state contractors from moving jobs overseas. The legislation failed to win final passage, but the contractor agreed to move the call center to Camden.
''A recovery cannot last very long if we don't create jobs,'' Senator Turner said. ''A lot of companies are continuing to increase their exportation of jobs overseas, and I think it's very foolish of government to follow their bad example.''
Senator Turner -- who plans to reintroduce her legislation in this session -- said the state's overall employment figures did not reflect pockets of severe unemployment in New Jersey, including Trenton. ''If you look at it statewide it doesn't look that high,'' she said. ''But if you go into our urban areas, it's twice as much as in suburban areas. That's where we need to create jobs.''
In the early part of the slowdown, as the tech bubble burst, the rate of unemployment was higher among whites than minorities, said William Rodgers, chief economist at the Heldrich Center, but over time, minorities began to close the gap.
''As consumer confidence started to slow, the recession took on the same flavor of past recessions in which African-American and minority unemployment grew faster,'' he said.
And Hispanic workers -- who now make up 12.4 percent of the state's work force, with 543,000 people, showed the highest increases in minority unemployment rates, he said. The unemployment rate for Hispanic men in New Jersey grew to 7 percent in 2002 from 4.2 percent in 2000; among Hispanic women, unemployment rose to 9 percent from 5.1 percent.
The housing market has also contributed to economic growth in New Jersey, where low interest rates have fueled the run-up in home values -- even as the stock market and jobs dried up.
And reassuring to homeowners, Mr. Seneca said a recent Rutgers study indicated that despite a 51.7 percent increase in housing prices in the state since 1998, it was not a bubble waiting to burst. In fact, he said, income and the demand for housing remain strong, while a new supply is constrained by restrictions imposed on development.
Nowhere has the increase in home values been as strong as in Monmouth and Ocean Counties, where the median price of a single-family home is up 68.74 percent, to $291,640, in just three years. According to a recent study by the Brookings Institution, a research organization in Washington, the increase put the Monmouth/Ocean County region in a tie for the fourth-largest increase in the nation.
Mindy North, owner of Paramount Properties in Marlboro and president of the Monmouth County Association of Realtors, said that 20 years ago the county was a haven for teachers working in Staten Island and Brooklyn, who could commute easily and get more home for their dollar. But gradually, Ms. North said, Wall Street professionals and a smattering of celebrities who want lots of space and yet remain close to Manhattan have begun moving in.
''For years Monmouth County was undervalued in comparison to what was going on north of us,'' she said.
Mr. Lego said that Monmouth -- with its run-up in prices -- was not likely to see prices fall since household incomes in the area could support them. But he did warn that housing prices could flatten in the areas around Newark as well as in Bergen, Passaic and Middlesex Counties.
The fact is, while the number of jobs is again on the rise, many workers are settling for less in pay.
Urs Muller -- who in 2002 lost his job as a research manager with AT&amp;T after working there for six years -- is starting up a software company, Net-Scale Technologies in Morganville, making about half his old salary, which he would describe only as in the six-figure range.
Mr. Muller said that about 150 people in his division were let go, and he estimated that about half left the state. Of the total, he said, about half have taken research jobs at universities or government laboratories -- earning less money -- while about a quarter of them moved to mid- to large-size companies, where they may even be earning more than they were at AT&amp;T. Another quarter, he said, are at start-up companies, and most of them have already switched companies two or three times.
For his part, Mr. Muller, who is 40 and has no young children at home, said he felt he could take the risk of starting his own company, which made nothing for the first nine months.
Vinh Vu was 50 and had four children at home when he took an early retirement package at Lucent. Mr. Vu has worked part time as a financial planner and a personal trainer since he left his six-figure job as a district manager at Lucent. He is now focusing more on a company in which he is a partner, Ginko Audio, which makes custom acrylic dust covers, and nonvibrating platforms and stands for high-end audio equipment.
Mr. Vu's wife, Mai-Uyen Nguyen, is a manager for AT&amp;T -- earning more than he did -- so between her salary and his pension and proceeds from his other jobs, the family has been able to maintain its standard of living.
''This allows me to develop the business,'' he said. ''It's not to the point where it has replaced my old Lucent income, but it's grown quite a bit and I'm happy with the progress.''
Mr. Van Horn said an increasing number of unemployed and underemployed workers were turning to self-employment for two reasons. First, large companies were hiring an increasing number of outside consultants and contractors. And second, the people becoming self-employed after leaving high-level corporate jobs had the skills to run their own businesses.
Finally, Mr. Van Horn said, self-employment may be a new way station in what he called the ''go-and-be-dislocated economy.''
''People have figured out its not smart to say you're unemployed when you're really looking for a full-time job,'' he said.
