Otis Birdsong played in four All-Star games, averaged more than 20 points a game in four seasons during his N.B.A. career and helped the Nets to a first-round playoff victory over the defending champion Philadelphia 76ers of Julius Erving and Moses Malone. But when he visits his hometown, Winter Haven, Fla., the only thing his friends want to talk about is what he did in high school.
''I had a pretty good career in the N.B.A., but my greatest thrill as far as basketball was winning the state championship in high school,'' Birdsong, 48, said recently. ''Winning -- that's what you play for. When I go home, people talk more about my high school championship than about me being a four-time All-Star. So I would've liked to have won an N.B.A. championship. I can't imagine the feeling of winning an N.B.A. championship.''
Birdsong, a 6-foot-4 guard, played 12 seasons in the N.B.A. When he left in 1989, he was burned out. Struggling through a divorce that separated him from his children, he said that he did not want even to shoot a basketball. It took two years to clear his mind. ''Then, a friend asked me to put on a celebrity basketball game,'' he said. ''So I did it and started meeting with different C.E.O.'s and corporate executives, and I said: 'This is pretty neat. I might enjoy doing this.' So I decided to start my own company.''
The result was a sports marketing company called Birdsong and Associates. After about four years, Birdsong gave up his company, moved to Dallas with his second wife and began working for Personalities and Promotions International, a marketing company owned by the N.F.L. Hall of Famer Roger Staubach.
Among other things, the company lines up motivational speakers, obtains endorsements for athletes and other celebrities, and organizes fantasy sports camps. Birdsong is director of events and promotions, and he is running a fantasy camp with other former N.B.A. stars at the league's All-Star Weekend in Los Angeles.
Birdsong still plays basketball, runs four or five miles a day and lifts weights several times a week to stay in shape. The game is back in his blood, but he said he did not covet a coaching or a management position.
His top priority is a Bible study he attends three days a week at the Institute of Divine Metaphysical Research. Birdsong has been attending the classes since 1989 and will not give them up for basketball. ''I would never coach no matter how much money I was offered because I would not have the time,'' he said. ''My No. 1 priority is the Bible school. It's made a world of difference in my life.''
Then and Now
