SAY what you will about winter, its dull skies and landscapes, your shriveled rhododendrons, stark dogwoods and all the rest. But the fact is, right about now roses have great hips.
Stripped down to their naked winter stems and menacing thorns, the New Dawn roses outside my office window were not exactly competing for attention when I noticed those hips. Now the sparkling copper-colored fruits are the highlight of my view.
Rarely mentioned in catalogs, hips are the rose family's best-kept secret. And while hip moments may not represent the pinnacle of rose appreciation, they are one way to keep away my winter discontent.
As I began to delve into the literature, I learned that the colors, shapes and presentation of rose hips are nearly as diverse as the flowers that take front stage during the growing season. Since winter is so long, leaving so much time for hip contemplation, I plan to start taking that trait into account when ordering my spring roses.
Michael Marriott, technical manager at David Austin Roses in Wolverhampton, England, offered me a long list of roses worth planting for their hips alone. Rosa pimpinellifolia, for example, a prickly character with cream-colored flowers, aka the Scotch rose, is notable for its shiny black hips. One of its children, Robbie Burns (hardy to an impressive Zone 3), has soft pink single flowers followed by mahogany hips almost an inch in diameter.
Pimpinellifolia doesn't often hold its fruit beyond fall. But in ''Roses: A Celebration'' (North Point Press, 2003), an anthology edited by Wayne Winterrowd, one writer, Thomas Fischer, rhapsodizes about Golden Wings, a pimpinellifolia hybrid that has the twin virtues of bearing yellow blossoms and then reddish-orange fruit.
Rugosa roses also come to mind. Emerging the moment a flower sheds petals, and rivaling cherry tomatoes in size, blush and soft flesh, rugosa hips perform their striptease in summer, when every other sort of seduction is in progress, then vanish before the first snow -- when we need them most.
For winter hips, Mr. Marriott recommends Rosa virginiana, an American native with shiny bright crimson hips that hold well, and Rosa forrestiana (alas not hardy beyond Zone 8), which has crimson flowers followed by dense clusters of bright red fruit.
Many ramblers have head-turning hips. Rosa mulliganii bears long-lasting orange hips, as do the climbers Rambling Rector and the Garland. For a nice contrast, toss in a climbing Cupid, whose hips are yellow.
For sheer size, Mr. Marriott would vote for Rosa macrophylla, a species from the Himalayas that ''isn't overly hardy,'' as he put it, but bears deep orange-red globes. The hips on Rosa moyesii are pear-shaped, while those on Rosa glauca are shaped like vases.
If you're lacking hips and wondering why, it's probably because you are too efficient and hastened last summer to clip your roses' spent flowers. Deadheading stimulates blossoms but forfeits fruit.
Donna Fuss, the rosarian at Elizabeth Park in Hartford, mentioned a handful of roses that can multitask, including Earth Song, Distant Drums, Prairie Harvest, Golden Unicorn and Bonica. But generally, you are forced to choose between blossoms and hips, a chore that gets easier as the season gets later. Mrs. Fuss, for one, stops deadheading at the end of August.
Leaving the flowers in place, she explained, actually helps a rose prepare for winter. Rather than squander its resources making new flowers, the plant channels energy into its roots. Colorful hips are the winter payoff.
Right now hips not only enrich my view but also feed the wildlife. Milan Bull, senior director of science and conservation for the Connecticut Audubon Society, says that rose hips are responsible for the northern range of mockingbirds, cardinals and tufted titmice.
Robins, bluebirds, cedar waxwings and Monk parakeets depend on rose hips to survive winter, creating something of a dilemma for backyard bird lovers, because the rose that provides most of the fodder is the non-native wild multiflora rose, which has spread so far that it is on the invasive plant list in every state in New England.
Birds are not the only creatures to benefit from a fruit that is high in Vitamin C. Mr. Marriott tells of British schoolchildren being sent out to gather nutritional hips during the lean years of World War II.
I would be wary about harvesting mine, given all the deer repellent applied during the growing season. And many gardeners douse their roses with sprays much worse than the stinky stuff that I apply. But more to the point, considering the dearth of other attractions outside my window right now, why consume the centerpiece?
CUTTINGS
