NINE years ago, Republicans won control of the House of Representatives in part because Newt Gingrich promised in the ''Contract With America'' that they would cut taxes and simplify the tax system.
The goal was to ''tear out the income tax by its roots and discard it and replace it with a new form of taxation,'' said Representative Bill Archer of Texas in 1995, shortly after he became the first Republican in four decades to head the House Ways and Means Committee.
But the reality has been far different. As Chris Bergin, the chief executive of Tax Analysts Inc., the nonprofit publisher of Tax Notes, put it, ''Instead of tearing the income tax out by its roots, Congress has been watering and fertilizing it.''
For decades, Congress has used the tax code to engineer social goals and hand out favors, a trend that accelerated during the Clinton administration and became supercharged during the administration of George W. Bush, which has introduced vast changes in such rapid-fire order that not all the consequences are understood even by people who study tax policy. Three major tax bills enacted in three years have vastly complicated the tax code, and a fourth Bush tax-cut bill is in the works.
The demand for more tax cuts is strong, especially from Americans with the highest incomes, despite soaring budget shortfalls. As Gene Steuerle, a tax policy expert in the Reagan administration who is now a senior fellow at the Urban Institute, has said, ''Around the town of Washington, the passing of a tax act never leads to a decline in requests for new tax breaks.''
Giving tax cuts to specific groups can be a powerful way for politicians to raise money, so it is not surprising that the size of the tax code has grown -- along with the volumes of money from campaign donors -- even though nearly all elected officials in Washington say that they favor simplification.
Congress is so hooked on complexity that it cannot seem to keep things simple even on matters that would not seem to offer any prospect of currying favor with contributors. The tax code, for example, contains five tax breaks for families with children, and each of the five defines a qualifying child differently.
So can anything be done about tax-code complexity? Or is simplification just a pipe dream?
Bruce Bartlett, a Republican tax expert who is a senior fellow at the National Center for Policy Analysis, said that the political and economic algebra worked like this: ''Support for simplification always disappears when people are forced to consider giving up tax breaks that benefit them. Complexity is O.K. as long as it saves you money.''
In an e-mail message, Mr. Bartlett said his ''main complaint about how simplification is generally discussed is that it doesn't differentiate between what I would call technical complexity (how many lines are on the tax form, how clear are the instructions) and fundamental complexity (the inability of experts to figure out what the tax law means, how to define income, etc.).''
Eliminating fundamental complexity, it turns out, is not simple. Academics who have tackled specific aspects of simplification have churned out law review articles with more footnotes than this article has periods.
When Congress ordered the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation to study simplification in 1998, it took 18 months of work to identify the issues -- and then decided to ignore 22 major ones that involved policy questions rather than tax administration.
When the committee's three-volume study was released in April 2001, it had 150 major recommendations and was 1,300 pages long.
Paul H. O'Neill, President Bush's first Treasury secretary, said the study ''points out the seriousness of complexity and the corrosive impact it has on the tax system.'' Mr. O'Neill said the study showed ''that there is a desperate need for reform'' because too many taxpayers spent too much time and money trying to comply with the law. ''We are worthy of better,'' he said.
Here is a look at some of the complex issues of tax simplification:
The Code's Five Children
Federal tax law gives five breaks for people with children: dependency exemptions, head of household filing status, the child tax credit, the child and dependent care tax credit and the earned income tax credit. But each break has its own definition of a qualifying child.
In some cases, a child can be in her 20's; in others she must be under 13 or 17 or 18. A child must reside in a home for a full year to qualify for some tax breaks, while for others the adult getting the break need not lay eyes on the child.
As a result of these different definitions, two families with the same income, but with children of different ages, can owe very different amounts of federal income tax. That violates a basic tax principle called horizontal equity, the idea that people with similar incomes should pay similar amounts of tax.
Confusion over the definition of a qualifying child appears to be a big reason that a fifth of all claims for the earned income tax credit contain errors. The Congressional study concluded that many of the working poor mistakenly believe that any child who qualifies for an exemption as a dependent also counts in qualifying for the earned income tax credit. Congress has enacted rules that are so complex that the experts have trouble explaining them in plain English.
''Adopting a uniform definition would reduce inadvertent taxpayer errors resulting from differing definitions of a qualifying child,'' the study said.
But even solving that problem is not child's play. This month, the Treasury Department proposed a ''uniform definition'' that would define a child as anyone under 19, except in these cases:
From the ages of 19 to 24, a person could be a child for purposes of the personal tax exemption, so long as she was a full-time student who was supported by her parents or was permanently and totally disabled.
Eligibility for the middle-class child credit would end at the age of 17 -- one year before legal adulthood.
The dependent care credit for working parents would end when a child turns 13.
Adopting this ''uniform definition'' would cost the government $475 million in lost taxes from 2005 through 2014, the Treasury Department estimated this month.
What the department did not break down was the cost of allowing exemptions for 24-year-old graduate students to subsidize their advanced education, compared with the cost of continuing a tax subsidy for children of working parents so that they do not become latchkey kids just as they enter puberty.
Joel Slemrod, director of the Office of Tax Policy Research at the University of Michigan, favors applying the idea of uniform definitions to more than just who qualifies as a child. Mr. Slemrod said that all tax credits for the middle class, like the Hope Scholarship and Lifetime Learning credits and the child credit, should apply to the same range of incomes, and should all start to phase out at the same dollar level.
The Stealth Tax
More than three decades ago, Congress passed the original version of what is now the alternative minimum tax to make sure that people with big incomes -- more than $1 million a year in today's dollars -- could not escape income taxes. Measured against that goal, the law has failed. Even when incomes are adjusted for inflation, the number of high-income Americans who paid no income taxes anywhere in the world has almost doubled, to 300 in 2000 from 155 in 1966.
Congress, meanwhile, has let the alternative minimum tax morph into something that strikes increasingly at the middle and upper middle class. More than 42 million taxpayers, about two-thirds of those making more than $30,000 a year, will lose some or all of their Bush tax cuts to the minimum tax by 2013, according to calculations by two tax economists, Leonard E. Burman of the Urban Institute and William G. Gale of the Brookings Institution.
Since 1987, the tax has stripped people of their exemptions for themselves, their spouses and their children, along with their deductions for state income taxes and local property taxes. It can even force people with huge medical bills to pay higher taxes.
Nina E. Olson, the I.R.S. taxpayer advocate, has proposed a simple solution in her latest annual report for Congress: repeal the tax. If that is not done, she said, couples who make less than $150,000, and singles who make half that, should then be exempted from the minimum tax, just as businesses with sales of less than $5 million are generally exempt from the corporate version of the tax.
Ms. Olson suggested that routine personal tax breaks should not be considered for the minimum tax -- those exemptions for the taxpayer, spouse and dependents; the standard deduction; and itemized deductions for state income taxes, local property taxes, and medical bills. She also favored indexing the trigger points for the tax for inflation.
The problem with repealing this complex and little-understood tax is that the first round of Bush tax cuts had the effect of increasing the alternative minimum tax paid by those making $30,000 to $500,000 a year. Over the first decade after the cuts, the alternative minimum tax was projected to raise more than a half-trillion dollars, which would be used to finance a reduction in the top tax rate to 35 percent from 39.6 percent.
The Bush administration has promised to order a study on the issue, but not until next February.
Complicating Capital Gains
A series of changes in the tax code since 1997 have made the once simple task of calculating taxes on capital gains -- profits from the sale of assets that have risen in value -- highly complex.
Depending on one's income, the type of asset, when it was bought and how long it was held and in what type of account, the profit from selling can be tax-free or taxed at 5 percent, 8 percent, 10 percent, 15 percent, 18 percent, 20 percent, 25 percent, 31 percent, 33 percent or 35 percent.
The highest rate would be on an asset owned by someone in the top 1 percent income group who held it for less than a year. The zero rate could apply to any taxpayer, rich or poor, who held the asset in a Roth IRA.
Prospects for Change
Professor Slemrod said that one populist approach to simplification would be to eliminate the need for the millions of Americans whose incomes are almost entirely from wages to file tax returns. The government has the income information needed to calculate these Americans' taxes, so long as they take the standard deduction. Of course, this would benefit primarily those who use two tax forms that are already simple: the 1040-EZ and the 1040-A.
John O. Fox, a retired tax lawyer who teaches a class called ''Winners and Losers: Taxation, Social Justice and Economic Growth'' at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass., said he longed for a return to the simplicity promised by the Reagan administration and its two huge studies of tax reform.
''We ought to revisit what Ronald Reagan and the Treasury Department thought about in 1984 and 1985, the most dramatic and compelling case the public has ever heard for real simplification,'' Mr. Fox said. The first study ''said the income tax laws were extremely unfair, that so many special relief provisions existed that taxpayers could not expect that people would pay anywhere near in relation to their ability to pay,'' he said.
''The image is that people were rewarded for their abilities not to pay, through such things as huge fringe benefits which were not on your return,'' he added. The special breaks ''destroyed the idea that two families, each with $50,000 on their tax return, would pay taxes that were anything alike,'' Mr. Fox said.
He favors broadening the tax base so that tax rates can be lowered. He estimates that close to half of all income goes untaxed each year, because individuals can defer tax into the future through devices like retirement savings plans, or avoid them entirely through devices like the Roth IRA. ''The idea is that if we could reduce the tax rates low enough, the inconvenience would be offset by having much lower tax rates on all of your income,'' he said. ''They put a fair amount of this into law in 1986, but since then they have undone every piece of that, just about, through the Clinton and Bush administrations. The focus has been to find areas of concern for specific causes and to incorporate them into the tax laws.''
Simplification, Mr. Fox said, will not come about until voters ask politicians on the campaign trail hard questions about how the 1986 promise to tax all income morphed into a tax code larded with special-interest tax breaks.
Mr. Steuerle said that ''the bias against simplification is strong, and history does not provide many examples of success.''
''Nonetheless, conventional wisdom on the history lesson may be mistaken,'' he said. ''Simplification gets its turn only during long cycles of deform and reform. Viewed as a cyclical process, the inattention to some principles -- simplification, equal treatment of equals, efficiency -- eventually becomes too great, and there is widespread agreement to switch focus on them.''
But when it comes to reform, cynics may side with Mr. Bartlett, the veteran Republican tax strategist, whose thinking is more in line with that of the preacher recorded in the biblical book of Ecclesiastes: ''There is no new thing under the sun.''
''In the end, probably nothing will be done,'' Mr. Bartlett said. ''I have in my files a study of tax complexity by the Joint Committee on Taxation in 1928. It raises many of the same problems we are still dealing with today.''
14 11
For an audio interview with David Cay Johnston, go to www.nytimes .com/taxes.
