THE tax law enacted last May may be compared to a dinner with two desserts. First, just in time for back-to-school shopping last summer, came a flurry of checks -- $400 a child -- for people who had claimed the child credit on their 2002 returns. Second, within weeks, millions of Americans will start receiving ''bigger refunds than ever before,'' predicted Sidney Kess, a tax lawyer and accountant in New York.
A main reason for the plump refunds is that tax rates were lowered retroactively to the beginning of 2003, but withholding from paychecks was not reduced until July 1, Mr. Kess explained. In addition, the standard deduction for married couples who do not itemize deductions was increased to $9,500, twice that for single filers and up from $7,850 on 2002 returns, meaning that millions of couples will discover this filing season that their tax liabilities are lower than usual.
The new tax law, formally named the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003, is complex. It achieved the tax reductions for last year and this year by accelerating rate cuts that under a 2001 tax law would have been phased in gradually over the next several years. Similarly, the increase in the child credit to $1,000 from $600 -- that $400 increase accounted for the checks last summer -- came from accelerating a provision of the 2001 law. But that law has a sunset provision: after 2010, the tax code is to revert to where it was before the 2001 act was signed. And some of the benefits of the 2003 law are even shorter-lived. The $1,000 child credit and the higher standard deduction for couples both expire at the end of 2004, not long after the election this fall.
The biggest breaks of the 2003 law, however, are not scheduled for a quick demise. Investors, no matter how rich, now owe a maximum tax of only 15 percent on what the law calls ''qualified dividends,'' generally those from stocks or stock-based mutual funds, and on long-term capital gains from sales after May 5, 2003.
Following are some of the law's important provisions and how they affect tax returns this season and financial planning for the longer term:
THE CHILD CREDIT -- A tax credit of $1,000 is available for each qualifying child under the age of 17 to joint filers with adjusted gross income of $110,000 or less and to single filers or heads of household with $75,000 or less. It phases out as incomes rise.
Because the checks last summer were based on 2002 returns, some recipients may not qualify for them in 2003, said Bob D. Scharin, a senior editor at RIA, a provider of tax information. For example, the child may no longer be a dependent, or the taxpayers' 2003 incomes may have been too high. So must they return the money? No, they can keep it, Mr. Scharin said.
Conversely, some people first became eligible for the credit last year, either because a child was born or otherwise became their dependent in 2003 or because their income fell. In that case, they can claim the credit on their tax returns, even though they did not receive the check, Mr. Scharin said. Credits reduce taxes dollar for dollar.
LOWER RATES -- The top tax rate, previously 38.6 percent, fell to 35 percent last year; the 35 percent rate was cut to 33 percent; the 30 percent rate dropped to 28 percent; and the 27 percent rate fell to 25 percent. The 15 percent and 10 percent rates were unchanged, but the cutoff points for incomes eligible for those rates were increased. For 2003 and 2004, the 10 percent bracket applies to taxable income of up to $7,000 for single individuals and of up to $14,000 for married couples filing jointly. The 15 percent bracket covers taxable income of $14,001 to $56,800 for married couples filing jointly and of $7,001 to $28,400 for single filers.
Joanne E. Johnson, a managing director and wealth adviser at the J.P. Morgan Private Bank in New York City, said, ''The reduction in rates was the biggest change in the law.'' Ms. Johnson, a lawyer, added that because rates fell, ''people may want to defy conventional wisdom and accelerate income and defer deductions like charitable contributions.'' The point would be to pay taxes at today's relatively low rates, especially the 15 percent rate on long-term capital gains, and to take deductions later, when rates may have climbed.
''By definition, the law says rates are going up,'' she said, referring to the sunset provision of the 2001 law, and rates could be raised even sooner to cover the deficit and the war in Iraq, especially if the Democrats take power in Washington.
Ms. Johnson's advice in a nutshell is ''think defensively.''
INVESTMENTS -- The new rules on long-term capital gains and dividends sound simple enough. For capital gains, the rates are 15 percent, down from 20 percent for most taxpayers, and 5 percent, down from 10 percent for people in the 10 and 15 percent tax brackets. The same 5 and 15 percent rates apply to qualified dividends, like those on stocks or on stock mutual funds. Previously, dividends, like interest, were taxed as ordinary income.
The reduced rates on investments have led investors to rethink much of their financial planning.
''I personally used to do a nondeductible I.R.A. every year in January, and this year I didn't,'' said Bernard S. Kent, who is the partner in charge of personal financial services for PricewaterhouseCoopers in its Midwest region. The reason, he explained, is that before the tax cuts, the benefit of deferring taxes on the account's earnings and gains outweighed the disadvantage that all disbursements from tax-deferred retirement accounts are taxed at ordinary-income rates. Now, because those earnings and gains are taxed at only 15 percent, he prefers to take the tax hit up front.
''It makes sense to recognize your gains now at 15 percent,'' Mr. Kent said, considering the sunset provisions on the lower tax rates as well as the size of the federal budget deficit, which, he said, could make tax increases inevitable eventually.
The current climate is bad for I.R.A.'s and worse for annuities because of the fees involved, he said. But he still favors investing in a tax-deferred 401(k) plan or similar employer-sponsored plan, if the employer matches employee contributions.
Mr. Kent, based in Detroit, advises putting investments that could produce long-term capital gains or qualified dividends into regular accounts. Tax-deferred retirement accounts are good for investments like bonds or REIT's, and for active stock trading that generates short-term capital gains, all of which produce income taxed at ordinary rates.
EDUCATION SAVINGS -- Saving for children's education has been encouraged by the tax laws. Under the 2001 law, plans that offered tax deferral became more attractive than ever. It made earnings tax-free on Section 529 plans, which are administered by states for college savings. Earnings on Coverdell education savings accounts, when used for qualified education expenses, are also not taxable.
The 2003 law made no changes in those plans, but given the revision of financial planning in general, should Americans also overhaul their educational savings plans? Not in Ms. Johnson's opinion.
The tax code allows anyone to give up to $11,000 a year to any other individual free of gift and estate tax consequences, but people are allowed to make five years' worth of gifts to a Section 529 plan at one time. In recent years, this has become a popular way for grandparents to get money out of estates that could be taxable by giving it to their grandchildren.
Ms. Johnson applauded the idea. ''It is an amazing opportunity to front-load your annual exclusion -- $110,000 for a couple,'' per child, she said. ''It is the greatest bonus Congress has given for recognizing the American dream.''
LOOKING AHEAD -- How can taxpayers plan intelligently, given the law's sunset provision and the sharp differences between the Bush administration, which wants to make the tax cuts permanent, and the Democratic challengers, who contend that the nation cannot afford such a move?
James A. Seidel, a senior manager at RIA, said, ''The best advice is to go with what we have right now and to try to stay flexible.''
