THERE are a few things that can be deduced about race-car drivers, based on watching Helio Castroneves. They don't use turn signals. They do not keep their hands on the wheel. And it is never a good thing when they say, ''Ooops.''
Mr. Castroneves arrived at the door in Miami wearing a white cashmere Hugo Boss sweater. Behind him was a life-size photo cutout of himself posing with Cher. Such are the perks of winning the Indy 500 two years in a row. On the docket this particular Friday evening was a jaunt to Boca Raton for a cocktail party. The 28-year-old Mr. Castroneves, who was born in Brazil and will compete here on Feb. 29 in the season opener for the Indy Racing League IndyCar Series, is rich, handsome and single. He got into his GS430 Lexus, a gift from Toyota, one of his sponsors, and went out the driveway, the car's global-positioning system fully engaged. ''Yay!'' he said. ''We can use the carpool lane.''
''The only time I use my skills,'' he said, ''is when I'm late.'' He has apparently been late five times in the last four years, leading to five speeding tickets. ''It's hardly one a year,'' he said.
Mr. Castroneves turned the sound system up to Gilberto Gil and Caetano Veloso. He gestured with one, sometimes two, hands; at one point wrote on a Post-it note and stuck it to the steering wheel; and often steered with two fingers. When his cellphone rang, he replied, ''Give me 40 minutes, I believe.'' Ahead was a sea of red tail lights in rush-hour traffic and pouring rain. But when the traffic cleared up, he zoomed, and he never stopped talking.
Topic A: beautiful girls, like the tennis-playing blonde Maria Sharapova. ''I think she's six feet tall,'' he said. ''That's too tall.'' (He is 5-foot-8.) ''No,'' he said, considering, ''I don't mind. If a man comes into a room with a woman who is much taller, the other men think, 'Hmmm, what does he have?' ''
He admits to crying easily at movies: ''I just saw 'Seabiscuit,' '' he said. ''And I got a choke-up even for 'The Prince of Egypt.' '' His idiomatic expressions are a few degrees shy of a full compass. In fact, he boasts about his misuse of English. ''I tend to say 'stud' for 'study,' '' he said, ''and they all laugh.''
And he offered driving tips. ''In the rain, you have to reduce your speed. You hit the brake, you hydroplane.''
''Oooooops,'' he said.
That got your attention. ''It's nothing,'' he said. ''I just hit the brakes a little too hard.'' He was weaving in and out on his way to Boca, without touching the turn signal.
''Is this the exit?'' he asked anxiously. Race-car drivers, he noted, go in ovals; they can't get lost. For him, off the race track, even global positioning doesn't help.
Three wrong turns later, he pulled into the Boca Raton Resort and Beach Club for a celebrity appearance. He did a lap of the guests, pausing to spend time with the sponsors. Celebrity appearance concluded, Mr. Castroneves hopped into his Lexus. Next stop, his friend's Brazilian steakhouse, Chima, in Fort Lauderdale.
At 9 p.m., his posse from Miami met him there for dinner: his sister, Kati, 30, and three Brazilian beauties: Roberta Schilling, with front cleavage; Sonia Meneghetti, with front and back cleavage; and Roberta Ronato, with side cleavage.
Mr. Castroneves stuck with fruit juice, but urged the others to try the caipiroskas, with vodka, ''Even better than the caipirinha,'' he said.
''Aaaiiieee. This is good,'' said Ms. Meneghetti, a freckled firecracker who runs a Prada store in Miami Beach. ''But it is dangerous.''
Mr. Castroneves was in his element, surrounded by beautiful Brazilian women, ready to enjoy the night, a few swordfuls of chicken, the Brazilian beans, the cheese puffs. ''Eat,'' he said. ''I want to make sure you all have a good time.''
''He says he likes women,'' his sister said. ''But he still doesn't understand them.''
A Night Out With
