A growing scandal involving the use of $75 million of public funds to enrich allies of the governing Liberal Party is threatening to overwhelm the new government of Prime Minister Paul Martin and to split the party as it prepares for national elections.
An accounting by the auditor general this week documented a web of fake invoices, double-billing and fictitious Public Works Ministry contracts funneling large commissions, from 1997 to 2001, to several Quebec public relations companies aligned with the Liberals.
Mr. Martin immediately called for a judicial inquiry, raising the prospect that senior Liberals, including former cabinet members -- and perhaps even former Prime Minister Jean Chrétien -- might be called to testify. The inquiry may begin before elections are held, probably in the spring, and may provide powerful fodder to an opposition that has been seeking a campaign issue.
Mr. Martin said his uneasy relationship with Mr. Chrétien kept him in the dark about the advertising program and other Quebec affairs even though he was finance minister at the time the questionable payments were made.
The prime minister has dismissed Alfonso Gagliano, the public works minister at the time of the payments, as ambassador to Denmark.
Mr. Martin further called on all politicians and bureaucrats who have information about the payments to come forward to testify voluntarily. If not, he said, they could be subpoenaed.
Mr. Martin's effort to distance himself from the scandal has drawn snickering from both the Socialist and Conservative opposition and disbelief from voters surveyed by pollsters. It has also threatened to widen the schism between stalwarts in his wing of the Liberal Party and the generally more liberal leaders aligned with Mr. Chrétien, many of whom remain influential in the House of Commons.
Mr. Chrétien was out of the country on personal business this week, but he is expected to speak out in the coming days. Mr. Gagliano has also suggested that he will speak out on what political analysts and columnists are calling the biggest political scandal in more than a generation.
The advertising program was supposedly intended to raise the profile of the federal government in the province of Quebec in order to counter separatist forces, but auditors were hard pressed to find any services provided for the payments.
The pro-federalist programs ostensibly included a subsidy for a television series about the hockey great Maurice Richard, a postage stamp design competition and a celebration of the 125th anniversary of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
Most of the payments were commissions to the public relations firms to do nothing more than transfer money from one government agency to another, often by simply receiving one check and writing another.
The same firms named in the report gave the Liberal Party large financial donations in recent years, giving rise to allegations by the opposition that the scheme was a money laundering effort to kick back money to the governing party.
The scandal has become a major distraction for Mr. Martin as he tries to project an image as a strong and honest leader, and his handling of the issue has been far from sure-footed. He first blamed 14 federal civil servants for the scandal, adding, ''the government did not know.''
That explanation drew harsh criticism from opposition politicians and newspaper columnists.
''This frankly was a money laundering scheme,'' said Grant Hill, the Conservative Party leader. ''The Liberal Party of Canada, quite frankly, is implicated in this right up to their eyeballs.''
By Thursday, Mr. Martin had sharpened his message and indicated that he intended to take responsibility for cleaning up what he called ''the disregard for public funds'' and ''the willful breaking of the rules and law'' by officials in government.
''I am sick and deeply, deeply troubled about what happened,'' he added. ''Heads will roll.''
His supporters have been quick to note that he canceled the sponsorship program as soon as he took office in December.
But a February 2002 letter published Friday on the front page of The National Post, from a senior Liberal policy official to Mr. Martin when he was still finance minister, suggested that he had reason to know at least two years ago that something had gone awry in the program.
The letter reported ''growing rumors that funds from the sponsorship program are being diverted'' and that the issue threatened to ''become a creeping miasma over the party.''
