When the White House released hundreds of pages of President Bush's National Guard records on Friday night, the immediate conclusion from Washington political analysts was that there had to be something incriminating buried in the two-inch stack.
For most modern administrations, Friday night has been a favored time for unloading bad news aimed for the relative dead air of the weekend.
But by Saturday morning, when it became clear that there was nothing significantly new in the repetitive, disorganized stack, the real reason for the release appeared to be a combination of the president's impatience and White House officials' eagerness to defuse the damage from decade-old charges that they say the Democrats are using more aggressively this year than ever before.
Dan Bartlett, the White House communications director, said in a telephone interview on Saturday that while the accusations that Mr. Bush avoided some of his National Guard duty came up in the 2000 presidential campaign, Al Gore, the Democratic nominee and a Vietnam veteran, did not pursue them.
What changed the dynamic this time, Mr. Bartlett said, were the charges by the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Terry McAuliffe, that Mr. Bush was AWOL from the Guard. Mr. McAuliffe, who was trying to draw a sharp contrast between Mr. Bush and the Vietnam war hero who is leading in the Democratic primaries, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, made the accusation shortly after the filmmaker Michael Moore called Mr. Bush a ''deserter.''
The charges so infuriated and stunned the White House, officials said, that Mr. Bush decided he could not sit by quietly, even after administration officials had said for months that he would not engage in the 2004 campaign until at least the spring.
So in an Oval Office television interview with Tim Russert on ''Meet the Press'' last Sunday, Mr. Bush promised to release his entire military file. White House officials had meanwhile requested what they said was everything in his records from a Guard personnel center in Denver.
The file, Mr. Bartlett said, arrived in Washington on Friday afternoon, and he said he released it just as he got it, in a highly repetitive form. The stack contains many duplicate copies of a great many documents that were released in 2000. Mr. Bartlett said that it would not have been so thick if White House officials had taken the time to cull it.
Although the stack made it appear to the television cameras that the White House was releasing far more documents than it actually was, Mr. Bartlett said the motive was full disclosure and speed. Mr. Bush, he said, wanted the documents out quickly.
''We didn't try to organize, collate or anything,'' Mr. Bartlett said. ''This was the raw data. We wanted to make sure that literally what we were handed from Denver we handed to you.''
The documents contain no new proof that Mr. Bush reported for duty in Alabama in 1972 and 1973 -- a period when his critics have called him AWOL -- beyond an already released record of a dental examination of Mr. Bush conducted in January 1973 at Dannelly Air National Guard base in Montgomery. But White House officials say that the combination of the dental exam, payroll records and the undisputed fact that Mr. Bush lived in Alabama during the period in question prove that he turned up for duty.
Most of the new material in the documents released Friday consisted of 40 pages of medical records that the White House allowed a small pool of reporters to read before the general release to the press. The pool then provided a report to all other White House correspondents. Mr. Bartlett said the intent was to allow the president privacy in medical records that included descriptions of a 1968 hemorrhoid and a cyst that Mr. Bush had removed from his chest at age 14.
But Mr. Bartlett said that in the White House jumble of Friday, some of the medical records mistakenly were included in the general release.
