NO matter what happens in the Daytona 500 today, it's a safe bet that it won't be stranger than the sight of a Toyota pickup truck circling the high banks of Nascar's favorite track.
Days earlier, on the same raceway in Daytona Beach, Fla., Toyota became the first Japanese manufacturer ever to participate in a top-tier Nascar event, part of the Craftsman Truck Series. Toyota's venture into truck racing is part of its effort to convince buyers that its Tundra, a full-size pickup built in Indiana, is as American as light beer and power tools.
''We aren't doing this on a whim,'' said Les Unger, Toyota's motorsports manager. ''We want to market trucks.''
Toyota is a four-year veteran in stock car racing, having competed through last season in the Goody's Dash Series, the equivalent in Nascar of a minor league. The Celicas that Toyota backed in those races were powered by the only multivalve, overhead cam engines used in Nascar. When one of those cars won a race at the Kentucky Speedway in June 2001, it was the first Nascar victory for the modern engine design.
But in the Craftsman Truck Series, Toyota must compete with the same old-school engine design that everyone else uses: a 358-cubic-inch pushrod V-8 with two valves per cylinder, topped with a carburetor.
''We haven't used carburetors in production cars -- or even race engines -- in forever,'' Mr. Unger said.
Nor has Toyota, unlike its truck racing rivals, ever manufactured a pushrod V-8 engine. The company's first V-8 appeared in the Lexus LS400 sedan in the 1990 model year. In 1998, the Land Cruiser became the first vehicle wearing a Toyota badge to be fitted with a V-8, the same 4.7-liter, 32-valve, double overhead cam engine that powers production versions of the Tundra.
In the last two decades, multivalve engines with overhead camshafts, a technology advanced by Japanese manufacturers, have become popular with consumers for their performance and fuel economy. But Nascar's engine rules originated in the 1960's, a time when ''stock cars'' were still based on the vehicles for sale at the local dealership. And the predominant engines in American cars of that era had a block-mounted camshaft that opens and closes the valves through pushrods.
With no pushrod production engine of its own on which to base the racing version, Toyota's motorsports arm, Toyota Racing Development, designed its Craftsman Truck Series V-8 from scratch. It is building the racing motors both in California and at a satellite plant in North Carolina, in the heart of Nascar's engineering community.
Although the technology is old in the sense of auto production, ''when you look at it from a racing perspective, the Tundra racing V-8 is a pretty sophisticated engine,'' Mr. Unger said.
Among Toyota's rivals, General Motors and DaimlerChrysler still use pushrod engines in Chevrolet Silverado and Dodge Ram pickup trucks that they sell to the public. Ford uses only overhead cam engines in its 2004 production F-150, but it has a long history of pushrod engines.
