IF you've ever met with a financial planner, you know that this much is true: No matter what you have saved for retirement, no matter how high your income is or how much of it you think you will put aside between now and gold-watch day, it won't be enough. You have no chance of maintaining your current lifestyle. No chance at all.
Well, maybe one chance, and I'm going to give it to you in this column. Also, I'll be offering you an opportunity to win cool prizes. So pay attention.
I long ago gave up trying to save for retirement and switched to a lottery-ticket-based plan, but recently after yet another unsuccessful week on the Pick 6 front I decided there must be another way. Then I found it: in the newspaper, where I read that the New Jersey Nets are apparently destined for extinction. A new owner wants to move them to Brooklyn.
It occurred to me that there is a corollary to the saying that absence makes the heart grow fonder, namely: absence makes the memorabilia grow more valuable. Once there are no more Nets, shouldn't stuff associated with the team be worth a lot more? After all, there is no more Honus Wagner, and in 1996 his baseball card sold for $640,000.
So I cashed in the kid's college fund and headed for eBay.com, the auction site, to buy up all the New Jersey Netabilia I could; by the time I retire, I figured, it will be worth a fortune. And there was plenty to choose from.
There were personalized New Jersey Nets address labels (not, apparently, containing players' addresses, but your own, next to a spiffy Nets logo). There were Nets hats, Nets throwback hats, Nets throwback pinwheel hats. For $2.99 I could have joined the bidding on a beer-bottle-shaped Nets tap handle. (''Show off your Nets pride as you pour beers,'' the seller urged.)
Someone was offering a ''University of Nets'' diploma (''Your Name Here'') for $8.99. A baffling array of Nets timepieces were being auctioned: Nets watches for a starting bid of 1 cent; a half-dozen different Nets wall clocks, including one emblazoned with an unprintable slogan suggesting that the team isn't very good.
After I had bid on some of this stuff, it occurred to me I should ask an expert if my retirement-plan theory was valid. So I called John Taube, whose sports memorabilia business (www.gameusedbats.com) in Margate specializes in baseball bats that have been used in games. Much to my surprise, he actually said I was right. Almost.
The trinkets catching my eye on eBay are not where the real value is going to be, he said; someone can always make another Nets cellphone faceplate. ''That stuff you stay away from, the watches and the towels,'' Mr. Taube said. If you want to finance a retirement, go for things that have been worn or used in a game and authenticated as such.
''Any time there are no more jerseys left, the jerseys that do exist are going to go up,'' Mr. Taube said. ''If you see a game-worn jersey, that's the thing to get. Especially in that last year.''
How much difference does contact with an athlete's skin make? A game-worn autographed jersey brings three or four times what a plain ordinary autographed jersey does, Mr. Taube said. And the money can be substantial. Mr. Taube, a nationally known expert in authenticating game-used bats, shattered my dream of giving my daughter a used Derek Jeter bat as a graduation present: they're $3,000 or so, he said.
So go get yourself some game-used Nets stuff. Meanwhile, I'd like jettison a bit of the bric-a-brac I bought before I talked to Mr. Taube, and I'd like you to have it. All you have to do is, in 50 words or so, address this essay topic: ''Why I'm Glad the Nets Are, Apparently, Leaving.''
Send your entry to negenz@nytimes.com; I apologize to those without computers, but opening snail mail has become dangerous again. In the unlikely event that any entries are actually received, they will be judged by Patrick Lamb, a comedian from Bloomfield, and Caren Lissner, a writer from Hoboken. The contest is open to you, to my family members and co-workers, even to the judges. Entries have to be printable in this newspaper.
The runner-up will receive one of those 1-cent Nets watches. The winner will get a New Jersey Nets Barbie, something that Mr. Taube said might in fact be valuable someday, not because of the Nets, but because it's a Barbie. And if anyone out there has a game-used Nets Barbie, well, I'm interested.
JERSEY
