LIKE many other New Yorkers, Monica Schaffer, an executive at a marketing company, would sometimes venture across the Hudson River to shop for bargains. In suburban malls and outlet stores in New Jersey, she found deals on a Dolce &amp; Gabbana coat, Anne Klein suits and Manolo Blahnik shoes. ''For all the rent I pay, it makes a lot of sense to save a little money where I can,'' said Ms. Schaffer, 32, who lives in Manhattan.
Did she voluntarily report these purchases to the New York State Department of Tax and Finance? ''Was I supposed to?'' she asked.
New York, in fact, is one of many states requiring residents to pay a ''compensating use tax'' on out-of-state purchases that would have been subject to sales tax at home, whether the purchases are made in person, by mail order or over the Internet. (A $300 pair of Manolo Blahnik pumps from New Jersey, which has no sales tax on clothing and footwear, would have been taxed at about $26 in Manhattan.)
''The government should do a better job of letting us know'' about the use tax, Ms. Schaffer said.
New York is doing so. It has added a separate line about the tax to its 2003 income tax return (along with five pages of instructions). California and Oklahoma added similar line items to their 2003 returns, joining more than a dozen other states, according to John Logan, a state tax analyst at CCH, a tax research firm in Riverwoods, Ill.
These new rules, cumbersome as they may seem to taxpayers, are part of a growing effort by states to devise ways to replenish their dwindling coffers without significantly reducing services.
Even as the federal government has been cutting taxes, many states have been increasing some of theirs, for businesses and individuals, or adding assortments of fees and surcharges. Some are going after scofflaws, too. A growing number are distancing, or ''decoupling,'' their tax rules from the federal tax system, which means that many taxpayers who receive new federal tax breaks on inherited estates or capital gains, among other things, will not get similar breaks on their state taxes.
''Some of these little nuances have larger implications than they would appear,'' Mr. Logan said.
Although the economy has been improving in recent months, many states remain mired in fiscal problems. They enlarged their budgets in the booming 1990's to meet rising social needs, and often lowered taxes, only to have revenue plunge early in the new decade as the stock market tumbled, the economy weakened and jobs were cut. Even states' ''rainy-day'' funds have evaporated.
''They thought they were kids in a candy store, but spending grew faster than was sustainable under the current trends,'' said Stephen Slivinski, a senior economist for the Tax Foundation, a tax research group in Washington.
Unlike the federal government, state governments cannot print their own money when they run out, and most are also bound by their constitutions to balance their budgets. The Center on Budget Policy Priorities, a research group in Washington, says that in fiscal 2004, which for most states began last July, the states collectively closed almost $80 billion in budget gaps, as spending declined by 0.2 percent from fiscal 2003. Over the last three years, cumulative budget deficits totaled $200 billion, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.
At least 21 states expect shortfalls for fiscal 2005, totaling around $40 billion, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. California alone is projected to have a budget deficit of $17.6 billion, or about a quarter of its general fund, the center said.
Some 36 states enacted various tax and fee increases for fiscal 2004, totaling $9.6 billion, according to the National Association of State Budget Officers.
Here is a closer look at what some states are doing, and the effects on taxpayers.
FOCUSING ON THE WEALTHY -- Raising income taxes outright has never been popular, and few states did so during 2003. Arkansas added a 3 percent, three-year surcharge on state income taxes. Pennsylvania increased personal income tax rates across the board, Mr. Logan said.
A more palatable solution, at least to legislators in other states, he said, has been to increase only the top tax brackets, as New York and Connecticut did. ''It affects relatively few people, but can raise a significant amount of money,'' he said.
GOING AFTER NONRESIDENTS AND BUSINESS -- Some companies that operate in many states, Mr. Logan says, structure their transactions so that certain items, like interest and royalty income, are assigned to states that tax them lightly or not at all. But an increasing number of states are following the lead of New Jersey by passing, or at least considering, legislation to ''add back'' a portion of this income to their jurisdictions, he said. He also noted that some states were requiring withholding for nonresident business partners who do not participate in the group tax return.
RAISING SALES AND ''SIN'' TAXES -- About two-thirds of the revenue raised through tax increases has come from higher sales taxes and excise taxes on products like cigarettes and alcohol, the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities says. Raising such so-called sin taxes can bring in significant revenue and usually generates little opposition from the public. For fiscal 2004, some 15 states have enacted increases in cigarette and tobacco taxes, and four have raised taxes on alcoholic beverages, according to the National Association of State Budget Officers.
ADDING OR RAISING FEES -- To avoid tax increases, some states, including Florida, which has no personal income tax, have raised fees for various services or professional licenses. Massachusetts, for example, began imposing a $10 fee for a certificate of blindness so blind or legally blind residents can gain access to state services.
FORGIVING SCOFFLAWS -- More than a dozen states, including Massachusetts, Michigan, Virginia, Illinois and New York, instituted tax amnesty programs over the last two years, waiving penalties and interest for those who pay their back taxes. The program in Illinois, for example, reaped more than $500 million.
The programs have been successful, said Nicholas Johnson, director of the state fiscal project for the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, but he warned, ''If you have them too often, people will not comply because they won't take them too seriously; it's a tricky business.''
RECOUPING LOST SALES TAX -- The use-tax line is one remedy, though it's hardly a panacea for compliance. Taxpayers ''have to let their conscience be their guide,'' said Alan E. Weiner, a partner at Holtz Rubenstein &amp; Company, an accounting firm in Melville, N.Y.
Ms. Schaffer, for one, says she intends to keep close track of her out-of-state purchases from now on. ''I'll certainly be as careful as I need to be in the eyes of the law,'' she said.
New York taxpayers who lose track of their purchases can refer to a chart in their returns that estimates the use tax based on adjusted gross income, but only if total purchases are less than $1,000. (Someone earning $80,000 would pay $43.) Purchases totaling more than $1,000 are calculated separately.
New York is looking especially at residents and businesses that make big purchases. (Remember L. Dennis Kozlowski, the former chief executive of Tyco International, and his 2002 indictment on charges of evading more than $1 million in New York State sales tax on artwork? Mr. Kozlowski has pleaded not guilty.) States are spending more time poring over United States Customs data, checking on big purchases from outside the country.
At least 38 states, meanwhile, have joined a group created by the National Governors Association, called the Streamlined Sales Tax Project, to unify their sales and use tax laws, and to share information with one another. The states are pushing for Congress to pass legislation that would authorize them to collect sales taxes when residents buy goods over the Internet. That tax loss has been estimated at more than $13 billion for 2001 alone, according to the Institute for State Studies, a research group in Salt Lake City.
DECOUPLING -- To keep tax administration consistent and simple, most state tax codes had routinely conformed to the Internal Revenue Code. But after the 2001 tax-cut law was enacted, many states started to break from the federal model and adopt their own rules. In Idaho, for example, a teacher who deducts up to $250 in out-of-pocket expenses for classroom supplies on her federal tax return has to add it back to her state return.
Several states, including New Jersey, Wisconsin and Rhode Island, rewrote their laws concerning estate taxes after the federal law began a phase-out of estate taxes in 2002, Mr. Logan noted. In 2002 and again in 2003, federal law also offered businesses the opportunity to take ''bonus'' depreciation on qualifying equipment they placed into service between certain dates. Of the 46 states with a corporate income tax, only 12 completely follow the federal rule on bonus depreciation; the remaining 34, plus the District of Columbia, either do not conform at all or modify it.
Nor do this year's cuts in federal taxation of capital gains and dividends directly translate into state tax cuts; no states have changed their laws to follow the federal cuts on these categories of income.
''The trend was for federal and state taxes to be more similar,'' Mr. Logan said. ''Now, different rules apply. One consequence is that taxes become more difficult for the average person to understand.''
Could that be possible?
