MORE than 60 years ago -- when the atom bomb and its horrors were still abstractions pondered by a tiny political and technical elite -- some of its most eminent architects foresaw today's security problems with startling clarity and proposed a radical solution. The world would renounce important aspects of state sovereignty and create a new international order meant to keep the ultimate weapon at bay.
The idea set off a top-secret debate in 1944 at the highest levels of the American and British governments, with Roosevelt interested in new political arrangements and Churchill vehemently opposed. Niels Bohr, a Danish Nobel laureate who acted as the scientific conscience of the Manhattan Project, worked hard to win friends for the proposal, sure the stakes were extraordinarily high.
''We are in a completely new situation,'' he wrote, adding that in the years ahead it would produce either a novel peace or global death. ''The terrible prospect of a future competition between nations about a weapon of such formidable character can only be avoided through a universal agreement.''
Remarkably, the same issues -- and the same stark polarizations, with advocates pushing internationalism on one hand and unilateralism on the other -- lie behind the swirl of recent proposals for dealing with what experts call a dangerous new phase of nuclear proliferation. The confessions of Dr. Abdul Qadeer Khan, the rogue Pakistani scientist, have shed light on a vast underground quietly spreading atomic time bombs.
Last week, President Bush proposed a seven-point plan to shut down the black market, declaring that the ease with which Iran, Libya and North Korea got help from Dr. Khan showed that the United States must ''prevent governments from developing nuclear weapons under false pretenses.''
While some experts praised the plan for its emphasis on cooperation with other nations, critics faulted it as empty phrasemaking, obscuring the administration's unilateral agenda of acquiring new nuclear arms, antimissile systems and space weapons.
At the other extreme lie the proposals of Mohamed ElBaradei, director of the International Atomic Energy Agency. He is urging the start of what he delicately calls ''multinational controls'' on making materials that can be used for nuclear arms -- not world government, perhaps, but a cousin that would intrude on state prerogatives in order to halt the atomic leakage.
Analysts say the nuclear black market may turn out to be so extensive, and its dangers so threatening, that the shock of discovery will help close the historical gap between the two factions and prompt tough reforms -- new global rules, institutions and methods to limit the bomb's spread.
The alternative, they say, could be grim.
''These ideas have has been around for a long time but things have changed and given them new urgency,'' said Lawrence Scheinman, a former State Department arms control official now at the Monterey Institute of International Studies.
In 1944, the radical agenda of Dr. Bohr centered, most concretely, on sharing atom secrets with Moscow, Washington's wartime ally, as a prelude to collaborating on international control to avert a precarious standoff of apocalyptic potential.
''Bohr saw that far ahead,'' said Richard Rhodes, who wrote of the scientist's labors in ''The Making of the Atomic Bomb.''
Bohr's idea went nowhere. But shock waves from Hiroshima and Nagasaki reignited the debate, this time in public. ''The only conceivable way to catch up with atomic energy is with political energy directed to a universal structure,'' E.B. White, the essayist who became a crusader for nonproliferation, wrote days after twin fireballs consumed the cities.
In 1946, the United States put forward a plan for the international control of atomic energy, offering what its architect, Bernard Baruch, called ''a choice between the quick and the dead.'' It also went nowhere.
The spread of the technology was deemed inevitable. So in 1953 the United States sought to channel it with Atoms for Peace, a program to share nuclear gear on the condition of inspections. The 1968 Nonproliferation Treaty codified new ways to limit the bomb's spread even while encouraging legitimate nuclear commerce.
Crises have repeatedly shaken the world's jumble of unilateral and global controls, with subsequent efforts at repairs and improvements.
The current crisis marks a dangerous escalation, experts say. Never before has the nuclear black market been found to operate with such startling impunity and thoroughness. This time it offered complete kits -- raw uranium, machines for enriching it and even blueprints for how to turn nuclear fuel into atom bombs.
Pakistani experts argue that the market's sheer size demonstrates that Islamabad -- which never signed the Nonproliferation Treaty -- actually bears less blame than nations that did but whose citizens nonetheless defied the prohibitions.
''We have not broken any international treaties.'' said Shireen M. Mazari, director general of the Institute of Strategic Studies, a research group in Islamabad financed by Pakistan's foreign office.
That's the problem, experts agree. The rules are so weak, so haphazardly applied, and so poorly enforced that they verge on irrelevance. They are what Dr. ElBaradei calls a failed gentleman's agreement.
Mr. Bush offered a mix of unilateral and global fixes. For instance, he renewed a call for the United Nations to require all states to criminalize nuclear arms propagation. He also issued a warning: ''We will find the middlemen, the supplier and the buyers.''
Dr. ElBaradei's approach would go further, erecting multinational controls on making new nuclear fuel, processing weapon-usable materials and disposing of spent fuel and radioactive waste.
In essence, his plan would get individual states out of the nuclear fuel business and put that responsibility into the hands of international consortiums. Critics fault Dr. ElBaradei's approach as naïve and Mr. Bush's as helpful but hypocritical. His administration, said the Natural Resources Defense Council, in analyzing his plan, ''is spending record amounts revitalizing the U.S. nuclear weapons complex.''
The United States and other powers, said Wade Boese, research director of the Arms Control Association, must lead by example and do more to reduce their reliance on nuclear weapons in order to ''diminish the importance and lure of such arms to others.''
