ALAN GREENSPAN, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, reassured investors last week, saying that Fed policy makers would be patient about raising interest rates.
But at the same time, Mr. Greenspan predicted that economic growth could be around 5 percent this year -- a forecast that means investors can no longer wonder whether rates are going to rise. They can wonder only when.
An analysis by the RiskMetrics Group, a financial risk management firm in New York, predicts that if rates rise even modestly, the stock market will decline, an outcome that may surprise some analysts and investors. The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index could fall by a range of 1.1 percent to 2.2 percent. The analysis also shows that there will be big winners and losers among stock sectors, even if rates rise just a bit.
Among RiskMetrics' winners are the energy and consumer-staples sectors of the S.&amp;P. 500, which include companies like Exxon Mobil, ChevronTexaco, Schlumberger, Wal-Mart, Gillette and Anheuser-Busch.
The S.&amp;P. energy index could rise by a range of 9 percent to 18.7 percent, while the consumer staples index could climb by 7.4 percent to 15.2 percent.
The losers are likely to be companies in the materials and financial services sectors, like Alcoa, Dow Chemical, International Paper, American Express, Citigroup and Charles Schwab.
The S.&amp;P. materials index could plunge by 12.8 percent to 23.9 percent, while the financial services index could fall by 7.6 percent to 14.5 percent.
RiskMetrics, using the same approach of many companies, investment firms and central banks, looks at what may occur in other markets if one market makes a big move.
For this analysis, RiskMetrics looked at the correlation between recent moves in interest rates and the 10 main sectors of the S.&amp;P. 500 index, assuming two possibilities. The first is generally in line with current forecasts: an increase of one percentage point in the yields of the Treasury's 3-month bill and 10-year note. The second assumption, a two-point climb in each yield, shows the possible damage from a surprise, like deficit fears' driving rates higher than now expected.
The RiskMetrics analysis concentrates on market correlations over the last year, with an emphasis on the last 20 trading days, so its results are hard to compare with other periods when rates rose. Still, the RiskMetrics outcome is broadly consistent with what happened in 1994, the last time the Fed raised its benchmark interest rate, the federal funds rate on overnight loans between banks. The Fed raised that rate by two and a half percentage points in 1994 to help slow growth and, in turn, pushed other rates higher. The yield on the Treasury 10-year note climbed two full percentage points.
At the end of that year, the S.&amp;P. 500 was down 1.5 percent. The financial services index fell 6.4 percent, while the consumer-staples index rose 6.8 percent. But the materials index, which falls in the RiskMetrics analysis, rose 3.3 percent. The energy index, which RiskMetrics shows as climbing, slipped by 0.4 percent.
THE RiskMetrics analysis is not consistent with the most recent jump in interest rates, from June to September of last year, when the yield on the 10-year note climbed by 1.5 percentage points.
During that period, the S.&amp;P. 500 climbed 3.4 percent, while the materials index jumped 10.1 percent and the financial services index rose 1.4 percent. But the energy index, a RiskMetrics winner, slipped 0.2 percent.
The environment for this rate climb, however, was different than what RiskMetrics is assuming. Last year, the Fed was promising to keep interest rates low. Now Fed officials are saying that a rate rise is on the horizon.
So the RiskMetrics analysis seems to get the overall direction right, which means that the stock market rally may stall when rates rise.
PORTFOLIOS, ETC.
