ROY E. DISNEY has been underestimated again.
When his quest to oust Michael D. Eisner as the chairman and chief executive of the Walt Disney Company began in November, few investors or analysts gave Mr. Disney much chance of succeeding. After all, despite his famous name, Mr. Disney owns less than 1 percent of the company's stock, and he has had little involvement in its day-to-day affairs for years. His opponent, Mr. Eisner, has survived decades of Hollywood infighting and is legendary for his ruthlessness.
But now it is Mr. Eisner's future, not Mr. Disney's, that is in doubt. The Comcast Corporation's $54 billion takeover bid for Disney last week, along with the recommendation by an institutional investor advisory group that shareholders not re-elect Mr. Eisner to the company's board, has left him scrambling to persuade investors to give him another chance.
So has Mr. Disney's moment arrived? Not necessarily.
Even as he crusades against Mr. Eisner, his own prescription for the ailing company is notably short on detail. Instead of suggesting specific changes, Mr. Disney has cast himself as a traditionalist who wants to return the company to the values of Walt Disney, his uncle, who died in 1966.
In a letter to employees on Dec. 3, three days after he resigned from the board, Mr. Disney wrote warmly of the ''wholesome family entertainment'' that Disney had produced in the early 1990's. He said the company needed to ''nurture and protect these wonderful characters we have developed.''
Thanks to the Comcast bid, Mr. Disney may well succeed in ousting Mr. Eisner, who has run the company since 1984, analysts say. But whether his broader goal of returning Disney to its roots is even realistic at a time when Nickelodeon and MTV are thriving by offering children and teenagers a less-than-wholesome view of life is a more difficult question.
Even if Disney's board rejects Comcast's bid, it may have to dump Mr. Eisner to show investors that it is serious about fixing the problems that have plagued Disney for a decade, Wall Street analysts and investors say. Disney's share price is near its 1997 level, and its earnings were 25 percent lower last year than they were in 1995.
Mr. Disney, meanwhile, has become a hero to thousands of frustrated Disney fans and employees who view Disney as not just another company, but as an American icon. In general, these people want Disney to focus on its theme parks and animation division, which formed the core of the company before it bought Capital Cities/ABC in 1995.
IN their view, the company is suffering because it has raised its prices to extortionate levels, become more concerned about profits than the quality of its products and squandered the good will with families that it built over generations. Only by returning to the values of Walt Disney can the company save itself, the Disney loyalists say.
''Disney has been on this track of obsessing over short-term profits to the detriment of its long-term survival, the health of its brand, for over a decade,'' said David Koenig, who writes for a Web site called mouseplanet.com and has written several books about Disney.
''Walt Disney's philosophy was: Let people go home with a dollar in their pocket. You'll make $9 instead of $10,'' Mr. Koenig said. Now, he said, the company believes: ''We want every penny we can possibly squeeze out of them, and we'll stop raising the price when they stop coming.'' Mr. Disney, who joined the company's board in 1967, the year after his uncle's death, would like to change that. On his Web site, savedisney.com, he presents Disney as an almost spiritual company: ''I believe that our mission has always been to be bringers of joy, to be affirmers of the good in each of us, to be -- in subtle ways -- teachers, and to speak, as Walt once said, 'not to children but to the child in each of us,' by way of great storytelling ... ''
By contrast, under Mr. Eisner's watch, Disney has become ''rapacious, soulless and always looking for the quick buck rather than long-term value,'' Mr. Disney complained in the letter he sent to Mr. Eisner after he resigned from the board.
Mr. Koenig said he believed that Mr. Disney's fervor was sincere, not just a tactic. ''While it has become personal between Roy and Eisner, his main objective isn't as much to get rid of Eisner as it is to save traditional Disney,'' he said.
Mr. Disney's emotional attachment is hardly surprising. His father was a co-founder of the original Disney Brothers studio, and he began working at the company as a teenager.
Clifford Miller, a spokesman for Mr. Disney, said he was not available for comment. But he said that Mr. Disney was not simply trying to freeze the company in time. ''He does think that existing characters that have value have been cheapened and misused, and they need to be used more intelligently and creatively,'' Mr. Miller said. ''He also thinks the theme parks have been allowed to deteriorate.''
Mr. Disney has not endorsed the Comcast bid, but he believes that it highlights the same issues he has raised, Mr. Miller said.
Though Mr. Disney may not support the Comcast bid, his attacks on Mr. Eisner paved the way for it, said Tom Wolzien, senior media analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company. The attacks brought to the fore simmering concerns about Disney's problems. ''Roy Disney opened the box, and Brian L. Roberts crawled out,'' he said. Mr. Roberts is the president and chief executive of Comcast.
If investors were not so concerned about Mr. Eisner, Comcast's bid might face long odds. Comcast is well regarded on Wall Street, but it is smaller and less profitable than Disney. And investors are often skeptical when a company moves into a new line of business by hostile takeover, as Comcast is trying to do with this acquisition.
''Eisner doesn't get the benefit of the doubt,'' said Mark Greenberg, who manages the $1.3 billion Invesco Leisure mutual fund. The fund owns 800,000 Disney shares and 700,000 Comcast shares. To keep his job, Mr. Eisner will need to explain what specific changes he will make to the company, not make vague promises that he will become a better manager, Mr. Greenberg said.
Since the mid-1990's, Mr. Eisner has overseen a series of mistakes, Mr. Wolzien said. Its California Adventure theme park, which Disney opened in 2001 based on the dubious assumption that people visiting California would prefer a fake version of the state to the real thing, has never met analysts' expectations.
The company also paid $5 billion in cash and the assumption of debt for the Fox Family Channel, even though the network is permanently obligated to run Pat Robertson's ''700 Club'' in prime time. The network, now called ABC Family, barely breaks even.
In addition, analysts say, Disney destroyed the popularity of its surprise ABC hit ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire'' by running the show four nights a week, while at the same time starving the network's development budget. ABC's profitability now lags badly behind Fox, NBC and CBS.
THEN there are the problems with Disney's animation division, which to many Disney fans represents the creative core of the company. For two generations, from ''Snow White'' to ''The Lion King,'' Disney's animated movies were unparalleled successes. But recently, Disney's animation has mostly flopped, while Pixar Animation Studios and DreamWorks have put out a half-dozen wildly profitable animated movies. Last year, Pixar had its biggest hit yet, with ''Finding Nemo,'' which has grossed $850 million worldwide, the 10th most profitable movie of all time.
Under an agreement with Pixar that will expire in 2005, Disney helps to finance and shares in the profits from Pixar's films. But Pixar creates the movies with little input from Disney. On a conference call on Feb. 4 to discuss Pixar's earnings, Stephen P. Jobs, the chairman of Pixar, harshly criticized Disney and Mr. Eisner, calling some of Disney's recent animated movies ''pretty embarrassing.'' The blowup with Pixar, while perhaps unavoidable, has robbed Disney of one of its few successes in the last several years.
In the last decade, the quality of Disney's animation has fallen, said Mr. Wolzien, who rates Disney's stock as market perform, or neutral. ''They had a franchise, and they lost it, and I think they lost it because of a lack of decent story development,'' he said.
Thanks to ABC and ESPN, animation is no longer as important to Disney's success as it once was. Even so, nothing would improve Disney's profits and its morale faster than a hit on the scale of ''The Lion King.''
But the formula that Mr. Disney champions may no longer resonate as it once did, said James Hill, who runs a Web site focused on Disney and is writing two books about the company.
DISNEY has traditionally presented a sincere, upbeat world view. But researchers say children as young as 6 are increasingly media-savvy. Disney's brand still appeals to very young children, but Nickelodeon and MTV, both owned by Viacom, have been much more successful at winning older children and teenagers.
''The window of childhood for what Disney does is shrinking,'' Mr. Hill said. He added that his own daughter, who is 9, was far less connected to Disney than he was at that age. ''It's a very different era,'' he said. But Mr. Koenig, who runs mouseplanet.com, said Pixar's success showed that relatively gentle G-rated movies could still be very successful, as long as they were told well. ''When Disney has something that is high quality and does appeal to its core family audience, people will respond,'' he said. ''Look at all the Pixar movies. Those are the Disney movies of 10 years ago. Those are high-quality movies that appeal to people of all ages and insult no one.''
In fact, on the conference call last week with investors, Mr. Jobs said that Disney's own research had found that Pixar has become a more appealing brand than Disney for both children and adults.
What about Mr. Disney's complaint that the company has neglected its theme parks, which along with animation was a cornerstone of the old Disney brand? Even analysts who criticize Mr. Eisner say the parks are probably not a good place for Disney to put its capital. Mr. Disney has demonstrated ''naïveté about a lot of this stuff,'' said one Wall Street analyst, who spoke on the condition that he not be identified. ''You're underinvesting in the theme parks? Well, a lot of people don't want you to invest in theme parks.''
Mr. Greenberg, the Invesco fund manager, said that Disney's brand was under pressure and that the company needed to find ways to be more relevant to modern children. Mr. Disney, the company's existing management and Comcast have all failed to offer enough specific suggestions about how to reverse that decline, he said.
But Disney's brand remains powerful, and whoever runs the company for the next few years should be able to capitalize on its mystique, Mr. Greenberg said.
''I don't think the Disney franchise is broken,'' he said. ''I'm not saying it's going to be easy, but I don't think it is irreparably damaged.''
