RICOT DUPUY got the call in the afternoon at his radio station, Radio Soleil d'Haiti, in Flatbush, Brooklyn. It was one of his regular listeners, a man whose nephew had just called from Port-au-Prince. ''The rebels have taken Gonaïves,'' the man told Mr. Dupuy.
Mr. Dupuy, Radio Soleil's 51-year-old manager and signature voice, soon took to the air. ''Mesdames et messieurs,'' he intoned in his velvety Creole. ''The rebels have taken Gonaïves.''
Last week, as opponents of Haiti's president, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, led uprisings in more than 10 Haitian cities that led to dozens of deaths, Mr. Dupuy's words resonated in Manhattan taxicabs, in the Haitian barbershops and restaurants on Nostrand Avenue in Flatbush and in mini-mansions in Laurelton, Queens.
In New York's sprawling Haitian community, news travels by teledyol, Creole for word of mouth. In this city, Mr. Dupuy is teledyol.
Crises back home and in New York are hardly new to Radio Soleil and its listeners -- Haiti is a country that has had 32 coups since 1804. And in New York, the assault on Abner Louima by police officers in 1997 and the shooting death of Patrick Dorismond by a police detective in 2000 shocked and galvanized the city's Haitian community. But even when there is no crisis, Radio Soleil, the city's first Haitian radio station, serves as a lifeline, umbilical cord and town hall of the air for New York's 200,000 Haitians.
Near midnight last Tuesday, Mr. Dupuy paced back and forth in Radio Soleil's cramped Nostrand Avenue storefront. His eyes were red and pouched. From time to time, he collapsed into one of the armchairs in the front room. Mr. Dupuy had spent the four days since the capture of Gonaïves at the station.
His voice, usually as smooth as a good bottle of 25-year-old Haitian rum, seemed worn and ragged. ''Gonaïves is my hometown,'' he said.
Not all nights at Radio Soleil offer the bitter adrenaline of rebellion.
One slow, sultry evening last summer, for example, Mr. Dupuy spent several hours preparing for that night's show, gathering Internet news items to read and discuss from an eclectic pool of news media: Agence France-Presse, WINS-AM (1010), Le Monde, New York 1, The Guardian. Before going on air, he relaxed in his tiny office, his feet up on his desk, his face half-hidden behind stacks of papers and books, trash and bric-a-brac.
The walls were crowded with framed photos of Mr. Dupuy with luminaries he has met: Mr. Aristide, Magic Johnson, Nelson Mandela, Muhammad Ali. Every now and then the phone rang. Mr. Dupuy would perk up, then answer: ''Radio Soleil! Bon soir!''
Mr. Dupuy is no mere conveyor of information; his role in Brooklyn, and in the city, is a strange mix of 1940's telephone switchboard operator and the aging-don-as-neighborhood-fixer of the ''Godfather'' movies. He is also a go-between for his fellow Haitians and the puzzling, at times hostile institutions of their new home.
''I spend my day answering the phone,'' said Mr. Dupuy, who has a courtly island manner and a foxlike grin. ''Seventy percent of the people that call need help with something. Sometimes young couples have disputes, and they call me to mediate. People in the community call me if they need help with city services. I'm there if there are no other doors to knock. Sometimes I try to find them the right lawyers.''
New York and Miami share the distinction of having the world's largest communities of Haitians outside Haiti, and since Mr. Dupuy arrived in New York 33 years ago, during the first big wave of Haitian immigration, the city's Haitian community has remained fluid but steady.
In the absence of official numbers, exactly how many Haitians listen to Radio Soleil is hard to determine. According to the station's Web site, it has ''half a million captive, dedicated listeners,'' a claim that may reveal less about actual audience size than about marketing goals.
Haitians tend to travel a great deal between Haiti and America. Many New York Haitians even send their school-age children back to live with relatives and attend school there, Mr. Dupuy said, worried by the atmosphere in inner-city schools. But lately, as conditions in Haiti have worsened -- the average Haitian lives on less than a dollar a day -- movement between the two countries has become increasingly one-way. In a poll of Haitians last year, more than 70 percent said they would leave Haiti if they could.
Pockets of the city's sprawling Haitian population are scattered throughout the five boroughs. But the biggest, densest and poorest Haitian neighborhood is the section of Flatbush around Nostrand and Flatbush Avenues, which is where Haitians usually land when they come to New York.
Some eventually move out to more prosperous and suburban Haitian enclaves in outer Queens, like Laurelton and Cambria Heights. (Laurelton, in fact, is home to many of the Duvalier-era elite. Emmanuel Constant, also called Toto, an anti-democracy paramilitary leader, was last known to be living in his mother's brick colonial there.)
But Mr. Dupuy swears by Flatbush. ''You've got to be in Brooklyn,'' he said. ''That's where the action is.''
And Mr. Dupuy seems to enjoy his stature. ''Everybody knows me here,'' he said. ''Once you come here, you've got to know me.'' The city has many ethnic radio stations, but it is probably fair to say that no other immigrants pursue radio with more intensity than the city's Haitians do.
The Power of the Transistor
In Haiti, radio is king. In modern times, whenever there is a coup, the first places to be shut down are the airports and the radio stations.
When the father of Haitian radio, Jean Dominique -- after almost a quarter-century of antagonizing dictators, inciting popular uprisings, weathering death threats and bombings, and helping both topple and restore regimes -- was assassinated four years ago outside his Port-au-Prince radio station, he was given a state funeral in a soccer stadium. The event was attended by tens of thousands of Haitians, including Mr. Aristide. That day, the offices of Radio Soleil were filled with mourners.
In 1971, when Mr. Dupuy left Haiti at 19 with his mother, radio was emerging as a powerful means of grass-roots resistance. The previous decade had brought the small, cheap, battery-operated transistor radio, a godsend in a country that was then, and still, largely without electricity. Mr. Dominique had started a station, Radio Haiti Inter, that reported the news in a frank, take-no-prisoners style.
For Haitians, who were accustomed to a newspaper and radio culture that for decades had essentially churned out French-language press releases for the ruling Duvalier dictatorship, that approach was a revelation.
And, as it happened, large swaths of the country's citizens had recently been given transistor radios by American Protestant missionaries. Tramping through the Haitian countryside and inner cities in search of converts, those missionaries had handed out transistor radios to poor Haitians to let them receive spiritual direction from the 24-hour evangelical programming on Radio Lumière.
Despite the missionaries' intentions, Haitians soon spent more time tuned into Mr. Dominique's Radio Haiti Inter and the dozen or so small independent Haitian radio stations that had mushroomed in its wake.
''The vast majority of the Haitian population is illiterate, but Haitians are very politically astute,'' said Jonathan Demme, director of a documentary about Mr. Dominique, ''The Agronomist,'' that is scheduled to open in New York in April. ''Before Jean Dominique, the airwaves were strictly French language. It was a way for the Duvaliers and the upper classes to exclude the Creole-speaking masses from radio and the national dialogue. Radio became the literature of an illiterate people.''
Mr. Dupuy added: ''The transistor radio was a symbol of resistance. All of a sudden, under the harshest dictatorship, there was a way for people to say things they wanted to say.'' And gradually, he added, ''the transistor brought down Duvalier father and son.''
In 1986 a popular uprising toppled Jean-Claude Duvalier, ending the Duvalier family's 28-year dictatorship. Mr. Aristide was elected president four years later.
Into the Void, a Voice
When Mr. Dupuy arrived in New York, there were no radio stations serving the city's burgeoning Haitian community; today there are also Radio Tropicale and a few Haitian newspapers to complement Radio Soleil. Mr. Dupuy, who had dabbled in radio as a student in Haiti, soon started a show on the radio station of Medgar Evers College in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. Throughout his early years in New York -- while he worked as a bike messenger, earned a master's degree in economics and finance at Pace University in Lower Manhattan, served as host of a local public access cable show and worked in the audit department at Chemical Bank -- he was always running some kind of Haitian radio news program at various community radio stations.
Eleven years ago, Mr. Dupuy was among the group of people who renovated the humble Nostrand Avenue storefront that is home to Radio Soleil. Friends gave them their old speakers and turntables, and they bought additional secondhand equipment. They soundproofed two back rooms with blue foam padding, hung up the red and blue Haitian flag and a large photo of Mr. Dominique, and recruited a few men and women who had worked in radio back in Haiti, and soon Radio Soleil was up and running. (Soleil leases a subcarrier channel from the Spanish station MEGA, effectively piggy-backing, at a different bandwidth -- 97.6 SCA -- off its Manhattan radio tower.)
Jean Monfistou, a cabdriver, is a typical Radio Soleil listener. For nearly two decades Mr. Monfistou had been listening to Mr. Dupuy in his taxi, on a radio cobbled together from used parts. He went by the station to buy a radio so he could listen at home. (Because Radio Soleil broadcasts on a subcarrier channel it requires special receivers, which most of its listeners have rigged up on their own, but Mr. Dupuy also sells them, and frequently gives them away, at the station.)
He greeted Mr. Dupuy as if he were a celebrity. After the cabbie left, radio in hand, Mr. Dupuy said: ''The community is first. I'll drop whatever I'm doing to go out and shake their hands and talk to them. Some people get happy just to see me.''
Fittingly, Radio Soleil was the first radio station to broadcast Mr. Dominique in the United States. And, in a sense, Mr. Dupuy, politics obsessed, a born showman and talker, emerged as Mr. Dominique's New York heir.
Mr. Dupuy is a dogged supporter of Aristide, who he says has been undermined by a Haitian press in the lap of a dirty-handed opposition and by the antipathy of the international community.
But for some New York Haitians, Mr. Aristide's presidency is a subject of debate. Down the street from Radio Soleil, a straw poll of a group of Haitian men hanging out in a laundry indicated that Mr. Aristide must go. When told of this, Mr. Dupuy sniffed that they had been found in what was probably ''an anti-Aristide Laundromat.''
He added: ''Millions of Haitians support Aristide. Forcing him to leave goes against every notion of democratic fairness. The guy was elected. The Haitian Constitution has to be the arbiter.''
'Talking Is a Drug'
As the offices of Radio Soleil are a shrine to teledyol, it seems appropriate that they also function as a community hangout and social club, a place where radio is piped into the rooms and pours out onto the sidewalk through funky little speakers. Impromptu groups of Haitian men, and a few women, are always gathered in the front room, lounging on two worn sofas under the Haitian flag and chatting away in Creole.
On long summer nights -- the closest Brooklyn ever comes to Haiti, when the streets of Flatbush become most alive -- the crowd spills out onto the street in front of the storefront, the men leaning on parked cars, the women rocking baby strollers along the curb.
On one such evening, Mr. Dupuy sat in his office, shirtsleeves rolled up, fanning himself with a newspaper. He complained of fatigue, of all the people who needed to see him. He had only 10 minutes to talk, he said, but soon close to an hour had passed, and he was reminiscing about his days in amateur theater in Haiti.
''I love Ionesco,'' he said. ''I love the theater of the absurd. Life is absurd. We talk because we are afraid of silence. Talking is a drug.''
Later, there was a knock on his door, and a clean-cut young man in a leather jacket and khakis entered. Each day, short obituaries of community members are read over the air, accompanied by traditional music of mourning. The young man, speaking perfect English, told Mr. Dupuy that he was waiting for his father, and that they had a death announcement to give him.
Soon, a thin, wrinkled man in a white guayabera came in. He greeted Mr. Dupuy, grabbing him by the shoulder as he shook his hand. The country frankness in his manner contrasted with his son's urban reserve. The son hung back as his father and Mr. Dupuy spoke in Creole.
Finally, the son spoke up: ''The police came to our house on Tuesday. They had found my older brother's body in the woods in Prospect Park. He had been strangled. We don't know when, perhaps Monday night.''
Mr. Dupuy took down the obituary as the old man read the words he wanted from a crumpled piece of notebook paper, and then escorted the men out.
Back at his desk, he shook his head and let out a low, sad whistle. ''Strangled at 28 in the bushes in Prospect Park,'' he said. ''There were all kinds of questions the journalist in me wanted to ask back there.'' But, he added, his job is to serve the community, and please the family of the deceased. ''So I just listened, and made sure I got the spellings and the facts right.''
With his homeland in free fall, Ricot Dupuy is grappling with how to live up to Mr. Dominique's ideal that ''radio could hold a mirror up to the Haitian people, so they could bring about social change in their own country.''
For Mr. Dupuy, for all Haitians, nothing they can see in that mirror seems clear, or hopeful. Last Thursday night, after finishing his show, Mr. Dupuy shook his head and considered the day's news:
In Saint-Marc, the police had shot their way through a slum where rebels were holed up, providing cover for burning and looting by Aristide loyalists. In Cap Haitien, pro-Aristide militants torched the house of a reporter for the opposition Radio Maxima. In Gonaïves, rebels killed a man suspected of being an Aristide hit man by ''necklacing'' him -- putting a tire around his neck, dousing him in kerosene and setting him on fire.
''Thirty years of military brutality in Haiti under the Duvaliers is something no one can comprehend if you have not lived through it,'' a weary Mr. Dupuy said. ''It left deep scars on every Haitian. With Aristide, we thought, 'Never again. That would never happen in my country again.'''
Field Maloney is on the editorial staff of The New Yorker.
