Being black in the United States in 1939 meant enduring insults, but there was one that John Isaacs refused to live with.
Isaacs had helped the all-black New York Rens beat the all-white Oshkosh (Wis.) All-Stars before nearly 20,000 fans at Chicago Stadium in the world's first integrated tournament championship. But when Isaacs looked at his reward, he noticed that he and his teammates had been shortchanged.
The team jackets they were given had Colored World Champions on the back.
''I went into the office of Robert Douglas, the team owner, and said, 'Do you have a razor blade I can borrow?' '' Isaacs, the only living member of those Rens, said last week. ''So he gave me a single-edged razor blade, and I went out and put my jacket on one of my teammates. Then I cut the world Colored off the back, so that it just said, World Champions, because that's what we were.''
The 88-year-old Isaacs, who lives in the Bronx, will watch today's N.B.A. All-Star Game from Los Angeles with great interest, knowing that he helped blaze the trail for the many African-American players at the game, which comes in the middle of Black History Month.
Though Isaacs never played in the N.B.A. or any of its predecessors such as the American Basketball League, the National Basketball League or the Basketball Association of America, he was part of a rich period of basketball that some call the Black Fives Era.
The period ran roughly from the time of Dr. James Naismith's invention of the game in 1891 to the integration of the N.B.A. in 1950. Unlike baseball, there were no Negro leagues but scores of black amateurs and professionals who played on a well-organized barnstorming circuit that featured teams affiliated with churches, businesses, colleges, social clubs and Y.M.C.A.'s.
The Rens, named for the Renaissance Ballroom in Harlem, and then the Harlem Globetrotters were the most famous teams of the time. The Rens, who won 88 straight games in 1933, often played against white teams, most notably the Original Celtics. Traveling throughout the country, the Rens and the Celtics played before big crowds.
The games were so lucrative that the Celtics refused to join the A.B.L. in 1925, partly because it would not allow the Rens into the league.
In the late 1930's, John Wooden, the legendary U.C.L.A. coach, played many games against the Rens as a member of the Indianapolis Kautskys. Wooden called the Rens ''the best I ever saw.''
Though he looks proudly at the strides African-Americans have made in the game, Isaacs said that they still have not been given their due. He said the Rens and the all-black Washington Bears, not Red Auerbach's Celtics invented the pick-and-roll and the motion offense.
''Auerbach was in the Navy and he would go watch the Washington Bears play in Turner's Arena, a small fight club in Washington, D.C.,'' said Isaacs, whose 1933 Rens jersey is in the Basketball Hall of Fame.
Isaacs also cringes when he hears New Yorkers say the 1970 Knicks were the first professional team to win a championship for the city.
''Those players weren't even born when we won it,'' said Isaacs, who still works at the Madison Square Boys and Girls Club in the Bronx. ''How can they be New York's first world champions?''
California Dreaming
Imagine Yao Ming, Dirk Nowitzki, Andrei Kirilenko, Peja Stojakovic and Steve Nash playing against Jason Kidd, Kobe Bryant, Shaquille O'Neal, Tim Duncan and Kevin Garnett tonight in Los Angeles. Think that might be a tad more exciting than the all-dunk, no-defense All-Star Game between players from the Eastern and Western Conferences?
With international stars becoming more prevalent in the N.B.A. the notion of an all-international versus all-American game is now legitimate, either instead of the traditional All-Star Game or in addition to it.
''I'm intrigued by it,'' Bryan Colangelo, the Phoenix Suns' president and general manager, said. ''It would make for some entertaining basketball and an entertaining storyline. It's something to explore as we move forward because the talent certainly is there.''
Nowitzki, one of five international all-stars (six if you count Tim Duncan of the United States Virgin Islands), said such a game would not be fit for the All-Star weekend because it would be far too intense for the happy-go-lucky midseason break.
''I think that game would be too competitive,'' Nowitzki, a three-time all-star, said. ''Guys would really go at each other and want to prove something there. I don't think the All-Star Game is about being that competitive. It's about having fun and enjoying the time together and getting to meet the people that you usually play against, so I don't think that would be a good idea.''
But Nowitzki would not mind playing such a game after the season.
''That would be a great game,'' he said. ''Just get everybody together and get a scrimmage going. I would be all for it.''
Being diplomatic, Nowitzki, who is from Germany, said the Americans would win the game. ''I don't think that we could beat them, but we could at least have a nice game going,'' Nowitzki said. ''It would be a battle.''
Russ Granik, the N.B.A.'s deputy commissioner, said no such game is currently under consideration.
''We've watched the National Hockey League do it, so it's obviously an idea that people have seen,'' Granik said. ''But we've never discussed it seriously. We're comfortable with the format that we have. I don't think it's likely for us to be doing that. I don't want to say never because who knows? But it's not something we have on the table right now. We don't make distinctions between international players and American players.''
O'Neal on Yao
Is there a difference between greatness and dominance? Yes, according to Shaquille O'Neal.
Yao Ming, who was voted to start in the All-Star Game over O'Neal for the second straight season, will eventually go down as a great center, O'Neal said. But one of the most dominant?
No.
''Most dominant is a title that, to me, it's all about banging,'' O'Neal said. ''It's all about how you play. It's all about making them change the rules. I've been in the league 10 years and I made David Stern change the rules two times. Yao's a great player, he's a great scorer, but being dominant means being mean, throwing elbows, talking trash, cursing on live TV. But will he be one of the greatest centers to play this game? Yep.''
Two weeks ago, O'Neal was suspended for one game for cursing on live television.
How dominant is O'Neal? So dominant that he could make any team in the feeble Eastern Conference a title contender, he said.
''I make guys around me better, I'm proven, and when I come to the city, the city's going to be pumped up, ticket prices are going to go up, TNT is going to be there, it's going to be very exciting,'' O'Neal said. ''Plus, the East is not that strong when it comes to big men. They've only got one and that's Jermaine O'Neal.''
Redd Comes of Age
Back when Michael Redd was a Milwaukee Bucks rookie, sitting on the bench for all but 35 minutes that season, Sam Cassell saw this day coming.
''When he was a rookie, I told Mike Redd, 'You've got a chance to be special,' '' Cassell said. ''I don't think at that time that he understood the vision that I saw. He didn't have confidence, but as time went on -- December, January, February -- and he started practicing against Ray Allen and myself, we couldn't contain him. We couldn't stop him. It became sickening to me, having one of my protégés kill me. It became sickening. I never told him that, but I knew this boy was going to be real good. I don't think George Karl understood what he had in Michael Redd.''
Karl is the Bucks' former coach. Redd, who is averaging 21.9 points a game for Milwaukee, is a first-time all-star.
INSIDE THE N.B.A.
