It is almost axiomatic in New Jersey politics that Democratic candidates for statewide office need to count on substantial margins in Essex County, a party stronghold in large part because of the substantial black vote.
The county gave Governor McGreevey sizable margins in his victory two years ago. Perhaps more important, its party leaders played a crucial role in helping Mr. McGreevey fend off at least one would-be challenger and a potentially fractious primary campaign.
So one would think that the county's voters should be happy with the McGreevey administration, and vice versa. But these days in Essex -- the state's second-most populous county -- there are those who are fairly pining for the return of such names as Kean and Whitman and DiFrancesco.
At the heart of this discontent is Mr. McGreevey's sentiment, finally expressed last week, though still not in so many words, that the Meadowlands arena -- surrounded by a sea of swamp grass and New Jersey suburbs -- is where he would like to see hockey played, not Newark.
Then there is Mayor Sharpe James of Newark, who sees his beloved sports arena as part of a larger six-year-old economic development scheme, energizing a faltering revitalization begun five years ago with the opening of the New Jersey Performing Arts Center.
Flush with money from a renegotiated lease for the Newark Liberty International Airport and armed with a letter of intent from the Devils saying that that the team can't wait to come to the city, all Newark needs is the governor's willingness to demolish Continental Arena, 12 miles to the north, so that it will not siphon off nonsporting events needed to make a one-team arena profitable.
So what caused the governor's change of heart after nearly four years of vocal support for the Newark arena is not clear. What is clear is that in choosing Bergen County over Newark, Mr. McGreevey has exposed some of the crucial fault lines in the Democratic Party.
And for a governor whose popularity -- even within his base -- is flagging in the opinion polls, the result may prove seismic.
Rick Thigpen, a former Democratic official and now a lobbyist and consultant, lamented the governor's flirtation with what he called ''the third rail of Democratic politics.''
That the party has different constituencies -- urban and suburban, black and white, poor and middle class -- is a given, he said.
''There are two ways to reconcile the very different viewpoints of these constituencies,'' Mr. Thigpen said. ''One is diplomacy. The other is power politics.''
Joseph DiVincenzo, the Democratic executive of Essex County, and a supporter of the Newark arena, noted that Governor McGreevey was approaching an election year where ''he has some major concerns about winning in Bergen County,'' the state's most populous county and the third-wealthiesty in the nation -- and a place where the party spent lavishly to win county offices and increase its presence in Trenton.
Walter Fields, a political consultant who -- though he is a Democrat -- has also worked for Republican candidates, said that Mayor James and Newark did not deserve Governor McGreevey's apparent tilt away from the urban base that helped elect him. After the support that Mayor James delivered, he said, it was matter of ''pride'' to try to punish the governor politically now.
Even Newark and Essex County residents who may not be wild about the notion of a hockey arena team can identify with the disrespect that the governor may have shown to one of his staunchest supporters. While this will not translate into fevered support for a Republican, Mr. Fields suggested, it could mean tepid support, at best, for the Democrat.
''Oh, McGreevey will get some points from the suburban voters for looking as if he is independent enough to stand up to Mayor James,'' he said. ''But pretty soon the chickens will come home to roost because there is nothing but bad news and low poll ratings surrounding this governor.''
One of those roosting chickens might be the eventual departure of the New Jersey Devils, in which case the governor may well have to take heat for losing two professional sports teams on his watch.
Late last week Mayor James donned a cheerleader's hat and held a pep rally for the Devils to highlight his commitment to the home team and the arena and to turn up the volume in the war that is brewing with the governor.
All of this made one North Jersey Democratic power, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, nostalgic for the old days. He recalled that there were two Republican and two Democratic governors who over nearly two decades carried the banner for building the Performing Arts Center despite strong opposition from predominantly white suburban interests. From one administration to the next, he said, there was resolve and an understanding of the importance of showing faith in the regenerative powers of the state's largest city.
''They all worked for it and no single person tried to get credit for it,'' he said.
In 2001, as Governor Whitman was departing for Washington, she gave her blessing to providing state money for a sports arena in Newark. Her successor, acting Gov. Donald DiFrancesco, eagerly embraced the project and even as a lame duck offered to use his clout with a Republican-controlled Legislature to push it through. But Mr. McGreevey waved him off, saying that he wanted to be the one to see it through.
''The only word for that,'' the Democrat said, ''was hubris.''
ON POLITICS Ronald Smothers reports from Newark for The New York Times.
