LA VIE EN ROSE is a quirky place at the end of nowhere in New London that serves surprisingly elegant French food. Surprising because the long, rectangular room with its rows of tables and pared down green and brown décor is more funky than elegant. (It reminds me a little of a railroad car.)
It seems likely that the spare décor is intentional: bistros in France -- the young chef Guillaume Berlion grew up outside of Paris -- are casual and inexpensive (sole meunière, steak frites and profiteroles).
The menu is prix fixe at $29.95 for a four-course meal; that comes to about $50 a head with wine and tip. This is somewhat more than I paid the last time I ate at a bistro in Paris, but the food is rather more dressed up, too. And with the exception of one very cold, very slow night, the food has been consistently good.
The first course is a variety of appetizers served on individual plates with excellent warm bread from Nancy Silverton's La Brea Bakery in California. The more people in your party, the more little plates you get to try. This unusual presentation is presumably inspired by the French ''crudités,'' a variety of vegetable salads -- generally raw, but not always -- each seasoned with a vinaigrette, sauce, or mayonnaise.
One night we had grated carrots in a spicy vinaigrette (a nice balance of natural sweetness and mild heat), crisp, fresh tasting slivered cabbage in vinaigrette, a salad of tiny shrimp dressed with mayonnaise, a plate of smoked salmon and something the waiter called a boeuf bourguignon. (It tasted much more like baked beans with beef.) Other nights I have had romaine salad with a lovely, sharp shallot vinaigrette, a slice of pâté (strong tasting), a chicken sautée, hummus (a bit bland) and a red leaf salad with chicken livers that were overcooked to my taste -- I like them medium rare -- but I ate them anyway.
Appetizers are followed by a tiny bowl of soup: the best was a luscious, creamy potato soup with Parmesan; another night, the chicken soup was salty.
Entrees are served under a covering of silver serving ''bells'' -- never, in my experience, standard bistro presentation. Duck confit is tender, just salty enough, served with a crisp potato cake and wild mushrooms. (The chef does nice things with shredded potatoes, also using them as a crisp wrapping for a variety of foods, such as a potato crusted pork loin.) A well-cooked steak was accompanied by the same potato cake and an onion tart enclosed in an excellent flaky crust. Lamb chops were correctly cooked and served with a well-seasoned ratatouille.
Veal ragout in puff pastry was delicious: tender, very French tasting, creamy without being too rich. Rare tuna -- someone had a heavy hand with the salt -- was served with a ''surf and turf spring roll'' stuffed with a mixture of ground beef and mussels; it was interesting and very good. One night the paella was bitter with saffron, and too salty, but that was the off-night. The only consistent disagreement I have with the food is that the sauces are made thick enough to pipe onto the plates in designs. (I like my sauces thinner than that and don't care about designs.)
Dinner finishes with a selection of four desserts: a crême caramel (just what you would expect, with a particularly tasty caramel sauce); a very good warm apple concoction layered with puff pastry; a sweet, rich, chocolaty mousse enclosed in a meringue swan (very cute). One night, what seemed to be a chocolate cake soaked in custard needed a stronger chocolate taste.
The combination of elegant food and funky chic is quirky enough. But if you're there on the weekend, you may also be serenaded by the chef's wife, Ashly, who croons Piaf (among others) as she glides through the room caressing a guest or two (no one seems to mind). The lady hits her notes and so does her husband.
La Vie en Rose  130 Pequot Ave., New London  (860)444-8860
Very Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Informal; quirky décor; music on the weekends and sometimes other nights.  NOISE LEVEL -- Moderate; louder when there is music.  SERVICE -- Friendly but largely unschooled in the food; can be slow, with some mistakes.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Potato wrapped pork loin, duck confit, ahi tuna, lamb chops, steak.  PRICE RANGE -- $29.95 for a four-course prix fixe menu.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards accepted.  HOURS -- Dinner only: 5:30 p.m. to 10 p.m. Tuesday to Saturday. Closed Sunday and Monday.  RESERVATIONS -- Recommended.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- A couple of small steps to the front door, but another entrance through the kitchen is available.  Reviewed by The Times Feb. 15, 2004.  Ratings -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING
