They have spent millions of dollars in advertising, accused Albany of trying to break a 200-year-old federal treaty and asked President Bush to come to their aid.
Now, with memories of past standoffs hanging in the air, the Seneca Indian Nation appears to have won, at least for the moment, its fight against a state plan to collect hundreds of millions of dollars in taxes from goods sold on its lands, in the western New York State area.
The tax plan was conceived last year by state lawmakers from both major political parties who have been under increasing pressure to collect the unpaid sales and excise taxes on all goods sold to non-Indian customers at Indian stores, where the mainstays are gasoline and cigarettes. Non-Indian wholesalers would be taxed before their goods were sold to Indian retailers.
Some neighboring merchants argue that the state's $1.50-a-pack tax on cigarettes and 28.95-cents-a-gallon tax on gasoline create unfair price differences and cost them business. A nonprofit group, Upstate Citizens for Equality, goes further, saying the state must collect the taxes to ensure equal and fair application of the tax laws for state residents.
The state budget that passed in May counted on $186 million in new revenue this year and $374 million next year from the collection of the taxes on tribal land.
The Seneca Nation fiercely opposed it, launching an advertising and public relations campaign calling the move a violation of federal treaties from 1794 and 1842.
In a Dec. 19 letter to President Bush, Rickey L. Armstrong Sr., the president of the Seneca Nation, wrote that he expected the United States ''to intercede if another party, even one of its own states, attempts to violate our treaty rights.''
In November, the Pataki administration announced that it would postpone by at least three months the planned Dec. 1 start of the tax collection plan.
In his budget presentation on Jan. 20, Gov. George E. Pataki then announced that he wanted to delay the start of the tax collections until March 2005. The ostensible reason, state officials said, was to address the tax collection as part of a package of issues the state faced with its Indian tribes, including various land claims and the establishment of six Indian-owned casinos.
But this week, Andrew S. Eristoff, the commissioner of the state's Department of Taxation and Finance, told a joint legislative committee that the state plan would be postponed indefinitely, saying the state needed more time to review public comments about the proposed tax regulations. He also said the possibility of violence by the Indians was a significant concern.
In 1997, after Mr. Pataki last tried to collect taxes on a Seneca reservation, about 1,000 tribal members blocked traffic on the New York State Thruway. Indians and state troopers clashed, with a number of injuries on each side, and about a dozen patrol cars were damaged.
An administration official said that if protests similar to the protests that took place in 1997 happened today, they would cost New York millions of dollars a week and take hundreds of state police troopers away from important new homeland security duties.
Mr. Armstrong said tribal leaders were not planning violent resistance to the tax collections, but he also could not promise that the tribe could keep a lid on any potential disorder.
A former Seneca president referred to the conflict as ''the Senecas' last stand.'' And in a Dec. 2 letter to the state, the Saint Regis Mohawk Tribe warned about the potential for problems if the state tried to collect the taxes.
''Jobs and the future economy of our tribe are at risk, and public health, safety and welfare will be endangered,'' read the letter, signed by three tribal leaders.
On Tuesday, Mr. Armstrong said Mr. Eristoff's announcement proved that the tribe's lobbying efforts were ''worth every penny.''
''This postponement tells us we have succeeded in educating the people of New York about the importance of honoring Indian treaties,'' Mr. Armstrong said in a written statement. ''We recognize this as a positive step by the governor in attempting to achieve a resolution to this issue that is respectful of our sovereignty and our deeply held belief in the rightness of our cause.''
But others are furious with Mr. Eristoff, saying the issue is a matter of fairness and equity.
''We are not happy with the commissioner or the department, period, on several fronts,'' said John E. McArdle, a spokesman for Joseph L. Bruno, the state Senate's Republican majority leader. He said Mr. Eristoff had taken the law into his own hands and though he declined to provide specifics, he said, ''We will act accordingly to show our displeasure.''
Daniel T. Warren, the chairman of the Niagara Frontier chapter of the Upstate Citizens for Equality, said the group was collecting signatures on a petition in an effort to have the State Assembly initiate impeachment proceedings to remove the governor, who he said is obliged to carry out the law the Legislature passed.
''It amounts to selective enforcement of New York's valid tax laws,'' Mr. Warren said of the Pataki administration's indefinite delay.
Kevin C. Quinn, a spokesman for Mr. Pataki, said, ''That is so ridiculous as to not be worthy of a response.''
