NOT so long ago, Mount Kisco was an unexciting little town with two primary thoroughfares for no-frills shopping and dining. Over the last few years, however, neglected alleys that connect South Moger Avenue to a new back parking lot have been reclaimed and developed into charming pedestrian walkways here.
With the Banana Republic, the Gap, Victoria's Secret and Mount Kisco Farms as near neighbors, the area draws shoppers in increasing numbers often looking for a place to eat that not only nourishes but also restores. To that end, Temptation Tea House, tucked in a tiny alley off South Moger Avenue, is a place worth discovering.
With a great variety of tasty pan-Asian snack dishes, entrees and beverages, it fills a culinary void in this area of the county. Let the megamalls have their food courts; we will take a serene respite here from work-a-day chores with a few steamed dumplings and a pot of rose flower tea.
About 45 snack dishes and 30 entree-size items will satisfy any appetite any time of day. Preparations are not always consistent. At its splendid best, for example, a scallop dish (served in a huge scallop shell) called Dynamite ($9) has the right balance of mushrooms, black tobiko and Japanese mayonnaise. On one try, however, the dish was tasty, but one had to spoon off the mayonnaise. That being said, and only because it was the most expensive snack on the menu, many other dishes had merit. Four steamed shrimp and shark fin dumplings ($4) as well as plain shrimp dumplings were succulent.
Vietnamese rolls were, surprisingly, a cold offering, served prettily with baby greens, chips of mango and a cold, sweet dipping sauce; but temperature did not detract from the lovely flavors of the filling -- a julienne of mango and vegetables -- in a translucent wrap. Almost as successful, dense Thai Special Spring Rolls, shaped like small cigars, dipped easily into a spicy sauce.
Meaty chicken wings (a house special) amounted to a bargain at four for $3.50, and nicely grilled nuggets of chicken satay came skewered and sprinkled with sesame seeds. Sautéed turnip cake was crisped outside and remained soft inside, a pleasing counterpoint of textures. Dark sesame balls with red bean paste might have stayed too long in the fryer, and Thai crab cakes had little flavor.
Of the several salads on the menu, we tried one called seaweed with mango. Shredded jicama was a welcome addition, but the salad contained mostly baby spinach and little of the promised mango and seaweed.
But some of the entrees proved delightful. Thai seafood casserole in a sauce of basil and coconut milk, (at $20.50 the most expensive dish on the menu) was a treat with its huge shrimp, scallops, big chunk of lobster, mushrooms, vegetables and jalapeño pepper, which imparted zesty heat. Packing even more spicy heat was the curry sauce seasoned grilled chicken ($7), a generous entree with its accompaniments of rice, gorgeous shiitakes and snap peas.
Tossed with garlic, asparagus and snow peas, a half-dozen wok-grilled jumbo shrimp were flavorful and succulent. Lemon grass shrimp with belacan (fish paste) sauce were almost as good. Black bean sauce overwhelmed a piece of potentially appealing salmon.
This cold weather has its drawbacks, but it's a good excuse to down one of Temptation's many steaming-hot broths or soups. A huge bowl of seafood broth ($10) abounds with udon (noodles), shrimp and scallops.
Skip desserts. Tiramisù seemed intrusively creamy as a closing to the kind of food served, and too much gelatin made mousse cakes rubbery. A few beers, wines and juices were on hand, but the real draw here is tea: green, black, frothy, pearl, Chinese and Japanese -- in myriad variations. Temptations indeed.
Temptation Tea House  11A South Moger Avenue,  Mount Kisco.  (914)666-8808.
GOOD
Atmosphere -- Informal, cheery red and gold Asian tea room with a giant tea pot and a rock fountain, with tiny charming figurines that lend scale, spilling into a fish pond. Helpful service. Parking lot in back.  Recommended dishes -- Fried mini sesame balls, shrimp and shark fin dumplings, shrimp dumplings, ''Dynamite,'' Vietnamese roll, Thai seafood casserole, grilled chicken with spicy curry sauce, seafood udon (noodle) broth, wok-grilled garlic shrimp, teas.  Prices -- Lunch and dinner, small dishes, $3 to $9; large dishes, $5.25 to $20.50.  Credit cards -- Major cards accepted.  Hours -- Mondays through Saturdays, 10:30 a.m. to 11 p.m.; Sundays, 10:30 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. Lunch served until 4:30 p.m.  Reservations -- Accepted.  Wheelchair access -- Street level.  The Ratings -- Excellent. Very good. Good. Satisfactory. Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambience and service taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.  Review published: Feb. 15, 2004
DINING OUT E-mail: westdine@nytimes.com
