Dale Earnhardt Jr., one of the favorites to win the Daytona 500 on Sunday at Daytona International Speedway, has moved in the lineup and will now start first.
Earnhardt replaces Greg Biffle, who won the pole in qualifying last Sunday but had engine trouble Saturday during practice and was forced to change engines for the race. Nascar rules require that cars move to the back of the field if an engine change is made after qualifying.
Biffle, who won the pole with a speed of 188.387 miles an hour, felt a loss of power during practice Saturday morning. After his car was taken to the garage, a defect in a valve and a leaking cylinder were discovered.
Biffle will start 39th in the 43-car field as four other cars also went to the back of the field because of changes.
Earnhardt technically will not start on the pole; Biffle will take the prerace laps at that spot but will go back to 39th just before the race begins.
Earnhardt moved to the first spot because he was to start directly behind Biffle on the inside lane in the second row. Elliott Sadler, who qualified with the second-fastest speed, will remain in the front row on the outside lane, per Nascar rules.
Earnhardt won one of the two 125-mile qualifying races on Thursday to earn his original spot in the field. He boasted after the race that his car could not be caught when he was in front. He drives for Dale Earnhardt Inc., which has dominated races at Daytona in recent years. His teammate Michael Waltrip has won the Daytona 500 two of the past three years, and Earnhardt won the Pepsi 400 at Daytona in 2001.
Also moving to the back Sunday is Ryan Newman, the series leader last season with eight victories and a preseason favorite to challenge for the Nextel Cup championship this year. His car also had an engine change Saturday after qualifying 20th for the race. Others moving back were Ricky Craven (who was to start 28th), Scott Riggs (36th) and Derrike Cope (42nd).
Rain Stalls Busch Race
Dale Earnhardt Jr. was leading the Hershey's Kisses 300 Busch Series race at Daytona International Speedway on Saturday before rain halted the race after 31 of the scheduled 120 laps.
The race will be resumed at 11 a.m. Monday. The cars will be impounded by Nascar, and no changes will be allowed until racing resumes.
Earnhardt, who has won the race the past two years, started eighth and steadily worked his way to the front, taking the lead on Lap 11.
A crash on Lap 12 led to a caution flag. Earnhardt retook the lead on Lap 24 from Michael Waltrip, who pitted just before the red flag came out. Robby Gordon is second, followed by Mike Wallace, the 18-year-old rookie Kyle Busch and Ron Hornaday Jr. (AP)
AUTO RACING: NOTEBOOK
