New York City Transit officials are considering backing out of a commitment made five years ago to convert one of their massive diesel bus depots, in West Harlem, into a compressed natural gas facility.
The officials say that cleaner diesel bus technology makes it no longer necessary for the transit agency's budget-pressed parent, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, to spend the $50 million that a conversion would require.
But the decision, which would require approval by the authority's board, could prove controversial because of the authority's long uneasy relationship with Harlem. The area has one of the nation's highest child asthma rates, and many residents say the disproportionate number of bus depots north of 96th Street is to blame, calling it a form of racism. According to some community leaders, if the authority reneges on its pledge, it will amount to another in a long string of betrayals.
''Given the whole record of the M.T.A. in this community, this will definitely be a fight,'' said Peggy Shepard, executive director of West Harlem Environmental Action, an advocacy group that filed a complaint under the Civil Rights Act against the authority in 2000, charging that the depots in the community amount to discrimination. ''The M.T.A. is an ongoing enemy up here because of the way they have dealt with the issues.''
Five out of the authority's six bus depots in Manhattan are north of 96th Street, although transit officials point out that the depots' history in these neighborhoods predates the agency.
For example, the depot that is the subject of the current debate, the Manhattanville depot on West 133rd Street, dates to the early 1900's, when Fifth Avenue Coach, a private company, had a streetcar depot there. That building was demolished in the late 1980's to make way for the current facility. More than 230 transit agency buses are now based there, and the authority drew the community's ire several years ago when it reopened a bus depot on 100th Street while closing one downtown.
The community's longstanding concerns prompted Gov. George E. Pataki to promise the conversion to natural gas at a June 1998 news conference in front of the 340,000-square-foot Manhattanville depot.
At that point, the science seemed obvious. Engines powered by natural gas burned cleaner than their diesel counterparts, which belched black smoke all over the city. Natural gas engines emitted lower levels of greenhouse gases and particulate matter -- the tiny fragments of soot that cause asthma and other respiratory problems and cancer -- as well as smog-producing hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxide.
''There was no other alternative at the time,'' said Dana Lowell, who handles research and development for New York City Transit's department of buses.
Officials initially resisted the conversion at Manhattanville because its three-story structure makes it especially expensive and cumbersome to convert. Besides requiring the installation of compressors and fueling stations, changing to natural gas operations involves adding ventilation and making light fixtures explosion-proof. On a one-story building, the conversion is relatively simple, costing as little as $10 million. At Manhattanville, it would cost $50 million, but environmentalists pushed it because the depot is in Manhattan, where air quality is the worst. Transit officials wanted to convert an unspecified depot elsewhere but bowed to pressure from environmentalists to convert one in Manhattan.
Although the infrastructure that accompanies natural gas buses is expensive, the transportation authority committed to buying 250 natural gas buses, on top of 221 buses it already had, as part of its capital plan for 2000 to 2004. At the time, environmental groups pressed the authority to buy only buses that ran on natural gas, but officials resisted, choosing a mixed approach and also investing in hybrid electric buses, which use small diesel engines to power electric motors connected to the wheels.
By 2000, however, the fruits of frantic efforts by diesel engine manufacturers to make diesel cleaner were becoming apparent. New exhaust filters that trap soot, coupled with a new generation of diesel engines built after 1994 and ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel, produced emissions comparable to natural gas.
''The levels of particulate that come out are so low they're hard to measure,'' Mr. Lowell said.
For transit officials, the results were a boon. Long reluctant to make the costly investments for natural gas conversion, they suddenly had a cheaper, quicker alternative. They plunged ahead enthusiastically, transforming the transit agency along the way into a nationwide leader in clean-fuel buses. Only 300 of the city's 4,500 buses now run on engines made before 1994 and still belch smoke. By the end of the year, they will be gone, transit officials say.
Hybrid bus technology has also become much more reliable in recent years, and transit officials now say that with their advantages in fuel efficiency, these buses represent the future. They plan to invest heavily in them in the upcoming capital plan, shifting away from natural gas.
But that leaves Manhattanville.
''It doesn't take a rocket scientist to ask about the cost versus the benefit,'' Mr. Lowell said.
If the conversion is to proceed, the contract would have to be awarded in late spring. Officials of New York City Transit have not decided whether to recommend a change to the authority's board.
A lawyer for the Natural Resources Defense Council, Richard Kassel, said the transit agency would have a tough time convincing the community.
''Clearly, the combination of low-sulfur diesel and particulate traps add up to a diesel bus that is dramatically cleaner than what New Yorkers are used to seeing,'' he said. ''That said, the M.T.A. made a commitment to West Harlem.''
Mr. Kassel pointed out that natural gas still had certain advantages when it comes to smog-producing emissions. The effectiveness of the filters is largely dependent on proper maintenance, said Ms. Shepard, of the West Harlem group, adding that she was skeptical of the transit agency's ability to keep up. Moreover, she said, the data she has seen shows that the filters come close to natural gas emissions but do not beat them.
There are two public housing projects with more than 3,000 residents each nearby, said the Rev. Earl Kooperkamp, the pastor of a neighborhood church, St. Mary's Episcopal. A middle school also stands across the street.
''Children's health is so important,'' he said. ''To make compromises on this really does worry me.''
