IF all that mattered in choosing a wristwatch was its ability to track minutes and hours with reasonable accuracy, a Timex would be the equal of a Rolex. But factors beyond basic utility -- style, pride of ownership or whatever you want to call it -- influence buyers, too, motivating them to spend thousands of dollars on fine mechanical timepieces that are also investments in precious metal and in self-esteem.
If you hold dear the belief that spending money on anything beyond pure function is a wasteful indulgence -- if, in short, you're a Timex sort of consumer -- you will probably never get the point of the Chevrolet SSR. Reading further will provide no compelling logic to justify buying a vehicle that looks a great deal like a pickup truck but is certainly not as utilitarian.
But if you figure that there is more to choosing a vehicle than cold, hard reason, more than tallying cup holders, luggage capacity and warranty terms, then the SSR could tug at your heartstrings.
There is no denying that the SSR is a bundle of asterisks and footnotes, a two-seat convertible built on the chassis of a sport utility. Despite the V-8 engine growling under the hood, it is not the tool for towing your bass boat to the bayou. Truth be told, the SSR has about as much in common with genuine trucks as Donald J. Trump has with real job recruiters.
But that doesn't mean you might not want to own it.
The initials in the model name stand for super sport roadster, and a quick review of the specifications lends credence to the label: a 300-horsepower aluminum V-8, rear-wheel drive, huge wheels (19 inches in the front and 20 at the rear) and disc brakes all around. The impression is reinforced by the rumble of the exhaust when the engine starts, and the SSR's hunkered-down stance over wide tires gives it the ''don't mess with me'' appearance of a body builder.
The SSR's look is, of course, on loan from Chevrolet's past, specifically the first generation of the company's pickups to be redesigned after World War II. The SSR clearly recalls the Advance Design Chevys introduced in the late 1940's, but in such an exaggerated way that it manages to be modern at the same time. No matter: the SSR is not an entry in an authenticity contest, but a shape that stands on its own. It is a custom hot rod, not a Franklin Mint reproduction.
The cab has curves in all the right places, but a close look reveals some illusion. The bulging fenders have distinct shoulders, rather than the continuous curves of the original, and the cargo bed ends at the back of the fenders rather than extending beyond them. Then there are the complete departures, like a hard shell covering the cargo bed and a top that retracts ingeniously, becoming a stack of metal that snuggles behind the cabin.
Though the flip-up bed cover is mostly cosmetic (and not altogether waterproof on my test vehicle) the designers recognized that some provision for doing without it would be a good thing. An accessory kit, consisting of a storage bag and a wall rack, enables owners to remove and store the cover to make use of the bed. But not a lot of use: the cargo capacity is 23.7 cubic feet, closer to the trunk space of a large sedan than a midsize pickup, so owners won't be carrying 4-by-8 sheets of plywood.
For all the marvels of the exterior styling, the interior comes as a disappointment, as if it were done by designers who were never allowed to see what they were working inside. The dashboard is resolutely General Motors, a plain of textured plastic that could have been smooth and body-colored (like the console) to continue the nostalgia theme.
Some touches are just right, like the chrome door-lock buttons, but the modern radio controls are out of character -- how much effort would it have taken to design a 50's-style faceplate? The door panels and the jet-age shifter for the automatic transmission, while snappy-looking, are also out of place.
To justify building the SSR, Chevrolet had to use as many parts as possible from existing models. The SSR's ladder frame, a shortened version of the one used in the TrailBlazer sport utility, is welded from hydroformed steel rails, which are stiffer than stamped rails would have been. The body panels are steel, not the plastic commonly used for low-volume models.
The downside to this brawny structure is that age-old enemy of performance: excess weight. The SSR weighs more than 4,700 pounds, a statistic that challenges the whole premise of the name super sport.
Accelerating from a stop and trying to squirt through traffic require too much effort from the engine. The SSR is not slow -- Car and Driver magazine timed 0-60 acceleration at a respectable 7.0 seconds -- but it is not as quick as you expect 300 horsepower to feel. The weight penalty is felt at the gas pump, too, with an E.P.A. city/highway rating of 15/19.
The other side of the coin is that the structure is not nearly as stiff as it ought to be for all that weight. Chassis flex is evident; when crossing bumps you can see and feel pieces moving in opposite directions -- even more so with the top lowered. Though the tires grip tenaciously and the suspension soaks up bumps adroitly, there's a wallowing sensation below and a mushy feeling at the brake pedal.
Having witnessed the debut of the original SSR design study at the 2000 Detroit auto show, and knowing how much is usually lost along the road to production, I was not optimistic when I picked up my test vehicle in Manhattan. All cynicism melted, though, when the doors of the parking garage swung back to reveal the brilliant red SSR.
Wherever I drove it, youngsters on bikes flocked to it. Once, a man of retirement age stopped to take a look, commented that it needed running boards, and then reminisced about his Z28 Camaro of 30 years ago.
Parked, it accumulated nose grease on the side windows, evidence of curious onlookers peeking inside.
Used as intended -- as a boulevard cruiser -- the SSR's shortcomings might barely be noticed. With the top lowered it is an ego-boosting pleasure, even at highway speeds. The cabin is remarkably pleasant; the stereo is excellent. Some tire noise intrudes, but the experience is no hardship. Comfortable seats help you forget how narrow the cabin is.
With the SSR, Chevrolet has again nailed the recipe for apple pie and hot dog Americana as surely as a glossy magazine ad for faded jeans. It would seem the perfect weekend hot rod (and one with a factory warranty, at that) to park between the Corvette and the Harley.
Chevrolet intends to find garages for 12,000 or so SSR's this year, a goal that ought to be attainable even given the $41,995 base price, though that may involve some cannibalization of its own customers. Early sales data collected by the Power Information Network shows that the highest percentage of trade-in models were Corvettes, at 15 percent of SSR sales.
Recent introductions of nostalgic auto designs have reached sales plateaus in a few years, so it is logical to assume that the SSR will enjoy some time in the limelight before it moves from center stage, as the T-Bird, the PT Cruiser and the Volkswagen New Beetle already have. Until then, the SSR will be a hoot to ogle, wash and even drive, and an indulgence with a dash of practical function. But buyers should not consider the SSR, like other revival efforts, an investment-grade addition to their portfolios.
INSIDE TRACK: More warm rod than hot rod, but still the coolest cruiser with a factory warranty.
Behind the Wheel
