IN the great green room, there was a telephone and a red balloon and just too many bad children's books. There was no time to appreciate the comb and the brush and the bowl full of mush. You could hardly hear the little old lady whispering ''Hush'' over the sound of all the books clamoring to be read: 6,000 new ones every year.
When you went to the bookstore, you were distracted by the bells and whistles: the sound chips, the coordinated stuffed dolls, the celebrity authors. Especially the celebrity authors. Yet that didn't stop more than 100 people from turning out on a chilly Monday night at the New School University in Greenwich Village for a forum called ''Writing for Children: Getting Published.''
It's hard to believe -- although who knows? -- that more than 100 people would turn out on a winter weeknight for a seminar on children's book publishing in, let's say, Cleveland. Yet in New York, a combination of social factors may conspire to make everyone yearn to become the next Dr. Seuss.
It's a city of hungry and ambitious artists and writers. It's a city of young people, not long out of childhood, whose strongest influences in life so far may have been ''Curious George,'' ''The Little Engine That Could'' and ''Madeline.'' (A striking portion of the audience were in their 20's and 30's.) And it's a city full of pampered and indulged children, a captive market.
One would-be writer, Edward Flynn, said he wanted to write a children's book to entertain his nephew, 6, and his niece, 1. ''I'm the uncle who tries to make them more literate,'' said Mr. Flynn, a 41-year-old earring-wearing ''pixel pusher'' who was seeking relief from his day job retouching photos. ''My sister and brother-in-law are like the super-busy couple. They don't have time to sit down and read. The kids get kind of spoiled with all the other toys that fill up their room.'' But as a freelance illustrator, Mr. Flynn knows the hard realities of publishing, and like others in the audience was thinking of self-publishing.
The panel members were not reassuring about the chances of being noticed as a first-time children's book author. When an audience member asked about submitting manuscripts to more than one editor at a time, the panelists practically throttled her. That would be very bad etiquette, they insisted. It was left to the moderator, Deborah Brodie, executive editor of Roaring Brook Press (titles include ''Princess Picky'' and ''The True Story of Trapper Jack's Left Big Toe''), to suggest that a three-month deadline for the editor to read a submission might be fair to both sides.
What do editors want, the audience wondered?
''Cultivate your eccentricities,'' urged Andrea Cascardi, an agent with Transatlantic Literary Agency. By that, she said, she meant ''mining your life or the details of the world around you. Reaching for that place inside of you.''
At least one audience member, Hope Hopkins, reacted a bit cynically to this call for authenticity, perhaps because, as a 25-year-old advertising account planner for BBDO who is trying to figure out how to sell the Venus razor, she knows what a trendy world we live in.
In the age of children's books by Madonna and Jerry Seinfeld, are publishers really looking for the next ''Little House on the Prairie''? Would writers even know how to write it? Ms. Hopkins was dubious. ''We live in a society that's so obsessed with being the right person,'' she said. ''So when you sit down to actually write something like 'Little House on the Prairie,' which is about family dynamics, it is so much more muddled for us, because we're influenced by what we should be instead of what we are.''
As if to prove that anyone in the room could succeed, Ms. Brodie pointed out Catherine Stine, a pale-complexioned brunette sitting in a middle row, whose first book, ''Refugees,'' a post-9/11 novel for teenagers, will be published next winter by Delacorte. Ms. Stine, a painter and the mother of two boys, has ghost-written ''American Girl'' books. But it has taken her six years, and a master's degree in creative writing from the New School, to see one of her own books reach print.
Ms. Stine had her own take on the appeal of writing children's books: doing so helped her become part of a children's writing community. ''It's a great community,'' she said. ''It's very supportive. It's the way I imagine sort of a utopian community should be.''
As a painter, she said, she used to find that life felt so solitary. Who knew that in a lonely city like New York, where Seinfeld and Madonna get all the attention, writing children's books could offer a ticket to a small town of at least 100 like-minded people?
COPING E-mail: amh@nytimes.com
