THE GREAT RIOTS OF NEW YORK: 1712-1873  By Joel Tyler Headley  Thunder's Mouth Press  ($14.95, paperback)
Soon as it was dark, the ''Sons of Liberty,'' numbering thousands, surged tumultuously up around the fort, and demanded that the stamps should be given up so that they might be destroyed.
(Governor Cadwallader) Colden bluntly refused, when with loud, defiant shouts they left, and went up Broadway to ''the field'' (the present park), where they erected a gibbet, and hanged on it Colden in effigy, and beside him a figure holding a boot; some said to represent the devil, others Lord Bute, of whom the boot, by a pun on his name, showed for whom the effigy was designed.
The demonstration had now become a riot, and the Sons of Liberty degenerated into a mob. The feeling that had been confined to words all day must now have some outlet. A torchlight procession was formed, and the scaffold and images taken down, and borne on men's shoulders along Broadway towards the Battery.
The glare of flaring lights on the buildings and faces of the excited crowd, the shouts and hurrahs that made night hideous, called out the entire population, which gazed in amazement on the strange, wild spectacle.
They boldly carried the scaffold and effigies to within a few feet of the gate of the fort, and knocked audaciously for admission. Isaac Sears was the leader of these ''Sons of Liberty.''
Finding themselves unable to gain admittance, they went to the Governor's carriage-house, and took out his elegant coach, and placing the two effigies in it, dragged it by hand around the streets by the light of torches, amid the jeers and shouts of the multitude. Becoming at last tired of this amusement, they returned towards the fort, and erected a second gallows, on which they hung the effigies the second time.
BABY PLAYS AROUND: A Love Affair, With Music  By Helene Stapinski  Villard Books  ($23.95, hardcover)
When we got back to New York, Julie landed us a gig at a club called Spiral on Houston Street. Their sign was a big black and white spiral projected onto the sidewalk out front.
Though we were still fresh on the club scene, we were the headliners that night, playing after Vitamin X and Talking to Lois. At the better clubs, the bigger your following and the better your sound, the better placement you had on the billing. But at Spiral, there was no rhyme or reason to your placement in the lineup.
I think they just threw the names of the bands in a hat and took it from there. Vitamin X, Talking to Lois, Stephonic. It didn't matter. Because another night at Spiral, we were the first of seven bands. There was nothing like being the opening act for six unknown bands.
That first night, though, we were the stars. And it was Doug's birthday. Since he was so far from home, he made sure everyone knew in advance so that he wouldn't spend the entire day without someone making a big stink about it.
I bought him a chocolate birthday cake in a bakery in Brooklyn, on my way to our show, and placed it gently in the backseat, next to my bass drum. I snuck the cake into Spiral without Doug seeing, and hid it behind the bar.
N.Y. BOOKSHELF/NONFICTION
