IF you look around the cafeteria at the Interlochen Center for the Arts , you are likely to find the director of alumni relations having lunch with an instructor of political science and world history -- who happens to be her husband. Two math teachers -- also married -- will probably be at a nearby table, as will the voice teachers, who are husband and wife. The academic librarian will be dining with his wife, the music librarian. And the director of music will be sharing a table with his girlfriend, while everyone around them wonders when the heck they are going to get married already.
In an era when the average human resources department has a stack of policies about nepotism and fraternization, there are offices out there where everyone seems to be coupled off. At Interlochen, a boarding school in northwest Michigan, 20 percent of the year-round employees are married to another employee -- and no one ventures to guess how many couples are born among the influx of summer camp staff.
At this particular workplace, combining work and romance seems to be part of a tradition. ''It's absolutely gorgeous here,'' said Ann Hanson, vice president for human and institutional resources, who met her husband, Byron, now the resident band counselor, when she arrived in 1973. ''It's woods and lakes and music everywhere,'' she said. ''Before you know it, you have families.''
Natural beauty and music alone, however, do not explain why some workplaces inspire romance. Sharon Anderson Wright, for example, met her husband, Ken, in the half-built shell of a bookstore. Her mother, Pat Anderson, was a founder of Half Price Books, a chain selling used books and magazines that has $120 million in annual business. Ms. Wright is now the chief executive of that chain, but 11 years ago she was the manager of a Dallas store and Mr. Wright, now vice president for merchandising, was a construction worker installing bookshelves during a renovation.
There are now nearly 20 couples in senior management at Half Price Books, and 7 of the 17 district managers met their spouses at work. ''I won't even begin to guess how many couples are working for us total,'' Ms. Wright says. ''Books can be darn romantic.''
Every so often, she says, someone suggests a ''nondating policy, because they've heard that other businesses have them.'' But the discussion never gets very far. ''That would be so hypocritical for us,'' she says. ''My mom founded this company with the man she was dating -- every Tuesday they would decide to stay together for another week, and they did that for 21 years. You could say we were built on nepotism.''
Yes, she says, there are complications -- workers who can't be promoted into certain jobs because they would directly supervise their spouse, couples who bring their arguments to the office or who break up but still work together. There are also lines to be observed -- bosses dating subordinates, the specter of sexual harassment. But those are a small price to pay for the ''feeling of family'' that comes from all these relationships, she says. And, quite frankly, she says, she doubts that the company could stop the pairing off even if it wanted to.
''How do you enforce a policy against falling in love?'' she asks.
How indeed. A recent poll by the Yahoo site HotJobs found that 74 percent of workers had dated a co-worker, an increase over the 51 percent who said they had done so in a survey the year before. And, not surprisingly, some of that dating leads to marriage. Last year, the American Management Association found that 44 percent of managers who dated co-workers, married them. ''The workplace,'' says Trish McDermott, vice president for romance at Match.com, an Internet dating service, ''may be more fertile dating ground than a bar or nightclub.''
It certainly was for Dr. Renata Pasqualini, who was a cancer researcher in Boston when she received an e-mail message from Dr. Wadih Arap, a researcher in California, who needed her help with certain reagents for an experiment he was conducting. She sent him the reagents, he sent his thanks, and eventually she was invited out to speak to his lab group. She arrived on a Wednesday, gave her presentation on Thursday, and, to save money on airfare, stayed on through Saturday night.
By Friday, Dr. Arap had asked her to marry him. Now, having merged their lives and their labs, they are at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, looking for cancer treatments that are less toxic than those currently used. On staff with them at M.D. Anderson are more than 70 other married couples, many of them, like Drs. Pasqualini and Arap, recruited as teams.
Now that's a chemical reaction.
LIFE'S WORK
