The Stranger Had A Problem, All Right
Jonah Brander has come to terms with the fact that he was, as he put it, ''in the wrong place at the wrong time.''
The place was East 11th Street between Second and Third Avenues in Manhattan, and the time was about 2 a.m. on June 16, 2002 -- just where and when a man with three pistols, a sword, a spray bottle of kerosene and a load of bitterness began a terrifying rampage.
''He said, 'I have a problem with you,' or something like that,'' said Mr. Brander, 30, a New Jersey resident who had been visiting the East Village. With no further explanation, he said last week, the stranger shot him in the abdomen.
Mr. Brander, above, managed to get up and flee to a nearby wine bar, but the man pursued him and shot him again, in the back.
The police said the assailant then held the patrons of the bar, Bar Veloce, hostage, spraying kerosene on them and threatening to set them afire. He shot and wounded two other people and shot at police officers but missed. Two patrons jumped him, and an officer shot and wounded him.
Through it all, the authorities said, the assailant, whom they identified as Steven Johnson, a black man from Brooklyn who has AIDS and whose girlfriend had recently died of AIDS, shouted anti-white invective.
They said he later told them that he had wanted to kill Mr. Brander and as many other white people as he could, and then to be killed himself. Among the charges brought were attempted murder and kidnapping as hate crimes.
As Mr. Johnson waits in jail, his lawyer is preparing an insanity defense. If it succeeds, he will be confined in a mental institution until doctors and the court deem him no longer a danger to himself or others. If a jury finds him legally sane and convicts him, he could spend the rest of his life in prison.
''I don't think he's a lunatic,'' said Mr. Brander, who was the most seriously wounded. ''He planned this out. I think the word 'evil' is better.''
''I'm doing substantially better,'' said Mr. Brander, who had two operations and is back doing sales work, after missing more than a year. He believes, he said, that public reaction to the incident showed a ''double standard.''
If a white person had carried out a similar racially motivated rampage against black people, he contended, there would have been a ''public uproar,'' not just a news story that faded away after two days.
In any case, Mr. Brander said, ''I feel lucky I'm alive.''
Fire Museum Traffic Falls After 9/11 Spike
After the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, in which 343 firefighters died at the World Trade Center, attendance soared at the New York City Fire Museum. But it has since come down, according to its director.
The visitor count on the books at the museum, in a converted firehouse at 278 Spring Street in SoHo, was 37,000 in 2000; 43,700 in 2001, after a sharp spike in November and December; 46,000 in 2002; and 37,000 again last year.
But the director, Joann Kay, said the numbers were unreliable estimates. ''We don't have turnstiles or cash registers,'' she said, and the small staff is too busy to tally all arrivals.
She is convinced, she said, that attendance is ''still definitely higher than pre-9/11.'' Now, along with artifacts like vintage fire engines dating back to about 1790, there are helmets, tools and other equipment recovered from the rubble of the World Trade Center.
Following Up
