NATHANIEL GOLDBERG, 63, and his wife, Adrianna Goldberg, 36, began their search to buy a home with what they thought would be a big financial boost: a $25,000 down payment, an assistance grant from Community Housing Innovations, a nonprofit housing services agency based in White Plains and Patchogue.
Three months later, the Goldbergs, who rent a two-bedroom apartment in Cortlandt Manor for $1,100 a month, still couldn't find a place they could afford. The grant expired. ''We really went gung-ho looking, but the prices were just too outrageous,'' Mr. Goldberg said.
Families earning 60 to 80 percent of Westchester's median income qualify for up to $25,000 in grant money from Community Housing, which gets its money from the state. For a family of four, the maximum income would be $72,080. The grant offer expires in 60 days, with a 30-day extension available. Nearly half of the 60 grant certificates issued last year under Community Housing's Westchester Home Ownership Initiative did not result in a home purchase, said Regina Tindal, the agency's grants administrator.
Community Housing's clients ''say how they've been trying and they can't find anything,'' she said. ''There's nothing we can do about the price of houses. That's why they can't find anything.''
Clients are facing a similar problem at Westchester Residential Opportunities, another nonprofit housing agency based in White Plains. This agency has a down payment assistance program that makes up to $25,000 available for families earning 50 to 60 percent of the county's median income and who buy homes in Westchester. Out of the approximately 20 families in the program last year, only one bought a house, said Toni Downs, the agency's executive director.
She said that her clients had run into a number of obstacles to homeownership. Some find a home, agree on a sale price, and then find that the bank says the house is worth less and they are only eligible for a loan for the lower amount. She said clients often can't afford the higher down payment to make up the difference.
Some are turned down by co-op boards, often without an explanation. ''Plus, you have the problem of someone with a $50,000 income.'' she said. ''How much of a mortgage can they afford?''
Mr. Goldberg, a jazz singer, and Mrs. Goldberg, a teacher's assistant, earn $45,000 a year. They had figured that with the $25,000 grant and $5,000 of their own savings, they could afford to take on a mortgage for a condominium or a cooperative costing from $90,000 to $95,000. They looked primarily in the artist-friendly Peekskill area. One $95,000 condo they liked sold before they could make an offer on it, Mr. Goldberg said. ''It's been difficult.'' he said. ''It's like batting your head against a wall.''
As Westchester's housing prices continue to climb, the number of homes on the market is shrinking. At the end of last year, 3,436 residential units were on sale, a 7 percent drop from 2002, according to a report issued by Westchester-Putnam Multiple Listing Service. The median sale price of a single-family home hit $564,000, up 7.4 percent.
The biggest increases, according to the report, were in the median prices of condominiums and co-ops, the most likely prospects for grant recipients. Median condominium prices rose 14.7 percent to $305,000, and median co-op prices rose 26.3 percent to 126,250. Inventory is particularly limited for condominiums, with only 334 on the market last year.
Gilbert Mercurio, the president of the Westchester County Board of Realtors, said the situation was frustrating for many middle-income buyers. ''They have to limit themselves to the co-op market, which is not a suitable lifestyle for a lot of them,'' he said.
Ms. Tindal said she encouraged grant recipients to cope with the tight housing market by not limiting themselves geographically. She said distributing grant money successfully could be limited by clients' ''not being flexible in the things that they want in the home and the areas where they want to live.''
Another solution for housing agencies is to combine grants. At Community Housing, eight families who qualified for both a $25,000 home rehabilitation grant and a $20,000 down payment assistance grant were able to close on homes, Ms. Tindal said.
Alfredo Chevres, 31, used the combined grant package to purchase a four-bedroom house in Yonkers for $255,000. The renovation money paid for a new roof, boiler, and upstairs bathroom. ''I was really lucky,'' he said. ''Everything else in the area was $300,000 and up.''
Ms. Downs said Westchester Residential Opportunities was in partnership with the Yonkers-based Housing Action Council and together identify more families who may be eligible for down payment assistance. The agency also may raise the maximum income requirement in its next grant application cycle to include families at 60 to 80 percent of the county's median income.
''We are not giving up,'' she said. ''We're hoping that we're going to be able to get this down payment money to families.''
Alexander Roberts, executive director of Community Housing Innovations, said larger grant amounts would help more people buy homes. ''But the question becomes, is this the most efficient use of taxpayer subsidies to generate affordable housing?'' he said. ''I personally believe we need more affordable housing and we need communities to allow more affordable housing to be built.''
Community Housing Innovations receives about a million dollars a year to finance its down payment assistance programs from two New York State agencies: the Division of Housing and Community Renewal and the Affordable Housing Corporation, run by the State Housing Finance Agency. Michael Wadman, the senior vice president of housing programs and policy for the New York State Housing Finance Agency, said the cap on individual grant amounts was set in 1985 and is written into state law. The agency is willing to extend deadlines for using grant money to up to a year, he said.The payoff for the extra effort to get grant money spent is the reward of putting homeowners on the path to long-term economic stability, Ms. Downs said.
''But it's really hard to develop that asset of homeownership in this county,'' she said.
HOUSING
