WHEN Veronica Peters took over her father's nearly century-old metal and aluminum finishing company, Contract Plating in Stratford, in 1992, it was a $2 million a year business with 30 employees.
Within three years Ms. Peters, now 59, was forced to shut down after the site was identified by state and federal agencies as being among dozens of locations in town polluted by toxic waste from Raymark, an industrial site. The waste included asbestos, lead and PCB's from the site that housed Raybestos, a company that made brake linings and car clutches.
The site has been declared ''by far'' Connecticut's largest federal Superfund site and it is among the largest two or three Superfund sites in New England, according to federal officials. Hundreds of other properties, besides that owned by Contract Plating, have been either directly or indirectly affected by waste from the Raymark site that could contain contaminants.
Now, a decade after the contamination was discovered many of the people affected are upset that there is still not even a remediation plan in place to clean up their properties, despite the fact that cleanup has been completed at the Raymark site itself, off Interstate 95 at Exit 33, and cleanup has been completed at several other projects connected to Raymark waste.
As a special Raymark fund is running out of money, both property owners and town officials have grown increasingly impatient and have accused both the federal Environmental Protection Agency and the state's Department of Environmental Protection of mismanaging the project and wasting money.
Town officials and the property owners even fear that after the funds run out, Stratford could be left with a toxic waste dump that they will not have the resources to clean up.
The town is also strongly opposed to moving any toxic waste, fearing contaminants will be released, posing a health risk.
While the town favors a remediation plan of capping all the sites, the state and federal agencies have not yet decided on a plan and have not ruled out a combination of capping and removal.
''While the E.P.A. and the D.E.P. should have long ago developed a plan to remediate the waste on all these local properties, they always seem to come up with another big testing project or study they have to do first,'' said Ronald Mazzey, a member of the 20-member Raymark Advisory Committee appointed four years ago by the town council to act as a liaison between Stratford and the state and federal agencies.
But both E.P.A. and D.E.P. officials said they have worked as fast as possible to complete the Raymark project pointing out most Superfund sites take at least 10 years or more to complete and that this one is particularly complex because it has affected the town in so many different ways.
The former Raymark site itself was cleaned up during the early-and mid-1990's after the federal Environmental Protection Agency spent more than $180 million in federal Superfund money, and the site is now home to a shopping center that includes Wal-Mart, Home Depot and Shaw's supermarket.
''Raymark spread contamination for 70 years. It's rare for a Superfund site to be completed within a decade, and we've been out there now for 10 years and have accomplished a great deal,'' said James Murphy, an E.P.A. spokesman in Boston who has been involved in the project the past seven years.
''We understand the frustration by many people in Stratford, but there have also been times when those same people were very happy when we were doing certain projects,'' said Mr. Murphy. ''We're trying to work with the state, the town and the Raymark Advisory Committee the best we can and as fast as we can. It's just not possible to move as fast as some people would like.''
The Raymark site once housed Raybestos, which dumped shredded leftovers from its products into nearby lagoons and that dirt was offered as fill to individuals and businesses unaware of the contaminants in the dirt.
For people like Ms. Peters the cleanup effort will come too late. Ms. Peters said that after millions were spent to clean up her property, she could no longer afford to operate her business due to state and federal restrictions that prevented her from obtaining further loans.
She, along with dozens of business owners (many still operating, but unable to obtain loans, expand or sell their properties), is still waiting for her property to be remediated.
''None of us ever expected this to take so long, and the major problem is that we can't obtain new mortgages or sell our land until remediation is completed,'' said Ms. Peters. ''I am still hoping it will be remediated and that I can at least lease or sell the property.''
For Edwin Fordham, 80, and his son Calvin Fordham, owners of the Housatonic Marina, there is still hope that their two-acre boat repair business in operation since 1957 can be remediated so they can obtain a new mortgage and expand, or eventually be able to sell their business.
''When we were put on the Superfund list, it immediately created a problem with the mortgage company, and put us in limbo ever since,'' said Mr. Fordham, also a member of the Raymark Advisory Committee. ''But with the E.P.A. not having remediated properties along Ferry Boulevard we are all in limbo, and financially the business is no longer an asset. Because we can't get a new mortgage we can't expand and that has cost us a tremendous amount of money over the years.''
But with only $14 million left of $20 million the E.P.A. recovered from the sale of the Raymark site, town officials and Raymark Advisory Committee members are sure the fund will run out not only before remediation is completed but before it even starts. They are also concerned it will be impossible, given the federal government's current priorities, to obtain more Superfund money in the near future, or ever, and that the town will be left with a toxic waste dump that it can't afford to clean up.
Raymark project leaders in the state and federal governments concede they cannot predict when, if and how much funding they will be able to obtain.
Town officials are highly critical of both the E.P.A. and D.E.P. for continuing to come up with others projects connected to the contamination such as two current million dollar projects before moving to develop an in-depth feasibility study that will be needed before further Superfund money can be sought. Both of the projects are nearly completed.
One is being conducted by the E.P.A., which in early December closed the town's Short Beach Park complex to test for Raymark asbestos, lead and PCB's at a nine-hole golf course, soccer and baseball fields and a dumpsite on the Bridgeport line. The E.P.A. said that results of the testings would be made public within six months. The other is a D.E.P. project that has included installing more than 100 ''sub-slab'' ventilation systems in homes between Ferry Boulevard and the Housatonic River to protect them from potential toxic groundwater and indoor cancer-causing Raymark Superfund gases. That project is nearly complete and is expected to be finished soon.
Ronald Jennings, an E.P.A. Raymark project manager, said Stratford will be competing with 125 Superfund sites throughout New England and 1,200 around the country for more funding.
''We have never said we can never guarantee that every penny will there,'' said Mr. Jennings. ''But we have no reason to believe that after the funds run out and once a comprehensive feasibility plan is in place that we won't eventually be able to obtain more funding to finish the job.''
Elaine O'Keefe, the Stratford health director who has worked closely on the project since it began, said critics of the Raymark Superfund programs and the E.P.A. abound.
''And not without justification,'' she said. ''The cleanup of hazardous waste sites under the Superfund rubric can be a painfully cumbersome and inefficient process. And Stratford has surely suffered the wear of having a major Superfund site in our midst for so long.''
However, Ms. O'Keefe said ''we have also reaped many benefits from the cleanup, and the magnitude of what the E.P.A. discovered during their investigation. There were imminent public health threats that compelled swift action.
''Given the size and complexity of the Raymark contamination problem,'' she added, ''it is unlikely that any entity but the federal government could have met the challenge and remedied the health threats attributed to Raymark pollution.''
