WHEN there is talk about Korean food, and there is not much, the conversation tends toward kimchi, bibimbap and barbecue. But that triumvirate is the barest branch of a centuries-old cuisine that is generally exceedingly fresh, deliciously exotic and delightfully cheap. When friends arranged dinner at a Korean restaurant with new friends, one of whom is Korean-American, I went hungry and looking for adventure.
I was satisfied on both fronts.
Keum Ho Jung is tucked into a strip mall right off Route 1 South, with a mailing address of Edison but a world away from the vibrant Indian community that I associate with the town. It is the second such venture for the owner, Joyce Kim, who came to the United States from Seoul in 1980.
Inside, the décor is family-friendly, with Fleetwood Mac on the sound system, a cuckoo clock on the wall and the welcoming aroma of grilling meat that gathers in the fibers of your clothing and stays.
On one Saturday night, we got a table after about a 20-minute wait, allowing us time to browse the aisles of the nearby Asian market. The spot was a tight fit for six, made smaller by the center grill pit and the hulking hood overhead, but the company was good.
It was a luxury to turn the ordering over to my new Korean-American friend. What won't you eat, he asked me. When I said that there almost nothing I would not try, he smiled and caught the server's eye. With a gesture, life turned spicy at our table.
Korean food is one of the most assertive of the Asian genre, with kimchi -- the fermented cabbage that functions as appetizer, main dish and foundation ingredient -- as its star. Typical flavorings of garlic, red pepper, onions, ginger, fish sauce and soy sauce pervade cabbage and cuisine alike; it is an assault on the palate that is the opposite of ice cream but with a similar effect: your mouth turns numb but you want more.
The meal began gently with a generous assortment of house-made panchan, small appetizers or side dishes sometimes collectively called kimchi (and always including it). There was a dish of cold watercress. A dish of sesame-flavored bean sprouts. A tangle of teeny-tiny whole dried anchovies, deep-fried, sautéed zucchini, green salad, gelled tofu. There was also raw crab pieces sopped in a spicy sauce of hot pepper, garlic, sesame oil and onion. The only thing I missed was the tiny bowl of black soybeans glistening with a glaze of brown sugar, garlic and soy sauce, but it barely seems worth mentioning.
As those foods disappeared, the server presented a memorably unusual food -- pork bossam -- a composition of boiled tricolor pork belly from skin in, boiled Chinese cabbage, daikon radish sparked with hot pepper and a raft of raw oysters.
To eat it, you slather a bit of house-made hot sauce onto a cabbage leaf, lay the pork belly on top, add some radish and then an oyster. Wrap it up and eat.
Pork bossam works only with the freshest ingredients, and at Keum Ho Jung, the foods I tried qualified. The slight pungency of the cabbage worked in concert with the slow burn of the daikon and the slippery brininess of the oyster to bolster the layers of pork and enhance them. If the server had not appeared with twin trays of crackling, sputtering coals for our grill and multiple platters of marinated meat to slap on top, I would have eaten several more than my share.
The routine with Korean barbecue is similar to that of pork bossam -- take a lettuce leaf, apply denjang, which is a fermented soybean paste, or samjan, a hot sauce, add meat, roll up and eat -- except you must wipe your brow from the heat of the grill before you begin again. All grilled meats were uniformly tender and tasty. On a visit for lunch the children's food was also credible -- California rolls (part of the Japanese section that precedes the regular menu and includes rolls, sushi, sashimi, a couple of noodle dishes and a few teriyaki selections), fried dumplings and broiled salmon, though that was overdone and dry.
Bibimbap was fairly well received as well, with its crusty bits of rice that stuck to the inside of the weathered black stoneware until we pulled them off and mixed them into the fried egg, vegetables and hot sauce.
Pancakes had interesting flavor mixes, but were a bit oily -- even my favorite with oyster and scallion. The runner-up was one of kimchi, scallion and pork, a combination that appears in an intensely satisfying soup that would rival the restorative powers of the best chicken soup.
That soup, for which I have scrambled to find a recipe, is kimchi du bu jigae, made of meltingly soft tofu, kimchi and pork in a spicy beef broth.
Another table favorite was a tamer tonic, with fermented soybean paste, denjang, as a backdrop to zucchini, tofu, green pepper and more of that tender pork. Even tamer was the rice cake soup, with its smooth, sleek ovals of bright white rice cake against a forest of greens in a clear broth. But I wasn't looking for tame.
The server brought a stack of bowls and a steaming bowl of deep orange-red broth brimming with mystery. My friend ladled it out, some to all of us, and then some for himself. This, he said, is the soup that Koreans will be impressed that you ate. It was spicy beef intestine, tripe and vegetable soup with noodles.
I went for the glory. But at Keum Ho Jung, there is plenty of adventure. Guts are not a requirement.
Keum Ho Jung  518 Old Post Road No. 12, Edison  (732) 650-1588
VERY GOOD
ATMOSPHERE -- Little tables, men carrying trays of hot coals and hulking hoods overhead.  SERVICE -- Friendly and helpful.  SMOKING -- No smoking allowed.  WINE LIST -- Bring your own.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Octopus over rice, noodles with beef and vegetables, oyster and scallion pancake, sliced pork with boiled cabbage and oysters, beef or squid barbecue, soft tofu and kimchi and pork casserole, vegetables and beef over rice in a stone pot.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers, $1.50 to $8; savory pancakes, $13; main dishes, $12 to $20; barbecue, $14 to $19; soups and stews, $9 to $16.  HOURS -- Lunch, Monday through Friday, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.; dinner, 3 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. seven days a week.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major.  RESERVATIONS -- Recommended for larger parties.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- The restaurant is on one level; restrooms are accessible.  IF YOU GO -- The edge of Edison extends to U.S. Route 1 and is a bit north of New Brunswick. From U.S. Route 1, take Old Post Road immediately south of the Ford plant. The restaurant is on the right, in a strip mall behind the Pep Boys auto supply store.
REVIEWED -- February 15, 2004
RATINGS -- Poor, Fair, Satisfactory, Good, Very Good, Excellent, Extraordinary. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
RESTAURANTS
