HAVE you heard? Monica and Chandler are moving to Westchester. They're adopting a baby and, like thousands before them, have decided to abandon their New York City apartment to raise their child in the suburbs.
For those of you who have been living in a cave, Monica and Chandler are characters on television's top-rated sitcom, ''Friends'' on NBC. If you haven't heard of them, perhaps you don't fall into the coveted demographic of television viewers between the ages of 18 and 49 who comprise most of the show's audience. Or maybe you're like me and you do fall into that category, but still have only the vaguest idea who these people are.
Never mind. If Dan Quayle can get worked up about Murphy Brown's single motherhood, and she wasn't real, there is no reason we can't get excited about Monica and Chandler coming here. Besides, the show is produced in Los Angeles, and I wanted to get an idea of what they think of our little county out there in Hollywood.
First, some background. The show is about the friendship of three men and three women who seem to spend most of their time visiting one another in their Manhattan apartments or sitting on a sofa in a coffee shop. ''Friends'' is in its 10th and final season. When it began, the group were a bunch of 20-somethings making their way in the big city. Now they're looking a little longer in the tooth. Two have married each other; another two have a baby together but are not a couple.
After making a pile of money, the show is wrapping up. The finale is scheduled for May 6, and presumably dangling plot lines will be tied up neatly. Some long-running series kill off characters at the last taping. Others evidently move them to Westchester.
Since I was among the group of roughly 27 people in America who don't watch this program regularly, I had to procure a tape of the Westchester episode, which was broadcast Jan. 15. When I called NBC, my request to see the tape was at first met as if I was asking for the document which would once and for all establish whether Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction. The publicist there also assumed I was on intimate terms with all the characters. ''You know how Monica gets,'' she said, conspiratorially. Well, I didn't, but I do now, because I have seen her in action. Here's what happens: Two of the women, Rachel and Phoebe, see Chandler, who is Monica's husband, get in a car with a blond woman. Convinced that Chandler is having an affair, they trail the car, which travels to an unspecified suburb in Westchester. After some typical sitcom misunderstandings and laugh tracks, the blonde is revealed as a real estate agent.
The secrecy is based on the concept that Monica and Chandler's friends will be upset that the couple is house hunting in the suburbs, as indeed they turn out to be. ''You don't want to live in Westchester,'' Phoebe says. ''That's like the worst of the Chesters.'' She points out that they will no longer be able to get Chinese food delivered to their door at 5 a.m.
Rachel says: ''What's wrong with raising a child in the city? Sarah Jessica Parker is doing it.'' Chandler counters: ''We want a lawn and a swing set. And maybe a street the kids could play in and an ice cream truck can go by.'' To which yet another friend replies, ''So you want to buy a house in the 50's.''
After getting past the portrayal of a broker driving into Manhattan to pick up a client (not likely, say local agents) what I enjoyed most about this vision of Westchester was the description of the couple's prospective house. Monica waxes on about the ''amazing wainscoting, the crown moldings and the dormer windows in the attic.'' Chandler likes the huge yard and the fireplace in the bedroom. Then there is the stream on the property and the maple trees. How much would such a house set back a young couple? Diane Shapiro, the branch manager of Houlihan/Lawrence in Larchmont, said: ''If it had a stream with a big back yard? Heavens to Betsy. We did have a house based on that description that had a little bit of a stream. It sold for $1.4 million.''
This made me wonder just what it was that Monica and Chandler did for a living. My new friend at NBC told me that Monica was a chef. Chandler was out of work for awhile, but did something with computers.
Anyway, I'm delighted they're coming. But I'm worried about taking a covered dish. You know how Monica gets.
COUNTY LINES
