DEEDEE ENCHIN, her reddish-brown curls bouncing boldly, led her daughter, Lily, past heat lamps, mirrors and hydraulic chairs occupied by women with full heads of ringlets, waves, kinks and Botticelli curls.
The Enchins had made a flight that morning from Toronto to a bright basement space in SoHo to spend time at what for many has become holy ground, Lorraine Massey's salon, Devachan.
''We came all the way down here just to meet you,'' Mrs. Enchin said, gushing at the sight of Ms. Massey. ''We've been using your products for six weeks.''
Ms. Massey laughed, as she often does, her springy blond locks shaking. She asked their names and then touched 13-year-old Lily's long light-brown waves and made what was at least her 50th pun of the day involving the word ''curl.''
''We call girls like Lily, 'underage curls,' '' Ms. Massey said.
Ms. Massey, 40, is an owner and the star attraction of Devachan, a hair salon that specializes in styling naturally curly hair. It seems like such a simple thing, but it isn't. For decades, most hair salons and makers of hair-care products either ignored the concerns of naturally curly-haired people or treated them as if their only wish was to straighten their hair. But with Ms. Massey and a growing number of other stylists leading the way, a curly cultural moment seems to have arrived.
On the red carpets of Hollywood's myriad premieres and award shows, stars are showing off a variety of long and short curly styles. At the Grammys last Sunday, Beyoncé, Alanis Morissette, Gwen Steffani, Christina Aguilera and Carmen Electra all sported curls. Days later, at the Halston show during Fashion Week in New York, the models Ana Nicole, and Linda J all bounced along the runway with unstraight hair.
Nearly two dozen new curly-hair product lines have hit the shelves in the last four years, among them Bumble and bumble Curl Conscious, Curl Life by Matrix and Tigi Catwalk Curls Rock, said Michelle Breyer, co-founder of the Web site naturallycurly.com.
Like an evangelist for the curly-haired, Ms. Massey doles out comfort and guidance to those who have suffered through bad cuts, long sessions with harsh blow-dryers and hair irons. Her gospel, a kind of ''Our Curls, Ourselves'' message of empowerment, encourages the curly-haired to try ''straightening out their heads instead of their hair,'' and to ''find their inner curl.'' In talks around the country and in a book she wrote with Deborah Chiel, ''Curly Girl'' (Workman 2001), Ms. Massey pounds her theme.
The Enchins heard about Ms. Massey and her credo of curl pride from two curly girls on a Caribbean beach in December; to them she is a guru.
Ms. Massey has heard the ''guru'' title before and decided she does not like it.
''Too much goes with that,'' she said. ''I say 'do-roo,' a hair do-roo. I'm tress-obsessed.''
Whatever word she prefers, people are seeking her out. Most days at Devachan, there is a line of waiting customers that looks like a casting call for ''Annie II: The Sassy-Haired Sprite Grows Up.'' (Ms. Massey is booked three months in advance and charges new clients $200, but she has trained a staff of stylists, who charge $75 a cut.)
''These are love-me tendrils,'' she said, touching a tousled mass of red hair at the back of the head of a client, Kathleen Sozanski. ''Kathleen just got back from a holiday to Mexico with her boyfriend.'' Ms. Massey said she can often tell when a client has started a relationship because the back of the head will be full of such tousled tendrils.
Turning to another client, Ms. Massey lifted the hair and promised that some of the curls underneath would find their way to daylight when she had finished cutting. ''Crouching curls, hidden gorgeousness!'' she said, traces of a Scottish accent from her birthplace in North Berwick in her voice.
Despite Ms. Massey's growing fame as a champion of curls, some curly-haired women enter her salon and ask for straightening treatments. These customers get what they wish, but the styling is done in the southern end of Devachan's basement space, far from Ms. Massey's work area. ''I can't bear to see it,'' she said.
''Growing up, there was nothing about curly hair in the fashion magazines,'' said Ms. Breyer of naturallycurly.com. ''There was no one you could turn to to say, 'O.K., this is what I should do about my curly hair.' ''
Ms. Breyer, a business reporter at The Austin American-Statesman in Texas, founded the Web site in 1997 with Gretchen Heber, the paper's home and garden editor. Now they have ads from cosmetics giants like Procter &amp; Gamble, sell ''Curl Power!'' bumper stickers and claim 15,000 registered members and 100,000 site visitors a month, many of them devotees of the Massey Way.
''Her whole 'Curly Girl' routine has become the gospel for the people on the site,'' Ms. Breyer said in a telephone interview.
Here are the basics of Ms. Massey's creed, applicable to all hair types:
* Don't wash your hair with standard shampoo.
* Don't blow-dry your hair, ever.
* Comb most curly hair only with the fingers.
* Find a hair stylist who understands all that. Ms. Massey argues that the main ingredient in most shampoos is a harsh detergent, most often sodium laurel sulfate, ammonium laureth sulfate, or sodium laureth sulfate. Those, she says, dry out curly hair unnecessarily and leave it subject to the most dreaded condition for the kinky-locked masses: frizziness.
Ms. Massey, who refers to standard shampoo as ''poo,'' preaches that the curly-haired can leave their hair hydrated with natural oils and clean their scalps quite well by rinsing only with hair conditioner (or her own product, No-Poo) once a week or less. Rubbing the scalp firmly with fingers, she says, is enough to loosen dirt. Her own hair, ''un-pooed'' for years, is an advertisement for this approach.
This is the point where Ms. Massey butts heads with a rival, Ouidad, the Queen of Curl.
''You do have to shampoo your hair,'' said Ouidad, who was born in Lebanon and runs a salon in Midtown Manhattan. She was tagged with her royal nickname by a morning television producer more than a decade ago. ''If you do not wash the excretion of sebum off the pores of the scalp, you are causing the bulb of the hair to dehydrate,'' she said. ''You are suffocating it.''
Dr. Gerald McEwan, vice president for science at the Cosmetic, Toiletry and Fragrance Association, an industry group based in Washington, also defended the common shampoo ingredients Ms. Massey attacks. ''There is nothing unsafe about laurel sulfate, ammonium laureth sulfate or sodium laureth sulfate,'' he said.
Ouidad opened her salon in 1983 on Seventh Avenue and 54th Street. ''I was the first and the pioneer of curly hair,'' she said. ''I was the only salon for years and years and the only products for 10 years. And then years after me, Massey came.''
Now Ouidad also travels the country sermonizing to salon owners about the proper treatment of curls, and, for a fee, allowing salons to advertise that they have been trained in the Ouidad way.
Sales of her brand of products for curly hair leaped 30 percent from 2001 to 2002 and by another 32 percent from 2002 to 2003, she said. Ouidad's salon is to move in July to a new space on West 57th Street, four times larger than the old.
Ms. Massey is pushing her Devacurl line of products, too. She is producing a video with characters she calls the ''poolice'' to enforce her curly-hair rules. ''They come into a salon and do a search and seizure of all the shampoo.''
She recently bought lakeside property in the Catskills with some small houses on it and said she wants to run weekend workshops. That way, she can take people through every part of a day in the life of proper curl treatment: washing, drying (for which she plans to use ''curly cuffs'' to prevent people from touching their hair while it dries) and proper scrunching. ''It's going to be a curly boot camp.''
As a child, Ms. Massey fought her curls, sleeping with rollers to try to straighten her hair. Her late father was a plumber and her mother, who died last year, was a factory worker who she said never appreciated her daughter's success or outward appearance.
''Even right at the end, she was saying, 'Are you sure you don't perm your hair?' '' Ms. Massey recalled.
The last word will be hers. ''I have instructions in my will,'' she said. ''The mortician must know you can't brush my hair, no pooing and leave the curls as they are.''
