Last November, when John Kerry fired his campaign manager, Jim Jordan, and replaced him with Senator Edward M. Kennedy's chief of staff, Mary Beth Cahill, the orchestrator of the change was one of the most influential, and least visible, of his advisers: his younger brother, Cameron.
''When John was going through what to do about Jordan, everyone who had a position on the topic spoke to Cam,'' said another senior adviser to Senator Kerry. ''And Cam wouldn't tell anyone what he thought or what John thought. Only he and John know what took place in their conversations.''
True to form, Cameron Kerry is reluctant to shed light on the decision to replace Mr. Jordan, or on any other matters that he discusses with the senator.
''I don't like to get into advice I give him,'' Mr. Kerry said in a recent interview, ''because that's between him and me.''
Mr. Kerry has been a pivotal figure in Senator Kerry's life, even as the senator's journey has influenced many of his younger brother's choices. The brothers' relationship is instructive in what it reveals about the ways of Washington and the makings of a presidential campaign.
''When John Kerry is mulling over something he'll call Cam,'' said George Butler, who is filming a documentary about Senator Kerry. ''It's not just family loyalty, it's steady reliance.''
Quiet and self-effacing, Mr. Kerry fine-tuned his considerable political instincts as manager of his brother's unsuccessful Congressional campaign in 1972 as well as his successful 1982 run for lieutenant governor of Massachusetts. He was also a senior adviser on his brother's four successful Senate campaigns from 1984 to 2002. In all of these efforts he shaped strategy; wrote speeches, advertisements and direct mail solicitations; and canvassed donors for contributions.
Starting with the 1982 campaign he also made a prescient choice of field director, a young worker named Michael Whouley. Today Mr. Whouley, again the senator's field director in Iowa and elsewhere, is a much-sought-after Democratic operative who played seminal roles in the Clinton and Gore campaigns.
But even beyond the campaign trail, Senator Kerry, 60, views his brother, 53, as his go-to guy.
Struggling in 2002 to decide whether to support a Congressional resolution granting President Bush the authority to wage war in Iraq, the senator called his brother on the eve of the vote. He sought advice on the possible political fallout from his decision -- a moment Mr. Kerry only reluctantly described.
''I told him it was a no-win situation and that he should do what he thinks is right,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''There were going to be different consequences in both a primary and a general election.''
The senator voted for the war resolution. And when he resurrected his presidential campaign in Iowa by surrounding himself with war veterans, positioning himself as tough on national security issues, then unleashing a formidable ground operation, his actions again reflected his younger brother's initiatives, others close to the campaign say.
''I think Cam will have a very central role in any Kerry administration,'' said Mr. Butler, the filmmaker, ''and I would liken it to Robert Kennedy and his relationship with John Kennedy.''
Unlike Robert Kennedy, Cameron Kerry is reserved, controlled and cerebral; he has avoided the political spotlight and is not managing his brother's presidential campaign. And unlike Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Kerry has decades of experience as a lawyer in the private sector, with clients in cable television, telecommunications and other industries.
But it is just these connections that have raised concerns among some consumer advocates and campaign finance analysts. Mr. Kerry and his Boston law firm, Mintz, Levin, Cohn, Ferris, Glovsky &amp; Popeo, have represented a number of companies with interests in legislation that his brother the senator has helped write or voted for in the Senate. Over the last 13 years, Mintz, Levin has also contributed about a quarter-million dollars to Senator Kerry's campaigns, according to data from the Center for Responsive Politics. This makes the firm the largest single donor to the senator's campaign.
In the interview, which took place in the Kerry campaign's headquarters in Boston, Cameron Kerry dismissed any notion of influence peddling and said he and his brother went to great lengths to avoid even the appearance of impropriety.
''I think it's silly,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''I have no connection with the firm's lobbying. I don't talk to John about those kinds of issues. It's a clearly understood sense of what's appropriate. I've always viewed the political activity and my career as just separate spheres.''
Senator Kerry's legislative record regarding cable companies has drawn barbs from consumer activists, largely because of what consumer advocates describe as his hesitation to support bills capping big cable rate increases. A report last year by the Center for Public Integrity, a nonpartisan research group, said Senator Kerry ''pushed the legislative priorities'' of Mintz, Levin's clients in the wireless telecommunications industry.
''John Kerry has never been the favorite of the public interest community,'' said Andrew Jay Schwartzman, president of the Media Access Project, an advocacy group in Washington. ''He has shown a tendency to have views that bear a close resemblance to the interests of the clients of Mintz, Levin.''
Cameron Kerry disputes that characterization of his brother.
''I think it's got nothing to do with Mintz, Levin's clients list,'' he said, adding that his brother ''calls it as he sees them.''
''I don't think he has a clue who's on Mintz, Levin's client list,'' Mr. Kerry continued. ''I think the record speaks for itself,'' he added. ''He's stood up to a lot of interests that give campaign contributions or have given him campaign contributions.''
In 1992 one of Mr. Kerry's clients, Continental Cablevision, actively lobbied against a bill setting a ceiling on runaway cable rates; the company was one of Senator Kerry's biggest campaign contributors at the time. But Cameron Kerry said he never spoke about the bill to any of those concerned: his brother; other Mintz, Levin lawyers; or Continental Cablevision -- a position that the Kerry campaign supports.
Senator Kerry, who at first backed an alternative bill that would have weakened the rate cap, eventually voted in favor of the bill.
R. Robert Popeo, Mintz, Levin's chairman, said the firm had hired Mr. Kerry for his legal abilities, not his relationship with his brother. ''Just as a matter of sensitivity I think Cam is the last person to want to approach his brother,'' Mr. Popeo said. ''I would be shocked to find one instance where that has happened.''
As for Mintz, Levin's status as Senator Kerry's biggest contributor, Mr. Popeo said it was because the senator had had a long career in Massachusetts. He also said that Cameron Kerry's standing with the firm made it easy for him to buttonhole colleagues for contributions.
More than a dozen people who have worked with Mr. Kerry as lawyers or on the campaign trail described him as a gentle, thoughtful man -- albeit one with a strong competitive streak and a firm sense of his own views and priorities.
''What makes Cam and John relatively interesting is their ability to understand and respect one another,'' said Josh Henson, who worked on the senator's 1972 Congressional campaign. ''And I think Cam had figured out that John was the flashy, eloquent guy and he was more of the person sitting down and thinking behind the scenes.''
In this presidential campaign, Mr. Kerry has barnstormed pivotal primary states on his brother's behalf, canvassing voters and offering advice.
He has reduced his workload at Mintz, Levin to make himself available.
''I'm a counselor, a surrogate, a critic, a cheerleader,'' Mr. Kerry said.
He describes the 1972 campaign as a brutal lesson in realpolitik. He said that neighbors in his family's largely Republican hometown, Lowell, stopped speaking to his parents, and that editors at local newspapers took unwarranted political potshots at his brother.
Mr. Kerry said his brother's campaign failed to respond to critics -- a mistake the campaign has not repeated.
Mr. Kerry was arrested during that campaign. He describes the incident with a slight grin. An anonymous telephone caller informed him that an opponent was planning to cut his campaign's phone lines, so he and an associate broke into the building where the phone lines were housed to make sure they were secure. The police arrived with suspicious alacrity, he said, leading him and others in the campaign to believe that political opponents had set him up. He was arrested for breaking and entering, but the charges were later dropped.
''It was obviously not the smart way to do it,'' Mr. Kerry said.
After receiving his bachelor's degree from Harvard and his law degree from Boston College, Mr. Kerry said, he was recruited to Mintz, Levin by John Markey, who once worked for Senator Kerry as a public prosecutor. (Mr. Markey, too, has a brother in politics, Representative Edward J. Markey of Massachusetts.) At the firm Mr. Kerry practiced antitrust, environmental, and media and telecommunications law.
Donna Lampert, a former Mintz, Levin lawyer who worked with Mr. Kerry on cases involving large Internet and cable clients, said he never lobbied in Washington, even though the firm was one of the more active lobbyists there.
For his part, Mr. Kerry says his support for his older brother is born of admiration, not access. He says he intends to remain focused on the task at hand.
''There's nothing you can do in political or social action that has the impact of electing a president of the United States.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CONFIDANT
