The field hit the top of the stretch and two good horses were set to square off for what would surely be a quarter-mile test of wills and talent to decide the outcome of the Fountain of Youth Stakes on Saturday.
A New York-bred named Read the Footnotes had the ability to win, but would he have the fortitude?
From his perch at Gulfstream Park, his trainer, Rick Violette Jr., did not know what to expect from his possible ticket to the Kentucky Derby. Read the Footnotes was an easy winner of four of his starts last year but was hampered by a breathing problem in his fifth. Never before had he faced this sort of test.
A quarter-mile later, Read the Footnotes had outbattled a tenacious Second of June to win by a neck, and Violette had his answer. Not only is his horse good, he's tough. That is the sort of combination that can make a horse a winner in the Kentucky Derby.
''He responded,'' Violette said. ''That horse looked us in the eye for a long time and kept staying a half a length, a half a length in front of us. It takes a pretty resilient horse to keep going back and going back, especially after a layoff. He showed a lot of quality today. It wasn't a matter of him just being a fast horse.''
Read the Footnotes's raw ability came to the fore late last year when he won the Nov. 2 Nashua and the Nov. 29 Remsen, both at Aqueduct. But Gulfstream bettors on Saturday were more enamored of Second of June, and made him the 3-2 favorite. With a recent victory on this track in the Holy Bull Stakes, he seemed a better fit for this race than Read the Footnotes, who was making his 3-year-old debut after a layoff of more than two months.
For much of the way, it appeared that Second of June's edge in fitness might make the difference. The two separated themselves from the rest of the field entering the far turn. On the inside, Second of June kept his head in front, and Read the Footnotes was having problems cutting into the slim lead under jockey Jerry Bailey.
''The other horse got away from him a little bit and I didn't know if he'd be equal to the task,'' Bailey said. ''But he gave me everything he had.''
It was only a few strides before the wire that Read the Footnotes got his head in front, edging a rival who also turned in a strong effort.
The top two finishers left little doubt that they are the best 3-year-olds training in Florida and that there is a sizable gap between them and the others. It was seven-plus lengths back to Silver Wagon in third. Previously unbeaten Sir Oscar finished fifth.
Over a track listed as fast, Read the Footnotes, who is owned by Klaravich Stables, completed the mile and a sixteenth in 1:42.71. The second choice in the wagering, he paid $6.20 on a $2 bet to win. Read the Footnotes and Second of June are expected back for the March 13 Florida Derby.
''Fortunately, it's four weeks to the Florida Derby and we're going to need every bit of it after a race like this,'' Violette said. ''He just showed us he's the real deal here.''
Saturday's card began with an easy allowance victory for the Kentucky Derby candidate Birdstone, last year's Champagne winner. Making his 3-year-old debut, he won by two lengths and completed the one mile and 70 yards in 1:42.40. The trainer Nick Zito was unsure where Birdstone would run next.
Bailey, Violette and Klaravich may have another Kentucky Derby contender in Swingforthefences, who won by five and a quarter lengths in the ninth race, an allowance.
HORSE RACING
