When Hermann Maier streaked past the red line into first place in Saturday's World Cup downhill, all of Austria seemed to erupt with shouts, drums and cowbells.
Maier, the country's greatest skier, looked up at the race board, which showed him over a third of a second in the lead, and shook his head in disappointment. It was not fast enough.
But at a peak speed of somewhere above 85 miles an hour, it still proved to be faster than everyone else. When his teammate, rival and the last conceivable spoiler, Stephan Eberharter, finished 32-hundredths of a second behind, Maier celebrated his 46th World Cup victory and a temporary return to the top of the overall World Cup standing nearly 33 months after an elderly German driver took a wrong turn into his motorcycle and nearly severed one of Maier's legs.
''I made mistakes,'' Maier said after the race. ''I thought it would not be enough, but the others made the same mistakes.''
Friday, after a slower training run, Maier said that he was merely happy to be back in the running and was looking forward to next season. While the skiing world has been saying ''the Herminator is back,'' Maier says he is still on the way up.
''I have still power, it's not the same as before, but it's getting better and better,'' he said in English.
It was a superlative day for Austria, the skiing world's juggernaut. On Saturday, Austrians took the top four spots and 7 of the top 10 on a cloudless day, which softened and slowed the course named after another Austrian skiing legend, Karl Schranz, who was in attendance.
Maier, who cannot forget a loss, said he was happy to correct a past wrong by winning at St. Anton, where he had lost before his accident in August 2001.
''I won the race I lost three years ago,'' he told reporters in the finish area.
While the Austrians were triumphant, the race was a disappointment for an ascendant American team led by Bode Miller and Daron Rahlves. Miller, ranked 31st in the downhill standing before the race, said he was satisfied with an eighth-place finish, but disappointed for his friend and his teammate Rahlves, who needed to stay ahead of Eberharter to have a realistic shot at capturing the season's downhill title.
''I don't know what happened,'' said Rahlves, who spent the week recovering from illness and finished 11th, falling behind Maier to third in the downhill standing. ''I felt good coming down.''
But Miller, who spends much of the season in nearby Innsbruck, has served notice on the Austrians, who have taken to affectionately calling him the crash pilot for his aggressive style. At Friday's practice run, autograph-seeking Austrian children, who are bred to worship their national ski heroes, alternated synchronized calls for ''Hermann'' and ''Bode.''
Watching the race Saturday, Schranz was impressed with Miller.
''Bode is a real threat and can take on anyone,'' he said.
But Schranz questioned whether the versatile American should be competing in all four disciplines, which could tire him.
On Sunday, while Maier rests, Miller will compete in the slalom against Benjamin Raich, who lost the lead in the World Cup's overall standing on Saturday but has dominated slalom this season. The Austrians still consider Miller, now in fourth place, in the running for the overall title and a long-term risk.
If the top of the world is not high enough for Maier, it is still a remarkable distance from a roadside ditch two and a half years ago, when he lay with compound fractures that nearly ripped off his calf.
He says now that his first thought when he saw the damage was ''amputation'' and that early on he only thought about walking.
In a new book written by his coach, Heinrich Bergmüller, Maier says that he suspected he would never ski again. ''When they took the bandages off and I saw my leg for the first time, I was close to tears,'' he said. ''My calf was bigger than my thigh. I thought: 'That's supposed to fit into a ski-boot. That will never, ever happen again!' '' he told Bergmüller.
But less than a week after doctors screwed his legs back together, while bruises left him temporarily unable to feel sensation in his lower torso, he was already using a hand-crank ergometer for stamina training in his hospital bed. Walking did not take long. He was back on skis 144 days later and won his first race in Kitzbühel last year, 521 days after the crash.
At the finish Saturday, it was clear Maier was back in world-class form. And it was hard to imagine that his calves could ever be larger than his thighs.
SKIING
