Lindsay Benko remembers when she was younger and unworldly and won her first national swimming title.
''It was 1991,'' she said in an interview here. ''I was 14. My coach and dad went with me from Indiana to Buffalo for the national junior championships, and I won the 200-yard freestyle.''
For weeks before a big meet, swimmers usually taper their training, with less distance but more speed. ''I heard somebody say she had tapered real well,'' Benko said. ''I didn't know what a taper was.''
Now, at age 27, she knows that and more. She is one of the world's leading freestyle swimmers. She has an Olympic gold medal from 2000, two gold medals and a silver from last year's world championships and 11 American titles.
She swam in three freestyle finals this week at the United States spring national championships. She won the 100 meters Wednesday and the 200 on Thursday, then finished second in the 400 on Friday. On Saturday, when the five-day meet ended, she rested.
''The whole sport has changed,'' she said. ''You have professionals now. I'm a professional. You can have money without having a job. You can concentrate on your swimming.''
She was disappointed at the 2000 Sydney Olympics; her gold medal came in the 800-meter freestyle relay. She finished 10th in the 200 backstroke and 12th in her best event, the 200 freestyle.
''I don't know why,'' she said. ''I was probably a little tired from training, and I was a little nervous because it was my first Olympics.''
In the 1964 Olympics, the average age of the United States women's swimming team was barely 16. There were no college scholarships or professional contracts for young women, so when they finished high school they usually retired.
Now careers are longer, and the elite Americans also include Jenny Thompson, who turns 31 this month; and Rachel Komisarz at 27.
Many of the older swimmers will probably retire this fall, after the Olympics. Benko seems to be leaning that way. ''I have an Olympic medal, an American record, a world No. 1 ranking,'' she said. ''There's no pressure. I just love the sport. It's given me a lot, but I'm very happy outside the pool, too.''
SPLASHES
On Saturday night, MICHAEL PHELPS won his fifth title at the United States spring national championships. He took the 200-meter individual medley by nine meters in 1 minute 56.80 seconds. SACHIKO YAMADA of Japan and AMANDA BEARD won their third women's titles of the week in the Y.M.C.A. Aquatic Center's 50-meter pool, Yamada taking the 1,500 freestyle in 16:06.13 and Beard the 200 individual medley in 2:13.11.
SWIMMIMG
