It Takes a Village
Embracing Ossining, a group of Ossining residents recently formed to promote the village's virtues, is eager to point out the river town's assets. ''Ossining is a great place to live,'' said Alice Lengers, a member who grew up in Ossining, moved away and returned nine years ago. ''Many people are here because of its diversity.''
That diversity is the theme of a planned photography exhibition, ''Celebrate Ossining: People, Places and Things,'' which will be held from April 3 through 28 at the Ossining Public Library. ''I'm hoping for realistic man-on-the-street scenes and not just nature shots,'' said Ms. Lengers, who is organizing the show.
The show is open to photographers of all ages throughout the county, who are invited to submit framed pictures, ready to hang, that were taken recently (no more than three years ago) and focus on some aspect of Ossining. Sixty pictures will be selected by judges who include professional photographers and photojournalists including Joyce Dopkeen, a New York Times photographer who lives in Ossining ; Alan Haywood of Ossining, a commercial and fine art photographer; and Ted Spiegel, a photojournalist. Entries must be dropped off at the library's community room on March 29 from 4 to 9 p.m. or on March 30 from noon to 6 p.m. Award winners will receive cameras donated by Fuji Photo Film U.S.A.
Information: (914)941-7679.
Legends at the Keys
Legendary pianists take the stage in Pleasantville at the Jacob Burns Film Center's ''Great Pianists of the 20th Century'' series, which will be screened Sundays at 3 p.m. from next Sunday through April 11. The series will feature many historic performances on film and video, beginning next week with footage of Arthur Rubinstein playing in his California home and in a studio in 1953, and in the Great Hall of the Moscow Conservatory in 1964. Robert Sherman, writer and radio personality, will be the host for the Rubinstein screenings, and the pianist Max Wilcox, who produced Rubenstein's recordings for RCA, will be the guest.
Sviatoslav Richter and Emil Gilels are featured on Feb. 29; Glenn Gould on March 7; Claudio Arrau and Wilhelm Backhaus on March 14; Benno Moiseiwitsch, Georges Cziffra and Alexis Weissenberg on March 21; Arturo Benedetti Michelangeli on March 28; Alfred Cortot, Dame Myra Hess and Wanda Landowska on April 4; and on April 11, ''Vladimir Horowitz in Moscow, '' a documentary video of the pianist's first concert in his native Russia in 61 years.
Mr. Sherman will also be the host on March 21 and 28. Other hosts include the pianist Jeff Rainer on Feb. 29, the pianist Michael Boriskin on March 7 and April 11, and the pianist David Dubal on March 14 and April 4. The pianist Walter Hautzig will discuss the three featured pianists on March 21, and the pianist Camille Budarz Kornreich of Ossining, who was Michelangeli's first American student, will discuss her teacher on March 28. The series was curated by the Louvre museum at the request of the film center, according to Brian Ackerman, the center's program director. Information: (914)747-5555.
Family Ties Help
A family connection to the Jacob Burns Film Center - namely Lael Morgan, the wife of a staff member, Brian Ackerman - enabled the center to mount what Ms. Morgan called a ''comprehensive exhibition'' of dance photographs by Ms. Morgan's late grandmother, Barbara Morgan, whose home and studio were in Scarsdale. She is best known for her early 20th-century photographs of various modern dancers, especially Martha Graham.
The exhibition, which was mounted in connection with the center's recent ''dance on camera'' series, can be seen in an upstairs gallery through March 4. Information: (914)747-5555.
Celebrating a Long Run
The Midnight Run is observing its 20th anniversary of helping the homeless with a chamber music concert next Sunday at 3 p.m. in the sanctuary of South Presbyterian Church in Dobbs Ferry.
Several performers active on the Westchester and Manhattan music scene will participate , including the cellist Elizabeth Anderson, the singer Andrea Saposnik and the recitalist and accompanist Nancy Theeman, all of Dobbs Ferry; and the pianist Mihae Lee and the French horn player William Purvis, both of Hastings-on-Hudson. The bassist Joseph Bongiorno of Manhattan will also play. Suggested donations to the concert are $25 and $15. Information: (914)693-0473.
ROBERTA HERSHENSON
