A Girl's Best Friend
Ulysses Dietz, decorative arts curator at the Newark Museum, said that in researching the new exhibition ''Baubles, Bangles and Bling Bling: The World of Jewelry,'' he and other curators at the institution discovered that throughout history, people have been consistent about why they wear jewelry; it is to look beautiful and attract the opposite sex.
''In the final analysis, it's all bling bling,'' he said.
The show, which opens on Wednesday and runs through May 9, displays more than 300 pieces of jewelry from the time of the ancient Egyptians to the present, mostly from the museum's collection. The items include a set of 19th-century Tibetan prayer beads made from human skull bones and set with turquoise, coral and lapis lazuli, as well as the diamond necklace that Douglas Fairbanks Jr. gave to Joan Crawford when they wed in 1932.
''The marriage didn't last long,'' Mr. Dietz said, ''but she always loved the bracelet.''
Information: (973) 596-6355.
Surround Sound
Drew University in Madison was founded in 1867 as a Methodist seminary. When architects from the Princeton firm of Ford Farewell Mills &amp; Gatsch were asked to design a new music wing for the university's Dorothy Young Center for the Arts, they found inspiration in that historical fact, and designed the hall in the shape of a Methodist camp meeting tent.
''It was a theme that informed the concept of the concert hall,'' said Michael Schnoering, managing partner for the project, undertaken in 2002.
Construction of the building, which will include rehearsal and performance space, has reached several important milestones this winter. Nearly all the structural steel framing has been erected and the concrete footings, foundations and retaining walls have been poured. The harsh winter has presented challenges for the project, but university officials say they still hope it will be completed on schedule in the fall.
Until now, concerts at the university have been performed in the gymnasium. The new hall will feature state-of-the-art acoustics and a wraparound balcony that can accommodate a choir.Images of the construction can be seen on the school's Web site at www.drew.edu.
Homeless
The 12 Miles West Theater Company in Montclair is looking for new space for next season. It is leaving its current home, at the Clairidge Cinema Building on Bloomfield Avenue, because the building has been sold, and the company can no longer afford the rent, said Lenny Bart, its artistic director. The group renovated the current space and has performed there since 1995.
As for a new home, Mr. Bart said the company had been approached by West Orange and was ''in serious negotiations'' for use of the Edison Storage Battery Company Building on Main Street. The building, on the National Register of Historic Places, was once used to store batteries made in adjoining factories.
The company is also considering forming a partnership with other theater groups, including the Pushcart Players in Verona and Teatro Si in Newark, to move to West Orange together.
In the Court of King Charles II
The George Street Playhouse in New Brunswick has announced that Amy Irving will star next season in ''Celadine,'' a new play by Charles Evered of Princeton about intrigue in the court of King Charles II of England. The rest of the 2004-05 season is still being finalized, said David Saint, artistic director of George Street.
Mr. Saint added that Mr. Evered wrote the play, a historical romance, for Ms. Irving. Information: (732)246-7717.
New Movies, Old Film
In 1932, the Eastman Kodak Company introduced a new film format, ''Cine Kodak Eight,'' for making amateur home movies. More than 70 years and several innovations later, what is now known as Super 8 enjoys a cult status as the medium of choice for short, small-budget films that are high on creativity, if low on budget.
The United States Super 8 Film and Digital Video Festival, in its 16th year, is the largest and longest-running juried event of its kind in North America, says Albert G. Nigrin, the festival's executive director. (Films made in a digital video format were added to the festival about eight years ago.)
This year, the festival will be held from Friday through Sunday in Scott Hall on the Rutgers University campus in New Brunswick. Eight films will be screened beginning at 7 on each night.
The festival is part of the New Jersey Film Festival. Information: (732)932-8482 or www.njfilmfest.com.
Michelle Falkenstein
