IF the devil is in the details, so are the opportunities -- and nowhere is that truer than in the increasingly complex Internal Revenue Code. As a result, taxpayers have countless chances to save, but there are also pitfalls.
REFUND ANTICIPATION LOANS -- Need money in a hurry? How about getting a quick check in anticipation of your tax refund? ''You can get better terms from Tony Soprano,'' said Julian Block, a tax lawyer in Larchmont, N.Y.
H&amp;R Block, which advertises such loans, says on its Web site that Imperial Capital Bank, which provided 4.5 million refund anticipation loans to H&amp;R Block clients in 2003, imposes finance charges of $5 to $75 for short-term loans of $200 to $7,000, which translates to an annual percentage rate of 34 percent to 129 percent, plus a $24.95 account charge.
Sidney Kess, a New York tax lawyer and certified public accountant, advises taxpayers who need their refunds quickly to file their returns electronically and request direct deposit to their banks. They will usually have their refunds in 10 days.
WORTHLESS SECURITIES -- Many people may want to amend returns because they did not realize they could take a loss when securities became worthless, just as if they had sold them, Mr. Kess said. In such cases, he said, ''taxpayers have seven years to file an amended return.'' If losses exceed gains, $3,000 a year can be taken against ordinary income; the rest can be carried forward to future years, offsetting other income.
RECOVERING A MISSED BREAK -- Since late 1997, people have been permitted to recognize tax-free capital gains of up to $250,000, for single filers, or $500,000, for married couples filing jointly, when they sell their principal residence, provided that they have lived in it two of the last five years.
The law allowed people who sold homes in less than two years because of ''unforeseen circumstances'' to take part of the tax break. But many people didn't think they qualified, Mr. Kess said. The I.R.S. recently issued regulations, explained in its Publication 523, specifying that people who moved because of job or health problems, divorce or even terrorism would qualify.
Others needlessly paid gains tax on a part of the home where they had a deductible office.
Under the recent regulations, any of these people would have qualified for tax-free gains, he said, and they still can. To claim the break on home sales, taxpayers who sold anytime in the last three years can file amended returns and get a refund.
EDUCATION CREDITS -- Even with the economy picking up, many unemployed and underemployed people have a tough time finding jobs they want. For many, a solution is to seek more education, as a path toward a new career. For 2002 and 2003, up to $3,000 of qualified higher education expenses can be deducted by single filers with adjusted gross income of $65,000 or less ($130,000 for married couples filing jointly).
Another break, the Lifetime Learning Credit, was doubled for 2003, to a maximum of $2,000, noted Bob D. Scharin, senior editor at RIA, a provider of tax and legal information. It is a 20 percent credit, so someone who paid tuition of $10,000 or more would qualify for the maximum credit of $2,000.
JAN M. ROSEN
YOUR TAXES: TAX TIPS
