MOST of the artists in ''For the Birds,'' the new exhibition at Artspace, in New Haven, are birdwatchers. This makes sense because the show samples artists who make art about birds.
Denise Markonish, the curator, and herself a bird watcher, or birder, as they are known, decided to put together the exhibition after noticing that so many artists use birds in their art. She seems to have had no trouble finding 32 artists, from the United States, Canada and England, whose work fits the theme.
Admired by artists for their color, beauty and grace, birds are a time-honored detail in paintings. Flight, and the freedom it represents, also made them popular symbols in religious art. But outside ornithological studies, and scientific illustrations, few works of Western art have birds as their central subject.
Eastern art traditions are another matter. Here, birds have a far broader symbolic function, and have long been the subject of major artworks. For instance, the crane in Chinese painting is one of many symbols for longevity, while in Indian, and early Greek, art the owl was often used as a symbol for wisdom.
''For The Birds'' is a chirping aviary of an exhibition. On view are symbolic birds, abstract birds, kitsch birds, sculptured birds, birds on video, birds made from trash, bird paintings and, yes, even real birds stuffed, then used to make art. Frankly, there are more birds here than you can poke a stick at.
First prize for the weirdest inclusion goes to Karl Unnasch, who uses bird road-kill and model railroad accessories to create bizarre, surrealistic landscapes. A fairly close second is Natalie Jeremijenko, who has cobbled together some kind of mechanical goose that evidently makes sounds and flaps about when plugged into the wall. It was not working when I visited the show.
Many of the exhibits are decorative and cute. In this category are Kathleen Bitetti's bird sculptures, Kathryn Spence's wispy chicks made from bits of wire, lint, thread, string and other materials, and a slew of paintings of real and imaginary birds by, among others, Walton Ford, John Newsom, Ann Craven, Gail Boyajian, Daniel Dueck, Meryl Blinder and Amy Ross.
Among the paintings, ''Dear Traveler'' (2004), by Chris Mir, a young New Haven artist, stands out for its compositional flair. Mr. Mir creates fairy-tale landscapes populated with imagery pulled from magazines and the mass media. They are all about the sampling of images as a metaphor for life's choices. If that seems a little deep, just soak up the color.
Other works have a bit more meat behind them, like Walton Ford's ''Swadeshi-cide'' (1998). Mr. Ford has long been fascinated with the drawings of birds and other animals by the American naturalist artist John James Audubon. Although Mr. Ford's works often take their visual cues from Audubon, their message is bound up with current social, political and ecological issues.
''Swadeshi-cide'' is a nine-color etching with aquatint, drypoint and hand coloring. It shows in meticulous and colorful detail a hornbill gazing into a nest of starlings and parakeets. Although the meaning of this image is vague, the use in the title of the word ''Swadeshi,'' a popular Indian expression for ''made in India,'' suggests that the piece is a commentary on the displacement of native birds, like the hornbill, by imported ones.
Mining a similar theme is Rachel Berwick's sculptural installation, ''A Vanishing; Martha'' (2003), consisting of an upturned bell jar containing a cast amber sculpture of a passenger pigeon. Running around the rim of the jar is the story of the last passenger pigeon, Martha, which died in a Cincinnati zoo in 1914. For no reason, this once plentiful species was hunted to extinction.
Ecological messages also underpin Mark Dion's ''Habitat Group'' (2004), a tableaux vivant consisting of a bunch of plastic bird decoys and outdoor roughage covered in tar to simulate the effects of an oil spillage. The toxic smell, and the dense, treacle-like consistency of the black sludge, is repulsive. Which brings me to a nagging thought: Does anybody buy this kind of art?
Fred Tomaselli's paper collages are eminently collectable. For ''Passerines White Eyes'' (2003), the artist cut images of birds from a field guide and then replaced their plumage with imagery of down jackets cut from fashion advertisements. Despite a priggish didacticism, the work has much that is appealing, not least of which is its vibrant color.
''For the Birds'' is at Artspace, 50 Orange Street, New Haven, through March 20. Information: (203) 772-2709.
ART REVIEW
