ON sunny weekends the tourists, those necessary crows of downtown commerce, swoop down on Canal Street. They flit from stall to stall, seeking bargains -- real bargains, mind you -- on handbags, jewelry, scarves. Most of them crowd the stalls that fill the stretch between Broadway and Lafayette. Once there, these bargain hunters lust after the perfect deal. And they haggle with a vengeance.
Customers swarmed a busy stall near a McDonald's there one recent Sunday. They scrutinized the necklaces strung in rows like glittering trout above boxes of rings. Three or four vendors tangoed through and around customers in the cramped 70-square-foot space.
One vendor, a woman in a fur-lined black sweater, sensed that a deal was at hand. She had pulled necklace after necklace from the display, and held them up to show to 10-year-old Alexandra Dvoretsky, who had come into the city from New Jersey with her mother and grandmother. As saleswoman and girl determined which necklace would complement the girl's brown hair, chocolate-brown pants and sand-colored shirt, Alexandra's mother, Melissa, picked out a necklace for herself, too. The vendor smiled.
''This one is $10, and this one is 12,'' she said to the pair. ''But I'll give you both for 20.''
Alexandra's grandmother, Dorothy Mercurio, was not satisfied. She inspected the necklaces, and she and Alexandra's mother ran their fingers over the material, questioning its quality.
''How about I give you this one for $8,'' the vendor said, ''and the other one for 10? Eighteen for both.''
The women hesitated.
''Eighteen,'' Ms. Mercurio said. ''Can you do any better?''
''Eighteen.''
Ms. Mercurio nodded toward Alexandra. ''She's buying this with her own money.''
''O.K. What about 17?''
''Sixteen. She earned it for getting straight A's on her report card.''
The vendor looked resigned but gave Alexandra a congratulatory nod. The necklaces sold for $16.
''A few years ago, tourists didn't haggle much,'' said Wu, a vendor who works on the other side of Canal Street. It used to be that merchandise in his stall sold at asking prices. But in recent years, tourists have become more brazen. They compare prices and pit vendor against vendor.
The most calculating negotiations seem to come over pashmina scarves, which sell for $8 to $10, depending on the stall. Vendors are usually happy to let them go for $7, but negotiations rarely end there.
''My friend told me you sold this to her for $6,'' one woman said to Liu, who worked with Wu. Liu knew he wasn't supposed to sell the scarves for anything less than $6.50. He looked back at Wu, who rolled his eyes, then approved the sale. Six dollars.
FLORA LEE
URBAN STUDIES/HAGGLING
