JOSEPH DELLO RUSSO, the doctor with the ubiquitous radio advertisements for laser eye surgery, apparently has a clearer vision of New Jersey's consumer-fraud law than two of his former patients do.
Dr. Dello Russo won a victory in a suit in which two New Jersey appellate courts also had different visions of whether the doctor -- who uses radio ads extensively to draw patients into his offices in Bergenfield as well as in Manhattan and Brooklyn -- was covered by that law. It prohibits the use of ''any unconscionable commercial practice, deception, fraud, false pretense, false promise, misrepresentation, or the knowing concealment, suppression, or omission of any material fact with intent that others rely upon such concealment, suppression or omission.''
Two patients, Joseph Macedo of Lebanon and Rose Mary Lesky of Hillsdale, sued Dr. Dello Russo and another doctor in his office, William T. Kellogg, claiming that they violated the Consumer Fraud Act by indicating that patients would be treated by fully licensed doctors, but that Dr. Kellogg provided follow-up care after surgery, even though he was not fully licensed then.
In fact, Dr. Kellogg's license was revoked by the state Board of Medical Examiners in 1995 after he was accused of, among other things, performing unnecessary surgery. At the time, he was not connected with Dr. Dello Russo.
To regain his license -- which he subsequently did -- he had to essentially intern, or work under another doctor as part of a program approved by the medical board, which is precisely what he was doing when Mr. Macedo and Ms. Lesky came along. One issue is whether he was acting as a doctor, as the patients claim, violating what they say was Dr. Dello Russo's guarantee, or as a nonphysician in their follow-up care, as Dr. Dello Russo's lawyer says.
The trial court, without reaching the truth of that claim, dismissed the part of the suit that was based on an alleged violation of the Consumer Fraud Act.
But the appellate division of Superior Court reversed that decision. In its view, ''When professionals engage in common commercial activity designed to attract the patronage of the public, they should be held to the same standards of truth and completeness that govern the sales activities of all other persons or entities.''
The court said the two patients were entitled to try to prove that the doctors violated the consumer law, and it reversed the dismissal.
At that point, the two eye doctors asked the New Jersey Supreme Court to take a closer look, and the higher court, in a decision issued two weeks ago, said it agreed with the initial ruling.
''The whole theory in this cockamamie case is that implied in Dello Russo's advertising was a notion that the only person who would touch you in his office was a licensed physician,'' said Dr. Dello Russo's lawyer, Steven I. Kern of Bridgewater. ''I can't remember the last time I went into a doctor's office and was seen only by a physician. You've got nurses; you've got technicians; you've got physicians' assistants; you've got a host of people, licensed and unlicensed, that form part of the team.''
Indeed, the Supreme Court reasoned that the law, first passed in 1960, ''obviously was not meant to encompass advertising by physicians because such advertising was not permitted for another two decades.'' The law was never amended after doctors were allowed to advertise to bring them under the law's scope, the court added.
In its 6-0 decision, with one justice abstaining, the Supreme Court explained that ''it would be ludicrous to construe the legislation with that broad a sweep in view of the fact that the nature of the services does not fall into the category of consumerism.''
''Learned professionals,'' the court concluded, are ''beyond the reach of the act so long as they are operating in their professional capacities.''
For his part, the lawyer for the two patients, Bruce H. Nagel of Livingston, said he was surprised by the eventual outcome.
''I thought that the Appellate Division signaled that it was about time that the law caught up with commercial aspects of medical practice,'' Mr. Nagel said. ''I thought that the Supreme Court would be more protective of the patient-consumers than they were.''
For now, Mr. Nagel has his work cut out for him. He said that the Supreme Court's decision eliminated only one of several bases for the suit, not all of them, and that the next step would be to ask the trial court to certify the case as a class action made up of ''several thousand patients'' treated by Dr. Kellogg.
Mr. Nagel and Dr. Dello Russo have tussled before. Mr. Nagel has represented other patients who sued Dr. Dello Russo, and his firm went so far as to take out an ad in two New Jersey newspapers in August 2001 seeking clients who had been treated by Dr. Dello Russo and Dr. Kellogg and were unhappy with the results.
Dr. Dello Russo sued Mr. Nagel for defamation on the basis of the ad, but the case was dismissed.
But never mind the eyes. Mr. Kern says this case ''has no legs.''
Asked what he thought would have happened if the ruling had been upheld, Mr. Kern said, without hesitation: ''The cost of malpractice insurance would have tripled.''
THE LAW
