Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis had Grand Central Terminal. Margo Cates has the West Side railroad cuts.
The exposed and sunken track beds, which are between 10th and 11th Avenues, mainly in the 40's, thread through the neighborhood like a rusty old needle. Amtrak uses the railway for its Empire line, but the track bed, littered with garbage and overgrown with weeds, still sends forth a sad look of neglect.
Unsurprisingly, most people in the neighborhood consider the cuts an eyesore. But Ms. Cates, who has pale skin, jet-black hair and a finishing-school accent, sees in them a rugged beauty.
''I always take a moment to peek behind the high concrete walls and see and enjoy the craggy shift of Manhattan,'' said Ms. Cates, who teaches reading at several schools and has lived near one of the cuts for 17 years. ''It allows for respite, reflection and a romance of the rails.''
Two weeks ago, Ms. Cates expressed a similar sentiment to Community Board 4. The board was voting on a proposal to construct an apartment building over the rail bed. The cuts would still be there and the trains would still run, but the cuts would be unseen. By Ms. Cates's estimation, 70 percent of the cuts on the line have already been covered, and the rest, she argues, should be preserved.
''I consider them a unique part of the neighborhood and I really felt a stand needed to be taken,'' Ms. Cates said. ''The cuts allow this wonderful perspective. So much of our life is spent at eye level. They allow you to look not only forwards, but downwards and upwards, as well. There's a sense of space.''
The community board members, who voted to support the apartment building, were unmoved.
''She's taking an artistic look at the situation,'' said Adam Honigman, a community board member who has also lived near the cuts for many years. ''The railroad cuts are the first place you'd look for a missing child. The Westies used to dump bodies there. The homeless are killed by trains. Some residents are used to the sunlight and they're waxing warm about the cuts.''
Ms. Cates disagrees, and will press on with her rather literary argument about the railroad cuts. The next stop: the office of C. Virginia Fields, the Manhattan borough president, who will decide whether to approve the development plan.
STEVE KURUTZ
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: CLINTON/CHELSEA
