ON Nov. 10, 1907, the magazine section of The New York Times added this headline to the historical record: ''Martians Probably Superior to Us.'' Some might assume that the newspaper was speaking only for itself, but the larger implication -- that there might be Martians up there -- is one that remains fixed in the popular imagination (if not the popular press).
NASA's two robotic rovers, which touched down on Mars last month, continue to relay crisp images of the planet's landscape, and the distribution of those pictures on the Internet has given armchair explorers a rare chance to scrutinize the planet for what they consider signs of life.
Enter the bunny.
Perhaps it was not as compelling as the Martian ''face'' that was first photographed by the Viking Orbiter in 1976 (experts said it was a naturally occurring feature, not some extraterrestrial totem). But when several Internet viewers noticed a puckish-looking bit of ... something in the middle distance of a recent Mars photo, another artifact was added to the long history of Martian lore, which has included everything from pyramids and canals (see another Times article at right), to systems of giant glass tubes.
Online discussions hummed with theories on what this new object might be -- a rabbit, a plant, a bit of coral, a dirty sock. One Web site, martiancrabs.com, dedicated itself to the notion that it was a crab. ''It's probably not an underground sand crab,'' said Tom Van Flandern, an astronomer and president of Meta Research, an organization dedicated to ''alternative'' ideas in astronomy. ''Without more hard data, we can only speculate,'' he said.
For its part, NASA said it was simply a bit of debris from the rover itself probably a bit of ''softgood,'' said Joy Crisp, one of the Mars project's scientists. (Say, cotton insulation, or a piece of airbag.)
''We try to make sure that bits do not fall off,'' said Dr. Crisp, in an apparent nod to neatness. But it happens, she added, ''and we were not at all surprised.''
No further investigation of the bunny is planned. The rover has now moved well beyond where the object first appeared, and later photographs showing Opportunity's path suggest to some that the topic is moot: the rabbit may have been run over.
TOM ZELLER
