PAPER MILL's new season, which is being unveiled this week, includes five musicals and one drama. This may be a relief to longtime subscribers fearing that the theater's new director would drastically transform Paper Mill, known for its lavish productions of chestnuts of the musical theater canon.
But it is hardly business as usual at the 1,200-seat theater. The musicals on the schedule are less familiar than usual; none have been performed at Paper Mill before; the emphasis is to be on the acting and directing, rather than on the sets and costumes; and there is an effort to bring new directors and interpretations to the stage.
''For all those who said, 'Gennaro's going to do away with musicals,' you can write that off,'' said Michael Gennaro, 54, Paper Mill's president and chief executive.
He was referring to whispers among the state's theater professionals that he would transport to New Jersey the experimental style of the Steppenwolf Theater in Chicago, where he was executive director for eight years before joining Paper Mill last April.
''I'm not here to kill the musical,'' Mr. Gennaro added. ''I'm here to save it.''
In fact, the 2004-05 season has one more musical planned than usual.
Mr. Gennaro said he had created ''a very accessible season'' as the first bearing his mark. It opens with ''Of Thee I Sing,'' which has music by George Gershwin, lyrics by Ira Gershwin and a book by George S. Kaufman and Morrie Ryskind, and was the first musical to win a Pulitzer Prize. The season ends with ''Ragtime,'' winner of several Tony Awards in 1998.
In between will be three other musicals: a revival of ''She Loves Me,'' music and lyrics by Jerry Bock and Sheldon Harnick; a world premiere based on ''Harold and Maude,'' the 1972 film that has become a cult classic; and ''The Baker's Wife,'' music and lyrics by Stephen Schwartz, who is represented on Broadway these days with ''Wicked.'' ''The Baker's Wife'' has been performed in smaller theaters, but never on Broadway.
The season includes one straight play, ''The Drawer Boy,'' a Canadian import written by Michael Healy and starring John Mahoney of the television show ''Frasier.''
One of Mr. Gennaro's goals in designing the season, he said, was to select pieces that had never been performed at Paper Mill, a formidable challenge for the 64-year-old theater that has earned a reputation for adding new sets and costumes, but sometimes little else, to old musical favorites. A second goal, Mr. Gennaro said, was to bring new interpretations and unusual combinations of directors and works to the theater.
At the same time, Mr. Gennaro is aware of the fine line he walks between pleasing the theater's subscription base while trying to attract new audiences. Subscriptions, which 11 years ago topped 42,000, have continued to slide, dropping to 30,000 this season, from 32,000 last year. Still, they bring in close to half the theater's earned revenue.
While he has yet to receive notice of what Paper Mill has in store for next season, Howard Rudd, one of those subscribers, said he was looking forward to seeing how Mr. Gennaro might shake things up.
''We were thinking that maybe there would be a couple of things off the mainstream thrown in with the older classics,'' said Mr. Rudd, 49, of Short Hills. ''It's nice to have a mix.''
Mr. Gennaro chose to open and close the season with ''Of Thee I Sing'' and ''Ragtime'' because, he said, ''I wanted the season to have an arc, with two musicals that are very much about Americana as the bookends.''
''Of Thee I Sing'' is a political parody that includes spoofs on presidential candidates, the Supreme Court and beauty pageants. Appropriately, Mr. Gennaro said, it will coincide with the fall's presidential race.
''Ragtime,'' which is based on the novel by E.L. Doctorow, has music by Stephen Flaherty and lyrics by Lynn Ahrens. The book was written by Terrance McNally. The musical tells the story of three families whose lives intersect in the early part of the 20th century.
Paper Mill's production is to be directed by a Canadian, Stafford Arima, who is bringing a version he directed recently in London. It is currently nominated for eight Olivier Awards, Great Britain's version of the Tonys. Mr. Arima is also directing Paper Mill's production of ''Guys and Dolls,'' which closes this year's season.
''She Loves Me,'' the second play of the season, opened on Broadway in 1963 and was revived 30 years later. It revolves around the pen-pal correspondence of two shopkeepers in Budapest in the 1930's. The show will be directed by James Brennan, who directed this winter's production of ''The Sound of Music.''
Next up is ''The Drawer Boy,'' in which Mr. Mahoney will revive the role he played at Steppenwolf a few years ago, as one of two lifelong friends who must deal with a secret from the past. The show will be directed by Anna Shapiro, Steppenwolf's resident director.
The fourth play is the musical version of ''Harold and Maude,'' to be directed by Paper Mill's associate director, Mark Hoebee. The story involves the unusual relationship between a teenager obsessed by death and an eccentric elderly widow who gives him a reason to live.
Before ''Ragtime'' will be ''The Baker's Wife,'' set in a French village in Provence. The story focuses on the arrival of a much-anticipated new baker.
Mr. Gennaro, who was both an actor and a lawyer before becoming a theater executive, said he first met Mr. Schwartz, the show's music-and-lyrics writer, while performing in an off-Broadway production of Mr. Schwartz's ''Godspell'' in the 1970's.
''It's interesting to now be sitting across the table from him discussing producing his play,'' Mr. Gennaro said.
Despite Mr. Schwartz's successes on Broadway, which include ''Pippin'' as well as ''Wicked,'' ''The Baker's Wife,'' first performed in the mid-1970's, has never played there. When asked if the Paper Mill production would be an audition for Broadway, Mr. Gennaro answered, ''We're not a tryout house.''
''Nothing would be more glorious than having a show that goes on to New York,'' he added. ''But I learned long ago, you produce a show for the theater you're in. If it's a great show, people will find it.''
Paper Mill audiences may detect some trimming of production costs, as the theater is struggles to keep its $19 million budget in the black while rebuilding its endowment.
''I don't think we're going to see the same kind of lavish productions we've seen at the Paper Mill in the last 20 years,'' said Michael Anania, the theater's resident scenic designer, noting that Mr. Gennaro's focus is more on the work and the acting, and less on the stage sets.
''In the past, we saw a lot of romantic realism,'' the set designer said. ''In the future, it will be a lot more abstract, more metaphysical. The audience will have to fill in the blanks.''
