Asset sales last year that resulted in a capital gain or loss are reported on Schedule D. This return includes only sales of stocks and mutual fund distributions, but sales of real estate, artwork and other assets, and even municipal bonds (only the interest is tax-exempt), would also be reported here. Active traders have to attach separate statements to report all their sales.
The cost basis includes brokerage fees and charges, and the sale price is after such fees. Assets held a year or less are considered short term, and gains and losses are reported in Part I. Assets held more than a year are long term, and gains and losses are listed on Part II. Although the tax breaks for dividends are retroactive to Jan. 1, 2003, the cuts in rates on long-term capital gains apply only to sales after May 5, 2003. The old 20 percent rate was reduced to 15 percent, and, for lower-income taxpayers, capital gains are now taxed at 5 percent, down from 10 percent (or 8 percent on assets held more than five years). The total gain or loss for each asset sold is listed in Column F of Part II, Line 8, and the post-May 5 gain or loss is listed in Column G.
The Taxpayers sold two stocks they had held for less than a year, resulting in a net short-term gain of $1,305 (Line 7b). In Part II, they had a $156 capital gains distribution from a mutual fund (Line 13), of which $127 was post-May 5. They also sold two long-term holdings after May 5 and one in April, reporting gains on all of them.
Like many other people, the Taxpayers accumulated more net long-term losses in recent years than they could take against ordinary income -- the limit is $3,000 a year -- and had a loss carryover of $7,505 (Line 14). When the stock market rebounded in 2003, that carry-over allowed them to recognize gains equal to that without being taxed on them. After all the gains and the loss carry forward are combined, they have a net long-term gain of $627 (Line 17a). If investors had only short-term gains, they would be taxed as ordinary income.
Part IV of Schedule D is used to calculate taxes on returns that include long-term capital gains and dividends. The Taxpayers' income tax liability is $17,298 (Lines 51 and 53) because that is less than it would have been from the tax rate schedule, $17,489 (Line 52).
Keeping track of the data for Schedule D can be demanding for active traders or those who make regular fund purchases.
