ROBERT GOLDSTEIN was a network and systems engineer at On Money, a financial services company in New York, when he lost his job in 2001 in the technology downturn. But unlike many in his industry, Mr. Goldstein bounced back quickly. He is now working as an information technology security consultant, and last year his earnings rose 20 percent.
Computer viruses, identity and information theft, and other kinds of computer crime are no longer exotic problems, and the demand for information technology security specialists reflects that change, according to experts in employment in the field.
''We are seeing a greater demand for I.T. security professionals than ever before,'' said Jerry Brennan, president of Security Management Resources, a recruiting firm in Warrenton, Va. According to a recent survey by Secure Enterprise Computing, an information security company in North Carolina, 35 percent of United States companies expect to add dedicated information technology security staff members within the next two years.
The CERT Coordination Center at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, which collects information on Internet security, said it had received 137,529 reports of computer security problems worldwide from individual and corporate computer users in 2003, roughly six times the number of incidents reported in 2000.
And according to a survey by the Computer Security Institute, an information security membership association, viruses and other computer crime cause, on average, economic losses of $803,000 per company in the United States.
Career experts say that the growth of the information technology security industry accelerated after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. The creation of the Department of Homeland Security in response to the attacks led directly to an increase in the number of government workers focused on digital security.
In general, ''9/11 made people much more aware of the importance of security, including the need to protect against cyberterrorism,'' and contributed to an increase in information technology security jobs in the private sector, said Joyce Brocaglia, chief executive of Alta Associates, a recruitment firm based in Flemington, N.J., specializing in information security.
Mark Stenberg, president and founder of Career Center, an employment training company in New York City, said, ''There are thousands of these jobs available in the New York area alone.'' Even job seekers with no information technology background can, in less than a year, become certified security professionals in network or wireless computer systems, he said. Computers connected wirelessly create a greater potential security risk than network computers, so wireless security is a particularly fast growing field, Mr. Stenberg said.
Siby Anthony, the chief executive of Marlabs, a software development company in Edison, N.J., has increased his information technology security staff by almost 10 percent in the last two years. ''As security systems become more and more sophisticated -- such as technology to recognize hand or face prints -- the need for skilled workers will continue,'' he said. He has no immediate plans to hire more workers, he said, but added that it was possible.
John McClurg, vice president for security at Lucent Technologies in New Jersey, explained why the need will continue to grow. ''Information technology is ever evolving, and with each new technology there is always an entrepreneurial bad guy who will find out how to use that technology in an illicit fashion,'' he said. The culprit can be anyone from a business rival, to an unhappy former employee, to a hacker who breaks into a corporation's system to shut it down ''just for the conquest and thrill of it,'' he said.
Mr. Goldstein, the consultant, attributes the growth of his business to the introduction of Microsoft's Windows 2003, along with companies' increased use of new computer technology. ''Now that it's a bull market, companies are spending more to have the latest technological advances, and they need to hire people with the expertise to protect those systems,'' he said. This has kept him so busy, he said, that for several months in the fall he worked 12-day stretches with only two days off between them.
''Any business that relies on the Internet, and today that means just about every business, is going to seek out I.T. security professionals, either on a consulting or a full-time basis,'' said Mr. Brennan of Security Management Resources. Indeed, Robert Dao, a former information technology security specialist for the United States Air Force who is now a program manager for the Secure Information Corporation, which provides information technology security services, said, ''There's not a 30-day period that goes by that I don't get calls regarding career opportunities.''
The field of information technology security encompasses a variety of specialties, from policy and strategy formulation to disaster-recovery management.
One of the fastest-growing job areas in the field, according to Mr. Brennan, is forensic, or investigative, security, which focuses on learning how digital crimes are committed, gathering evidence of such crimes and collaborating with law enforcement on prosecuting such cases. He said demand for forensic security experts increased 20 percent in 2003.
Ms. Brocaglia of Alta Associates says she has seen job openings for senior-level information security officers increase by nearly 50 percent in the second half of 2003, when 57 companies contacted her company to hire information security professionals -- up from 39 companies in the first half of the year.
''The market has changed dramatically,'' with the greatest demand coming from the financial services industry, she said. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act, legislation intended to prevent corporate financial scandals, has contributed to the growth of technology security officers in financial services, she added.
While salaries ''have not grown tremendously in recent years, given the economy,'' she said, information technology security remains a lucrative field, with many experienced professionals earning $150,000 to $200,000 a year. Some earn much more: In New York City, high ranking information technology security officers in financial firms can command incomes ''approaching seven figures,'' she said.
As the need for information technology security has increased, the profession has changed, according to Ms. Brocaglia. ''Companies used to look strictly for people with tech skills, but now they want people who have corporate skills as well,'' she said.
''As a result, the role of information security officers has been elevated. Today you can find them in the boardroom, making executive-level presentations. At most corporations, the stereotypical I.T. geek in jeans and a flannel shirt has become a thing of the past.''
