THERE are few temporary workers among the ranks of senior executives. But as companies run leaner, and seasoned but unemployed managers continue to search for new jobs, that is starting to change.
Small but growing numbers of executives are building careers as itinerant managers, moving from one senior-level assignment to the next. Sometimes the jobs last for just a few months, but the pay often exceeds what an executive could earn in a comparable period at a permanent job.
For some executives, interim assignments offer relief, however brief, from unemployment. For a few, like John S. Reed, the former co-chairman of Citigroup who is now the interim chairman of the New York Stock Exchange, the assignments offer a chance to help an organization they care about. But for others, life as an itinerant executive provides flexibility, variety and a chance to use skills that may otherwise atrophy. Companies find that these executives can fill gaps quickly and often bring fresh solutions to longstanding problems.
Companies' use of short-term executives ''opens up a lot of doors for people who are senior who have talent, wisdom and know-how that companies don't want to hire on a permanent basis,'' said John A. Thompson, author of ''The Portable Executive'' (Simon &amp; Schuster, 1995).
Companies that place executives in short-term assignments say business is increasing sharply. ''There's a lot of nascent demand out there,'' said Stephen Giusto, executive vice president for corporate development and the chief financial officer of Resources Connection, a firm in Costa Mesa, Calif., that finds candidates for interim executive jobs.
Last year the company, spun off from Deloitte &amp; Touche, had a 30 percent increase in the number of executives placed with clients, he said. Spherion, a recruitment and outsourcing firm in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said requests for interim executives increased 12 percent from 2002 to 2003.
Paul Cattermole, 57, has been living the peripatetic life for several years. After working in interim jobs in Boston for nearly a decade, he moved to Boulder, Colo., in 2002. Now Mr. Cattermole, a certified public accountant with a master's degree in business administration, is the interim chief financial officer of two companies: Teknovation, a digital video security products company, and Confio, a company that monitors database performance. He is also a consultant to Boomerang Inc., which makes automotive accessories.
Mr. Cattermole says he meets weekly with the chief executives of the companies and sends e-mail to them three to five times a week. He is guiding Teknovation and Confio through rounds of financing. For Boomerang, he is streamlining the inventory tracking process.
He and other interim executives who were interviewed declined to discuss their compensation. But Randy Cochran, a former managing partner for interim practices, North America, at Heidrick &amp; Struggles, the executive search company, said he used this rule of thumb: companies can expect to pay an interim executive 1 percent of the annual salary for the position per day, with a full salary being paid out in about four to five months. The interim executive's compensation typically does not include benefits and pension costs.
Some itinerant executives align themselves with agencies. One is Julie White, 53, who formerly worked at J.Walter Thompson as an account executive and as director of advertising at Sallie Mae. She became an interim executive eight years ago to gain more control over her schedule and child-care arrangements, and has worked on seven or eight projects, she said. They have lasted from three weeks to 14 months.
While insulated from corporate politics, Ms. White says she is not totally immune. On one assignment, she looked for an advertising agency to promote a series of Internet newsletters published by her employer. She recommended that the agency provide the copy. The proposal got a frosty reception from the vice president for marketing, who had been the copywriter, she said.
Another interim executive, Jeffrey DiRubio, 58, says he avoids surprises by evaluating a potential employer before signing up. He recently completed a nine-month assignment outside London as interim vice president for worldwide sales and marketing at the AIT Group, a software company. Before starting, he spent 30 days on site, he said, asking questions like ''How do you sell the benefit of your product to your customers?''
BEFORE becoming involved with AIT, Mr. DiRubio studied on his own the deals of Bessemer Venture Partners, an affiliate of the Bessemer Securities Corporation, the private investment firm, meeting periodically with several partners and associates there. When some partners invested in AIT, Mr. DiRubio, a former I.B.M. salesman who once had his own start-up, told them he could help.
The Bessemer Venture investors recommended him to AIT to perform a sales assessment, and when it became clear that an interim vice president for sales would be needed, he stepped in.
Some executives find that interim jobs become permanent. In January 2002, Brian Sobelman, 52, was hired for an interim assignment at New Weathervane Retail, a New Britain, Conn., retailer of teenage girls' clothing. He has never left.
There were hitches. Early on, he had to tell five merchandise planners that a report tracking sales, inventory and turnover that was already three months late would not be ready for two more months, but he placated them by providing weekly status reports. He also sought out the company president, asking, ''Am I on the right track?'' After 60 days, the two went to lunch and he was hired permanently as the director of information technology.
Some experts expect interim executives to become more common. Robert E. Mittelstaedt, vice dean for executive education at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, predicted that their ranks would be swelled by baby boomers nearing retirement who want to work as much for stimulation as for money. And many companies, he added, ''are still trying to keep their costs down and prefer to have to pay someone on a temporary basis.''
Executive Life
