I TOOK my first selling job in this industry over 28 years ago, working for Merck, and on my first month on the job I got into a tough situation in Jersey City with a pharmacy, one of my biggest accounts.
This pharmacist was trying to shake down the sales reps. He wanted me to give drug samples to offset, he said, the cost of his postage, of about $20 to $30. We had a policy at Merck that we didn't allow that. In fact, it's illegal to give samples to a pharmacist.
It was a key moment for me. I understood the policy and stuck with that, but it meant shutting down a big account. Could I lose my job? I was scared to death.
I'm the kind of guy who goes home and calls the manager. I don't let stuff fester. And he said, ''Let me meet with you and the pharmacist.'' In this case, my district manager really laid into this guy. He said, ''I don't expect you to be shaking down my people.''
He took a strong stand and told me how important it was to operate with integrity and honesty. It is a message that has stuck with me my entire career.
An early job that influenced me was the work I did for several summers when I was a student at Gettysburg College. The job involved preparing picnics for patients at a state mental hospital. The people were pretty sick, and I was responsible for making picnic lunches for them, cooking all the food and cleaning up.
I usually had 15 picnic tables set up and grills, cooking 100 hot dogs and 100 hamburgers. We would throw a Frisbee around. I was 18, and I went into the job thinking I would make the food quickly and get out. But I found I was spending more and more time there, talking to patients. They really appreciated the picnics.
As I reflect on that, I realize we were helping to improve their quality of life. I had never visited an institution like that, and you think of the stereotype of people stuck in an institution and taking medication. I thought I would be just setting up tables. But in the end I was cutting up watermelon and putting food on people's plates, even feeding them. I got to know the patients and the people who worked there. What stuck with me was how committed those people were to improving the patients' lives.
My family and faith are the most important things in my life. I've been married for 29 years and have four great kids. When people talk about balance, it is not about equal time but the quality of everything that you do with one another.
On a recent family vacation, I got certified to scuba dive. I saw it as something I could do with my daughter Kaitlyn, who is 13 and the only one left at home. My son David, who is at the Naval Academy, had an interest in getting into scuba, so he came along. Kaitlyn went through a 150-page book; she took tests. She was amazing for someone so young.
On our last dive we were sitting 60 feet below the surface in our scuba gear. My daughter was worried about me. She was looking at me, tapping me and giving me the O.K. sign to check that I was fine. And I was thinking: ''What an accomplishment. What a great thing to do with your children.''
EXECUTIVE LIFE: THE BOSS
