Guerrillas shouting ''God is great'' staged a brazen assault on the main police station here on Saturday, blasting their way inside, killing at least 15 police officers and freeing dozens of prisoners.
Four of the attackers were killed as well as several Iraqi civilians, bringing the number of dead to 25. At least 40 people were wounded.
Documents found on the four dead attackers indicated that one was Lebanese and that two were Iranians, the Americans said. The presence of fighters from those countries could be disturbing to Iraqis.
The attack came at the end of an extraordinarily violent week in Iraq, when two suicide bombings killed more than 100 people.
Falluja is a center of anti-American sentiment, and in recent weeks American troops have largely ceded responsibility for the city to Iraqi security forces, hoping that they can handle the insurgency in the delicate period before the planned transfer of governmental authority to the Iraqis at the end of June. The attack on Saturday represents a blow to that strategy.
Yet at the same time, many people in Falluja are clamoring for the first signs of democracy. [Page 16.]
The attack on the police station was unusually bold and sophisticated, with the insurgents advancing from four sides, firing heavy machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades.
The assault was coupled with a simultaneous attack on an Iraqi civil defense headquarters about a mile away, intended to hold that center in check while the prison break unfolded. In all, the insurgents numbered 30 to 50, operating with heavy firepower in morning light.
The goal of the raid, which lasted several minutes, was unclear, but there were indications that it was intended to free a small group held inside. American officials estimated that 70 prisoners had escaped, most of them common criminals, although the Iraqis put the figure higher.
One police officer said the attackers had taken 18 prisoners with them.
A senior occupation official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that of the four attackers who died, three were carrying the documents indicating they were foreign citizens.
The Americans said the attack appeared to have been an attempt by supporters of Saddam Hussein's former government, with the help of foreigners, to free a group of four insurgents who were captured attacking a busload of Iraqi civil defense forces last week.
The senior occupation official said there were indications that the attackers had had help from the inside.
Only two days before, on Thursday, Iraqi insurgents attacked a convoy carrying Gen. John P. Abizaid, the commander of American forces in the Middle East. The general was unhurt.
The apparent nationalities of the attackers lent credence to claims by Iraqi officers that the attackers were trying to free a group of Iranians captured last week.
The claims, made Saturday by a number of police officers, dovetailed with statements made earlier this week by the Falluja police chief, Brig. Abid Farhan, speaking at a meeting with the Falluja city council and an American lieutenant colonel. Brigadier Farhan said an unspecified number of Iranians were captured as they tried to drive into the city late last month. After those arrests, the chief said, he imposed a 10 p.m. curfew across the city.
The American lieutenant colonel, Brian Drinkwine, whose battalion is based in Falluja, heard the statements by Brigadier Farhan at the meeting and did not challenge them.
After the attack on Saturday, a Falluja police captain said that Iranians had indeed been captured recently but that they had not been at the main jail at the time of the attack.
''I think we still have five Iranians, but they were in another jail,'' Capt. Abbas Fathal said.
Another police officer wounded in the attack, Faris Ibrahim, reiterated from his hospital bed that a group of Iranians had been captured in the city.
''We knew they were Iranians because they could not speak Arabic, only Persian,'' he said.
The attack began at 8 a.m., when many of the officers were at breakfast. The assailants threaded through the barricade wall and barbed wire that ringed the area. Officer Mahmood Falla said he had just fallen out from his daily inspection line when the shooting started. He said he had picked up his gun and managed to shoot one insurgent.
''They took us completely by surprise,'' Officer Falla said.
If proved, the presence of Iranian agents inside Iraq would be potentially explosive here. Falluja is an Sunni Muslim city, where people are acutely sensitive to the growing political power of the country's Shiite majority. They are also wary of Iran, a Shiite country.
Earlier this week, American officials said they had obtained a 17-page memorandum outlining plans by Sunni Muslim insurgents in Iraq to start a ''sectarian war'' with Iraq's Shiites.
After the battle on Saturday, the Iraqi police recovered a black battle flag. In the Muslim world, black is the color of the Shiites.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: INSURGENTS  Correction:  February 16, 2004, Monday  Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about a deadly raid on a police station in Falluja, Iraq, reversed the figures in some copies for the nationality breakdown of some of the assailants. According to American authorities, documents found on four dead attackers indicated that two were Lebanese and one was Iranian.
