SEVENTEEN years ago, my husband, Roy, and I were looking to move from Manhattan -- not too far away, but far enough that we could afford a few acres.
Our son, Stuart, was just over a year old, and we were hoping to expand our family. A white seven-room colonial on a quiet dirt road in Katonah seemed the perfect place.
We moved in mid-September, and we were delighted with the country surroundings: The grass was long and luxuriant; the sunlight on the hillside was mellow; and the air, crisp. That first weekend, our neighbors, Ben and Rita, came from across the road to say hello. Ben and Rita were roughly our age, but had married when they were young so they had teenage children.
We invited them in, and over a glass of wine, they pointed out some of the perils of country living.
Our well? Don't be surprised if it gets struck by lightning, we were advised. Just replace the pump, we were told.
And the biggest nuisance? The deer.
''''The deer?'' we said together. Roy and I didn't understand.
They told us:
''Well, they jump out in front of your car.''
''They can really total it,'' Ben said. ''Rita hit one last month, right around the corner from here. Sooner or later you'll hit one. Everybody does.''
And that wasn't all. They warned us about Lyme disease. ''Have you ever heard of Lyme disease?'' Rita wanted to know.
We hadn't, but by the end of the evening we were about ready to pack up the car and take Stuart back to Manhattan, where life suddenly seemed simple and safe.
Over the years, we settled in.
I enjoyed watching the deer when they came out at dusk. Once at sunset, looking out the front window, I saw a graceful young doe grazing on the front lawn. It seemed a symbol of harmony and peace, and a harbinger of a rosy future.
But sure enough, one day Roy hit a deer as it skittered across Route 172. After that, going above 35 miles per hour after dark on the local roads was out; it was just too risky.
Our families visited from Long Island. To them, it was a novelty to see a deer. My mother-in-law, a native of Jerusalem, was stunned to see the deer roaming free.
And I learned after that first summer's garden that, other than the glossy andromeda foliage, there is no such thing as a deer-proof plant. Carefully tended roses became the deer's favorite food. But gradually, I learned how to build a winter fence around the shrubs, and I resigned myself to having a small garden, which I sprayed weekly with deer repellent.
The neighbors were right about Lyme disease, too. It became standard for people to ask, ''Did you check yourself for ticks?'' And it wasn't unusual to see people dragging white sheets around their yards, trying to determine if they had a tick problem. And everyone blamed the deer.
I look back to that time when Roy and I first saw that beautiful doe on the lawn at sunset, and thought of it as a symbol of a rosy future. Every fall the deer eat all the leaves off the burning bush before I can get the netting up. And, yes, I've had Lyme disease -- three times. We even put up a tall wood-post-and-wire fence, partly to keep the dog in, partly to keep the deer out.
Yet I love to see them, with their white tails held high, leaping through a snowy field in winter or traveling with their spotted fawns in spring. Katonah just wouldn't be the same without them.
SOAPBOX Lydia Landesberg, a freelance writer, lives in Katonah.
