Since the announcement of a proposed football stadium on the West Side to house the Jets, debate has swirled over weighty issues like the cost of the project, its financial return and its environmental impact. But some West Siders are concerned about something on a more human scale: tailgaters.
For many football fans, arriving early to drink and barbecue is as integral to football as the pigskin.
''A third of the fans tailgate,'' said Jim DeBosh, a spokesman for the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, which operates the current home of the Jets, the Meadowlands. ''Some have elaborate parties. They set up tents and bring big grills.''
In their wake, however, they often leave congested traffic, noise, piles of trash -- the cleanup bill runs to $30,000 a game, Mr. DeBosh said -- and, occasionally, burning cars.
The last problem may seem far-fetched, but at the Meadowlands last June, for example, six cars caught fire when hot barbecue coals were left too close to a parked car during an N.B.A. game.
''There are a lot of residential streets on the West Side,'' said John Fisher, who lives in the neighborhood and is worried about the potential troubles of tailgating at the proposed stadium, which would face the Hudson River from 30th Street to 34th Street. ''Let's say you got a guy with an R.V. and he and his buddies find a spot, set up and put grills on the sidewalk.''
According to Matt Higgins, a vice president of the Jets, there are no plans to build a large, centralized parking area like the 25,000-space lot at the Meadowlands. Such a lot would make it easier to monitor tailgaters and clean up trash. But if the stadium is built, he said, tailgating will be a moot point.
''It's going to be similar to other stadiums in urban environments,'' Mr. Higgins said. ''Most people will arrive by subway and go to a local bar or restaurant instead of tailgating.''
Moreover, in contrast to the Meadowlands, the city has many regulations on outdoor grilling -- grills, for instance, must be at least 10 feet away from a combustible surface -- although enforcing such rules may be a challenge, given the vast number places where intent fans could set up.
Chad Marlow, a resident of the West Village, a Jets fan and a seasoned tailgater, believes that fans will merely adapt the suburban tradition to the city.
''Cooking on the grill and tossing a football around is part of the whole football atmosphere,'' said Mr. Marlow, who opposes the West Side stadium plan. ''I can see people bringing coolers and portable hibachis and setting up wherever they happen to be.''
STEVE KURUTZ
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: WEST SIDE
