ARKADY VOLSKY, a Soviet apparatchik who maneuvered elegantly, for a time, in the new Russia, liked to make his political points hidden in the safety of a jest. ''People say that Russia should become like Sweden,'' he once said in Moscow. ''Or like China. Or like America. But the problem is that we don't have enough Swedes. We don't have enough Chinese. We don't have enough Americans.''
Democracy, in other words, grows out of a nation's history and experiences. It can't be inserted like a silicone implant or put on like a new hat. Nor can it be imposed, even by the most well meaning or well armed.
Democracy can be nurtured, even fertilized. But one need only read a few pages of Churchill's ''History of the English-Speaking Peoples'' to realize how tender a plant it is, and how aberrant. And how much it needs protective institutions, like independent courts and just laws, in which to flourish.
Does this state the obvious? Even so, the United States and the European Union have spent billions in the name of democratization wherever their armies have roamed, and in lots of places where they haven't.
Democracy, a wonderful idea, scarcely needs to be force-fed; but from Iraq to Haiti, Russia to Romania, Belgrade to Kosovo, many people who embrace it haven't any real idea of what makes it work, or the kind of collective understanding of the collective good that grows over centuries and is essential to making democracy self-limiting.
The selling and implanting of democracy face three essential problems: institution-building, which requires time, money and commitment; making that effort palatable in a foreign land, so it is not seen as imperial; and making the effort sustainable in countries where other interests -- wars on terrorism or drugs, or maintenance of regional stability -- trump Americans' ability to face down an illiberal state.
''The principal struggle in all these societies is about modernization,'' said Fareed Zakaria, author of ''The Future of Freedom: Illiberal Democracy at Home and Abroad.'' ''The idea that you can just hold elections while everything else remains feudal, medieval, means you won't get democracy but some perversion of it.''
Stephen Kotkin, a professor of European and Asian history at Princeton and director of Russian studies there, says simply, ''It's always about the quality of governing institutions and how they work on the ground.'' When Boris N. Yeltsin took over Russia in 1992, Mr. Kotkin points out, there were 6,000 judges, trained in the old regime, and a quarter-million members of the K.G.B.
''How do you get rule of law?'' he asked. ''Only if the number of judges goes up and the number of agents down.'' In 12 years the number of judges has tripled, to 18,000. But about 200,000 agents of the secret police remain. By contrast, when the United States won its independence, there were more lawyers than bureaucrats. The society was stronger than the state; there was a foundation of individual rights and private property. Over time, as slaves were freed and women and blacks won civil and property rights, the liberal order has become more democratic.
But the effort to democratize an illiberal order -- a Russia, a former Yugoslavia, a Haiti, an Iraq -- lays elections over societies without the rooted institutions that protect democrats and democratic values. Elections by themselves don't translate into parliamentary rule or civilian control or an independent judiciary or fair taxes or protections for private property and minorities.
The result, often, is an intellectual class beholden to the state or co-opted by it, while the state suborns or seizes or paralyzes any independent institution that becomes profitable or popular. Just look at Russia.
When a form of democracy first came to infect the Soviet Communist Party, it blew the system apart. Free speech was used for movements, like environmentalism, that were thin disguises for popular nationalism, ethnic resentment and collective action. Democracy proved destabilizing and pulled the tottering country down. The resulting anarchy shook a people historically terrified of weak central control.
Now Mr. Putin, the icy former spy, is about to win re-election by virtual acclamation, after jailing a rich political opponent and shutting down or confiscating independent newspapers, because he has provided a strong and respectable hand.
In the former Yugoslavia, the effort to escape from Slobodan Milosevic's grip has produced a divided Bosnia that votes on ethnic grounds, with moderates squeezed out. In Kosovo, NATO and the United Nations have presided over a kind of gangster democracy, where minority rights are protected only in principle. And in Belgrade, the Westernized democrats are split and tainted, ultranationalists have done well, and a moderate nationalist, Vojislav Kostunica, may become prime minister with the support of Mr. Milosevic's Socialist Party.
Haiti has been independent about as long as the United States, so is largely untouched by feelings of anticolonialism. But Haitians can resent patronizing American efforts to teach them about democracy, as when they are told that their elected leader, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, has a disturbing tendency to terrorize the opposition.
The problems of the ideology of democracy are vivid in Iraq. The leader of the majority Shia Muslims, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, is demanding direct elections immediately, before a constitution is written, using the Americans' slogan against them.
The Americans, pushed by insurgency and terrorism and their allies to hand back sovereignty to Iraqis by July 1, are caught up in their own contradictions. They have had to appeal to the United Nations and its emissary, Lakhdar Brahimi, to try to convince Ayatollah Sistani that the world thinks direct elections now would be a mistake.
Afghanistan is almost a better model. There, the United Nations, backed by the Americans, is trying to build democracy on an indigenous model of representation, the council of leaders (loya jirga), and to modernize it. Not just to promote elections, but to institutionalize pluralism and an existing form of federalism.
Creating working democracies took 400 years in the West and 40 years in East Asia, said Mr. Zakaria, who is editor of Newsweek International. ''Now we want it in four months in Iraq.'' That is why he has always supported United Nations involvement there, he said. ''They have the staying power, and they are not seen as colonial.''
Arkady Volsky used to tell another joke, this one about hope and progress. There were two economists, an optimist and a pessimist. The pessimist said: ''Everything is terrible. It can't get any worse.''
The optimist said: ''Yes, it can.''
Haiti to Russia to Bosnia
