ON Thursday night, Mayor Joe Scarpelli sat in a television studio at Brick Memorial High School, getting ready to appear on ''About the Town,'' a local access cable show. Past shows have ranged from ''Brick Showstoppers,'' a lineup of summer stock talent, to a chat with Ant Cathy, author of ''Funny Side of the Street.'' But this time, Brick Township's gregarious mayor was not looking for laughs. He wanted to talk about the fate of the Oyster Creek Generating Station, a 650-megawatt nuclear reactor in neighboring Lacey Township.
''For safety's sake, nuclear rust bucket should be mothballed,'' Mayor Scarpelli said, reading a headline from a local newspaper editorial and holding up the clipping.
''Joe, can you zoom in on the picture?'' he asked. With eerie slowness, a black-and-white aerial photograph of the Oyster Creek nuclear plant swelled to fill the screen. It looked like a scene from Dr. Strangelove.
The shroud of doubt around Oyster Creek is nothing new. Loose coalitions of Shore residents have been agitating to close the 34-year-old nuclear plant since the early 1990's. But recently their concerns have evolved into a groundswell, with a dozen towns in Ocean Creek urging Governor McGreevey to speak out against Oyster Creek.
In the past several days, the state felt compelled to respond, leading the top environmental official, Bradley Campbell, commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection, to insist that deteriorating equipment at the plant had to be replaced and security enhanced before its operating license was renewed.
''We have serious concerns about this plant,'' Mr. Campbell said in an interview on Wednesday. ''We fully intend to present a series of specific technical concerns that need to be addressed, and our concerns have been reinforced by some frustrations over the past year with respect to security and operations at the plant.''
Time is of the essence, opponents of the plant contend. Built in 1969, Oyster Creek Generating Station is the oldest commercial nuclear reactor in the country, and its operating license is set to expire in 2009. To keep the plant running, Exelon Corporation -- an energy giant that owns Oyster Creek and has the third-largest nuclear fleet in the world -- must apply for a 20-year extension with the federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission no later than April.
''They're giving us every indication that they're going to apply, even though public officials, community organizations, and concerned citizens think this is a huge mistake,'' said Suzanne Leta, an energy associate with the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group.
Over the last eight months, 12 towns in Ocean County have passed resolutions expressing concern about the future of Oyster Creek; 4 of them -- including resolutions from Brick Township and Dover, the two largest towns in the county -- call for the plant's immediate closing.
For activists and elected officials alike, the problems at Oyster Creek are many. The plant consists of a Mark I boiling water reactor, a model that was discontinued in 1972 after the Atomic Energy Commission deemed the design had serious structural flaws and prohibited future construction of Mark I reactors.
Throughout its history, Oyster Creek has been plagued with cracking containment walls and accidental releases of iodine gas. In 1979, an engineer's miscalculation allowed the water surrounding its radioactive core to drop 10 feet, and only an emergency shutdown averted a serious accident.
Three years ago, when AmerGen Energy Company, a subsidiary of Exelon, bought the Oyster Creek Generating Station from its former owner, GPU Inc., it slashed the number of plant employees to 450 workers from 1,000. When AmerGen did away with 20 more jobs last summer, 220 electricians walked out for an 11-week strike.
''The plant currently has the smallest work force in its history,'' Mr. Campbell said. ''We are concerned that safe operations, maintenance and security may not be adequately staffed.''
In the aftermath of 9/11, many residents here fear that if the security is inadequate, the plant, which sits only 400 feet from Route 9, could be an easy target for terrorists. They also worry that plans to evacuate the area will prove woefully inadequate in the event of a catastrophe.
Ocean County is the second fastest-growing regions in New Jersey, yet the current evacuation plans are based on census data from a decade ago and only encompass a 10-mile radius around Oyster Creek, according to Ms. Leta. The area is also home to a large population of elderly adults who cannot drive. Hypothetically, emergency buses would shuttle them to safety, but activists question the likelihood of anyone staying around the area to drive the buses in the event of a nuclear catastrophe.
Aside from a handful of state senators and assemblymen, New Jersey officials have been hesitant to call for the decommissioning of Oyster Creek. Even Mr. Campbell, discussing problems at the plant, has stopped short of requesting the closing of Oyster Creek in 2009, when its current license expires. But he did say in the last several days that the state would condemn any attempt by Exelon to extend the relicensing deadline beyond April.
''We're going to oppose any effort to extend the deadline for the renewal application, or to shortchange the public process,'' he said in an interview.
Elaborating on the state's position, Micah Rasmussen, a spokesman for Governor McGreevey, said: ''It's not something we decide one way or the other, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission does. But we're definitely keeping an eye out to make sure the public interest is being served.''
Yet a letter recently sent to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission from Frank Lautenberg and Jon A. Corzine, the state's two senators, did little to placate activists.
While the two wrote that ''understanding the potential of nuclear power as an energy resource, we also believe that safety concerns should be addressed,'' they took what was perceived by activists as a moderate stance and requested further investigation.
For elected officials and grassroots activists alike, the regulatory agency would make a daunting opponent. And the commission has already granted 20-year license extensions for 23 reactors at 12 sites nationwide, with 10 other plants still waiting to pass through a decision process that can take more than two years.
On ''About the Town'' last Monday, Mayor Scarpelli expressed his concern about the regulatory agency's reputation among environmentalists for ''rubber-stamping'' applications, and what that could mean for Oyster Creek.
''What if they get the Good Housekeeping seal of approval from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission?'' the mayor wondered aloud. ''What should we do then?''
Ms. Leta of the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group urged him to focus on the present, and the mayor responded with levity and gusto. He took Ms. Leta's sign, which read ''NJPIRG: 30 Years of Action in the Public Interest,'' and peered at her from behind it. He asked, ''Are you the people who go knocking from door to door?''
She laughed, and then he returned to the business of Oyster Creek.
''Whether you believe it's a rust bucket or not, the risks still outweigh the benefits,'' he said soberly, then paused. ''It's just too dangerous to have in our backyard.''
ENVIRONMENT
