EVEN in a society inured to depravity and violence, Kursheda Sultanova's murder last week managed to shock. She was walking home with her father and cousin in a courtyard in St. Petersburg on Monday night when a dozen or so young men attacked them for reasons that are not yet clear. They stabbed her 11 times. She was 9 years old and bled to death in the snow.
The city's governor, Valentina I. Matviyenko, vowed to punish the ''underage scum'' who killed Kursheda, whose family migrated from Tajikistan five months ago. ''Get them even from under the earth and try them with all severity of the law,'' she told her police chief.
Chances are the police won't. And the reason is clear: in Russia, there is plenty of crime, but far less punishment.
Late last month, Russia's top prosecutor, Vladimir V. Ustinov, lamented publicly that the number of unsolved crimes increased by more than 25 percent last year.
On the same day, President Vladimir V. Putin, who famously promised to build a ''dictatorship of the law,'' scolded the police and investigators to do better.
While Mr. Putin warned that crime had a ''destructive impact on all spheres of society and the state,'' the real problem that Russia faces today is not a crime wave but a crisis of law enforcement.
Police officers, detectives and prosecutors are poorly equipped and poorly paid, earning $100 to $400 a month, depending on their rank. As a result, they are demoralized and susceptible to the corruption that gnaws at every layer of Russian society -- from health care to education to routine traffic stops.
On Thursday, a court convicted a police officer of accepting a bribe to provide a residency document to one of 41 Chechen terrorists who took hundreds of hostages in a Moscow theater in October 2002. The biggest surprise was not that he took a bribe, but that he was convicted of it.
The police are now viewed with such deep suspicion that many Russians avoid them. President Putin has acknowledged that as many as 40 percent of crimes are not even reported.
Irina Kislinskaya, who is considered one of the country's best crime reporters, said that the political and social upheavals that followed the collapse of the Soviet Union left the police and prosecutors in disarray.
''Very many of the law enforcement institutions were simply destroyed,'' she said.
A new criminal code that went into force last year has only highlighted the problems of law enforcement. The code introduced jury trials and new rights for defendants, allowing defense attorneys to shred not only flimsy cases against those falsely accused but also incompetently handled cases against those who might well have been guilty. Mr. Ustinov said that the number of acquittals in criminal cases has doubled.
Many high-profile crimes are investigated by the Federal Security Service, the successor of the K.G.B., but the agency tends not to get involved with common crime.
Under pressure from politicians and the public, many in law enforcement appear increasingly defensive. There have been reports that precincts underreport crimes for fear of rebukes from above.
The police in Moscow spent much of last summer denying that a serial killer was on the loose after a dozen women were killed in the city's northern neighborhoods. The murders may or may not have been related, but either way they remain unsolved.
Earlier this month, the police publicly played down a bombing outside the apartment of a journalist who wrote a sensational behind-the-scenes account of Mr. Putin at the Kremlin. They said the bomb was directed at an empty apartment, not the journalist's across the hall -- as if that were somehow a lesser deal.
The journalist, Yelena Tregubova, said that investigators did not even interview her for five days and dismissed her concerns about mysterious phone calls she received.
'''Why are you raising hell about it?''' she said an investigator told her. '''Nobody was even killed.''' She spoke in a telephone interview from a hotel overseas, having fled to a country she declined to identify.
Even in those cases that are solved, some remain skeptical of the outcomes. Because of the opacity of the legal system -- secret investigations, closed trials, scant access to court documents -- questions about motives often remain unanswered, allowing conspiracy theories to fester.
Some of the highest-profile crimes in the recent years are now making their way through the system. Last week, the trial of six suspects opened in the murder of a liberal member of parliament, Sergei N. Yushenkov, gunned down in Moscow last April.
The murder of another member of his party eight months earlier, however, remains a mystery. A trial also began at last in the case of Galina V. Starovoitova, a prominent liberal politician who was shot to death outside her apartment in St. Petersburg more than five years ago. There are six suspects, but whoever ordered the crime has not yet been found.
Yuri M. Schmidt, a prominent lawyer, said that Russians increasingly feel fearful and exposed. He cited not only common crimes, but also sensational terrorist acts, like the subway bombing in Moscow on Feb. 6, which, at last count, had claimed 41 lives. While Mr. Putin blamed Chechen terrorists for the bombing, the authorities have yet to establish who carried out the attack.
Instead of focusing on the flaws of the police and prosecutors today, Mr. Schmidt said, politicians have responded to the subway bombings and other crimes by calling for greater investigative powers and tougher punishments, including the death penalty, which Russia suspended in 1996.
''When crimes are not solved, society suffers,'' he said. What develops, he said, is a desire ''to tighten the nuts, to simplify the procedures to remove legal or judicial guarantees, to demand increased punishment.''
''That would mean a rollback from the democratic achievements we have made,'' he said. ''This would be the most terrifying outcome.''
