WHAT do love, health, telecommuting and skepticism about free advice have in common? To a tax expert, the answer is that all can play roles as you try to figure out your income tax liability.
Often, the tax laws do not behave the way we expect and, sometimes, they even seem to defy common sense. For instance, many people are aware of the so-called marriage penalty. It is not a formal penalty, but because couples often must pay a higher tax than they would have owed on the same incomes had they remained single, it certainly feels like a penalty. Still, there are situations when one spouse, in effect, is a tax shelter for the other. Whether a couple are in a penalty or shelter situation depends on their individual circumstances.
Another misconception is that the new health savings accounts enacted by Congress last year will benefit relatively few taxpayers. In fact, many workers can use them.
Then there is the issue of telecommuting. Many people who now work at home hope they will be able to deduct the expenses of a home office, but it is almost impossible for them to do so. Such offices have long been a red flag for the Internal Revenue Service, and employees have had a much harder time than the self-employed in meeting the tests that allow deductions for home office expenses. But with the recent proliferation of telecommuting, more employees will be seeking to take the deduction.
The last misconception is that if all of this is too confusing, a taxpayer can turn to the I.R.S. to sort it out accurately. A government audit last month showed that one of every five people who visited I.R.S. taxpayer assistance centers, which offer free help, got the wrong answers to their question. And that, of course, can be costly to the taxpayer.
Marriage Penalty, or Shelter
The marriage penalty kicks in when two spouses have incomes that are equal, or nearly so. Consider a husband and wife who have no children; each has $40,000 in salary and interest. If they do not itemize their deductions, their tax on a joint return is $9,726. If they were not married, each one's tax would be $4,866, or a total of $9,732 -- a difference of just a few dollars.
But if one spouse earned $70,000 and the other $10,000, the situation would change. In that case, as a married couple filing jointly, they would face a tax of $9,726. But if they were not married, the lower-earning spouse would owe $221, while the higher-earning one would pay $12,366 -- for a total of $12,587. Voilà! A marriage shelter of $2,861 -- a 23 percent savings, compared with the singles' rate.
Or consider this couple: a husband who earns $80,000 in salary and interest, and a wife who earns $100,000. Assume that their combined itemized deductions are $30,000 and that they have no children. On a joint return, their tax is $30,813. But if they were not married, the man's tax (assuming that the itemized deductions were split proportionally) would be $12,716, and the woman's would be $17,223, for a combined total of $29,939. So their marriage penalty would be $874 -- a difference of about 3 percent.
But the same couple would pay far less under a different income combination. Assume that the husband earned $30,000 and the wife $150,000. Their tax, with the same itemized deductions, would change significantly. If they filed jointly, the tax would still be $30,813. If they were not married, and the deductions were split proportionally, the man's tax would be $2,946, and the woman's $29,066, for a combined total of $32,012, Marriage would thus produce a shelter of $1,199 -- a savings of nearly 4 percent.
Sidney Kess, a tax lawyer and accountant in New York, noted that ''every situation is unique,'' and that the tax outlook could change, even for married couples, depending on many variables. But he said marriage was often a tax shelter.
He told the story of a woman who had sustained heavy business losses one year. ''She was dating a guy with a six-figure income, and told him, 'By marrying a loser, you're going to end up a winner,''' Mr. Kess said, adding that the man said ''I do'' and recognized significant tax savings.
Health Savings Accounts
These accounts, enacted by Congress in November and available for the first time this year, can provide a boon to some people without health insurance and tempt others with insurance to choose less expensive, higher-deductible policies to pay for some medical expenses with income that will not be taxed, and to save for future medical expenses. They are much more flexible, and available to more people, than the old medical savings accounts, though people who already have these accounts can continue to use them.
Contributions to health savings accounts are deducted from gross income. The maximum contribution is set as the lower of two amounts: the deductible on the account owner's health insurance policy, or $2,600 for single coverage and $5,150 for family coverage. (People over 55 can contribute $500 more.) But anyone covered by a health insurance policy with a deductible of less than $1,000 for single coverage or $2,000 for family coverage is not eligible.
The money in the account can be withdrawn, free of tax, to pay for medical expenses that are not covered by the high-deductible policy (but not for the policy premiums). Unlike employer-sponsored flexible spending accounts for uninsured medical expenses, the new accounts have no use-it-or-lose-it rule, and balances can be carried forward from year to year.
According to Research Recommendations, a newsletter published by the National Institute of Business Management in McLean, Va., the accounts are attractive for self-employed people and employees of smaller companies. Employers can make tax-free contributions to the accounts, but Research Recommendations said it expected few to do so.The accounts, the newsletter explained, were ''really intended to (1) encourage businesses that don't currently provide any health insurance to buy high-deductible coverage and (2) give a shot in the arm to employers that are considering dropping health coverage entirely due to rapidly rising costs.''
Several insurance companies are expected to offer the accounts -- possibly linked to a high-deductible medical insurance policy. Contributions to a 2004 health savings account, like those to an I.R.A., can be made as late as April 15 of next year.
The Home Office
The I.R.S. -- which interprets the tax laws, but does not write them -- says taxpayers may be able to deduct part of the cost of maintaining their homes, or part of their rent, for a home office if they meet certain tests. For employees who do work at home that is traditionally done in an office, those tests are rigorous.
The latest issue of Publication 587 -- Business Use of Your Home is available free at many local I.R.S. offices, by phone at 1-800-TAXFORM (1-800-829-3676) or at www.irs.gov. It explains that the home office must be used regularly and exclusively for business, with few exceptions.
The next test is that the home office is one's principal place of business. In recent years, the law has broadened the definition of principal place to a home office that is used to meet clients or customers or is necessary for administrative or management activities like billing, bookkeeping, forwarding orders or writing reports. But those activities are more often done by self-employed people than by telecommuting employees.
The third I.R.S. test, which applies only to employees, is that ''business use must be for the convenience of the employer.''
Martin Nissenbaum, national director of personal income tax planning at Ernst &amp; Young, said that the I.R.S.'s position ''is basically that unless the employer requires you to use your home as a place of business as a condition of employment,'' the deduction is not available. He added that the employer has to say, in effect: ''We're not going to provide you with an office. You're not going to have an office here.''
Mr. Nissenbaum said that he expected that the most likely employee candidates for deductible home offices were ''programmers and people in the computer industry,'' including people who answer telephone help lines. Often, he said, their employers ''hire them but don't provide them any space.''
An employee who splits the work week between telecommuting and going to an office would have a harder time nailing down a home office deduction, in Mr. Nissenbaum's opinion. ''A split week doesn't seem like it would be for the convenience of the employer,'' he said. ''The employer must say with a straight face that you must work at home.''
The home-office deduction is figured by computing the percentage of the home used as an office, either by square feet or by the number of rooms. That percentage is applied to that year's costs of owning a home, like mortgage interest, real estate taxes, depreciation, utilities, insurance, maintenance and repairs. Renters use the computed percentage to deduct a portion of the rent, as well as utilities and insurance.
Home-office expenses for employees are deducted on Schedule A, meaning that they are available only to taxpayers who itemize deductions and would be subject to phase-outs for higher-income taxpayers.
I.R.S. Advice
The I.R.S.'s pamphlets, like the one for business use of your home, are widely considered to be accurate statements of the law, or, if there is any doubt about interpretation, of the I.R.S. position on the law. But the information people get at the agency's walk-in advice centers does not have nearly such a good reputation.
A report last month by the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, an independent agency that oversees the I.R.S., found that agency employees correctly answered only 72 percent of the questions from auditors posing as taxpayers who visited 34 of the approximately 400 help centers last September and October. Twenty percent were answered incorrectly; the other questions were not answered directly by the help-center employees.
The report cited answers to the question of whether child-support payments, as distinguished from alimony, were taxable to the recipient. They are not. But a positive answer was offered twice, the report said.
Tax Hotline, a newsletter from Boardroom Inc., a business publisher, said recently that relying on bad advice from the I.R.S. did not relieve the taxpayer of liability if that advice resulted in an underpayment of taxes. Caveat filer!
