IN 18th-century Connecticut, the multitude of products made from wood were part of every human life, from hello to goodbye. The woodworker was the indispensable artisan, the go-to guy of village commerce.
For example, in December 1760, Ezra Bryan, a woodworker with a shop in Newtown, made a cradle for the Glover family and a coffin for a widow, Mrs. Bloodgood. His fee was eight shillings for the cradle and six shillings sixpence for the coffin.
In December 1766, Bryan made a highboy, a lowboy, a chest with two drawers, two tables and seven chairs for Ephraim Bennit, apparently on the occasion of Mr. Bennit's marriage. This grouping cost the bridegroom more than 10 pounds.
The next March, Bryan made ''a coffin for Ephraim Bennit's child.''
These details of Bryan's work are found in his account book, which was discovered by Mary Silks of Woodbury, a direct descendant of the woodworker through his son Amos. She found the book in 1999 in the back of a concealed drawer at the bottom of a Victorian bureau that her mother had owned.
When Ms. Silks, 55, realized that the document might have historical interest, she got in touch with the Newtown Historical Society. Ms. Silks said she was in the process of donating the account book to the society.
The account book, which is complete, covers Bryan's work from 1759 to 1778, from when he was about 19 until he was about 38, and evidently building a successful business. It tells the story of that business, but also of life in Newtown, which in 1756 had a population of 1,253. And so the book is a piece of social history, like probate inventories, wills, tax lists, census records, church records, land deeds, genealogies, diaries and other documents that historians study to learn the patterns of ordinary people's lives.
''I wish I'd had Ezra Bryan's account book when I was writing my books,'' said Edward S. Cooke Jr., the chairman of the art history department at Yale and a specialist in American decorative arts who has studied the furniture makers of western Connecticut and written two books on the topic. They are ''Fiddlebacks and Crooked-backs: Elijah Booth and Other Joiners in Newtown and Woodbury, 1750-1820'' (Mattatuck Historical Society, 1992) and ''Making Furniture in Preindustrial America: the Social Economy of Newtown and Woodbury, Connecticut'' (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996).
Professor Cooke explained that woodworkers like Bryan were at the center of the social and economic structures of their time and that the account book makes this plain by providing ''a series of snapshots that put him at the center of a web of relationships.''
In 1760, Connecticut was an outpost colony of Great Britain. The American Revolution and the republic it created were years in the future. Men like Bryan considered themselves subjects of King George III, far away in London. Capitalism as we know it did not exist. Instead, as Professor Cooke wrote in ''Making Furniture,'' there was a ''social economy,'' or a ''web of relations and activities that preceded a capitalist economy.''
With the resources of the seemingly endless forests at hand, woodworkers were the center of this web, Professor Cooke points out in the book. Craftsmen working with wood outnumbered all others because with their skills, they had the ability to drive progress by improving the quality of life and jump-starting commercial activity.
Carpenters built houses, barns, fences and churches, Professor Cooke explained, while coopers fashioned barrels, shipwrights and wheelwrights made specialty items, and joiners and turners created furniture that filled homes. Conspicuous consumption appeared as rich families treated themselves to elaborate dwellings and furnishings, luxuries that consumed both time and materials.
Village woodworkers like Bryan made and maintained an astonishing array of products that made life possible and even comfortable. It is clear from the range of furniture that he made, all noted in his account book, that he was a proficient turner as well as a skilful joiner and cabinetmaker.
Turners shaped wood on a lathe, joiners ''joined'' furniture parts using pinned mortise and tenon joints, while cabinetmakers used dovetails. In making a highboy, for example, Bryan would have used mortise and tenon joints as well as dovetails to fasten the various parts together.
Bryan was born on Nov. 30, 1740, in Newtown, and died on July 17, 1825, in Dutchess County, N. Y. His Connecticut shop may have been located on the Newtown-Brookfield line on a tract of land once called Bryan's 100 acres, said Daniel Cruson, Newtown's town historian and past president of the Newtown Historical Society.
Over the years, the account book indicates, Bryan had helpers named Daniel, Abel and Josiah. These may have been apprentices or journeymen, or even neighbors working part-time, Professor Cooke said.
According to the account book, at the shop Bryan made chairs, tables, stands, chests, clock cases and bedsteads in a variety of styles acceptable to local tastes and pocketbooks. He made humble and utilitarian items like warming pan handles, window frames, bullet molds, cheese presses, buttons, bowls, spools for spinning wheels, molds to fashion hats, bins for storing wheat, turned handles for a range of woodworking and agricultural tools.
Bryan and his helpers ''bottomed'' chairs, that is, wove rush seats for turned chairs he made. Bryan also helped his neighbors build houses, make wheels, lay floors and mend sleighs. In a barter economy he supplied customers with cider, tobacco and beef.
Mr. Cruson, who has studied the account book, calculated that between 1760 and 1775, the Bryan shop made 414 chairs of various sorts, 53 chests of drawers of several different types and 80 assorted tables.
In ''Making Furniture,'' Professor Cooke points out that much of the major furniture work of this period was done in the winter months, since almost everyone in 18th-century Connecticut did at least some farming in the warmer months.
''The professional joiner could draw on a number of neighbors during the slack farming months of December, January and February to fell, score, sled, split and saw the plentiful supplies of cherry, maple, yellow poplar, oak and white pine,'' he wrote. ''Winter was the ideal time for such activity: farmers had more free time, the wood cut best at that time and logs were easily sledded on the snowy ground. Most preparation and assembly of furniture took place between harvest and spring planting.''
In the late 1770's, Bryan, his wife, Sarah, and their children moved to Dutchess County, to a hamlet then called Nine Partners and now named Pine Plains. The Bryan family lived there for generations until Ms. Silks's mother moved a few miles east to Lakeville, Conn. in the mid-20th century.
Mr. Cruson said the account book needed to be conserved and rebound to insure its survival. ''When it's been conserved, the account book will be at the Newtown Library, on permanent loan from the Newtown Historical Society, where it will be available for study,'' he said.
