In a hallway outside David Baker's Arena Football League office is a huge, shiny gold bell that he asked an assistant to buy from a boating store. Baker, the commissioner, decided that the bell would help his staff of 20-plus in the league's Manhattan office discern how much the A.F.L. was sinking or swimming in its goal to move into the upper crust of America's sports scene.
It goes this way -- Baker receives good news, he rings the bell, and his staff comes running and assembles at his door. All then share in the announcement of a joyous accomplishment. If the bell does not ring for several days, well, that is a case where silence is not bliss.
Last Monday, Baker gave the bell a stirring ring. The Arena Football League, which opened its 18th season last weekend, had scored a 2.1 rating and a 5 share for regionalized television coverage and had drawn more viewers than the National Hockey League All-Star Game. The rating represented a 31 percent increase over the A.F.L.'s opening weekend a year ago and also set a league viewing record.
After so many years of toiling in obscurity, the A.F.L. had taken a heady peek through the clouds.
''You grow the most when you're in the crucible,'' Baker said.
And when are you in the crucible again, he was asked?
''When next week's ratings come,'' he said, chuckling.
So it goes for the A.F.L., a league being built into prominence brick-by-brick and by a few rings of a bell by Baker, by an NBC contract that gives it a fresh spotlight, by invigorating new ownership and by daring players and coaches playing a fizzle-and-sizzle game.
In arena football, everything is indoors; eight men are on the field per team, not 11; the field is 70 yards long, not 100 yards; walls surround the action; nets hang in the end zones and keep balls alive; and a player must perform on offense and defense and sometimes on special teams, too.
It is a fast, offensive-minded, pass-heavy game where outcomes are routinely decided by scores of 60-something to 50-something.
What may be making fans take a second look at arena football is the way Baker and the league are pushing their game with a fan-first priority. Sixty-five percent of the arena fan base attends games with the family, the league says. Tickets are much more affordable than those of most other pro sports leagues.
The entertainment on the field and during timeouts is creative and nonstop. Fans sit close to the action. Coaches and players know they will be fined by Baker for excessive cursing, in part because of the fans' proximity. After games, children are welcomed onto the field to gain player autographs. Little wonder the Arena Football League is becoming known as the All Fun League. All flexible, too, Baker said.
''Our game is a tough game with tough players, it's fun and it's a great product,'' said Baker, in his eighth season as commissioner. ''We consider ourselves the most fan-friendly in sports. We believe the way to build a league is not from the top down but from the bottom up. Sports is about being inspired and lifted up, and our game does that.''
The buzz around the A.F.L. has many sources.
*It is expanding when most sports leagues would prefer contraction. Austin, Tex.; New Orleans; and Philadelphia are new franchises this year that push the league to 19 teams. Over the next three years, teams are expected to be added in Nashville; Boston; Jacksonville, Fla.; San Francisco; and Washington.
*Nine National Football League owners, four National Basketball Association owners, three N.H.L. owners and one Major League Baseball owner have invested in ownership of an A.F.L. franchise.
*John Elway created a stir when he joined the Colorado franchise as a co-owner before last season. The singer Jon Bon Jovi did the same this year as a co-owner of the new Philadelphia Soul.
*During its first week, the A.F.L. averaged 14,242 fans a game, a 25 percent increase from last season.
''Obviously, the TV contract has made a great difference in our appeal, but also the caliber of players and coaches has grown so much in what is a wide-open game,'' said Jay Gruden, coach of the Orlando franchise. Gruden played quarterback in the league from 1991 through 1996, coached in it from 1997 through 2002, played again in 2002 and 2003 and enters his first year as coach of the Orlando team. He is the brother of Jon Gruden, coach of Tampa Bay in the N.F.L.
''The game itself is unique,'' Jay Gruden said. ''You are looking for players who can play two ways, fullbacks who can play linebacker, receivers who can play defensive back, and so on. It's a whole different breed of cat and put it together, as more fans become more familiar with us, the sky is the limit.''
Baker emphasizes that the N.F.L. has existed for 84 years, Major League Baseball for 120 years, the N.H.L. for 87 years, the N.B.A. for 58 years and Nascar for 56 years.
''We are trying to do something that takes decades,'' Baker said. ''We want all of our people to grow and if they do the business grows. If we didn't believe in our hearts in our product, we couldn't win hearts. I start every meeting by first reading our mission statement. People have come to call that Kumbaya time. But Kumbaya is helping turn us into a success. When I first took this job, people asked me what in the world I was doing? Now those same people call and ask for tickets.''
PRO FOOTBALL
