In an era, and a city, in which education often seems to be focused mercilessly on grades and test scores, one man is setting his sights in another direction.
Alan Berger, who is on leave from his job as an assistant principal at Murry Bergtraum High School in Lower Manhattan, is trying to start a school that would have no grades, no tests, no required courses, no set curriculum and no report cards. The new institution, which would serve kindergartners through high school students, would be called the Brooklyn Free School, although despite its name it would charge an annual sliding-scale tuition of $9,000.
The school would follow what Mr. Berger calls a democratic education model in which students design the curriculum based on what they feel like learning. Students, who would not be segregated by age, would decide to learn subjects in order to do practical things; for example, because they would be involved with the school's budget, they would want to learn math.
''In traditional education,'' said Mr. Berger, a 46-year-old Park Slope resident and the parent of two children who attend New York public schools, ''we're telling you what you need to know and learn, and if you don't, you fail.''
While some of the city's progressive public and private schools, such as Montessori and Waldorf schools, incorporate elements of Mr. Berger's philosophy, none go as far as he hopes to. The idea is, in part, a reaction to the emphasis on grades and SAT scores that can turn conventional schools into stress incubators. And since October, when Mr. Berger published an article in the Park Slope Food Co-op's newsletter and started posting fliers around the neighborhood, about 170 people have expressed interest.
Many have attended biweekly planning meetings for the school, which Mr. Berger hopes to open with 30 students in September and eventually expand to serve twice that number. He is looking for a building and hoping to cover the first-year costs of $230,000 with tuition combined with money from fund-raising and foundation grants. Classes would be taught by Mr. Berger, two paid teachers and unpaid interns.
Mr. Berger may be proposing ideas that seem a little fuzzy to hard-bitten New Yorkers, but parents who support them say New York schools are too hard-bitten for their taste.
''My daughter had many good teachers and excellent classes,'' said Corinne Goodman, a Park Slope resident whose daughter, a sophomore at Emerson College in Boston, attended city public schools. ''But she drowned in homework. She spent so many hours losing sleep and doing things she didn't want to do.''
Ms. Goodman hopes that her 13-year-old son, whom she home-schools, can attend the Brooklyn Free School.
The idea of schools with more relaxed curriculums is not new; in the 60's hundreds if not thousands of so-called free schools flourished in the United States. But some educators say they are not for everyone.
''Generally they work best for kids from very literate and educated families because the kids bring a lot to the experience,'' said Diane Ravitch, a leading education historian. ''It's going to be a problem for kids in the current climate because of Regents exams and city tests and state tests and the rest.''
In response, Mr. Berger said students from similar schools, like the Albany Free School upstate, get into college on the strength of essays and interviews. ''They come across extremely forcefully as people who know what they want to do,'' he said.
That appeals to Katherine Chew, a Prospect Heights resident who has attended planning meetings and hopes to send her two children, age 4 and 1, to the Brooklyn Free School. In schools she has visited, ''a lot of the daily routine is about social control and keeping kids quiet,'' she said. ''Democratic education may be more chaotic and loud, but I'm more comfortable with the kids being allowed to function more naturally.''
TARA BAHRAMPOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: PARK SLOPE
