IT is one of the best-kept secrets among tax preparers: a growing number of accountants across the nation are using workers in India to prepare tax returns for clients in the United States.
This year, at least 100,000 returns, both federal and state, will be prepared by Indian citizens in places like Bombay and Bangalore, according to L. Gary Boomer, the chief executive of Boomer Consulting, a technology consulting company based in Manhattan, Kan., that has 250 accounting firms as clients. That number of returns is four times larger than last year, and many more times the several thousand just two years ago, said Mr. Boomer, who is also a certified public accountant.
Other American industries, like manufacturing and software, have successfully used low-cost, well-educated Indian labor for nearly a decade, and many companies have moved customer service and financial record-keeping operations to India. Now some accountants say they are pleased with the quality of work being done there, and plan to outsource even more.
But employing foreign workers to prepare United States tax returns carries risks, mostly involving privacy and accuracy, according to several accounting experts.
''It appears to be the wave of the future, but there are several issues that need sorting out,'' said Jay Hauck, executive director of DFK International/USA Inc., an association of 25 independent accounting firms that is based in Washington. Four of its members outsource some tax returns to India through American firms that serve as middlemen.
''Accountants are usually a person's most trusted adviser, even more so than their attorney, and you have to be careful not to jeopardize that in any way,'' Mr. Hauck said.
The biggest issue, he said, is security. A tax return contains essential personal data, including address, Social Security number and employer, so it is a rich target for identity thieves and hackers.
The typical outsourcing arrangement involves screened Indian workers logging on to secure servers based in the United States and retrieving scanned tax documents. The Indian workers type in information needed to process the return, then use software for the calculations. No paper ever leaves the accounting firm in the United States, where a tax expert typically reviews, approves and signs the final return.
But in a few cases, according to Mr. Boomer, some small accounting firms in the United States have simply sent data to India by e-mail - a practice that could lead to security problems. A second concern among accounting firms is whether to tell clients that their returns are being prepared overseas.
William B. Bierce, a lawyer at Bierce &amp; Kenerson, a law firm in New York that specializes in outsourcing issues, said that an accounting firm could be held liable for damages if it failed to ensure that its Indian partners had taken adequate steps to protect taxpayer data.
MANY accounting firms in the United States offer their clients a boilerplate disclosure that says the firm may use unspecified third parties or affiliates to assist in tax preparation. But very few state outright that workers in other countries may be used - apparently for fear of scaring off clients.
''People may be put off by the fact that they hired Person A and Person B is doing the return,'' said Marshall Huggins, director of operations at StrategicPoint Investment Advisors in Providence, R.I., that will use Indian workers to process tax returns for about 250 of its clients this year.
Mr. Huggins said a certified public accountant in the United States would review each outsourced return. But he added that the firm had not yet decided whether to tell clients explicitly that their returns might be prepared in India.
Some taxpayers say they have reservations about the trend. ''You're kind of believing in the product that the accountant is selling you, and not in some person across the world,'' said Melissa Scheve, a homemaker in New Haven.
The cost of processing returns in India is about a quarter of what it is in the United States, yet few accounting firms say that they have lowered their fees accordingly.
Xpitax, a software company in Braintree, Mass., that provides tax-return outsourcing to American accounting firms, said it charges those firms flat fees of $75 to $110 to process a return in India, depending on the complexity and the date of submission. The accountants, in turn, still charge their own clients the usual fees, ranging from several hundred to several thousand dollars a return, said Glen Keenan, vice president for business development at Xpitax. He would not say how much Xpitax paid its 80 workers in India.
In general, salaries for a chartered accountant in India, whose training is roughly equivalent to that of a certified public accountant in the United States, start at several hundred dollars a month.
Jay A. Soled, a tax expert at Rutgers University who has studied outsourcing, said that generally, ''the savings is not passed along directly'' to the taxpayer who is having the return done.
Alan Klein, head of the unit at Ernst &amp; Young that oversees outsourcing, said his firm might give clients a discount if they asked. Ernst &amp; Young has used its outpost of 260 staff accountants in Bangalore to process several thousand ''simple'' individual and corporate returns a year over the last three years, he said.
A spokesman for KPMG, another large accounting firm, said that the firm was exploring whether to use outsourcing but declined to be specific. On the other hand, H&amp;R Block said it did no outsourcing for American returns.
The principles of Indian tax law are roughly similar to those of American tax law, tax experts say. Nonetheless, critics of the practice question how well the workers know the American code.
To be sure, outsourcing to India has ardent proponents.''They blow my expectations away,'' said Bruce M. Carlin, a managing partner at Carlin, Charron &amp; Rosen, an accounting firm in Worcester, Mass. He was impressed, he said, both by the security at a Bombay facility operated by Datamatix, an outsourcing firm based in Billerica, Mass., and by the quality of the tax-preparation work that is done there.
Mr. Carlin said that he expects to use Datamatix to prepare 2,000 individual returns this year, or one in six of his firm's total returns - double the level last year.
As part of its security measures, he said, Datamatix conducts background checks on its Indian employees and does not permit them to bring any writing materials into the office. There are no printers, fax machines, disk drives or even e-mail access. Employees must punch in a code to enter the guarded building, then submit to fingerprint identification. The employees work on terminals that communicate with a server in Boston. ''The security there is just incredible,'' Mr. Carlin said.
Competitors of Datamatix, including SurePrep, based in Newport Beach, Calif., and Outsource Partners International, of New York, said they use similar security measures.
OTHER proponents argue that outsourcing brings efficiency and speed to the hectic tax-preparation season, which begins in earnest by February. Because of the time difference between the United States and India, accountants in the United States can turn over returns to Indian workers at the end of the day and have them done by the next morning, doubling the number of clients they can handle. They also avoid the seasonal scramble to hire scarce temporary accountants.
Mr. Keenan said many American accountants regard outsourcing as a way to avoid increasing their fees. ''You're still paying for the partner or manager to review the return, do tax planning and supervise the process,'' he said.
Correction:  March 14, 2004, Sunday  An article on Feb. 15 about the use of workers in India to prepare income-tax returns for Americans misstated the name of an outsourcing firm that does such work. It is Datamatics Technologies, not Datamatix.
