February is crunch time at United Soccer Academy's headquarters in Branchburg; it is the final month for Neil Richards, the regional director, to pull together spring and summer programs before new coaching recruits, average age 21, start arriving from abroad.
''Of around 40 guys we pull from England, Wales and Scotland for nine-month contracts, only around six will be returning,'' Mr. Richards said. ''The rest are new, and they're all from completely different backgrounds, some from rural areas like near Bristol, where I'm from, and others from London.''
Whatever their expectations, Mr. Richards says, he is certain that two or three of the recruits ''won't last past a month'' in coaching 3-year-olds to high schoolers at 20 clubs across the state, including Chatham, Cherry Hill and Camden. It's too much driving or too much time with preschool children or they don't like living with other coaches in the six-to-a-house rentals that the organization provides in various towns.
Other recruits are the ''guys who don't want to go back,'' he said. Mr. Richards, a semiprofessional who signed on with United Soccer Academy two years ago after being sent to Long Island for a coaching gig with a rival soccer organization, includes himself in this category, after having become quite used to his North Branch lifestyle. In addition, ''me and my housemates all have American girlfriends now,'' he said, giving another reason that he has ''put himself at the mercy of the visa process'' to stay.
To a lesser degree, the children who sign up for the camps also influence the recruits' decisions to love New Jersey or leave it. ''The kids over here are very enthusiastic,'' Mr. Richards said. And ''they love the accent -- they think it's hilarious, because we'll say 'mate' a lot and things like that.''
The foreigners are also known to bring their eager students a foreign brand of discipline. ''We've heard a lot of times,'' Mr. Richards said, ''that we're the first people who have ever told these kids no.''
Tammy La Gorce
BY THE WAY
