The signs of Brooklyn's building boom are scattered across the borough, and they are not hard to read.
''Brand New Two-Family Homes -- Locations Include East New York, Bedford-Stuyvesant,'' blares one sign on Pitkin Avenue. ''Now Offering for Sale Luxury Two-Family Waterview Homes, Granite Kitchen,'' says another, along the quiet East Mill Basin channel. ''Another Job Done by S&amp;S Developers,'' says a third, in south Williamsburg.
These announcements, and the bricks and mortar they represent, are going up faster in Brooklyn than anywhere else in the city. According to census figures released last month, residential developers in New York City are building at the quickest pace in decades, and Brooklyn, perennial second fiddle to Manhattan, has become the new-housing capital of New York, with permits for more than 6,000 new housing units approved last year.
More than 17,000 units of housing have been approved in Brooklyn since 2000, and those now coming onto the market echo the borough's old patchwork of styles, sizes and prices. In the farthest corner of East New York, bordered on three sides by marshes and landfill, rises a long, low-income apartment complex in alternating facades of brick and white. A few miles south, along East Mill Basin, stand a matched set of three two-family houses with relatively gracious wrought-iron terraces, columns and dormer windows. And along Flushing Avenue in a formerly defunct Williamsburg industrial zone, weed-choked lots are giving way to masses of cookie-cutter brick condominium complexes.
Most of the growth is taking place between the cracks of Brooklyn's cityscape, in neighborhoods that often lack proper names, let alone downtowns: the former swamps and wastelands at the borough's edges, the buffer zones between communities.
This only makes sense. It is easiest to build where there is room to spread out, and a great deal of Brooklyn, long the city's most populous borough, is simply full, or close to it. But the expansion, which has been gathering steam for six years, is gradually remaking the face of the borough. With two-family starter homes here and a factory-building-gone-condo there, neighborhoods once pocked full of holes are becoming whole again, while others are bursting their boundaries, gobbling up vacant land as they go.
The growth parallels Brooklyn's rise as a destination for immigrants; city officials say it is beginning to rival Queens. The Caribbeans who have revitalized Canarsie over the last 20 years are moving into Bergen Beach, once an all-white enclave. The Satmar Hasidic Jews of south Williamsburg have pushed down into the northern fringes of Bedford-Stuyvesant. The little India of Ozone Park, Queens, has spilled across the border into East New York.
But as rents in the gentrified neighborhoods of northwest Brooklyn approach Manhattan levels, developers have found that there is also money to be made building lofts for the young and hip in neighborhoods like Bushwick and Bedford-Stuyvesant, which have suffered through decades of poverty and decline.
The process is not always pretty. There are regular growing pains and zoning (and rezoning) disputes. What heavy industry remains in Brooklyn is being squeezed out by more profitable housing, just as farmland is in distant suburbs.
Few of the new buildings are likely to win architectural prizes, though the 850-unit Oceana condo complex on the Brighton Beach waterfront was a finalist in last year's National Association of Home Builders awards. At the same time, not nearly enough of the new housing is affordable to lower-middle-class families who need it most, advocates say.
In a city with a chronic housing shortage, though, it all helps. ''It's a huge vote of confidence in the borough,'' said Regina Myer, the Brooklyn director for the City Planning Department. ''I know it sounds corny. But it really crosses so many neighborhoods, so many different types of people, so many different types of housing. It shows how stable the borough is right now and poised for future growth.''
It is unlikely that the boom can continue at this rate. Interest rates will eventually rise, and sooner or later the land will be used up. ''The challenge now is to find the right places to develop,'' Ms. Myer said.
Bergen Beach
Bergen Beach is certainly looking like the right place. Lying largely on a former island off the coast of Canarsie, the neighborhood was joined (via landfill) to the mainland in the early 20th century but was barely developed for decades. In the 1960's, custom homes went up on big lots. Now there is a proliferation of town houses and condominiums.
''Go drive around Bergen Beach and Mill Island,'' said Dorothy Turano, the district manager for Community Board 18, which includes both neighborhoods. ''You see a Dumpster on every street.''
There are many Dumpsters along Avenue M, where a multiblock chain of market-rate town houses is sprouting from the soil. A few blocks farther north, along the commercial strip of Ralph Avenue, a ''now renting'' banner flies from the side of a 72-apartment middle-income complex that opened less than a month ago.
The new apartments, Bergen Gardens, are next door to a big lot full of dirt and cranes that is announced by a sign as the Paerdegat Basin Water Quality Facility Construction of Combined Sewer Overflow Storage Tanks. The nearest subway stop is almost two miles away.
But the developers of Bergen Gardens, built with financing help from the city's Housing Development Corporation, say it is filling up. Rents are around $1,100 a month for one bedroom and $1,400 for two bedrooms. ''We get a lot of nurses,'' said Victor Gartenstein, one of the owners. ''Couples where, say, the husband is a bus driver and the wife is a nurse.''
Louise Ray, a retired school administrator who sold her house in Crown Heights, said she felt at home in Bergen Gardens immediately. ''The shopping is across the street, there's a post office in the supermarket and the drugstore is two blocks away,'' she said. ''It's nice, it's quiet and it's comfortable.''
South Williamsburg
By the late 1990's, after several generations of rigorous adherence to the biblical directive to be fruitful and multiply, the Satmar Hasidim of south Williamsburg were running out of room. Their attempts to build housing south of Flushing Avenue, in a decaying industrial zone and the spotty but improving north side of Bedford-Stuyvesant that lies beyond it, ran into zoning restrictions and, in some cases, resistance from longtime black homeowners uninterested in selling their property.
For the Hasidim, persistence paid off. A rezoning in 2001 made way for 700 units of housing along Flushing Avenue, and building is proceeding at a dizzying pace, all the way down to DeKalb Avenue four long blocks south. Some blocks seem like one long stretch of temporary plywood fencing plastered with building permits. Others, long vacant or abandoned, are becoming solid walls of five-story brick buildings.
Many of the buildings are in the Hasidim's stepped-back style, with small terraces that give residents space to build temporary huts for Sukkot, the autumn harvest festival. The apartments, mostly condominiums that sell for around $250,000 and are often rented out, are plain but functional inside. They have what is needed: two sinks for observing kosher rules and three or more bedrooms.
''Before anybody understood that Williamsburg is the promised land, we knew it,'' said Rabbi David Niederman, the president of the United Jewish Organizations of Williamsburg. ''We have stayed here and held onto it.''
East New York
Part 1 of the rebirth of long-suffering East New York, made possible by an array of government subsidies like free land, low-interest loans and tax breaks, is drawing to a close, albeit with a flourish.
In the southeasternmost corner of Brooklyn, on a lot past the South Shore Incinerator and a new shopping center with a Target store, stand a pair of three-story low-income apartment complexes, just finished, called the Fountains at Spring Creek. A white archway frames a high-ceilinged lobby. In the courtyard, a large bowl-shaped piece of granite sits on a pedestal, waiting for water to be turned on.
But closer to the heart of old East New York, the housing market jump-started by the city has acquired its own momentum. In December, Park Lane Enterprises, a developer in Richmond Hills, Queens, finished three two-family brick houses on Hendrix Street. They were put up without a dime of government help, and Park Lane is asking $450,000 apiece for them, an unthinkable figure just a few years ago. One is sold already and the other two are in contract, said Paula Celemin, Park Lane's president.
Farther out, at Pitkin and Shepherd Avenues, not far from the Queens border, a cluster of three-family homes is going up. Most of them are being sold to Indian families, said Shariar Uddin, the sales director for the developer, Millennium Homes. ''People are moving from Jackson Heights, from Astoria,'' he said.
Across the street last week, Marquese Page stood in front of the skeletons of what will soon be a row of two-family houses. Mr. Page, who grew up in a housing project nearby, is head of security for the contractor putting the buildings up. The row is interrupted by an old brick building with a long-shuttered grocery store on the ground floor. Mr. Page, 28, said he would like to open a barbershop there if he could find a way.
Mr. Page, who is black, said he was watching the neighborhood become a blend of colors. ''More Koreans, Pakistanis, Jews, Africans,'' he said, adding that it made no difference to him. ''It's really just getting into buildings. It's good out here.''
