THE Westminster Kennel Club just concluded its annual dog show, and the best in show was a Newfoundland -- Ch. Darbydale's All Rise Pouchcove, otherwise known as Josh. He was a popular, if surprise, winner. We asked Mark Derr, a longtime critic of the kennel club, as well as the author of ''Dog's Best Friend'' and the coming ''Dog's History of America,'' to explain the contest.
Q. Do dogs care about winning? Michelle Ostermiller, Josh's handler, said he ''loves to hear the crowds cheering for him.''
A. The dog could care less about the ribbon and trophy. It's responding to the swell of human emotion and the situation. The lights, the cheers of the crowd and the presence of other dominant dogs arouse canine and human competitors alike.
My dogs go nuts whenever they reach a certain point on their daily walks, because they know they are going to get to play ball and Frisbee. They are conditioned to respond, but they also know when strangers are watching, and so put on a show. Dogs are natural performers.
Q. Why do the handlers tend to wear business suits?
A. The ''fancy,'' meaning the world of show dogs, began in the mid-19th century as an upper-class event designed to display the ability of breeders to produce ''pure blood'' animals, to manipulate nature to their desire. The suits are a vestige of that upper-class origin. Even though the show world became democratized after World War II, to the dismay of some members, the champion purebred is still perceived as bestowing class and status on its breeder, owner and handler.
Q. Does it help if the handler is attractive, as was portrayed in an episode of ''Sex and the City''?
A. A few years ago, I attended Westminster and watched a woman wearing a low-cut diaphanous gown handling a poor excuse for an Afghan hound, before a male judge who guided her past him by placing his hand, ever so lightly, on the small of her exposed back. He kept the dog in for the final, then excused it. That handler was an extreme case. I suppose you would have to say, yes, attractiveness matters, for men and women, but only to a point. More important are internal politics and biases of judges toward certain dogs -- large, small, terriers, poodles, sporting dogs. The show world, sadly, has more to do with people than dogs.
