THE clank, clank, whoosh, whoosh would go on night after night, later and later. Eleven-year-old Bruce Frank was out practicing on the new hoop his father, Gordon, had put up in the driveway of their house in Teaneck. It wasn't long before 8-year-old Steven started joining in. Then one night, a neighbor came to the door.
''I was worried about a complaint,'' Gordon Frank said, recalling that night 30 years ago. ''The guy says with a laugh, 'All right, I understand Bruce and Steven, but what is Lawrence doing out there? He's so small he can barely lift the ball.'"
Lawrence Frank is still looking way up to the other guys on the court, but few people are laughing at him these heady days. Since being named the interim coach of the reeling New Jersey Nets last month, the 33-year-old Mr. Frank, a full 5 feet 7 inches tall and toothpick thin, has won his first nine games, tying the National Basketball Association record for most wins at the start of a coaching career.
Mr. Frank graciously defers, attributing his current success to his players, many of whom defied odds of a rough upbringing and poverty to reach their current station. Yet his background -- though one devoid of that kind of hardship -- is probably a greater basketball anomaly. Unlike most coaches in the N.B.A. these days, Mr. Frank never played in the league. Nor did he ever play college ball.
The underwhelmingness is overwhelming.
Rare among N.B.A. coaches -- and perhaps unique in the history of the league -- this squirt from Teaneck never even played on his high school team. He is the league's youngest coach -- the first to be born in the 1970's -- and probably its smallest.
L-Frank, as he is known affectionately by his players, grew up only a few miles from his current office. But in fact, the Nets originated as the New Jersey Americans, playing in the Teaneck Armory in 1967-68, three years before Mr. Frank was born. Gordon and Marilyn Frank moved their growing family to Teaneck about that time, excited about the prospects of raising them there.
''We chose to live in Teaneck because it was a diverse community,'' said Gordon Frank, a business consultant. ''That gave Lawrence a real broad range of friends. I think that is one of the reasons he has succeeded in basketball.''
Bruce Frank became a star point guard on some of Teaneck High School's best teams of the late 1970's and early 80's, later playing at Brandeis University. Steven Frank succeeded him on the court at Teaneck High. Lawrence Frank, about four inches shorter than his brothers, gave it a valiant effort.
''The story seems to go now that we cut him, but I seem to remember we were going to keep him at the end of the bench,'' said John Mazziotta, then coach of the Teaneck High team and now retired from coaching and teaching history there. ''I told him he wasn't going to play very much and he decided one day he was going to be the manager and learn that way.''
For his part, Mr. Frank says today that he was bothered only so much by not making the Teaneck High squad. His goal, he says, was always somewhat different.
''From the time I was 12, I knew I wanted to coach,'' he said, animated and talking at his usual double-speed in a conference room at the Nets training facility, a low-rise building tucked away in a Meadowlands industrial zone. ''I worked on my game, but I just loved to coach and teach. I just always studied coaches, and I knew the first step was being involved with the high school team.''
The stereotype of the team manager is the geeky guy who stoops to gather the sweaty towels and makes sure the stars' water cups are filled to the brim. Mr. Frank doesn't deny that was him -- but with a twist.
''Oh, yes, that is what you do -- towels and water,'' said Mr. Frank, serious about his former position. ''That's how it started. I think whatever you do, it is important to be in the trenches. Even though it's not a glamour job, but doing that job you understand, appreciate and respect it. You do it to reach a greater goal. Even though it wasn't my goal to fold towels, that was the way there.''
Mr. Mazziotta let Mr. Frank keep stats and chart the other teams' plays, much like an assistant coach would do. By his junior year, Mr. Frank was coaching the Catholic Youth Organization and Jewish League teams he was also playing on (''I was equal opportunity, as long as it was basketball''), and Mr. Mazziotta sometimes let him work with individual school players on their skills. Still, this was hardly the path to the N.B.A.
''But when Lawrence gets intense about something,'' his father said, ''if one route isn't appropriate, he asks, 'What other way is there to look at the problem?'''
So Lawrence Frank asked those who ran Five-Star Basketball Camps, a place where coaches go to scout the premier high school players, if he could come out and watch and take notes. He trekked on his own money to Robert Morris College near Pittsburgh and hung out with college coaches and took notes and videos to study when he got home.
''My parents were supportive, but they made me buy my own video player,'' he said. ''So I got a paper route and did it. I wanted to be a coach.''
When time came for Mr. Frank to apply to college, he looked into schools only if they were willing to accept him as a student manager with the hope of learning to coach. He got just such an offer from the University of Delaware, but there was also a glimmer of a chance at the University of Indiana, a basketball mecca where the coach Bobby Knight was holding court.
Mr. Frank applied to Indiana and was accepted into the education program, but that didn't get him far with Mr. Knight. More than 60 applicants were vying for 3 spots as a freshman student manager.
''This was the University of Indiana, after all, and to people in that state, that is everything in basketball,'' said Mr. Frank, who traveled to the school to meet with the head student manager and an assistant coach, Dan Dakich, who today is head coach at Bowling Green State University. ''There were no promises, just to come out to start school and see what happened.''
Still, he clicked with those young men. Soon he was back to gathering towels and filling water cups.
Each summer, he returned home and coach a youth team or two. And each year, the Indiana coaching staff gave him a little more to do, either charting plays or helping with practice drills or some other minor task. When he graduated, he applied to dozens of colleges, hoping to get even an unpaid assistant's job. Mr. Dakich put in a good word with a friend, Kevin O'Neill, the head coach at Marquette University, but Mr. Frank wanted Mr. Knight's advice first.
''It was the spring and I would try to meet with Coach Knight every morning,'' he said, shaking his head as if it were only yesterday. ''I would go in there and his secretary would say, 'He's busy.' Came back next day. Same thing. Next day. Same thing. It goes on for two weeks, maybe. Finally, he brings me in and says, 'What can I do for you?'
''I say: 'Coach, just wanted to ask for some advice. I want to get into coaching. I just wanted to ask what's the next step.' He said, 'Son, relax, you have a while before you become the next John Wooden.' And that was that, so I went on my way.''
Mr. O'Neill eventually called and hired Mr. Frank as a special assistant -- though with little pay -- forcing him to go to graduate school while working. A few weeks into the job, while talking with Mr. O'Neill, he found out that despite Mr. Knight's seeming indifference, he had immediately called Mr. O'Neill about him, the big reason he was hired.
''No matter what they say about Coach Knight, he does things right,'' Mr. Frank said of the hot-tempered coach, who was finally banished by Indiana in 2000 after an altercation with a student. ''He never told me, never took credit. He is what a teacher should be.''
Mr. Dakich remembers Mr. Frank as the hardest-working basketball man he ever met.
''I'm not sure he could do a 360 walking down the street,'' said Mr. Dakich, referring to a full-twirl move most N.B.A. players can glide through while dunking a basketball through a rim 10 feet off the ground. ''But who cares?''
He went on: ''He's a special guy working with people, getting people to enjoy being around him while also being hard on them. What is also amazing about him is that he will work even harder now that he's been successful. He is appreciative of what he has gotten and knows that it will continue to take work to make it last.''
Mr. Frank followed Mr. O'Neill for five years, from Marquette to the University of Tennessee, but balked when Mr. O'Neill -- now the coach of the Toronto Raptors in the N.B.A. -- went to Northwestern University to try to rebuild the basketball team there.
''I had worked those years, 18 hours a day, with no days off,'' he said. ''I wanted to see what life might be like without basketball.''
His brother, Steven, was having success at C.B. Richard Ellis, a large commercial real estate concern, and offered to teach Mr. Frank the business. Only eight weeks later, Mr. Frank got a call from a coaching acquaintance, John Carroll, who is now the coach of the Boston Celtics, that the Vancouver Grizzlies were looking for an advance scout, the lowest rung of N.B.A. coaching. Mr. Frank would be on the road, a couple of games ahead of the team, writing reports on future opponents from lonely hotel rooms.
"I had worked for my brother for eight weeks,'' Mr. Frank said. ''I felt like I was going into a sewer pipe with a spoon. I had zero knowledge. My brother was very successful in his field. He did everything to put me in a position to succeed. It's a people business to some degree, but you have to have product knowledge. I didn't have it. I knew it was going to take me a significant amount of time to get it.
''And,'' he added, ''the basketball thing was still with me. I couldn't pass it up.''
After 18 months on the road, Mr. Frank got an invitation from Brian Hill -- the coach of the Grizzlies and a native of Essex County -- to join his bench as an assistant. He stayed for two years before the entire staff was fired by the new ownership. After several months of applying, Mr. Frank impressed Rod Thorn, the general manager of the Nets, and Byron Scott, the coach. In the summer of 2000 he was hired to return -- almost in the shadow of his old backboard on Lower Winthrop Road.
When Mr. Scott and the Nets parted ways last month, Mr. Thorn was not hesitant to hire Mr. Frank.
''Yes, he had odds to overcome, not having played even in high school,'' Mr. Thorn said. ''But I have had the opportunity to observe him nearly four years now and I don't think there is anyone in the league with a better work ethic or who knows more about basketball than Lawrence. He has motivational qualities I don't think you can replace.''
Of course, he did not sit at the right hand of Bobby Knight all that time and not learn how to use it on occasion. Mr. Frank is known to be stern -- and sometimes volatile -- but also compassionate.
''Oh, he can be in that chair-throwing school,'' said Jason Kidd, the current star of the Nets, alluding to an incident in Puerto Rico in which Mr. Knight threw a chair across the court over a call. ''But he knows a lot about basketball, so we are impressed.''
While still with the Grizzlies, Mr. Frank also impressed Susan Delaney, a New York lawyer and a member of his graduating class at Teaneck High, where they had both returned for a 10th reunion.
''We knew each other in high school, but weren't exactly in the same group,'' said Ms. Delaney. ''Teaneck was a wonderful place to grow up, though, so we had friends in common. He turned out to be a great guy, a hard worker, the hardest I know.''
The two are now married and living in Englewood with their two young daughters just minutes from his parents. Steven Frank runs his own commercial real estate company in Fort Lee, and Bruce Frank collects and sells Asian art at a retail shop and gallery in Manhattan.
''So we're absolutely delighted that he's with the Nets,'' said this father of three sons. ''It beats trekking all around the place and finding a game on some obscure TV network. His brothers are his greatest fans. And you know what? Sometimes he can now actually beat them to the hoop in the driveway.''
IN PERSON
