WHAT would an oxymoron wear?
A leisure suit, of course. As one will recall, that lead-footed clash of weekend and workday proved more corrosive than explosive in combination. Today it remains one of the 20th century's all-time style lows, winning an entry in Jane and Michael Stern's priceless 1990 ''Encyclopedia of Bad Taste.'' Even Marc Jacobs, tomb raider of the 1970's that he is, has not resurrected it.
Certainly Thom Browne is not touching it. Mr. Browne, the smart new men's wear designer, is a haberdasher at heart. When it comes to his suiting, he has no interest in leisure of any stripe, or in any clothing bearing the words ''relaxed fit.''
The term alone gave him a pained look. ''Why do you have to be relaxed all the time?'' he asked. ''I'm just as comfortable in a jacket and tie as jeans and a T-shirt.'' At his appointment-only shop in the meatpacking district, furnished with brass and wood mid-century furniture by Paul McCobb and Harvey Probber, Mr. Browne's line has the slight air of a New York executive from the early 1950's, when the crisply tailored ''Mr. T'' suit (so christened by Esquire magazine) made its debut and sleekly snubbed its broad-shouldered late-1940's predecessor.
Not to say that Mr. Browne can't loosen his tie. Indeed, his favorite complement to his buttoned-up style, he said, is the key that undoes the lock: a Champagne coupe. The most common glass for Champagne 50 years ago, the coupe has gradually been supplanted by the flute, whose slender upright form is now deemed far more proper and elegant.
Karen MacNeil, in ''The Wine Bible,'' explained that the coupe is ''terrible for Champagne.'' ''In it bubbles dissipate quickly,'' she wrote. ''The Champagne is easily warmed by the drinker's hand.''
Mr. Browne pointed out that such problems are easily solved by tossing the glass off fast, which also makes the drinker dissipate more quickly. The problem with both Champagne and the flute, he said, is that they have become proper, the default celebratory drink and vessel of every reception. ''That is not what I think Champagne is about,'' he said, adding that his greatest nightly (yes, nightly) luxury is sharing a bottle of the stuff with his companion, Charles Fagan. ''What the coupe evokes for me is a time when everyone had more fun.''
Even the coupe's reputed origins are decadent. Legend has it that the glass was modeled after Marie Antoinette's left breast. Since the Champagne process was not perfected until the 19th century, long after her demise, the story seems wishful thinking at best.
But the coupe, easy to spill, with a broad surface allowing the bubbles to tickle your nose, is more 1950's than 1770's. Mr. Browne delights at its decline into tackiness, as the building block of that triumph of kitsch, the Champagne fountain. While he has a set of heavy crystal coupes from Steuben, it is a set of anonymous crystal ones, bought at a country flea market, that he uses most often.
''I'm not a thing person,'' he said. ''I don't get too attached.'' As such, he said, the nicest thing about a cheap coupe is saying goodbye, as he did with his last set, throwing them into the fireplace one New Year's Eve.
So what if they don't approve in the Wine-Bible Belt.
POSSESSED
