IT was just weeks ago that Abdul Qadeer Khan, the so-called father of Pakistan's bomb, admitted he had shared nuclear secrets with other countries, including Iran, Libya and North Korea, and reaped millions for doing so. But Gen. Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan's leader, had known for years that Dr. Khan, the head of the Khan Research Laboratories, was involved in financial improprieties and had removed him from his job in 2001 in response to pressure from American officials, who worried he was exporting secrets.
After his admission, Dr. Khan was pardoned by General Musharraf, which many interpreted as an effort to keep him from implicating others, particularly in the armed forces.
Dr. Khan's ego, his patriotism and his nation's deep-seated fear of neighboring India are all reflected in a celebratory brochure, published in 2001 to mark the 25th year of his research institution. Excerpts follow.
PETER EDIDIN
From a speech by General Musharraf at Dr. Khan's retirement dinner on March 27, 2001:
The situation was critical. Our security paradigm has changed and, with no nuclear weapons program worth the name, Pakistanis literally looked to the sky for help. We did not lose faith. And sure enough, Allah Almighty answered the nation's prayers, had mercy on our situation and made a miracle happen. In walked a giant of a man, none other than Dr. Abdul Quadeer Khan, the man who would give Pakistan a nuclear capability single-handedly.
The nuclear challenge from India began 30 years ago:
India negotiated a deal with Canada for the establishment of a research reactor, later rechristened CIRUS. Though meant for ''peaceful purposes of power generation only,'' the spent fuel retrieved from CIRUS was clandestinely used to derive plutonium in a pilot reprocessing plant at Trombay. This plutonium was used for the nuclear explosion of May 18, 1974, which India termed as ''peaceful'' and named ''Smiling Buddha.''
The Pakistanis were terrified by the Indian bomb and felt persecuted when the world tried to prevent Pakistan from following suit:
The Indian test came as a severe shock to the establishment in Islamabad. Moreover, the unjustified reaction of the world community further jolted the Pakistan Government. We were penalized for the mischief done by India. Pakistan was left high and dry. To complete the humiliation, the French backed down from an agreement, to supply a reprocessing plant. The Americans succeeded in arm-twisting the French. ...
Dr. Khan, who worked at a nuclear enrichment plant in the Netherlands, left suddenly in 1975, according to reports, and the Dutch accused him of trying to steal what was described as ''essential gas centrifuge know-how'':
A case was initiated against me in Holland for writing two letters from Pakistan to two of my former colleagues. ...
I submitted certificates from six world-renowned Professors from Holland, Belgium, England and Germany that the information requested by me was public knowledge and was not classified. I filed an appeal against this unjust case and the High Court of Amsterdam quashed the proceedings and the verdict of the lower court. Justice eventually reigned supreme. The Dutch Government finally dropped all the charges realizing that enough was enough. There was no substance in the case. I had full faith in the Dutch Judiciary and I was not disappointed.
Dr. Khan describes Pakistan's crash program to build a nuclear bomb at Kahuta:
From the very beginning, the Kahuta Project was never smooth sailing. Instead, it was an uphill task with every step being marred by a new set of intricate problems and obstacles. The world would never allow us to have it and we would never bow to surrender it. ...
A country which could not make sewing needles, good bicycles or even ordinary durable metalled roads was embarking on one of the latest and most difficult technologies. We devised a strategy whereby we would go all out to buy everything that we needed in the open market to lay the foundation of a good infra-structure.
Dr. Khan recounts how Western companies sold him whatever was desired. These were the same businesses, he says, that sold equipment to the nuclear enrichment facilities at Almelo, in the Netherlands, where Dr. Khan worked in the 1970's, and at Capenhurst, England:
While a lot of biased and unfounded propaganda is directed against us, the Western world never talked about their own hectic and persistent efforts to sell everything to us. When we bought inverters from Emerson, England, we found them to be less efficient than we wanted them to be. We asked Emerson to improve upon some parameters and we suggested the method .
At that time we received many letters and telexes and people chased us with figures and details of equipment they had sold to Almelo, Capenhurst, etc. They literally begged us to buy their equipment. We bought what we considered to be suitable for our plant and very often asked them to make changes and modifications according to our requirements. One should realize that all this equipment was what we call conventional technology. It was a normal chemical process and vacuum technology equipment which had a thousand and one uses in other disciplines.
Notwithstanding the fact that we were handicapped by not being able to hold open discussions with foreign experts or organizations, we attacked all the problems successfully. Our scientists and engineers not only designed and ran good centrifuges, but designed the cascades, worked out the header piping system, calculated the pressures, developed the control philosophy and developed software and hardware for it. Our plant is a beauty by any standards.
Dr. Khan describes how his study and work in Europe helped him in his quest:
My long stay in Europe and intimate knowledge of various countries and their manufacturing firms was an asset. Within two years we had put up working prototypes of centrifuges and were going at full speed to build the facilities at Kahuta.
Once it was known that we were working on the enrichment technology, the Western press mounted a most vicious and unfounded propaganda against our program.
It is a Herculean task and an ultracentrifuge is undoubtedly a mechanical miracle. Naturally, the Western world was fully aware of these problems and was sure that an underdeveloped country like Pakistan could never master this technology. We proved otherwise. We not only succeeded in mastering this difficult technology, but also in putting up a plant which symbolizes our national pride and competence.
In the end, Dr. Khan proudly notes, Pakistan responded to India's nuclear tests by demonstrating its ''deterrent capabilities'':
Nineteen ninety-eight will always be remembered as a year that saw two countries from the third world joining the nuclear club, though not officially recognized. India detonated five devices on May 11 and 13, 1998, thus exposing the ''peaceful'' nature of its long-standing nuclear program.
With this backdrop, on May 28, 1998, at 3:15 p.m., Pakistan responded in kind. Five successful nuclear tests were conducted while another one was carried out on May 30 in Raskoh Hill. As the world watched the hill changing color due to the immense heat generated by the nuclear explosions taking place beneath it, we all felt vindicated in our pledge to make this country's defense impregnable.
Word for Word | Pakistan's Hero
