HIGHER property tax bills for most county residents were the result last week when county legislators filled a $28.5 million budget gap by choosing to raise taxes and thus avoiding job cuts, sparing bus service and numerous other county programs.
''Where's it going to end?'' said Sergio M. Povia, a local landscaper, when asked about the tax increase, which would average 18.8 percent for homeowners on the county portion of their property tax bills. The increase is the second double-digit county property tax increase in two years, and it came just a day after the state approved a half-percent sales tax increase in most parts of the county as well as increases in mortgage and auto use taxes.
Mr. Povia's question had a familiar ring for William J. Ryan, the chairman of the County Legislature. In fact, he said, as he walked in to greet his wife the morning after the late night meeting where the tax increase was voted, he found her reading a paper featuring a banner headline announcing the increase.
''She looked at me and she said, 'Where does this end?''' he said. ''I said, it doesn't until we're able to resolve the problem of the devastating impact of state mandates on the county budget.''
Two big ticket items included in those mandates are Medicaid, which provides medical coverage for the poor and long-term care for the elderly, and pensions. Only two states in the country -- New York and North Carolina -- require counties to pick up a portion of the Medicaid spending, said Michael B. Kaplowitz, the chairman of the county legislature's budget and appropriations committee.
He noted that nearly 13 percent of the county's population is Medicaid eligible. In 2003, he said, the county's portion of Medicaid assistance, about 25 percent of the total cost, was $194 million. This year the figure went to $220 million. ''Medicaid is the largest single item in the budget, and it's not growing at cost of living or 2 or 3 percent a year,'' Mr. Kaplowitz said. ''It's growing at triple and quadruple cost of living. The reasons for it are that the state has enriched the Medicaid program well beyond federal levels.''
Mr. Kaplowitz and other legislators said they were working with representatives in Albany to find a solution.
Mr. Ryan noted that the tax increase applied only to the county's portion of a homeowner's property tax, which represents about 20 percent of the total tax bill. On average that means if someone pays $10,000 in annual taxes, he could face an increase of $376.
In reality, however, the picture is much less straightforward, because assessments are based on a complicated formula that tries to equalize the tax levy across towns and cities. In Harrison, it is estimated that county property taxes will actually decrease about 2 percent this year with those same taxes estimated to increase about 30 percent in New Rochelle and Cortlandt . Mr. Kaplowitz noted that in addition, it is estimated that the sales tax will generate about $8.7 million, which will go to towns, villages and the small cities of Peekskill and Rye while school districts will receive about $4.3 million.
While county officials are placing the blame squarely at the state's doorstep, closer to home there is growing sentiment that the county is not working hard enough to resolve the situation, including failing to rein in its spending.
John Russo, a Greenburgh real estate broker, said that while he understood the role of the state in such problems, he also believed that counties need to strive for efficiency.
''I think the tax increase is indicative of the lack of good budgeting by the county that they resort to tax increases rather than straightening out their act,'' said Mr. Russo, a member of the Coalition Against Unfair Taxes and Spending, which is made up of nine tax reform groups in the county.
He suggested that County Executive Andrew J. Spano could start by paring down the size of his office and giving up his county-paid car and driver. He also said that there had been significant cost overruns on county projects like the Hudson Hills golf course, which was financed without a referendum.
Critics of county government say they think that county officials, instead of tightening their belts, try to frighten residents into accepting tax increases by threatening to cut much needed services like the buses.
On the same day that the County Legislature approved the property tax increase, hundreds of residents turned out in White Plains before the county's transportation board to testify against service cuts that would have decimated the county's bus system.
Under the proposal that was being considered, 44 bus routes would have been eliminated or reduced to close a $1.6 million financing gap. The cuts were being considered just a year after the county raised fares to offset the increasing cost of fuel, salaries and insurance.
As a result of the impending budget problems, the county had gone to Albany asking for a 1 percent sales tax increase to close such gaps and allow the budget to be balanced with just an 8.5 percent property tax increase. But Albany permitted only a half-percent increase in the sales tax, to 7.5 percent from 7 percent, outside the county's four largest cities, and so the county budget gap persisted.
Ultimately, all but one bus line survived unscathed as the legislators voted to raise taxes rather than cut services. But riders and advocacy groups were not exactly relieved.
''It's good news for today and tomorrow, but its hard to say what it means over the long term,'' said Kate Slevin, a spokeswoman with the Tri-State Transportation Campaign. ''Every year bus riders are whipsawed back and forth as county and state officials negotiate these issues.''
County officials say they want to get the state to increase the amount it sends to the county via the Statewide Transportation Operating Assistance Program. They said the amount the county receives has increased only 20 percent since 1998, while other counties have seen increases ranging from 53 percent to 168 percent.
''Most frustrating,'' said Patricia Chemka, director of planning for the county department of transportation, ''Nassau County, with a bus system that is almost a mirror image of Westchester's, now gets 81 percent more than it did in 1998 -- almost $9 million more per year than Westchester.''
Mr. Kaplowitz said it is just this type of money county officials will seek from the state as they look for long-term relief.
And Mr. Ryan suggested that all counties in situations similar to Westchester need to start pressing their delegations in Albany for reforms. He said while the county could go through and systematically review department for cuts, it still would not be enough to cover the cost of the state mandates.
''Last year we cut $60 million,'' he said. ''We've been driven to the wall for a number of years now.''
But Supervisor Paul J. Feiner of Greenburgh, who was active in the fight to preserve the bus service, suggested the county should continue to look for ways to tighten its belt.
''What we really have to do is start examining how the county government operates to see if it can be run in a more cost-efficient manner,'' he said. ''I think these tax increases are really getting to people.''
Mr. Russo said he knew of three families that left the county after the tax increase last year, and he expects to see more.
It's certainly a move that is in Mr. Slovia's plans after he retires. He is building a house in the Catskills.
''I figure by the time I retire, my taxes are going to be $40,000,'' he said. ''I can't afford that. What are you going to do? Go out and rob a bank to pay your taxes?''
GOVERNMENT
