WHEN Elizabeth Sheed and Robert Baldridge married in June 1999, she was a single mother with a 10-year-old son, Luke, and Mr. Baldridge was a footloose, well-traveled bachelor. Mr. Baldridge's life as a magazine photographer was full of chance encounters. He might meet someone on the subway and end up traveling with his new friend to take photos of a volcano or monks on a mountaintop in Tibet.
Guests at their Quaker wedding wondered: Will she rein him in?
During their first year of marriage, Mr. Baldridge continued his travels, often flying off with only a few hours' notice. Sometimes he would stay away so long he would forget things like Ms. Sheed's favorite meal, which unnerved her.
''Liz got very frustrated,'' Mr. Baldridge, now 48, said. ''She liked smashing dishes sometimes.''
The flying plates captured his attention, quickly. ''That's the great thing about dishes, they're a little over the edge,'' said Ms. Sheed, a woman who has worked as everything from a Sunday school teacher to a hairdresser. In her free time, she does African dance. Ms. Sheed, now 45, called her dish throwing ''a mild clipping of his wings.''
They reached a compromise: on the road, he started calling her regularly, eventually incessantly. ''It was such a new thing for me to be with a wife and child,'' he said. ''I had to learn what Liz needed, but I also needed her to know I wasn't completely ready to relinquish the traveling.''
Today he travels even more. In addition to his photography work, Mr. Baldridge works as study coach in schools all over the country for the Baldridge Reading and Study Strategy Program -- the workshops created by his parents, Lila and Ken Baldridge. But he returns home every weekend to Ms. Sheed and Luke, now 15, and their tiny, bohemian Queens apartment, which is decorated with his photos and is illuminated everywhere by Christmas lights. (It is their favorite lighting.)
They describe their family life as a work in progress, something the three of them rewrite and rethink daily. The furniture in their apartment is in constant flux. ''We always move the furniture around,'' she said. ''We're always reconfirming our lack of attachment to any particular things but each other.'' They don't celebrate birthdays or anniversaries. ''Too much pressure,'' Ms. Sheed said. Nor are there any set mealtimes or chores. ''There's none of the 'This is the way a family is supposed to be,' '' she said.
Last April, Mr. Baldridge spent three weeks in the hospital, keeping his father company as he died of cancer. Throughout, Mr. Baldridge remained an optimist as well as a traveler. In one 48-hour period, when his father appeared to be getting better, he flew to Paris and back on assignment. He turned his father's hospital room into an arty, meditative shrine. He unplugged all the fluorescent lights; played CD's of Native American flute music; covered the walls with life-size photographs he had taken of family members and the Dalai Lama; and lay in bed with his father, tape recording stories, advice and poems. His father also gave him vocabulary tests, a family tradition.
''I definitely felt like I married the right guy when I saw how Robert was in the hospital,'' Ms. Sheed said. ''I thought, 'Wow, he'll be good right up until the very end.' ''
Ms. Sheed still occasionally tosses a teacup at him. When she does, he just ducks and smiles. ''He's always trying to make me behave nicely,'' she said, ''and I believe in letting anger out. Over the years, I've never gotten any nicer, and he's never gotten madder. We've just gotten used to each other.''
Ms. Sheed, who has been trying since the wedding to have a baby, said, ''I've had a few pregnancy scares. I get totally thrilled and excited. And then when I find out I'm not pregnant, I get totally thrilled because I can dance more.''
After all, she said, marriage is ''two people being really willing to accept what life dishes out and get a kick out of it.''
THE STATE OF THE UNIONS
