Devils center John Madden slammed his stick on the ice. He was stopped on a breakaway, then hit the post with a shot three minutes later. No matter what Madden tried, he could not beat Carolina Hurricanes goaltender Kevin Weekes.
The difference Saturday afternoon was that Madden was merely looking to pad the Devils' lead, not create one. The energetic line centered by Scott Gomez had generated two first-period goals, and the Devils rolled to a 4-1 victory over the Hurricanes.
''He's got my number,'' Madden said of Weekes, ''but that's why we have the rest of the team to chip in.''
The Devils (29-16-10-1) ended their first three-game losing streak of the season, a dismal run in which they were outscored by 11-2. They seized the lead and pumped in goals against an injury-depleted Carolina team that is 17-27-11-2.
''If you go out and work hard, things will work out for you,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said.
Burns insisted Saturday that the Devils had been working hard. Scoring goals was another matter. They had scored as many as four goals in only 2 of 24 games before Saturday.
Gomez, who had not scored in his previous 15 games, had a goal and an assist by the end of the first period. ''It was nice to get the feeling again,'' he said.
In the Devils' 3-1 loss to the Rangers on Wednesday, Burns used right wing Brian Gionta with Gomez and left wing Patrik Elias. On Saturday, that speedy line was forceful and effective.
''Those two are great offensively,'' Gionta said. ''My job is just to forecheck.''
Gomez scored for the first time since Jan. 9 as the result of Gionta's applying pressure in the Carolina zone. Weekes stopped Gionta's shot from the right wing, but Elias, hit from behind by Carolina defenseman Niclas Wallin, barged into Weekes.
The puck bounced out to Gomez on the left wing, and he whipped it in before Weekes could scramble back into position. The goal, at 8 minutes 56 seconds of the first period, was only the sixth of the season for Gomez. He had 13 last season.
''I think Weekes was a little surprised, but I'll take it,'' Gomez said. ''Hopefully, it doesn't go 15 games again.''
Gomez fed Gionta for a goal that gave the Devils a 2-0 lead with 32 seconds left in the period. Weekes stopped Gomez's shot, and Hurricanes center Marty Murray slammed Gomez to the ice, drawing a cross-checking penalty.
Gomez kept the puck in play. While on his stomach, he shoved it past Elias to Gionta, who scored his 12th goal of the season. It was the Devils' 13th shot of the first period. They are 16-2-2-0 in games in which they have led after one period.
The Hurricanes scored their only goal on their only shot of the second period. Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur, who stopped 14 shots, went behind his net to play the puck, but flipped it to Carolina right wing Jeff O'Neill, who fired it in.
The Devils had taken a 3-0 lead 74 seconds earlier. Left wing Jeff Friesen, who had one goal in his last seven games, scored a power-play goal at 13:08 after a shot by Devils defenseman Paul Martin caromed to him off the end boards.
''We were appalling from the time they dropped the puck to the time the buzzer finally blew and we were able to exit the ice,'' said Carolina Coach Peter Laviolette, the former coach of the Islanders.
Devils right wing Mike Rupp scored his sixth goal at 7:18 of the third period when Erik Rasmussen's shot bounced off Weekes, hit Rupp in the right leg and bounced in. Rupp had not scored in his previous 23 games.
''Usually big goalies stop the first one, so we need to get the rebounds,'' Rupp said.
The consensus among the Devils is that they need to continue doing that Sunday, when they play host to the Los Angeles Kings. Madden said it was far too early to declare Saturday's victory the end of a bad run.
Madden has not scored in 19 games, but he came close Saturday. He pointed out that a shot that hit the post was almost inadvertently nudged in by a Carolina player.
''You know it's bad when you're hoping that the other team scores for you,'' Madden said.
HOCKEY
