President Bush's political advisers are completing plans for a more aggressive stage of his re-election campaign, seeking to discredit Senator John Kerry and promote Mr. Bush's record and character with television advertisements and a more visible role for the president himself, aides and Republican officials say.
With Mr. Kerry having emerged as the almost certain Democratic nominee, Mr. Bush has told associates he wants to get more assertive in drawing sharp distinctions with Democrats and defending his tenure as he travels the nation.
The planned shift in strategy, to be executed in the next few weeks, comes amid anxiety among Republicans about the president's declining poll numbers, uncharacteristic missteps by a usually assured White House and a torrent of criticism of Mr. Bush from an energized Democratic Party that appears to be unifying around Mr. Kerry.
In a further show of his strength, Mr. Kerry easily won party caucuses yesterday in Nevada and the District of Columbia. [Page 22.]
'' 'Get going' is the operative term,'' said Thomas Rath, a New Hampshire Republican leader who is close to the White House. ''You've had a couple of weeks where the free media has not been what it should be. There's a need for an antidote.''
The degree to which the White House has been put on the defensive was emphasized Friday evening, when Mr. Bush released hundreds of pages from his military record in an effort to counter accusations by Democrats that he might not have carried out all his duties in the National Guard in the early 1970's.
The file, made up largely of duplicative documents, did little to settle the issue. But it was part of an effort by the White House to move beyond Mr. Bush's service record and other topics, including a standoff with the commission investigating the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, that have made it difficult for the president to focus attention on subjects of his choosing.
The effort to put the matter behind him came after a month in which the White House hit one setback after another in its efforts to seize the initiative back from the Democrats and present Mr. Bush as a steady leader in a time of national trial.
''The two defining events for this year have been the State of the Union and the 'Meet the Press' interview, and both have been colossal failures,'' one prominent Republican strategist said Friday night after the document release, referring to an interview broadcast by NBC last Sunday. Mr. Bush's inability to present a compelling, aggressive case for himself in those two nationally televised appearances has ''got Republicans, especially at the grass-roots level, questioning the White House's strategy and tactics,'' said the strategist, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Even as they have been forced to adapt to Mr. Bush's changing political fortunes, his campaign aides have had to respond to the dramatic twists in the Democratic race, which only a little more than a month ago seemed likely to go to Howard Dean. Mr. Bush's campaign advisers had gone so far as to write advertising scripts attacking Dr. Dean.
Republicans say they have been caught especially off guard by the prospect that Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, could emerge from the primary season relatively unscathed by his Democratic rivals, freeing him to focus his message on Mr. Bush.
Ken Mehlman, Mr. Bush's campaign manager, said he remained confident in his campaign's initial decision to lay low while Democrats chose a nominee, using the time to raise money and build get-out-the-vote operations. But, he said, that period was almost over.
''We're now moving into a phase where we will begin contrasting the president's positive, optimistic vision with the alternative,'' Mr. Mehlman said. ''You're going to see us focus on the contrasts we're going to face: a contrast in style, in policy.''
Mr. Bush's chief strategist, Matthew Dowd, said the record Mr. Kerry has built in the Senate ''has not been examined in any concerted way; that will happen over the next nine months.'' Mr. Kerry, he said, would be defined by the Bush campaign as ''part of the Washington establishment that says one thing and does another,'' while Mr. Bush would be presented as a leader who does what he says he will do, even if not everyone agrees with it.
The aggressive response from Mr. Bush's White House and his re-election campaign is the latest example of how this president has learned from the mistakes of his father's re-election campaign in 1992. At that time, many Republicans said that the Bush White House had been complacent and waited too long to address signs that the political dominance of the president was eroding.
Mr. Bush's campaign team has begun filming the president for television commercials that will be built around the theme of ''Steady Leadership in a Time of Change.'' Other advertisements, Mr. Bush's advisers said, would mine votes that Mr. Kerry has cast to present him as a liberal who opposed tax cuts and voted against strengthening the military and intelligence agencies.
The new Bush advertisements were likely to begin within the month, as soon as the Democratic race is settled for certain, aides said.
Senator Arlen Specter, a Republican who flew to Pennsylvania aboard Air Force One with Mr. Bush on Thursday and then spent 30 minutes with the president in his limousine, said Mr. Bush was ''raring to go.''
''He's ready to go toe-to-toe, and he's very confident about his record,'' said Mr. Specter, of Pennsylvania.
In a White House that resists analogies between Mr. Bush and his father, Mr. Dowd scoffed at the notion that Mr. Bush would run against Mr. Kerry the way his father ran against his Massachusetts opponent in 1988, Gov. Michael S. Dukakis.
''This idea that's developed that we're going to run against Kerry like he is Mike Dukakis is a bunch of baloney,'' said Mr. Dowd, offering a view of Mr. Dukakis that no doubt would have turned the head of Lee Atwater, the mastermind of George H.W. Bush's 1988 campaign.
''Mike Dukakis was an outsider, and compared to John Kerry, Mike Dukakis is mainstream. Michael Dukakis was a governor who balanced a budget. I don't remember Michael Dukakis ever advocating defense cuts, and I don't remember Michael Dukakis ever advocating against cuts in taxes.''
Mr. Kerry's communications director, Stephanie Cutter, said: ''The Bush campaign is right. This will be a different campaign. John Kerry will fight back against the right-wing smear machine, and this president's record provides ample opportunity to do so.''
Mr. Bush's aides say that in intensifying the campaign effort, they are following a road map drawn long ago, and are not reacting to polls that show support for Mr. Bush dropping after what many Republicans view as the roughest month he has endured as president.
Still, the shift comes as some of his biggest supporters around the country have expressed concern about the course the race is following.
One result of this unease in Republican circles is that the White House is receiving conflicting advice about what to do now that the general election race is about to begin in earnest. Some Republicans say the White House needs to move quickly to bat down Mr. Kerry and build up Mr. Bush. Others say Mr. Bush's team should hold back, leave Mr. Bush in his White House setting and conserve resources for later.
Senator Lamar Alexander of Tennessee said the Republican campaign team appeared not to have fully anticipated the intensity of the news media's focus on the Democratic primary battle, which left Mr. Bush exposed to a months-long partisan onslaught.
Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker, cautioned the White House against panic.
''One lesson that Howard Dean should have taught all the pundits is that the election isn't until Election Day,'' Mr. Gingrich said. ''If Kerry was a centrist from the Midwest or South, the next six or eight months would be intense. But he's a Jane Fonda antiwar liberal. They just need to let the country get to know Kerry, calmly and methodically.''
Representative Thomas M. Reynolds of New York, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, said he was struck by how energized and unified the Democratic Party is, but suggested Mr. Bush would be better off ''remaining as president, doing his duties, raising money for what will be a mammoth campaign; it would be better to hold back before taking on his opponent.''
And Representative Tom Davis of Virginia said the White House should sit back and wait until Mr. Kerry had the nomination wrapped up, and not risk helping Senator John Edwards of North Carolina snatch it away from him, since Mr. Bush should be better off running against Mr. Kerry. (With clear regret, none of the Republicans interviewed said they saw any prospect that Dr. Dean would be running against Mr. Bush this fall.)
''The Democrats have not elected a president since Kennedy from outside the South,'' Mr. Davis said. ''In my book, I'd rather run against Kerry than Edwards any day.''
Senator George Allen of Virginia, chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, reflected the view of many Republicans, describing himself as ''guardedly optimistic,'' but expressing concern at what he described as the intensity of Democratic opposition to Mr. Bush.
''We're going to have to work hard,'' he said. ''The Democrats are fired up. There's almost a vehemence in their dislike for President Bush.''
In New Hampshire, Mr. Rath, the New Hampshire Republican leader, said he was startled to watch Democrats coalescing around an opponent after what he described as the least caustic Democratic primary battle he had seen in 40 years in politics.
''He's given more of a free ride since he was a front-runner than Dean ever was,'' Mr. Rath said. ''What I hear from Republicans the most is, the president's been torn down, that we need to remind people of why we like this guy.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE STRATEGY
