WESTCHESTER County is known more for its McMansions and corporate headquarters than for its fields of corn and soybeans. Indeed, to talk about farmland in Westchester over the past century is to talk about its disappearance in the face of relentless development. And yet farmers still farm in some parts of the county. Consider this:
Two high-spirited goats stood with dainty grace on hind hooves one day not long ago to nibble energetically on a leftover holiday wreath hanging from a barn window in Bedford, as 40 free-range Araucana chickens fluffed their feathers and scrabbled for feed on the frozen ground.
Emerald green baby spinach, feathery pea greens and lush arugula flourished in a heated greenhouse on an eyeball-freezing cold day in North Salem. Nearby, a mound of compost, filled with animal manure and kitchen waste from a restaurant, steamed in the biting air.
Wiccan, a prize show horse, was slowly and gently vacuumed on the same day, part of an elaborate daily grooming offered at the high-touch Heritage Farm in Katonah, a kind of Ritz-Carlton Hotel that accommodates 65 private show horses.
Two weeks later, a newborn Simmenthal bull calf, still slick, with an umbilical cord dangling from its wet belly, took its first steps in a heated calving stall at Hudson Pines Farm in Pocantico Hills.
Yet despite these bucolic scenes, farmland is disappearing quickly. In 1950, for example, there were 664 farms comprising nearly 50,000 acres in Westchester County. Today, that number has dropped to 128 farms with not quite 12,000 acres, according to the New York Agricultural Statistics Service.
But still, stubbornly, and improbably, Westchester is a place where agricultural pursuits thrive. Many Westchester farmers have the financial resources to run their so-called trophy farms for the pure pleasure of it; others must farm to earn a living.
In fact, the number of farms and farmland is actually higher now, in 2004, than it has been since 1987, according to state data.
Indeed, a small but passionate vanguard of politically active Westchester farmers is lobbying the county legislature to halt and even reverse the loss of local agriculture. Enthusiastic cheerleaders for Westchester's farms, they say they need to protect farming in Westchester before most of the local farmland is lost forever.
Saving land for agricultural use, they say, preserves open space at the lowest cost possible, protects the watershed, provides a habitat for birds and wildlife, and offers local agricultural education to residents, some of whom have never touched a cow or picked a pumpkin off the vine.
Westchester County Executive Andrew J. Spano approved two proposals in the last few years to protect farmland, including the appointment of a farmland board and the formation of an agricultural district certified by New York State.
''Farming is a deep part of the heritage of the county, and to preserve open spaces we have to make sure it's part of the political process,'' Mr. Spano said. ''It really keeps a lot of our land out of development, which is really what we need.''
The 11-member Agriculture and Farmland Protection Board was set up in 1999 to oversee the preparation of a countywide farmland protection plan, which will be presented to the county legislature and the public in late spring.
In 2001, Westchester County also established an agricultural district, a state-sponsored designation which protects members with ''right to farm'' laws that supersede any local ordinances that might conflict with farmers' needs (early-morning mowing, say, or unpleasant odors from animals). Such a district must total at least 500 acres of viable agricultural land, although it doesn't have to be contiguous, according to Diane Miller, an environmental planner at the County Department of Planning.
That district now includes 128 farms, with the largest proportion, about half, devoted to the horse business, and nurseries and horticulture as the second most common farm activity, Ms. Miller said.
About a dozen additional farms have applied to join this year, she said, and there are probably more who have not yet done so. Although there are no economic advantages to being in the district, ''it helps being part of a community and sharing information and having the power that belonging to a group gives you,'' she said. Among the 325 agricultural districts that have been designated in New York State, Westchester's is among the smallest, although it is also one of the most valuable.
While the average value of an acre of farmland in Westchester was $8,300 in 1997, the value of farmland in Livingston County, a major dairy area southwest of Rochester, was just $1,091, according to the most recent Census of Agriculture. That disparity has most certainly widened substantially since then, according to Stephen Ropel, a state statistician with the National Agricultural Statistics Service in Albany.
The Agriculture and Farmland Protection Board is a raucous and cheerful group of Westchester farmers, some of them working farmers who earn a living from their land, and others more like landed gentry, whose substantial achievements in the business world help to finance their hobby farms.
When the board met last month at Muscoot Farm in Somers, they debated the ways in which they would be most able to persuade the county legislature of the importance of local farms.
''We're putting together a farmland protection plan for Westchester County to raise everyone's awareness of the connection between quality of life and farming,'' said Barbara Wilkens, 72, the board's president.
The owner of Wilkens Fruit and Fir Farm, a 180-acre family farm in Yorktown that has raised apples, pumpkins and Christmas trees since 1916, Mrs. Wilkens and her family have consistently refused to sell their land to developers -- even though they would have made more money doing so -- because ''it's a real family operation and it provides a whole different atmosphere for the people of Westchester,'' she said.
Annie Farrell, an organizer of Westchester's agricultural district, said, ''The Hudson Valley was the bread basket for the city, and we're bringing it back.'' With expertise on everything from growing vegetables in hoop houses to breeding cattle, Ms. Farrell is widely acknowledged by most farm people as one of Westchester's most knowledgeable farmers. Ms. Farrell, a Yorktown resident who earns her living as a farming consultant, has also been called ''the Queen of Mesclun,'' for her one-woman campaign to grow, harvest and sell the once-unusual vegetable. Since she began championing mesclun nearly 20 years ago, Ms. Farrell estimated that she has grown and sold more than five tons of the stuff. She also owns a 225-acre dairy farm in Bovina in the Catskills, which her daughter and son-in-law manage for her.
Michael Dignelli, 45, a member of the board and co-owner of the 40-acre Heritage Farm in Somers, is an advocate for Westchester's horse business. Westchester's horse industry ranks fourth in income in counties in New York State (after Saratoga, Nassau and Dutchess Counties), with a value of $121 million, according to figures provided by the Department of Agriculture and Markets.
''The horse business is very big and very healthy because of the intense connection people have with animals and with the land,'' Mr. Dignelli said.
His business, which he owns with his brother, Andre, is quite successful, and although he would not disclose annual revenues, the cost of boarding a horse there is $2,550 a month, he said.
Another board member, Peter Kamenstein, 59, owns an Elmsford company that manufactures housewares. But Three Ponds, his 70-acre farm in North Salem, is clearly his true love. He raises Black Angus cattle as breeding stock there, and produces up to 10,000 bales of hay each year, some of which he uses for his own animals and sells the rest. He keeps his own horses there, eight of them, and sponsors a 4-H Club, which keeps one pig, one sheep, one goat and one cow on his property.
Mr. Kamenstein is adamant in his belief that his farm does more good for the town of North Salem than any residential development would. He even grew up on a dairy farm in Princeton, N.J., he said.
''In addition to preserving open space, farmland is critical for a developed area like Westchester,'' he said, citing a study that shows that farms actually subsidize residential housing by using fewer local services.
Another board member is Don Homer, 68, who described himself as ''a Bostonian cowboy'' and is the general farm manager of Hudson Pines Farm, the Rockefeller property in Pocantico Hills. Along with three employees, Mr. Homer works 350 acres there, raising 100 head of Simmental cattle as breeding stock. So far this winter, 34 cows have calved, and another 33 are due any minute. Mr. Homer sold a heifer last month in Denver for $44,000, and is planning a trip to Indiana next month, a trip on which he said he plans to sell about 20 more head.
Mr. Homer said that he has sold cattle, semen and frozen cow embryos in 14 countries, including to the former Soviet Union, all from the Westchester farm.
When Mr. Homer goes to sales in, say, Texas, ''they're amazed that we're only 25 miles from the major New York airports,'' he said.
While the Rockefeller family farms flourish because of the family's philanthropic devotion to local farming, other, much smaller farmers, struggle to earn a living from farming.
Ellen Casale, 54, and Brian Spahr, 40, cultivate 2.5 acres of their 5.5-acre plot in North Salem, on a certified organic farm called Toad Haul, but both work other jobs to support themselves.
''For us, this is not a job, it's a way of life,'' Ms. Casale said.
She and Mr. Spahr grow salad greens in raised beds, outside and in greenhouses. This year, they harvested more than two tons of salad greens, including arugula, mizuna and tatsoi.
''Every leaf is a work of art,'' she said. ''Food should be beautiful.''
Ms. Casale keeps a dozen chickens and rabbits on her farm just for their nitrogen-rich manure, which she adds to the compost that covers all the growing beds.
She will not sell her gorgeous and intensely flavorful greens to restaurants in New York City, however. Instead, she sells to the Flying Pig, Finch Tavern and other local restaurants, as well as to local catering companies and at the Mount Kisco farmers' market. She says she also has 25 private clients to whom she makes produce deliveries at home.
''Our mission is to stay as local as possible,'' she said. ''Buying organic is important, but buying local organic is the best thing you can do. The community we live in must benefit first.''
By contrast, the Westchester agricultural district features many gentleman farmers.
Shirley and George Bianco, for example, live in Bedford on the 30-acre Maple Grove Farm, which was a 500-acre farm in 1740, Mrs. Bianco said. They keep five rare Belted Galloway cows, four sheep, two rambunctious goats, a pig, 40 Araucana chickens, 20 quail and 8 horses, and have sold 700 cartons of half-dozen eggs, and two breeding bulls in the last year.
A retired currency trader, Mrs. Bianco, 45, is passionate about her love of the land and of learning to farm properly. ''Our goal is to supply humanely raised animals for food,'' she said. Mr. Bianco, 48, a vice president at Merrill Lynch, is vice chairman of the Westchester Land Trust, who has practiced what he preaches by placing a legal restriction on his own property to prevent it from being subdivided, he said.
''On this scale, I'm not going to quit my day job,'' he said about his farm, ''but we want to keep the farm as productive land.''
A patrician farmer with perhaps the deepest roots in Westchester County, Jim Wood, 76, lives in Bedford on Braewold, a 40-acre farm that has been in his family for seven generations. President of the Bedford Farmers Club, Mr. Wood's ancestor was among the founding members in 1852. Although Mr. Wood no longer works his farm, he raised dairy and beef cattle when his two daughters were growing up, to pass on his love of farming.
''I was an investment banker to support my farming,'' Mr. Wood said. ''One kept me sane while the other kept me solvent.'' Mr. Wood did such a good job instilling a farming passion in his daughters that one is now ranching in Montana, and the other moved to New Zealand, where she and her husband bought a 7,000-acre sheep station.
''Instead of preserving history, which we were doing in Westchester, we are now involved with cutting-edge advances in New Zealand agriculture,'' Mr. Wood's daughter, Emily Crofoot, said in an e-mail message.
Ms. Farrell, who left last week to visit Ms. Crofoot's farm in New Zealand, plans to search for new blood lines for Westchester cattle, ''collecting genetics,'' as she puts it.
''Most women bring back jewelry, but I bring back semen,'' she said. ''When you reach in my freezer, be careful what you grab.''
A Warm Berth for Newest Foals  GRANITE SPRINGS
It's a little-known fact, but dozens of 100-pound babies will be born in Westchester this winter.
Of course, their mothers weigh in at around half a ton, and the infants aren't human, but still, they are soft and deliciously smelly.
Some of these whopping newborns will be born at Stonewall Farm, the 760-acre thoroughbred horse farm owned by Barry Schwartz, chairman of the New York Racing Association and a former owner of Calvin Klein Inc.
The first foal of the 26 that are due in 2004 arrived on a glacial evening in mid-January, almost two weeks past the mare's due date. But Jennifer M. Gurney, the farm manager and de facto midwife, was not worried. ''It has to do with the cold,'' she said. ''It's their natural instinct that it's not the safest time to have a baby.''
In her nine years at the farm, Mrs. Gurney has witnessed at least 200 foalings, she said.
In this clean but chilly brood barn, a fancy maternity ward for valuable horses, two kerosene heaters glowed and 18 mothers-to-be lolled in their stalls on that cold evening, enjoying the good life of a pregnant former racehorse.
The first to give birth was Lynclar, a dark bay who won nearly half a million dollars in her racing days. Now on her fourth foaling, she was calm and attentive to her new filly, a soft, damp and shivering creature born at 5:50 p.m. on Jan. 25.
The still-steaming foal struggled to stand on her own spindly legs, in a foaling stall with rubber matting and a thick layer of protective straw.
As Lynclar nickered to her newborn, several pregnant mares whinnied back, in sympathy, or support, perhaps. ''They're the fan club, they're always whinnying after a baby is born,'' Mrs. Gurney said.
The young filly was wrapped in a blanket after she stood, as her mother looked on.
Most foalings at Stonewall are a family affair for Mrs. Gurney. Besides her, there are her husband, Cameron, a tennis pro at Sleepy Hollow Country Club, and their 5-year-old daughter, Ava, who gave the new foal its temporary name, Minnie. Even their dog, Olivia, attended the birth.
Although Mr. Gurney has also seen hundreds of foalings, he is not jaded.
''It's always amazing every time,'' he said. ''It never gets routine.''
Carin Rubenstein
Westchester
