The gray-haired woman on the phone from the Dominican Republic is beside herself over the constant power failures in her country. ''With all these blackouts, who can stand it?'' she tells her son in New York. ''The little we have in the refrigerator is all ruined. But what makes me really mad is I can't watch my soap operas!''
No problem, the television ad claims. Her son can just call a Manhattan number, and in 48 to 72 hours an inverter strong enough to power a house during a blackout can be installed anywhere in the Dominican Republic. (An inverter stores power when the electricity is on, and is used as a power source when the electricity goes out.)
The commercials have been running on Spanish-language television stations like Telemundo's Channel 47 since Fernando Jaquez and Juan Carlos Nu침ez began offering their service a month ago, from the basement of Mr. Nu침ez's travel agency, American Worldwide Travel, at 714 West 181st Street.
Their timing could not be better: constant power failures -- apag칩nes in Spanish -- are a fact of life in the Dominican Republic. And the problem is getting worse. One Dominican newspaper reported last weekend that in some communities daily shutdowns last up to 15 hours.
''It's not a luxury there, it's a necessity,'' Mr. Jaquez said of the inverters. ''That's why the commercial attracts people.''
When it is seen on ''Santo Domingo Invita,'' a Dominican show broadcast Sundays on Channel 47, he says he gets about 100 calls, and averages a sale a day.
It has always been possible to wire money to relatives in the Dominican Republic who can then buy their own equipment. But given that the two partners have an exclusive agreement with a Dominican distributor, Trace International, which has offices throughout that country, the inverter makes an appealing gift: relatives at the other end don't have to lift a finger. The devices range in price from $480 to more than $7,000, depending on storage capacity.
Andres Cavassa, a welder from the South Bronx, recently ordered an inverter after seeing the commercial. He wanted one for his mother-in-law, who is raising his three children in Los Mina, a Santo Domingo neighborhood. Mr. Cavassa set up a layaway plan to buy one of the more expensive inverters.
''I want to make their lives a little more enjoyable,'' he said. ''Imagine! A completely hot country, and a person doesn't even have a fan to cool off.''
He also has another, more selfish reason: he is used to (nearly) blackout-free New York. ''When I visit on vacation,'' he said, ''I naturally want to hear my music, and pass my time there without the frustration of the apag칩nes.''
SETH KUGEL
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: WASHINGTON HEIGHTS
