THE subject of big-time college sports is complex and often confounding, especially for those in the position of running it. Consider, for example, a commentary by Myles Brand for The Sporting News, in which the president of the N.C.A.A. seems to lament the recent court decision allowing Maurice Clarett early entry into the N.F.L. draft.
While acknowledging the potential financial gain for a handful of players, Brand called the decision a fallacious victory that will leave many more young athletes ''with the worst of both worlds: neither a professional career nor the benefits of a college education.''
That said, Brand went on to make the case for the formation of professional developmental vehicles in football and basketball, akin to baseball's minor leagues, that do not limit enrollment to those 20 and over, like the N.B.A.'s.
''College sports will continue to feed its graduating athletes to professional sports,'' he wrote. ''It always has and always will. But there should be alternatives to athletes who have little or no interest in a college education to develop themselves as professional prospects. In basketball in particular, the integrity of the student-athlete mission has been compromised by the proverbial pounding of the square peg into the round hole.''
Which, of course, is exactly what the Clarett case is about. According to numerous reports, he was the squarest of pegs at Ohio State, successfully pounding through only the holes created by his offensive line. The decision last week by Judge Shira A. Scheindlin of the United States District Court was an affirmation of Brand's latter assertion: yes, there should be alternatives for those athletes who have little or no interest in a college education.
In a meeting Friday afternoon with editors and reporters at The New York Times, Brand acknowledged that the pro football and basketball leagues living large off the cost-free and highly marketed N.C.A.A. system will only invest in minor-league vehicles when put in the legal and business positions where they must.
''Speaking for the colleges, it seems to me they would be happy if there were football and basketball developmental leagues,'' Brand said, while reiterating his concern for the likely fallout, for what he called ''the lost generation,'' young athletes manipulated by hustlers into professional drafts and out of the chance for a college education.
Asked why academia should be involved in the decision-making process of young male basketball and football players more so than with other 18-year-olds inclined not to matriculate, Brand said: ''There's a difference between becoming a plumber and a professional athlete. These kids are being misled by others for personal gain.''
That may be, but good luck in contriving a cure for the ignorance of youth. If the colleges are so concerned about blown scholarship opportunities, they should consider welcoming those who bomb in hypothetical football and basketball bush leagues back into their womb. In the meantime, stop making paternalistic arguments to defend the colleges' practice of profiteering.
For years, we have been asking where the outrage is for the baseball player who signs out of high school and goes off to hone his skills in Ogden, Utah? Where is the alarm for the kid plucked at 16 off the Dominican dirt lot? And for all the hand-wringing about dropouts and graduation rates, how many expressions of dismay have we heard about six academic derailments at St. John's, as opposed to the effects of the recent scandal on the poor basketball team?
Contrary to the forces of self-interest, the Billy Packer brigade, Brand said he does not believe that N.F.L. and N.B.A. minor leagues would damage the quality or dampen the enthusiasm for college sports. Nor will they create nirvana. With all fierce competition comes the chance for corruption, as we have been reminded of by the many outbreaks in the pros all the way down to peewees.
Again, major college sports have always presented us with more contradictory issues. Here in New York, we have reached the preaching point in the sad St. John's case. Kill the program, as N.Y.U. did decades ago, or at least downsize it, we advise the Rev. Donald J. Harrington, the school president, forgetting how the president of little St. Bonaventure was forced out last summer by a recruiting flap. A city commuter school cannot compete anymore with the sports factories in the hinterlands, we tell him, before marveling over this week's Sports Illustrated cover boy, Jameer Nelson, and the Philadelphia story at St. Joseph's.
There are no absolutes in big-time college sports, or magic cures, but serious reform begins with more options, with pressure applied to the professional leagues long on the developmental dole. The N.F.L. and N.B.A. for too long have hid behind collective bargaining agreements, behind oh-so-sincere contentions that they really, truly don't want to damage the college product.
Good for Myles Brand, then, for leaving no doubt on where he stands, for having the courage to say that college is not for everyone, including those who blitz and dunk. Of course, we want to educate as many as possible but it can't be forced on someone and certainly not along with the full-time job of being a Division I athlete.
On the subjects of opportunity and choice, Brand concluded: ''Baseball has it absolutely right.'' It is time, finally, for pro football and basketball owners and players, to have this peg pounded through their thick skulls, and wallets.
Sports of The Times
