Tiniest Show on Earth
Q. Last year, I saw ads for a traveling flea circus in Times Square. Is it still there? Didn't there used to be an old one? And how do you train a flea, anyway?
A. The old one was produced by the veritable Barnum of bugs, Professor William Heckler, who died in 1935. He and his son, Professor Roy Heckler, ran the flea circus at Hubert's Museum, at 228 West 42nd Street, a site now occupied by Madame Tussaud's wax museum; it lasted from about 1923 until 1957.
A native Swiss, William Heckler once explained that he learned his craft after he ran away to sea and found two essential ingredients: time on his hands and plenty of willing trainees (Pulex irritans), which he always fed off his own arm. He opened his first flea circus at the St. Louis World's Fair in 1904.
He would tell audiences that new trainees went into a small bottle, in which the flea soon learned that if it jumped, it would bump its head. Want to get one to kick a ball? Present it with a ball of citronella, which it will try to kick as far away as possible. Graduates went on to jump through hoops, operate a miniature merry-go-round and pull a tiny Roman chariot.
His fleas, each with a little collar, had their own personalities, he and his son said. Among them was ''Sandow, the world's strongest flea,'' bought from a ship's steward for $3; Reuben, who would pull a tiny steam roller; and Prince Henry, who would lie on his back and ''juggle'' a ball.
The recent Times Square revival was the Acme Miniature Circus of Performing Fleas, run by Professor Adam Gertsacov in the Palace of Variety at 125 West 42nd Street. The traveling show ran there from August 2002 to March 2003 under the umbrella of the Bindlestiff Family Cirkus, said Keith S. Nelson, president of the circus. The circus, however, is being evicted next month and the building demolished to make way for the Bank of America. Mr. Nelson said the Bindlestiffs had not found a new home.
'Medicated Paper'
Q. I read that toilet paper was invented in New York City. Is that true?
A. The consensus is that toilet paper was first commercially produced about 1857 by Joseph C. Gayetty, who sold flat sheets of ''Gayetty's medicated paper for the water closet,'' for the fairly expensive price of 1,000 sheets for a dollar out of his shop at 41 Ann Street in Lower Manhattan. His name, J.C. Gayetty, was watermarked on each sheet.
Gayetty's customers, who had used sheets torn from catalogs or newspapers, probably resisted the idea of wasting paper. The pages of The New York Times from the late 1850's include many of his advertisements, which stressed the medicinal angle.
''It is conducive to comfort,'' an 1858 ad read. ''It is elegant and pure. It is proven beyond doubt to be the finest and purest paper ever made from Manila hemp, and four grand medicines incorporated with the pulp render it a sure cure and preventive of piles.''
But not until the brothers E. Irvin and Clarence Scott produced a roll of perforated paper in Philadelphia and founded the Scott Paper Company in 1879 did the idea catch on.
A Place in TV History
Q. Where was that ''deluxe apartment in the sky'' where George Jefferson and his family relocated when they moved on up to the East Side?
A. The East Side high-rise seen on the opening credits of ''The Jeffersons,'' a CBS sitcom popular in the 1970's and 80's, is at 185 East 85th Street, at Third Avenue, in Manhattan. The television address was Apartment 12-D on ''Sixth Avenue,'' which is, of course, on the West Side.
The series, a spinoff of the immensely popular ''All in the Family,'' made its debut in 1975 and ran in prime time for 10 seasons. George, Louise and Lionel Jefferson supposedly moved to Manhattan from 708 Hauser Street in Corona, Queens, where they were neighbors of Archie and Edith Bunker at No. 704. In fact, there is no Hauser Street in Queens.
MICHAEL POLLAK
F.Y.I. E-mail: fyi@nytimes.com
