The city's health commissioner, Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, recently looked at a map of New York neighborhoods with high rates of drug use and H.I.V. infection, and was struck by the fact that all but three communities -- all of them in Queens -- have programs to replace drug users' dirty needles with clean ones.
As a result, Dr. Frieden has proposed needle exchange programs in the three areas: Jamaica, the eastern end of the Rockaways, and from Long Island City to Elmhurst.
''There is drug use in these communities,'' he said, ''and it is taking a terrible toll on people's lives.''
His task will be challenging. Because it is illegal in New York State to hand out a syringe without a prescription, each program will need a waiver from the state's Department of Health. The AIDS Center of Queens County, a medical and social service agency, is applying for the waivers. But the state can grant them only if the applying agency shows there is local support for the programs. This creates a rare situation in which a community board can rise above its customary advisory role and approve or veto a government program.
''For once, they need our permission,'' said Jonathan L. Gaska, district manager of Community Board 12 in the Rockaways. ''Some of our questions are, 'What are the locations?' and, 'Is there a need?'''
Dr. Frieden has answers for both questions. In the early 90's, he said, when needle exchanges were relatively few, sharing dirty needles accounted for 50 percent of all H.I.V. transmissions. Today they account for 12 percent. The reduction is due in part to greater H.I.V. testing (people who know they have the virus share needles less), but also to the establishment of the exchanges.
As Dr. Frieden envisions the program, an exchange van would visit the neighborhoods at set times, stopping at locations away from schools, churches and commercial strips. ''They could work at hours like 10 p.m. to 1 a.m.,'' he added.
That idea doesn't appeal to Jerry Walsh, who lives near Queensboro Plaza in Long Island City, a potential stop for the program. ''The city is trying to redevelop Queensboro Plaza,'' he said. ''It's just been rezoned for business. But who would want to start a business with a needle exchange nearby?''
Dr. Frieden will hold meetings in the next few weeks to discuss just such concerns. ''We want to be minimally disruptive to the community,'' he said. ''But we're not going to find some magical place that everyone agrees on. It's a question of dialogue.''
JIM O'GRADY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: QUEENS UP CLOSE
