HAVERSTRAW, overlooking Westchester from the Rockland County side of the Hudson, was once known as the brick-making capital of the world. By the turn of the 20th century, as many as 42 brickyards operated in the area, churning out millions of bricks a year from the abundant local supply of Hudson River clay.
It has been more than 60 years since the last brick was made in the village, but the industry has not been forgotten. As the village experiences the shifts of revitalization, soon to include a $200 million retail-residential complex on the riverfront, a new museum is paying tribute to the area's past.
On a recent frigid Saturday afternoon, about a dozen visitors wandered through the storefront museum on Main Street. They took in period photographs depicting the stages of brick making, drying racks and other antique equipment, a model kiln, a 1903 payroll ledger listing daily salaries ranging from $1.20 to $4.50, and a wall display of 300 locally made bricks, many branded with the ''frogs'' -- indented name stamps, which served both to identify bricks and to save a little clay -- of the prominent brick manufacturers of the era, including Excelsior, deNoyelles, Hutton and Gormley.
The Hudson Valley's prominence in the industry, which until the 1920's was rivaled only by Chicago, was sparked by the region's clay resources and by New York City's hunger for bricks, said George V. Hutton, a retired architect and expert on the industry's history. After fires took down many wood frame buildings in the 1830's and 40's, ''New York City began turning into brick city,'' said Mr. Hutton, who estimated that 75 percent of the bricks came from the Hudson Valley.
A centerpiece of the museum is a new diorama of a 1906 landslide in Haverstraw. The disaster was caused by increasingly overzealous excavations as area clay supplies dwindled. Digging by the Excelsior Brick Company began to dip below river level and spread westward toward the village, leading to the collapse of the slope in front of Division Street and Rockland Avenue.
The landslide swept away 19 lives and about 20 homes and cost Haverstraw its prominence in the industry, said Mr. Hutton, author of ''The Great Hudson River Brick Industry'' (Purple Mountain Press. 2003). ''The next year, Ulster County became the biggest brick producer'' in the valley.
Patricia Gordon, the museum's founder and director, bent over the diorama, built by John Rossi, a retired advertising executive, which is designed to spring into motion at the press of a button.
She said the museum, which opened two years ago, attracted an average of more than 20 visitors an afternoon on the three afternoons a week it is open. There is also an active 15-member board and 45 volunteers, ranging from retirees to high school students. Students from area grade schools use the children's center to get a feel for the era (a favorite activity is pressing Play-Doh into miniature brick molds).
Mrs. Gordon of Tappan, a Haverstraw native and real estate agent whose grandfather and great-uncle worked in the brickyards, started a small version of the museum eight years ago with a window display in a candy shop. The Village of Haverstraw owned the building next door, the former Rosenberg's Hardware store, and she persuaded village trustees to spend about $50,000 on renovations to the roof, facade, plumbing and main exhibit room. The museum board spent $17,000 to add administrative office space and other changes, and now rents the space at the below market rate of $500 a month, Mrs. Gordon said.
The museum also provides a look into the brick-making traditions of the entire Hudson Valley, where bricks were made from the 17th century up until two years ago.
The industry's regional hot spots shifted as clay supplies diminished in the lower Hudson Valley. Westchester took the early lead. Before the Civil War, Westchester had more brickyards than any other county in New York. By the 1880's, production went into decline. ''Westchester ran out of clay,'' Mr. Hutton said. ''In other places, the clay beds were much thicker.''
After Haverstraw's turn-of-the-century reign, the industry's energy shifted to Kingston.
But by the 1920's, Hudson Valley brick making faced competition from concrete blocks and cheaper European brick imports. New York City's growing preference for steel and aluminum also hurt, but brick making continued in the region until 2002, when the last plant in the state, Powell &amp; Minnock in Coeymans, south of Albany, was sold.
Tom Sullivan, 70, a retired police officer and a Brick Museum trustee, has lived in Haverstraw and nearby Stony Point all his life. His paternal grandfather, an Irish immigrant, came to Haverstraw in 1900 to work in the brickyards. On his mother's side, brick workers stretch three generations back. He grew up listening to stories about the brickyards. ''They didn't complain, but I used to think, gee, they were breaking their backs out there,'' he said.
Haverstraw has yet to shake off its gritty postindustrial funk the way other communities along the Hudson have. Hope for change is being pinned on the recent approval of Harbors at Haverstraw, a $200 million riverfront retail-residential complex.
Ricky Sanchez, a former village trustee, said he saw the museum as an important element of the village's revitalization. ''The Haverstraw you see today won't be the same 10 years from now,'' he said. ''Gentrification is coming. This museum will be here for people to see how Haverstraw was at one time.''
MUSEUMS
