Greatness, thy name is Armond Prisco. Such, at least, was the claim of an enormous four-story banner that appeared astride 5 King Street in SoHo in December and stayed up, to the mystification of those passing on the Avenue of the Americas, until 10 days ago.
''The following people are great,'' it read, in foot-high letters. ''No one is as great as they are.'' There followed a list of perhaps 500 names, in alphabetical order, starting with Mark Abellera, including Mr. Prisco about halfway down, and ending at Lisa Young, 15 feet off the ground.
There was no obvious pattern to the list; it might have been culled from the phone book, except for the occasional standout, like ''Happy'' or ''Traktor.'' A little Googling, however, revealed a thread: almost all of those named were advertising executives. Inquiries led to Sundy Procter, executive producer at Mackenzie Cutler, a post-production company for television commercials.
''It was a Christmas present to our clients this year,'' Ms. Procter explained. ''We've done everything from giving out $50 bills that say, 'Buy your own damn fruit basket!' to giant salamis, and this year we decided to put everyone we've worked with on a billboard.'' Other Mackenzie Cutler Christmas presents have included wigs and toupées.
Josh Kilmer-Purcell, 31st row, last name on the right, is a creative director at the advertising firm of Shepardson Stern &amp; Kaminsky. He and several colleagues received cryptic Polaroids in the mail in December, showing the street signs at the intersection of King Street and the Avenue of the Americas, where the banner hung. The banner was not shown in the photograph. ''It didn't seem like a nice present at the time,'' he said. Nevertheless, he and his co-workers trooped up to SoHo from their downtown offices to see what they'd find.
''It's one of the nicest Christmas presents that we got,'' he said of the banner. Then, wistfully: ''It's nice to finally be recognized as one of the greatest people.''
ALEX MINDLIN
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: SOHO
