Alexander Eror, a soft-spoken, 27-year-old elementary school teacher, does not like to think of himself as a nationalist.
So, he explained, when he voted in December for the most virulently nationalist group in Parliament, the Serbian Radical Party, it was not for its long support of a Greater Serbia or for its leader, Vojislav Sesejl, who is facing war crimes charges in The Hague.
Instead, he said, he made his decision because of the sight of his neighbor's top-of-the-line sports car.
His neighbor, Mr. Eror is convinced, is part of a criminal elite that emerged in the 1990's while the former president, Slobodan Milosevic, was still in power, and continued to prosper even under an elected government dominated by reformers.
''I expected crime to be uprooted,'' he said. ''Nothing has changed.''
The anger and disillusionment of Serbs like Mr. Eror goes some way in explaining how the Serbian Radical Party became the election's big winner, with 28 percent of the vote, and is now the largest party in the 250-seat Parliament.
The victory has thrown pro-reform parties into disarray, stalled formation of a coalition government and sent chills through the ranks of Western analysts who are fearful that nationalism may again be on the rise in Serbia.
Political analysts here acknowledge that nationalism remains a powerful undercurrent in Serbian politics. Certainly, Mr. Eror's decision was made easier by the fact that Serbs generally have yet fully to face their role in the wars of the 1990's that left their country isolated and economically shattered.
At the same time, opinion polls showed that Mr. Eror's concerns -- unemployment, low living standards, economic decline, and not least, corruption and crime -- were shared by a majority of voters.
As much as anything, analysts here say, the vote's outcome reflected disappointment with an elected government that failed to live up to its promises to bring about economic and political change, and to crack down on rampant cronyism and racketeering.
Each morning, Mr. Eror said, he had left his parents' home in Belgrade with a sense of anger. He watched his neighbor, also in his 20's, grow richer, while his own salary stagnated at $200 a month. At school, too, he said, a small group of rich children emerged, while a majority stayed poor.
Like more than half the Serbian electorate, Mr. Eror voted to remove Mr. Milosevic from office. His removal as Yugoslavia's federal president was followed by the election of an unwieldy 18-party coalition government in Serbia's state Parliament. Three years later, Mr. Eror said, his neighbor's car reminded him how little that government achieved.
Vojislav Kostunica, the former president who defeated Mr. Milosevic in elections three years ago, said in a recent interview that the new government was under huge pressure to perform.
After 10 years of war and international sanctions, he said, Serbs ''expected and looked forward to some quick change, improvement of their situation.''
The expectations of the government, he said, ''were even larger than in other post-Communist countries,'' where people also returned to voting for Communist parties after an initial round of disappointment in elected reformers.
He maintained that Serbia had seen some change for the better. Growth in 2003 was estimated by the World Bank to be 4 percent. The hyperinflation of the 1990's is over. The dinar is stable. Many indicators suggest that living standards have improved in the past three years.
But those advances were overshadowed, political analysts say, by deep divisions in the coalition government, political paralysis and allegations of corruption.
''These guys have discredited democracy, it's covered with mud,'' said Ljiljana Smajlovic, a journalist and political commentator with the weekly magazine Nin.
In 2002, two important groups in the coalition fell out. Mr. Kostunica withdrew his Serbian Democratic Party from the coalition, accusing the prime minister, Zoran Djindjic, of abusing the law in his pursuit of reforms and failing to crack down on criminals, some of whom the president claimed were closely linked to Mr. Djindjic.
Two senior aides to Mr. Djindjic, who was assassinated last March by a member of an elite police squad that prosecutors say has links to organized crime, were forced to resign last summer after it was revealed that they carried out a series of deals with offshore companies.
Most recently, Miodrag Kostic, a donor to Mr. Djindjic's Democratic Party, and a close friend of the former prime minister, was implicated in a sugar-trading scandal uncovered by the European Commission.
His factories were accused of importing sugar from outside Europe that was then repackaged and sold to the European Union, thereby receiving a substantial tax break.
Such stories have dominated the news media, while the more visible symbols of the Serbian economy appear to be in decline.
In cities like Kraljevo in central Serbia, the region's three biggest state conglomerates have laid off hundreds of workers.
Most recently, Fabrika Wagona, which makes railroad cars and industrial boilers, laid off 800 employees. The official unemployment rate, like in the rest of Serbia, stands at close to 30 percent.
The city's mayor, Radoslav Jovic, said in an interview that people believed that Serbia's improved cooperation with the outside world after the fall of Mr. Milosevic would yield greater benefits.
While the economy is people's overriding concern, he and other Serbs say that leftover issues from the wars that tore Yugoslavia apart have created a lingering sense of uncertainty about Serbia's future, encouraging nationalist strains.
The mayor said people were frustrated by the presence in the area of at least 17,000 refugees, some of the more than 200,000 Serbs, Gypsies and Serbian-speaking Muslims who fled Kosovo as NATO troops seized control of the province in the summer of 1999. Almost five years later, they appear no closer to going home.
Kosovo's final status has yet to be determined. It is run now by the United Nations, but legally still a part of Serbia and Montenegro, the federation that replaced Yugoslavia.
Montenegro itself, which throughout the 1990's threatened to break away, is expected hold a referendum on independence next year.
Above all, though, it is Serbia's fraught relationship with the international criminal tribunal in The Hague, which politicians blame most for bolstering the nationalists. Opinion polls show that the tribunal was not a major concern for voters during the last elections, but it remains a constant source of friction between Serbia and the West.
Most of the indictments issued by the court have been against Serbs, adding to the impression that the tribunal is biased against them, Serbs say. Western officials say the Serbs have not turned over two of the top suspects from the war, the onetime leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadzic, and the former Bosnian Serb general Ratko Mladic.
Serbian politicians dispute their presence in the country. American aid, worth up to $100 million, is conditional on full Serbian cooperation.
''The indictments of The Hague tribunal have been a sort of national humiliation,'' said Mr. Kostunica, the former president.
He urged Western governments to ease the pressure on Serbia over the tribunal if they wanted to secure the reform process, which at this point, analysts agree, is in jeopardy.
