The red paint is gone; yellow and black are now the colors of choice at racetracks all over the country. Signs around Daytona International Speedway declare a new day for Nascar: ''New Cup. New Color. Same Race.''
Little is the same around Nascar anymore. At a time when stock car racing's popularity is growing, with television viewership second to only the N.F.L.'s and a boast of 75 million fans, Nascar has undergone major changes in recent months. The leadership, competition, schedule, sponsorship, cars, gas, even the tires, are new this season, which begins Sunday with the Daytona 500. And much of it was done with an eye toward turning what used to be a little Southern racing circuit into the sport of choice in the United States.
''We're just trying to keep growing the sport,'' said Brian France, the new and telegenic face of Nascar.
France, 41, was named chairman and chief executive of Nascar last October, taking over the family business from his father, Bill France Jr. As senior vice president last year, Brian France was heavily involved in recruiting Nextel Communications to be the naming sponsor of Nascar's elite racing series. Nextel and its yellow-and-black scheme replace Winston, whose red-and-white logos had adorned tracks since 1972. The series is now called the Nextel Cup, the most visible change fans will see in Nascar's much-desired coupling with a high-tech company.
But perhaps the more telling change in Nascar's bid to capture new fans and greater national visibility, and the most controversial move among drivers in the garage, is the restructuring of the points system that determines the annual champion. In his first signature move as chairman, France spearheaded the decision to use the first 26 races to set a 10-car field for a runoff in the final 10 races of the season that will decide the winner.
The points system has drawn varying responses from the drivers. The veteran Jeff Burton is among those applauding the move by Nascar, which has traditionally experienced a drop in interest when the N.F.L. season and the baseball playoffs begin.
''How many people watched the Super Bowl?'' Burton said. ''If that system was based on points and the Panthers, based on the number of wins that they had versus the number of wins the New England Patriots had, New England would have had 89 points when the game started and Carolina zero. Nobody would watch. It was zero-zero and people turned in and they showed up. That's what the new system is all about.''
Dale Earnhardt Jr. represents the old school of thought in Nascar. His father, Dale, won seven titles under the former system, in which drivers simply accumulated points throughout the 36-race season.
''I read an article where a driver was talking about it,'' Earnhardt said, ''and he said we compare ourselves to other sports and we talk the talk about how much different we are, how much better we are, and here we are trying to emulate them.''
He added: ''I don't think racecars and racecar drivers and playoffs should be in the same sentence. I think it's pretty ridiculous, but that's the way it is.''
The introduction of Toyota to the Craftsman Truck series, the first foreign-based manufacturer in Nascar since Jaguar ran in the 1950's, has drawn some controversy as well. Nascar has long held a rule that only American-made cars or trucks may compete in its events. Although Toyota is a Japanese company, it manufactures the Tundra in the United States.
Still, driver Jimmy Spencer slammed Toyota's entry during a media day in Texas last month. In somewhat colorful language, Spencer told The San Antonio Express-News that he wanted the Ford, Chevrolet and Dodge trucks to rout Toyota.
Jim Aust, president and chief executive of Toyota Racing Development U.S.A., said he was surprised by the comments, particularly because Spencer was among the first to apply to Toyota to be a part of the program. Aust said Spencer withdrew his application.
''Certainly the fact that Toyota's been selling cars and trucks here in the United States since 1957 still doesn't eliminate people from thinking that Toyota's an outsider,'' Aust said.
That is why Toyota joined Nascar in the first place, Aust said.
''Ultimately it gets back to selling trucks, exposure for the brand and the Americanization of Toyota,'' he said. ''The company spends a tremendous amount of money with advertising, in print as well as television, trying to get the word out that Toyota builds cars and trucks in the United States. People will look at and read it, but probably don't pay a lot of attention to it in some regards. So entering the Craftsman Truck series, which is a series that was made in America, is only run in America, what better way to say that you're part of America?''
Beyond the new logos and competition, Nascar has angered some fans in the South by adjusting the schedule this year. Officials moved the Southern 500, a Labor Day tradition in Darlington, S.C., to November and eliminated a race in Rockingham, N.C. The precious Labor Day weekend race will be in Fontana, Calif.
Nascar also made significant changes to the spoiler and tires of Nextel Cup cars. The alterations will affect preparation and strategy during races in hopes of improving competition. But after the Gatorade 125 qualifying races Thursday at Daytona, driver Robby Gordon said about the new tires, ''They're junk.''
Maybe they're just a work in progress, as is the rest of Nascar. France said he never intended for Nascar to undergo so much change in such a short time. But as he pointed out, some of that was out of his control. R. J. Reynolds, which makes Winston cigarettes, chose to end its agreement with Nascar in part because of advertising restrictions on tobacco products.
''If we were choosing all of it to happen, we would do a different sequence, for sure,'' France said. ''When Winston had their issues, we had to deal with it right then, and Toyota had announced a couple years ago, this was their year and they were on a schedule. The points was something that we didn't feel like we wanted to wait. It was such a dynamic, good idea, that we wanted to take advantage of that right away. So I agree it's a lot. On the other hand, you've got to do what you've got to do.''
Inevitably, Nascar will continue to evolve. France has pushed hard to promote its diversity program, hoping to tap into the vast minority-group fan base that has eluded the sport. The schedule will be adjusted again, with an announcement expected early this season.
Beyond that, the France family's sister company, International Speedway Corporation, continues to look at the Meadowlands sports complex in East Rutherford, N.J., for possible construction of a racetrack.
''I don't think it's pipe dreams,'' France said. ''It's a longer push, but it's an important goal. I know some people are working on that.''
If Nascar can conquer the New York metropolitan area, the next step will be to go global. Yes, France said, Nascar is working on developing an overseas series someday.
''I went to Europe myself,'' he said. ''We're going to have a smart international strategy. I don't know what that strategy is going to be. We know our style of racing is far and away the most competitive and exciting anywhere in the world. Can we take that with people on the ground in the right places in the world and develop a Nascar-type franchise? We probably can over a long period of time. That's what we're trying to carefully do.''
AUTO RACING
