Just when it seems as if they cannot get any worse, the Rangers sink to new depths. On Saturday afternoon, they displayed little fight and less emotion in a 6-2 loss to the Philadelphia Flyers.
Two days after the Flyers' captain, Keith Primeau, sustained a concussion after colliding with Bobby Holik at Madison Square Garden, Philadelphia played as if there were a bounty on Holik's head. The Rangers finally put up a fight in the third period, but by then they were down by five goals.
''The way we ended the game, maybe we should have started that way,'' said Rangers left wing Chris Simon, who confronted Holik's biggest tormentor, the Philadelphia enforcer Donald Brashear, with 2 minutes 55 seconds remaining in regulation. The confrontation occurred only after Brashear hounded Holik around the ice in the waning minutes of a game that had long been decided.
''We were outplayed,'' Holik said. ''That's what I have a problem with. Everyone's talking about the last five minutes of the game. What about the first 40 minutes?''
Holik said he felt responsible for John LeClair's goal at 17:20 of the first period, which gave the Flyers a 2-0 lead. Holik also said that he lost his man on Michal Handzus's power-play goal, at 3:32 of the second period, which put the Flyers up by 3-0. Holik was also on the ice for both of the goals by the rookie center Patrick Sharp, at 14:39 and 19:28 of the second period, which put Philadelphia up by 6-1.
''I was part of the problem,'' said Holik, who, with Aleksei Kovalev, registered a team-worst plus-minus differential of minus-3. ''That's what I have a problem with.''
The defeat dropped the Rangers to a season-worst five games under .500, at 21-26-7-4. Over the last month, they are 3-10-2-0.
With 24 games remaining on their regular-season schedule, they trail the Islanders by 10 points for the eighth and final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference.
The Rangers have yet to put together a three-game winning streak this season, and they have not won two straight games since late December.
The N.H.L.'s trading deadline is March 11. Glen Sather, the team's embattled president, general manager and coach, may become a seller at the deadline instead of the buyer the Rangers have almost always been.
''I don't think it's appropriate here to get into anything like that and start speculating,'' said Sather, who is in his fourth season running the Rangers.
SLAP SHOTS
Rangers goaltender MIKE DUNHAM was pulled after two periods after allowing 6 goals on 18 shots. . . . Defenseman FEDOR TYUTIN, the Rangers' top prospect, made his N.H.L. debut. ''When he's got the puck, he plays very well,'' Rangers Coach GLEN SATHER said. ''He handles it well and he is composed. He's a talented kid. He has some aspects to learn about his own end, but he did very well for his first game, and I knew this wouldn't be an easy game for him to play in.'' Tyutin, 20, had not played since spraining knee ligaments in the minor leagues on Jan. 8. After the game, Tyutin said: ''It was very exciting. I'm not so happy about the final score.'' Tyutin dressed in place of JOEL BOUCHARD (concussion). . . . The Flyers have won all four meetings between the two teams this season. . . . Both teams were without two star forwards. For the Rangers, ERIC LINDROS missed his seventh consecutive game with a concussion, and JAROMIR JAGR sat out his first game with a sore groin muscle. For the Flyers, JEREMY ROENICK (fractured jaw, concussion) and KEITH PRIMEAU (concussion) were out.
HOCKEY
