WHEN the Katonah-Lewisboro School District dismissed school early a few weeks ago in anticipation of a major snowstorm, Maria Arena, a parent in the district, was in the midst of her usual morning errands.
What could have been complicated under the circumstances -- finding out that her sixth grader was being dismissed at 11 a.m., and her fifth grader was being dismissed at noon -- was surprisingly simple.
Her husband, having received an e-mail message from the district, called her on her cellphone to alert her, she said. ''I wasn't near a computer, and in no position to get the message,'' Mrs. Arena said of the new e-mail notification service the school uses. ''I gave the district my home e-mail, and my husband's office e-mail. It's really convenient. This is an invaluable service.''
Such praise is exactly what the district wants to hear from the 1,000 families who have signed up to receive real-time e-mail notifications about emergency dismissals, snow closings and other important information. ''What got it going was the weather this year,'' Don Scott, president of the Katonah-Lewisboro school board, said in a telephone interview. ''There were 300 registered until it snowed. Now we have over 1,000. We have close to half of the parent households in the district on e-mail. It's a supplement that enhances what's already in place.''
Instead of the usual bleary-eyed scramble at 6 a.m. to dial a school district office to find out about weather-related delays or closings, or the tried-and-true telephone tree, or struggling to listen to the local radio or television station, many parents have become used to logging on to their computers.
''There are friends of mine whom I told about the e-mail notification,'' Mrs. Arena said, ''and one said that she knew the night before about a two-hour delay the next morning.''
Many districts already have adopted e-mail to keep parents informed about homework and other classroom projects, or to post school newsletters and other information that usually would be stuffed (and buried) in students' backpacks. Increasingly, Web sites provide information on everything from Board of Education minutes to lists of a high school's National Merit semifinalists. Community members often sign up as well, to obtain information about the budget process or continuing education classes.
E-mail also has its place in the classroom. For example, fourth-year Spanish students at Gorton High School in Yonkers are using the district's e-mail to communicate with students in Mexico.
Ardsley and Katonah-Lewisboro are two districts that have recently contracted with Message Logix Inc., a Web-based e-mail marketing and messaging company, according to the its president and chief executive, Gregory Bender, with headquarters in Rye, to use the company's Campaign Builder software to reach parents. They inform them not only of snow delays or school closings, but also tell them about coming athletic and cultural events, PTA meetings or other postings.
The Campaign Builder system can also target parents precisely -- by their child's school, grade, even extracurricular interests -- to deliver information.
''We can also do an explanation of when things will be rescheduled,'' Mr. Scott said. ''The system for emergency dismissals can make 3,000 phone calls in less than 20 minutes, and wait for confirmation that someone heard the message.'' Traditional emergency phone chains can take up to two hours to call the same number of parents.
There are also financial benefits. In Ardsley, where about 1,800 parents and residents have signed up for the e-mail notification system, Schools Superintendent Richard Maurer estimates that the annual $6,000 cost of having Campaign Builder will be offset by reduced mailings, which cost the district more than $10,000 a year.
''We do a newsgram every month, that's similar to the district newsletter, with hyperlinks back to the district's Web page,'' Dr. Maurer said in a telephone interview. ''It's convenient for parents to see the highlights and read school news at work.''
The Campaign Builder contract in Ardsley is about $ 7,250 a year, Mr. Bender said.
The Ardsley school board president, Joanne Sold, said in a telephone interview: ''The hope is that we'll get off paper-based notices that cost money to reproduce and mail. We can't quantify it yet.''
Frank Hariton, an Ardsley school board trustee, said in a telephone interview: ''Do we save $7,000? You do a few mass mailings, and you're there. The postage alone to reach 3,500 homes is $900.''
The Katonah-Lewisboro school district started its e-mail system about two months ago (signing up with Campaign Builder about two weeks ago). According to the district superintendent, Robert Lichtenfeld, the decision was prompted by a request from an person who runs Lewisboro's Web site, who wanted to be on the school's emergency notification chain. ''We didn't want to do that, because we wanted to restrict who got those notices,'' Dr. Lichtenfeld said in a telephone interview.
Although the products are not exactly identical, there are other companies, like Alertnow and Pace America, which offer some similar services.
Still, there are some questions about potential problems and downsides to these systems. ''We have been looking at and talking about a reverse 911 system for six months,'' Carole Andreasen, director of technology for the Rye City School District, said in a telephone interview. ''We want the right product on board. A prime issue for us is does everyone have an e-mail? You don't have everybody on computers. And if somebody fills out a form, there's no way of knowing if it's fictitious. The data is only as good as what you get. There's the potential of anyone signing up, and getting those e-mails.''
Another issue, Mrs. Andreasen said, has to do with the technology. ''Let's say there's an emergency in school, if the electricity is out. How do we alert people via e-mail?''
She also said that deciding who is responsible for posting the e-mail messages (school closings may come from the superintendent, but what about a canceled school trip or an athletic event that has been to another location?) can become complicated.
''Where do you draw the line?'' She said. ''You need to be very careful. This is a wonderful opportunity, and I'm very impressed. The question remains how to you minimize vulnerability, maximize productivity and get the best return on your investment.''
Then too, there are concerns about potential viruses, or spam, affecting the system.
In an e-mail message, Mr. Bender said: ''Our systems are protected and closed and cannot send out viruses. Since our systems are closed, no spammer can use them to send or relay Spam Messaging. Our systems run on eight different types of servers, the servers are segmented and security protected with firewalls and run in a secure data center called the Bunker.''
Of course, not all families in all communities have e-mail. Nor are all those who have e-mail likely to log on to their computers before dawn to find out the snow status at their school. So schools can't abandon traditional forms of communicating with parents, like phone chains and printed newsletters. Dr. Maurer said: ''It'll never substitute for the print medium entirely. But parents don't want more junk mail coming into the home.''
Still, Mrs. Arena said: ''It's a lot easier than waiting for the radio. It's another way the district provides a service. People are so much more computer savvy. It's second nature to click on.''
IN THE SCHOOLS E-mail: wested@nytimes.com
