YOU'RE going to have to trust me on this one.
The Sir Francis Drake, served at Hearth, a restaurant on East 12th Street, is a shot of sherry, topped off with Clamato juice. It's delicious.
Mike Mraz, the bar manager who invented it, has 10 years of experience bartending, including ''a bar in a dry county in Kansas,'' he said, but his specialty cocktail list for Hearth is a kind of prodigious first.
Included is the Huckleberry Ginn, a gin cooler with huckleberry syrup and ginger beer, and the Martin Luther -- a gin martini with a wash of Bushmills Irish whiskey instead of vermouth. Mr. Mraz's directive from Paul Grieco, the general manager, who was formerly the service and wine director at Gramercy Tavern, and from Marco Canora, formerly the chef at Craft, was to create cocktails with three ingredients or fewer. That makes them perfect for adventurous home consumption.
The Sir Francis Drake, which is seasoned with celery salt, black pepper, Tabasco and freshly grated horseradish, tastes like a sherry and a tapa together in a glass. Mr. Mraz said he typically spent more time explaining the name than making the drink.
''He's the guy who defeated the Spanish Armada,'' Mr. Mraz said of Sir Francis. ''Part of the booty was 16,000 barrels of sherry, which is one of the reasons sherry became such a popular thing in England.''
When I arrived last Friday night, the bar at Hearth was crowded with unapologetic wine drinkers -- prosperous types who can take up two bar stools and not feel bothered to move. There were three women in dark day-to-evening suits, with haircuts as opposed to hairdos, light makeup and small, sensible earrings -- the fashion equivalent of political correctness.
Hearth's waiters wear Tommy Hilfiger striped dress shirts and new bluejeans. The long, low room, with a red ceiling and copper beams, a slate-floored bar at one end and a cork-floored dining room at the other, looks like a dining hall at a nice and expensive Northeastern prep school. Diners appeared to be in their early 30's or late 40's, still game for a trip to the East Village if it involved a destination like a restaurant. Hearth, on Friday night, looked and sounded like a Groton reunion.
Sailing smoothly with Sir Francis, I circumnavigated the rest of the cocktail menu. The Huckleberry Ginn was part aperitif, part palate cleanser -- a public television version of cocktail drinking and Twain. The Martin Luther nails you to the door. Mr. Mraz warned me about drinking it. I think that I am not spiritually (as in mixed drinks) rigorous enough for the Martin Luther.
I want to see the world, I thought as I finished my Sir Francis Drake, not leave it.
SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  Adapted from Hearth
4 ounces Mott's Clamato juice  Dash each of celery salt, black pepper, Tabasco and freshly grated horseradish  2 ounces Tío Pepe dry sherry  Lemon wedge.
1. Mix Clamato juice with spices and seasonings. Pour the sherry into an 8-ounce glass filled with ice. Top off with spiced Clamato juice, and garnish with the lemon wedge.
SHAKEN AND STIRRED
