FEDERAL and state regulators have begun to investigate whether mutual funds are being included in 401(k) retirement plans for the wrong reasons. Instead of selecting funds because they are the best available, regulators say, some consultants and plan administrators may be choosing them because of hidden financial incentives.
These inquiries are an outgrowth of long-running investigations into abuses by mutual funds and brokerage firms, according to officials at the Securities and Exchange Commission and the office of Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general.
''We are concerned that mutual funds are paying for the privilege of appearing on 401(k) menus,'' said David D. Brown IV, chief of the investment protection bureau in Mr. Spitzer's office. He said the important questions were, ''Is this in the best interest of 401(k) savers, and are these arrangements being disclosed?''
Lori A. Richards, director of the S.E.C. office of compliance inspections and examinations, said the agency had begun to focus on why consultants recommend certain investments for 401(k) menus and pension funds.
''This is our first avenue of inquiry'' into retirement industry practices, she said. ''We will go wherever the investigation takes us.''
The inquiries of both the S.E.C. and the attorney general's office are in an early phase, and no charges have been made against any companies.
One investigative target, Mr. Brown said, is a practice known in the industry as revenue sharing, in which 401(k) administrative costs are paid from mutual fund fees, some of which may be distributed to administrators, sponsors, brokers and others associated with a 401(k) plan.
Revenue sharing is used by roughly 90 percent of 401(k) plans, according to Michael Weddell, a retirement consultant at Watson Wyatt Worldwide. Across the country, 401(k)'s have a total of $1.5 trillion in assets, according to the Labor Department.
Most people are unaware of how their 401(k) plans are paid for, said R. Theodore Benna, a consultant in Jersey Shore, Pa., who designed the nation's first 401(k) plan more than 20 years ago. ''Participants think their 401(k)'s are free because they aren't writing out a check,'' he said. ''The costs are actually buried and not revealed to them.''
The S.E.C., Ms. Richards said, is examining whether consultants for both 401(k)'s and pension funds are receiving perks from asset management firms for recommending their mutual funds or money management services. It is looking into whether the consultants are encouraging these firms to buy the consultants' software and services in pay-to-play schemes, she said.
Hidden financial incentives may motivate consultants, brokers and others to recommend expensive investment choices for retirement plans because they spin off more cash or other rewards for themselves. Mr. Brown said that he sees possible parallels with arrangements in which mutual funds have paid brokerage firms for preferential treatment.
William C. Carey, president of Fidelity Institutional Retirement Services Company, which administers $500 billion in 401(k) assets for 8.5 million participants, said he was not surprised that Mr. Spitzer's office was broadening its inquiries to include 401(k)'s. ''If the end result is greater clarity, greater disclosure and greater decision-making, that's a great thing for the industry and the individual investor,'' he said. Fidelity has not been accused of any wrongdoing as a result of investigations into mutual funds.
Donald B. Trone, president of the Foundation for Fiduciary Studies, a nonprofit organization in Sewickley, Pa., that advises investment professionals on fiduciary practices, said he saw similarities between questionable practices involving financial services companies inside and outside the retirement plan arena. ''Mutual fund scandals, 401(k) abuses and consultant pay-to-play arrangements are linked by the fact that fiduciaries parlayed their positions of trust for personal profit,'' he said.
All plan sponsors must comply with the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, or Erisa, which requires that employers make sure that the costs of their 401(k) plans are reasonable. The Labor Department can hold employers who fail to monitor plan costs financially liable.
Ann L. Combs, an assistant secretary of labor and head of the Employee Benefits Security Administration, said that while the agency was not conducting a special investigation of 401(k) practices, ''the whole issue of fees is one the agency has been focused on for some time.'' Any employer, she noted, can get a copy of the 401(k) Plan Fee Disclosure Form from the agency to help understand plan expenses.
REVENUE-SHARING arrangements, sometimes called bundling, can be particularly appealing to smaller companies that do not have the experience or time to oversee details of a 401(k). Instead, a vendor, like a mutual fund company, broker, consultant, insurer or bank, oversees a plan's daily operations.
Mr. Carey said that, typically, non-Fidelity fund companies pay a maximum of 0.35 percent to be included in 401(k) plans administered by Fidelity. ''They are very aware of the costs of administering the plan,'' he said of companies with 401(k)'s.
Supporters of revenue sharing maintain that by shifting costs to workers, the practice has made it easier for many companies to start plans.
''Bundled arrangements have absolutely encouraged small businesses to start 401(k)'s,'' said David L. Wray, president of the Profit Sharing/401(k) Council of America, a nonprofit industry group, said.
Critics of revenue sharing say the practice discourages employers from using lower-cost, institutional shares of mutual funds, as well as other low-cost options that may not generate much excess cash.
Here is how revenue sharing can work: A company chooses a vendor to assemble a 401(k) plan. The vendor recommends funds that will ultimately pay the vendor some of the fees generated by funds within a 401(k). The amount of the payback can be negotiable. A prime source of this cash is the fund's 12b-1 fee, which is intended to pay for marketing and distribution costs. The fee ranges from a quarter of a percentage point to 1 percent of the assets in a worker's account. The vendor pockets some of the money it collects from participating funds and uses the rest to pay for record-keeping and expenses like employee communications.
If a fund company will not pay to be included in a 401(k) lineup or will not pay enough, its funds, even those with impressive performance records, may not be considered for inclusion.
This has happened often to the Vanguard Group's low-cost funds, which don't charge 12b-1 fees, the company says. Gerry Mullane, Vanguard's director of institutional sales, said he had been contacted by brokers who wanted to include Vanguard funds in 401(k)'s. But, he added, ''When brokers realize they won't be compensated for placing our funds in a plan, they will typically hang up on us.''
Under revenue-sharing arrangements, workers pay 401(k) costs based on how much money they have in their accounts, not how much it costs to manage them. During bull markets, revenue-sharing cash can skyrocket, even if costs like those for employee account maintenance and enrollment meetings remain fairly stable.
Many workers would fare better if their plans used funds that did not spin off revenue-sharing cash, and if either the employer or workers paid for record-keeping separately, said Mark A. Davis, owner of a consulting firm in Thousand Oaks, Calif., that advises small and midsize companies about 401(k) options. Administrative costs, including those for record-keeping, are estimated at $100 to $150 a worker per year, according to the McHenry Group, a consulting firm in Emeryville, Calif.
It is possible to establish 401(k) plans without revenue sharing. Big corporations, with many millions of dollars in their plans, are more inclined to choose a low-cost option for their workers, Mr. Benna said. As an example, he cited I.B.M., whose workers pay an average expense ratio of a mere one-tenth of a percentage point for their 401(k) investments that are overseen by institutional money managers.
A big drawback of the present system, said Brooks Hamilton, an employee benefits lawyer in Dallas, is that companies lack an incentive to keep 401(k) costs low because they are not footing the bill. Yet Fred Reish, a lawyer who handles Erisa issues and is a partner at Reish Luftman Reicher &amp; Cohen in Los Angeles, said plan sponsors were risking legal action if they did not examine their plans' costs. It is the duty of the employer who is a fiduciary ''to understand all the costs embedded in a 401(k) package,'' Mr. Reish said.
One 401(k) provider, Nationwide Financial Services and Nationwide Life Insurance, has been sued in United States District Court in Bridgeport, Conn., by five employers who contend that Nationwide selected funds for their 401(k)'s based on the amount of revenue sharing it could pocket rather than focusing on performance and low cost. ''I think potentially the whole practice of revenue sharing could be called into question,'' said Roger L. Mandel, a lawyer in Dallas who is seeking class-action status to include other companies using Nationwide for their 401(k)'s. A judge is expected to rule on this motion in the next couple of months.
In a statement, Nationwide said that the suit had ''no merit and is based on many allegations that are untrue.'' Nationwide added that the 401(k) contracts that the plaintiffs were challenging in the lawsuit ''are widely accepted in the industry.''
Jackie Killgore, chief operations officer of Walker MacRae, a firm in Manchester, N.H., that assists companies in analyzing 401(k) plans, said that many company executives were not aware of revenue-sharing.
JOSEPH F. DOBRYDNEY, the controller of Binghamton Giant Markets, a grocery chain based in Vestal, N.Y., with 1,000 employees, once fell into that category. Mr. Dobrydney, who learned about revenue sharing from Walker MacRae, said that from 1999 to 2002, he reviewed 401(k) proposals from several big companies. ''Revenue sharing was not even mentioned,'' he said. ''When I did mention revenue sharing, people seemed to be surprised, to say the least.''
Mr. Dobrydney used what he learned about the subject to ultimately choose institutional class shares of American Funds, which offered many funds with expense ratios of less than 1 percent.
Employers should check at least every three years for the best deals for their employees, Mr. Reish said.
And Mr. Trone suggested that companies should consider abandoning bundled 401(k) plans when the account balance of the average participant reached $20,000. ''When you unbundle, you put record-keeping, administration and investment management out for bid,'' he said, ''and it is now more cost effective to look for funds with lower expense ratios or perhaps low-cost investments like exchange-traded funds.''
