Four Afghans working to remove land mines were shot dead by suspected Taliban or Al Qaeda assailants pursuing them in a car in southern Afghanistan on Saturday, officials said.
The attack is the latest in a series that have killed at least 20 foreign and Afghan aid workers since last March, in what local and international officials say is a campaign to scare away foreign aid and undermine the government.
The governor of Farar Province, where the incident occurred, said he was sure the killings were the work of Taliban or Al Qaeda because the assailants did not take the mine-removal workers' money or belongings.
''We think these were remnants of Taliban and Al Qaeda,'' the governor, Abdul Hai Neamati, said by telephone. ''In Farar it is the second attack by the enemy.'' He called the attack on these workers ''cowardly.''
''All over Afghanistan, the enemy want to destabilize, destroy the security and create chaos; this is their goal,'' he added.
A spokesman for the United Nations Mine Action Center for Afghanistan confirmed that the victims were staff workers from the Afghan mine removal agency, Organization for Mine Clearance and Afghan Reconstruction. They had been traveling back to the western town of Herat from a supply trip to their teams working in Farar Province, in southwestern Afghanistan.
The spokesman, Patrick Fruchet, said he did not know who the attackers were. ''We do not know if they were Taliban or Al Qaeda, but it has shocked all our staff workers,'' he said. Three of the men who died were from Herat and one was from Kabul, he said.
Banditry is common in the area, with frequent robberies and car thefts along its roads. But the governor said one of the workers, who was still alive when the police reached the scene, had described the attackers, saying they drove a station wagon, chased the workers' vehicle and opened fire, then fled.
The wounded man died on the way to hospital, the governor said.
The attack follows a shooting of census officials from Central Statistics Office in Farar in November in which one man was killed and another wounded, the governor said.
