IN the late 1960's, Melvin Woody, a philosophy professor, and some of his solitude-loving academic colleagues built homes on a quiet chunk of land along Beaver Brook, a plentiful tributary of the Eight Mile River in Lyme.
For the last three decades, they have walked their dogs in the woods, cooled off in the brook in the summer and generally enjoyed the bucolic, almost sentimental lifestyle of a rural town like Lyme.
But for the past year, their peace has been riddled by the prospect of something decidedly unbucolic: a neighboring gravel pit that would yield about 750,000 cubic yards of lucrative construction-grade gravel to an out-of-town developer through the next five to 10 years.
The notion of the pit -- something opponents of the project frequently refer to with terms like ''wound'' and ''gash'' -- has triggered an expensive and protracted battle that underscores just how difficult it can be to limit certain types of industry, even in an adamantly rural and affluent town like Lyme.
Early last year, Daniel Troiano, of North Branford, proposed excavating 900,000 cubic yards of gravel from a 15-acre site south of Beaver Brook Road over the course of the next several years, depending on the pace of the excavation. He arranged to purchase 70 acres from Robert Congdon, a longtime town resident, on the condition that he get approval from town commissions to go ahead with the project.
Mr. Troiano outlined a detailed restoration plan that promises to plant 4,000 trees at the site after the excavation ends and cover each opened area with topsoil and re-seed it. He has also pledged to give 31 acres at the southern end of the property to the town as open space when the project is complete.
Yet, despite his offers and the careful plans of one of the largest environmental consulting firms in the state, the town's Inland Wetlands Conservation Commission rejected the proposal last July on the basis of 12 concerns, including the potentially damaging effects on wetlands, wildlife and Beaver Brook itself.
Mr. Troiano, whose company C. Troiano and Sons Inc., of North Branford, would operate the gravel pit, then appealed the commission's ruling, saying the initial application met the town's regulations, and the commission's decision was ''arbitrary and capricious.'' The lawsuit is still pending.
''We have a two-pronged strategy,'' said Robert Ward, Mr. Troiano's lawyer. ''We think they should have accepted the first application, but the appeal could be tied up for years, so we've submitted another application, which we think addresses their objections.''
The 70-acre property south of Beaver Brook has several wetlands areas and a vernal, or seasonal, pool; in the commission's rejection of Mr. Troiano's initial application, they figured prominently. A 2,000-foot access road leading to the pit site crosses a wetlands area, and by Mr. Troiano's own estimates, dump trucks would make a 120 trips a day on the road to haul gravel. In the initial application, Mr. Troiano also planned to build a box culvert across Beaver Brook, which the commission rejected, saying it would disrupt fisheries resources.
The nearly seven-mile brook leads into the Eight Mile River, a tributary of the Connecticut River, now being considered for a national designation under the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act, and the surrounding 6,250 watershed is considered pristine by environmental groups.
''Any time you have a change this radical, it's certainly going to have an impact on that integrity,'' said Nathan Frohling, of the Nature Conservancy. ''We did express our great concern.''
Lyme has about 2,000 residents and roughly two-thirds of the town's land is designated open space, the legacy of residents who methodically gave land to groups like the Nature Conservancy in an effort to maintain its rural character.
''We're torn between sharing the treasure and keeping it to ourselves,'' said Carl Christensen, a resident on Beaver Brook road. ''It's so glorious.''
About 10 years ago, a group of local residents living along Beaver Brook banded together as the Pleasant Valley Association to fight another proposed gravel pit, but when that plan was rejected and its mission faded, the association languished. Last year, the association resurfaced, signing up some 90 households as members, collecting dues and contributions and spending $36,700 to fight Mr. Troiano by hiring lawyers of its own to help the group challenge the proposal during the public hearing process last year.
''That was a lot of money, but it worked,'' said Mr. Woody, who is a board member of the association. ''We won.''
Last year, the Connecticut Supreme Court issued a decision in another land-use case, giving Mr. Troiano the steam he needed to again reapply to the wetlands commission. In that case, Avalon Bay vs. the town of Wilton Inland Wetlands Commission, the court said that wetlands commissions did not have jurisdiction on the upland breeding habitats surrounding vernal pools, but only on the pools themselves and a buffer area surrounding them.
The change prompted Mr. Troiano's re-application, submitted earlier this year, which includes modifications to address the commission's initial objections. The proposal calls for the removal of only 750,000 cubic yards of gravel and a 42-foot abutment bridge crossing Beaver Brook.
Under the new plan, graded crushed stone roads would be installed, rather than pavement, to control dust and limit run-off. Also, sediment filter fences would surround the pit and the bridge; no more than two acres would be exposed at any time during the excavation; and the pit would not be as deep or wide, staying clear of wetlands and ground water.
''We feel we've addressed concerns,'' said John M. Milone, the president of Milone and MacBroom, the environmental consulting company based in Cheshire that drew up plans for the site. ''We've taken steps to minimize the impact.''
''When you're doing developer advocate work, there's typically opposition and scrutiny,'' Mr. Milone added, noting that his company did about 50 percent of its work in the public sector for government infrastructure projects. ''In essence, the entire excavation is outside their jurisdiction.''
Recently, the wetlands commission held the first in a series of public hearings, which will enable the town to hear the specifics of the new proposal and to comment. At the meeting, the wetlands chairman, Donald Gerber, warned residents against delivering ''emotional dissertations.''
''This is not a popularity contest,'' Mr. Gerber said. ''We have a set or regulations to look at.''
In the next few weeks, the commission will review the new proposal, and if it passes the commission's scrutiny, it will then be reviewed by the town's planning and zoning commission, where issues like traffic impact and noise will be addressed.
There are two existing gravel pits along Beaver Brook that were grandfathered in before the current zoning regulations were in place. But according to Mr. Gerber, though the regulations have changed, gravel pits could still be allowed with special permits. That concerns residents who say the entire watershed, with its desirable gravel, could turn into a ''gravel bank,'' and if the town allows this project to go forward, it could open the door to many more.
''The fact that we as individuals are part of this process is a counterpoint to the town folding; to the town losing its political will,'' said Edna Parry, a member of the Pleasant Valley Association at a meeting last week. ''The town now has a catalytic event, it's an important threshold.''
Indeed, the Pleasant Valley Association is trying to expand its scope by persuading other townspeople that the decision could set an important precedent.
''If we're not successful here, we're going to need the support of the whole town, because we have an industrial operation that's antithetical to the rural character of the town we've committed ourselves to,'' Mr. Woody said. ''I still think we're going to win this. You have to fight it every step of the way.''
