IN the basement of an old firehouse, Lynda and Hossein Fassa create little fashion statements that are sold across the country and around the world. Among their most popular sellers: the ''Give Peas a Chance'' baby romper.
''We've shipped tens of thousands of these,'' said Ms. Fassa, who along with her husband runs Green Babies, a company producing organic cotton outfits for children, sizes infant through 7.
Manufacturing may be dying out in other parts of Westchester County, but the Fassas are going strong, even if it's just the two of them most of the time, working in their firehouse office just three doors away from their turn-of-the-century home here.
The business was created when Ms. Fassa -- a former fashion model who later went into advertising -- began looking for ways to work at home after the birth of her first daughter, Layla. Disenchanted with the style of baby clothes she was seeing, concerned about her daughter's allergies and the toxic chemicals used to grow and process cotton, she decided to develop a line of clothing made from organic cotton.
''Layla and I spent a lot of time talking about it,'' she said, adding with a laugh, ''it's great to talk to someone who agrees with everything you say.''
Ms. Fassa said she was motivated to create something that would draw attention to the child, but at the same time be environmentally and worker friendly. But, she said, she is not trying to sell an ideology.
''We're not selling ethical standards,'' Ms. Fassa said. ''We want to sell the very cutest clothes that make the baby looked at and talked about.''
Many of the outfits feature distinctive hats like the one with ears and a row of fringe on top resembling a mane, which goes with the zebra print infant kimono and pants.
THE company got its start about 10 years ago in a one-bedroom Manhattan apartment at 10th Street and Second Avenue, which was expanded into a large closet to make a nursery for the couple's first child but soon became their warehouse. The start-up was difficult on several levels. Ms. Fassa initially did not have a sewing machine and had to sew the outfit by hand, which might show what an offbeat choice clothing manufacturing was. There were other complications, too, she said: she needed to find someone willing to sell her organic cotton in amounts of 50 yards rather than 5,000.
Her marketing surveys consisted of walking around Washington Square Park to get people's reactions to her designs.
The company's first big break came in 1994 with the order of 24 of the peas rompers, which Ms. Fassa screen-printed and sewed individually on a old Singer machine.
But working out of an apartment was difficult. The UPS delivery man was having difficulty getting orders in the small elevator (the couple's stroller didn't fit either) and the Green Babies, www.greenbabies.com, inventory was taking over Layla's bedroom. In 1997, they moved to Tarrytown and every outfit now features a label saying, ''Made in Tarrytown.''
Technically, however, the outfits are only designed, cut and later shipped from here. The fabric is made from cotton grown in Texas and California, knitted in North Carolina and then finished and printed or dyed in New Jersey. After a stop in Tarrytown for cutting, it is then sent to a small family-run factory in Queens to be sewn. The finished garments are then returned to Tarrytown for inspection and shipping.
Mr. Fassa, who had been running the Stella Adler Conservatory of Acting, quit in 1996 to handle the business side of Green Babies, and the couple split their time between the shop and home so one of them could be with the children. There are now three. Layla is 10, Mina, 7, and Nadia, 4.
While they originally had the fabric cut in a factory, the couple now handles that because it avoids waste, which can cost dearly. In a factory, they said, about 40 percent of the fabric ends up on the cutting room floor. With organic cotton costing about $6 to $7 a yard printed, compared with 60 cents to a $1 for regular cotton, there is reason to be frugal. They have had an employee in the past, but they don't now.
''Apart from the fact there is real waste, you're not making your money'' without such controls, Mr. Fassa said, noting that the company operates on a tight margin.
The items sold by the Fassas range in price from a bib at $10 to rompers in the ''Wear Your Veggies'' line, which features fruits and vegetables, for $32. The items can be bought on the couple's Web site. The company has sales of about $250,000 a year, not as high as at one time, when a large company was buying about half their production and they were selling almost $500,000 annually.
In 1999, their biggest customer, which they would identify only as a direct-mail company featuring natural baby clothes, went under after going public with a stock offering. The company, which did not pay the Fassas for an extended period, almost took Green Babies with it, and the lack of payments spilled over into their ability to pay their vendors, jeopardizing those relationships.
''I would definitely never ever do this again if I knew how difficult it was,'' Ms. Fassa said. ''Now I don't feel that way. Today, this week, I feel good. The mortgage is paid and the clothes are doing well in stores.''
Still, while the company has regained its profitability, at this point it provides only a modest existence.
''It was very rough,'' she said. ''We're still recovering from it.''
Now they stick with serving a variety of vendors and virtually all their sales are off the Internet to small specialty stores. Every season Ms. Fassa creates a line of about 150 items.
She says her main competitors were places like Target that sell well below her prices, and European-made baby clothes, which are competitive on looks.
Ronnie Cummins, founder and director of the Organic Consumers Association, an advocacy group, said traditionally the sale of organic clothes had lagged behind the organic food sector. He said, though, that there had been strong growth in the number of small companies like Green Babies as well as larger companies like Hanna Andersson, a children's clothes manufacturer, and apparel giants like Nike, getting into the organic cotton clothes market.
''I think it's going to take off, especially as people learn that conventional cotton is not only the most toxic agricultural crop in the United States, but that we do end up eating most of the cotton boll through other products,'' he said, noting that dairy cows eat cottonseed, bringing residue from pesticides into their milk products.
On the Green Babies Web site, the Fassas say that conventional cotton uses more chemical pesticides and fertilizers than most corps. The chemicals used include the defoliant paraquat and insecticides like parathion, which has been found to be 60 times more toxic than DDT.
The Fassas predict that they will see a jump in sales next year, but not necessarily because of the public's increased interest in organic clothing. No, their 4-year-old heads off to kindergarten, leaving them with more time for the family business.
''We're going to look toward doubling everything we do,'' Mr. Fassa said.
IN BUSINESS
