PEEKSKILL had reason to be proud in 1930 when the new Paramount Theater opened to raves about its architecture and interior design. The walls were covered with paintings and tapestries, and visitors gazed up at a ceiling resplendent in French Renaissance patterns of red, green and gold.
But soon the ceiling was painted over - even Peekskill old-timers say they never saw the original one - and it has been blue in recent years. Now the ceiling has been restored, thanks to the continuing efforts of the Paramount Center for the Arts, a nonprofit organization committed to returning the theater to its former glory just in time for its 75th anniversary next year. The ceiling will be unveiled, along with new stage curtains, on Thursday at 7:30 p.m., when the public is invited to a free reception and open house at the theater.
The two-month restoration took place at EverGreene Painting Studio in Manhattan, a company specializing in theater work whose projects include many Broadway theaters. In the final days before the new ceiling was installed, its curlicues and scroll patterns -- painted on canvas after stencils of the original ceiling were made -- dominated much of the studio's floor and wall space.
On one recent afternoon, four artists worked by hand on a 32-foot-long canvas, while two others used a silkscreen process to prepare smaller panels for hand-finishing.
''By putting back this ornamentation, you can see what the theater was about, so it's a major transformation,'' said Kim Lovejoy, a spokeswoman for EverGreene, whose president and founder, Jeff Greene, supervised the project. She said the colors were determined by conservators who used a microscope to analyze paint samples taken from the ceiling.
Jon Yanofsky, the Paramount's executive director, said he hoped the change would ''build the momentum'' for the next phase of the renovation, which includes new carpeting and refurbished lobbies and restrooms. ''We're hoping people will be energized about this architectural jewel right here in Westchester,'' he said.
Rapp and Rapp, a noted architectural firm, designed the building.
In 1930, the Paramount's first program featured the Paramount Symphony Orchestra, the United States Indian Reservation Band and the showing of a film, ''The Big Pond,'' starring Maurice Chevalier and Claudette Colbert. The theater thrived as a movie house for decades until shopping malls and television helped drive away audiences. After the Paramount company sold the theater in 1958, it passed from owner to owner, until it was taken over by the City of Peekskill in 1977 for nonpayment of taxes. In 1982, when George E. Pataki was mayor, the hall was reborn as a performing arts center.
The theater's winter-spring season will open Saturday at 8 p.m. with the band Buckwheat Zydeco, followed by the Boys Choir of Harlem on Feb. 28 at 8 p.m. New lighting, courtesy of the New York Power Authority, will also be on display. Other sponsors of the restoration include Entergy Nuclear Northeast, which recently announced a $100,000 challenge grant for continued capital improvements and physical renovations to the theater; Indian Point Energy Center, the Empire State Development Corporation and the City of Peekskill. Information: (914)739-2333 or www.paramountcenter.org.
