THE Comcast Corporation has offered more than $50 billion for the Walt Disney Company. If Comcast is successful, it would become the world's biggest media company. Tom Wolzien, a media analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, talked last week about the offer. Following are excerpts from the conversation:  Q. If Comcast bought Disney, would it be able to rein in the monthly prices of the programming provided to cable subscribers?
A. Owning a television network, a movie studio and cable channels like ESPN doesn't mean that Comcast would have better control over the costs.
Let's look at ESPN. Subscriber fees are between $2 and $2.50, which are payable to Disney. If you went back 10 years, the fee was probably $1. A good piece of the money is flowing into sports rights, which means it ultimately flows through to the leagues, the teams and the players.
Q. Could Comcast's management run a combined enterprise efficiently?
A. As a cable company, Comcast is terrifically managed. They did a brilliant job of putting together the assets of AT&amp;T with their own businesses.
But Disney, which has studios, cable networks and is into things like consumer licensing and real estate, is in radically different businesses.
Comcast has made it clear they don't like the management at Disney, which raises the issue of management depth at Comcast. It is hard to see how the top three or four layers of management at Disney are going to hang around if people think this deal is going to close. In addition, the longer a deal takes to close, the more the company being acquired starts to run on autopilot.
Q. Would regulators object to a combination between Comcast and Disney?
A. The political environment in Washington is such that there is very significant concern about media consolidation, and in this particular case you are talking about one entity owning one of the best television networks and a cable monopoly in the markets the cable company is operating in.
Comcast has big concentrations of subscribers in 24 of the top 26 markets in the country, and those 26 markets cover half the population. Conceivably, it could be able to suck money out of the local broadcast market from other television stations in that market by bundling the television station with the cable networks that they own.
So, even if these guys reach a deal, it could take a long time to occur. And if a Democrat becomes president, the makeup of the Federal Communications Commission changes as well.
Q. What do you think Disney is likely to do about the Comcast bid?
A. It seems to me they have three or four options. First, they can say the price Comcast is offering is not high enough, which is true.
While they are waiting, they could look for a white knight, who would structure a deal more to their liking.
Or, they could bulk themselves up by buying somebody else. There are three approaches in this scenario: buy a distribution company like an EchoStar, a like-type broadcasting company like Clear Channel Communications or do a real estate deal with a big hotel company like Starwood.
The fourth possibility is that they could make the case that the regulatory issues are scary, and that as a consequence they choose to remain independent. Disney could get away with that for a while, but if the bid gets high enough it would be hard to stick with that argument.
Q. Disney's stock did well last year. What sort of shape is the company in now?
A. The quarter they reported last week was spectacular. They blew everybody away. It was a great job.
But the reason the stock ran up substantially in 2003 was in anticipation of this kind of performance. Today, the issue is what reason do we have to anticipate improvement in 2005 and 2006, particularly without Pixar Animation and with the results of negotiations with cable companies, including Comcast, about the rates ESPN will charge. I have a market perform recommendation on the stock.
Q. Are media and entertainment still growth industries?
A. The real growth story is almost over.
At some point these will become mature companies that will be run that way. Money no longer goes into acquisitions, because there won't be anybody big left to buy.
Going forward, think of these companies as consumer cyclical stocks. It doesn't mean you can't see nice growth as the economy grows and advertising picks up, but the consolidation phase and the benefits you see from it are over.
Q. How do you handicap the outcome of Comcast versus Disney?
A. The chances are 50-50 that Comcast wins. And I think the odds are 75-25 that a year from now Disney is either with somebody else that buys them or that they have bought somebody else.
MARKET INSIGHT
