Last night, after 43 years of charming its guests with an onion tart so light it seemed held together by a wish, delicate mousselines of pike and proud soufflés that collapsed with a sigh, Manhattan's much-loved Lutèce closed its doors on its final customer. Inside the restaurant world this will surely be the signal to start pontificating about the demise of French food in New York or the end of fine dining, or the fact that nobody wants to dress up to eat out anymore.
But the truth is that the closing of Lutèce is not a sign of any dining trend at all. It's been a long time since Lutèce was a truly great restaurant, but while André Soltner, its chef almost from the start and its owner from 1972 to 1994, was at the helm it didn't matter. Ark Restaurants may have thought it was buying a restaurant when it took over the place from him, but all it purchased was some furniture and a name. When Mr. Soltner walked out the door, Lutèce went with him.
It's true that the restaurant had four stars during the last years of Mr. Soltner's reign, but it was a sentimental rating: nobody (including me) wanted to take anything away from him. This was not just because he is such a swell guy. He is a cook's cook, a man who epitomizes the best of great French gastronomy. Handsome, kind, courtly, Mr. Soltner has been lionized for most of his American career. Somehow it never went to his head. He stayed focused on the kitchen and during the 70's and 80's his cooking kept evolving, becoming lighter and fresher as it mirrored the changes taking place in France. Mr. Soltner may have been the first of the celebrity chefs, but he also understood that going out to eat is about much more than what is on the table.
In more than 30 years there were only five nights when Mr. Soltner was not at Lutèce, murmuring his way through the dining room, asking people how they had liked his food. One night in the 70's when I was there celebrating my parents' anniversary, he inquired if we had heard about the specials. Told that we had not, he said, ''Well, that's not very nice, is it?'' For the rest of the evening he kept showing up with tidbits -- puff pastry filled with foie gras, a couple of crayfish in a sauce Nantua, a single tiny artichoke. ''The room was filled with actors and ambassadors,'' said my mother as she slipped into her coat. ''But he made me feel special.''
When Lutèce opened in 1961, the Four Seasons was two years old and still astonishing the city with its magnificence. The Forum of the Twelve Caesars was the talk of the town, and the most famous French restaurant in America was Henri Soulé's starchily formal Le Pavillon. Lutèce, a town house whose upstairs dining rooms never tried to disguise their previous lives as bedrooms, must have been a breath of fresh air. A French restaurant with no hauteur? How revolutionary! From the beginning, much was made of the chef's talents. But even though it took at least a month to snag a reservation, and people were traveling from across America to eat Mr. Soltner's chicken in cream-laced Riesling with tiny marrow dumplings and saumon farci en croûte, the chef remained modest.
Then the city's food caught up with Lutèce. When the 1990's rolled around fine food was no longer a novelty in New York. By then, Lutèce was no longer cutting edge and the waiters were getting on in years. Still, most of the regular customers didn't care. If great food was easy to find, the sort of welcome that the Soltners offered was not. They made everyone feel like a long lost child who had just come home.
Given the closing of Lutèce, and two other landmark city restaurants, La Côte Basque and Lespinasse, it's tempting to think that the fine French restaurant is in decline. But there are many thriving Le Thises and La Thats, not just in New York but across the country. Notice what they have in common: an owner standing at the door. Sirio Maccioni's smile awaits at Le Cirque 2000. The Jammets warmly welcome you to La Caravelle. You'll find Maguy Le Coze at Le Bernardin and a Masson at La Grenouille. They are a major part of the package.
It's great that we now have chefs with television shows, book tours and strings of restaurants spanning the globe, and it's lovely that people who stand at the stove can now make a good living. American food is the best that it has ever been, and much of that is due to the rise of the celebrity chef. Still, when most of us go out to eat we want to feel like the star of the show -- and André Soltner never forgot that.
''We probably made a wrong turn a couple of years ago when we decided to make this menu edgy and more modern,'' Michael Weinstein, the current owner of Lutèce, told this newspaper.
What Mr. Weinstein didn't understand is that the lesson of Lutèce had less to do with food than hospitality. Mr. Soltner may have been a great chef, but he was an even greater restaurateur. He knew how to do more than feed people -- he knew how to make them happy.
Op-Ed Contributor Ruth Reichl, former restaurant critic for The Times, is the editor of Gourmet magazine.
