They are separated in age by nearly five decades and in accomplishments by several résumé pages. But Mario M. Cuomo and Andre Stanley have much in common. Both are graduates of St. John's University. Cuomo, the former New York governor, earned his bachelor's degree there in 1953 and also his law degree, in 1956, and Stanley, a sports management major, graduated last spring.
Both know poverty. Cuomo, the youngest son of a greengrocer, lived in South Jamaica, Queens. Stanley, the only child of a single mother, lived in the Farragut Houses in Brooklyn.
Both have overachieved. Cuomo served three terms as governor. Stanley endures hour-and-a-half subway rides to campus, and has evolved from a walk-on on the basketball team to a sometime starter.
Now Cuomo and Stanley share a deep sense of hurt, too, after their alma mater's proud basketball program turned a disappointing season into a shameful one.
On Feb. 4, after another losing effort in Pittsburgh, six players broke curfew, ventured to a local strip bar and took a woman back to their hotel for sex. Now three players are gone, two others were suspended and one was disciplined.
Now St. John's, founded in 1870 by the Vincentian order to make higher education accessible to immigrants and the working class, is trying to remove the tarnish. St. John's counts 140,000 alumni, 85 percent of whom live in the greater New York region.
''We want to educate people who don't have a shot at the elite schools and don't have connections,'' said Cuomo, who taught at the law school and was president of the alumni association. ''It's a city school, a religious school. This is a blow to their mission, and they feel embarrassed because they could not keep fundamental order. Not winning championships is one thing, but not living by the rules is another. Now we're showing we're willing to pay the price for upholding those rules.''
In the days since the Pittsburgh incident, the Rev. Donald J. Harrington, the university president, has responded to calls and e-mail messages from unhappy alumni, held town hall meetings with students and apologized for remarks he made that many students believed were racially charged. Rebuilding a basketball program that has an interim coach and only nine players -- four of them walk-ons -- will be a mammoth task. It is one that university officials and alumni say can wait.
Like Cuomo, many St. John's graduates have gone on to high-profile careers, including Hugh L. Carey, another former New York governor; Raymond W. Kelly, commissioner of the New York City Police Department; and Susan Kropf, president and chief operating officer of Avon Products. But for 96 years, men's basketball has provided St. John's most public face.
The team has won 1,667 games, made 27 N.C.A.A. tournament appearances and reached the Final Four twice, the last time in 1985. Lou Carnesecca, a St. John's graduate from the Lower East Side of Manhattan who was the coach at the time, harnessed the talents of three unmistakable New Yorkers -- Chris Mullin, Walter Berry and Mark Jackson -- to show the basketball world what the city had to offer in hustle, as well as prodigious homegrown talent.
But this season was difficult from the start. In November, Willie Shaw was caught smoking marijuana on a Queens street with Marcus Hatten, the star of last season's National Invitation Tournament championship team. On Dec. 19, Mike Jarvis was fired as coach after a 2-4 start and his relationship with Harrington had deteriorated. St. John's is now 5-16 and 0-10 in the Big East.
''We had a couple guys make some bad decisions, and it has reflected badly on the whole program,'' Stanley said. ''But it shouldn't because we have some stand-up guys on this team who have made a lot of sacrifices, and each have a story to tell.''
Stanley was a 20-point-a-game scorer at John Jay High School in Brooklyn, but neither St. John's nor any other Big East team came calling. He chose a community college on Long Island, then dropped out after a month because his mother, Stephanie, learned she had diabetes. He got a job as a stock boy at Bergdorf Goodman to help support her.
He returned to school and basketball at Globe Institute of Technology in Manhattan, attracting recruiters from East Carolina and Quinnipiac. But he wanted to stay close to his mother, who had a leg amputated. Stanley walked on at St. John's and has earned playing time and a scholarship -- all by beginning his days at 5 a.m. on a subway platform in Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
Stanley, now 24, says he has much to be grateful for: he played in the N.C.A.A. tournament, won an N.I.T championship and spent the past two summers working on Wall Street.
''No matter what happens this season, St. John's has been good to me,'' said Stanley, who is pursuing a master's degree in criminal justice. ''You got to know that our tradition and our place in the city is big enough to bounce back from all of this.''
Harrington refused several interview requests, but he said publicly over the past week that St. John's was committed to operating a clean, competitive Division I program.
The Rev. James Maher, the basketball team chaplain for the past eight years, said that although the off-court incidents were disappointing, they should remind the St. John's faithful of the university's roots.
''It's an opportunity for us to refocus on our mission, which is balancing character and integrity with competence,'' Maher said. ''It's not about winning; it's about winning with class.''
The new coach will have to understand that mandate, as well as St. John's place in the city's culture. He will also have to suffer through the inevitable lean times that accompany rebuilding a program.
Three starters involved in the Pittsburgh incident are gone: forward Grady Reynolds was expelled immediately; point guard Elijah Ingram, the leading scorer, withdrew from the university rather than face expulsion; and center Abe Keita was permanently barred from the team and suspended from classes for a year.
The reserves Lamont Hamilton and Mohamed Diakite were suspended from the team indefinitely. The freshman Tyler Jones has finished serving a two-game suspension.
Jarvis, who recruited all of them, had little success landing high-profile prospects from the city. When he did, they moved on to the N.B.A, as Omar Cook did after one season and Erick Barkley after two.
This season, St. John's was having trouble recruiting because of its lame-duck coaching staff. Kevin Clark, the Jarvis assistant who took over as interim coach, said there would be no shortage of accomplished coaching candidates and plenty for them to sell. St. John's is building $23 million field house and the Big East is adding the basketball powers Louisville, DePaul, Marquette and Cincinnati in 2005.
Georgia Coach Dennis Felton, who left Western Kentucky last year to take over the Bulldogs' program after it was gutted by an academic fraud scandal, said the challenge would be difficult. He lost four of Georgia's five recruits and advertised for walk-ons in the campus newspaper. Felton's team is 12-10 with four seniors and nine freshmen.
''You're working at a deficit personnel-wise, which will take time to recover from,'' Felton said. ''There is also the pressure of restoring the honor of a program that has been shamed.'' Cuomo is hopeful that the university will overcome this basketball season. Now 71, he is confident that the Vincentians who run the university will return the emphasis on producing graduates like Stanley ahead of winning games.
''This is a difficult moment in the school's history,'' Cuomo said. ''But there also have been a million great moments in our history. There's enough to right this ship. There are too many people like me who owe the joint their life. We will all make sure that St. John's will be O.K. in the long haul.''
BASKETBALL  Correction:  February 27, 2004, Friday  A sports article on Feb. 15 about St. John's University's troubled basketball season referred incorrectly to the recruitment of Erick Barkley, one of the high-profile St. John's players who have left for the N.B.A. Although he played for Coach Mike Jarvis, who was dismissed last December, it was Jarvis's predecessor, Fran Fraschilla, who recruited him.
