For nearly eight years, David Thompson felt restrained, as if he were a prizefighter forbidden to throw his knockout punch. The 6-foot-4 Thompson had a 44-inch vertical leap and all kinds of midair innovations to show the world, but dunking was outlawed when he played in high school and in college. So Thompson, with gnashed teeth and a sigh of exasperation, finished alley-oops without touching the rim and shot layups when what he really wanted to do was rattle the basket stanchion.
Then Thompson was drafted by the American Basketball Association, where creativity reigned and where he and, most significantly, Julius Erving, a.k.a. Dr. J, revolutionized the game.
''It was like, 'Free at last,' '' Thompson said of his rookie season (1975-76) in the A.B.A. The chains were loosed, and I could really show them what I could do. That was real exciting. I hadnt been able to dunk for four years in college, so that first year I tried to dunk every time I could.
Erving, and then Thompson, whose nickname was Skywalker, were the first professional players to dunk with awe-inspiring showmanship and flair. They were the precursors to Michael Jordan, Dominique Wilkins, Kobe Bryant, Vince Carter and Tracy McGrady.
While creativity during dunk contests has had its ebbs and flows over the years, dunking in games has never become stale. Great dunks are often showcased during the N.B.A. All-Star Game, which will be Sunday night. In the 2002 game, McGrady performed one of the most incredible slams during a game, tossing the ball off the backboard, catching it amid defenders and reverse dunking.
With ESPN highlighting the most electric dunks daily and college and high school players slamming nearly as often, the dunk has become the games signature play. But there was a time when it was unheard of.
''We all could jump high enough,'' said the 88-year-old John Isaacs, who played for the New York Rens, an all-black barnstorming team, during the 1930's. ''But we never envisioned doing anything like dunking the ball. All we wanted was the basket.''
When Dr. James Naismith invented basketball in 1891, the game had a built-in deterrent to dunking: the peach baskets used as goals had bottoms, and if the ball caromed out of the basket, the field goal was nullified.
Further, any player who dribbled was forbidden to take a shot, so gathering speed and momentum for a potential dunk was impossible. That rule, along with the bottom of the basket, was eliminated early in the 20th century, but it would be some time before anyone thought of dunking.
''Awesome Kansas Giants Reverse Basketball Lay-Up Shot Process'' read a headline in The New York Times in 1936. The writer, Arthur J. Daley, chronicled the fabulous feats of the McPherson Oilers, a refinery-sponsored team in Kansas that awed fans and opponents by dunking during practices and warm-ups.
After a McPherson workout at New York's West Side Y.M.C.A. for the 1936 Olympic trials -- the Oilers won en route to claiming the Olympic gold medal Daley wrote: ''The McPherson version of a lay-up shot left observers simply flabbergasted. Joe Fortenberry, 6-foot-8-inch center, and Willard Schmidt, 6-foot-9-inch forward, did not use an ordinary curling toss. Not those giants. They left the floor, reached up and pitched the ball downward into the hoop, much like a cafeteria customer dunking a roll in coffee.''
Had Daley used the term ''dipping a roll,'' perhaps Saturday nights slam-dunk event would have been called the Slam-Dip contest.
Isaacs, the former Rens player, said the first dunker he ever heard of was Jackie Robinson. Robinson, a national broad jump record holder at U.C.L.A. and the first African-American to play major league baseball, played professional basketball for the independent Los Angeles Red Devils in 1946-47. The story that the 5-11 Robinson occasionally played above the rim spread from coast to coast, according to Isaacs.
''Guys would talk and people said that out in California, Jackie was the first one to elevate and go over the rim,'' Isaacs said.
Jim Pollard, who played for the Minneapolis Lakers from 1947 to 1955, might have been the first great leaper of the N.B.A. Pollard, a 6-5 forward, was nicknamed the Kangaroo Kid for his jumping ability. Though he rarely dunked in games, Pollard is said to have left his teammates spellbound by dunking from the free-throw line during practice.
The 7-1 Wilt Chamberlain, towering over his opponents, made the dunk a common occurrence.
''Wilt came in and sort of popularized it,'' said Harvey Pollack, 82, who kept Chamberlain's dunk totals from the moment he entered the league in 1959. Pollack said Chamberlain once converted 25 slams in a game.
''That's where his nickname, the Big Dipper, came from,'' Wayne Embry, who played against Chamberlain, said. ''Whenever he would dunk, the public address announcer in Philadelphia would say Dipper Dunk!''
While more players were beginning to dunk by then, the best small players of the 1960's and the 70's -- Oscar Robertson, Jerry West and Elgin Baylor -- rarely slammed. Baylor is known as the forerunner to Erving because of his prodigious hang time, but rather than dunk, Baylor finished his flights with elegant finger rolls. The 6-5 Robertson never dunked during a game, saying his aversion dated to the playgrounds of Indianapolis, his hometown.
''When I first started playing basketball, they had these straight-up poles with a basket on it,'' Robertson, 65, said. ''And I went in for a dunk once and a guy pushed me into the pole and almost knocked me out. So while dunking the ball was great, I didnt want to get hurt.''
Robertson, a basketball purist, is not a fan of slam-dunk contests, sticking to the old adage that ''a dunk is just 2 points.''
''I wouldnt spend 3 cents to go see a slamdunk contest,'' Robertson said. ''I watched them reluctantly because my family wanted to see some of them, but a dunk doesn't mean anything to me. It's just another basket.
Things were different on the playgrounds of New York City, and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, a New York native, slammed so often at U.C.L.A. that the dunk was ruled illegal in college games from 1968 until 1977.
Like Thompson, Erving was a victim of that rule while playing at the University of Massachusetts. But when unleashed in the A.B.A. in 1971, Erving turned the game upside down.
''The A.B.A. promoted showmanship because they were fighting to survive and find their niche, so the players were willing to try more spectacular stuff,'' said Rod Thorn, the Nets president and an assistant on the New York Nets team that featured Erving in 1973.
''And thats when Dr. J really brought the dunk into focus. He dunked everything. He was a high-wire act. He was like a totally different kind of player. When he was in his physical prime, he'd bring you up out of your seat four or five times a night with some of the stuff he did. He got a lot of publicity for it, and the game started changing.''
One of Ervings teammates in Philadelphia became as renowned for dunking as Erving. Darryl Dawkins, who became one of the first players to enter the N.B.A. straight from high school, in 1975, shattered two backboards in 1979, leading to the creation of the breakaway rim.
''The first one was an accident, but I wanted to see if I could do it again when I got back to Philadelphia,'' the 6-11, 275-pound Dawkins, who smashed his first backboard in Kansas City, Mo., said. ''All the fans were hollering, 'You've got to do one for the home crowd,' so I went ahead and brought it down. Everybody was in awe.'' Fans were running out grabbing the glass. People's hands were bleeding. I felt like I was doing something no other human could  do.''
''Everybody says a dunk is only 2 points, but it gets your team hyped, gets the crowd all excited and takes the starch out of other teams, especially when you dunk on somebody. And I always dunked on somebody.''
Five years after Dawkins shattered the backboards, Michael Jordan improved on Erving and made the pro game synonymous with high flight. With Jordan's amazing air show coinciding with the emergence of the all-sports network ESPN and with the global marketing strategy of N.B.A. Commissioner David Stern, Jordan became a worldwide icon, his soaring, slamming Air Jordan logo seemingly reaching the ends of the earth.
With Jordan, the dunk took on unprecedented significance, and a generation of youngsters appeared to be thinking dunk first, jump shot second. Most connoisseurs of the game believe that is when pure athleticism began to supplant fundamental play, a trend that some believe has decreased the quality of play in the N.B.A. and threatened the country's pre-eminence in the game.
''I wouldnt say that dunking has hurt the game, but that the way its presented has hurt the game,'' said Embry, who was the N.B.A.'s first African-American general manager. ''That's all everybody focuses on now. Because its been made such a glamorous part of the game, I think players have not worked on their midrange game and their jump shot as much. I tell anybody to dunk the ball in competition if you can. But that's just one part of the game. Let's not glamorize it and make it the only way you can score.''
As was the case with Jordan, today's players place less value on the dunk as they age. Usually, their games become more fundamentally sound and they begin seeking jump shots rather than exhausting forays to the basket. Carter, who slammed with two hands from the foul line in winning the 2000 dunk contest, slams less nowadays.
But even as the dunk takes on less significance in his game, Carter, who still dunks quite often, knows it will always be basketball's most exhilarating play.
''The dunk is so popular because a lot of people who love the game, play the game, watch it as a pastime, can't do those things,'' said Carter, a six-year veteran. ''You have a chance of doing a behind-the-back pass, a crossover dribble, maybe even hitting a halfcourt shot. But how many people are going to do a 360 dunk?''
''I think just the amazement of guys being able to get off the ground that high and do things like that is what draws so much attention to the dunk. I cant imagine where my game would be without it.''
PRO BASKETBALL
