Edouard Boubat: Vintage and Modern Prints  Candace Perich Gallery, 27 Katonah Ave., Katonah, (914)232-3966. Through Feb. 25.
In his black and white gelatin silver prints, Édouard Boubat captured some of the most tender and romantic images of mid-20th-century European life. Seemingly influenced by the classically painted imagery, Mr. Boubat's works ''Lella, Bretagne'' (1947) and ''Portrait de Lella'' (1947) both have the soul, mood, clarity and style of any seminal pre-Raphaelite painting.
He was inspired by life itself. In ''Portugal Nazare'' (1956), a father cradles his sleeping son in his arms as he takes in a spirit-cleansing sea breeze. In ''Collioure, Pyrenees'' (1954), a young woman at her lakeside terrace, wearing a flowing sundress and a wide-brimmed straw hat, soaks up the natural vista that surrounds her.
When Mr. Boubat trains his eye on children, his art becomes truly timeless. In ''Florence Sous La Neige, Paris'' (1955), a child catches falling snow in his open mouth with such delight that I longed for my own long lost inhibitions. The masterstroke here, however, is ''Premiere Neige Jardain Luxembourg'' (1955), where we see a large number of children playing in the freshly fallen snow. Framing the base of this view is a web of cafe chairs that in its confusing form, amplifies beautifully the mirth and merriment that abounds. This framing makes the difference between the ordinary and the extraordinary.
Museum Directors' Selections for the 1965 New York World's Fair Exhibition  Krasdale Gallery-White Plains, 65 West Red Oak Lane, White Plains, (914)694-6400, extension 2125. Through April 24.
For many years, Ivan Dimitri, director of the National Advisory Committee of Photograph in Fine Arts, had one distinctive goal: to elevate photography's status, encouraging critics, collectors, gallery owners and curators to put it on the same level as painting or sculpture.
Fortunately for him, Kodak, which had a pavilion at the 1965 World's Fair, agreed. A result was a stellar, museum quality exhibition that has now been reinstalled at Krasdale Gallery-White Plains.
One photograph in the exhibition is ''Fireman's Lace,'' by John W. Bower, which captures a four-story, city fire escape covered in layers of icicles.
Another, Zdenek Vozenilek's ''Winter in Prague'' shows children sledding down a hillside, with the storied city as its background. This immediately reminded me of some of Pieter Bruegel the Elder's winter scenes like ''Winter Landscape With Skaters and a Bird Trap'' (1565).
William Klein's ''Girl With Flowered Hat'' shows a close-up view of the day's modern woman, whose face is veiled by smoke from her cigarette.
Theodore Rozumalski's ''Retiring After 60 Years'' is a tender, heart-warming depiction of an elderly couple as they reminisce about a life lived well.
Burt Glinn offers two incredibly pensive views of Georgia O'Keeffe and Sammy Davis Jr., while Arnold Newman's now famous, high Modernist portrait of Igor Stravinsky still dazzles. There are other famous works here. Ruth Orkin's staged ''American Girl in Italy'' (1951) maintains its visceral bite.
Yasushi Nagao's ''Assassination of Asanuma,'' (1960) with its ceremonial assailant and writhing victim continues to stun. Both historically and aesthetically, it is a great show.
Roman Holiday: New Work From a Year in Rome  Kenise Barnes Fine Art, 1955 Palmer Ave., Larchmont, (914)834-8077. Through Feb. 28.
The current show at Kenise Barnes Fine Art features the work of Arthur Simms and Lucy Fradkin. The exhibition's title, ''Roman Holiday,'' refers to the fact that the artists lived and worked in Rome on Mr. Simms's Fellowship in Visual Arts, which was awarded to him by the American Academy in Rome.
The works on paper that Ms. Fradkin produced in Rome continue her obsession with domesticity, which up to now were mostly focused on the lot in life of the 1950's American homemaker. In the works here, she superimposes her visual treatise against the patterns and customs of contemporary Roman society. Mr. Simms's powerful art, on the other hand, is more cerebral.
When I first saw Mr. Simms's assembled junk sculptures, I was reminded of the art of the late Curtis Cuffie, who, while homeless in the mid-1980's, honed his skills on the streets of the East Village in Manhattan. Mr. Cuffie found his muse in the local debris; an urban archaeologist whose work too often was dismantled and carted away by the city's trash collectors.
There are elemental similarities, too. Mr. Cuffie often built his work along the chain-link fences that surrounded vacant lots. Similarly, Mr. Simms links wire around his assemblages to keep them visually and physically together.
They also share that same impromptu feel in their work; and in both cases, their art has deep visible and figurative scars. Mr. Simms grew up poor in Jamaica, where it was common for children to make toys out of debris. Every object, broken or not, had many lives. As a child, he often saw street vendors as they strolled by, carrying their wares in carts.
During his stay in Rome, Mr. Simms again saw vendors hawking their wares from carts. Only this time, the merchants were Senegalese. The results of the Roman influence on his art here are fabulous.
ART REVIEWS
