Senator John Kerry won back-to-back victories on Saturday in caucuses in the District of Columbia and Nevada and then headed to Wisconsin, where he lashed out at President Bush in a continuing effort to position himself as the de facto nominee.
''George Bush is trying to defend the indefensible -- his own record,'' Mr. Kerry told a packed crowd of 1,000 Democrats at a fund-raising dinner for the state Democratic Party. He went on to denounce Republicans for running an attack advertisement against him on the Bush re-election Web site.
''Instead of attacking America's problems,'' Mr. Kerry said, ''George Bush and our opponents have once again turned to attack politics.''
Earlier in the day, Mr. Kerry's twin victories helped him consolidate his position as leader of the Democratic pack; so far, he has won 14 of 16 Democratic contests. Few delegates were at stake -- 16 were apportioned in Washington, and none in Nevada -- but the victories came as polls here showed that Mr. Kerry was heading for success in the Wisconsin primary on Tuesday.
Mr. Kerry shared the stage on Saturday night with two of his rivals, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio, who finished last in both caucuses. Mr. Edwards played down his latest losses -- he came in fourth in the District of Columbia and third in Nevada's nonbinding caucus -- instead sticking to the positive themes he has stressed throughout his campaign.
''The country is so hungry for a new direction, for new leadership,'' Mr. Edwards said. He went on, ''We are going to build one America, where we say no to kids going to bed hungry, no to kids who don't have the clothes to keep them warm and no, forever, to any American working full time and living in poverty.''
Looking ahead to the next primary, Mr. Kerry said: ''On Tuesday, Wisconsin will speak. And you can send a message to all Americans all across America that the mainstream values that we share -- fairness, love of country, a belief in hope and work -- are on their way back to the White House in November.''
In the caucus in the District of Columbia, Mr. Kerry won 47 percent of the vote, 27 points ahead of the second-place finisher, the Rev. Al Sharpton, the only Democrat to campaign in the district in recent weeks. Howard Dean, who had built a formidable organization in Washington only to see it shrink as his national campaign faltered, finished third with 17 percent of the vote. Mr. Edwards won 10 percent.
Mr. Sharpton managed to hold on to core supporters in the city's heavily black neighborhoods, where Democrats said they wanted him to have enough delegates at the national convention to raise issues important to minority groups and low-income urban voters. But the bigger trend seemed to be the shift of Dean voters to Mr. Kerry.
''At some point, everyone has to get behind one candidate,'' said Isabel Sternberg, 45, who voted for Dr. Dean last month but planned to cast her ballot for Mr. Kerry on Saturday. ''The number one thing really is to get a Democrat elected.''
In Nevada, where Mr. Kerry greeted caucusgoers on Saturday morning, he drew 63 percent, according to state Democratic officials, with 17 percent for Dr. Dean and 10 percent for Mr. Edwards. Campaigning in Las Vegas on Saturday morning, Mr. Kerry, escorted by union members, waded into a crowd of about a thousand supporters outside a high school, shaking hands, holding babies and signing magazines, baseballs and scraps of paper.
Mr. Kerry is hoping another victory will clear the field of the other Democratic contenders.
Mr. Edwards, meanwhile, is hoping for at least a strong second, which he believes would create a two-man race heading into the March 2 primaries in big states like New York, California and Ohio. He has campaigned hard here in the past week, though he did slip out Thursday and Friday to raise money in Los Angeles and appear on ''The Tonight Show'' with Jay Leno.
Dr. Dean has also campaigned aggressively in Wisconsin, though he skipped Saturday night's dinner to attend his son's final high school hockey game.
Earlier in the day in Milwaukee, Dr. Dean, the former Vermont governor, appealed for votes at a prayer breakfast with African-American ministers, where two of his black roommates from Yale University and Milwaukee's mayor, Marvin Pratt, vouched for him.
Dr. Dean has called Wisconsin a must-win state. On Feb. 5, he told supporters that he would quit the race if he did not win here, but he reversed himself four days later. On Saturday, when asked if would quit the race if he lost in Wisconsin, Dr. Dean told Chicagoland Television, ''You'll find out on Wednesday.''
Mr. Edwards, asked if he would get out of the race if he lost here, strongly suggested he would not.
''We're just going to wait and see what happens Tuesday,'' he said. ''I am completely committed to this race and believe I will be the nominee.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CAUCUSES
