IF only American families saved for retirement the way the lagging Democratic candidates are running for president. Whoever takes the oath of office next January, whether President Bush or a Democrat, might then have an easier time dealing with some of the nation's biggest domestic problems.
Instead, households and candidates are offering two different lessons in how people can trip themselves up when they face what economists call ''intertemporal choice.'' The rest of us tend to think of such decisions, which are essentially choices between doing something now or later, in terms of aphorisms: ''A penny saved is a penny earned,'' versus ''Do not put off until tomorrow what can be done today.''
For the last month, Democratic candidates other than Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts have been saving their pennies, skipping some primaries to focus their energies on others down the road. Mr. Kerry has benefited from this romanticizing of the future and can move close to the nomination with a victory on Tuesday in Wisconsin, where polls show him comfortably ahead.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark was the first to fall into the intertemporal trap when he decided to ignore the Iowa caucus, the year's first contest, because he thought he could do better in the second one, in New Hampshire. The move seemed sensible enough at the time, given that the Iowa caucus is an unpredictable process that draws just a sliver of the state's population and that four years ago, Senator John McCain, an Arizona Republican, skipped Iowa and then easily won New Hampshire. But General Clark, who had never before run for office, was not a strong enough candidate to survive the lack of attention coming his way in the wake of Iowa.
Last week, when a supporter whispered ''I wish you'd gone to Iowa'' to the general after his withdrawal speech, he responded, ''So do I.''
Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, and Senator John Edwards of North Carolina put off until tomorrow what they thought they could not do today in ways that look even more questionable. After Dr. Dean finished second in New Hampshire, his campaign announced that it would barely compete in the next 13 states and focus instead on Wisconsin. Senator Edwards, fresh off a victory in South Carolina almost two weeks ago, bypassed the next race, in Michigan, a state that has been hospitable to Southern populists in the past, to focus on Tennessee and Virginia.
Money was a factor in all of these decisions. The candidates did not have enough of it to run strong campaigns everywhere. But a belief that a future task would somehow be easier -- and more important -- than any present task also seemed to have played a crucial and damaging role.
General Clark is no longer in the race. Senator Edwards, instead of going on the offensive in a region outside of his own and possibly gaining momentum with a strong showing, played defense in Tennessee and Virginia and lost both. Dr. Dean received 4 percent of the vote in Tennessee and looks even less viable than he did two weeks ago.
When Dr. Dean announced his Wisconsin-or-bust strategy, I began thinking that he would have benefited from having Joe Torre, the New York Yankees manager, among his advisers. Over the last eight baseball seasons, Mr. Torre has shown himself to be something of an intertemporal expert. When the Yankees have been in difficult situations, he has often asked his best pitchers to take on extra duty, realizing that having a tired bullpen in a future game is a better problem than not having any future games.
Perhaps the most remarkable part of the candidates' behavior is how much it differs from the way most people balance the present and the future. Traditional economic theory held that people simply acted in their best interest, saving what they needed and spending the rest. But a mountain of recent research has proved what most non-economists already knew: it's hard to say no to a piece of cake sitting in front of you.
Even if you know that you will later regret eating the cake, you might dig in. Or even if you had no cares about your waistline and someone appeared magically by your side to offer you two slices of cake tomorrow in exchange for the one slice sitting in front of you, you might turn the person down. Delaying gratification is just hard, notes Jonathan Gruber, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology - whether the decision involves spending money or saving it, having a cigarette or quitting, watching one more television show or going to the gym.
BUT the lack of intertemporal discipline has its consequences. American households now save only about 2 percent of their income, down from almost 10 percent in the 1980's, and the federal government has run up a $521 billion budget deficit. This behavior is likely to require a sharp, and possibly painful, shift in the years ahead, as the nation's growing number of retirees tries to tap its small pool of savings.
Deciding that today is more important than tomorrow stops looking so good when tomorrow finally arrives. Deciding that tomorrow is more important than today, on the other hand, hurts somebody's chances of becoming the president who will be faced with those problems.
ECONOMIC VIEW
