There are more people dead than alive on the Schaghticoke Indian Reservation overlooking the Housatonic River in northwest Connecticut. There are more headstones than houses. There is more silence than sound.
Just one member of the Schaghticoke Tribal Nation lives on the 400-acre reservation at the foot of Schaghticoke Mountain in the tidy town of Kent.
His name is Brett Rothe, and he is 4, a child of a divorce between a father who is Indian and has rejected the Tribal Nation government and a mother who is not but has embraced it. But Brett is also caught in a larger divide, between the Tribal Nation and a separate Schaghticoke faction at odds over control of the reservation and who will capitalize on the tribe's newfound leverage in the region's escalating casino wars.
When the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs formally recognized the Schaghticokes last month, the ruling culminated a decade-long pursuit by a tribe that claims 273 members in one faction, 76 in another. To earn its sovereignty, the tribe cobbled a piecemeal three-century narrative hopscotching from Brett back through Schaghticokes serving in the Revolutionary War and still further to a patriarch named Gideon and the arrival of early colonists to the river valleys of western Connecticut.
But the new decision, a reversal of a previous bureau finding, has prompted critics, including some state officials, to accuse the Schaghticokes and the bureau of massaging history into something close to fraud.
Although the recognition could still be reversed on appeal, the Schaghticokes' tale helps reveal the increasingly complex equations involved when a democratic bureaucracy determines matters of Indian identity and every tribal designation is perceived by critics as a license to build casinos and to bully whoever might stand in the way of one.
''I'll guarantee you that if there was no casino issue, no one would care less,'' said Kevin A. McBride, a professor of anthropology at the University of Connecticut and the director of research at the Mashantucket Pequot Museum and Research Center, which is financed by the tribe's Foxwoods Casino in southeastern Connecticut.
Since gambling on Indian lands began to boom in the early 1990's, the tribal recognition process has become freighted with lobbyists, Congressional intervention, outside investors, court agreements and accusations of incompetence and inconsistency at the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
But amid the politics and pressure, government researchers scrupulously study family links and community interaction to determine whether to confirm that a tribe, according to federal requirements, ''has existed as a community from historical times until the present.''
The stakes of recognition have risen exponentially, but the process remains tied to the most elemental human connections.
''With no Schaghticoke blood you're not a member,'' said the Tribal Nation genealogist, Linda Gray. ''It has to be blood.''
Turning to her computer in the tribe's offices in Derby, Conn., Ms. Gray began clicking through a database she and a consultant to the tribe have built using Family Tree Maker, a popular genealogy program. ''We'll do the chief,'' she said, beginning a search.
The Schaghticoke (pronounced SKAT-a-coke) Tribal Nation chief, Richard L. Velky, comes up quickly in the database, the two stars by his name indicating he is a confirmed member of the tribe who can trace his roots to the reservation at least to 1910. Tribal Nation rules require members to be able to trace their lineage to residents of the reservation that year, the first in which the Census Bureau has described the area specifically as Schaghticoke land.
One man, Gideon Mauwee, is generally considered the ''founder'' of the present-day Schaghticokes, descendants of what the bureau calls ''an amalgamation of the Weantinock and Potatuck'' tribes that settled along the Housatonic in the first half of the 18th century under a land agreement with the state.
State overseers in the late 19th century confirmed the existence of the tribe, but also reported that many Schaghticokes had moved from the reservation. By the 1930's, a guide to Connecticut published by the Federal Writers' Project described the ''shaggy head'' of Schaghticoke Mountain and, at its base, ''a few weather-beaten shacks occupied by descendants of the Schaghticoke Indian Tribe.''
The same account suggests that the Schaghticokes once were more cohesive and ''furnished more than 100 warriors'' to the colonists' cause during the Revolutionary War. ''These Indians acted as a liaison unit, relaying messages from Stockbridge to Long Island Sound by means of drumbeats and signal fires,'' according to the guide.
Evidence of cohesive tribe activity becomes harder to find after that. A timeline on the tribe's Web site jumps from the war to the ''mid/late 1800's,'' saying that as ''overseers sell off much of the tribe's land, reservation dwindles to several hundred mountainous acres and a resident population less than 100.''
The tribe has long claimed that much of its land was taken, including a burial ground flooded by a dam and acres absorbed by the prestigious Kent School. The reservation now is a narrow, wooded tract with fewer than a dozen buildings and even fewer people. Fewer than 10 people live on the reservation full time, and no more than five claim Schaghticoke lineage. But only Brett, the little boy, is enrolled in the Tribal Nation.
Mr. Velky, 53, is a former commercial printer who has been chief since 1987. He has been aggressive in pressing for recognition, filing lawsuits, making land claims and defending the Schaghticokes against doubters. Since the ruling, on Jan. 29, he already has begun seeking a ''host community'' in Southwest Connecticut that will allow the Tribal Nation to build a casino. The founder of the Subway restaurant chain, Frederick A. DeLuca, has been a major outside investor in the tribe's efforts.
Mr. Velky said he hoped to use the Kent reservation, and the land the tribe claims was taken, for new housing that will allow scattered tribe members to live ''in harmony'' with ''the neighboring community.''
About 80 Tribal Nation members have said they would like to move to the reservation, Mr. Velky said. If they do, they could have a neighbor, other than Mr. Velky, who also calls himself chief.
Alan Russell lives with his non-Indian wife atop a hill on the reservation, calling off his dogs when they meet visitors coming up the driveway.
''I took my first steps right out there,'' said Mr. Russell, 57, pointing to where the Housatonic River bends toward the only road running through the reservation.
Mr. Russell, who calls himself Chief Gray Fox, is tribal chairman of the Schaghticoke Indian Tribe, which he says has 76 members and is separate from Mr. Velky's Tribal Nation. The Tribal Nation's current pursuit of recognition began in 1994, before the tribe divided in the late 1990's. The Indian Tribe filed a separate petition in 2001, claiming it had first requested recognition in 1981.
''We're the tribe, and they broke away from us,'' said Mr. Russell's sister, Gail Harrison, the Indian Tribe's vice chairwoman.
The Indian Tribe petition is still pending, and the group seems somewhat uncertain of its standing in light of the recognition given the Schaghticokes through the Tribal Nation petition. The lawyer for the Indian Tribe, Michael J. Burns, said lawyers representing the Bureau of Indian Affairs ''have basically told me that the two groups need to work this out, need to work together.''
Mr. Velky, of the Tribal Nation, said the bureau explicitly recognized his group's authority, though he did not rule out finding common ground with members of the rival group, some of whom are identified as ''unenrolled members'' on the Tribal Nation petition.
The precise roots of the conflicts within the Schaghticokes are murky, but several people said they began in the 1980's and involved tribal elections and accusations of corruption.
After initially weakening the Schaghticokes' pursuit of recognition, infighting may ultimately have strengthened it.
In a preliminary finding of December 2002, the bureau of Indian Affairs generally accepted the Schaghticokes' Indian lineage but denied recognition because of ''insufficient evidence'' of a continuous community and failing to maintain ''political influence or authority'' for all but a single decade -- 1875 to 1885 -- during the period from 1800 to 1967.
The bureau, whose recognition decisions are handled by its Office of Federal Acknowledgement, also found that the ''present-day group'' did not meet the political requirement, citing the breakdown between the Tribal Nation and the Indian Tribe after 1996. The bureau described the Indian Tribe members as having ''a strong history of past involvement in these political processes.''
According to its findings, ''These individuals are clearly part of the same group, but not of the current petitioner.''
But after the Tribal Nation submitted more information last year, the bureau saw things differently. It cited ''a thorough review of the existing data together with new data,'' including oral histories and tribe enrollment lists. Previously thin political evidence apparently was bolstered after the bureau ''re-evaluated the evidentiary weight'' it had given to the Schaghticokes' history of recognition by the state. It also said ''internal conflict'' after 1996 as evidence of political activity.
The Connecticut attorney general, Richard Blumenthal, has said the state will fight the decision. While the Schaghticokes may descend from Indians of the 18th century, he said in a telephone interview, they have not functioned as a tribe since then.
''Our point is that this group failed to meet two key criteria: No. 1, that it existed continuously as a community with ties across family lines, a social unit over the time since colonial years,'' Mr. Blumenthal said. ''And the second is that it failed to show that it had political authority or an internal governance over the years.''
The divided status of 4-year-old Brett is another matter. Ms. Harrison said the boy, who is her grandson and lives with his mother, Amy Rothe, in a house next to Ms. Harrison's, remained on the rolls of the Indian Tribe even though his mother ''wanted to go to the other side.'' Ms. Harrison said that she planned to evict them, her grandson included, and that the house belonged to her.
''He's going to have to leave, too,'' she said. ''In order to live on the reservation you have to get permission from the tribe.''
In the Tribal Nation offices in Derby, Ms. Gray, the genealogist, said whatever separates those claiming Schaghticoke heritage does not necessarily jeopardize their ambitions, whether they include pursuing federal recognition or entering the casino business.
''Conflict,'' she said, ''represents continuity.''
