TO appreciate Chakaia Booker's midcareer retrospective at the Jersey City Museum fully, you have to like rubber. You have to enjoy its acrid, toxic smell and base consistency. In short, viewing her artwork is a material experience.
Ms. Booker, 50, makes sculptures with recycled car tires, objects closely associated with American identity and industry. Scavenging tires from the streets and scrap yards, she cuts, folds, coils and combines them into tough urban sculptures addressing social and cultural issues. Some people, like me, even find beauty here.
Around two dozen of Ms. Booker's sculptures are presently fouling the air on the first floor of the museum. The exhibition is small, for a retrospective, yet big enough to convey the unrelenting energy and inventiveness that have become hallmarks of her style.
The show begins with the artist's early wall sculptures, made mostly of industrial discard, wood and metal. There is also a very early ceramic piece, ''Assimilation'' (1982). Although few are of great quality, they affirm the artist's affinity for found objects and her ability to match exquisite formal execution with provocative ideas.
''Mother and Child'' (1991) is a choice early effort. It consists of found wooden crates, chairs and bar stools arranged to represent the dead Christ lying in the lap of the Virgin. Solemn and graceful, it's a kind of junkyard Pietà.
Other sculptures also refer to religion, an important part of Ms. Booker's life. ''Baptismal Dance'' (1994) consists of bone, fruit peels, and wood arranged in the vague shape of a crucifix. In place of Christ is an accretion of peels that look a bit like dried flowers; at the same time it has a steady radiance.
Ms. Booker, who lives in New York, was born in Newark. Later, she earned a degree in sociology from Rutgers University. Although she has not lived in New Jersey for years, the landscape remains a profound influence on her art.
''Echoes in Black (Industrial Cicatrization)'' (1997) is a direct statement on the Jersey landscape. It is a rapturous yet alienating mural made from a tangled mess of tires and other discarded rubber. It covers an entire wall of the museum, the rubber spilling out of its frame. Cold, grim and toxic, this is a representation of a landscape choked by industry.
Ms. Booker is not the only artist to have worked with tires. Robert Rauschenberg, in the 1950's, made a car tire print on a long strip of paper, while Allan Kaprow, in the 1960's, produced environments using tires. But Ms. Booker, to my knowledge, is the only recognized artist to skillfully cut and carve the material into sculptures.
The show includes about a dozen of Ms. Booker's tire sculptures, from the early 1990's to last year. Clever, surprising, sensual and funny, they make a case for Ms. Booker as one of the most innovative sculptors at work in America.
So what makes her tire sculptures so heavenly? Partly it's the way she transforms this dull, base material into refined objects. For instance, ''Splintered Reality'' (2003) consists of curved, twisted and coiled splinters of tire from a high-speed blowout woven together to create a dazzling work of art. It has a crystalline sublimity.
But it's also their sensuality and sexiness. Rubber breasts, udders, and penises flop about in her works with a lewd comicality. The title of ''Male Referendum'' (2003), I think, tells us all we need to know about that work, while droopy mammary glands flap from ''Nomadic Warrior'' (1995-96), a viscous mound of tire, fruit, bone and metal.
''(Wench) (Wrench) III'' (2001), an oversized metal wrench covered in sharp rubber thorns cut from tires, is also spiced with sexual references, lending itself to many readings.
Mostly, Ms. Booker likes her materials rough, ready-made and raw. An exception is ''Dorothy's Red Shoes'' (1994), an oversized pair of red shoes made of painted rubber sprinkled with glitter and placed on top of an upturned milk crate. The title ties the work to the Wizard of Oz, in which Dorothy needs the magic ruby slippers to find her way home. Perhaps these are shoes with which Ms. Booker made her way back to Jersey.
''Chakaia Booker: Jersey Ride'' is at the Jersey City Museum, 350 Montgomery Street, Jersey City, through June 13. Information: (201)413-0303.
ART REVIEW
