IF a silver lining broke through New Jersey's ice- and snow-covered surfaces anywhere last month -- the 14th coldest January on record and the coldest since 1994, with an average temperature of 24 degrees -- it was in Burlington County.
There, Madelyn Mears- Sheldon, executive director of the Christian Caring Center in Delanco, was relieved to watch 15 homeless men -- she calls them ''woods guys'' -- crawl out of the woodwork around Browns Mills to seek shelter. During a month in which temperatures fell below 10 degrees a total of seven days and the high climbed above freezing only 11 of 31 days in the Trenton area, their survival depended on it, Ms. Mears-Sheldon said.
''These are guys who have been deep in the woods, very well hidden for years,'' said Ms. Mears-Sheldon, who has ventured into the Pine Barrens to deliver lunch to the men several times a week for the last 10 years. ''But this year we're finally getting a chance to help them. They have no other option in this kind of weather.''
And conditions have mellowed somewhat, with the January thaw showing up in February instead.
''Around 41 degrees for the high in Newark and 25 for the low is right around where we should be, and we've seen that,'' said Al Cope, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Mount Holly.
Mr. Cope said a ''cold shot'' was expected to come through and linger through the early part of the week, ''but other than that the outlook looks normal, temperature-wise.''
Despite an early February snow storm, he said the precipitation figures are also not as dramatic as those registered over the last two months.
''We've had one storm that was quite heavy this month, he said. ''Around two and a half inches fell in Trenton, and that's about one and a half inches above normal. Because of that same storm, Atlantic City is also about an inch above normal. But nothing major so far. We seem on course for a normal month.''
That was anything but the case last month. On Jan. 23, with the wind chill -- the combined effects of sustained winds and low air temperatures on exposed skin -- registering several degrees below zero in the region, county officials and representatives from the Salvation Army and Red Cross met at the Emergency Management Building in West Hampton to work out a ''code blue'' system to house local homeless when conditions pose a health threat.
''All we have had till now in Burlington was a shelter system'' 0f rotating churches, Ms. Sheldon-Mears explained. ''And we just ran out of money to put the guys up in motels. But everything is in line. We have cots, we have volunteers, we have food. All we need now is a roof. It has been brutal, but something good is going to come out of this.''
More established shelters also felt the effects of the unusually bitter cold. In the face of Newark's ninth coldest January since 1895 -- the thermometer did not rise above freezing a total of 20 days, the most since 1977 -- many were challenged by a lack of space. At the Market Street Mission in Morristown, Deborah Mod, the mission's director, said that 34 percent more people sought shelter in December and 90 percent in January.
And at the Ozanam Men's Shelter in New Brunswick, which has 40 cots, the resident attendant, Jim Connors said: ''We've been booked for a while now, but we still have people knocking on our door at 4 in the morning. It's too cold for them to sleep in a doorway or an abandoned building, but we have fire codes to worry about.''
Mary Gay Abbott-Young, executive director of the Rescue Mission in Trenton, said that on most January nights she saw ''180 to 190 guys coming in the door, and we won't turn them away,'' though the shelter technically has room for only 158.
With the wind chill in Newark plummeting to 28 degrees below zero on Jan. 15 and 16 -- cold enough to cause frostbite in 30 minutes of exposure, according to the National Weather Service -- women like Angela Rosary, who has been homeless for 14 months since losing her job as a nurse's aid, were most at risk.
Ms. Rosary spends her nights at Newark's 31 Fulton Street shelter for women, but between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m., when the shelter is closed, she has to look elsewhere for housing. Most days, she sits in the Goodwill Rescue Mission Drop-in Center's heated auditorium, where she also eats lunch. But during her morning walk from Fulton Street, ''my hands are freezing,'' she said. ''The kind of gloves I have, they're not enough. They just don't work when it's so cold.''
It has been that kind of winter.
PSE&amp;G, the state's largest supplier of electricity and natural gas, has already broken records in response to the arctic-like conditions. Karen Johnson, a spokeswoman for the utility, said that from the morning of Jan. 15 to the morning of the 16th, PSE&amp;G supplied more gas than on any single day in its 100-year history; 2,429,000 dekatherms were delivered, while on a typical winter's day with temperatures around 32 degrees it would only expect to deliver 1,759,000 dekatherms. By 8 p.m. on Jan. 15, the utility had reached a winter peak in electricity demands: 7,039 megawatts were provided as against 6,200 megawatts on an average winter's day.
The company does not keep count of calls from customers complaining about the lack of heat, but Ms. Johnson can say unofficially said last month such calls poured in at double the daily rate. During a six-day stretch that included Jan. 15 and 16, when the temperature plummeted to 4 degrees in Atlantic City and zero in Newark, the Newark-based utility answered an ear-bending 17,000 no-heat calls.
Many more calls have concerned skyrocketing heating bills, but in response to these the company offers little consolation. ''We passed through a 4.3 percent decrease in the price of natural gas Jan. 1,'' Ms. Johnson said. ''That helps a little with the several increases that were passed last year.''
In any event, she said, the utility ''will not cut off any customer's gas through March 15.''
While the cold has taken its toll, heavier than average snowfalls have presented a different set of obstacles. Accumulations like the 37.9 inches that fell in Newark in December and January, making it the city's third snowiest period on record, required the state to spend $12 million of its $14.8 million budget salting and plowing by Jan. 19, according to Department of Transportation Mike Horan.
Snowfall records are not maintained in Hackensack, but with more than 35 inches of snow having fallen on Manhattan so far this winter -- approximately twice as much as normal -- Dr. Edwin Yamin, vice chairman of Hackensack University Medical Center's emergency trauma department, said he was battling the expected snow-induced crises.
While Dr. Yamin cited ''the usual orthopedic stuff'' like fractures from falls on the ice, plus cardiac patients who overdid it shoveling, he said the most notable new threat was ''snowblower injuries.''
''Every time there's been a storm I have seen four or five of these,'' he said. ''What happens is people will stick their arms in trying to unclog the thing. It can cause partial amputation. But more people are getting snowblowers, and we're seeing more injuries. The good news is that word is getting out -- don't put your hand in there.''
ENVIRONMENT
