The virus first crept in at the Russian border and, for a time, nobody in Estonia blinked.
For more than a decade, beginning in 1988, only a handful of people in Estonia tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS. Those who did were easily ignored -- young, Russian-speaking heroin users in the country's depressed northern reaches. The problem seemed small enough to shrug off.
Not any more. Estonia is in the grips of a ''concentrated'' H.I.V. epidemic among intravenous drug users that has migrated south and west to the country's graceful medieval capital, Tallinn, and is threatening to spread still wider through unprotected sex.
While the absolute numbers are small, the spike in infections has alarmed health officials as Estonia prepares to enter a borderless European Union. It is also challenging a cosseted, tradition-bound culture -- that still blushes at the word condom -- to shake off outmoded assumptions about sex, drugs and AIDS.
With little preparation, Estonians have been plunged into the fine points of needle exchange programs, methadone treatments, anonymous AIDS testing and protected sex.
''It was not proper to even use the word condom less than 10 years ago,'' said Heli Pallo, who works for the National Institute for Health Development, which oversees the country's AIDS program.
Even today, added her boss, Maarike Harro, the chief of the institute, ''In some cases, pharmacy dealers are not selling condoms to young people and are telling them, 'Sex is not for you.' ''
While all the Baltic countries, and their other former Soviet neighbors, like Belarus and Ukraine, are grappling with the swift spread of H.I.V., Estonia has the highest rate of infection per person. Nearly 4,000 people out of 1.4 million were known to be carrying the virus in 2003, a number that takes into account only those who have been tested. The vast majority are young -- teenagers and people under age 24 -- and a good number are prisoners and former prisoners. Three babies have been born H.I.V.-positive.
''The country was caught by surprise,'' said Kristina Tauts, the director of the development center for the National Institute for Health Development. ''Some were talking about how it might happen, but usually it seemed very far off to understand.''
The sudden rise in H.I.V. cases occurred in 2000, when 390 people tested positive, according to government health statistics. That total jumped sharply the following year, when the crisis appears to have peaked, with 1,474 more people found to be carrying the virus. With that, the Estonian minister of social affairs declared ''a concentrated epidemic'' and set about trying to curtail the virus's spread. The challenges were many.
Estonia did not have the necessary cash to combat AIDS; few, if any, places offered anonymous H.I.V. testing; needle exchange programs did not exist; sex education was taboo; AIDS antiviral drug therapy was not readily available.
Some relief came in October in the first chunk of nearly $11 million from the Geneva-based Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, a windfall that will help the national health institute steer money into pivotal AIDS prevention programs. But getting the government to pay as much attention to social concerns as to economic ones has not been easy, critics say.
Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, Estonia has experienced a relatively smooth economic recovery, embracing American-style policies of low taxation and free markets. Most people speak English, and many have computers and Internet access at home.
But critics say the country has neglected building the sort of social safety net that is common in most of the rest of Europe, particularly among Estonia's Nordic neighbors, where high taxes and generous benefits, like health care and long maternity leaves, are common. As a result, the underclass -- drug addicts, the unemployed, prisoners -- do not get the help they need, some say. The number of people testing positive is declining, but still relatively high. In 2002, 899 new cases were reported; in 2003, it was 840.
''The H.I.V. rate is a very serious problem,'' said Mart Ustav, a professor of microbiology and virology at Tartu University who is working with a Finnish biotechnology company to develop an AIDS vaccine. ''And it will be a very serious social problem in 5 or 10 years. It is not only a question of money, it is also a question of how to professionally handle the situation. The government has failed completely in fighting this.''
Mart Soonik, the director of public relations for the Ministry of Social Affairs, said the government had reacted vigorously to the AIDS threat. It has increased spending considerably, and created the National Institute for Health Development to coordinate efforts to fight H.I.V..
The epidemic has also forced Estonia to confront the divide between its own people and the country's Russian-speaking minority, a population that grew out of the Soviet Union's desire to Russify Estonia. When Estonia became independent in 1991, an estimated third of the population was Russian and ineligible for automatic citizenship. Russians must learn Estonian, a tricky language similar to Finnish, to qualify for citizenship. Thousands have not done so and say they feel marginalized. ''Russian people became a second sort of citizen,'' said Julia Vinckler, project leader for Convictus, a needle exchange program.
But the problem is as much Estonian as Russian, and health officials realize they must connect with the young if they want to stop the spread of the disease. Sex education is now mandatory in most grades, although schools do not regularly distribute condoms. Commercials warning of the dangers of AIDS have aired on Estonian television. More people are getting tested at the handful of anonymous testing sites around Estonia.
''It is difficult to change the way of thinking of the community because when the epidemic started, everyone was talking about how it was a problem of homosexual men, then Russian-speaking, unemployed, IV drug users,'' said Ms. Pallo, who oversees the government AIDS program. ''They thought this problem does not concern us.''
