While it is no secret that New York and Los Angeles are money meccas for both Republicans and Democrats, what about Teton County, Wyo.? Or Greene County, Ga.? Or Blaine County, Idaho?
Candidates reached into all quarters of the country to raise money last year, including some places that are not part of the well-worn money trail that presidential candidates walk every four years. In many cases, candidates found money in unusual places thanks to fund-raisers who happen to live and work there.
''Big fund-raising is largely people driven and the campaigns know it,'' said Larry Noble, executive director of the Center for Responsive Politics. ''A well-connected fund-raiser raises money in their backyard. That allows the candidates to get connections they wouldn't otherwise have.''
For example, Senator John Edwards raised almost $1.7 million in Texas through Dec. 31, 2003, the latest data available more than he raised in his home state of North Carolina. He raised more there than any other Democratic candidate, though not more than President Bush (who was, after all, governor of the state). The situation seems a mystery until one learns that Fred Baron, one of Mr. Edwards's top money men, lives and works in Dallas.
Equally mysterious is Mr. Bush's popularity in Teton County, Wyo., population 18,251. He received more money per capita there than he did in parts of Texas.
Of course, big money from a small place can yield some statistical anomalies. Then again, Wyoming is the part of the country that Vice President Dick Cheney is from and Mr. Bush has at least one $200,000 fund-raiser in the state. With roughly 416 people raising $100,000 or $200,000 - and sometimes far more - in at least 45 states, Mr. Bush has a wide geographic reach. The president is popular, for example, in Greene County, Ga., population 14,406, where he received the most money per capita. Then again, the campaign has at least a dozen six-figure fundraisers working in Georgia.
On the Democratic side, Howard Dean is tops in terms of geographic diversity. His Internet fund-raising network reached out to a vast number of supporters without regard to borders. As a result, he received contributions from 1,426 counties, more than any other Democrat.
As for Senator John Kerry, the Democratic front-runner, most of the money he received last year, before he started winning primaries, is easily explained. New York was tops, followed by Los Angeles and then parts of Massachusetts, his home state.
But there is at least one oddity: Blaine County, Idaho, population 18,991. Mr. Kerry received more money per capita there than anyplace else in the country. It turns out that the Kerry family has a vacation home there, campaign aides said, and spends time there every year.
GLEN JUSTICE
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
