In the scrappy, often hard-hearted world of presidential politics, Senator John Edwards has stood out by presenting himself as Mr. Nice Guy: No harsh attack advertisements. No sharp contrasts with the front-runner, Senator John Kerry. The word ''Kerry'' rarely crosses his lips.
Instead, Mr. Edwards smiles his way through sunny promises of a ''positive, uplifting vision'' and ''bringing hope'' to America.
The relentlessly upbeat approach has worked, to a point. While Mr. Edwards may not be on the verge of snatching the Democratic nomination from Mr. Kerry, at least he is still standing.
But some strategists say that by refusing to go after Mr. Kerry, Mr. Edwards is lending credence to the notion -- true or not -- that he wants to be the senator's vice-presidential running mate or position himself for some future office.
''He's clearly the No. 2 guy,'' said Dave Manley, an Edwards supporter who heard the candidate speak at a rally on Thursday in Racine.
Mr. Edwards has repeatedly denied campaigning for the second slot on the Democratic ticket when asked about that in New Hampshire, in South Carolina, in Tennessee, in Virginia and now, in Wisconsin. Yet the notion still lingers, in part because Mr. Edwards has not emphatically ruled it out.
It does not help that some Democrats have begun speaking of his candidacy in the past tense, even some who otherwise heap praise on him for his positive message and for raising concerns about poverty and rural America.
''He may be out of votes for the race for president, but I hope he can be utilized,'' said May Scheve Reardon, the chairwoman of the Missouri Democratic Party, who has not endorsed any candidate. ''He would be great to add to any cabinet.''
Tony Coelho, a Democratic strategist who was chairman of Al Gore's 2000 campaign, said Mr. Edwards's approach was reminiscent of John F. Kennedy's vice-presidential campaign in 1956, setting up a successful run in 1960. He said Mr. Edwards had accrued significant good will and political stock that he could cash in down the road.
''If Dean beats him he is really hurt, and if he comes in second the issue is should he get out at that point,'' Mr. Coelho said. ''Because I think he has got cash in the bank, and to bet on Kerry losing is not a good bet.''
Many Democratic strategists say that as he faces a critical primary in Wisconsin on Tuesday, it is time for Mr. Edwards to offer voters a reason they should not vote for Mr. Kerry. They said his approach worked when the field was larger and hostile fire was directed at the presumed front-runner, Howard Dean.
''You have a chance to collect votes from everybody else, and that's clearly what happened in Iowa,'' said David Doak, a Democratic consultant. But as the field narrows and the front-runner builds momentum, Mr. Doak said, ''it may be a tactic that ends up costing the war.''
Recent political history is dotted with examples of candidates who surged after early primary losses -- Ronald Reagan in 1976, Edward M. Kennedy in 1980, Gary Hart in 1984. They all came back after clearly delineating sharp differences in policy or ideology, though none went on to capture the nomination.
''Everybody who had a comeback after losing, what, 14 primaries and caucuses now, has had some framework to do it,'' said Bill Carrick, a strategist who worked for Representative Richard A. Gephardt, who dropped out of the race after Iowa. ''They got some traction out of challenging the opponent either on ideology or policy grounds, some substantial attack.''
But Mr. Edwards steers clear of mentioning Mr. Kerry by name on the stump, and in news conferences he mentions him by name only when prompted by reporters. He last criticized Mr. Kerry by name on Feb. 2, and aides are concerned that heading back in that direction will be interpreted by the press as attacks.
Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry are moderates who have voted the same way on many hot button issues -- for the war in Iraq, against an $87 billion appropriation for it last year, for the No Child Left Behind legislation.
Here in Wisconsin, aides to Mr. Edwards say they believe Mr. Kerry is vulnerable on the issue of trade -- he voted for the North American Free Trade Agreement that many in this state blame for the loss of thousands of manufacturing jobs to Mexico. Mr. Edwards was not in the Senate when the measure passed, but he has said he would have opposed it.
Still, Mr. Edwards has not pointed out Mr. Kerry's vote and has focused on declaring where he stands, supporting ''not just free trade but fair trade,'' and advocating tax credits and other measures to induce companies to stay put and to build factories and offices in communities with high unemployment.
For now, at least, the Edwards camp seems intent on pressing forward with a test of the theory that a candidate does not need to go negative, or even articulate sharp distinctions, to bring down a front-runner.
Mr. Edwards and his advisers insist that his message is perfectly fine. Edwards aides point out that Gov. James E. Doyle of Wisconsin has admonished the candidates to keep their campaigning civil.
With his positive approach, Mr. Edwards's aides say, he can repeat his performance in the Iowa caucuses last month, when he surged from behind to a surprising second.
Mr. Edwards believes he draws a distinction between himself and Mr. Kerry every day by talking about his upbringing in a mill town and mentioning that his brother is a union electrician and that his mother is a retired member of the letter carriers' union; Mr. Kerry's more privileged background goes without saying.
''There is a candidate in this race who will wake up every morning thinking about you,'' he said here on Friday to a couple of dozen steelworkers whose plant plans to lay off 500 workers next summer.
Asked later why Mr. Kerry could not make the same statement, Mr. Edwards replied: ''I'll let him speak for himself. I know because I personally lived through this. I take it very personally.
''When I talk about their problems and what I will do for them it comes from -- in here,'' he said as he pointed to his heart.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO
