THE smell of fresh paint lingers as Ira T. Distenfield, the chairman of We the People Forms and Service Centers USA, a chain of self-help legal centers, admires his company's newest Manhattan storefront, sandwiched between a Subway restaurant and a dry cleaner in the Gramercy Park neighborhood.
On a slushy February day, in the opening week for the office, a receptionist sits idly at an empty desk. Behind him, a larger office has new wallpaper, but the desk is unoccupied and the bookshelf is empty. But Mr. Distenfield does not seem the least bit worried about the inactivity. His spirits are soaring.
''We thought the market here would be good,'' he says, sitting at a cream-colored table adorned with tulips, drumming his fingers. ''We didn't know it would be this good.''
He is talking about how quickly his company has swept into New York, not about the lack of customers in this office. Fifteen We the People offices have opened in the five boroughs since May, and the other 14 all reached a level of business within a month that many of the company's 120 other franchises took years to achieve, he says. This one, he predicts, will be one of the busiest. The company, he says, has no big national rivals though small businesses do such work in some of its markets.
Mr. Distenfield and his wife, Linda, are residents of Santa Barbara, Calif., but have rented an apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan to supervise their growing operation in New York, which they say will have 45 offices by June. Mr. Distenfield projects a 60 percent increase in revenue this year for the company, to $16 million.
Not a bad record for a company that has been the target of 29 lawsuits by lawyers, state bar associations and other critics. One reason for the company's success is that it helps people fill out legal forms for bankruptcies, wills, incorporations, uncontested divorces and the like for as little as $199, a small fraction of what they might pay to use a lawyer.
But there is another reason for Mr. Distenfield's exuberance. Twenty-six of the lawsuits have been dismissed or have been won by We the People, and it is starting to gain grudging acceptance in law circles. And now it has a business ally who may help it win even greater respectability: Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Mr. Giuliani's consulting firm, Giuliani Partners, signed on in September to help We the People in assessing potential markets and in its expansion. ''I call it my 'New York luck,''' Mr. Distenfield said, ''Being associated with someone like Mr. Giuliani gives us instant credibility.''
Mr. Distenfield's company was born in 1993 in a Santa Barbara storefront, and the legal challenges began almost immediately. Today, it is still fighting three lawsuits filed by bar associations in North Carolina, Illinois and Tennessee. The Illinois complaint accuses it of giving legal advice to a customer seeking a divorce -- something that only lawyers are legally permitted to do.
''They tout themselves as a document-typing service,'' said William Anaya, a Chicago lawyer who represents the Illinois State Bar Association in the case. ''It's our position that they are more than that. They are making a profit on the marginal practice of law, putting clients at risk.''
Mr. Anaya criticizes the company's methods, which include having clients fill out a workbook, which is then sent to a processing center, where the necessary court documents are prepared. ''They send off these forms and then -- poof! -- they magically become legal documents,'' Mr. Anaya said. ''In our opinion, that's practicing law.''
Jason E. Searns, the lawyer for We the People, scoffs at the accusation. ''We have never given legal advice,'' said Mr. Searns, who was hired by We the People in part to test the legal waters as it enters new markets. ''These lawsuits have been brought on by people who feel threatened by our success.''
Mr. Searns says some lawyers have gone to unusual lengths to ''try and catch'' the company providing legal advice to clients. He says one posed as a customer in a North Carolina franchise, with a hidden tape recorder, and sought to trap an employee into making incriminating statements.
Mr. Distenfield says he thinks he knows why opponents may go to such lengths. ''Because of us, some lawyers are Maytag repairmen waiting for their phone to ring,'' he said. ''We're the only large company out there that offers affordable legal access to the underserved.''
That is what attracted Giuliani Partners, said Michael Hess, senior managing director of that firm and former corporation counsel for New York City when Mr. Giuliani was mayor. Mr. Hess says he met Mr. Distenfield about a year ago at a social event and was intrigued by his story. ''If you can solve the problem for $299, rather than $10,000 with a lawyer, why wouldn't you do it?'' Mr. Hess asked.
Mr. Searns said the New York State Bar Association had not contacted the company about its move into the state. A. Thomas Levin, president of the association, said it had heard no complaints about the company but was watching its work. ''If they do only what they purport to do, it's perfectly legal,'' Mr. Levin said.
Mr. Searns also cited a recent public opinion letter issued by the Federal Trade Commission and endorsed by the Justice Department that criticizes the American Bar Association's definition of practicing law as overly restrictive. The letter, he said, urges a balance between protecting consumers and giving them access to alternative forms of legal assistance.
THE Giuliani connection is more than a public relations coup for We the People; it also provides a fountain of business expertise that the founders acknowledge they lack. ''I wish I could tell you that we've had 15 business analysts working with us, charting our course every step of the way,'' Mr. Distenfield said. The reality is more down to earth. ''At our home in Santa Barbara, we've got a huge shower with two heads,'' he said. ''That's where all of the serious discussions have taken place.''
Not that business insights cannot be made in unlikely surroundings. Ms. Distenfield was shopping recently in the Bronx and mentioned her company to a sales clerk. ''She looked at me and smiled, and said, 'You're doing my bankruptcy!''' Ms. Distenfield said. ''That's when I knew that we were going to do well here.''
