Early in the 17th century, Dutch settlers bought a large piece of land from the Maspet Indian tribe along what is now known as Newtown Creek. The tribe, whose name survives in the Queens neighborhood Maspeth, might have been eager to make the deal, given that they called the area ''at the bad water place.''
It is not known why they disparaged the creek back then. But the reasons to do so now are plain. Despite being long past its prime as a shipping hub, Newtown Creek, which forms the northern border between Brooklyn and Queens, is a 4.3-mile waterborne theme park for the remnants of industrial abuse.
In fact, Alex Matthiessen, the executive director of Riverkeeper, an environmental group, said the creek was so polluted that ''there is a defeatist attitude'' about it in government agencies. Maureen Wren, a spokeswoman for the state's Department of Environmental Conservation, disagreed, saying that it inspects facilities to make sure the water regulations are followed, investigates possible polluters and works to clean up contaminated sites.
But Riverkeeper has taken matters into its own hands. Two months ago, it sent letters to five companies that operate on the creek -- a cement plant, a scrap yard, a beverage distributor, a construction supply company and a recycling plant -- announcing that it planned to sue them for violating the federal Clean Water Act if each company did not at least come up with a cleanup plan by the end of December.
Although most of the companies denied any polluting, Mr. Matthiessen says the letter has gotten results.
One of the companies was Allocco Recycling, which decontaminates soil and pulverizes used concrete in a plant that abuts the creek at the end of Kingsland Avenue. Kenneth Reiss, a spokesman, said the company cooperated with Riverkeeper even though its operations were not harming the water. ''We spent $150,000 to increase the size of our bulkhead and raise it up to prevent any further erosion,'' he said. ''We even put netting underneath our outdoor conveyor belt.''
Mr. Matthiessen is cheered by such actions, but said much more needs to be done. The creek is bordered by 160 properties, he said, and his group is sending out more letters.
Ms. Wren said the conservation department was cleaning up the Phelps Dodge site, which has been designated by the federal government as a highly toxic site, and pressed for a continuing $2 billion improvement to the large Newtown Creek Sewage Treatment Plant. As for Allocco Recycling, ''D.E.C. did investigate that thoroughly,'' she said, and determined that ''there were no discharge or outfalls.''
If these pollution fighters succeed, Bill Schuck, an art teacher and kayaker who lives on Commercial Street in Greenpoint, may be among the first to know. ''There are slicks of garbage around where I put the kayak in,'' he said. ''There might be condoms and wooden pallets floating in the water. Further down the creek, it gets really polluted and still.''
JIM O'GRADY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NEW YORK WATERWAYS
