THE dismantled Litchfield house in which Harriet Beecher Stowe, the author of ''Uncle Tom's Cabin,'' was born, will be reconstructed, not in Litchfield where it was built in 1774, but in nearby Torrington.
Torrington's city council has approved a 99-year lease of a city-owned, 90-acre tract to the Beecher House Society for a dollar a year. All that is needed to complete the project, however, is $20 million.
The land is near the foundation of the childhood home of another historic figure in the anti-slavery movement before the Civil War, John Brown. The Brown homestead burned to the ground in the early 20th century, but the site has been maintained and developed by the Torrington Historical Society.
The Beecher house was purchased from a private school more than six years ago by Chandler Saint, a preservationist who intended to dismantle it and rebuild it in Litchfield as a museum to be known as the Beecher House Center for the History of Equal Rights.
After years of sometimes contentious discussions, and a referendum that rejected construction of the house in Litchfield, Mr. Saint and the Beecher House Society were offered the Torrington land.
Mr. Saint said the society planned to raise the $20 million for construction and endowment from foundations, the private sector and other sources now that the group had a site.
The property is across University Drive from the Torrington branch of the University of Connecticut, which is in a partnership with the Beecher House Society and Yale's Center for the Study of Slavery, Resistance and Abolition to develop programs for the center.
In the city's lease there are several safeguards designed to ''protect the best interests of the taxpayers'' and ''ensure that the project is completed within a reasonable time frame.'' The society must submit a master plan within two years and begin construction within a year after the plan is approved. The center must be open to the public within 10 years, or the land will revert to the city.
A study by UConn's Center for Economic Analysis concluded that the center could attract 18,000 visitors who would spend about $2.7 million on lodging, dining and shopping in the Torrington area annually.
''I like the idea of it,'' Mayor Owen Quinn of Torrington said.
Mr. Quinn said he saw the project as ''an exciting opportunity for Torrington that could transform the University of Connecticut at Torrington into a center for American studies and bring economic benefits to the city.''
