FOR much of American history, a respectable  if not heroic  stint in the military was almost a prerequisite for high political office. An overwhelming majority of the House of Representatives for many years were veterans. Most presidents had served in the military, and even before the rise of modern image making, presidential campaigns celebrated the candidates' feats in battle, from Yorktown to Tippecanoe to PT-109.
This changed in recent years, as the draft ended and military service became a far less common rite of passage. Some analysts, in fact, saw the rise of a new, post-cold-war, feminized politics in the 1990's, epitomized by the ascent of Bill Clinton and his doggedly domestic agenda. Under this theory, the president-as-warrior seemed almost a throwback.
But not anymore. The president-as-warrior seems painfully relevant, as the first presidential election since the attacks of 9/11 takes off. And the old question -- what did you do in your generation's war? -- is back, with a vengeance, in a new and perhaps more unforgiving context.
Last week, Republicans were scrambling to define and defend President Bush's stint in the Air National Guard during the Vietnam era: how he got there, where he served, how often he reported, whether he fulfilled his obligations.
Democrats, for their part, were trying to defend their likely nominee, Senator John Kerry, against charges that he came back from his much-decorated service in Vietnam to denounce the war, make common cause with the angriest protesters, including Jane Fonda, and vote against military spending.
It was a moment that captured the edgy, altered politics of the post-9/11 age. Republicans were outraged by the suggestion that President Bush, who is running for re-election as a proud and seasoned commander in chief, had not fulfilled his own duties in 1972, when he was assigned to the Alabama Air National Guard.
Democrats were intent on not being painted into their own dangerous corner in a dangerous age -- and on beating back the idea that they are instinctively antiwar. All this played out for an electorate that, compared with four years ago, is acutely aware of the value of the military and the demands put upon it, and considers national security something other than an abstraction.
Analysts say the current debate revolves around the question pushed to the forefront by the war on terrorism: Which candidate is the better commander in chief? How do they behave under stress? Can they relate to the soldiers on the front lines? Has each of them lived, personally, by the values he professes publicly?
Douglas Brinkley, a historian at the University of New Orleans and the author of ''Tour of Duty: John Kerry and the Vietnam War,'' argues that the Clinton years, in retrospect, were an aberration, not the dawn of a new era.
''In 2004, it's the perfect time for that American tradition of waving the bloody shirt to come into our political discourse again,'' he said. ''The soccer moms of the 1990's have become the security moms of 2004.''
And what the candidates are telling them, Mr. Brinkley and others said, is ''I will make you safe.''
Walter Russell Mead, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, argued: ''People need to feel that the president is not going to be fazed by life and death decisions. And the only way you can demonstrate that is by showing you have made some.''
Mr. Kerry has highlighted his Vietnam experience from the start, mindful that as a challenger, he faces a harder test of credibility as commander in chief. In his advertising and on the trail, he is surrounded by veterans, who testify to his bravery and his toughness. It serves to both humanize him and defend against attacks, advisers said, like the ones that came last week, with the circulation of a 1970 photograph showing him at the rally with Ms. Fonda, who is still anathema to many veterans.
''It's hard to do this kind of scurrilous thing with the Jane Fonda pictures against someone who took three bullets in Vietnam,'' said a Kerry adviser. ''It's hard to say that someone who's served in combat, been decorated for bravery, is soft on defense.''
The toughness question is important for the Democratic Party, which for many years has fought the image that it is almost reflexively against using military force, the ''mommy party'' as the commentator Chris Matthews put it years ago. Mr. Kerry's record as a vet, in fact, is one reason that so many Democrats see him as an electable nominee.
Still, Republican leaders argue that what he did later is at least as relevant. ''John Kerry's record of service in our military is honorable,'' Ed Gillespie, the Republican chairman, said last week. ''But his long record in the Senate is one of advocating policies that would weaken our national security.''
Mr. Bush has been building his re-election campaign around his record as an experienced ''war president,'' who has kept the nation safe from further terrorist attacks and unflinchingly protected American interests abroad. His conduct in the days after 9/11, his allies argue, reflects his steadiness and courage, ''demonstrating the same resolve and leadership in the great challenge of our time, the war on terror,'' as Abraham Lincoln did in his, Mr. Gillespie said last week.
But Democrats have grown increasingly aggressive in challenging this image of a ''war president.'' Mr. Kerry regularly mocks Mr. Bush's aircraft-carrier landing last year under the banner ''Mission Accomplished,'' asserting, ''I know something about aircraft carriers for real.''
Terry McAuliffe, the Democratic chairman, gave new life in recent days to questions about Mr. Bush's Guard experience in Texas and Alabama, suggesting he had been AWOL -- absent without leave -- during his time in Alabama. Republicans have denounced it as a smear tactic, arguing that Mr. Bush's years in the Guard are fully accounted for, but the issue has clearly caught the Bush camp off guard.
The White House, trying to halt the political storm, released a stack of his Vietnam-era military records Friday night, asserting that the documents show the accusations against Mr. Bush are false. It came at the end of a week of questions, statements and attempts to document Mr. Bush's military service.
Even among some notable veterans, there is disagreement about how relevant a military background should be in a presidential campaign. Former Senator Bob Kerrey, the president of New School University and a Medal of Honor winner in Vietnam, says he does not believe it is a prerequisite. ''It's the quality of the individual and their values that determines whether or not you're qualified to be commander in chief,'' he said.
James Webb, former secretary of the Navy under Ronald Reagan, and a highly decorated Marine platoon and company commander in Vietnam, argues that military service matters. ''It's how you face the challenge when your country is at war,'' he said, ''and then how you portray yourself later on.'' Both Mr. Kerry and Mr. Bush have questions to answer, Mr. Webb said.
Clearly, this campaign will be waged in a different climate. Mr. Kerrey noted that when he first ran for office, in 1982, being a highly decorated veteran was not necessarily an asset.
''First question at a press conference -- do you have flashbacks,'' he recalled last week. ''Vietnam veterans were expected to wig out.'' Now, Mr. Kerry is campaigning across the country with his ''band of brothers'' from Vietnam, ''who still know how to fight for their country,'' as he puts it.
Trust in the military has soared in recent years, pollsters say. And while military service is no longer as widespread among elected officials -- fewer than a third of the members of the House are veterans -- ''it is an asset at a time of war,'' said David C. King, an associate professor of public policy at Harvard. ''And people do feel we're at war.''
THE sense of equanimity that settled, briefly, on the voters after the fall of the Berlin Wall has vanished. ''We've woken up after the 90's,'' argues Robert D. Kaplan, author of ''Warrior Politics.'' ''The next few years and decades are going to be dirty and messy and violent, and whoever is elected president is going to project military power around the world, greatly.''
So the question returns: What did you do during the war?
