NOT long ago, I walked past the building in Chelsea where I grew up. I was amazed at how ordinary it seemed: a broad stoop, cast-iron fire escapes cascading down the brick-and-stone facade in perfect Z's, a well-lighted lobby and clean glass doors. There was nothing threatening about the building, and the block itself, lined with trees, was quiet and unremarkable.
My mother lived on the sixth floor of this building, at 210 West 21st Street, from the time I was born in 1961 until the day before she died in 1983, and she spent most of those years in a fog of depression. I often wondered if her mental deterioration was inevitable, rooted in genetics or some early sorrow, or if the time and place in which she lived contributed to her breakdown.
To her, that seemingly ordinary building was a dirty, dangerous place, with a clanking box of an elevator that always seemed to be broken, heat that never seemed to come on and roaches that seemed to be everywhere. She was frightened of the old men who played dominoes on the corner and drank liquor from bottles hidden in paper bags. She was certain that after dark, muggers lurked in every shadow.
Anyone who arrived in New York in the past 20 years can be forgiven for wondering how my mother could have had such a bleak view of such a nice block. Today, of course, Chelsea is famous for its cutting-edge galleries, charming streetscapes and trendy places to eat and shop; it's safe, convenient and expensive.
My mother's Chelsea was different. Soot from rooftop incinerators stalked the white sheets she hung on the clothesline strung between our kitchen and bathroom windows. After a grocery store around the corner burned down in 1977, during an epidemic of arson, the building was abandoned for years.
And while I was the only first grader at Public School 11 on West 21st Street who spoke English, my mother was the only customer in our local bodega who didn't speak Spanish. To her, Chelsea was a slum; she would have given anything for a little house with a garden.
My mother had moved to Manhattan from Maine in 1947 with dreams of becoming a model. But by the time those dreams were gone and she realized how much she hated city life, she was trapped, a housewife surrounded by the urban decay of the 1960's and 70's. She panicked when the doorbell rang, forever afraid that the voice calling out ''Gas man!'' might belong to a criminal instead of a meter reader.
My mother hated our building so much, she wouldn't even allow family photos to be taken in front of it. Instead, she'd walk me and my sister a block away until she found a building with a doorman or shrubs to pose us in front of. The sole picture I have of my mother in the place where she lived for 22 years was taken, at her insistence, on the roof; she is standing in the snow, holding an amaryllis. She looks like a madwoman; who poses with a plant on the rooftop of an apartment building in the middle of winter? But flowers reminded her of Maine, and the photo of a plant she'd coaxed into bloom proved her small triumph over the gray city.
All my life I struggled to understand the connection between my mother's moods and the place where she lived. If depression is an organic condition best treated by drugs, did it make sense to claim that her depression was caused by the deterioration of New York? Even if it's now acceptable to attribute depression to a cataclysmic event like Sept. 11, no single watershed moment could be blamed for my mother's blues. It's not as if Son of Sam or the city's near bankruptcy had put her over the edge.
Then about two years ago, as I was doing research for a book about my mother's life, an aunt in Maine and a family friend down South sent me a cache of letters that my mother had written over the years. In her own words, these letters explained more clearly than I ever could how strongly she linked her personal burdens with conditions in her adopted city.
''I read in the paper yesterday soot is 68 tons per square mile in NYC,'' she wrote to my aunt in the early 60's. ''No wonder I'm always cleaning filth and my house is always dirty.''
BY 1966, her despair over life inside and outside our apartment had deepened. ''Bus and subway fares have gone up,'' she said. ''The hospital attendants have gone on strike. Our combined newspaper is still on strike. Ten cans of bug spray have made only a small dent in the roach population. They are feasting like Holy Romans.''
The chaos seemed to seep right into our building. ''Tonight someone laid on my bell right outside the apt. door at 1 a.m.,'' she wrote to her friend. ''I had finally just closed my eyes. Don't know who it was or what they wanted a couple of men and I didn't dare even peep through my door spy.''
The upturn in crime continued to hit close to home. ''Robbed twice last week and really shook up about it,'' she wrote her sister. ''This face in my face, on silent feet of a cat, wrenched my purse from under my arm. He was gone with the wind in the dark of the night!'' She added plaintively, ''I'm going to get to Maine somehow even if I have to crawl! I'm damn sick and tired of being a prisoner here.''
In our family, Maine was the antidote to all the city's poisons. Each summer, my father shut down the store in the garment district where he sold used sewing machines, and took my mother, my sister and me back to the place my mother wished she'd never left. The rundown lakeside cottages we rented were equipped with little more than outhouses and wood stoves, but they seemed like paradise.
In New York, my mother obsessed about crime and roaches and a million other things; in Maine everything was idyllic: ''The weather has been perfect here,'' she wrote in one note. ''Hot sunny days and wool blanket nights. This is truly one of the most beautiful spots on the lake. I hope this gives me a new lease on life. Will be back in N.Y. all too soon.'' For her, Labor Day was the saddest day of the year because that was the day we drove back to the city.
My mother died before New York turned around, before crime plummeted and real estate values soared. The roach-infested apartment she hated so much is worth more than a half-million dollars as a co-op; our Spanish-speaking neighbors and the old men who used to play dominoes on the corner were long ago replaced by successive waves of gay men, artists and investment bankers.
Of course, some of what has happened since my mother's death would have upset her as much as the roaches and radical bombings; I'm thinking of crack, AIDS and the trade center's demise. But there is one change in New York that I know my mother would have loved. At the 24-hour Korean groceries that have sprouted throughout the city over the past 20 years, alongside the boxes of strawberries and cherry tomatoes, there are often buckets of brilliantly colored flowers.
Perhaps amid the roses and daisies, my mother would have found some respite from the dirt and chaos that depressed her so. Maybe the tiger lilies would have reminded her of Maine. And maybe on a bleak, winter day, she would have taken cheer, as I always do, in the sight of those candy-colored tulips.
NEW YORK OBSERVED Beth J. Harpaz's memoir about her mother, ''Finding Annie Farrell,'' is being published this month by Thomas Dunne Books/St. Martin's Press.
