The news came, Faris Mourad said, as ''a total surprise.'' For 30 years, he endured life as a political prisoner here, suffering torture, harsh conditions, an untreated disease that curved his spine, permanently and painfully. Then on Jan. 31, along with almost 130 other political prisoners in Syria's police state, he was suddenly freed.
Syria has still not explained to the nation this act of unexpected clemency toward a handful of perhaps 3,000 such prisoners -- or even acknowledged publicly that it happened. But some human rights officials say it is a sign, if a small and ambiguous one, of the larger pressures Syria is under these days, with more than 100,000 American soldiers next door in Iraq and increasing impatience for change at home.
It was the first release of a large number of prisoners since 2001, in the early days of promises by a new, young president, Bashar al-Assad, for greater democracy.
''Time is running out,'' said Haitham al-Maleh, a lawyer and human rights activist who has defended many political prisoners. ''Everything is changing all over the world. The United States is trying to make pressure. The European Union is trying to make pressure.''
And so are Syrian people, if gingerly for fear of a backlash from a state ruled with iron for 30 years by Hafez al-Assad and, since his death in 2000, with something slightly softer by his son, Bashar, 38. Mr. Maleh, for example, has drafted a letter signed by 700 intellectuals, demanding the repeal of the state of emergency in place since 1963.
But there is a paradox here that says much about the state of mind around the Middle East: the United States is exerting the most pressure on Syria -- which it accuses of sponsoring terror groups -- and talks loudest about democracy in the region. Yet human rights activists, intellectuals and released prisoners like Mr. Mourad say they distrust America deeply, seeing it working more for its own larger strategic interests than pushing for improvements in civil rights for ordinary Syrians.
''Where is American democracy?'' asked Mr. Mourad, 54, arrested for activity in the Arab Communist Organization and one of the two longest-serving political prisoners. ''Where are American human rights?''
American pressure has focused, in fact, almost wholly on terrorism and the war in Iraq, and on those fronts the pressure has been unrelenting.
American and Israeli officials accused Syria last week of resuming shipments of arms to the Lebanese guerrilla group Hezbollah, and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell suggested that Syria should take ''a hard look'' at its policies now that it is largely encircled by allies of the United States: Israel, Jordan, Turkey and, since last year, Iraq.
The accusation comes as American officials prepare a report on Syria that could lead to economic sanctions as part of the Syria Accountability Act passed by Congress last year. The act demands that Syria cut ties with Hezbollah and Palestinian militant groups fighting Israel, withdraw its nearly 20,000 troops from Lebanon, and close off its border with Iraq to anti-American insurgents.
The act does not address the issue of political prisoners. But the European Union has made their freedom part of its negotiations over a new trade agreement with Syria. Mr. Assad faces still others pressures: a soft economy; a surging Islamic community; and many questions about whether Mr. Assad himself is the real power in Syria or, as one intellectual speculated, only ''a point of intersection between factions of power.''
The workings of the Syrian state -- murky, secretive, with overlapping security services and no real opposition -- is a mystery to most observers, foreign and domestic, so it is hard to say with any precision how exactly Syria is reacting to these many pressures.
But Walid Moallem, the deputy prime minister and for years Syria's chief negotiator with Israel, cautioned against reading too much into the prisoner release: it was not a sign, he said, of pressure on Syria, though that pressure has been substantial, he conceded. All nations in the region, he argued, are feeling pressure, given that the conflicts in Iraq and Israel are far from settled.
Rather, he said, the release showed that the government felt secure enough to free people it had considered a danger to the state.
''It reflects the regime's self-confidence,'' Mr. Moallem said.
Many experts on Syria say they believe the prisoner release was partly a gesture to the European Union, in anticipation of the coming signing of the trade pact, and partly to show some movement on reforms to Syrians themselves. And since most of the released prisoners were Islamists, some speculate that the release was a way to create good will with the growing number of observant Muslims in Syria.
In all, human rights activists, diplomats and other experts say the prisoner release seems consistent with what they see as other recent steps to ease pressure on several fronts: give a little but make no major changes that could loosen the government's hold on power.
In recent months Syria has made much of a new willingness to reopen talks with Israel, as a way to show the United States and other nations that it is interested in peace, and last week its foreign minister, Farouk al-Sharaa, repeated that readiness. Reiterating Syria's often-stated view -- an excuse, critics say -- Mr. Moallem said internal reforms were difficult to carry out in the absence of peace with Israel.
Yet experts say they have detected little willingness on Syria's part to move on issues that could clear the way for talks, like cutting support for Hezbollah. (It is also true, experts say, that Israel does not appear ready to sit down with Syria, either.)
Damascus closed the offices of Hamas and Islamic Jihad, as the United States demanded, but allowed their leaders to remain in Syria. American officials say that it has beefed up security along the Iraq border but that some foreign militants are still crossing into Iraq. Syrian officials say they have done their best but cannot completely control the 370-mile border, much of it desert.
Mr. Assad took office encouraging more public discussion and criticism, yet many who attended public forums have been arrested -- including 10 taken during a brief blooming in 2000 and 2001 now known as the ''Damascus Spring.''
Then, out of the blue, came this latest prisoner release.
There have been limited releases of prisoners since 1998, while his father was still alive and when Mr. Assad took office in 2000 and quickly freed about 700, then 113 the next year. Others have trickled out of jail since, but nothing like the 130 freed at the end of January.
Khalil Khayrat, who had spent 30 of his 58 years in prison, seemed as confused as everyone about precisely how this prison release fit into the larger pressures facing Syria.
''They have their own motives,'' said Mr. Khayrat, who was accused of belonging to a rebel Baath wing.
Out nearly a week, he said he still had not left the house, being too busy greeting visiting well-wishers. Still, he said, he felt a different mood in Syria. ''In the past, I could never speak to you,'' he told a reporter.
But he did not think real change would come soon. ''It will be gradual,'' he said. He amended the thought, with slightly more hope, ''Let's make it in between -- not quick, but not slow either.''
