THE future level of terrorist threats is hard to predict, but two years after airport security personnel began ordering passengers to remove their shoes to check for explosives, more acute disruptions and security delays -- like the ones last month -- seem entirely possible.
''It's conceivable that the imagination of terrorists is limitless,'' said Dominique Bussereau, the French transport secretary, in Paris at the end of December, ''which means the measures must be stringent.''
He spoke at a moment of peak terrorism worries, but unusual measures continued this month when American officials backed most of the country off from an orange alert, or ''high,'' the second-highest in the five official stages of anxiety, to yellow (or ''elevated''), but kept airlines and airports at the higher level. The stringent airport procedures were in place around New Year's Day, at the same time as a scheduled implementation of tight new immigration procedures, combining to produce new headaches for air travelers.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service began requiring visitors from most countries to submit to fingerprinting and a quick digital snapshot, on arrival at 115 international airports in this country.
This step, in preparation for a year, took effect soon after several flights from France and Britain were canceled at the last minute, and one from Mexico was turned back in midair. For people whose airplanes flew more or less on time, lines at passenger screening points were longer, and for international arrivals, there was an added step of giving fingerprints, although American officials said that this did not add much to processing times.
Fighter planes escorted some jetliners, airport police searched some cars approaching terminals, and various other special procedures took effect.
France, which had never used armed air marshals, agreed to add them temporarily. It took a little more time, as well as negotiations with the pilots, in Britain. But Sweden and Portugal, among others, said they would not add marshals, and would cancel flights if necessary.
The effect on air travel and the airline industry of all the security changes -- both the ones in the last few weeks and those added since Sept. 11 -- is unclear. That is because those effects are mixed in with other factors that have an impact on air travel, notably a nosedive in corporate profits that has cut travel budgets, and consumer nervousness.
But Robert W. Poole Jr., director of transportation studies at the libertarian Reason Public Policy Institute, noted in a recent report that the steepest traffic declines were in short-haul flights, when travelers have a choice between flying and surface transit. While waits to clear security were generally short, they have added a layer of unpredictability, and he wrote in an e-mail newsletter, ''Having to add an extra hour of preflight time to a one-hour airline trip starts to push door-to-door time for these 200-300-mile trips much closer to driving time.''
The airlines are trying to be optimistic. At the Air Transport Association, the trade association of the major American carriers, John M. Meenan, a vice president, said that the reaction of passengers over the busy holiday period had been favorable. ''All we've heard is anecdotal, and it's from the passengers who say, 'We're pleased to see this kind of security','' he said. ''It seems that the public is accepting the reality of the world we're living in. They're pleased to see the security the way it is.''
The association's president, James C. May, said that there had been declines in passenger traffic, but they had been small.
Waiting for a British Airways flight from Dulles Airport to Heathrow one day recently, Sarah Plunkett, a restaurant manager from Bristol, England, said she was nervous, not only that her flight would be delayed or canceled but also that terrorists could have targeted her flight. ''But I'd rather them ground a plane than have something awful happen,'' she said.
More changes, with expense in time and money, seem certain. The Homeland Security Department recently announced that it would give $2 million to each of three corporate teams to design antimissile systems for civilian planes. But completion of testing on prototypes is about two years away, officials said, and only then would a decision be made about feasibility.
Of the changes so far, many are likely to go unnoticed by travelers; for example, various federal law enforcement officers will be pressed into undercover service as air marshals. And the Air Force has fighters at a high state of readiness, ready to swoop in on hijacked passenger planes.
Of course, passengers will notice when a flight is canceled. Airlines are still groping with how to handle that problem.
Where flights were canceled, the airlines generally provided vouchers for meals and hotels. Air France put up about 400 passengers overnight, most at an airport Sofitel. The airline also took the unusual step of offering to reimburse the fare if the substitute itinerary did not suit the travelers.
Aeroméxico also provided hotel rooms and meals. It said that two cancellations had cost it $150,000, mostly for buying tickets on other airlines to carry the passengers.
British Airways said that passengers on canceled flights were put on the next available flight to Dulles, or to nearby airports. The airline paid for rooms and meal vouchers. Refunds were available, said the spokesman. USAirways did not have any flights disrupted, but a spokesman said that its policy would be similar to what it does for weather cancellations: it would not offer rooms or meal vouchers, but a customer relations program, he said, ''does empower employees to make appropriate adjustments.'' Refunds would not be allowed.
United Airlines said it would handle security cancellations the way it handles cancellations for other reasons, by rebooking passengers as soon as possible. It often offers hotel rooms at steep discounts, a spokesman said. American also will handle security cancellations by rebooking but it will not pay for hotels or meals if the cancellation is for a reason beyond its control, said John Hotard, a spokesman. ''We'll refund the passenger's ticket if they no longer wish to fly,'' he said.
The crackdown by the United States on incoming passengers provoked retaliation in Brazil, where a judge, Julier Sebastiao da Silva, ordered Americans arriving in Brazil fingerprinted. He called the American program to which he was responding ''worthy of the worst horrors committed by the Nazis.''
Despite the oratory, within a few days at least one entity -- the city of Rio -- was seeking an injunction to reverse the policy. The hastily arranged Brazilian computerized workstations simply required visitors to place each index finger on a glass pad that looked like the surface of photocopy machine. A State Department spokesman, Richard Boucher, said some Americans had been delayed nine hours on arrival in Rio.
For the near term, the number of new procedures seems likely to increase. In October, for example, all foreign visitors to the United States will have to carry machine-readable passports, and they will be scanned as the traveler leaves the country. But efforts are being made to reduce the number of times travelers must line up.
In mid-January, a Maryland company specializing in airport and aviation electronics, Arinc, began showing off an automated kiosk that would scan visas and fingerprints for exit processing. Then, instead of lining up to face an airport official, passengers would line up to face a machine.
MATTHEW L. WALD is a correspondent in the Washington bureau of The Times.
