Father Demo Square, the little triangle where Bleecker Street, Carmine Street and the Avenue of the Americas meet, is a defining oddity of the West Village. A dozen benches sit at haphazard angles, as if tossed there randomly; in the center is a bulky, three-headed lamppost; a few sickly trees complete the ensemble.
But this square is more than the sum of its parts. For decades, local residents have gone there to read the paper on warm summer days. In the evenings, the square is seeded with nuzzling couples and crisscrossed by revelers shuttling from one stretch of Bleecker to another; on summer nights, the homeless take over, filling the benches as they have for decades.
In a move to keep out the homeless, Community Board 2 is close to approving a Parks Department proposal to surround the square with a three-foot-high metal fence, punctuated by four wide gates that would be closed around midnight.
''All night long there's people screaming, yelling, music, boom boxes,'' said David Gruber, a Carmine Street resident who three years ago founded the Friends of Father Demo Square to push for the fence. ''Now, what the police can do is say, 'This park is closed; it's locked; you need to be out of here, or we'll arrest you.'''
Mr. Gruber's complaint dovetails with those of many Village residents. But although there are no statistics on crime in Father Demo Square, the police say disorderly conduct there is not a problem.
''The issue is the homeless,'' said Tim Duffy, a community affairs officer with the Sixth Precinct, which serves the neighborhood. ''There's no crime over there; it's not like people are mugging people. It actually has gotten much better.''
Fencing in the square would likely keep out the homeless who sleep there in droves during the summer, but it might not force them to move far.
''The odds of their going to shelters are very small,'' said Mitchell Duneier, a professor of sociology at Princeton and the CUNY Graduate Center who is the author of ''Sidewalk,'' a study of homeless people and street vendors in Greenwich Village. ''My guess is that the cheap stores, the cheap food and the massive numbers of people will make that area into a place where homeless people will still want to stay.''
More broadly, the proposal to fence in Father Demo Square at night represents a signal change for what has traditionally been a space through which people pass en route to elsewhere. At a hectic meeting of the community board's parks committee on Jan. 7, many proposals, some farcical, were offered for clearing the park of homeless people. One woman suggested rotating sprinklers, in response to which a man behind her growled: ''What are we going to do in winter? Ice skating?''
The proposal, which includes a fountain, a rose bed, repaving and new trees, now goes to the full community board and the city's Art Commission. Although both bodies are expected to approve the plan with few changes, reactions to the fence are mixed at street level.
''It's terrible,'' said Michael Kitting, who was eating a quick slice at Joe's, next to the square. ''That's so unfriendly.''
Raymond Leslie, a homeless man who sleeps in his pickup truck (''I use two space blankets'') and with whom Mr. Kitting was sharing a minuscule table, disagreed.
''I support putting the fence up,'' said Mr. Leslie, who has spent nights in Father Demo Square. ''In this particular area you have these restaurants. I don't think that's an appropriate space for people to hang out. There's no social services here.''
Besides, he said, ''you've got people in the neighborhood that are upper-middle-class, paying two or three thousand dollars in rent, and they don't really have anything in common with a homeless person.''
ALEX MINDLIN
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: WEST VILLAGE
