WHEN the East Hampton High School boys' varsity basketball team beat Southampton 62-51 on Dec. 20, it was a big win over a longtime rival. But it was an even bigger win for Ed Petrie, East Hampton's coach: with a total of 631 victories, he became the winningest public high school basketball coach in New York State.
The previous record-holder for public schools was Jack Halloran of Whitney Point High School, just north of Binghamton. Jack Curran of Archbishop Molloy High School, a coeducational Catholic school in Jamaica, Queens, is the overall record-holder, with 832 wins.
For Mr. Petrie, whose victory total had grown to 633 as of Wednesday, the passion for basketball and winning did not begin with coaching. He was a starting guard at Rye Neck High School, in Rye, N.Y., and in the 50's, he played on the Seton Hall University team coached by Honey Russell that twice played in the National Invitation Tournament. When he graduated in 1956, he was drafted by the New York Knicks.
His N.B.A. career was short-lived, however. When the Knicks traded for a player named Slater Martin and had to open a roster spot, Mr. Petrie was cut. He played in the professional Eastern League for two years, but unable to make a living at basketball alone, he turned to teaching physical education, first at a junior high school in Yonkers, then at a technical school in Connecticut.
In 1958, he learned of an opening for a teacher in the Sag Harbor School District. He got the job. The following year, he was appointed coach of the Pierson High School boys' varsity basketball team.
''You could see right away that Eddie knew basketball, and he loved the game,'' recalled Bob Vishno, Pierson's athletic director at the time. ''He certainly had the enthusiasm and the expertise to teach it. I worked with him as the J.V. coach, and we had some pretty good success over the years.''
Pierson became a force in basketball, even though it was one of the smallest high schools on Long Island, and in 1968, it won a state championship.
In 1970, Mr. Petrie decide to move on to a larger high school and became the coach at East Hampton. More league and regional titles followed, and in 1989, East Hampton won a state championship. Much of the firepower on that team was supplied by Kenny Wood, who still holds the state's public high school scoring record, with 2,613 points.
But those who have played for Mr. Petrie point out that for him, winning is not an end in itself. ''He's excellent with young players, very patient and very knowledgeable,'' said Tom Bubka, a former player who coached the junior varsity in East Hampton for 26 years. ''He emphasizes the fundamentals, team play and placing individuals in the roles that were right for them and for the team. As I was passing kids on to the varsity level, I knew they were going to the best situation possible. And Coach's door was always open if I had questions.''
Scott Rubenstein, a former player who now has two sons on the East Hampton squad. ''Everybody takes for granted that he's a genius when it comes to basketball, but what makes him a great coach is dedication,'' he said. ''At a time when teachers had two or three jobs on the side, Coach was always there. He opened up the gym weeknights for rec. If we were playing hoop outdoors, he'd show up on his bicycle and watch. We all appreciated the extra time he put in.''
Mr. Petrie, who was inducted into the Suffolk County Sports Hall of Fame in 1996, is modest about his success. ''I've been fortunate to have a lot of good kids,'' he said. ''The attitude toward basketball in East Hampton has been excellent all during these years, from the community as well as from the kids. There's no way you can win all those games unless you have good kids. And there's a nice network of former players. Bill McKee has been my assistant for many years. His brother Joe now coaches the junior varsity. Howard Wood coaches the seventh-grade team. I look in the stands -- there's one generation cheering on the next.''
East Hampton's athletic director, Chris Tracey said that Coach Petrie commands the respect of his players. ''He's a real gentleman,'' Mr. Tracey said. ''He's a tough, demanding coach coupled with being a fine human being. The kids come into the gym knowing there's a tradition of working hard and being appreciated for it and a tradition of winning. That works for any generation of player.''
For Mr. Rubenstein, describing Mr. Petrie is simple. ''Other kids would always ask what it was like playing for him because there was a kind of mysteriousness about him,'' he said. ''They'd ask, 'Is he like a big brother?' The answer is no. 'Was he like a father to you?' No. 'Is he like your best friend?' No. 'Well, what's he like?' He's Coach. Not a coach, not the coach, not my coach. He's Coach. That's who is and always will be.''
