A classified Army study of the downings of military helicopters in Iraq found that guerrillas have used increasingly sophisticated tactics and weapons -- including at least one advanced missile -- to attack American aircraft, senior Army officials in Iraq and the Persian Gulf region say.
The insurgents have proved adept at using both rocket-propelled grenades, which are point-and-shoot weapons, and heat-seeking surface-to-air missiles, which require greater maintenance and skill, said Army officials familiar with the study.
No type of helicopter is more vulnerable or more protected against the problem, the review found. But the team recommended specific changes to help pilots better evade ground fire, Army officials said. Senior officers declined to elaborate, but changes in the past have included flying more missions at night with lights off to avoid detection.
The study was conducted before the three most recent downings this month, but those incidents in the restive area near Falluja, west of Baghdad, have only reinforced the team's findings and raised fears that insurgents are closely studying the flight patterns of helicopters and other aircraft, Army officials said.
''The enemy has clearly seen the possibilities from earlier successes,'' said one senior Army aviator in the Persian Gulf region. ''The enemy enjoys a strategic success each time one of our aircraft is shot down. It becomes a major media event, and questions arise as to who is winning. So the enemy sees this as very useful.''
It was concern about these attacks that prompted Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, the senior American commander in Iraq, to go beyond the standard review after any crash and order last month a comprehensive study of all downings, Army officials said.
The goal was to detect more about the insurgents' techniques and weaponry, and possible weaknesses in the Americans' defensive countermeasures and tactics.
One troubling finding, Army officials said, is that on at least one occasion the insurgents used an SA-16 shoulder-fired missile, which has a guidance system that is harder to thwart than the SA-7 missiles and rocket-propelled grenades that insurgents have used in other attacks.
Since Oct. 25, nine military helicopters have been shot down or have crash-landed after being hit by what the authorities believe was hostile fire, killing a total of 49 soldiers. American military authorities say on Jan. 2, a rocket-propelled grenade or a surface-to-air missile downed an OH-58 Kiowa reconnaissance helicopter, killing the pilot.
Six days later, another missile, probably either an SA-7 or SA-16, struck a UH-60 Black Hawk medical evacuation helicopter, killing nine crew members and passengers. And on Tuesday, ground fire brought down an AH-64 Apache gunship, but the two crew members survived.
Senior military officials in Iraq emphasized that with the three latest incidents near Falluja still under investigation, it was premature to draw any conclusions about long-term trends.
''It's hard to say whether it's been a bad couple of weeks or it's something larger,'' said one senior officer in Baghdad. ''But clearly, that area has us concerned.''
The team conducting the review was headed by Col. Stephen Dwyer, a brigade commander at the Army Aviation Center at Fort Rucker, Ala., and it included about a dozen forensic and weapons experts, crash analysts and helicopter specialists. The team spent about four weeks in Iraq visiting each crash site, taking soil samples for forensic analysis and talking to aviators.
''They went over to look at Army aviation, make an assessment and make recommendations on how to improve it,'' said Lt. Col. James Bullinger, a spokesman for the Army Aviation Center.
Colonel Bullinger said that even before the team started its work, the Army was adopting lessons from Iraq, teaching Apache and Kiowa pilots to fire their weapons while ''running and diving,'' instead of hovering, when a helicopter is more vulnerable to an attack from the ground.
Senior Army commanders said the assessment team provided several valuable insights for pilots in Iraq, and for the fresh crews preparing to rotate into the country.
''This is a case of our Army coming through quickly with the right expertise at the right place,'' said Maj. Gen. David H. Petraeus, commander of the 101st Airborne Division, which had as many as 250 helicopters in Iraq.
American intelligence analysts have said that during Saddam Hussein's rule, Iraq stockpiled at least 5,000 shoulder-fired missiles, and that fewer than a third have been recovered. The missiles are also easy to smuggle across Iraq's porous borders; they weigh 30 pounds or less and are less than six feet long.
The senior Army aviator added: ''No specific aircraft appears more susceptible than others. The team found that RPG's, SA-7's, SA-14's, and an SA-16 were used. The RPG appears to be a fairly effective weapon in a skilled shooter's hands and, given the right parameters, somewhat close to the ground.''
Army officials declined to specify which incidents might have involved an SA-16. One senior officer said the Black Hawk that crashed on Jan. 8 might have been shot down by an SA-16, but another senior officer disagreed, saying that parts of an SA-7 warhead had been found in the wreckage. Both missile systems were designed by the Soviet Union.
''It's unclear just how many SA-16's are in the theater,'' the senior Army aviator said, ''but it is a worrisome development which both helicopter and fixed-wing forces will have to fully understand and counter.''
Army helicopters, like military airplanes, have defensive countermeasures, including flares and a metallic confetti called chaff, that are designed to help defeat infrared and radar-guided missiles. Some helicopters also have infrared jammers.
But those defenses are designed to guard against missiles, not rocket-propelled grenades. So pilots must also rely on evasive tactics. Those tactics include flying low and fast, as well as asking passengers and crew members to watch for ground fire.
There are trade-offs in different tactics, Army aviators said. Flying at high altitudes protects aircraft from rocket-propelled grenades, but somewhat increases the likelihood of being spotted and engaged by surface-to-air missiles, one officer said.
Military officials in Iraq say they review pilots' tactics and procedures after every incident, but they never stop flying missions. ''We are changing tactics on a daily basis based on the intelligence and the operating patterns that we're seeing so that we don't present a steady-state pattern to the enemy,'' General Sanchez told reporters in Baghdad on Friday.
On a flight last month between Tikrit and Ad Dwar, the village where Mr. Hussein was captured, a visitor aboard a UH-60 Black Hawk was treated to a roller-coaster ride as the pilot banked sharply several times and flew just above treetops at more than 130 miles an hour during a 10-minute trip, to pose a more fleeting target to potential shooters on the ground.
Military officials said a combination of former Iraqi military or security personnel, and possibly foreign fighters, were probably carrying out the attacks against helicopters.
''Many incidents against aircraft are attacks by Iraqi former regime elements and those paid by them,'' said the senior Army aviator in the gulf region. ''It is clearly possible and likely -- if not yet, in the future -- that foreign fighters will target helicopters, since a successful attack often has strategic effect.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: INSURGENTS
