Investors Point To Iowa Winner
Some tracking polls show the presidential contest in Iowa as too close to call, but the invisible hand of the market is pointing to the favorite.
Howard Dean is the choice of two political futures markets, where thousands of speculators, unlike journalists, put their money where their punditry is. They buy and sell contracts that pay off if a candidate wins.
At press time on Saturday, Dr. Dean's stock in the Iowa caucuses market at Intrade.com was listed at 45, meaning that investors gave him a 45 percent chance to win the caucuses tomorrow. Next was Representative Richard A. Gephardt at 25 percent, followed by Senator John Kerry at 20 and Senator John Edwards at 8. .
Dr. Dean also remained the favorite to be the eventual nominee on another exchange, the Iowa Electronic Markets. Traders yesterday gave him a 51 percent chance to win, putting him well ahead of Gen. Wesley K. Clark (21 percent) and Mr. Kerry (13 percent). This exchange has been run since 1988 by the University of Iowa's business school, which says its futures market has usually been more accurate than public opinion polls at predicting election results.
Nice Counts In Informal Poll
In an exclusive Political Points poll with no history whatsoever of accuracy, we can report that Senator Kerry is the clear favorite among the waiters, bartenders and hotel workers in Des Moines who have been tending to the various candidates for more than a year. No man may be a hero to his valet, but Mr. Kerry is at least a mensch to these workers. They said he was the most polite customer -- and best tipper.
The survey, conducted Tuesday through Friday of 38 workers in six locations (including the two campaign restaurants of the moment in Des Moines, 801 and Centro), has a margin of error of two olives and a twist.
Dean Disciples Feeling Good
Now that thousands of volunteers have journeyed to Iowa to canvass for Dr. Dean, it seems clear that this get-out-the vote operation called the Perfect Storm has succeeded on at least one front. Talk to just about any of the Dean door-to-door missionaries and you will discover that their work has made them feel very good about taking back their country.
But what about the Iowans they have been visiting? Are the locals paying any attention to the fervent out-of-staters in fluorescent orange stocking caps? How many Iowans actually want to take back their country? How many even knew it was missing?
To try to answer those questions, we hit the pavement on Tuesday with a team of four Dean volunteers who had paid their way to Iowa from Colorado, Minnesota, Vermont and New York City. In order not to bias the experiment by dampening their ardor, we did not inform them that some skeptical Iowan politicians had taken to calling the orange-topped hordes the Perfect Stormtroopers.
Nor did we mention that one of the state's most famous songs is called ''Iowa Stubborn'' and celebrates the locals' hostility to new people and new ideas. It's the song in ''The Music Man'' used to snub another out-of-state proselytizer, the salesman Harold Hill. He is barely off the train before the inhabitants of River City are bragging about Iowans' ''special chip-on-the-shoulder attitude'' and warning, ''We can be cold as our falling thermometers in December.''
The Dean volunteers encountered a few Iowans like that on a frigid afternoon in West Des Moines, visiting more than 100 homes. Three-quarters of the residents either were not at home or refused to come to the door. Most of the rest said they either had no plans to vote or were not interested in Dr. Dean.
When one volunteer, Amber Morgan, 35, a public school teacher from Brooklyn, asked an elderly woman if she was leaning to any candidate, the woman replied ''Yep,'' followed by a long, long stare.
''Is it a secret?'' Ms. Morgan finally asked.
''Yep.''
But the volunteers did manage to find five Iowans already leaning to Dr. Dean, a valuable addition to the get-out-the-vote list that campaign workers will be calling before the caucuses. The canvassers also found three Iowans who were undecided and willing to listen to Dr. Dean's plan for taking back the country.
But they did not manage to convert any of those three, at least not according to a follow-up survey we conducted independently later in the week. All three said they remained undecided.
''If it had been somebody local, somebody that I knew, I might have listened,'' said Frances Rosen, a retiree. ''What those people from out of state said didn't really make any difference, but they were nice people and it's their prerogative to come. I guess they must be getting something from it themselves.''
Honor Roll
Least Controversial Policy Pronouncement. From Mr. Edwards's stump speech: ''I say no to children going to bed hungry.''
Giant Pander Award. The competition was fierce this campaign. Besides the usual paeans to ethanol subsidies, candidates passionately swore fealty to the ''national packer ban,'' which would prevent meat-packing companies from owning herds that would compete with Iowa farmers.
But Representative Dennis J. Kucinich showed special flair before a Des Moines audience worried about his plans for a national health care system. Since his public system was supposed to replace private companies with all their unnecessary paperwork and profits, what would happen to all the insurance workers in Des Moines now shuffling that needless paperwork? Not to worry! All these workers ''absolutely'' will get jobs in the new streamlined federal system, Mr. Kucinich said, and added with a perfectly straight face, ''I mean, where better to find the expertise than here in Des Moines?''
Nowhere except maybe New Hampshire.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
