ABSOLUTE FRIENDS
By John le Carré.
455 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $26.95.
Unlike the great majority of best-selling writers of popular fiction, John le Carré never, ever phones it in -- not even on a secure line. He's an old pro with the ardent heart of an amateur, which is why, at the age of 72 and with four decades of critical and commercial success under his belt, he is still capable of producing a novel as odd, as ungainly, and as compelling as ''Absolute Friends.'' For a writer whose lifelong subject has been espionage, he's surprisingly guileless: his narrative tradecraft, as George Smiley might say, is distinctly unorthodox -- borderline unsound. In the new book, for instance, le Carré interrupts the story he has begun to tell in the first chapter with a flashback that goes on for better than 200 pages and contains his best writing; the rest of the novel feels like a coda (albeit a pretty exciting one). And in a sense it is, because the flashback builds to the fall of the Berlin Wall, which puts an end to the spying careers of the hero, Ted Mundy, and his ''absolute friend'' Sasha, and induces in them a sort of permanent post-cold-war tristesse.
This is a malady that John le Carré probably knows something about. Since the wall came down, his writing has often seemed a little uncertain, and his first view of Ted Mundy here -- adrift in Germany, guiding tours of one of mad King Ludwig's Bavarian castles and looking like ''a failure at something -- a professional English bloody fool in a bowler and a Union Jack, all things to all men and nothing to himself'' -- has the vehemence of a nightmare self-portrait. This ''Man Without Qualities'' is, of course, le Carré's favorite kind of character, who has appeared in several guises in his fiction: as the unfortunate double agent Alec Leamas in ''The Spy Who Came in From the Cold'' (1964); as the actress/spy Charlie in ''The Little Drummer Girl'' (1983); as the near-sociopathic traitor Magnus Pym in ''A Perfect Spy'' (1986); and, in many novels, as the enigmatic, alarmingly efficient espionage guru George Smiley. These are people who by virtue of their ability to be ''all things to all men'' have, like Ted Mundy, found their ''natural art form'' in spying, and it's hard not to feel that le Carré, in his sometimes pitiless exploration of their too-fluid identities, is expressing his doubts about his natural art form, his ambivalence about his own capacity for silence, exile and cunning.
What's fascinating about ''Absolute Friends,'' in fact, is how deliberately awkward its narrative technique is, how adamantly le Carré refuses to be glib or ingratiating. Fans who have been disappointed in his recent work will be happy to learn that he returns here to his old cold war stomping grounds of Germany (East and West) and Eastern Europe. But Mundy and Sasha's adventures in double agentry take up less than a third of the book; and the frame story, which finds these ''two cold war bums on the skids'' attempting to rekindle the radical idealism of their student days in Berlin, provides them with no successes comparable to those of their bygone careers in espionage -- which, in perhaps the most crushing of this novel's ironies, neither of them ever fully believed in.
Mundy, like so many of le Carré's spies through the years, is a victim of his ''inextinguishable need to belong'' -- in the writer's view, the real English vice. All it takes to keep Mundy running dangerous missions for M.I.6 is to be told that his performance rates an ''alpha double plus'' and, yet more insidiously, to hear from his handler that he is ''a born One of Us.'' He is ''one of us'' in another sense, too, the sense that Conrad intends when he uses those words -- over and over, like a tolling bell -- to characterize his Lord Jim: a man who seems to embody the universal human terror of never really knowing who you are.
Le Carré, using narrative techniques nearly as oblique and perverse as Conrad's, makes Mundy that sort of figure too, circling constantly around the void of his identity and subjecting his slippery personality to incessant, almost obsessive formulation and reformulation. Mundy is at one point ''a hybrid, a nomad, a man without territory, parents, property or example''; at another, he is ''in his many parts . . . a master of prevarication''; at another, he is broken down into a ''Mundy One: hero of Weimar, the major's loyal only son, former captain of cricket at his public school,'' and a ''Mundy Two,'' with a far less flattering biography, and finally a ''Mundy Three . . . made up of all the odd bits of his life that are left over after he has given the rest away.'' And then, at the height of his espionage activity, we're told that ''the many disparate fragments of Ted Mundy -- actor, novelist, befriender, major's son, misfit, dreamer and pretender -- come together to make a single hero.'' Until, inevitably, it all comes apart again.
His radical friend Sasha, who turns up at fairly regular intervals for the apparent purpose of forcing Mundy to define himself, is less various, more consistent in his ideals. It's just that Mundy can't always tell whether Sasha represents his better self or his worse -- a question that takes on some urgency in the present-day portion of the story, when Sasha comes to Mundy with a grand project that is either the long-awaited fulfillment of their youthful utopian visions or a front for a terrorist organization. This dodgy proposal drops in Mundy's lap at a moment when he is, for practically the first time in his life, discovering something about himself that seems firm, authentic, entirely and un-self-consciously his: the invasion of Iraq has awakened in him, to his shock, an enormous rage, which he can explain only as ''anger at seeing the show come round again one too many times.''
''It's about becoming real after too many years of pretending,'' the ex-spy tells himself. ''It's about putting the brakes on human self-deception, starting with my own.'' A tallish order, you might say. But le Carré, who by this point in the novel seems to identify wholeheartedly with his foolish hero, means to carry it out -- to tell the truth as he sees it as bluntly as he can, and with no literary subterfuge whatsoever.
Does it work? Not really. The heavy sarcasm of the book's final pages doesn't come naturally to this writer. But in a sense this is what le Carré has been striving for in his writing at least since the unwieldy, ambitious ''Perfect Spy'': a way to subvert the jaunty gamesmanship that comes all too naturally to Englishmen and thriller writers. The unapologetic idealism he reveals at the end of ''Absolute Friends'' and the intemperate tone with which he expresses it may startle some of his faithful readers, but it shouldn't, because emotionally he's always cast his lot with the misfits and the dreamers, even while recording the exploits of those who are, in parlance of the public school, good at games. In his cranky old age, le Carré has become a little like the half-mad visionary Yakov of ''The Russia House'' (1989), who blurts out secrets so innocently that the professional spies can't figure out what he's playing at -- and who turns out, to their astonishment, to be exactly what he seems.
Maybe the most resonant of le Carré's many formulation of his hero's multifarious self is this: ''Ted Mundy, life's eternal apprentice.'' There's no real nostalgia for the cold war in ''Absolute Friends,'' but there is a palpable yearning for the hectic, hopeful student life that Mundy and Sasha shared in Berlin in the waning 60's. In this book John le Carré, the pro's pro, seems determined to resume his own apprenticeship as a writer, to shuck off the last stubborn vestiges of public-school cleverness. The rant at the end of the book is the proof. He does the most un-English thing imaginable: he loses his head while all about him are keeping theirs.
Terrence Rafferty is the author of ''The Thing Happens: Ten Years of Writing About the Movies.''
