NO sooner had the Bush administration heralded its initiative last week to spend $1.5 billion to promote marriage, particularly among low-income couples, than some social and religious conservatives began to worry. The gesture, they said, was a weak substitute for their larger goal: support from the White House for a constitutional amendment banning gay marriage.
But that $1.5 billion ($300 million to be spent annually over five years on counseling services, public awareness campaigns and marriage enrichment courses intended to foster ''healthy marriages'' among the poor) has been stirring debate at a more academic level since it first appeared in the welfare reauthorization bill two years ago. And while decades of research has shown that marriage is good for society, last week's news once again raised questions about what role the government should play in supporting it, and whether marriage should be seen as a cure for poverty.
Part of the concern stems from the language chosen by the administration -- ''promoting marriage'' -- which for the critics conjures everything from a draconian social experiment to simple big-government meddling. Kim Gandy, president of the National Organization for Women, has called the initiative ''thinly disguised social engineering.'' Michael Tanner of the libertarian Cato Institute refers to it as ''1965-style Great Society liberalism.''
''There was a time when conservatives were against big government,'' Mr. Tanner added, ''but if you close your eyes, you just might think that Bill Clinton was president again.''
Wade F. Horn, assistant secretary of health and human services for children and families, acknowledges that the term can generate confusion, but said the administration was not interested in creating converts to marriage. Rather, he said, the money will be aimed at programs to assist couples already contemplating marriage to learn skills that will help them stay together, or provide counseling and education for married couples who are having trouble sorting through conflicts.
''This is not about influencing the decision-making process,'' Dr. Horn said, adding that the initiative is tied to changes in the welfare system because low-income people either don't have the money for counseling or such programs don't exist in the areas where they live.
The federal government's promotion of marriage -- or support, or counseling, or whatever term ultimately proves appropriate -- represents the culmination of an effort that began 40 years ago, when researchers first began examining the social value of marriage. Since then an overwhelming body of statistical evidence has led to a conclusion that now sits at the bedrock of popular wisdom: two parents are better than one.
''There's no question that controlling for income and holding race and other things constant, that children raised in two-parent families are better off than children in one-parent families,'' said James Q. Wilson, the social scientist and author of ''The Marriage Problem: How Our Culture Has Weakened Families.''
Few would argue with that point, but it raises questions. First, if healthy marriages and families are socially desirable, it remains unclear, given the high divorce rate, just what sorts of programs might help foster them.
''We have to overcome an ignorance as to what works,'' Professor Wilson said. ''There are no books you can read, no benchmarks to refer to. It's all untested.''
Judith Wallerstein, the author of ''The Unexpected Legacy of Divorce,'' suggests that while the Bush administration's initiative is well-intentioned, it may be too little too late. It is better to start in early childhood, Ms. Wallerstein said, with instruction on choosing friends and forming stable relationships of any kind.
''Young people as they grow up -- they want a good relationship, but they're terrified that they're not going to get it,'' she said.
But what if they do get it? The drumbeat of the ''promoting marriage'' campaign, driven by statistical evidence, can make it easy for some advocates to overstate the ability of marriage to cure society's ills.
The data show, for instance, that married people experience less poverty than single people, and that children of two-parent households tend to fare better overall than children of single-parent households.
But does it follow that getting married is a ticket out of poverty or that children of single parents are doomed?
''If you have a single mom making good choices and she marries a good man,'' said the Rev. Ted Haggard, president of the National Association of Evangelicals, ''then it's not long before they're driving a better car and living in a better home and the child is better off and they become an asset to society rather than a drain on society.''
But some experts who generally support the Bush initiative say it is more complicated than that. In a study published last February in the journal Social Problems, Daniel T. Lichter, a professor of sociology at Ohio State University, found that while women from disadvantaged families reaped some economic benefits from marriage, those women who married and then divorced experienced higher poverty rates than those who never married at all.
''Marriage alone will not offset the long-term deleterious effects associated with unwed childbearing,'' the study asserted.
Other researchers, like Leslie J. Brett, the executive director of the Connecticut's Permanent Commission on the Status of Women, have argued that other influences, like work hours, the availability of child care and access to health care, are set up to favor two-parent nuclear families, and that therefore families that don't fit that model have a harder time.
''In order to improve the outcomes for families that do not fit the 'ideal' type,'' Ms. Brett wrote in a paper published last January, ''we can seek to change and broaden the systems to support more types of families, rather than seeking to change the families themselves.''
STILL, most researchers concede that low-income people are no less interested in healthy, loving marriages than anyone else. As long as the marriage initiative is part of a constellation of programs that address other aspects of poverty, like jobs, education and proper health care, Professor Lichter said, ''what's wrong with the government helping them reach those aspirations?''
Dr. Horn said this is all the Bush administration is aiming to do. ''Marriage is not the administration's antipoverty program,'' he said, pointing out that no money was diverted from any other program to pay for the new proposal. ''It's an issue of addition, not subtraction. This will add options and opportunities, not take away from them.''
''I'm a conservative,'' Dr. Horn added, ''And I think the government ought to be limited in what it does, even in the area of doing good.''
