After her remarkable performance Friday, Michelle Wie was asked if she would play in the Sony Open again next year if she received an invitation.
Wie smiled coyly.
''What do you think?'' she said.
That was a no-brainer. Wie electrified the tournament, amazed spectators and solidified her place as the most talked-about amateur golfer since Tiger Woods by shooting a two-under-par 68 for a two-round total of 140, missing the cut by one stroke. Imagine a 14-year-old finishing tied with players who have won major championships, like Jim Furyk and Ben Curtis, and finishing ahead of the past major winners Craig Stadler and Jeff Sluman. No need to imagine it. It happened. And now Wie is more of a happening than ever.
Yes, it was only one tournament, and yes, Wie's familiarity with Waialae Country Club, which she has played about 50 times since November, was a definite advantage. But nobody in golf has ever seen a 14-year-old, girl or boy, do anything close to what Wie did.
She is a remarkable combination. On the course, she displays the talent and the poise of someone much older. But off the course, she speaks with the comical bluntness of a teenager.
When asked how thrilling the experience was, she said: ''My playing partners were really nice to me. I think everyone out here was very nice to me. The food was great, too.''
When asked if she had expected the kind of attention she received at the tournament, she said: ''I didn't expect this much, because I thought you guys would probably be used to women playing by now.''
When asked what kind of reception she expected when she returned to school, she said: ''I saw a lot of my friends today. I think they got bored pretty fast.''
But the golf world is hardly bored with Wie. The sport needs players with charisma, and Wie has it. Like Woods, she draws people who do not usually watch the game and, barring injury or burnout, it will be difficult for her to avoid stardom.
Many people felt she was being naïve when she talked of one day playing on both the men's and women's professional tours. But after watching her here, that does not sound so far-fetched.
''I think I belong in both,'' Wie said.
Watching Wie develop will be fascinating. She plans to play six L.P.G.A. tournaments this year, she wants to make the United States Curtis Cup team (an amateur competition between teams from the United States and Great Britain and Ireland), and she will defend her title at the United States Women's Amateur Public Links Championship.
No matter what she does, people will comment on the best way for her to develop. Some feel that she should concentrate on winning more amateur events. Others feel she will develop more quickly with more experience against professionals.
Those are decisions that Wie and her parents will have to make. But those who were quick to criticize Wie's father, B. J., for pushing her too quickly may want to reassess. Wie seems well adjusted and happy, and her father has kept an open mind. He ran into problems working as her caddie last summer, so he fired himself and hired Bobby Verwey, who is Gary Player's caddie on the Champions Tour. Wie and Verwey worked well together at the Sony; he talked her into playing it safe several times when she wanted to try a riskier shot.
''He helped me a lot,'' Wie said. ''I'm usually the kind of person that if I'm in trouble, I go over the tree and like, make it a miracle shot.''
But Wie supplied all the thrills necessary to make this tournament memorable. No matter who wins Sunday, this event will be remembered for Wie and her two-day performance.
Most of the PGA Tour players, who have played golf most of their lives and who have reached the top of their profession, were amazed by what Wie did. That speaks volumes about her potential, when the players she competed against underestimated what she could do.
Whenever Wie plays amateur golf, she will be a target for other players who want to make a name by beating her. Whenever she plays an L.P.G.A. event, expectations will rise. And the next time she is offered a spot in a PGA Tour event, something that will surely happen, people may be disappointed if she does not do as well.
Right now, Wie seems equipped to handle whatever comes her way. It is far too early to predict how her career will end, but no one can deny that she is off to a fascinating beginning.
GOLF
