Though the court case bore the family's name, the Browns rarely discussed it back then around the dinner table in Topeka, Kan. So when the landmark decision was reached in May 1954, life went on for the Browns -- the Rev. Oliver L. Brown, his wife, Leola, and their three daughters, Linda, Terry and Cheryl.
''For years, it didn't affect our family at all,'' says Leola Brown Montgomery, whose first husband had tried to enroll their eldest daughter, Linda, at an all-white elementary school, setting the stage for their part in the case. ''The importance of it had not really hit people -- maybe not even us -- when it first came down.''
The Browns made history more by happenstance than design. Oliver Brown was just one among 13 plaintiffs in the Kansas case -- and the Kansas case was just one of five from around the country clustered under the name Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka that would ultimately answer the question of segregated schools. In the five decades since, the Browns have learned far more about the significance of their case, the mythology that surrounds it, and the complications and responsibilities that come with being perceived as an icon.
In 1950 it seemed a small choice.
Local leaders of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People came forward with a strategy to fight segregation, and they were looking for elementary school parents to carry out the mission. The junior high schools and high schools in Topeka were already integrated, but elementary schools were not.
When the N.A.A.C.P. approached the Brown household, Oliver Brown, a railroad welder by profession, agreed to take part. There was little debate over the matter at home.
As the association instructed, in the fall of 1950, he took Linda, then 7, over to Sumner Elementary School, an exclusively white school not far from the family's home. While she waited outside on a bench, he stepped inside the school and asked if he could register his daughter. When he was turned away, as 12 other black parents in Topeka would be in the end, he returned to the N.A.A.C.P. with the results they had expected and the documentation needed for a suit.
So began the case.
Oliver Brown's name took the lead plaintiff's position in the list of 13 parents when it came to the court case styling. (The others -- the ''et alia'' -- would be mostly overlooked.) Chronologically, he was the 10th parent to sign on to the lawsuit, and an alphabetical list would have put Darlene Brown, another plaintiff, first. His family suspects that the order may have revealed a gender bias: Oliver Brown was the only father in the bunch. Cheryl Brown Henderson, 53, the youngest daughter, says that the Brown case itself took the lead position because Kansas was a border state -- neither Southern nor Northern -- and thus separate from the politics of geography.
Over the years, myths arose, the Brown family says: that Oliver Brown had instigated the lawsuit, that Linda had pleaded not to have to walk all the way to her all-black school, the former Monroe Elementary School (which is being transformed into a historic site), and that the education was inferior there. ''The truth is that Linda was a little kid,'' says Ms. Montgomery, now 82. ''She was 7 years old and playing and she didn't think anything about any of it. At her age, she just wanted to play with her little neighbors -- they were Indian and Mexican and white -- and she did know that she couldn't go to school with her little friends.''
Ms. Montgomery does not remember the precise distance traveled -- only that the trip took Linda more than an hour. According to Richard Kluger's seminal history of Brown, ''Simple Justice,'' Oliver Brown testified that Linda's trip began at 7:40 a.m. to reach school by 9. She had to walk a half-dozen blocks through the dangerous Rock Island switchyards to meet a bus that would take her to Monroe.
At the time, few people at school or within the community knew much about the case or Linda's role in it, Ms. Montgomery says. Her daughter faced little retribution, and little acknowledgment.
Compared with the other school segregation cases -- from Delaware, Washington D.C., South Carolina and Virginia -- that were combined with the Kansas case when the Supreme Court took it up, Topeka was a mild environment, Cheryl Brown Henderson says. In Clarendon County, S.C., angry whites retaliated with an economic boycott against blacks, plaintiffs lost their jobs, and the home of the minister who was the main organizer of the lawsuit was burned to its foundation.
In 1961, before the height of the civil rights movement, and only weeks after his eldest daughter graduated from high school, Oliver Brown died. He was interviewed only once for television before his death, his family says.
In the years that followed, though, reporters began coming around. They came every anniversary, sometimes during Black History Month, sometimes with no time element at all.
''It wasn't so bad until people started camping out on Linda's doorstep,'' says Ms. Montgomery, who remarried after her husband's death.
Linda Brown Thompson, 60, a widow, did not respond to repeated requests for an interview. Ms. Thompson attended Washburn University in Topeka, went on to teach in a Head Start program, and works with her sister Cheryl for the Brown Foundation for Educational Equity, Excellence and Research, a nonprofit group established in 1988 by the family and community leaders. Ms. Henderson runs the foundation, and as a member of the 50th Anniversary Commission, established by Congress to coordinate the commemoration of Brown v. Board of Education, she has been speaking around the country since the anniversary kickoff last year. Ms. Thompson is scheduled for several observances over the next few months.
''It wasn't until I was in college that it really hit me what the court decision meant, and that it had really done something that made a profound change,'' Ms. Henderson says. ''By association, it hit me that this case bears our family name. The import of the case was the first revelation. Secondarily was our connection. It's a legacy, and you come to understand the responsibility that it bears.''
THE CASES Monica Davey is a Chicago correspondent for The Times.
