The personal essay -- 500 words on the meaning of life -- has become a mainstay of the college application. But high school and college students have the opportunity to write essays for cash throughout their academic careers. Some essay competitions are limited by geography, like those for humanists in North Puget Sound or Viking enthusiasts who live in Texas. Other competitions seem even more arcane: Consider the contest for the best essay describing the impact of accelerated depreciation rules on fire sprinkler installation. (Sorry, but that particular competition is already closed. Try again next year.)
Below are some of the more intriguing, lucrative or unlikely competitions. Rules on eligibility, essay length and deadlines vary. In all cases, however, originality is encouraged.
For Capitalist Pigs The virtue of selfishness is richly rewarded by the Ayn Rand Institute (ayn rand.org), an educational foundation devoted to promoting the author's philosophy of Objectivism, which endorses reason, self-interest and capitalism over altruism or environmentalism. A top prize of $10,000 goes to the best essay by a high school junior or senior who demonstrates ''an outstanding grasp of the philosophic and psychological meaning of 'The Fountainhead.' ''Appropriately, it's a no-strings-attached cash award. College students can win up to $5,000 for the best essay on the meaning of ''Atlas Shrugged.''
For Smart Jocks At the other end of the intellectual spectrum are the Scholar Athlete Milk Mustache of the Year Awards (whymilk.com), $7,500 scholarships offered to 25 high school athletes who stand out academically, too. Applicants must submit an essay describing in 75 words or less ''how drinking milk is part of their life and training regimen.'' Winners are also featured in an advertisement sporting the white ''got milk?'' mustache.
For Skeptics The Freedom From Religion Foundation (ffrf.org) offers several cash scholarships -- including a couple of top awards of $1,000 -- for essays by young freethinkers. Last year's high school contestants wrote why ''under God'' does not belong in the Pledge of Allegiance. The second-place winner wrote, '''Under God' is about as traditional as Burger King (founded that very same year, as a matter of fact). The founding fathers could do without 'under God' just as easily as they could without onion rings.'' The subject for this year will be announced in February.
For True Believers The Bible Sabbath Association (bible sabbath.org) is offering six prizes ($100 to $500) for essays supporting the seventh-day Sabbath -- that is, Friday sundown to Saturday sundown. Only high school and college students who keep the Sabbath and are Christian may enter, and every applicant gets a free one-year subscription to The Sabbath Sentinel. This year contestants are invited to discuss what they would do if they were compelled to work on the Sabbath or lose their job. Essays must be handwritten, with a typed copy attached for easy reading by the judges.
For Dog People The Dog Writers Educational Trust (dw etinfo.com) is offering $1,000 college scholarships to at least a half-dozen essayists who produce 250 compelling words on why people own dogs. It helps if the writer is also a dog owner or, at least, has worked with dogs. One of last year's winners, for instance, trained military working dogs at the naval base in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. In the contest's 25 years, has a mutt -- or a mutt owner, to be precise -- ever won? ''I doubt that,'' says Hal Sundstrom, chairman of the trust.
For Wilde Fanciers Promoting its backlist, Penguin Putnam (penguinputnam.com) is offering five $1,000 scholarships for the best essay by a high school student on Oscar Wilde's ''Picture of Dorian Gray.'' Winners also get a Signet Classic library for their school. (Last year's book was Mary Shelley's ''Frankenstein.'' One winner lamented Victor Frankenstein's egotism and selfishness, clearly putting her out of the running for the Ayn Rand award.)
For Diplomats Giving peace a chance is the timely subject of two essay contests for high school students. The professional association of the United States Foreign Service (afsa.org) will pay $2,500 for the best essay describing how its members promote United States interests ''by participating in the resolution of today's major international problems.''
The United States Institute of Peace (usip.org) is offering a $10,000 college scholarship for the best 1,500-word essay about rebuilding societies after conflict. Essayists must provide ''practical recommendations on how to design and conduct a program of postconflict reconstruction that leads to stability and reconciliation.'' Perhaps the Nobel Peace Prize (upward of $1 million) would be more appropriate.
For Devoted Children Unfortunately, the most effortless essay competition has been canceled. Last year, College Parent Magazine (collegepar entmagazine.com) offered a $500 scholarship for an outstanding essay that had been submitted with a college application. ''Simply send us your favorite one, or if you are especially proud, send us all of them along with the topic assigned,'' the magazine's Web site urged parents.
Deluged with more than 45,000 submissions from readers, the publisher changed the topic this year. But, at least for parents, it's still heartwarming. The essay question: ''What was the most valuable way your parents helped you with the college application and selection process?''
SCHOLARSHIPS Sandra Salmans is a freelance writer in the Philadelphia area.
