IN northern Alabama, where I grew up, our ethnic restaurants were Mexican, Chinese or German, so my father's passing friendships with foreign scholars (and their wives, the cooks) were my periscope to the larger world.
I developed a taste for soy-dyed eggs, Taiwan-style. And I ate my first bowl of borscht as an ancient woman told a story, her own story, of being separated with her baby from her husband in the aftermath of the Russian Revolution and her desperate search for him that led her over the Ural mountains until one day, years later, they saw each other in a train station and started again. But we were never introduced to an Italian scholar, so my mother was left to work out the Betty Crocker pizza recipe and the spaghetti-and-meat-sauce recipe. That was Italian.
The hometown is better now -- with Korean, Cajun, Japanese, Thai, Middle Eastern and Indian restaurants. But there is no terrific Italian-American, so after my last visit there, I was doubly appreciative of the chicken cacciatore at Marsilio's. Juicy and tender, with tones of garlic, rosemary, white wine and red wine vinegar and without the distractions of red sauce or olives, it is one of the most satisfying dishes in recent memory.
Marsilio's is Italian in the way that would have thrilled my yearning teenage self. The place feels old, with a history. It has crisp tablecloths, a jukebox with volume control, appearances by police officers and politicos, and waiters who don't need a pad to take your order. Then there are the little eccentricities -- wine pitchers kept on pegs for regulars; a man who seemed familiar to the servers as he went from table to table taking snapshots; and ''Bobby V'' Vitella, the head waiter and manager, who stayed to chat with women at a table but on another visit moved right along after checking in at a table of couples.
Then there's the food, which could go either way at a 53-year-old restaurant. At Marsilio's, the food is generally consistent and well prepared.
Alan Meinster, 39, chef and an owner, says his in-laws bought the place in 1986, shortly before he married and around the time that he graduated from college with a degree in communications. Since he had worked his way through college in the restaurant business, he agreed to help out for a year, to help get the place established. He learned to make the Italian-American standards from a family friend, gathered some recipes from the neighbors and, 18 years later, seems delighted to find that his three-longtime cooks can handle the food while he watches over the front of the house.
The menu is short, only two sparsely populated pages of filigreed and italic type listing classic antipasti, pasta, salad, main courses and side orders. The specials, unfortunately, aren't inserted into the menu. They are recited -- in our case, recited and recited, because there are so many of them and they have multiple components. On one visit, our server showed a bit of irritation at the third request to repeat the specials. Her annoyance would be better directed toward the person who can't manage to run the copier and see that each menu holds a page of specials.
Appetizers are uniformly well prepared. Crab cakes are light and barely formed, full of sweet meat and little filler. Clams casino was blessedly free of breading, leaving the full, fresh, clean farm-raised clam flavor to shine with its accents of parsley, garlic and white wine. Mussels marinara, too, were clean and fresh, their clear flavor blending with a simple sauce flavored with garlic and a bit of red pepper. And Marsilio's special chopped antipasto salad, with its roasted peppers, tuna, black olives, fresh mozzarella and aged provolone, was a table favorite.
The pasta course would be more interesting with fresh pasta. But if one must eat the boxed version at an Italian restaurant, this works: the vodka sauce is mild and smooth; an abundance of clams comes with the spaghetti; and the sausage, artichoke and broccoli rabe with penne has at least a bit of green.
Beyond the lick-your-plate chicken cacciatore, there is the roast chicken -- very flavorful and only slightly overcooked on a single try. But there is also an aged New York strip steak that looks like a charred hulk on the plate but on one visit was a transporting experience in the mouth. Flavorful, succulent, tender and rosy on the inside, deep, dark brown on the outside, it was a steak to remember, and order again. A second try wasn't quite as exciting, but it still made the 90th percentile in the steak world.
Fish at Marsilio's was relatively uninspired, and one dish, which paired salmon with flounder, was misguided, with clashing flavors and textures. The zuppa de pesce, which my teenage self would have loved, was disappointing because the seafood didn't arrive in a big bowl with broth but was laid over pasta on a plate.
The broccoli rabe, the steak fries and the hot finger peppers were table favorites in the side orders category. But the remaining items -- spinach, green beans and mushrooms -- would probably be welcome at the table, too.
Of the slim pickings for dessert, my teenage self would have picked the house-made tiramisù. And I would pick it now. Made by a recipe from a neighbor of Mr. Meinster who shared it about 15 years ago, it is a simple confection of lightened mascarpone, ladyfingers dunked in coffee liqueur and shaved chocolate. It's not a particularly pure rendition of the Italian classic. But it is as satisfying as the restaurant itself.
Marsilio's  541 Roebling Avenue, Trenton  (609)695-1916
VERY GOOD
ATMOSPHERE -- White tablecloths, one-armed hugs and men in blue.  SERVICE -- Congenial and efficient, these servers have seen it all.  SMOKING -- Allowed in all but back room.  WINE LIST -- Mostly Italian, with a sampling of California wines.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Fried calamari, clams casino, crab cakes, Marsilio portobello, spaghetti with clams, chicken cacciatore, roast chicken, New York strip steak, broccoli rabe, tiramisù.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers, $7 to $14; pastas, $16 to $21; main dishes, $18 to $33; specials, $7.50 to $30; desserts, $5 to $6  HOURS -- Lunch, 11:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. Monday through Friday; dinner, 5 p.m. to 10 p.m. Monday through Thursday, 5 p.m. to 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday.  CREDIT CARDS -- American Express and Visa.  RESERVATIONS -- Appreciated.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- The restaurant is on one floor but has no handicap-accessible bathroom.  IF YOU GO -- Marsilio's is off U. S. 1 in the Chambersburg section of Trenton. From U.S. 1, take the Market Street-Train station exit. At the traffic signal at the bottom of the ramp, turn left onto South Stockton Street (street may not be labeled). At the next signal, turn left onto Market Street, which becomes Greenwood. Turn right onto Chestnut Avenue, and then right onto Roebling.
REVIEWED -- Jan. 18, 2004.
RATINGS -- Poor, Fair, Satisfactory, Good, Very Good, Excellent, Extraordinary. Ratings reflect reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
RESTAURANTS
