IN ''The Tale of the Allergist's Wife'' there is much talk of Kafka, Mann, Hesse and other great thinkers. Would that any were around to explain this vexing question: Why has this not-very-funny, not-very-insightful play been so popular?
The play, by Charles Busch, had an inexplicably healthy run on Broadway, and now is occupying Paper Mill Playhouse for five weeks. Two of the actors in the five-member cast, Lenny Wolpe and Shirl Bernheim, come close to making this a worthwhile endeavor, but in the end they cannot overcome the fact that the play accomplishes less in two-plus hours than the best sitcoms do in a quarter of the time.
Mr. Wolpe plays Ira, the allergist of the title, and Robin Strasser is his wife, Marjorie, who as the story begins is in a mega-midlife funk. Her head is stuffed full of ideas from the highbrow literature she reads, but she is unable to get herself off the couch and out of her bathrobe. Ms. Bernheim plays Frieda, her ornery mother, who lives down the hall.
Mr. Busch, following the Playwriting 101 formula, injects an outsider into this domestic picture to shake things up. It is Lee (Meg Foster), a friend from Marjorie's childhood, who turns up on the doorstep, as vibrant and energized as Marjorie is drab and listless. Soon Lee has insinuated herself into the family and the guest room, and there is a vague attempt to build suspense over who she really is and what her motives are. Before it all resolves itself, there is a brief bit of something that would have been racy 30 years ago, and a dose of equal-opportunity political rhetoric.
What there isn't is much to laugh at. Ms. Bernheim, with pinpoint comic timing, gets most of the chuckles with her foul-mouthed-granny stereotype, but it's a cheap form of humor. Sticking obscene words into the mouth of an elderly character and having her talk graphically about her bowels, which Frieda does a lot, are gimmicks found in a frathouse movie. Mr. Wolpe, too, shows his comic gifts; one wishes he had more to do.
This play, though, is primarily about Marjorie and Lee, and, at least in the Saturday night performance last weekend (the day before the official press opening), neither Ms. Strasser nor Ms. Foster ever looked completely comfortable. Carl Andress, the director, seems not to know the meaning of the word ''nuance''; the women bray their lines with a sameness that ultimately makes you wish they would just shut up. Yes, shrill can be funny, but in moderation; shrill all the time is annoying.
This may be more the fault of the script than the actresses or director. There is not really much to draw from the thin story. The person who seems to have been inspired the most by it is Michael Anania, whose eyecatching set makes you want to go up on the stage and peer out the windows of Ira and Marjorie's apartment; in the background is a lovely Manhattan panorama.
''The Tale of the Allergist's Wife'' is at Paper Mill, Brookside Drive, Millburn, through Feb. 8 . Information: (973)376-4343 or www.papermill.org.
THEATER REVIEW
