Lenny Wilkens told Keith Van Horn to keep shooting as if he believed in his shot. Because Wilkens did. He believed last summer, when he saw that Scott Layden, the Knicks' general manager then, had traded Latrell Sprewell for Van Horn.
''I thought that would be a new lease on life for Van Horn,'' Wilkens said.
Five months later and two games into Wilkens's tenure with the Knicks, a newly aggressive Van Horn has reinvigorated his team.
As Allan Houston's hands grew as frigid as Lake Michigan in the second half and as his knees grew sore Saturday night, Van Horn took Wilkens's advice in the fourth quarter and began feeling it against the Bulls in the United Center. Despite missing 8 of 11 shots through three quarters and overcoming a blow to the face by Ronald Dupree that left him dripping with blood, Van Horn locked into a rhythm that has carried him over the last month.
Van Horn scored 16 of his 24 points in an electric fourth quarter to stop the Knicks' bleeding and overcome a 7-point deficit, lifting the Knicks to a 101-96 victory over the Chicago Bulls.
''I didn't feel great all night,'' Van Horn said, one game after leading the Knicks to victory with 30 points against Seattle in Madison Square Garden. ''I felt like I was just waiting for a second wind. I was hoping to get a nice stretch where I felt great out there and it happened.''
Van Horn opened the Knicks' scoring in the fourth quarter with a stunning one-handed dunk to put back a missed shot by Michael Doleac.
That ignited a 16-2 Knicks run that did not stop until Van horn scored on back-to-back 3-pointers and another jumper. In less than five minutes, Van Horn had scored 13 points. He complemented Houston's 23 first-half points, and they have given Wilkens a 2-0 start to his tenure with the Knicks.
''I didn't want him to hesitate,'' Wilkens said. ''I'm not going to pull him out for missing a shot. And all of a sudden, he started nailing them. His confidence went up a level, and that's what you need.''
The Knicks matched their record of last season at this stage, 18-24. But it is a far different team, even from the one that played the Bulls on Jan. 2, losing at the Garden.
The Knicks' new year began under Isiah Thomas, who, in four weeks' time, found a franchise point guard, traded four veterans and replaced Don Chaney as coach.
Through all the changes, including trade rumors involving him, Van Horn has stood tall and proved to be Layden's lone successful move. Entering Saturday night's game, Van Horn averaged 21.4 points in his 13 previous games.
''I'm feeling very comfortable on the court,'' Van Horn said. ''I haven't felt this comfortable in a while.''
And so is the team. With Thomas making moves and with the speculation accompanying Chaney's imminent departure, ''it created a sense of tension on the team; you kind of wondered what would happen next,'' said Van Horn, who added: ''All I tried to do was focus on playing. There's definitely a sense of now we know who our coach is going to be and not even think about it.''
The Knicks have scored at least 100 points in four straight games, courtesy of Stephon Marbury's pushing the pace. For the first three quarters, the Knicks may have had tired legs from Marbury's setting a fast tempo on Friday night.
Then Van Horn listened to Wilkens and became aggressive, driving to the basket and pulling up for his shot. He tried to ignore the impact of Dupree's inadvertent elbow to his face. ''My whole face felt like it cracked,'' Van Horn said.
While Van Horn and Houston combined for 50 points and Marbury had a relatively quiet night with 18 points (he made 11 of 12 free throws) and 8 assists, Kurt Thomas contributed 13 rebounds and 12 points. The Knicks' bench added 19 points.
The Bulls made it close at the end when the Knicks relaxed defensively. But Van Horn had given his team more than enough.
The Knicks had to overcome a dismal third quarter in which they made only 3 of 21 field-goal attempts. The Bulls took a 75-68 lead going into the final quarter.
''Fortunately, that fourth quarter, I got it together,'' Van Horn said. ''The guys kept feeding me.''
REBOUNDS
SHANDON ANDERSON's league-leading streak of consecutive games was nearing an end at 540 Saturday night when LENNY WILKENS put him in with 1 minute 54 seconds to play and the Knicks up by 9 points. Wilkens was briefed after Friday night's game that Anderson was on a streak. ''I don't care about that,'' Anderson said. ''If it's done the right way, it's cool.'' Asked if it was done the right way, Anderson shrugged and said: ''You guys put that in. You want to play, but the team's playing well.'' . . . ANTONIO DAVIS, who played in Toronto under Wilkens, said of his former coach: ''His beliefs in the old style of playing weren't good for so young a team. Because we were losing and he was not standing up and yelling and screaming, people said he didn't care. Behind closed doors he talked to us like men. If you weren't a man, it's on you. Maybe we needed to be more yelled and screamed at.''
PRO BASKETBALL
