AT noon on a recent Tuesday in the parlor of the First Presbyterian Church in Red Bank, Sally Schwartz was getting advice about job titles.
Ms. Schwartz, 56, a member of Workers in Transition, a group of unemployed residents who meet at the church, wants to manage an office. But when someone suggested that she look for a job as an executive assistant, she disagreed. That job title is too limiting, she insisted. Office manager or administrative assistant would be better, she said.
Ms. Schwartz, who was a secretary for a home health aide placement agency in Fair Haven for almost a year, was laid off in July, the second time in two years. Although her expression was hopeful, as she sat deeply in the couch, her patience was wearing thin.
According to economists and the latest unemployment statistics, her disenchantment is not unusual. A projected nationwide increase of 150,000 jobs in December overshot the mark by 149,000.
Despite a strengthening economy, job growth came to a halt in December, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported. Most economists had forecast a better showing, but instead the unemployment rate dropped to 5.7 percent from 5.9 percent -- a negligible decrease -- primarily because so many people chose not to look for work, a requirement to be counted as unemployed. New Jersey has yet to report its numbers for December; in November, the state's unemployment rate was 5.5 percent.
That said, New Jersey actually had a good year, said Joseph Seneca, an economics professor at Rutgers and chairman of the governor's Council of Economic Advisors. He said that from December 2002 through November 2003, New Jersey gained 41,200 jobs, a rate sixth highest among the states.
''Considering that 21 states lost jobs, including New Jersey neighbors New York, Connecticut and Pennsylvania, New Jersey stands out,'' he said. ''But at the same time, that's a net number, and lots of jobs have been lost, too.''
Experts note that although the economy is improving, jobs are either moving overseas or disappearing altogether. And, Mr. Seneca agreed, ''there is a lingering sense that the last few years have been difficult and lots of people are still discouraged.''
On any given day or evening, a scene similar to the one at the First Presbyterian Church takes place in any number of churches and synagogues around the state.
''Ad hoc groups reflect the difficult times we've been through," Mr. Seneca said.
These groups provide job leads, suggestions and moral support to those who have been hit hard by the economic slowdown of the last few years. The groups, some of which began forming in the 1980's, vary in size, structure and composition. Many include visitors as well as congregants. Some have a spiritual bent -- opening and closing with a prayer -- while others merely use the religious institutions as meeting places.
Whatever the message, experts and participants alike say these groups are helping to fulfill a need along with the state Department of Labor's One Stop Centers -- there is one in every county -- that offer job leads, counseling and information on benefits.
Some participants say the groups provide a service above and beyond those met by other organizations. ''We're not just about finding a job,'' said Richard Bundy, an ordained minister from Eatontown who leads the Workers in Transition group each week.
In 2001, an associate pastor at the church asked Mr. Bundy -- who is also a licensed therapist and worships at the Red Bank church -- to act as a facilitator for a group of unemployed parishioners. ''These are real support groups for people going through a difficult time,'' he said. ''The members are sharing at an intimate, emotional level. Any loss involves a grief response, but when you're dealing with a job loss, it doesn't get better. You might get an e-mail about a position that gives you hope, but then if you don't get the job, the hope dies.''
At the First Baptist Church, also in Red Bank, the Jabez Business Networking Group meets at 7:30 a.m. on various weekdays. Mark Mendez, 41, who was laid off from an engineering job on Wall Street and is now selling cars, leads the group. Though the group is not affiliated with the church, Mr. Mendez said the founding members are Christian business people who named the group after an Old Testament figure.
In Princeton, the Career/Networking Group, which meets at St. Paul's Roman Catholic Church, has about 40 members and offers eight-week sessions with speakers on topics like understanding yourself, résumé writing and targeting a job search.
Steve McCarthy, a leader of the group who operates Today's Office Staffing, an employment placement business in Edison and Parsippany, said that members talk about themselves for a minute or two and share where they are in their job search and where they need help. Participants are asked to speak in a positive way, he said. ''It works well, for us,'' he said, so ''no one gets bogged down feeling sorry for himself.''
At Princeton Trinity Church, a group called Jobseekers, which was formed in 1982 by Niels Nielson, a human resources consultant. ''Being let go in the 80's had a sense of shame attached to it,'' Mr. Nielson said, describing how parishioners confided in him about their frustrations and fears.
These days, 25 to 35 people -- primarily managers and other professionals -- show up once a week for instructional workshops and open forums for networking and support. Spouses and partners are encouraged to attend, he explained, to understand what the unemployed person is experiencing.
Job Seekers of Montclair, which is not affiliated with the Princeton group, meets at St. Luke's Episcopal Church and offers 12-week sessions with a variety of speakers.
''We even had a high school junior come with his mother one week to get some job-hunting tips,'' said William Nikel, who leads the 15-year-old group.
At Christ Church in Short Hills, Sandra Johnson, a corporate banker who works in Manhattan, leads Careers in Transition, which meets two Saturdays a month. Last year, she said, members were primarily finding jobs that paid on a commission basis, though she added that ''some serious employers are starting to hire.''
And the group has started a tradition. If someone gets a job, that person has to bring doughnut holes to the next meeting.
Judy Schnitzer, who helps lead the Career Networking Group at Temple Beth Shalom in Livingston, said she could relate to what many members were feeling. She said that in 2001 she was laid off from an investment banking firm in Morristown, only to find another job with a small manufacturing company and be laid off from that job too.
''We've had 15 or 20 people pass through," Ms. Schnitzer said, adding that membership in the group, which meets every three weeks, had recently dwindled.
Even when a group disbands, the need for networking does not necessarily disappear. In Caldwell, when Congregation Agudath Israel's networking group broke up, the synagogue rose to fill the gap, said Randi Brokman, the synagogue's program director, collecting information on job openings from congregants. Recently, the temple joined with 19 other synagogues in the state and Jewish Vocational Services Metrowest to develop a Web site with job leads.
After a networking group at Temple Shalom in Succasunna died out nine months ago, Rabbi Joel E. Soffin announced from the pulpit that the entire congregation would be a networking group and promptly received dozens of job leads, he said.
''The most significant part of this is that we're learning about people we didn't know about who don't have jobs,'' the rabbi said. ''We have created an environment in which people feel comfortable enough to tell us.''
NEW JERSEY &amp; CO.
