TOYOTA does not have a flashing sign at the Detroit auto show telling the hometown companies to watch out. Instead, it has a bold, brash, oversize blue pickup called the FTX, a design study that sends a clear message to the competition: Toyota's next big truck will be, yes, big.
Company executives conceded that the FTX, with a pugnacious grille wearing a thick crown of chrome, hints at the size and look of their next-generation Tundra, to begin production in 2006. Until this year, when Toyota introduced its larger-all-around Tundra Double Cab, its largest pickup fell short of rivals from Detroit's Big Three.
But the FTX, on the heels of the Nissan Titan, shows that the Japanese are serious about crowding into the full-size pickup segment that contributes disproportionately to the earnings of Detroit carmakers.
There were fighting words. ''Make no mistake about it: we are on a serious mission to build big-truck market share,'' said Jim Press, chief operating officer of Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A.
Last year, Chrysler, Ford and General Motors accounted for nearly 96 percent of the 2.3 million full-size pickups sold in the United States.
The Japanese are interested in selling more large trucks because they are profitable, said James N. Hall, vice president for industry analysis at AutoPacific, an automotive research firm in Southfield, Mich. He said that plenty of families who garage their Camrys or Maximas next to American pickups would seriously consider Japanese models.
Honda is also entering the truck market in a different segment. It is displaying a design study in Detroit called the SUT (for sport utility truck), a precursor of a production model to go on sale in 2005.
While Nissan and Toyota are building trucks with conventional body-on-frame construction, the SUT will be car-based, with a unit body. It combines an S.U.V.-like cabin with a short bed, like the Ford Explorer Sport Trac's. In Mr. Hall's opinion, Honda decided not to tackle full-size domestic pickups because it has neither a body-on-frame platform nor the requisite V-8 engine. ''They are going their own way,'' he said. ''They'll be fine.''
Nissan is also enlarging its smaller pickup, the Frontier. In Detroit, it showed a prototype of a 2005 model, which will be built on a shortened Titan frame.
Nissan and Toyota have made large investments in American plants to build their new trucks. In addition to the Smyrna, Tenn., plant where Frontiers are assembled, Nissan opened a plant in Canton, Miss., last year for full-size trucks. Toyota is building an $800 million truck plant in San Antonio, in the heart of Texas truck country.
