The rise of the Carolina Panthers from 1-15 two seasons ago has almost come too quickly for a franchise that for so long has held firmly in the second tier of the N.F.L.
It has been such an improbable, charmed run that the Panthers were dismissively dubbed as unknowns in their matchup with Philadelphia in Sunday's National Football Conference championship game, just before the hosts of HBO's ''Inside the N.F.L.'' picked the Eagles to win.
The Panthers are not true playoff newcomers -- they were in the conference title game after the 1996 season, in only their second year, losing to Green Bay -- but Philadelphia, Indianapolis and New England, the other semifinalists, have been there more recently and more often. Still, it is hard to imagine the Panthers remaining that far under the radar this deep into the playoffs.
''People don't know who the Carolina Panthers are,'' center Jeff Mitchell said. ''That's only because we haven't really done much. Once we win ballgames, that all comes; everybody will jump on the bandwagon, whether it be the fans, the media, it's natural.''
It might help if the Panthers (13-5) were a big-name team. They're not. There is running back Stephen Davis, who established his reputation with the Washington Redskins before arriving in Carolina as a free agent this season. Anchored by the Pro Bowl tackle Kris Jenkins, the defensive line is on the verge of dominance in the league.
Mostly, though, the Panthers are a team of rising stars lacking true star power.
Consider quarterback Jake Delhomme, who was best known before this season as a New Orleans Saints backup who was cut five times in his career. Delhomme readily acknowledges his standing among the other quarterbacks left in the N.F.L. playoffs: Donovan McNabb of Philadelphia, Peyton Manning of Indianapolis and Tom Brady of New England.
''You talk about a guy that wills his team to win, then Donovan,'' Delhomme said. ''He's been doing it for a few years now. Then you look at Peyton, he's unconscious. And then Tom Brady, he has a Super Bowl ring. That's all you need to say about him. I'm maybe the other guy. I want to get to where they're at.''
Those who have watched Delhomme this season believe he is on his way. The backup quarterback Rodney Peete said, ''Jake's a star, but nobody knows it yet.''
Maybe they will find out Sunday. Maybe the game will come down to a last-minute drive and Delhomme will inspire yet another comeback for the Panthers, as he has done all season.
Of their 13 victories this season, including two in the playoffs, eight have been won on the final possession of the game in the fourth quarter, overtime or even double overtime.
Delhomme has become a semi-legend in Charlotte because of those last-minute drives, and the Panthers have earned the nickname Cardiac Cats.
Yet is there a team less respected? Certainly not among the playoff teams remaining. Consider the indignity suffered by the Panthers during the regular season, when they were scheduled to play at the Georgia Dome on Dec. 7 in their only nationally televised game of the regular season.
Why Atlanta? The Panthers, who had been embarrassed by quarterback Michael Vick twice the previous season, were there to be the Washington Generals to Atlanta's Harlem Globetrotters.
''They wanted to see Vick go off,'' Panthers safety Mike Minter said. ''Why not put him on national TV against a team like this?''
Vick scrambled for 141 yards and Atlanta won that game, the Panthers faltering in the national spotlight. But it was their last loss of the season. Carolina won the N.F.C. South title, beating the defending Super Bowl champion Tampa Bay Buccaneers twice, including once with a blocked extra-point attempt that forced overtime. In the playoffs, Carolina routed Dallas, 29-10, then beat St. Louis in double overtime, 29-23.
Yet they are still a bunch of unknowns, and that starts at the top with their general manager, Marty Hurney. He's a former sportswriter, for goodness' sake. How many athletes over the years have said sportswriters know nothing about the games they cover?
''They know something,'' defensive lineman Brentson Buckner said. ''Sometimes, they do. Not all are bad.''
It doesn't help that the Panthers play in that news media outpost Charlotte, a city still small-town enough that it threw an old-fashioned pep rally for its Panthers on Friday.
''People come up with all kinds of gimmicks to try to promote a defense, promote a team, promote this,'' Panthers Coach John Fox said of his team's lack of national recognition. ''If you win, they come. To me, that's really kind of the solution. I'm not sure this will ever be New York; I'm not sure anywhere ever is. If you win, people are going to take notice eventually.''
Fox not only turned the Panthers into winners, but he also changed the perception of the team. Not too long ago, the Panthers were known nationally as the franchise of Rae Carruth, the former wide receiver convicted in the 1999 shooting death of his pregnant girlfriend, and Fred Lane, the former running back shot and killed by his wife in 2000.
''It's definitely embarrassing, because that's all they were talking about,'' said Minter, one of the few Panthers left from that era. ''They weren't talking about the Carolina Panthers winning championships; they were talking about the Carolina Panthers and their off-field problems.
''Everybody in this organization stuck together, got the plan they wanted, implemented it, they got the man to do it, and now we're at the stage we're not talking about that, now we're talking about the Carolina Panthers in the N.F.C. championship game against the Philadelphia Eagles.''
By Sunday night, this team of unknowns may finally have its coming-out on the ultimate stage.
PRO FOOTBALL
