EVEN within the Outsider Art field, where hard-to-classify works by self-taught artists are the stock in trade, some creations are more unusual than others. Consider the work of Emery Blagdon, a former hobo who settled on a farm near the Sand Hills of central Nebraska.
Blagdon, who died in 1986 at 78, made ''healing machines'': ornate thickets of wire, aluminum-foil strips and wood scraps that he also called ''my pretties.'' He was 48 when he began making these peculiar constructions, which grew to fill an 800-square-foot shed. Living in isolation, Blagdon devoted the rest of his life to his ''machines.'' He believed they generated electromagnetic energy that could help cure arthritis and other ailments of people who stood near them.
For years, Blagdon's art was known to curators, collectors and aficionados by legend and hearsay. But it was rarely seen, and until now, it was never for sale.
''Figuring out the scope, structure and meaning of this complex work -- it's like an archaeological dig,'' said Shari Cavin, a director, with Randall Morris, of the Cavin-Morris Gallery in SoHo, which specializes in self-taught artists' works. The gallery is bringing the Blagdon estate to market on behalf of its longtime owners, the New York collectors Dan Dryden and Don Christensen. Returning to the Outsider Art Fair after a four-year absence, Cavin-Morris will present some of Blagdon's work there, at the Puck Building in SoHo, from Friday through next Sunday.
The Blagdon oeuvre's journey to market has been inextricably linked to what Mr. Dryden and Mr. Christensen, lifelong friends, call the ''twists of fate'' that have marked their paths since their childhoods in North Platte, Neb. Mr. Dryden, a sound engineer and former pharmacist, was operating a drugstore in North Platte when he first met Blagdon in 1975. ''One day this tramp with scraggly hair and a beard came to buy 'elements' for his 'machines,' '' Mr. Dryden said. He assumed Blagdon was ''a hobo from the freight trains'' in the city's huge switching yard. But, Mr. Dryden said, ''it turned out that he wanted common mineral salts, like sodium bicarbonate, and that he was completely at ease and charming.''
Mr. Dryden soon visited Blagdon at his farm, where the artist-inventor led his visitor into his shed and flicked some switches to illuminate what had become his magnum opus. ''It was lit with Christmas tree lights strung throughout the hanging sculptures and by painted light bulbs in coffee cans on the dirt floor,'' Mr. Dryden recalled. Stacks of paintings lay on the ground beneath the wire works, and small wire ornaments decorated the rafters. Blagdon told Mr. Dryden that the components of this dense environment generated electromagnetic, healing energy.
Mr. Christensen, who moved to New York several years before Mr. Dryden and works for an independent record company, did not see the shed installation until he and Mr. Dryden returned to North Platte for a school reunion in 1986. They arrived to learn that Blagdon had recently died without leaving a will, and that local officials were planning to auction off his property. (A souvenir poster from that public sale, on display in Mr. Dryden's TriBeCa loft, announces ''guns, farm equipment'' and ''lots &amp; lots of metal wire, fancy work.'')
Mr. Dryden and Mr. Christensen went to Blagdon's farm to see if his creations were intact. To their relief, they were. ''It was a wonderland, the product of an amazing intelligence,'' Mr. Christensen said of the shed-filling work. To rescue the work from the scrap heap, the men decided to bid on it. Although they decline to say how much they paid at that sale, they pooled their funds and acquired everything. ''The gavel came down -- and we became stewards of this man's vision,'' Mr. Christensen said.
Since then, they have kept the works in storage and photographed many of them. ''We classified the wire pieces according to their shapes,'' Mr. Dryden said. They identified groups of ''cascades,'' in which necklacelike strings of wire objects dangle in vertical strips; ''chandeliers,'' which resemble hanging lampshades or fluffy, daffy hats; and ''balances,'' whose extended arms sport clusters of assorted wire elements like oversize charm bracelets.
For all their tumbleweed wildness, Blagdon's constructions are often elegantly assembled. His paintings, with their bold, simple palettes and dynamic patterns, recall early modernist geometric abstractions.
Recently, the Philadelphia Museum of Art and a few other American institutions offered a re-creation of Blagdon's shed, complete with piped-in sounds of crickets and prairie winds, in a traveling show of self-taught artists' works. ''Ideally, his 'healing machines' should be experienced as a total work of art and will someday find a permanent home in a museum,'' said Jan Petry, head of exhibitions at Intuit: The Center for Intuitive and Outsider Art, in Chicago.
However, in recent years, even though the collectors have approached various museums with Blagdon's art, none has made a commitment to acquiring it in its entirety. ''It needs professional conservation and care,'' Mr. Dryden said. ''We can't do it.'' The collectors' decision to allow a once-integrated body of work to be sold piecemeal could lead to contentious debate in a field that has wrestled with this question before.
Blagdon left no writings, and little is known about his life. In the only film of him, a local television news clip from 1980, a reporter asked the leathery old recluse to explain how his constructions generated energy. Like a Beckett character, Blagdon replied tersely: ''I can't.''
For Mr. Dryden, ''that was enough.'' Anything anyone might want or need to know about Blagdon, he suggested, lies in the mystery of his art, which is, in large part, its subject. For many Outsider Art enthusiasts, as this work becomes better known, such enigma may fuel its allure -- and help secure its place in the annals of a rich and unconventional art history.
ART Edward M. Gomez is a co-author of ''The Art of Adolf Wölfli: St. Adolf -- Giant -- Creation'' (American Folk Art Museum/Princeton University Press, 2003).
