NATALIE WOOD
A Life.
By Gavin Lambert.
Illustrated. 370 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.95.
THIS is an elegiac, mournful book, and not just because its author, Gavin Lambert, had been friends with Natalie Wood for the last 16 years of her often troubled life. There are layers of sadness inherent in Wood's story: pushed by her ambitious, manipulative mother, she became a child star in the 1940's, supporting her family with her wages from pictures like ''Miracle on 34th Street.'' Wood worked hard to become a respected adult actress, and she certainly led the life of a glamorous movie star, even going so far as to marry the same handsome prince, the actor Robert Wagner, twice. But Wood was hounded by sadness and depression. She came from Russian stock, to which she readily attributed her melancholic, often passionate nature. And her death by drowning, in 1981 at the age of 43, would have been grievous by any standard.
With all that built-in drama, Wood's story would be hard to mess up, and if ''Natalie Wood: A Life'' were simply solid and readable (and it's both), that would be enough. But this biography has a wistful, elegant, humane quality that feels out of place in the American cultural landscape of 2004. This isn't just the story of one beloved, bedeviled actress: Lambert's book also represents a lost mode of thinking about movie stars.
Of course, we don't even call them movie stars anymore. They're now celebrities, an expandable satchel of a word spacious enough to contain both Paris Hilton and Angelina Jolie without forcing us to make a distinction between which of those two might have actual talent (or at least some spark of on-screen appeal). The term ''movie star,'' with so much dazzling sincerity built right into it, sounds quaint, even naÛve. Celebrity, on the other hand, has a serviceably ironic ring to it: it allows us to proclaim our disdain for famous people without having to go to the trouble of paying attention to their work.
But Lambert writes about Wood, unapologetically, as both a movie star and a human being. He makes a distinction between the two, but he also shows us how not even Wood herself could tell where one began and the other left off. It's crucial to note that Lambert isn't part of that tiresome breed known as movie buffs, old-movie fans who carry the details of every Joan Crawford tear-jerker in the card catalog of their brains. Lambert is a novelist, screenwriter and biographer who knows the contours of Old Hollywood intimately: He has written biographies of Nazimova and Norma Shearer, as well as assembled a book of perceptive conversations with the director George Cukor.
But when you're writing about performers and directors, facts will carry you only so far. Lambert is adept at analyzing all the slippery subtleties that go into the making of a movie or a performance. Although he diplomatically plays down some of her lesser performances, he works valiantly to capture how moving Wood, with her aura of quivering dewy eroticism, could be, particularly in pictures like those two classics of teenage alienation, Elia Kazan's 1961 ''Splendor in the Grass'' and Nicholas Ray's 1955 ''Rebel Without a Cause.'' Lambert describes how Judy, Wood's character in ''Rebel,'' moves in to kiss James Dean's Jim Stark after uttering the devastating and deceptively simple line, ''All this time I've been looking for somebody to love me, and now I love somebody.'' He writes: ''Unexpectedly, it's Judy who makes the first move for a mouth-to-mouth kiss (they've only brushed cheeks before), and Dean who reciprocates in an almost passive way. But at 'the age when nothing fits,' something begins, very tentatively, to fit.''
Lambert stresses how committed Wood was to her work, from the first time she ever set foot on a soundstage. He recounts how, required to cry during the screen test for her second movie, ''Tomorrow Is Forever,'' 6-year-old Natalie forced herself to think about her German shepherd puppy, which had recently been hit by a truck. She ''rose to a pitch of emotional intensity'' uncommon for a child actor, Lambert says, a pitch she'd hit time and again in her later roles.
Lambert also captures Wood's fragility and vulnerability, her superstitious nature (most notably her lifelong fear of ''dark waters,'' an irony so weighted that no one could have made it up) and her hearty sense of humor. But by this point you may be asking, Where's the dirt? Without being unnecessarily prurient, Lambert reports that Wood, at 16, lost her virginity to the director Nicholas Ray not long after he interviewed her for ''Rebel Without a Cause'' -- and how she began a close liaison with Dennis Hopper (who also had a role in the film) around the same time. Wood fell in love easily, and Lambert suggests that she loved great sex. Although she was apparently a model of kindness and good manners, she wasn't apologetic about her appetites.
A number of Wood's closest friends and family members were interviewed for this book, even though many of them, like Warren Beatty and Wagner, are notoriously (and wisely) reticent about speaking with the press. Without ever letting them off the hook, Lambert extends as much courtesy to them as he does to Wood's memory. In one of the book's most moving anecdotes, he tells how Wagner, whose often turbulent relationship with Wood is probably about as close as you can get to a grand movie-star love story, ran into Wood at a party some years after the two had divorced, and before their second marriage. Wood was six months pregnant with her first child (by her second husband, Richard Gregson). The two spent the evening talking, obviously still entranced with each other, and Wagner gave Wood a lift home afterward. ''I guess I shouldn't come in,'' he said. It was agreed that he shouldn't, and after saying goodnight, Wagner drove half a block, at which point he ''stopped the car and began to sob.''
Still, Lambert doles out his respect cautiously, and when it's called for, he's a great rapscallion, with a delightful disregard for authority figures -- most notably the sneaky and avaricious studio chief Jack L. Warner, who early on drafted Wood into a deviously exploitative contract. Lambert is understandably protective of Wood, even when he's dealing with the details of her death, which he addresses as matter-of-factly as possible. (He's also quick to discredit, with convincing evidence, the rumors of foul play that the press entertained at the time.)
The consideration Lambert accords Wood isn't just good taste or cautious discretion on his part; it's a case of his having a brain, a critical sensibility, and using it. ''Natalie Wood: A Life'' could be a model for a new way of looking at and thinking about today's movie stars. After all, celebrities are people too. Some of them can even act.
Stephanie Zacharek is a film critic for Salon.
