MANY exotic plants have gotten under my skin. Though they often break my heart by failing to grow -- or my back by making ridiculous demands -- I am determined to have them. Increasingly, I find, I am not alone.
My latest passion is for an Asian perennial seductively known as desert candle. Hybrids of Eremurus, desert candles send up spires that can soar to nine feet. Hundreds of tiny bell-shaped flowers, coral, white or yellow, open gradually, colonizing the spire's three-foot top.
After snuffing two batches, I was about to give up. Then I saw some desert candles in a friend's garden. They looked like giant colorful exclamation points. I had to have them. And plant lust spurred me to try again.
Soon I had my hands on three-year-old rootstocks, each nearly a foot across, or twice the size I had planted before, with an eye or two on each crown. I realized my failed plantings were of younger rootstock with broken roots.
Knowing desert candles' aversion to heavy clay, I chose a loamy bed where my roses thrive and dug holes 3 inches deep and 14 inches wide. I spread an inch of sand at the bottom to ensure good drainage and planted the crowns with about an inch of soil on top, the octopuslike roots radiating horizontally.
When a burst of spires shot up among the rose bushes last June, my lust was finally satisfied.
Louis Bauer, a former curator at the Wave Hill garden in the Bronx, told me he has a weakness for the tree fern (Dicksonia antartica), which he calls a badge of commitment. In frost-free climates, tree ferns grow to 30 feet, with a 12-foot spread. He keeps a baby one, a 4-inch tall stem in a 10-inch pot, in a cool room in his house.
It has an exquisite chartreuse umbrella of feathery two-foot-tall fronds spreading four feet across. The stem, covered with rust-colored fuzz, will eventually turn into a trunk covered in coarse rust-colored rootlets, which absorb moisture from the air.
It's madness because tree ferns in pots are in constant peril of drying out, which can set them back a season or kill them outright.
Still interested? Experts recommend wetting the trunk two to three times a day and perhaps also corseting it with damp moss to hold the moisture.
Mr. Bauer has come up with a simpler solution. He planted his fern in a potting mix that is half humus and half equal parts vermiculite and sterile loam, giving the roots ample room (three or more inches beyond the root ball). He added a little charcoal, the kind used in aquarium filters, to keeps the mix vital. All this means being able to go a day or two without watering, especially if the air is relatively cool (in his house, down to about 60 degrees at night, and about 70 degrees during the day).
Up in Readsboro, Vt., Wayne Winterrowd, a partner in North Hill Garden Design, has fallen for a little Chilean crocus, Tecophilaea cyanocrocus, which he describes as the most eye-catching of all small bulbs. In his garden it bloomed only once (at $25 a corm), then fragmented into tiny cormlets that could take three to five years to grow to flowering size. As he says, you have to think of it as a long-maturing bond.
The corm sends up one to three stems, each four to six inches high and topped with an intense blue scented bloom. The flower is funnel-shape and about an inch in diameter, opening flat and flaunting a white eye encircled by six petals.
In Chile, the crocus grows on stony slopes high in the Andes, where it experiences a dry fall followed by the protection of a deep snow cover. It blossoms in late March or April. In the United States, the challenge is to protect it from a killing late frost.
Daniel J. Hinkley, a plant explorer and the founder of Heronswood Nursery in Kingston, Wash., worships the rare Himalayan blue poppy, Meconopsis betonicifolia. He has a clump of them in his garden, likening their vivid blue, crinkled blooms to a flock of turquoise macaws sweeping in with pieces of the sky.
In their native Himalayas, the poppies grow fully exposed on rocky outcrops where the subsoil remains moist. Difficult to cultivate in low elevations, they quickly expire if trapped by high heat. Don't even try it if you can't offer moist, rich woodland soil, at least half a day of sun and cool summers.
Mr. Winterrowd points out that backyards everywhere would be overflowing with pachysandra, the gardener's equivalent of meatloaf, were it not for passionate gardeners constantly seeking out unusual plants. I hope the passion grows, along with the persistence to grow them.
Desert candles can be ordered from John Scheepers Inc., 23 Tulip Drive, P.O. Box 638, Bantam, Conn., 06750, (860)567-0838 or www.johnscheepers.com. Tree ferns are sold by Thimble Farms, Fraser's Thimble Farm Order Form, 175 Arbutus Road, Salt Spring Island, V8K 1A3 B.C. Canada, www.thimblefarms.com. Himalyan blue poppies are available from Heronswood, 7530 NE 288 Street, Kingston, Wash., 98346, (983)46-9502, (360)297-4172 or www.heronswood.com. Chilean crocuses are sold by Odyssey Bulbs, 8984 Meadow Lane, Barrien Springs, Mich., 49103, www.odysseybulbs.com or (877)220-1651.
CUTTINGS
