AN AMERICAN PLAGUE
The True and Terrifying Story
of the Yellow Fever Epidemic of 1793.
By Jim Murphy.
Clarion, $17. (Ages 9 to 12)
In a city stricken with terror, a mysterious disease kills a hundred people every day. Unable to respond, government and medical workers are also falling ill and dying. Because no one else remains in the temporary capital, the secretary of war commands the country. This scenario, which sounds like a current medical thriller, actually took place in Philadelphia in 1793.
Beginning in the dock area, yellow fever stalked the citizens of Philadelphia, moving eventually upward to its mansions. After the epidemic struck, as many as 20,000 people left for safer environs, including President George Washington and his cabinet. While doctors like Benjamin Rush argued about the best methods for treating the disease -- ranging from severe blood letting to herbal cures -- as many as 5,000 people may have succumbed to yellow fever.
In a lavishly illustrated book, containing maps, newspaper columns and period illustrations, Jim Murphy unflinchingly presents the horrors of the event as well as its heroes. The mayor, Matthew Clarkson, stayed in Philadelphia throughout the crisis, even though he lost a wife and son. Israel Israel, a wealthy man, helped the less fortunate of the city. Members of the Free African Society nursed the sick and attended the dead, though at the cost of many of their lives.
Murphy also discusses some consequences of the plague -- an improved city water system, a summer White House for the president and scientific research into the disease itself, now understood to be borne by mosquitoes. But even today no cure exists; yellow fever remains, he says, ''a modern-day time bomb.''
Murphy has written many children's books, including ''The Great Fire'' (a Newbery Honor book in 1996), which recreated time and place to describe the Chicago fire of 1871. In ''An American Plague'' he has produced another book that can make history come alive for his readers.
Anita Silvey
