IF there are rewards to living in 21st-century New York (there have got to be some, right?), they are places like Simpson Wong's seven-seat bar at his restaurant, Jefferson, at 121 West 10th Street.
Mr. Wong's bar is the soul of the new machine, for a cocktail culture entering its next, very different golden age. It is characterized by the quality of a casual experience, not social ritual: cashmere replacing silk.
The black leather stools at the white French oak bar face the dining room, not a wall of bottles, over a low opaque glass backsplash. People drinking can watch people eating, like a droll illustration come to life in an urbane magazine. It is an immensely satisfying kind of quiet camaraderie: the fun of being an adult with enough money in your pocket for a $9 cocktail and the ambience of a beautifully engineered room.
Jefferson was designed by Philip Wu, one of Mr. Wong's four partners. Like the friendly, civil bartenders, it is deferential to a fault -- a wall of oak, a wall of glass and a slatted wall and ceiling, punctuated by horizontal strips of light, that give the impression you are sitting inside an elegant corrugated box. Something you would buy at a Japanese stationery store, without a clue why.
Mr. Wong, the chef, with his manager, Roger Kugler, created the cocktail menu, which was introduced on Monday. It includes the Bleeding Heart, a double-rum drink that takes advantage of blood oranges now in the market. Mr. Wong said the season was late; he buys his fruit at Whole Foods on Seventh Avenue at 24th Street, like anybody else.
The Bleeding Heart, served like a punch in a highball glass, is also subtle and stylish. Mr. Wong intends it to work well with food. The drink is the color of a $23 lipstick. The cocktail's name is a reference to its blood orange ingredient. Mr. Wong has his eye on Valentine's Day, too.
Last Valentine's Day, he recalled, a man broke up with his girlfriend, who was pregnant, at their table in the restaurant, and at several other tables people proposed. Sophistication has its costs.
Asked if he himself is romantically happy, Mr. Wong answered instead that he was ''really busy'' professionally. Sad?
''Stressed,'' he said on his cellphone while shopping in Chinatown on Thursday morning.
In previous lives, before his career as a restaurateur, Mr. Wong worked with Penthouse magazine, when it tried unsuccessfully to publish in China. Mr. Wong, who is Chinese-Malaysian, speaks Chinese. He has also worked at the United Nations with the World Meteorological Organization. He learned how to cook from his mother, who cooked for the workers at his father's lumberyard company on the east coast of Malaysia.
Mr. Wong's heart might not bleed, but it's in the right place. His new cocktail is as sympathetic as the restaurant you drink it in, interesting, not overwhelming, entertaining without condescension. You feel its accomplishment is yours alone. And in this city, that's what reward is all about.
BLEEDING HEART  Adapted from Jefferson
1 ounce white rum  1 ounce dark (or gold) rum
1/2 ounce Cointreau or triple sec  Juice of 1 lime wedge  4 ounces blood orange juice.  Wedges of orange, lime and tangerine, as a garnish.
1. Shake all liquid ingredients together with ice, and strain into an 8-ounce highball glass filled with crushed ice.  2. For garnish, thread two skinned tangerine or orange wedges on each of two wooden skewers. Run skewers, crossing, through a lime wedge.
SHAKEN AND STIRRED
