THE HAVANA ROOM  By Colin Harrison  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux  ($24, hardcover)
I flagged down a cab near the Plaza Hotel. The school was only 20 blocks away, and I knew it well, for it was one that Timothy might have gone to when he'd gotten older.
The school's gym stood around the corner from its main entrance and I could hear the cheers roaring out of the high, lighted windows. I stepped past the guard without making eye contact, walked down a corridor of pewter trophies, many of them 50 or 80 years old, and into a small, old-time gym.
It was packed with parents. They looked tired and quite prosperous, many of them clearly on the way home from the office, dragging briefcases, caught in the whirling time-squeeze of parenthood and work. These were people with jobs and marriages and lunches scheduled months into the future; I used to be one of them and I hunched a bit, as much out of shame as from the worry I might see someone I knew.
You never can tell whom you're going to run into in these places and it was quite possible I'd encounter fathers or mothers of Timothy's old friends, or even people who knew Wilson Doan. This thought nearly made me turn around, and I was glad to be dressed in a suit, as if that might protect me from something.
DEAD FAMOUS  By Carol O'Connell  G.P. Putnam's Sons  ($24.95, hardcover)
It was a cold day, yet Victor Patchock was perspiring profusely. He blamed this on the cheap red wig and the press of the surrounding subway passengers. He had no fear of getting caught by the cop in the brown leather jacket. Riker was so intent on following his own prey that he never looked back at his stalker, a smaller man lost among the taller riders.
The train stopped at the Franklin Street station in TriBeCa. Victor had lost sight of the detective. With swipes of both hands, he wiped the sweat from his eyes, and the white cane dropped from his slippery fingers. He bent low to retrieve it, and the dark glasses slid down his wet nose and fell to the floor, where they were trampled by departing feet.
He snatched up cane and glasses, holding each in a tight fist. And now his vision was blurred not by sweat but tears. He turned his crying face to another passenger, and the man stepped backward slowly in that New York drill of no sudden movements while encountering a lunatic. For the moment, Victor, the faux blind man, had truly lost his sight as he fought his way to the door of the train, colliding with those who were boarding.
Tears falling, his mouth wide open in a silent scream, he waved his cane in the air, and the crowd magically backed away as he rushed off the train, stepping onto the platform, which might well have been a dark hole for all he knew. He made his way toward what he hoped was the exit, looked up and saw a bright patch of daylight.
Victor scrambled up the stairs, stumbling on every second step, and out onto the sidewalk, breathing deep and blinking like a mole.
THE CON MAN'S DAUGHTER  By Ed Dee  Mysterious Press  ($23.95, hardcover)
The phone didn't ring again for the rest of the night. Eddie lay in bed fully dressed, staring at the light shining under the door. Grace, all elbows and knees, slept fitfully next to him. He could hear the cops tiptoeing on the squeaky wooden floors, the toilet flushing, water running, cars coming and going in the driveway, and several times the voice of Babsie Panko. They tried to be quiet, but when you've lived in a house as long as Eddie had, you could tell when its heartbeat became irregular. Not that anyone was keeping him awake. A little before 5 A.M., he called Kevin and asked if he and Martha could come over.
Two hours later, in the low-angled sunlight of the morning, Anatoly Lukin and his bodyguards emerged from a newly renovated Art Deco apartment building in the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn. Watching from a block away, Detective Matty Boland picked up his radio and relayed a brief description to the other members of the team. Lukin wore only a baggy wool suit and the sable hat. Cold weather didn't bother the old man. He'd spent the first 42 years of his life in the Ukraine, where an average day in spring inflicts more misery than the coldest New York City winter.
''The big shot,'' Boland said. ''Looks like he doesn't have two rubles to rub together.''
''Shkafy,'' said Eddie Dunne, ''is the Russian word for big shot.''
Boland mouthed the word quietly as he watched from behind the steering wheel of the black Lincoln Town Car he'd borrowed from the federal motor pool. He'd parked to the east of Lukin's building, knowing the glare of the morning sun would camouflage their presence. Even if Lukin's bodyguards spotted the car, its occupants could not be seen. The windows were coated with the darkest tint available.
''The guy in the camel-hair coat is Lukin's nephew, Pavel,'' Eddie said, nodding at the three men walking. ''He runs what's left of the operation, hires the bodyguards, gets the old man from place to place.''
''You'd think he'd drive him, or grab a cab.''
''He's never been in a cab.''
Although the old man will make an exception Thursday. His first and last cab ride, straight to J.F.K.. The hell with the rest of them, Eddie thought; it will be a pleasure to see them in a cell. The Russian trio moved slowly toward Brighton Beach Avenue. Lukin's breath fogged in the damp morning air as he shuffled past cars coated with a thin coat of frost -- the price of living next to the Atlantic Ocean in April.
NEW YORK BOOKSHELF/CRIME
