DIPLOMA MILLS were such a menace in the 1980's that Congress decided to crack down, enacting a set of restrictions in 1992 aimed, in part, at ensuring that fraudulent correspondence schools could not award taxpayer-supported aid. One such restriction, the so-called 50-percent rule, prevents students from getting federal financial aid if the institution they attend does not offer more than half its coursework in traditional brick-and-mortar classes.
Distance learning groups have been vigorously lobbying to eliminate the rule, arguing that it impairs their growth and that, with the evolution of online courses, distance education has a new respectability. Indeed, in 2000-2001, according to the most recent figures from the Department of Education, more than 56 percent of the nation's degree-granting institutions had online courses, with 34 percent of those offering degrees or certificates totally outside the classroom.
The 50-percent rule is currently under review. A Department of Education spokeswoman, Jane Glickman, says that ''the department and many in Congress are interested in modifying rules that restrict distance education, including the 50-percent rule.''
But the rule's supporters warn that loosening regulations will encourage shoddy programs, especially with the ease of mounting a handsome Web site. ''Do we want the taxpayers to subsidize this?'' says Elena Ackel of the Legal Aid Foundation of Los Angeles. ''There's no minimum standard.'' Ms. Ackel was among those who opposed last year's dissolution of the 12-hour rule, a regulation that required programs to offer 12 hours of coursework a week in an actual classroom to be able to award federal grants and loans.
Meanwhile, the Department of Education has been issuing waivers to selected institutions as part of its Distance Education Demonstration Program, which allows colleges to allocate aid even if more than half their coursework is offered online or via mail. Five more institutions were accepted into the program on Dec. 1, bringing the total to 25. Among participants are American InterContinental University, Regis University, the University of Phoenix and Western Governors University. (A complete list is at ed.gov/programs/disted/ participants.html.)
''The distance demonstration program has been very important in that it has allowed the department to waive restrictions in a controlled environment,'' says Sally L. Stroup, assistant secretary for postsecondary education for the Department of Education. ''This has allowed the department to gain a comfort level with distance education delivery methods while ensuring that students receive the benefit of federal student aid.''
What does all this mean for online students trying to finance their education? As long as the school complies with the rule or has a waiver, eligibility for federal aid involves the same conditions as for a standard college. For instance, the program must be accredited, and the student must be seeking a degree.
Students should be aware, though, that there are reputable online institutions that lack waivers, sometimes because of a technicality. For example, federal aid is not available to students attending Concord University School of Law, Excelsior College or Cardean University. Institutions without government aid often offer payment plans or other financing options, and some award their own scholarships.
Stephen G. Shank, chancellor of the online Capella University, says that abolishing the 50-percent rule is crucial to the future of distance learning institutions like his. Capella, with about 8,500 adult students, offers federal aid through the demonstration program.
As for traditional colleges, one temptation is to respond to increasing demand for virtual courses by adding too many, putting the institution on the wrong side of the rule as the number online exceeds those offered on the physical campus. University College, one of 13 universities within Maryland's state system, illustrates the point. The college, which does participate in the demonstration program, offered 932 distinct courses in 2002-2003: 644 of them were face-to-face, 546 online. But only the distance learning side of the equation is growing, at 8 to 10 percent a year.
''We haven't surpassed it yet,'' Dawn Mosisa, associate vice president of financial aid, says of the 50 percent marker. ''But we're getting close.''
COLLEGE AND MONEY David Kushner is a freelance writer who specializes in technology.
