On May 17, 1954, the day the Supreme Court handed down Brown v. Board of Education, the N.A.A.C.P. held a news conference to unveil an ambitious new agenda. With segregated schools now unconstitutional, the intention was to move on directly to housing segregation and employment discrimination. Thurgood Marshall, the N.A.A.C.P.'s lead lawyer, admitted there was still work to be done implementing Brown, but he was sure it wouldn't take long. School segregation would be eliminated nationwide, he told reporters, within five years.
It hasn't worked out that way. This year marks Brown's 50th anniversary, but the commemorations that have already begun are bittersweet. Brown remains the most important legal decision of the 20th century, perhaps of all time. It rebuked centuries of government-sanctioned black inferiority, and it began to give real force to the post-Civil War amendments to the Constitution, passed to lift up the freed slaves. Most concretely, Brown overturned Plessy v. Ferguson, the court's infamous 1896 ruling endorsing separate but equal accommodations for the races.
''I don't know that there will be another moment like Brown,'' says Theodore Shaw, associate director-counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. ''For African-Americans, it divides American history into a B.C. and an A.D.''
But millions of black students are celebrating Brown's anniversary in schools almost as segregated as when it was decided. It is now true, as the court held, that ''separate but equal facilities are inherently unequal.'' But 70 percent of black students attend schools in which racial minorities are a majority, and fully a third are in schools 90 to 100 percent minority. The fierce resistance that school desegregation has met in the political realm, and more recently in the courts, has many civil rights advocates and scholars lamenting what one legal academic calls Brown's ''hollow hope.'' But others are going back to the Brown decision, this year more than ever, looking for new ways to press for school integration. ''If you really believe in Brown, you can't celebrate it right now,'' says Gary Orfield, director of the Harvard Project on School Desegregation. ''But the potential is there.''
Brown's roots lie in 1950, in a national conference of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. There had already been signs that the courts were ready to rethink Plessy, and the group's leaders decided the time had come to push for racial integration in elementary and secondary schools. The conference adopted a resolution saying that it would now bring lawsuits aimed only at ''obtaining education on a nonsegregated basis,'' and ''no relief other than that will be acceptable.'' Within months, Marshall was in Clarendon County, S.C., representing a group of blacks that had been agitating for improved conditions in black schools but now were demanding that the county desegregate its school system.
A group of students in Prince Edward County, Va., made the same switch. They had been striking against conditions in their all-black high school, but the N.A.A.C.P. persuaded them and their parents to sue for desegregation. As the two cases made their way through the courts, they were combined with similar challenges in Topeka, Kan.; Delaware; and Washington D.C., with a total of more than 200 plaintiffs. It was the Topeka case that would ultimately give the landmark ruling its name, after Oliver Brown, a welder and father of three girls.
Brown's outcome feels inevitable now, but it was hardly thought so at the time. Jim Crow had an imposing advocate in John W. Davis, the 1924 Democratic vice presidential nominee and the nation's pre-eminent trial lawyer. Davis, the scion of an old Virginia family, believed in the Southern way of life, and in his legal arguments he contended that whatever one thought of desegregation, nothing in the Constitution required it or authorized the courts to order it. When Brown was first argued in front of the Supreme Court, in 1952, Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson, a Kentuckian, appeared ready to reaffirm Plessy, and it seemed he might have the five votes to do so.
But the court was divided enough that it asked the parties to brief some additional issues and put the case down for re-argument. Before that could happen, Chief Justice Vinson died of a heart attack in September 1953 at 63. It was, Justice Felix Frankfurter later remarked, ''the first indication I have ever had that there is a God,'' according to ''Simple Justice,'' Richard Kluger's definitive account of the Brown litigation.
Thinking of his political debts, not Brown, President Dwight D. Eisenhower filled the vacancy with Gov. Earl Warren of California, a supporter of civil rights. By the following May, the seemingly fractious court ruled 9 to 0 to overturn legally segregated schools.
The driving force behind the decision was Chief Justice Warren, who proved as able a politician on the court as off. Public opinion was also a factor, as it generally is. In a nation that had only recently triumphed over Nazism, and that was locked in a fierce battle with Soviet Communism for the hearts and minds of the world, support for Jim Crow was slipping, particularly among the nation's elites. Polls showed that 70 percent of college-educated Americans sided with Brown's black plaintiffs.
Jack Greenberg, a member of the original legal team who now teaches at Columbia Law School, says the justices simply wanted to be on the right side of the critical moral question of the day. ''The other side's briefs talked about federalism, separation of powers, textualism,'' Professor Greenberg says. ''Ours talked about right and wrong.''
But the ruling generated intense opposition in the South. Virginia's governor, Thomas B. Stanley, spoke for much of his region when he pledged to use ''every legal means at my command to continue segregated schools.'' The court had put off for the following year the difficult question of how to implement its decision, and when it issued its next ruling, widely known as Brown II, it ceded the forces of resistance considerable ground. Rejecting the N.A.A.C.P.'s call for a ''forthwith decree'' -- an order that desegregation begin immediately -- the court ruled that the schools had to admit students on a nondiscriminatory basis ''with all deliberate speed.''
Brown II gave the lower courts few guidelines at a time when the South's resistance was becoming more heated. In early 1956, more than 100 Congressmen from the 11 states of the Old Confederacy signed the Southern Manifesto, attacking the court's ''clear abuse of power'' and pledging resistance by all ''lawful means.'' There were a few early instances of integration, including the famed 1957 showdown at Central High School in Little Rock, in which Army troops escorted nine black students past angry whites -- and the Arkansas National Guard. But ''deliberate speed'' turned out to mean no speed at all. As late as 1964, only 2 percent of black students in the South attended integrated schools.
But if Brown's impact on education was muted, it had a powerful effect on the civil rights movement. ''American politics was like a frozen sea,'' Mr. Greenberg says. ''Brown was the ice cutter.'' Within months of Brown II, Rosa Parks had refused to move to the back of a segregated Alabama bus, kicking off the Montgomery bus boycott. Brown's anniversary took on symbolic significance: on May 17, 1957, the third anniversary, Martin Luther King Jr. held a prayer pilgrimage for freedom at the Washington Memorial. The first Freedom Ride left Washington scheduled to arrive in New Orleans on May 17, 1961, the seventh anniversary.
In the legal world, desegregation gained more ground. Civil rights activism was starting to translate into legislative victories, including the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, which gave the Johnson administration the power to withhold federal funds from segregated schools. Federal courts struck down racially separate lunch counters, bus stations and libraries. And in 1967, the Supreme Court took aim at the most sensitive of the South's dividing lines, striking down state laws against interracial marriage.
But schools remained largely immune to this tide. Southern states adopted legal tactics to stall integration, notably ''freedom of choice'' plans. In theory, freedom of choice allowed blacks to attend any school in a district, but black parents were threatened with losing their jobs and homes -- and having crosses burned on their property -- if they tried to send their children to white schools.
Then, everything changed. Clearly influenced by the growing national support for civil rights, the Supreme Court threw out a ''freedom of choice'' plan in 1968 in New Kent County, Va., as an ineffective way of promoting integration (85 percent of the county's black students remained in the school that had been reserved for them during segregation) and directed the school board to remove segregation ''root and branch.'' A year later the court threw out ''all deliberate speed'' and ordered recalcitrant Mississippi school officials to desegregate ''at once.''
The Supreme Court became more forceful still in 1971, ordering the North Carolina school district of Charlotte-Mecklenberg to bus students beyond their neighborhood. But by endorsing busing, the court injected a hugely divisive issue into American life, setting off fierce resistance for the first time in the North, notably in Boston, which was torn by riots and racial violence. There were calls for an antibusing constitutional amendment, and even liberal Northern members of Congress began introducing antibusing legislation. The court's tough-minded approach may have been controversial, but it was effective. By the 1972-73 school year, about 37 percent of black children in the 11 states of the Old Confederacy were attending majority white schools.
Busing also responded to the nation's growing residential segregation. Post-World War II suburbanization had transformed America's metropolitan areas into segregated doughnuts, with blacks in the urban center and whites in a suburban ring.
A federal court in Detroit had found that it was impossible to desegregate the city's schools, which had become 72 percent black, except by mixing them with suburban children, but the suburbs insisted there was no legal basis for including them. In 1974, almost exactly 20 years after Brown, the Supreme Court -- influenced, no doubt, by the antibusing backlash and the growing power of the suburbs -- overturned the metropolitan-area plan by a 5-to-4 vote. Thurgood Marshall, who had been named to the court by President Lyndon B. Johnson, lamented that ''after 20 years of small, often difficult steps'' toward equality, ''the court today takes a giant step backward.''
The majority held to a fiction that Detroit schools could be desegregated on their own, and ordered the lower court to do so. But given the demographics, it was not possible. Once suburbs were put legally off bounds, the momentum for desegregation slowed considerably. Whites were almost uniformly against busing but so, too, were many blacks, who increasingly insisted that their children did not need to sit next to whites to learn.
With desegregation orders losing favor in the courts, education reformers turned to the other main source of inequality in education, which desegregation advocates had thus far largely missed -- unequal financing across school districts. Because a school's resources are tied to its local tax base, children in wealthy suburbs enjoy quality teachers, smaller classes and up-to-date science labs, while students in poor areas make do with far less. In 1973, in San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez, the Supreme Court had put an end to these cases in federal court, ruling 5 to 4 that school finance was a local matter.
Now advocates for poor children were meeting with some success bringing state constitutional claims. Courts from Connecticut to Kentucky to, a few months ago, New York issued orders that school financing in their states be made fairer. But in many more states, courts rejected these claims.
Under Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, who wrote a memorandum as a Supreme Court law clerk arguing for reaffirming Plessy, progress on desegregation has not only stopped but reversed. In a series of decisions in the 1990's, sometimes called the ''resegregation cases,'' the court made it far easier for school districts to skirt desegregation orders already in place. A pair of cases in the early 1990's lowered the obstacles for school systems once held to be segregated to achieve ''unitary status,'' meaning they had legally desegregated and could start becoming segregated again. In the majority's view, desegregation was no longer a state for America to aspire for and work toward, but a punishment imposed on districts that had once done wrong, to be lifted as soon as possible.
A few years later, the court went further, dismantling a Kansas City, Mo., program meant to attract white suburban and private school students willingly to heavily black city schools. Gary Orfield of Harvard regards that decision as ''the most disgraceful of all,'' because it made even voluntary desegregation virtually impossible. The deciding vote was cast by Clarence Thomas, who occupied what was once Marshall's seat.
The waning support for desegregation efforts had an undeniable effect. The percentage of blacks attending majority white schools in the South, which peaked in 1988 at 43 percent, had fallen by 2000 to 31 percent; nationally, 28.4 percent attended majority white schools.
The civil rights groups that rushed into state court with school-finance cases have not made the same effort to get state courts to pick up the ball on desegregation -- with one exception. In Sheff v. O'Neill, advocates for minority students in Hartford contended that racial segregation violated the Connecticut Constitution's segregation clause, and that they were entitled to a remedy that included integrating the suburbs as well as the city. In 1996, the Connecticut Supreme Court agreed.
Last January, the parties settled: a $245 million integration plan will create a racially mixed setting -- in regular classrooms, afterschool programs and summer school -- for about 30 percent of Hartford students.
Desegregation advocates had hoped that the case would be a model, but there is little evidence that other states will follow it.
In their most cynical moments, some civil rights activists suggest that the legal situation today is actually worse than before Brown. At least, they argue, the Plessy separate-but-equal regime guaranteed an ''equal'' education, and when it was denied, as it uniformly was, black students had a legal claim for improving their schools. But since the Supreme Court decided in the Rodriguez case in San Antonio that there is no requirement to equalize financing, many minorities are now stuck with schools that are separate and unequal.
But others argue that it is only a matter of time before the courts once again get in the business of working for racial integration. They point to this year's Supreme Court ruling upholding affirmative action at the University of Michigan. A conservative court handed the NAACP Legal Defense Fund one of its greatest victories in years by not only endorsing the law school's affirmative action program, but declaring that diversity can, as a legal matter, be a significant state interest. Civil rights advocates are hard at work looking for ways to combine this holding with the classic formulations of Brown to promote a new generation of desegregation cases.
In her Michigan opinion, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor made an eerily familiar prediction. She was less troubled than she might otherwise have been about endorsing race-based admissions criteria, she noted, because she expected that ''25 years from now, the use of racial preferences will no longer be necessary.''
Justice O'Connor's time frame for when the nation would remove racial barriers in education was longer than the one Justice Marshall gave on the day Brown was decided. But it may prove no more well founded.
After 50 years, the real lesson of Brown may be that to achieve racially integrated schools, we need less blind optimism -- and more appreciation for how much hard work remains to be done.
THE COURTS Adam Cohen is an editorial writer for The Times and co-author of ''American Pharaoh: Mayor Richard J. Daley: His Battle for Chicago and the Nation.'' A lawyer, he helped represent plaintiffs in the 1996 school desegregation case in Hartford.
Correction:  January 25, 2004, Sunday  An article in the special Education Life section last Sunday about the 50th anniversary of Brown v. Board of Education misstated the office sought in 1924 by the constitutional lawyer John W. Davis, an opponent of desegregation. It was the presidency, not the vice presidency.
