The Democrats took over the Legislature last week and marked the occasion by airing a few of their scarring feuds. The Republicans ceded their last ground and took on the unity of losers.
After Governor McGreevey's modest proposal, otherwise known as the State of the State address, on Tuesday, the Republican response was a two-part wail: The governor said almost nothing about property taxes or campaign finance legislation. But we will, for two years, with the regularity of a buzz saw.
It's hard to go wrong by getting cranky about these issues. Nothing is more real than a bill -- the kind you get in the mail, that is -- and people are much more cognizant of the check they are writing than the services they receive in return, like a mowed median strip or oil changes in school buses. And whatever the incidence of influence-peddling by elected officials, no one says it is too low.
Some political minorities, secure in their indignation, veer toward the utopian or the doctrinaire. But these Republicans must be still unaccustomed to their diminished status, since they are making pitches that no one will argue with.
At the same time, they can promise to be clean in thought, word and deed.
In remarks after the governor's speech, the new Senate minority leader, Leonard Lance, was relentless on the issue of campaign finance limits, which were stalled last year by Assembly Democrats.
Senator Lance talked about ''the terrible system of pay to play'' (he also called it ''the horrible system'') in which campaign contributors receive big no-bid contracts from the administration that they help finance. Twice Mr. Lance used the term ''rotten to the core.''
Democrats are especially irritated that in a decade of Republican domination, ending when Mr. McGreevey won the governor's seat and his party won the Assembly two years ago, the leadership showed minimal interest in ethics issues, particularly as they affected government contracting.
In fact, there is little evidence that pay-to-play politics has changed much, except for the winning party labels. When The New Jersey Law Journal recently analyzed contracts for legal work awarded by the McGreevey administration and that of Christie Whitman, it found similar, and complicated, patterns.
Then, too, limits on campaign contributions are bound to be more popular in a party that raises $1 to the enemy's $6 or $8, which was the Republicans' predicament in the 2003 legislative campaigns.
But in the indignation-fest that the pay-to-play issue has become, Republicans can be angry that the Democrats are accusing them of hypocrisy. Joe Farren, a spokesman for the Senate Republicans, said they were more than willing to follow their own rules: ''What an arrogant argument it is to suggest that we're never going to be in power.''
And if his party recovers politically with a campaign-finance law in place, Mr. Farren said, ''I don't think you'll see Republicans repealing it.''
As for property tax relief, neither party has many attainable ideas. (Senator Lance would ease the burden on middle-income school districts by diverting more of the aid given to the urban districts, but that would require a constitutional amendment.)
Since neither party wants to change the tax structure, or to acknowledge that lowering property taxes means raising income taxes, both have spoken in favor of (but still not authorized) a constitutional convention to suggest solutions.
But in the meantime, Democrats can protest, as they did in the fights over the budget last spring, that governing is harder than carping about government. In cutting the state's property-tax rebates to homeowners, Mr. McGreevey and legislative Democrats have made themselves vulnerable to blame.
If the Republicans have popular causes, they might find them hard to get across. Since they lost their shared control of the Senate, Republicans are no longer able even to bring bills to a committee vote.
But they would love to talk.
ON POLITICS Laura Mansnerus reports from Trenton for The New York Times.
