Nat Gale, 17  Hartford Public High School  (61 percent Hispanic, 33 percent black, 4 percent white, 2 percent other)
''I know that Sheff v. O'Neill says there is de facto segregation in the school system and they were pushing for students to be bused in and out of Hartford and the suburbs so schools would be integrated. I am the only American-born white person in my senior class at Hartford High. I don't pay it any mind. My circle of friends is so integrated -- Asian, African-Americans, Latino -- all the different colors of the rainbow. In seventh and eighth grade, race was more of a problem because people called me cracker and Saltine. Two weeks into freshman year, people stopped looking at race because there are so many different races at the high school.
''The balance of race in Hartford schools has changed my education. I get more of a well-rounded view of matters. In my U.S. history class we discussed the shooting of Amadou Diallo. A lot of African-American students were very upset because they thought he was shot because he was black. It was good to get the other perspective; then different arguments are brought to the table.
''I don't think I agree with Sheff v. O'Neill that students in suburban settings have a better education. As soon as you convince students that they want to come to school, they'll learn. I attribute failure to a poor upbringing, where parents or guardians might not have stressed education. If you walk into any classroom where the students are willing to learn in Hartford High, you'll find teachers willing to teach and students immersed in a lesson. Your education is what you make of it.''
Nakia Wright, 17  Glastonbury (Conn.) High School  (89 percent white, 4.7 percent Asian, 3 percent Hispanic, 3 percent black)
''My parents felt the school system in Hartford was racially segregated so they sent my brother to live with my aunt in Newington and go to school there. But a friend heard about Project Choice'' -- a voluntary program that buses city children to suburban schools -- ''so my brother could live at home and still go to Newington. I started in Glastonbury in kindergarten, and have always gone to Glastonbury schools. All the black kids came from my bus; we all grew up together.
''When I was younger I didn't feel different about color, I just felt, like, I went to school out of town. When I was older, people don't like to talk about race so when it came up it is like, wow, I realized people's idea of black people was pretty strange. A lot of people in Glastonbury have racist parents, I couldn't hang out with certain friends or go over to their houses or ride in the car with them and that was, like, wow.
''I catch a school bus at 6:30 in the morning. I spend most of my day in Glastonbury, I hang out with my friends in Glastonbury on the weekends or I'm here at the house because I don't really know anyone around here in Hartford. I got into an argument with a guy I was dating because he said me and my friends thought we were better than Hartford kids. But I told him, I'm from Hartford, too.
''Sometimes I think Hartford schools are underrated. Then I asked my cousin in Hartford what she got on her SAT's and she said she got a 400 combined and I said, 'What! On the whole thing?' Their scores are crazy. Project Choice gave me an opportunity to do something more with myself.''
Michael Mitchell, 13  Dr. James H. Naylor School, Hartford  (59 percent Hispanic, 23 percent black, 16 percent white, 2 percent other)
''I don't think race is the problem. I think we need more access, to technology, to more and better books, to clubs, to sports. There was a homework club after school, but that isn't around anymore. I like volleyball, I would like a volleyball team here. There's student council, but it hasn't started yet, because the day it was supposed to start, there was a fight, so they canceled it.
''I like construction. I would like to be an architect. I want to go to college, my mother says get good grades, maybe play football to get some money -- my mother is unemployed right now.''
Eliana Perez, 13
''A lot of parents want their kids to be enrolled in Glastonbury because it's so wonderful. They have drama, they have electives we don't have. They have advanced science, they have the chemicals and the dissecting frogs. We don't have leveled books, higher-level books, and we would really like art supplies that are more advanced than white paper and markers. I wish we had home ec. I want to be a chef when I get older.
''Most of my friends are Hispanic. I have African-American girlfriends, but they're not part of my tight crowd. My friends and I are close when we're at school, but we go our separate ways after school. We're very alone. My mother works at Wal-Mart, from 5 a.m. to 2 p.m. When I get home from school, my mom is way tired and has a lot to do. So I spend a lot of time in my room, always alone, watching TV, doing homework.''
Akeisha Nave, 17  Highland Park High School, Topeka, Kan. (33.8 percent white, 33.7 percent black, 20.5 percent Hispanic, 2.5 percent American Indian/Alaskan, 9.5 other)
''I work in North Topeka at China Inn, and there's not very many black people. They have questions. They see things on TV. Like what do we eat for Thanksgiving. Questions about really good hair or nappy hair. I eat the same thing other people eat for Thanksgiving -- turkey!
''So many people are biracial nowadays, half black, half white. I don't ever see race as a problem -- ever.
I feel like sometimes, just being a minority, I have so many more opportunities. And as part Indian, I get money from the tribe.''
Hadley Beier-Green, 14  Topeka High School (56 percent white, 18 percent black, 12 percent Hispanic, 2 percent American Indian/Alaskan, 12 percent other)
''In honors English, there are Asian boys, blacks, whites. We have the same goals, to go to school. College is the next logical step. Economic class, that's almost more of a barrier than race is.
''We say they're wearing their bling. Fake diamond necklaces, cornrows, jumpsuit. P. Diddy clothing line. Or we say they're G -- they're gangster. But people look at me weird because of my clothing style. Stupid preppie blonde girl. I have experienced the same thing: Oh, you shop at the Gap. People get teased for being white, people get teased for being black.''
Ashley Aguirre, 17  El Rancho High School, Pico Rivera, Calif. (94.8 percent Hispanic, 2.7 percent white, 2.5 percent other)
''My dad is from Guatemala, so I usually say I'm Latina. If I classified myself just as Mexican-American then I would be eliminating my dad's heritage. Most of my friends are second-generation Mexican-American. None of them are, like, 'I'm all proud of being a Latino.' I don't think anybody really puts a label on themselves anymore. Race isn't an issue.
''I think there are a lot of people at El Rancho who are illegal. They have a right to go to school, too. Everybody should have education available to them. I've heard people make fun of them, like saying, 'Oh, you're a real Mexican.' There's a difference of how Mexican you can be, funny as that may sound. Most of the people that recently came from other countries, they have their own cliques and they all talk to each other, whereas people who have been here and grew up here have their own friends. I guess they feel more comfortable being around the people who came to this country illegally because they can relate to them. They have the same struggles.''
R.J. Johnson, 14  Topeka High School
''My great-grandfather was a Black Panther. He didn't teach me the bad things, just the good. Not the violent things. I grew up hearing that stuff. That I'm part of the N.F.L. -- Negro for Life.
''Martin Luther King, to me, is a freedom fighter. He did nonviolent things. I don't feel comfortable with people hitting at me and not hitting back. As a freedom marcher, maybe they should have fought back just a little bit so people would know that just because we're a different color doesn't mean we're not going to fight for our rights.
''In Arkansas, when I was little, my dad would ask for directions and they would just look at him like he was crazy. I said, 'Maybe they didn't hear you.'
I didn't really understand. But now I do. It still goes on, throughout your whole life. It makes me angry. If you don't like me, I'm not going to like you. We have to try a step harder.
''But it's slowly fading away. I went to a primarily all-white middle school and had no problems there. I think it's more adults that need to work on it than us. They're the ones teaching it to us.''
IN THE CLASSROOM
