For Yang Wang, 2003 was a year of waiting. A 26-year-old doctoral student in civil engineering at Stanford University, he had returned to China to visit his parents in December 2002.
He had planned to stay just three weeks. He would have to stay at least 11 months, which is how long it took Washington to conduct a security check for his return visa to the United States.
Bored, he started an Internet chat room for those in a similar plight, and it quickly became a regular haunt for hundreds of students awaiting security checks. The visitors exchange tips about American visa officers in Beijing (''Don't go to the bald guy if you can manage it. He's mean. The pink-faced woman is nicer''). They offer advice on how to approach powerful people to intervene in their cases, including a template for letters to members of Congress. Most important, the chat room lets visitors vent.
One post from Beijing read: ''I have been back for five months now. My parents have spent most of that time worrying about my visa. They wait every day beside the phone for the call from the embassy. I am almost despondent now. For the first time, I understand what it means to be helpless.''
Occasionally, some of the site's Beijing visitors meet at a coffee shop or teahouse. More than a dozen, including Mr. Wang, attended a recent gathering. Their voices were tinged with sarcasm and bitterness as they spoke of their experiences. Some wouldn't give their full names to a reporter, fearing that criticism of the American government could bring retaliation.
Over cups of bubble tea -- flavored teas with tapioca beads -- horror stories were exchanged. Jane Wang, a 22-year-old who is not related to Yang Wang, had to postpone her wedding, which was scheduled for December. She was in Beijing waiting for a visa to attend Ohio State, while her fiancé, a Chinese graduate student already studying in the United States, had decided not to return to Beijing to avoid being stranded. ''What the American government is doing to us is not humane,'' Ms. Wang said.
Another student, also stuck in Beijing, said he was close to splitting with his wife, who is at the University of Washington in Seattle. Their relationship has withered under the pressure of a long wait.
Yang Wang, who goes by Andy at Stanford and wears spiky hair and loves American culture, wished for some predictability in the checking process. The American Embassy tells applicants that their visas could arrive any day and that most checks last six weeks. After waiting half a year, Mr. Wang's case was mysteriously closed in July by Washington, forcing him to reapply.
''The cruelest part is the indefinite wait,'' Mr. Wang said. ''You don't know when or whether the visa would come. If they had told you it definitely would be six months or a year, you could at least plan your life.''
Another student, Fei Liu, who has been admitted to the University of Washington to study medical image analysis, said: ''When you are young, you have the determination and the drive to get something major done. The wait really saps the youthful vitality out of you.''
American consulates started paying special attention to visa applicants with science or technology backgrounds in the summer of 2002, part of the State Department's response to a directive issued by President Bush after the Sept. 11 attacks. The directive called for stricter enforcement of immigration laws and greater surveillance of foreign students in the United States.
In May 2002, the department sent a memorandum to all American visa officers asking them to watch for applicants whose areas of study appeared on the ''technology alert list,'' also known as the sensitive major list. Among the 150 concentrations of study are nuclear technology, engineering, immunology and seemingly benign fields like community development and urban planning.
The memorandum tells the consular officers, who have much discretion in issuing visas, to err on the side of caution and to send every uncertain case to Washington for review. The aim, the State Department says, is to keep out terrorists and to prevent the transfer of sensitive technology to certain parts of the world.
Such checks actually go back to at least the 1950's, when the United States wanted to prevent the transfer of technology to Communist countries, although consulates seldom scrutinized the backgrounds of students or visiting scholars. In the 12 months ending on Nov. 30, 2003, however, almost 15,000 technology- or science-related cases were submitted for review, more than twice those of a year before, according to the State Department.
''We just want to be more careful about screening for people who would hurt our country,'' says Janice Jacobs, deputy assistant secretary of state for visa services. ''Security is our No. 1 priority after Sept. 11. There is no question about that.''
Although the Chinese represent 11 percent of foreign students in the United States, a recent survey by a consortium of three educational organizations showed that 57 percent of student visa delays involve Chinese applicants. Students from Russia and India have also experienced significant delays.
Ms. Jacobs says that the State Department doesn't focus on a particular country, but a consular officer in Shanghai said that American officials in China were particularly worried about the transfer of technology that could be used to make weapons.
Male students from Arab or Muslim countries undergo an additional round of checks for terrorist links. Students from other parts of the world who have backgrounds in the social sciences or the humanities are not subject to the same scrutiny, nor are most undergraduate students who have yet to declare majors.
Once a case reaches Washington, officials from the State Department, the Defense Department, the Department of Energy, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other agencies decide its fate. Only about 0.05 percent, or fewer than 10 of all 2003 applications, are eventually rejected, Ms. Jacobs says. She would not specify whether Washington had detected terrorism-related activity or signs of illegal technology transfer in the checking process.
While the typical turnaround time for a case is 30 days, according to the Bureau of Consular Affairs, close to 1,000 science- or technology-related cases were more than three months old in mid-December.
Stuart Patt, the bureau's spokesman, says there is little the department can do about the lack of information provided to applicants. ''There is no real information we can give applicants,'' Mr. Patt says. ''Their cases are being processed. We don't know whether the agencies are looking up something in the database or trying to get a file from somewhere in the world.''
The new scrutiny has caused some scrambling at top research institutions. At the beginning of the fall semester, New York University's physics department scurried to find a replacement for Jun Zhang, an assistant professor stuck in China who would have taught a required course for physics majors. A prominent Russian physicist, Valery Rubakov, canceled his plan to lecture at the university when he failed to get a visa. An Iranian graduate student in astrophysics, who had applied for a visa in Ireland, has been stranded there since June, missing his responsibilities as a teaching assistant.
Since most core classes in physics are sequential and offered only once a year, says Allen Mincer, the department chairman at N.Y.U., graduate students who miss classes in September often have to wait until the next September.
''A year is a long time,'' Dr. Mincer says. ''In sciences, particularly in physics, people are most productive in their 20's.''
More than a dozen top American research universities have issued advisories to their foreign students against traveling outside the United States. According to the education consortium survey, thousands of foreign graduate students have missed classes, research projects and teaching responsibilities after traveling home. At an international physics conference last summer at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill., 19 top Chinese physicists, including the director of the Institute of High Energy Physics in Beijing, had to cancel because of the lengthy visa application process.
Irving Lerch, director of international affairs at the American Physical Society, a sponsor of the conference, is angry at the situation. ''Our scientific enterprise is very much imperiled by this kind of policy,'' he says. ''The health and vitality of our scientific research depends on the open and free exchange of ideas. Without such exchange, science cannot survive.''
Around 600,000 foreign students study in American colleges and universities, with a little more than half in science and technology. In most of the nation's top graduate schools, more than a quarter of the students are foreign.
Statistics recently released by the Institute of International Educators, the Manhattan-based administrator of the Fulbright program, have raised concerns among national education organizations. The number of foreign students enrolled in American colleges and universities rose by 0.6 percent in 2002, the smallest growth since 1996. In each of the previous two academic years, foreign enrollment increased by 6.4 percent.
Allan Goodman, the president and chief executive of the institute, says that the slowed growth can be attributed to things like last-minute hesitations or home obligations. But Victor Johnson, the public policy director of NAFSA: Association of International Educators, has a different take.
''When you have a clearly identifiable government policy and a clearly identifiable effect,'' Mr. Johnson says, ''you cannot say it's just a blip on a curve. This could be the beginning of a long-term decline or leveling off of international students coming to this country.''
Officials at national organizations like the American Council on Education support Mr. Johnson's view.
''Colleges and universities are very concerned about their ability to attract international students,'' says Terry W. Hartle, a senior vice president of the council. ''Many countries, like the United Kingdom, South Africa, Germany and Australia are recruiting the same students we are after, and some students are finding these places more attractive.''
Indeed, the enrollment of students from China in Australian colleges grew by 25 percent and students from India by 31 percent last fall, compared with a year ago. In England, the number of Chinese students grew by 36 percent and Indian students by 16 percent. Growth was more moderate in these two countries in previous years, according to local education agencies that keep data on foreign admissions.
In Beijing, officials at campuses that administer the Test of English as a Foreign Language -- the exam required for admissions to most American schools -- say that for the first time in a decade significantly fewer students are taking the exam.
''Students are saying, even if you get a perfect score on that test, most likely you still won't get a visa to go to America,'' one official says. ''So what's the point?''
Administrators at the University of Michigan say they are trying to counter the effects of the visa policies. The director of the Office of International Students and Scholars, Rodolfo Altamirano, regularly calls stranded students overseas to keep their spirits up, holds workshops on immigration policies and presses politicians for changes.
''We had a Chinese woman stuck in Canada,'' Dr. Altamirano says. ''I had to call her every day on her cellphone because hearing my voice made her feel better. We spent hours and hours calling the American government offices about her case, but it was worth it because we want the very best students.''
Earl Lewis, the dean of the University of Michigan Graduate School, has asked each of its academic departments to admit its best international applicants as early in the season as possible to give them more time for visa security checks. Dr. Lewis and his deputy, John Godfrey, have taken multiple trips to China to meet admitted and potential Michigan students.
''For the first time, I started to find Chinese students who were deeply embittered about America,'' Mr. Godfrey says. ''For somebody who has worked so hard in an extremely competitive environment like China or India, to see the opportunity to attend Michigan or Stanford or M.I.T. drift away at the last minute, the bitterness is hard to counter. ''The question becomes, 'Am I going to bet everything to see whether I can get my visa?' Some people have decided it's not worth it.'' It typically takes two years for a student from a non-English-speaking country to prepare and take the English language test and the Graduate Record Exam to apply for American graduate schools.
In response to criticism from the education and scientific communities, the State Department has made some changes to its security check procedures. Last summer, it began to give student visa applicants priority when scheduling interviews before the start of semesters. It took landscaping off the list of sensitive concentrations in November. It has added a few more liaison officers to coordinate between security checkers in Washington and the American consulates. It also plans to replace the telegram network that connects the consulates and the Washington office with an electronic system.
The scientific community is not satisfied. ''The State Department needs people who understand the difference between research on something dangerous and basic research,'' says Daniel Marlow, chairman of Princeton's physics department. The guidelines caution against any field with the word ''nuclear'' in it, even those with applications only in medicine.
Students have recommendations of their own. They want the State Department to be more caring about visa applicants. Some suggestions: the receptionist at the Beijing embassy shouldn't hang up when told the caller is checking on the status of a visa, and applicants shouldn't be put on hold for an hour when calling the hot line in Washington.
Mr. Wang has finally received clearance from Washington and is returning to Stanford this month. He says he will not visit his parents again until he has his Ph.D. because their anguish about his uncertain future far outweighed the joy of seeing him. As for why it took the State Department 11 months to check his background, he cites the fact that his name is common.
But there are more wrenching stories than Mr. Wang's. Xiaomei Jiang, a doctoral student in physics at the University of Utah, rushed home to Sichuan Province after her father and mother died in a traffic accident. She was unable to get back to defend her thesis in Salt Lake City.
''I could have gone insane, literally,'' says Ms. Jiang, who is now back in Utah after waiting nine months in China. ''To have your parents die suddenly and to go through something like that. It was very cruel.''
Yilu Zhao is a freelance writer and former education reporter for The Times.
