ARROW ELECTRONICS of Melville, the global distributor of electronic components, has seen the future, and it's Asia. William Mitchell, Arrow's president and chief executive, said: ''Asia is about 10 percent of our business right now. In five years, it's going to be about one-quarter. Asia is our growth engine.''
The refrain is much the same at CMP Media, the trade publishing giant in Manhasset. It announced last month that it was closing its flagship publication, EBN, originally Electronic Buyers' News. By March, CMP said, it will introduce a replacement, Electronics Supply &amp; Manufacturing, with an emphasis on Asia.
At the Standard Microsystems Corporation, a semiconductor manufacturer in Hauppauge, sales in Asia now represent 88 percent of revenues, up from 67 percent four years ago. ''The vast majority of our business we do in Asia,'' said Steven J. Bilodeau, the chairman and chief executive.
With North America and Europe just beginning to show signs of recovering from the long information technology slump, executives in the United States are looking to India, Singapore, Taiwan, South Korea and especially China to replace withering American and European sales.
In 2002, the last full year for which data are available, the United States exported $43.1 billion worth of high-tech components to Asia, the largest Asian export category. Overall, components accounted for nearly a quarter of American exports Asia, which reached at total of $173.6 billion in 2002, according to federal trade data.
In addition to electronic components, a category that includes products like silicon chips, computer hard drives and connecting cables, Long Island's other major manufacturing categories also figure prominently in Asian sales. Exports of aviation equipment ranked third, at $15.4 billion, and exports of optical and medical equipment came in fourth, at $12.6 billion.
On Long Island, where electronics and instruments historically lead the export parade, interest in doing business in Asia is perhaps at an all-time high, despite the weakness of the Japanese economy.
''There has been an enormous shift in the supply chain over the past four years,'' said Mr. Mitchell of Arrow. ''In 1999, the U.S. consumed about 40 percent of all electronic components. Japan consumed about 25 percent.'' Now, he said, the United States uses about 20 percent, Japan is under 20 percent, and Asia takes up the slack. ''Asia has gone from purchasing maybe 15 percent of all components to purchasing about 40 percent,'' Mr. Mitchell said. ''An industrial revolution has taken place in only four years.''
After decades of treating Asia primarily as a source of inexpensive parts and cheap labor, Asia is now seen as a major customer, a view that reflects a boom in industrial production driven largely by a rise in American-style consumerism. Governments that have historically kept tight control over private business activities are loosening up.
Unsurprisingly, most eyes are on China.
''China is the fastest-growing market for component consumption in the world,'' said Paul Durando, a director of Nu Horizons, a components distributor in Hauppauge. ''We believe you have to be in China in a big way.''
Like Arrow and many other American companies, Nu Horizons has invested heavily in Asia in the last two years. In less than 18 months, Mr. Durando said, Nu Horizons has opened two branches in India, two in China and one each in Singapore, Taiwan and Malaysia.
The company's investments are paying off, Mr. Durando said. Sales for the most recent nine months surpassed $37 million, up from $15 million in the same period in the prior year. The company has about 55 employees in Asia, most of them local residents rather than expatriated Americans.
While hiring native employees to staff foreign operations is politically expedient and often mandated by government contracts, the decision is also good management, Mr. Durando said. ''It may sound trite, but when in Rome do as the Romans do,'' he added.
At Arrow, the goal is to pull ahead of arch-rival Avnet to be the undisputed No. 1 electronics distributor in the world. ''That means being the clear No. 1 in Asia,'' Mr. Mitchell said. ''And to be No. 1 in Asia means being declared No. 1 in China.''
To expand successfully in Asia, Mr. Mitchell said, Arrow is following a plan it calls scaffolding. ''We have certain capabilities at Arrow, and we take those people who have those capabilities and transplant them to Asia,'' he said. ''That's the scaffolding. Later we take it down,'' meaning that the American executives return home, and their protégés apply what they have learned. Arrow has about 1,000 employees in Asia and plans to triple that number in the next four years, Mr. Mitchell said.
''The usual way American companies grow overseas is to send expats over to do key jobs for three years,'' Mr. Mitchell said. ''I have seen mixed results from that. The practice leaves you open to the charge that you are reserving the big jobs for your own people. In Asia, Arrow is following the path of hiring local people.''
Arrow executives emphasize passing along Arrow's corporate culture and knowledge base, Mr. Mitchell said, rather than simply doing the operational work themselves. For the company's Asian strategy to succeed, Mr. Mitchell said, ''it has got to have an Arrow culture with an Asian face.''
Savio Chan, the president of US China Partners, a trade consulting practice in Melville, said, ''It isn't easy doing business in Asia, but it isn't as hard as you might think.'' Mr. Chan, a Hong Kong native who emigrated to the United States 20 years ago, said that the Chinese, long enthusiastic consumers of American culture, were more enthusiastic than ever and that the government was rapidly losing its anti-capitalist policies and attitudes.
''In China, people love Madonna, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Burger King, you name it,'' Mr. Chan said. ''You want Starbucks, it's everywhere, and I mean everywhere.''
Mr. Chan noted that Beijing, which in the past imposed restrictions on foreign companies hoping to do business in China, was increasingly less adversarial. China, a member of the World Trade Organization since 2001, is preparing for the Summer Olympics in 2008 and the World's Fair in 2010, so ''the government is motivated to be more friendly,'' Mr. Chan said.
Successfully setting up operations in Asia poses unique challenges, including finding a cultural middle ground, several executives said. Patrick Moffett, the vice president for global logistics at the Audiovox Corporation in Hauppauge, a consumer electronics company specializing in audiovisual products, buys nearly all of its components in Asia.
One problem is that Asian trading partners, particularly the Chinese, may lack Americans' preoccupation with security, Mr. Moffett said. ''We're trying to secure the entire supply chain, which is what Customs is looking for,'' said Mr. Moffett, who is the chairman of the Long Island Import Export Association. ''But the Chinese are not into the security as we are. Who is authorized to load the trucks? Were background checks done on those people? It's often hard to get answers out of the Chinese.''
As Asian expansion continues, most American executives appear willing to find ways to make the partnerships work. ''Yes, there are cultural differences,'' said Mr. Mitchell, Arrow's president. ''But it's a two-way street.''
L.I. @ WORK
