WHEN the Rev. Rufus A. Strother Jr. began his ministry at the Antioch Baptist Church here, he thought it was ''just a step toward something greater, larger.''
That was 38 years ago and, at the time, he saw the ''something greater'' as an urban ministry in a bigger city. He may never have physically made that move to a city, but as he preached his last sermon before his retirement this month, it was obvious his path had taken him exactly where he expected to go.
His predominantly black congregation grew to nearly 250 active members from about 50, and his influence has been felt throughout the area as he preached a message of love, tolerance and understanding. It was perhaps fitting that his departure came as the church sponsored its 26th annual banquet honoring the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., an event he started.
When Mr. Strother, 73, came to Bedford Hills in 1965 as a 35-year-old man and the civil rights struggle was at its height, he said, it was still a segregated community. ''Bedford Hills was not spared that,'' he said. And while there were not cross burnings, there was still discrimination in the form of a segregated fire department and barber shop as well as in housing. As issues arose, he worked to bring people together.
''I tried to get people to understand we're not as different as we think,'' he said. ''The mode of traveling may be different, but human beings are pretty much the same.''
Hundreds packed the church for his farewell sermon Jan. 4, among them public officials who came to know Mr. Strother over the years. Mr. Strother, was given an honorary doctorate from the International Seminary of Orlando, Fla. He and his wife, Frances, have two grown daughters and one grandson.
Beyond organizing the Martin Luther King Jr. events, he was instrumental in forming the Northeast Westchester Council on Equality, a citizens' group organized by local churches after the King assassination to help calm the community and to foster understanding, and spearheaded interfaith relations in the area. In the early 1970's, when a plan for housing for people of low and moderate incomes in Bedford Hills met with outrage, he pressed to bring sides together to resolve the issue.
''They thought they were going to experience the Black Plague,'' he said. ''It got dramatic, quite ugly. But it was very good for the community. It brought us together to share and talk about it.''
The Antioch Baptist Church, which was formed nearly 110 years ago to serve the domestic workers living in the area, now has Hummers and Mercedes-Benzes parked outside the church and workers from corporations like I.B.M. and Xerox fill the pews. The church, a picture-perfect white and gray clapboard building with a steeple, has moved locations several times and now sits just up the hill from the train station. About 95 percent of the congregation is African-American; a small group of whites attends regularly, and it draws interest throughout the area. People come from as far away as Dutchess County and all parts of Westchester County to attend the church's services.
''We have everybody and anybody and we're all equal members,'' said Dorothea Wiggins, an 82-year-old Somers resident who has been attending the church for 56 years.
In drawing people to the church, Mr. Strother has been aided by a good sense of humor and a dynamic gospel choir that has grabbed many a newcomer at the door and made them repeat visitors.
''When I walked into this church, I was absolutely floored by the joy and the gorgeous music,'' said Arthur Heydendael, a publisher who lives in Ossining. ''It's better than the best musical on Broadway.''
For nearly 45 years, Earl Brown, 73, who has attended the church since he was 4 or 5, led the music department. He took over from his mother and is turning the job over to his daughters, one the choral director and the other a piano player at the church.
The music's fame has gone beyond the neighborhood in more ways than one. In the early 1990's, the conductor André Previn asked the chancel choir to record a jazz and gospel album with him.
Lucas Natali, of Katonah, who had been invited to a church event on New Year's Eve, said that he was so impressed he has begun to return for services.
''I had been going to St. Mary's in Katonah, and I didn't feel any connection to the Catholic Church,'' he said. ''Everyone here was very friendly, and there is a great sense of community and honestly I got caught up in the song.''
But members say Mr. Strother's lighthearted nature has also played an important role in the direction of the church and its success. He has an easy smile and quick wit. Even when he had one foot out the door, his sense of humor was evident in the signs that had not yet been removed from his office.
''Dear Lord,'' read a poster near his desk, ''I want to thank you, Lord, for being with me so far this day. I haven't been impatient, lost my temper, been grumpy, judgmental or envious of anyone. But I will be getting out of bed in a minute, and I think I will really need your help then. Amen.''
When it came time to choose his successor, Mr. Strother supported the choice of the Rev. Dr. Paul Briggs, the co-pastor at the New Hope Baptist Church in Newburgh, N.Y. He is the son of the church's pastor, Dr. Coleman Briggs, a longtime friend of Mr. Strother.
Asked about the big shoes he has to fill at Antioch Baptist, the younger Dr. Briggs, 40, quipped, ''I'm kind of used to being in the shadow of greatness.''
With two master's degrees and a doctorate, Dr. Briggs comes to the job after years of teaching art and fending off a nagging urge to minister. He is the chairman of visual arts at the Storm King School, a private school in Cornwall-on-Hudson, where he has been on the faculty about three and a half years.
''When I was doing the other things, it just wasn't doing it for me,'' said Dr. Briggs, who is married and has three children.
But taking on a job as the head of Antioch Baptist was a bit of a surprise, even for him. He had been the heir apparent at his father's church. ''I'm torn about leaving my dad, but it made sense,'' Dr. Briggs said, adding that he thought his father's church, with its Pentecostal leanings, might not have been the best fit for him.
Although he had Mr. Strother's support, Dr. Briggs said that it was such a grueling process, full of intense scrutiny, to get the job that he joked about it when he spoke to the congregation last Sunday.
''I'd like to thank the search committee,'' he said, noting their questions were as rigorous as those asked at his doctoral defense. ''I cried after that,'' he said, drawing a laugh and joking that the panel should feel free to return any of his leftover DNA samples.
Like many retirees in Westchester, Mr. Strother has confronted the costs of retiring in the county and decided to leave the rectory in Bedford Hills to move to Fishkill, near Millbrook in Dutchess County, where he grew up.
In his last sermon he left the congregation with a message. ''I told them: 'This is your family. Be good to each other.'''
IN PERSON
