Living off campus used to be an eagerly awaited rite of passage for juniors and seniors. Yes, you probably had to live in a crumbling house or moldy basement. But at least you had your freedom. You could keep a car nearby. You could have your own room. You could cook spaghetti on your own temperamental stovetop.
Today, upperclassmen are just as likely to be living on campus. It's not that they have less desire for freedom. It's that their universities have made on-campus living so desirable. As more residence halls boast private bathrooms, kitchens and high-speed Internet access, many upperclassmen can't fathom why anyone would want the hassle of living in a creaky apartment with an absentee landlord and monthly cable-modem fees or -- gasp -- dial-up Internet access.
Ask students if living on campus is geeky and many of them sound puzzled. ''I don't think it's looked down upon to stay on campus,'' says Erin Hickey, a senior at Washington University in St. Louis who lives in an on-campus apartment with a kitchen, high-speed Internet access and free technical support. Jim Nichols, a senior at Rutgers University, says that at his university-run garden apartment, ''I've never heard once in the last three or four years anyone say, 'Oh, my God, you're still here?' Instead it's, 'Cool, you're our neighbor again.'''
The trend has been documented in focus groups, like those conducted by Robert Stickney, a senior manager for KPMG Consulting and former housing director at Tulane University. If they can cook for themselves, get cheap and reliable cable TV and Internet access, and have the privacy of their own bathrooms -- or, better yet, their own bedrooms -- students will likely stay put, he says. An architecture firm specializing in student housing, Einhorn Yaffee Prescott of Albany, reports that that's exactly what they're putting into hundreds of projects nationwide.
Campus quarters in general are improving, with some residence halls looking just like regular apartment buildings -- they just happen to be university owned and filled with students. Gone are beds bolted to the floor. Furniture, including couches, can be moved around (though it's often still of the bulky, wood-plank variety).
At Pennsylvania State University, a new residence with single occupancy and private bath for upperclassmen is set to open in July. It will cost students $900 more per semester than traditional double rooms but already has a waiting list for the 2004-5 academic year. At the State University of New York's Purchase campus, upperclassmen started moving into a new complex last year, complete with living rooms, kitchenettes and private bedrooms and bathrooms. The cost is at least $300 a month higher than for traditional rooms but has generated a waiting list, too.
Living off campus can be even more expensive in the affluent areas around campuses like Purchase and Georgetown. Patrick Durbin, a Georgetown senior, pays $679 a month, utilities included, for his university-managed apartment. Last year, he paid $717 plus utilities to share an old house with broken appliances and a negligent landlord.
All in all, however, living off campus may be a bit cheaper nationwide. The College Board recently estimated that students living on private college campuses pay an average of $7,144 a year for room and board, while those who live off campus but not at home pay an average of $6,476.
Nonetheless, parents seem to like the fact that university housing folds everything into semester fees, with no monthly bills or surprise expenses. They also feel more secure knowing their children are walking at night in patrolled areas. ''Safety is the biggest issue,'' says Gary J. Schwarzmueller, executive director of the Association of College and University Housing Officers-International and a parent of two children who lived on campus.
The result is a complete redefinition of campus housing. ''The word dormitory is never used,'' says Kevin Duffy, former vice president for student affairs at Boston College, who has conducted research on residence halls. In a survey reported by the housing officers association last summer, about 57 percent of respondents were planning to either renovate or start anew on residential construction in the next five years. And of the new projects, only 3 percent were for traditional dorm-style rooms.
To university administrators, the shift is part of a larger strategy to revitalize students' connection to the campus. Seniors who live on campus are more engaged in campus life, have more positive interactions with faculty members and express greater satisfaction with their universities, according to an annual survey of more than 185,000 freshmen and seniors conducted by the Center for Postsecondary Research at Indiana University at Bloomington.
Georgetown opened an apartment complex last fall that added 900 students to its on-campus population, making the grounds more lively. ''It's more fun because there are more people around,'' Mr. Durbin says. The complex was designed in part to help mend relations with residents of the historic neighborhood surrounding the campus. Neighbors complained about noise and trash from students living on their own. The university was fortunate enough to have a parking lot to build on -- tight urban campuses like Columbia have had to buy buildings on their periphery, antagonizing the community even more as their borders leach into the neighborhood.
The on-campus trend doesn't apply everywhere, of course, especially if independent living is embedded in student culture and if campus housing doesn't measure up to what is available off campus.
In the case of Lacey Rose, a senior at Duke University, the difference between living on campus and off was stark. As a junior, she had lived in a dorm room not much bigger than 150 square feet. ''You had to walk down the hall and key in every time you had to go to the bathroom,'' she says. ''It certainly was not a comfortable living environment.''
This year, she has big windows, a kitchen, washer-dryer and parking privileges in her own apartment. ''It's more social to live off,'' Ms. Rose says. She also savors getting away from campus every afternoon.
''At the end of the day I can remove myself from the academic world,'' she says. ''It's a privilege that a lot of upperclassmen look forward to.''
Forget Square Footage. Just Give Me Access!
College students are plugged-in people. They want Internet access at the highest speed possible. If they can get special cable access or digital music options, they want that, too. So it's not surprising that high-tech accouterments are a big part of the lure of on-campus living. It's also hard to beat a college's prices or customer support.
Erin Hickey, a senior who lives on campus at Washington University in St. Louis, pays $120 a semester for Internet access with free technical support, or nearly $30 a month. Off-campus, she paid twice that much -- $70 a month -- for phone and DSL line. ''That was really rough,'' she says. ''And then you have to purchase a router.'' The router was needed to share the high-speed connection with her roommate, who also had a computer. Ms. Hickey saved money by not setting up a wireless network -- another perk that students on some campuses enjoy without seeing a single Internet bill.
Amber Marcum, a fourth-year student at the University of Virginia, has lived off campus for two years and sorely misses the easy-access network commonplace in university housing. ''I've had tons of problems,'' says Ms. Marcum, who last year rented a house with eight other women. Their DSL provider would not help them set up a network to distribute it among everyone's computers. ''Basically only one computer in our house was able to get DSL,'' she says.
Students who find themselves off campus without high-speed access have had to come up with alternatives. Coffee shops near campuses tend to offer wireless access hotspots. Even a sushi bar near American University in Washington has introduced wireless. ''I have sophomore friends who live off campus who will sleep over at someone's dorm to get the faster connection when they need it for registration,'' says Keosha Johnson, a freshman there.
At Rutgers University and Pennsylvania State University, students in dorms not only get a ''port per pillow'' -- college lingo for having one high-speed port for Internet access per student -- but also have access to specialized cable channels. Only students in Rutgers-managed housing can tune into live review sessions offered by professors in chemistry, pre-calculus and Spanish, or watch live forecasts on the Rutgers weather channel. Jim Nichols, a meteorology major who works at the station, appreciates the sophisticated technology in his residence hall. ''If we wanted to, we'd be able to update our forecasts from our rooms,'' he says.
This spring, Penn State has another treat for on-campus students. Napster is back -- except that it's legal. Students will be able to listen to streaming music files from an inventory of half a million songs and download the files on up to three computers. Eventually, the university expects to open the service to anyone who can sign into the network. For the short term, it will be available only to the lucky listeners in Penn State's dorms.
LISA GUERNSEY
STUDENT LIFE Lisa Guernsey is a contributor to the Circuits section of The Times.
Correction:  January 20, 2004, Tuesday  An article in the special Education Life section on Sunday about dormitories for upperclassmen misstated the affiliation of Robert Stickney, a consultant who has held focus groups with students. He works for KPMG L.L.P., not KPMG Consulting.
