Documentaries about writers follow certain patterns now. The narrator is an omniscient guide into the hallowed life and work. Photographs and paintings are combined with luminous shots of where the artist lived and wrote. Expert witnesses (scholars, other writers, family) offer testimony. Poems are read or scenes from the novels are re-enacted.
So last month, when public television broadcast a documentary on Emily Dickinson as part of its ''Independent Lens'' series, I was ready and eager. Dickinson is honored, even worshiped by writers (including me). She is studied ravenously by scholars. Plenty of readers love her. But plenty are still put off.
They have unpleasant memories of her early, girlish-wonder poems, which they learned in middle or high school. (I remember shrinking from ''I'm Nobody! Who are you?/Are you -- Nobody -- too?'' when a soloist in my school's speaking choir delivered it vehemently.) It isn't just girlishness. There's a naked childishness in Dickinson that embarrasses, even repels, when you are not far past childhood yourself. The four- square beat of church hymns, the ''dear Sirs,'' ''Misses'' and ''little fellows''; the zooming bees, bashful flowers and blushing birds. (Sometimes I want to wring the neck of every bobolink I find on the page.)
Then you realize how much else is there. Nature sears and scalps trees. The bee plunges into the rose with orgasmic fervor. Snow ''heaves Balls of Specks'' into the sun's yellow eye like a vicious boy. The cat toys with the mouse just long enough to give it hope, then mashes it to death. And what about all the lines that have fed other artists: ''Good Morning -- Midnight''; ''Gay, Ghastly Holiday!''; ''This is my letter to the World / That never wrote to me.''
Some of her poems are so packed with image and meaning you feel you're splitting the atom when you read them.
The Soul has Bandaged moments -
When too appalled to stir -
She feels some ghastly Fright come up
And stop to look at her . . .
The soul has moments of escape -
When bursting all the doors -
She dances like a Bomb, abroad,
And swings upon the Hours
Dickinson's fame has always been fed by myth. She was the virgin poetess dressed in white, the tremulous daughter who never left her father's house, the maiden who turned to art because she was thwarted in love. Hard-working biographers notwithstanding (my favorite is Alfred Habegger), myth often wins out. Dickinson may still be best known to the public from ''The Belle of Amherst,'' the 1976 play starring Julie Harris, which was eventually televised and still plays in theaters around the country. It favored a vision of a fragile, lovelorn Emily who warbled her songs valiantly in the face of a dismissive world.
So yes, please, give the public a new look at Dickinson. ''Loaded Gun: Life, and Death, and Dickinson'' opens with the director and writer Jim Wolpaw pondering the poem that begins ''My Life had stood -- a Loaded Gun.'' Then he takes center stage and tells us about a dream he'd had. He was coaching a baseball team and Emily wanted to play second base. (Shot of a white ruffled dress and black lace-up boots racing to the base. Sure enough, she tags her man. )
I should have known where the baseball metaphor was headed: the player running to second eventually slides under her skirt. The big mystery Wolpaw wants to solve turns out to be: ''How this sheltered 19th-century spinster was able to produce poetry that still seems ahead of the times in the 21st century.'' This is not a big mystery; it's what Hemingway used to call ''the big nada.'' Better to ask why all those 19th-century lawyers, journalists, professors and husbands failed to produce poetry that still seems ahead of the times.
I love the idea of breaking the standard documentary form. But for all its jump-cuts and free associations, ''Loaded Gun'' is like one of those narcissistic essays in which a writer chronicles his difficulties with his subject to show how creative he is. So we get a rock group setting Dickinson's words to music (not well) and a comic riffing on her life (not well). The director consults psychologists (all male) and sets up a Chris Matthews-like exchange between two professors (one male, one female). He casts an imaginary film about her life. (Charlton Heston as her Puritan father? Not a good choice if he means it; not a good joke if he doesn't.) And he stages a casting call for actresses, asking questions like ''Miss Dickinson, do you have a problem with God?,'' which they are supposed to answer in character. There is even a coy film-school homage to John Ford: a desert shootout between the good girl, spinster Emily (in white) and the killer poet Emily (in black).
What Wolpaw really wants is to fantasize about the men in Emily's life. What about ''The Master,'' the mysterious figure she wrote passionate poems to? This is the point of that stale baseball pun. ''What I really wanted to know,'' he confides, ''was whether Master or anyone else had ever gotten past second base with Emily Dickinson.'' How else could anyone explain the gloriously sexy poem beginning:
Wild nights / Wild nights!
Were I with thee
Wild Nights should be
Our luxury!
Here we are in the 21st century and there's still something unacceptable about a woman who can write great poetry, and erotic poetry, without the presence of a husband or lover.
For more than a century editors tried to tame Dickinson's syntax and writers tried to tame her psyche. The popular narrative saw her as a woman spurned or neglected. Now men are lining up for her. Her genius makes her a prize, a conquest, a proof of artistic manhood. In the documentary the former poet laureate Billy Collins dismisses talk about whether she was asexual or bisexual as backstairs gossip: ''I wanted to just blow that off the table by saying, 'I'm going to take off her clothes and make love to her.' '' Then he reads a smarmy poem called ''Taking Off Emily Dickinson's Clothes'' and the camera (standing in for both poet and director) chases an Emily impersonator through the Amherst graveyard.
No wonder she never left her house. It still isn't safe.
ON WRITERS AND WRITING
