VIRGINIA FRANKLIN was my oldest friend. That's not to say that I knew her longer than I have known other friends; I mean it literally. She was 88 when she died last month at her home. And I miss her.
Having a friend who is considerably older than your mother is unusual. Don't misunderstand the relationship because of the age difference between us, which spanned more than 40 years. This was not a situation where I visited a lonely elderly lady who appreciated my attention. Virginia and I were gal pals. We had lunch once a month at the Pleasantville diner. We spent so much time comparing notes on work, kids, siblings and politics, that part of our routine included the waitress who always served us wearily asking: ''Anything else, ladies? About done here yet?'' long after the rest of the lunch crowd had thinned out.
The fact is, we just liked each other a lot. We were constantly amazed by how much we had in common, despite being from very different generations. We both shared a fascination with Westchester's history. Both of us grew up in the county and settled here, though Virginia could remember a time when trolleys ran in White Plains and could easily recall what was at stake in local elections that took place long before I was born. We both hated television and were inveterate readers. We didn't always agree on books, though. Once I lent her a book about writing that I particularly liked. She returned it to me with a polite ''Not really my cup of tea,'' and that was that.
We shared opinions about the unfortunate trend of changing nouns into verbs (agreeing that neither one of us would ever ''conference'' with each other, but would either confer or attend a conference), about the chicken salad at the Pleasantville diner and about George E. Pataki challenging Mary Goodhue for a State Senate seat in 1992. (Did I mention we loved raking over Westchester politics?) We also shared a profession. Virginia had a 50-year career in journalism. Until last year, she was the chief editorial writer for The Patent Trader, a weekly newspaper covering northern Westchester. She also wrote a column.
The generational difference would pop up unexpectedly. She never mastered a computer. She didn't hold with answering machines, let alone call waiting. When she called me at home, she always asked for ''Mrs. Lombardi.'' During one of our lunches, when I was complaining about how underpaid I believed myself to be, she told me that for her first column in 1953 she was paid 10 cents an inch, and rarely had space for more than seven or eight inches. That gave me a little perspective.
Virginia, who once described herself as ''a wild-eyed liberal,'' told me that one of her proudest professional moments was persuading the rest of the editorial board to endorse George S. McGovern over Richard M. Nixon in the 1972 presidential race, at a time when Westchester was an overwhelmingly Republican county. She knew other people tended to become more conservative as they became older, she told me over a club sandwich (a wild foray away from chicken salad), but she just never seemed to mellow.
Still, we didn't spend the majority of our time on shop talk. Virginia was unsentimental, but she was crazy about her three children. She often talked about how lucky she was to have such nice kids who took such good care of her, as if she'd had nothing to do with it.
Virginia's children were a bit older than I am. So sometimes, we skipped a generation for a meeting of the minds. When I described my daughter's college application process, she'd respond with the college experiences of her grandchildren.
Talking with Virginia about children was particularly illuminating , because she had the long view. Sometimes, when I was worked up about one of my kids -- a curfew violation, a disappointment with a soccer team, driving lessons, or whatever the drama of the day might be, she would smile gently. She told me that she knew from my perspective it seemed as if I would be raising my children forever, but that really, 18 years or so was quite a small portion of one's life.
As usual, she was right. But what strikes me today is what a small portion of time I had with my friend Virginia.
COUNTY LINES
