''Boohbah!'' is not an exclamation adults would use in moments of excitement or despair, but for children the world over, the ''booh'' and ''bah'' sounds are music to the ears. Not surprisingly, the word was chosen after much research, said Anne Wood, the producer of the British series ''Boohbah,'' which will be introduced to American audiences tomorrow and shown weekdays at 6:30 a.m. on Channel 13, 11 a.m. on Channel 21 and 10 a.m. on Channel 49. ''We needed a word with two syllables,'' she said in a telephone interview from Stratford-Upon-Avon in England, ''because one thing we learned from our musical director is that in general, parents call their children using a minor third in music, what is known as an integral.''
For PBS, ''Boohbah'' met a need for programming that would appeal to preschoolers, as opposed to toddlers, the group toward which ''Teletubbies,'' also produced by Ms. Wood, is geared. ''We wanted something like nothing else, and at the same time, content that gets kids moving,'' said John F. Wilson, the network's senior vice president for programming. ''It's distinctive. It has a real, surreal look.''
Actually, the Boohbahs look a little like inverted ice cream cones: wide at the waist and narrow at the top, with funny fish-egg eyes and stubby little arms. Each Boohbah is a single color -- yellow, pink, purple, orange or blue -- and the rainbow theme is reinforced every time a ''boohball,'' or ball of light, streaks onto a scene. These ''colorful atoms of energy,'' as the producers call them -- Humbah, Zumbah, Zing Zing Zingbah, Jumbah and Jingbah -- are played by actors in costumes who are constantly spinning, bowing, jumping, hopping, skipping, swirling and dancing. Viewers, Ms. Wood said, are soon up and running, too.
The half-hour episodes begin with the ''boohbah'' command spoken by children on and off screen, a signal for the Boohbahs to initiate their exercises. Thereafter, other real people appear -- Grandmamma, Grandpappa, Mrs. Lady, Mr. Man, Brother, Sister, Auntie -- all of whom try to solve a ''story puzzle'' with a minimal voice-over narrative that leaves time for children who are watching to speak out.
''Boohbah'' aspires to be as quirky as ''Teletubbies,'' while making youngsters feel not only active but also in command. The show also has a Web site so that children can develop ''a sense of manipulation in both places,'' Ms. Wood said. And the stories, which are short and repetitive, focus on problem solving and decision making. In one episode that covers symmetry and spatial awareness, Brother and Sister are jumping rope. Mr. Man arrives, and the rope grows. A second later, Mrs. Lady wants to join, but the rope is too short. Magical sparkles make it grow again, and the two people then jump rope simultaneously. Finally, Grandmamma and Grandpappa want to skip rope, and the rope lengthens again and everyone is so happy, collapsing into giggles. Which is exactly what the Boohbahs intended.
Dulcie Leimbach
FOR YOUNG VIEWERS
