Hard-line Islamist lawmakers walked out and secular deputies jeered and heckled Saturday as Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, delivered his first speech to the nation's Parliament since seizing power in a bloodless coup in 1999.
General Musharraf, who narrowly survived two assassination attempts by suspected militants last month, showed no sign of backing off from a renewed promise to crack down on religious extremism or from a historic agreement reached earlier this month to hold peace talks with India.
''We will have to launch a massive operation against those foreign elements in our border areas who can be a cause of terrorism in our country and Afghanistan,'' General Musharraf said, adding later, ''the curse of extremism, by a handful of persons, is damaging the country internally.''
In a 40-minute address that was also broadcast to the nation, General Musharraf said the country was threatened by a ''negative image'' because it is seen as promoting an Islamic insurgency in Kashmir, the Indian state that is a main source of contention between Pakistan and India; failing to crack down on Taliban supporters along the Afghan border; spreading nuclear weapons technology to other countries; and being an ''intolerant society.''
The general called that image inaccurate and said a vast majority of Pakistanis were ''moderates who totally reject extremism.'' He urged Pakistanis to ''wage a 'jihad' against extremism.''
Tariq Rehman, a professor at Quaid-i-Azam University in Islamabad, said General Musharraf was trying to signal that he was committed to reform.
''He wants the United States to know 'I will stick to this,' '' Professor Rehman said. ''He is giving a message both to India and the U.S.''
While such blunt language may please American and Indian ears, the walkout and the jeering from the lawmakers showed that the general still faces serious domestic political opposition, particularly regarding the legitimacy of his rule.
In 2002, General Musharraf blocked Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto, the leaders of the two main secular parties, from contesting parliamentary elections. European analysts called those elections, which created the current Parliament, flawed. Mr. Sharif and Ms. Bhutto, both former prime ministers, continue to live in exile.
Last month, General Musharraf struck a deal with an alliance of hard-line Islamist parties intended to end a yearlong deadlock in Parliament. Under the deal, the Islamist members of Parliament voted for the ratification of some of the constitutional amendments General Musharraf unilaterally enacted in August 2002. In exchange, the general promised to resign as army chief of staff by the end of 2004, ostensibly giving up some of the sweeping power he wields, although he will continue as a civilian president.
In a sign of the coming change, General Musharraf, who usually addresses the nation in a military uniform, today wore the sharwani, a jacket that is Pakistan's national dress.
But that gesture, and the agreement over the constitutional amendments, appeared to do little to placate his vocal opponents.
Members of the hard-line religious alliance that struck the deal on the constitutional amendments walked out of the session even before the general spoke. Members of the country's two main secular political parties chanted ''Down with dictatorship,''  ''Stranger in the house'' and ''Go Musharraf go'' throughout his speech.
Pakistani observers said they have seen worse jeering in Parliament. During civilian rule in the 1990's, prime ministers and presidents were also heckled by lawmakers while addressing the nation.
The general, for his part, appeared annoyed by the jeering at first. He glared at the chanting lawmakers several times at the beginning of his speech, then raised his voice and read his words loudly, ignoring the clamor.
