Women's tennis will have to wait until next month at least for the return of the Williams sisters. For now, the sport and its sponsors will have to settle for the return of one Williams sister.
While Serena Williams is still not prepared to make a comeback after knee surgery and a six-month break, Venus is back in Melbourne, warming up on the practice court and in front of the microphone for her first official tournament since she lost in the Wimbledon final to Serena last July. ''I am bursting with energy,'' said Venus, who will face the tenacious yet limited American baseliner Ashley Harkleroad in the opening round of the Australian Open, the season's first Grand Slam event, which begins Monday (Sunday night in United States time zones).
A year ago, Venus lost a hotly contested final here as Serena won her fourth Grand Slam singles title in a row. At that stage, the sisters were unquestionably the top two players in the women's game, but after six months of physical therapy and family tragedy for the Williamses, the top two players are now from Belgium: No. 1 Justine Henin-Hardenne and No. 2 Kim Clijsters.
Serena, who withdrew from the Australian Open last week, is No. 3, and Venus has plummeted to No. 11, her poorest ranking in six years. While Henin-Hardenne spent her Saturday winning the Australian Open warm-up tournament in Sydney with a 6-4, 6-4 victory over Amélie Mauresmo of France, Venus spent the morning at Melbourne Park, fielding blunt questions about the state of her health and more elliptical queries about the death of her half-sister Yetunde Price, who was shot and killed in Compton, Calif., in September.
In their rare public appearances since Price's death, the sisters have declined to address the subject. When asked Saturday if getting back on the court had helped her cope, Venus, eyes welling with tears, answered: ''Obviously, this isn't really the time or place that I want to get into any specifics, but what can I say? There's not much to say. Not at least at this point.''
Visibly affected, Venus had difficulty concentrating on the next, unrelated question. Asked whether Price's death had changed her perspective on the importance of winning and losing matches, she paused before answering.
''There are just a lot of emotional thoughts connected with that sort of thing,'' she said. ''But I still want to win as much as ever in any case.''
If Venus wants the chance to resume winning, she will have to stay healthy.
''I guess the toughest part was accepting that I had to stay out,'' Venus said. ''I am not the kind of person who accepts a circumstance. I make something happen for myself, and this was a case where I could not do more, no matter what I tried.''
Despite her long layoff with a severely strained stomach muscle, she said she still has to be cautious. ''I just have to really be careful with how much training I do,'' she said. ''I warned my trainer, 'Don't let me hit too many serves.' If I need to hit 30, I will hit 200. If I need to hit for one hour, I will hit for three hours. They have to pull me off. I had to give him veto power.''
Yet nobody vetoed her decision to play here, after she resumed practice at the end of November and eased back into competition earlier this month by winning an exhibition tournament in Hong Kong. Thanks to the largess of tournament organizers, she will still be seeded third despite her relatively low ranking. That decision was not embraced by Mauresmo, who would have been seeded third if rankings had been respected.
''I am not afraid of anyone,'' Venus said. ''So if I was No. 11 or No. 3, I still would have been very, very happy to play, because I have been No. 11 before, and I was fine.''
Though the men's field, led by top-seeded Andy Roddick and second-seeded Roger Federer, is nearly at full strength, the women's field is not. Two former Australian Open champions, Jennifer Capriati (2001-2) and Mary Pierce (1995), withdrew with injuries. Clijsters plans to play but is recovering from a sprained ankle that forced her to miss Sydney. Lindsay Davenport also plans to play despite straining a right shoulder muscle in Sydney. Even Henin-Hardenne is nursing a minor ankle sprain.
''I think if we can get the players at the very top to all compete at the same time, it would be an extraordinarily exciting time for women's tennis,'' Davenport said. ''We haven't had that luck really in a while.''
Players have long complained that Rebound Ace, the rubberized hardcourt in use at the Australian Open and its tuneup events, is rough on the joints and that it can become sticky underfoot when the temperatures rise. Saturday's casualty was Carlos Moya, who turned his right ankle midway through the first set of the men's final in Sydney against Lleyton Hewitt and had to retire. It is unclear whether Moya, seeded seventh in Melbourne, will be healthy enough to face the American James Blake in the first round on Monday.
Roddick won the United States Open and finished last season at No. 1, but he is not yet a dominant figure. Since his victory in New York, he has failed to reach another final. He has the most daunting first-round test of the seeded men, drawing Fernando Gonzalez, a big-serving Chilean who has rarely met a shot he did not want to overhit. But he has beaten Roddick once on a hardcourt and was ranked as high as No. 13 last year.
Andre Agassi, 33, the defending champion, has not lost here since 1999, although he missed the tournament in 2002 with an injury. His first opponent, the Australian journeyman Todd Larkham, should not threaten that streak.
TENNIS
