HOLLYWOOD is a town ruled by conventional wisdom. Teenage boys rule at the box office. The most marketable actresses are both pretty and young. And female moviegoers are capricious and unpredictable.
But some nominations for the Golden Globe Awards next Sunday defy convention. Four of the five actresses up for best actress in a comedy are near 40 or older, including Diane Keaton, 58, who starred in ''Something's Gotta Give''; Jamie Lee Curtis, 45, in ''Freaky Friday''; Helen Mirren, 58, in ''Calendar Girls''; and Diane Lane, 38, in ''Under the Tuscan Sun.'' And unlike many star-driven epic movies produced last year, these films will actually make money.
The older woman, it seems, is this year's Hollywood ''It Girl.''
Actresses considered past their prime do not command the $20 million salaries of younger stars like Julia Roberts, whose ''Mona Lisa Smile'' opened in December to a disappointing $11.5 million in first-weekend ticket sales. Films featuring older actresses tend not to require expensive special effects, either, so budgets are more reasonable, often less than $40 million.
But just as important, it is older female moviegoers, a group largely ignored in the late 1990's, who are driving the popularity of these movies. Ticket sales among men and women in the over-40 set are up sharply in the past 15 years. Some analysts attribute this to baby boomers interested in seeing stars they grew up with. Others suggest that the woman in a couple is increasingly choosing the movie to see.
Either way, women, movie studio executives say, have become more vital for any mainstream success, turning out for movies like ''My Big Fat Greek Wedding'' and ''Chicago,'' which became huge hits.
''If you don't get the female demographic, you can't have a mainstream movie,'' said Amy Pascal, chairwoman of Columbia Pictures, which released ''Something's Gotta Give.''
Lynda Obst, a producer at Paramount Pictures and author of ''Hello, He Lied: And Other Truths From the Hollywood Trenches,'' added, ''Older women are saying, 'We're not dead yet.'''
Even more striking is that the appeal of big-name celebrities like Russell Crowe and Tom Cruise, who both starred in expensive epic battle movies in 2003, was not enough to draw women this year.
Dawn Taubin, president of domestic marketing at Warner Brothers Pictures, said that when the studio initially screened ''The Last Samurai'' for a test audience of women, it found little interest. The women said the movie was too much about war.
So, she said, Mr. Cruise went on daytime talk shows, including ''The Oprah Winfrey Show,'' ''The Ellen DeGeneres Show'' and ''The View.'' The studio softened the movie's image by playing up in ads the love affair between Mr. Cruise's character and a Japanese woman.
But the strategy only worked so well. The movie's domestic take thus far is $98 million, less than ''Freaky Friday,'' a remake of the 1972 Disney classic in which a mother and daughter switch bodies. The remake earned $110 million and cost a quarter as much as ''Samurai.''
Back in the 1930's and well into the 1950's, women's movies were more common, often portraying a woman in peril who is forced to overcome hardship and who learns she needs a man to be fulfilled. After the 1960's, women were portrayed as more free-spirited and independent, as Ms. Keaton showed in ''Annie Hall'' in 1977.
By the 1990's, strong female characters willing to avenge any slight, particularly one from a man, showed up more frequently. In 1991, ''Thelma and Louise'' became a cultural event and a box office hit. So, in 1996, did ''The First Wives Club,'' in which three women (one played by Ms. Keaton) punish their husbands who desert them for younger women.
In 1995, the percentage of women 18 or older who went to the movies at least once a month peaked at 27 percent, according to the National Association of Theater Owners. But in the late 1990's, that percentage declined as Hollywood delivered a string of female-oriented box-office disasters with predictable plots. Studios then began making more action films for teenage boys who see them in groups over and over.
Teenagers remain the largest segment of the audience, primarily because they are repeat customers. But in the past 15 years, the older set has gained ground. Tickets bought by men and women older than 40 grew to 32 percent of overall ticket purchases in 2002, from 20 percent in 1987, according to the National Association of Theater Owners.
By contrast, the percentage of tickets purchased by filmgoers from 12 to 39 years old dropped from 80 percent in 1987 to 67 percent in 2002. Much of that decline, studio executives say, is a result of new distractions, like video games and the Internet.
The latest crop of movies for older women is a new attempt to attract that audience.
Still, many in Hollywood complain about a dearth of parts for older actresses, even though the number of older actresses nominated for Golden Globe awards has increased in recent years. Until three years ago, only two or three older actresses were normally acknowledged in all the combined categories.
It is with profitability that the door opens a little wider, Ms. Obst said.
''Men and teenage boys have been driving the market and creative process for decades,'' she said. But after this past year, she said ''it will be easier for studios to green-light movies they are phobic about. This is really healthy for the industry.''
Aging Gracefully
