Howard Dean does not consider himself a reflective man. He avoids queries about how he has evolved over time, what he learned from a struggle, which moments were most meaningful. He focuses step by step by step.
But after two years of near-nonstop campaigning, on the eve of the election of his life, Dr. Dean finds himself marching forward almost on autopilot.
''Time was rolling by early on, but now, it just stands still,'' he said in an interview Friday night, near the close of yet another 15-hour day in a week that could well be considered the most difficult of his campaign.
''It's like climbing Mount Everest,'' he said. ''You go to this pitch, you think you've done a lot of work, and then you look up and there's another pitch. And you do more work, and then you look up, and 29,000 feet. It's an enormous learning curve.''
Indeed. When Dr. Dean announced in the fall of 2001 that he would run for president rather than seek a sixth term as governor of Vermont, few outside his state would have recognized him. Even a year later, as he recounts daily, when he went to visit his daughter at Yale on Parents' Weekend, her roommate's mother had to cover her laugh with a cough when she heard about his grand plans.
Now, Dr. Dean sits in a spot he never imagined, having amassed more money and collected more coveted endorsements than most of his rivals combined. He landed on the covers of Time and Newsweek simultaneously. Twice. What began as a symbolic quest to highlight the issues of universal health insurance and early childhood education somehow morphed into a broad call to change Washington, change America.
And for months, it has felt as if the Democratic presidential nomination was his to lose.
Yet in the past week, as polls showed the race tightening to a dead heat among four candidates, Dr. Dean and his campaign have struggled to maintain momentum, straining to corral an unwieldy entourage across Iowa's two-lane roads and toggling between the feisty outsider attack that fueled his rise and the feel-good unity message he tried to adopt to solidify his front-runner's status.
After struggling in a nationally televised debate Sunday, he came out swinging Monday morning, naming names of the ''Washington Democrats'' in the race who, he said, lacked the courage to stand up to President Bush. Despite his promise days before to hover above the fray, Dr. Dean explained at a hastily called news conference, he was tired of being a pincushion.
Then Iowa's most popular Democrat, Senator Tom Harkin -- one of many establishment politicians who have raced recently to endorse Dr. Dean's anti-establishment candidacy -- advised him to lighten up lest he alienate undecided voters. By Friday, Dr. Dean was promising, again, to stay positive.
He has seemed tired and distracted, stumbling over some words. He spent much of the past three days secluded with his senior staff in a bus as he criss-crossed the countryside between events in small towns, where some of the meeting rooms had space left over. He even borrowed a sweater from his deputy campaign manager to fit in better with his new roadie, Mr. Harkin, but instead of looking more comfortable, he seemed to miss having sleeves to roll above the elbow.
''I don't think he was quite ready for the intensity of it,'' Dave Nagle, a former chairman of the Iowa Democratic Party, said of the onslaught of attacks and media coverage Dr. Dean has faced. ''Initially, I think his reaction was not good. He failed to respond. He failed to respond with humor when he did.''
''For about a week, he wasn't very good, but I think we just got the old guy back,'' added Mr. Nagle, who endorsed Dr. Dean on Dec. 19 and has traveled frequently with him since. ''He seems to be catching his stride again.''
By 9 p.m. Friday, Dr. Dean was standing atop a wooden booth at the Paradise Cafe in Iowa Falls, pitching the Cliff's Notes version of his stump speech to the 75 people stuffed between soda fountain and juke box, the words ''Monday at 6:30'' -- caucus time -- stuck into every other sentence. After making his most direct plea yet, Dr. Dean handed the microphone to Mr. Harkin, who climbed onto the booth to urge his constituents to harangue their friends all weekend.
And Dr. Dean, the man who would be president, stood at Mr. Harkin's feet, slurping a strawberry milkshake.
Never mind the 12 pounds, mostly from chocolate-chip cookies, he has put on in the past few months of the campaign. Forget the cameras following his every move. In 109 days of campaigning here in Iowa since February 2002, Dr. Dean has rarely missed a milkshake opportunity. He even had one poured into a glass perched on his head last month at Stella's Diner in Urbandale.
Unsure whether to believe the lengthening list of polls showing his lead here and elsewhere slipping, or the ever-expanding cadre of consultants assuring him that his ground troops are unmatched, Dr. Dean stared into his glass. Strawberry is his favorite.
''This is sort of the moment of truth for everything we've been doing for the past two years,'' he had said in the interview that evening. ''Can we turn this enormous amount of energy we've built into votes? We think so. We'll see''
Since his surprise summer surge, Dr. Dean's campaign has been caught in near-constant growing pains, coupled with a clash between the political neophytes that birthed his grass-roots movement and the experienced hands who joined up as he moved ahead in the pack. Endorsements from 35 members of Congress, plus former Vice President Al Gore, bring with them conflicting theories of campaigning. Conference calls occupy more of every day.
Through Labor Day, Dr. Dean mostly flew commercial, with just one longtime Vermont aide, Kate O'Connor, the two bunking at supporters' homes. After Thanksgiving, his traveling team doubled to four, adding a press secretary from Capitol Hill and a senior adviser from one of the nation's largest unions. As the press corps quintupled to 55 for this week's Iowa bus trip, the staff swirling around Dr. Dean swelled to more than a dozen, including a former Secret Service officer eyeing traffic and crowds.
Which made lunchtime on Friday much more complicated.
The Iowa staff wanted Dr. Dean to make an impromptu stop at a Maid-Rite diner to pick up some of the state's famous loose-meat sandwiches -- and a classic photo-op. A senior person on the bus nixed the idea; schedule too tight. Finally, someone secretly suggested that Mr. Harkin, a Maid-Rite lover, suggest it, and the stop -- and the picture -- were made.
At the end of the day, as he snaked through the crowded cafe in Iowa Falls, Dr. Dean stripped his message to its essentials, which, essentially, was: ''Monday at 6:30.''
When a woman introduced herself as a native of Fairhaven, Vt., he asked, ''Ever been to caucus before?'' To a paralyzed woman for whom his supporters had raised $5,000 to buy a new wheelchair, he said, ''Do you know where the caucus is?''
Shake drunk, Dr. Dean headed to the bus and stopped to meet two women -- ''Hope you come to caucus. Monday at 6:30.'' -- on the darkened sidewalk.
At his side among the 20 assorted hangers-on sliding along the dangerous black ice was the former Secret Service agent, one hand a few inches from his back, in case of a fall.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
