NEW JERSEY is in bad shape. And I'm not speaking metaphorically.
Every once in a while some smart aleck discovers that if you do a computer search on the phrase ''the size of New Jersey'' or any of its cousins (''the shape of New Jersey,'' ''as big as New Jersey''), you get scads of hits.
In fact, I have a vague memory that the comic Robert Klein was doing a routine based on that premise back in the mid-80's, before anyone had ever Googled anything.
Anyway, the smart aleck doing this experiment is usually content to note how many things have been compared in size or shape to New Jersey and be mildly amused. Not me. I'm not amused; I'm alarmed.
That's because in the last few years the comparisons have taken an ugly turn. There's the killer asteroid, for instance. And the dead zone. And the bruises.
New Jersey is not the leader among states in terms of being used as a measuring device -- Rhode Island and Texas are well ahead of us -- but we're right up there.
Blame or thank Israel: our state is apparently roughly its size, and anyone who has ever wanted to make a point good, bad or indifferent about that country has felt compelled to mention this.
Our 7,417 square miles (about seven times the size of Rhode Island!) also make us roughly as big as Swaziland, Slovenia and the Delta/Greely School District in Alaska. (Note to bus drivers: do not apply for a job there.) But that's benign stuff. What bothers me is that we're also the size of Kleopatra.
Kleopatra is an asteroid whose image was captured in 2000 by sophisticated radar signals. Those signals determined that Kleopatra is shaped like a dog bone and, as news accounts said again and again, roughly the size of New Jersey.
Though at the moment Kleopatra is safely in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, who's to say it couldn't go spinning out of orbit and crash into Earth, ending life as we know it? ''Asteroid the Size of New Jersey to Kill Us All Next Tuesday.''
That's the kind of publicity our state doesn't need.
When Kleopatra hits, perhaps it will land in the dead zone off the coast of Louisiana that was caused by pollutants carried into the sea by the Mississippi River. It's an area devoid of aquatic life, and it is, of course, the size of New Jersey.
Did I mention United States cropland loss in the decade ending in 1992? T.S.O.N.J.
A visit to a chat group involving sexual spanking (for research purposes only) turns up an alarming mention of our state in relation to a bruise the size of New Jersey. But for additional details -- this being a family newspaper -- you'll have to look it up yourself.
Elsewhere are references to bruises the shape of New Jersey, and on www.spamhaiku.com someone has crafted a multiverse tale involving the ''Star Wars'' characters in which Darth plunks Luke with a can of Spam, leaving a bump ''as big as New Jersey.''
There are hangovers and hemorrhoids and soggy diapers our size, and in one chat group's discussion of the vital question ''Why People Are Jealous of Hooters Girls,'' someone says that Hooters customers ''tend to have stomachs the size of New Jersey.''
Positive references do not seem to exist. No one has ''a philanthropic streak as big as New Jersey'' or ''a smile the shape of New Jersey.'' From which we must conclude that being the shape and the size that we are is simply bad.
So I'm going to make a radical suggestion: we jettison Somerset and Gloucester Counties. Sell them if anyone will buy (''Budget Crisis Solved!''); if not, simply ''release'' them, as baseball teams do with players they don't want.
I pick Somerset because it's landlocked. Without it, we will have a nice, big hole in the middle of the state, more or less guaranteeing that nothing will ever again be described as being the shape of New Jersey, unless it's a weird S-shaped doughnut.
I pick Gloucester because that's where Gibbstown is, and according to The Associated Press, Gibbstown is the residence of a man who earlier this month stole two snakes from a pet store, tried to drive home with them in his pocket and sustained a bite ''to his groin area.'' More publicity that we don't need.
Yes, I know, some people will be upset by my proposed changes. Get over it; when that giant dog bone hits, it won't matter much anyway.
JERSEY
