ADVOCATES for immigrants had reason to celebrate last month. After nearly two years of wending its way through the government, a City Council bill that requires the Human Resources Administration to provide interpretation and translation services became law. But now some of these same advocates are criticizing the fine print; they say the new law has left speakers of South Asian languages like Bengali, Hindi, Urdu and Punjabi stranded.
Under the new law, documents emanating from the agency, which administers public assistant and food stamp programs, will be translated into Spanish, Russian, Chinese, Korean, Haitian-Creole and Arabic only.
Partha Banerjee, a columnist for the Bengali-language weekly Akhon Samoy, faulted the choices in a column published late last month. ''It's astonishing and arbitrary and needs to be fixed,'' he said last week, adding that part of the blame lay in the South Asian community's failure to organize behind the issue.
The backers of the law, many with gleaming pro-immigrant credentials, defend the legislation. ''Ultimately, the point was to be as inclusive as possible while accommodating the fiscal concerns that the administration and other members of the council,'' said Councilman John C. Liu of Queens, one of the law's sponsors. ''And these six languages covered the most people.''
Still, resentment runs deep. ''I think it's essential legislation, but it excludes my community,'' said Annetta Seecharran, executive director of South Asian Youth Action, based in Elmhurst, Queens. ''Especially in the post-9/11 era, it feels like another slap in the face.''
Although translation of documents is limited to six languages, the city must still provide oral interpreters in all languages. The agency already provides live and phone interpretation services in more than 100 languages, said its spokeswoman, Lisi de Bourbon.
The final list of six languages covered by the new law was derived from sources that included the latest census and a survey of food-stamp recipients, according to Andrew Friedman, co-director of Make the Road by Walking, a nonprofit group that worked for years on behalf of the legislation. The languages found to be most common among respondents nearly match the six languages cited in the law, except that Arabic replaced French. Bengali, at 16th, was the top South Asian language.
Determining how many people speak a language like Bengali is tricky. The 2000 census showed only 19,000 Bangladeshis in the city, but community leaders like Mujib Rahman, president of the Bangladesh Society of New York, said there were hundreds of thousands of South Asians who spoke the language.
SETH KUGEL
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: SOUTH ASIAN NEW YORK
