FOR developers who build multifamily housing in New Jersey, there is one particularly dicey decision to be made before shovels hit dirt: condos or rentals? With the rental market still somewhat depressed -- even along the Hudson River Gold Coast -- and the condo market still buoyed by low interest rates, a logical assumption would be that for-sale units are the best way to go right now.
Not necessarily, say a number of large developers. Some cite their particular company's need for a diverse portfolio. Others see a niche in providing whatever is least available in a given community. And some, alert to signs that the overall economy is improving, see rentals as the next wave.
Take the REMI Companies of Hoboken. It began by specializing in condos a decade ago when that was going against the tide in most communities, particularly along the Gold Coast, which was then rapidly developing, said REMI's principal, Erik A. Kaiser. But about 18 months ago, the company began planning a 100-unit apartment building on a waterfront site in Hudson County that its market analysts deemed particularly attractive to renters.
Then, when rentals were suffering during the worst of the two-year economic downturn and the condo market became exceedingly hot, Mr. Kaiser said, the plan was switched to condos. Now, as the foundation is about to be laid, the project is being reconsidered as a rental building, he said.
''All of our current data says the rental market is starting to heat up,'' said Mr. Kaiser, who did not want to identify the site of the 100-unit project because REMI is renegotiating with lenders. ''By next summer, I see an extremely hot rental market. The job market is heating up; Wall Street firms are hiring again. Bonuses are up. There is job growth throughout the market for the 20-to-30 age group, and they are the renters,'' said Mr. Kaiser, only 33 himself.
He predicted that as the members of the college class of 2005 graduate and are hired, rentals will surge. ''Developers need to be preparing for that now, 18 months out,'' said Mr. Kaiser. ''Some developers have always stuck with rental, because it's generally a reliable income producer, but during the last two years, the rental guys who got hurt have had to smarten up really fast.''
Mr. Kaiser said his company ''sat on the sideline'' for about six months during the downturn and then decided to ''put a lot of condos into the pipeline.'' REMI currently has $150 million in condominium projects planned, he said. But Mr. Kaiser said he worried about the downside to that. ''My fear is that the stock market comes back and interest rates go up,'' he said, ''and then, what happens to buyers?''
REMI has done well with a 19-unit, high-end condo called the Crossing that it built last year in Hoboken. There are only a handful of two- to four-bedroom units left to sell, although at $335,000 to $910,000, they are relatively pricey for Hoboken.
Mr. Kaiser said REMI designs all of its buildings for easy conversion from for-sale to rental or vice versa. ''The main thing,'' he said, ''is you need to be superlightning fast on your feet.''
Other developers agreed with that, but said it led them to a variety of conclusions.
The KOR Companies, a diversified builder, is about to open a preconstruction sales office for 113 upscale condominiums in Jersey City that were originally planned as rental apartments. Construction is to begin in March at the project, called Montgomery Greene, a 19-story building featuring lofts, studios and one- and two-bedroom units that will also include 4,000 square feet of ground-floor retail space and a parking garage.
Prices for the condos will range from the low $200,000's to the low $600,000's -- and higher for penthouses -- said KOR's president, Harry Kantor, whose firm is a partner with a private real estate company, Time Equities, on the project.
About two and a half years ago when planning began for Montgomery Greene, the rental market in Hoboken was sizzling, Mr. Kantor said, and it was designed as a rental building. ''Quickly after 9/11 happened, a lot things changed,'' he said. ''The paradigm shifted, as they say, and the rental market softened. There was a drop of between 15 and 20 percent in rentals. It became difficult to analyze how long it would take for vacancies to be absorbed, and difficult to finance construction of new rental units.''
New Jersey's Gold Coast has been a developing center for high-rent apartments for about a decade, he observed. ''But suddenly, there was a compelling vacuum created in the market,'' Mr. Kantor said. ''Except for a few low-rise condo buildings, there was no product to own.''
KOR moved quickly in late 2001 to have its architects, Lindemon Winckelmann Deupree Martin &amp; Associates, begin redesigning Montgomery Greene, upgrading amenities, increasing ceiling heights and rearranging layouts for more open views of Manhattan. ''We wanted the people who come in to really feel this is something superior,'' Mr. Kantor said, ''something they want to own.''
It has taken about 18 months to reconfigure the building plans and to refinance the project as condos, he said. But Mr. Kantor said it is still an excellent time for creating a new condo building in the Gold Coast area, with interest rates still at record lows, motivating people to buy rather than rent.
Another huge condo project -- 832 units -- is in the early stages of planning for Hoboken. Pinnacle Downtown, a subsidiary of the Pinnacle Group of Companies, which has a contract to purchase the former Maxwell House factory site on the waterfront off Frank Sinatra Boulevard, is proposing a $500 million mixed-use development with 210,000 square feet of retail and professional office space and 1,500 parking spaces, near the PATH train and ferry stations.
Meanwhile, the Applied Property Company, based in Hoboken, has a number of high-rise multifamily projects under way or in the planning stages -- some for-sale units, some rental units, and in some cases both types of units in the same project.
''It's tricky,'' said Michael Barry, president of the concern, the homebuilding arm of the Applied Companies. ''The more option time we can give ourselves with respect to deciding on condo or rental, the better. Once you decide, construction takes a year to two years, and a lot can happen. The crucial thing for us is to maintain a good balance between the two.''
At its multiphase waterfront development in Hoboken, the Shipyard, Applied began construction of a new building called the Sovereign last spring -- and is still weighing its options.
''We just finished a rental building, the Independence, at the Shipyard,'' Mr. Barry noted. ''We have the two Constitution buildings -- one rental and one condo. We are now considering whether to go condo with the Sovereign or convert the Constitution rental to condo.''
Because of the time that construction takes, Mr. Barry said he was leaning toward converting the existing Constitution to condo and building the Sovereign as rental. ''The Constitution building is a known entity in a marketplace we are familiar with right now,'' he said. ''We could, in a much shorter time frame than it will take to build the Sovereign, go to sale. Then, if the for-sale market continues strong relative to rental while the Sovereign is under construction, maybe we would switch.''
One drawback to converting an existing rental building to condo, though, Mr. Barry said, is that property taxes typically rise sharply.
In Long Branch, an oceanfront community in southern New Jersey, Mr. Barry said, Applied has been marketing 280 town homes and condos that are being built in partnership with Matzel &amp; Mumford, another large home developer. Two blocks away, Applied is putting up 320 rental units. Long Branch is in the midst of town-sponsored redevelopment, Mr. Barry said, and town authorities believe there is a need for both rental and condominium housing.
At its massive Port Liberté development in Jersey City, Mr. Barry said, ''The market has plenty of rental, and we are continuing to build and sell town homes and condos.''
MEANWHILE, Applied has nearly completed construction of 300 rental units in New Brunswick, in a joint venture with Matrix and Roseland, two other companies. ''That particular market has a strong demand for rental,'' he said. ''There is a lot of corporate presence and university presence that generate a good demand for rental units.''
The Kushner Companies maintains rental properties as the core of its business, no matter what the economy is doing, said the managing partner, Jeffrey Freireich, because they provide reliable cash flow. Late last year, Kushner completed construction of the Mews at Annandale, an 18-unit complex of three-bedroom rental units in the historic section of Clinton Township in Hunterdon County -- the only rental project for miles around, according to Mr. Freireich.
On the other hand, Kushner recently began construction of the Horizons in East Brunswick, 148 units for ''active adults'' -- meaning tenants must be at least age 55 -- as condominiums. The project was first planned as rentals, and the switch was made just before construction began.
''In that situation, we find real strength in the condo market,'' Mr. Freireich said. ''We also own other projects in the East Brunswick area -- we recently purchased Renaissance at Cranbury Crossing -- and we think the new project presents a good opportunity to balance our portfolio.'' Renaissance at Cranbury Crossing, with 182 units, including some town houses, is another condo project for tenants age 55 and over.
''You have to take it case by case,'' he said. ''There's no other way to do it.''
In the Region | New Jersey
