I DRINK martinis, gimlets, too. I thought that was living the gin lifestyle until I heard that Bombay Sapphire, the blue-bottled premium gin label, was introducing Infusion.
Infusion is a gin fragrance, which has started appearing this month in duty-free shops around the world, including Heathrow in London, Charles de Gaulle in Paris, and Kennedy in New York. There is also a shower gel and moisturizing lotion, which give new meaning to the idea of bathtub gin. And there are scented candles too, if you want to Infuse yourself at home like an olive in a cocktail glass.
The $25 fragrance and $19 candle gift sets, which include a bottle of gin, are a limited-edition test in what is called the ''travel retail'' segment of the luxury-goods market (a k a duty-free shops), to determine the strength of interest in the new products. Bacardi's 8 Millennium, a $750 crystal bottle of rum, was rolled out with success the same way four years ago and subsequently became available in liquor stores. Bacardi Ltd. owns Bombay Sapphire.
As a friend put it when I shared the news about Infusion, there are easier ways to smell as if you've been drinking.
Infusion is not actually gin, but is based on the same 10 botanical elements used in the 18th-century recipe that flavors Bombay Sapphire, which includes Italian juniper, Spanish lemons, and Moroccan coriander. Apparently you don't get the Welsh lake water that the gin is made with. When I thought about it, I realized that most other spirits, like the big brown liquors, whiskey and bourbon, or Cognac, probably wouldn't work. You would smell like an unflamed crêpe suzette.
The Infusion fragrance was developed by Geza Schoen, a German scent specialist based in Hamburg and Paris. Mr. Schoen has more typically worked with fashion houses like Comme des Garçons, Diesel and Boudicca, and cosmetics companies like Body Shop and Ren in London. Infusion is produced by Expressions Parfumée in Paris.
I called some in, to try, and spritzed myself before going out on Wednesday night. I thought briefly about splashing myself with vermouth too, and presenting myself as the perfect martini, but stopped at the dose of gin.
At my first stop, an acquaintance of mine who is a doctor, when asked to identify the strong scent I was now carrying conspicuously on my person like a flask in an outside pocket, said that she thought the smell was ''very familiar,'' but couldn't place it. That worried me, given that she is a doctor. (How familiar was she with the smell of gin?)
But Infusion, which has a powerful gin presence coming out of the bottle, softens or ''dries down,'' as perfume people say, to a vigorous citrus and spice scent that entrenches itself in your skin. I smelled like a Bombay-sponsored after-party well into the night and finally showered before going to bed.
Whose idea -- I'll let the public vote on whether it's a good one -- was Infusion?
José Chao, vice president for travel marketing at Bacardi Global Brands, said on Thursday that the concept originated in 2002 in London at the Sanderson, Ian Schrager's boutique hotel, over cocktails -- what else? -- as a response to a challenge to pour fresh excitement into the Bombay Sapphire brand.
For the record, Mr. Chao currently has two seven-ton fish tanks with 600 blue Brazilian fish in each traveling the world, as an advertising display for Bombay Sapphire. The tanks are interactive -- the opaque glass sides, laminated with film triggered by sensors, turn transparent as curious travelers approach them. (The association of ''drink like a fish'' is unintentional.)
Southpaw Creative, Mr. Chao's London advertising agency, hit on fragrance as a category that, much like premium spirits, was a best-selling product indefinite enough and stylish enough to hold large amounts of imaginative promotion.
''It was in keeping with the lifestyle,'' Mr. Chao said of his demographic target, international business travelers, who are generally affluent, in their late 20's to early 40's, and who drink.
''It's the cocktail consumer, 100 percent -- cool dressers, nice clothes,'' he said. ''They use fragrances. We saw the possibilities of bringing together two now distinct categories.'' Fragrance and liquor, not accidentally, are also the duty-free world's two top sales performers.
Philip West, brand director for Beefeater gin and Wet for Beefeater, its premium label, and a competitor of Bombay Sapphire, was admiring.
''I think it's very clever,'' he said of Infusion. ''The target consumer has an aspirational lifestyle, and these nontraditional ideas play well.'' Wet for Beefeater has looked into fragrance, clothing and other brand extensions and licensing opportunities.
But Benoit Garbe, the brand manager for Tanqueray No. Ten, another of the recent designer gins, is keeping his eye on the prize -- the liquor itself and its drinkers.
''We're not about selling image, but being with the right people at the right places,'' he said. ''We're not branching out.''
Mr. Chao and his creative group met closely, over the two-year development with the Bombay Sapphire brand managers, and encountered predictable skepticism. Mr. Chao put the number of skeptics as high as 20 percent of those people in the discussions.
Bombay Sapphire also went back and forth 10 or 11 times with Mr. Schoen, the scent specialist.
''There was explicit concern that you not smell like you've been drinking,'' Mr. Chao said. He also insisted that it was not a brand extension, but a test. But he added, ''Hopefully two years from now, we'll be looking at something different. If people want to use this fragrance, I'm sure the company will revisit it. The value of a trademark is its ability to fit into any category.''
I look forward to gin jeans.
