THERE was a time when the oddest thing about Michael Jackson was his shiny white glove. Kids met at the mall food court to figure it out. Why just one glove? Man, that is so weird.
The world has moved on, and Mr. Jackson's world, even farther on. It would seem those days are long gone. But wait, look over there, near the crosstown shuttle could it be?
Peel away the streets of Manhattan, as a plastic surgeon would a face, and there he is, moonwalking his way through the Midtown subway stations. There is Steven Clark, the New York transit system's Michael Jackson impersonator. It is, presumably, a difficult time to be Michael Jackson right now. So what is it like to be someone who pretends to be him?
''The more controversy that goes on with Michael Jackson, the more popularity I get,'' said Mr. Clark, 31, who is single and lives in the Bronx. ''If I want to come out here and dance like Michael Jackson for the rest of my life, that's what I'm going to do.''
March 1983: Mr. Clark was about 11 years old when the ''Billie Jean'' video burst onto television screens, and it is that Michael Jackson he reminds us of: the simple black blouse over a white T-shirt, the short pants, the fedora pitched forward, the ringlets framing a smooth, handsome face. The glove.
Mr. Clark moved to New York from Chicago three years ago and said he earns $200 to $300 a day. Crowds gather for what amounts to time travel. He moonwalks over the years, the lawsuit, the sleepovers, the balcony, the indictment, the handcuffs. Girls take his picture, giggle, then run off.
It is more than a job to him. He is there not just to impersonate, but also to represent. ''I am not the one to judge Michael Jackson,'' he said. ''No matter what Michael Jackson did, it is between him and God.''
A lot has changed for the King of Pop since young Steven sat in front of the television. There were the leather years, the generalissimo-epaulet years. The surgical mask, the stubbly new chin, the bruise on his arm that he blames on the cops.
''I think that's Michael,'' Mr. Clark said. ''I'm used to Michael changing, changing, changing. I'm not going to change my outfit, and I'm not going to change my looks. This is me.''
November 2003: Mr. Clark is again in front of his television, watching his hero being booked on child molestation charges. In the subway stations, people have been yelling smart remarks, mean remarks, saying there are other routines he should work into his act if he wants to really be Jacko.
''The next day, I came out and gave, in my mind, the best show possible of any Michael Jackson performer,'' he said. ''I took it to the people and let them know I'm not afraid. One day I'm going to meet that man. I still love him. I've still got his back.''
MICHAEL WILSON
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: URBAN STUDIES/MOONWALKING
