Computer Associates Could Face Civil Penalties
The Securities and Exchange Commission has alerted Computer Associates International (NYSE: CA) of Islandia that it is considering enforcing civil penalties against the company for its accounting procedures during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2000, the company said on Monday.
Computer Associates acknowledged in October that it had booked revenues prematurely in past quarters and accepted the resignations of three senior financial executives, including Ira Zar, the chief financial officer.
Charles Wang, the company's chairman and a founder, resigned in November 2002.
The company is presently cooperating with a continuing S.E.C. investigation into its past financial practices and with a separate Justice Department criminal investigation.
Sanjay Kumar, Mr. Wang's successor as chairman, has said repeatedly that the company has overhauled the way its contracts are structured and how the company accounts for the income the contracts produce.
On Tuesday, Nancy Li, Mr. Wang's wife, resigned as chief executive of ICanSP, a wholly owned Computer Associates subsidiary.
Robert Gordon, a spokesman for the company, said that her departure was voluntary. About 50 people work for ICanSP, which develops software for the information technology sector.
Mr. Gordon said that ''several people left'' this week along with Ms. Li, but that he did not know the exact number.
He said that it was Computer Associates' policy not to disclose a subsidiary's revenues.
The company has not announced Ms. Li's replacement.
Adecco Delays Issuing Results
Adecco S.A. (NYSE: ADO), the global employment services company based in Zurich, said Monday it was delaying the release of its financial results for 2003 because of problems with accounting and financial controls in the company's North American operations and elsewhere.
The North American headquarters are in Melville.
The company said its audit and finance committee had appointed an outside lawyer to conduct an investigation and report back to the board. The company did not say when it expected to file its annual results.
Compiled by Warren Strugatch
E-mail: libiz@nytimes.com
