PERFORMING arts organizations have generally adhered to a genteel style of marketing: tasteful rather than ''tastes great.'' But in the face of declining funds, some are starting to look elsewhere for marketing magic, adopting models once thought to be better suited to the Mets than the Met.
Aggressive corporate marketing techniques are becoming more acceptable, according to Ben Cameron, executive director of the Theater Communications Group, a national organization for nonprofit professional theaters based in New York City. The Cincinnati Playhouse on the Park, for example, has displayed Mercedeses and Saabs outside the theater as part of local sponsorship for specific plays in its season.
Some are beginning to take it to the next level. Stuart Layne, a sports marketing consultant in Andover, Mass., is adapting the assertive marketing techniques of basketball courts, football fields and baseball diamonds to the theater world. Though purists may fear the arrival of Pepsi or Coke cans on theater sets, or actors wearing Nike swooshes on their costumes, Mr. Layne, 50, says there are plenty of more subtle sports marketing concepts that can be integrated judiciously into the performing arts.
Mr. Layne left the Boston Celtics in 2002 after more than nine years as marketing vice president to form Seven 2 Sports Marketing. He now works with clients like Reebok and Bill Russell, the former Celtics' basketball star for whom he is arranging marketing opportunities. But also on his client list is a nonprofit performing arts center, the North Shore Music Theater at Dunham Woods, in Beverly, Mass.
He became involved with the theater last spring as officials there considered the fact that its 50th anniversary season was less than a year away. It turned to him because it, like many other arts organizations, was experiencing a decline in revenue from corporate sponsors.
John E. Alexander, the theater's director for external relations, makes no apologies for the move. ''We're bringing the sky-box mentality to the arts,'' he said. ''We feel we can deliver an audience and value per sponsorship that in a lot of ways is better than what they are getting from the Red Sox.''
Like a successful sports franchise, the North Shore Music Theater has a loyal fan base that appeals to corporate sponsors. Although the number of subscribers has been shrinking slightly, its 1,800-seat theater in the round annually attracts about 385,000 spectators, making it the second-most-popular performing arts organization in the Boston area, after the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
The theater presents many concerts each year, and 27,000 people renew subscriptions annually for a package that includes six musicals as well as the annual production of ''A Christmas Carol.'' The audience is upscale, educated and primarily female.
''The Celtics will draw 700,000 fans to the Fleet Center this year,'' Mr. Layne said. ''The theater is drawing 400,000, and the cost-effectiveness of reaching that audience -- a more upscale audience -- is terrific.''
Last year for the theater, Mr. Layne created a campaign that has already attracted major sponsors like Comcast and the Chrysler unit of DaimlerChrysler. For four months last year, for example, a gleaming new Chrysler Pacifica sat on the grounds outside the theater during musicals. People were invited to sit in the car and were directed to a local dealership if they wanted a test drive.
Thomas Barenboim, owner of the local dealership, Clark Chrysler/Jeep in Methuen, Mass., says the effort produced results. ''DaimlerChrysler spent $1.3 billion last year on sports advertising,'' he said. ''But these people who come to theater events are an audience I would love to get to my dealership. They say, 'I never thought about a Chrysler before.' But after seeing that Pacifica at the theater, a lot of them came in to take a test drive.''
Mr. Layne also persuaded the cable company Comcast, which was trying to establish a presence in New England, to sign on as the main sponsor of the theater's musical series that starts in March. ''We'll have opportunities in the theater to present the Comcast brand and demonstrate our products and services to the audience that comes to the theater,'' said John Fouhy, director of sales and marketing for Comcast's northern New England region.
Comcast will set up kiosks and product demonstrations in the theater lobby, and will use the V.I.P. lounge to entertain clients. Comcast will also sponsor the theater's education program, which exposes 100,000 students in New England annually to the arts through workshops in the schools and low-priced tickets.
Mr. Layne says he is just getting started. Although he would not identify companies until the deals were set, he said a vodka company might sponsor a martini bar inside the theater, while a beer maker might sponsor a beer garden outside during the spring and summer.
Sponsors already have private parties for their customers in the V.I.P. lounge, and Mr. Layne is planning a sponsored sweepstakes. In it, customers will have a chance to win a walk-on role in a show, in much in the same way sports teams select fans to participate in halftime contests at games.
''I used the word 'fans' when I spoke to them,'' Mr. Layne said of his initial meeting with Mr. Alexander and with Jon Kimbell, the artistic director. ''That's not a word you usually hear when you talk about theatergoers, but these are people who know and love the theater, the actors, the shows, and they are willing to wait in line for tickets.''
OTHER nonprofit arts organizations are catching on. Jackie Gedonius, director of marketing at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn, N.J., said that she was exploring relationships with sports marketers. ''They are doing what we want to be doing,'' Ms. Gedonius said of the North Shore Music Theater. ''Things are changing, and this is an area where we have a lot to offer corporate sponsors.''
Mr. Cameron of the Theater Communications Group in New York agreed that the approach used in sports was a logical one for the arts. "People have always assumed that the sports audience and the arts audience are two entirely different entities,'' he said. ''But our surveys have shown that people who go to professional sports events are the most likely to attend professional arts events. It's about having a robust social life, and as more people realize that there is a crossover of these two audiences, we'll see this type of marketing increase.''
Private Sector
