For the grade school pupils crowded backstage last Sunday before the Bronx Opera Company's English-language performance of the rarely produced ''L'Equivoco Stravagante,'' by Rossini, it was your basic lesson in stringed instrument sizing.
''Sometimes violins have a tendency to overeat,'' said the company's founder, Michael Spierman, standing next to a violinist. ''What happens when you overeat?''
''You get full,'' said Daniel Maxfield, 8, a third grader at Public School 19.
Undeniably. But not quite the answer Mr. Spierman was looking for. ''And then you eat a few times?'' he continued.
''You get fat,'' said Daniel.
In other words, Mr. Spierman suggested, you become a viola. Out came the viola player to demonstrate.
''Sometimes they really overeat,'' he said, ''they get much fatter, and they turn out like . . .''
Enter the cellist.
''You couldn't tuck that thing under your chin,'' said Mr. Spierman, and the cellist, Jim Pedersen, tried, to the sound of laughter.
This is one of the many tricks the silver-haired, slightly hobbitlike Mr. Spierman uses to demystify opera for Bronx schoolchildren.
The Bronx Opera Company, now in its 36th season, has worked with the borough's public schools for the last seven years. Cast members and musicians make pre- and post-performance appearances at the schools, give students free tickets and conduct backstage tours minutes before the shows, staged at the Lovinger Theater at Lehman College.
Third grader Kristina Thaqi, who attended with her brother and parents, previewed the opera's plot for another visitor: ''Well, there is this lady. She's going to marry a guy that's rich, but she doesn't like the guy. The lady's friend tells him she's a man, but she's not. She marries the guy that she does love.''
After the backstage tour, the children settled into their seats. All were quiet, a relief to the mostly elderly regular crowd.
Maureen Cooney, a third grade teacher at P.S. 19, marveled at how attentive some of her students were. She attributed this to the performers having visited the school, in the Woodlawn section of the Bronx. ''It's so wonderful when they come in; the kids get so excited,'' she said. ''Some of the kids you wouldn't have expected say they're interested in opera.''
Ellie Diaz-Walters, a music teacher and Project Arts coordinator at P.S. 94, said that all this took time. ''The reason they take so well to it now is that a lot of them are experienced operagoers,'' she said. ''They've been seeing Mr. Spierman since the third grade. It becomes infectious. They can't wait to go to the opera.''
During the intermission, Genesis Rosario, 9, a fourth grader at P.S. 94, in the Norwood section of the Bronx, said that she had learned one important opera lesson: ''They sing the words instead of saying them.'' Her mother, Sara Mota, said that getting involved with the opera was a great experience for the children. ''This really motivates them,'' she said in Spanish.
Not everyone gave rave reviews. When Laura Bennett, 11, a sixth grader, said she had found the opera to be funny, Kaitlin Finnerty, three years her junior, interjected: ''It's funny,'' said Kaitlin, ''if you understand it.''
The opera company has been paying for the program out of its own general fund since it lost a foundation grant for the school work last year. It is currently looking for a new benefactor.
Last week, Mr. Spierman and a few performers conducted follow-up sessions at the schools. On Tuesday, at P.S. 94, he was joined in the school's auditorium by the stage director, the pianist and two of the leads.
When he opened the floor to questions, a sea of raised hands wiggled. Why does Buralicchio, the buffoonish rich suitor, wear high heels? (It was the style at the time.) Why does Ernestina wear a wig? (Dark hair goes better with her outfit.) Jessica Santiago, a fourth grader, asked September Bigelow, who played Ernestina, ''Did you ever make a mistake?''
''Yes, it happens all the time,'' said Ms. Bigelow. ''I think a lot of the best performers are not the ones who are perfect, but those who make a mistake and recover from it well.''
After the presentation, Jessica, 9, lamented that she had been able to go only to the Friday performance at Lehman. She liked the romance and the dancing and wanted to go back on Sunday, but it was not to be. ''My mother wouldn't go with me,'' she said. ''She said my baby sister would start crying.''
Mr. Spierman and the four members of the company who accompanied him were happy with the presentation. ''People always ask, in a frightened way, who is going to be in the audience in the next generation?'' he said. ''It's a very haunting question. But the question has a very clear answer when you're in this auditorium. It's exhilarating.''
Bronx Journal
