A few years ago, while waiting with a friend for a canoe to ferry us across the Upsalquitch River in the Canadian big woods near Campbellton, New Brunswick, I stood stupefied on a primitive landing as a pair of Jet Skis -- loud, sleek and festooned with the obligatory fluorescent graphics -- came blasting out of the stillness.
It wasn't that I particularly disliked Jet Skis. I just couldn't imagine why anyone would want to ride one up 25 miles of rocky, swift, transparent salmon river that has always symbolized natural beauty and rustic solitude. Nor could I think of many machines more out of place on the Upsalquitch than these aquatic versions of motocross bikes. But there they were, alien as hallucinations and symbolic of a motorized recreation trend that is coming into increasing conflict with other forms of forest use, as well as some fundamental values associated with wild places.
This is a particularly vital consideration in a nation that has a special place for all things motorized, one that has recently embarked on an extended, emotional roller coaster ride through the numerous conflicts arising from the Clinton-era Roadless Area Conservation Rule. Indeed, very little has been done to address incursions into roadless areas, and similar public lands, by off-road vehicles, or ORV's, for short.
''I think it's fair to call ORV usage in roadless areas a big-ticket issue,'' said Jim Range, an architect of the wetlands provisions of the Clean Water Act in the 1970's who is now chairman of the Theodore Roosevelt Conservation Partnership. ''To some folks, the idea of ORV usage in a roadless area amounts to a non sequitur. But in many roadless areas, ORV access points and routes are already grandfathered in, and ORV users have established themselves as stakeholders in the debate on how we manage our public lands.''
The recent widely publicized controversy over continued snowmobile use in Yellowstone National Park may be just the tip of an iceberg whose exact dimensions are still undetermined. (The Bush administration, which has opposed an outright ban, put new limits on the number of machines allowed in the park for this winter.)
The Wilderness Society, a strong critic of the unregulated use of off-road vehicles, says that the United States has at least 11 million of them and that 93 percent of the 262 million acres of Western land under the Bureau of Land Management is open to some form of off-road use. In Utah alone, the society says, 94 percent of the 22 million acres under the federal bureau's jurisdiction is open to vehicles ranging from dirt bikes to Jeeps.
The International Snowmobile Manufacturers Association says the United States has 130,000 miles of signed and maintained snowmobile trails. In places like the Florida Keys, where fragile reefs and fertile wetlands abound, water scooters are under increasing scrutiny for the damage they -- or the access they provide -- can cause.
''Motorized recreation has outstripped the ability of agencies to manage it,'' said Rollin Sparrowe, president of the Wildlife Management Institute, whose members are professionals in the field. ''And there's a whole new generation of people using the forest who have never used any other means of access but a machine.''
Proponents of regulation make their case on numerous fronts, including their definition of the wilderness experience, concerns over erosion and pollution, the destruction of imperiled species and the spread of invasive species.
Understandably, users of off-road vehicles feel beleaguered by the criticism, with many arguing that they pose no threat to the underlying values of wilderness areas.
''You can see the writing on the wall,'' said Verlyn Parker, 68, a retired Idaho schoolteacher who uses his all-terrain vehicle to reach the backcountry for hunting. Parker has consulted with the Forest Service on how best to manage off-road vehicles. ''Too many people are getting off and making new trails, causing all kinds of problems. We need to get trails designated and accept some restrictions.''
Reacting to the debate over the Roadless Area Conservation Rule, Range, the wetlands protection expert, helped create the Forest Roads Working Group. That organization brought together diverse and sometimes clashing groups; one of the organization's main objectives was to affirm the values underlying the roadless rule, whatever disputes it unleashed. Many prominent environmental groups, including the Wilderness Society, refused to join, but the recommendations the Forest Roads Working Group ultimately issued were broadly welcomed. Among other things, the organization called for a national approach to managing off-road vehicles and curtailing any negative impact on roadless area values and characteristics.
''This really is about a clash of values,'' Sparrowe of the wildlife professionals' group said. ''You have people who cherish solitude, exercise and backcountry traditions versus people who have grown accustomed to complete freedom of motorized access.''
Bill Dart of the Blue Ribbon Coalition, a group that supports snowmobiling in Yellowstone, sees room for compromise. ''We are not in favor of route proliferation,'' he said. ''We support limited use and want to preserve our historic, traditional access.''
OUTDOORS
