IT'S time to come clean, and no longer live in denial. I'm man enough to admit it: Yes, I've developed a real liking for traffic reports.
Maybe it's a suburban thing. Maybe it's because in working part time for the last two years, I'm at home more, telecommuting more often, and taking the train into Manhattan from Westchester only two to three times a week.
From the moment the clock-radio awakes me each morning with news of a tremendous tie-up on the Governor Thomas E. Dewey Thruway or jack-knifing on the Cross-Bronx Expressway I'm consumed, and want more. It's gotten to the point where, if I'm at home, I'll check for traffic reports every 10 minutes -- looking for updates on that Brooklyn-Queens Expressway tie-up, or trying to find out just what caused the hourlong southbound delay along the Harlem River Drive.
I've started to revel in the language and the shorthand of traffic reports, like the ones that warn ''45 minutes inbound at George,'' meaning, of course, the George Washington Bridge, and traffic slowing westbound into Westchester across the ''Tap,'' short for the Tappan Zee Bridge.
The speed in which ''Tom in the Chopper'' digests and spits out information about Interstate 287, single-lane delays and accidents on the Bronx River Parkway amazes me. Tom's a true riff artist, a rapper of the skies, a guy who probably has to wake up really early, long before those who go out and end up being towed off the Van Wyck Expressway.
Thanks to traffic reports, I have developed an affinity for a whole new subset of New York landmarks. I'm not talking about the Empire State Building or even Times Square. Instead, try the Gowanus Expressway in Brooklyn and that late, great beacon, the former Elmhurst gas tanks site, where, if inbound traffic to Manhattan was back to there, you knew a bad day was in store.
Traffic reports have even made me ponder deep philosophical questions.
I find myself daydreaming about the Major Deegan Expressway, and wondering why Deegan has a roadway named after him when he was just a major? My late father was a Marine Corps colonel, and there are no roadways, even an alleyway, named after him. And on those nights when I can't sleep and wake up to turn on the radio instinctively, I wonder why traffic in Brooklyn is snarled at 3:18 a.m.? Just why are all those people driving around Brooklyn at that hour? And I strongly suspect there aren't as many delays caused by ''rubber necking'' as they let on.
I'm not sure if all this affinity to traffic reports is healthy. My guess it has something to do with where I was and what I was doing around 8:31 a.m. on Sept. 11, 2001. Since that was what I was doing then -- sitting and tapping into a laptop from the couch at home, listening for the next traffic report -- somehow, even now, I feel more secure.
For now I'm content to be at home several days a week on our suburban, dead-end, tree-lined street. And while I'm sorry for all those commuters stuck at Exit 9 of the Saw Mill River Parkway, I feel their pain thanks to ''traffic on the eights.''
SOAPBOX Jim Reisler lives in Irvington.
