A Last-Minute Switch
Crossroads Theater Company in New Brunswick has announced that it is pulling ''Walking With Ijapa'' from its schedule. The play, starring Ossie Davis and the Caribbean storyteller Paul Keens-Douglas, was to open next month. It will be replaced with ''Passing the Blues Along,'' an extended version of a musical act performed one night last year at the theater.
In a press release issued by the theater, Roberta Coleman, its executive director, described the last-minute switch as ''unresolved visa and immigration issues'' surrounding Mr. Keens-Douglas, who lives in Trinidad. Barbara Martalus, the theater's spokeswoman, said last week that ''there was a lot of uncertainty'' about Mr. Keens-Douglas's availability and that Ricardo Khan, the artistic director, decided to ''move forward and see what else is out there.'' Neither Mr. Khan nor Ms. Coleman responded to repeated requests for comment.
With the theater already booked for early February, Mr. Khan turned to Crossroads's former house manager, Susan Settles, the wife of Mississippi Charles Bevel, who starred with Chic Street Man in the one-show performance of ''Passing the Blues Along'' last year, to see if they could turn the act into a full production. Subscribers of the theater, which is still struggling to make a comeback after being closed for more than two years, were informed of the scheduling change last week.
Described by Ms. Martalus as ''a work in progress,'' the show, which combine music and storytelling, will run from Feb. 7 through 15. Information: (732)545-8100.
Honoring Dr. King
The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. would have turned 75 on Jan. 15. Tomorrow, New Jerseyans can choose from a variety of activities in honor of his birth.
From noon to 3 p.m., children ages 3 to 12 are invited to create a story quilt at the Morris Museum in Morristown. After a discussion of Dr. King and his ideals, each child will be given a paper square to draw, paint or write a poem on. The squares will be combined on a wall of the museum, creating the ''quilt.'' Information: (973)971-3700.
Princeton University will celebrate Dr. King's birth with a public program in its Richardson Auditorium beginning at 1 p.m. The event includes an address by the director of Princeton's African-American Studies Department, Valerie Hill; a musical presentation by the university's gospel choir; and an awards ceremony for the winners of an essay, poster and video contest that was held in local schools. Information: www.princeton.edu.
The Newark Museum will hold a family day from noon to 5 p.m. that includes film, music and a lecture in tribute of Dr. King. Information: (973)596-6550.
On Jan. 25, Barry Scott will portray Dr. King in the one-man play ''Ain't Got Long to Stay Here'' at the South Jersey Performing Arts Center at the Tweeter Center in Camden. Mr. Scott, founder and artistic director of the American Negro Playwright Theater in Nashville, also wrote the play, which is based on the life and speeches of Dr. King. Information: (856)342-6633.
Images of Sculptors
Ricardo Barros, a 50-year-old photographer who lives in Princeton, has published a book of portraits of sculptors. The book, ''Facing Sculpture: A Portfolio of Portraits, Sculpture and Related Ideas'' (Image Spring Press 2004), includes images of New Jersey sculptors, including Barry Snyder, Jonathan Shahn, Caroline Gibson, George Segal, Jules Schaeffer and Eve Ingalls, right.
Mr. Barros, who is the principal photographer for Grounds for Sculpture in Hamilton, thinks that photographing poets would be just as meaningful as photographing sculptors.
''But with sculptors, there's something visual to show for their work,'' he said. ''They're making an impression on their environment as much as they are making an object. The process is visible.''
To reflect the variety of materials sculptors use -- glass, metal, stone, wood, string -- Mr. Barros said he used different techniques when making his portraits. These include printing on fabric, cutting the images up and blending them together.
''I'm trying to stretch the medium of photography to correspond with the diversity of sculptural practice,'' he said.
Signed copies of Mr. Barros's book will be available at two receptions, on Thursday and on Saturday, for the opening of ''Ricardo Barros: Facing Sculpture,'' a new show at Marsha Child Contemporary in Princeton. Information: (609)497-7330 or www.ricardobarros.com.
Michelle Falkenstein with Jill P. Capuzzo
