IT'S only January, and already the wheels are coming off in this quiet Bergen County town.
Only six days after taking oaths of office, the mayor and members of council found themselves under investigation by the Bergen County prosecutor -- which may well be a record, even for New Jersey.
Investigators are studying documents from a council meeting earlier this month and the events leading to it when a reform slate led by the new mayor, Laurence Cherchi, took control and abruptly fired several officials, including the borough administrator and a new police chief.
Two council members from the previous administration of Mayor Paul Kaufman, Mary Heveran and Anthony Puzzo, took exception to the hasty hook and complained that they had been excluded from discussion about the changes.
All this has proven embarrassing for a team that campaigned on a platform of open and inclusive government but now finds itself accused by its political foes of running one that is closed and secretive.
Councilwoman Barbara Mitrani, a former president of the Leonia Taxpayers Association, acknowledged as much when she posted an e-mail message on the association's server the day after the firings, calling the meeting ''the most embarrassing night'' of her life and apologizing to Ms. Heveran and Mr. Puzzo for having excluded them from personnel discussions.
Mr. Cherchi, who was once banned from Borough Hall by Mayor Kaufman for supposedly harassing the borough clerk, has defended the dismissals by saying he believes he was elected to make changes and wants a new team. ''When the dust settles, I really do believe they will see this borough was in need of a large amount of change,'' he said.
But Christopher LaBianco, a former councilman under Mr. Kaufman and a mayoral candidate who lost to Mr. Cherchi in the June Democrat primary, scoffed, saying: ''It's political retribution; it's payback.''
By a vote of 4-2, the council dismissed the administrator, Wolfgang Albrecht Jr.; demoted a new police chief, Robert Peacock, to captain; and declined to hire a probationary police officer, Michael Venezia, who is the son of a Superior Court judge in Hackensack, Donald R. Venezia. In addition, the council chose not to reappoint the borough attorney and the borough engineer.
The prosecutor, John Molinelli, has said that his investigation is related to how decisions were made relating to the police department, though Mayor Cherchi suggested that it might have more to do with politics. He and his running mates, Ms. Mitrani and Charles Ryan, campaigned against what they considered to be the undue influence of the Bergen County Democratic Party on Mr. Kaufman's administration.
''We acted within our legal rights upon the advice of counsel and made routine personnel changes which every new administration does,'' Mayor Cherchi said. ''I can't understand why the prosecutor's office is investigating the termination of a probationary patrolman and perhaps the appointment of a highly competent captain to acting chief. It certainly has a chilling effect on our ability to run Leonia.''
Mr. Molinelli, who once served as counsel to the county Democratic organization, replied, ''They can say whatever they want.''
He said that he had received numerous calls the day after the firings and was investigating ''something'' indirectly related to the meeting. ''It's not the decisions of the mayor and council,'' he said. ''It's not what they did on the dais.''
Venturing a guess as to what is on the prosecutor's mind, Ernest C. Reock Jr., former director of the Center for Government Services at Rutgers, said, ''It could have something to do with the Sunshine Law.''
Mr. Reock said that the investigators might be looking at whether officials made decisions before being officially sworn. ''That might be a violation of the Sunshine Law,'' he said. ''It's not explicit in the law.''
For his part, Mr. Cherchi said he notified Mr. Albrecht several days before announcing the dismissals but never warned Mr. Peacock, who had served as chief for only four months. As to why Mr. Peacock lost his stripes, Mr. Cherchi said he believed that Mayor Kaufman did not have the right to appoint him before the official retirement of the former chief, which took effect on Jan. 1.
Not surprisingly, residents of this middle-class town are a bit stunned, and a council meeting last Monday drew an unusually large crowd of more than 80 people.
One resident, John Sommermeyer, told of a conversation overheard at a basketball game: ''Three people who I didn't know said that because of the actions of the council they were embarrassed to tell people whom they met in Manhattan the other day that they even lived in this town.''
Members of the Cherchi team have been reluctant to give details of how they reached their decisions because they have been unable to hire a lawyer to advise them on what they can say. But Ms. Mitrani, who never held public office before, said that the situation left her ''devastated.''
''I can't eat, I can't sleep,'' she said. ''I can barely talk.''
Then she found her voice. ''In retrospect we should have moved more slowly, but don't forget we were essentially elected six months ago and had to sit on the sideline all that time,'' she said. ''We were very frustrated and wanted to get moving forward.''
That wasn't all. ''During our campaign, we warned of county machine influences on Leonia politics and the good-old-boy network,'' she said. ''We promised to do our best to restore Leonia's independence. This was a priority, and what you are seeing is a manifestation of that battle.''
COMMUNITIES
