When at 16 I entered the Armory Track and Field Center to run my first high school meet in the winter of 1963, this is what I found: a cavernous arena with a painted line on a splintered, wooden floor that served as the track, thunderous noise from spectators pounding the balcony guardrail, and opponents who were bigger and faster than I was and walked around as if they owned the place. And they did.
It was the scariest moment of my youth.
But it would turn out to be the most liberating as well; for the Armory, which has played host to track meets for a century in northern Manhattan, is where I found my passion for running, and for life, a fusion that lifted me from neighborhood boundaries of Sheepshead Bay in Brooklyn to inhale the breadth of the city. I sat with black opponents on the cold, unforgiving floor waiting for my turn in the mile relay. When I couldn't keep up, I tried to learn from those who could, opening my heart, seeking pathways of success I continue to pursue to this day.
In my teens, as an aspiring journalist, I traveled with athletes from schools like Boys High of Brooklyn and Andrew Jackson of Queens to meets all over the East and to California. We roomed together and I saw how these youngsters could thwart pressure and survive. Their lives were harder than mine, and I embraced them for not taking the easy way out. I took their work ethic, their joie de vivre, and ran with it.
Today, 40 years later, this is still the Armory's lifeblood: to have children from practically every neighborhood and beyond loosening up together for their events, competing shoulder to shoulder, embracing one another at the finish. How innocent the athletes look today: so young but no less needy or spirited, sweeter than ever, I must say, as they run and compete in a track facility that now warms them in its bosom.
The Armory is the city's diversity laboratory. Kids of every background share the sweat of honest toil, in Roger Bannister's words, with commitment to excellence as a common bond. The Saturday meets in particular, with fields numbering in the thousands, are daylong festivals. You can't hold hard views at the Armory, which was refurbished in 1993 and is now so sparkling its beauty overwhelms you. The Armory, for all the clamor of the racing, puts you at peace, as though you are meditating over a work of art.
Next Saturday, the Armory will indeed become a museum as the National Track and Field Hall of Fame, transported there from Indianapolis, celebrates its opening, another jewel in the Armory's amazing transformation. What a perfect marriage: the Armory as track's Cooperstown. This will be the place to see Jesse Owens's track spikes, Steve Prefontaine's racing singlet, and a history and multimedia center to inspire young athletes and remind us how America once set the pace in all of track worldwide.
Many of the 198 greats enshrined -- from the sprinter John Carlos (infamous for his black-gloved salute after winning the 1968 Olympic 200-meter bronze) to suave miler Marty Liquori (who would later win 14 straight races at Madison Square Garden) to the long jumper Bob Beamon (who added Beamonesque to the sports lexicon for his prodigious world record at the 1968 Games) -- got their starts at the Armory. These three athletes all competed there in the 60's, a period recalled as the glory years in New York City area track, when passion and speed were at their pinnacle.
At times, that passion flowed out from the Armory and into the neighborhood, and I can recall one night after a meet when Carlos, who ran for Manhattan Vocational in the early 60's and was apparently already seething with rebellion, challenged all comers to a race down 168th Street. I don't remember how it came out. But I do remember thinking, Yeah, this is my crowd.
At the Armory, you came in a naïve kid and left a survivor. The old facility, which was a homeless shelter for seven years before it was refurbished, had rough edges setting a combative tone. Hoodlums showed up to wager on races. Lighting was dim, and my coach told me to watch my belongings or they would be stolen in a New York minute. Clutching my stuff and stripped down to my racing uniform, my bare shoulders would graze the exposed heating pipes in the grandstand and be burned.
Then there was the track itself, a worn, wooden floor used by a National Guard unit stationed there at the time. For sprinters attempting to run at top speed, the surface had the traction of a skating rink. As you sped around the first turn seeking the inside lane in heavy traffic, someone, inevitably, went flying and wound up with the official Armory badge of courage: a nasty splinter in the derrière. A meet doctor with tweezers and alcohol was ready to minister aid. Or if you really were banged up, you could be taken across the street to Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
That's history. The current track, installed in 1996, is a blazing-fast banked Mondo surface, the kind used at the Olympics. At an Armory meet last week, Elzie Coleman from Newburgh Free Academy in Orange County set a national high school indoor 400-meter record of 46.58 seconds. When I ran, we worshiped the few stars who could break 50-flat on the Armory floor. Two of them top the pantheon of Armory legends -- Julio Meade of Andrew Jackson High and Otis Hill of White Plains, the nation's two fastest high school quarter-milers of 1966.
When they raced at the Armory, as men in leather jackets with fists full of cash placed their bets, it was like Ali-Frazier. Meade was Ali: smooth, elegant, cool. Hill was Frazier: bigger, stronger, brazen. In 300's and 440's, Hill would lead with elbows wide, daring Meade to come after him. Meade would, his taut body striding the slick track like an Alvin Ailey dancer, for the victory.
Those were my events too: 300's and 440's. That first day in 1963, in my first race, I lined up for a novice 440. Our team had no track and we had practiced in school corridors to prepare. I had fancied myself a pretty good sprinter. It was late at night, a cacophony still ringing from the grandstand, and the odor of grilling hot dogs from the concession merely inches from the starting hole filled the air. That smell had to impair my breathing, at least for the 58 seconds it took me to run two laps.
Dizzy after my race, I collapsed into the arms of my coach, who told me I could be a top-notch runner some day. Even then I knew better. I would never cut it at the Armory. It was too great a place for me as an athlete, but it helped me appreciate the greatness of others, and that was enough then as it is now.
