KA-CHING, ka-ching. I am standing in line at the train station one morning, waiting to pay for my paper. A woman with a Caribbean accent is buying a strip of lottery tickets.
''Give me a winner,'' she says with a smile to the nice man behind the counter.
I glance at the magazine rack and spot Pete Rose's surly face.
I shift my weight. A commuter buys a few lottery tickets. He is wearing an expensive topcoat and he skips the pleasantries. Finally, I plunk down my two quarters for the paper -- small potatoes compared with the lottery tickets.
I sit down on the train. One paper gives me the odds on the college basketball games.
Another paper tells me Rose's new book is at the top of the best-seller list. Apparently, we are obsessed by his wretched exile from the Baseball Hall of Fame. He is the Man Without a Plaque.
I get to the office and scan a sports calendar for the next few weeks: The United States Davis Cup tennis team is playing Austria in Connecticut in early February in some place called Uncasville. Ahhh, I see. It's a casino.
I make a call to Christiansen Capital Advisors, which monitors the gambling industry and other so-called leisure activities. Eugene Christiansen, the chairman, based in New York, provides figures that overall wagering rose 6.85 percent in 2002 to a gross national total of $69.7 billion, not including Internet gambling, which is considered international and unverifiable. The biggest revenue came from casinos, $28 billion gross in 2002.
''It is absolutely enormous, and will continue to grow,'' Christiansen says.
The $69.7 billion gross is compared with the $9.3 billion from movie box office, $10.6 billion from spectator sports, $12.19 billion from recorded music, $18.98 billion from flowers and plants and $9.9 billion from theme parks, according to figures from Dan Eber, an analyst with Christiansen.
The biggest growth in 2002 was 11 percent in lotteries -- ''the biggest single purchaser of advertising time,'' Christiansen says, referring to radio and television. ''They have become an agency of state government,'' he continues. ''They have turned it into a patriotic act of citizenship.''
I remember the zeal of the baseball commissioner A. Bartlett Giamatti, who believed that lotteries were an abuse of government, a cop-out.
Giamatti did not show much sympathy for Rose as a man with an addiction that needed to be treated. Rose had adamantly denied gambling on baseball while managing the Reds, said Giamatti, who died of a heart attack three days after banishing Rose for life.
Gambling on baseball was not only against the rules of baseball, but also against the laws of the land. It will come as no shock that bets placed with your friendly neighborhood bookie do not show up in the official statistics of gambling in America -- or in the computers of the Internal Revenue Service.
''Buying a lottery ticket does not satisfy the appetite for sports,'' says Christiansen, who suggests it may be better to legalize sports betting, as in Britain, where several prominent soccer players have recently admitted serious gambling problems through legal bookmaking and casinos.
On my way home from the train station that night, I am listening to the car radio. The boyzz on the talk shows are yakking about the playoffs in the Over-Under League. Will the Eagles cover the spread?
I flip the dial to avoid the most irritating jingle on radio, for a casino -- make it happen, finger-snappin'. I think of the taunt I once heard Don Rickles direct toward a patron in a casino lounge: ''Look at that guy. He thinks, 'I'm in Vegas; I'm gonna lose my pimples.' ''
Are we all rushing to these oases to improve our complexions, to change our humdrum lives? I think of the buses speeding to Connecticut and Atlantic City every day. These outings make the news only when a bus swerves off the road, injuring old people from a home for the elderly.
The next day, I call Arnie Wexler, who placed his last bet in 1968 after nearly wrecking his life and now works as a counselor as well as an expert on gambling. In a statement to the National Gambling Impact and Study Commission on Jan. 22, 1998, he said, ''Another form of gambling that is often overlooked is the stock market.''
Six years ago, that commission, appointed by President Clinton and Congress, suggested that 15.4 million adults and adolescents could be classified as problem or pathological gamblers.
And speaking of problem gamblers, Wexler believes Rose, the player, belongs in the Hall of Fame.
''Society and professional sports treat people with chemical dependency and alcoholism as sick people, yet they look at compulsive gamblers as bad people,'' he once said.
Doesn't the pervasive national support of lotteries, casinos and parimutuel betting send the wrong signal to troubled people like Rose?
''All I can tell you is I never gambled in a legal casino,'' says Wexler, who often counsels casino employees with gambling problems.
''This country is exploding with gambling,'' Wexler says. ''Nobody's doing a thing about it.''
He continues: ''We've sent out a message that it's legally accepted. The legislators see it has a way to balance budgets. Meanwhile, it's destroying their citizens.''
What about our national obsession with the sad sack who used to play baseball so very well? Wexler says Rose is lucky: ''He can sign autographs.'' That is to say, Rose will always have a source of income.
Pete is going to need all that money from autographing his book. The silence from Commissioner Bud Selig has been eloquent. And the public, while losing affection for Rose, remains fascinated by his ongoing self-destruction from denial and gambling.
The next day I use a photocopying machine in a stationery store. I owe the man 35 cents. I stand in line while people buy lottery tickets. Ka-ching, ka-ching.
Sports of The Times
