Interest has grown in the overseas campuses of American universities since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks made it harder to get student visas to the United States. With foreign students eager to earn American-accredited degrees, even little-known institutions report increased enrollment.
While Americans, too, study at these outposts to hone language skills and experience another culture, most students are foreigners who couldn't or didn't want to travel to the United States.
''American M.B.A.'s are preferred in India; they have much more value,'' says Antony George, a 25-year-old finance student at Webster University's Leiden campus, in the Netherlands. Mr. George, who is from Kerala, India, had hoped to study in the United States but was denied a visa three times. He heard about Webster, which is based in St. Louis, through a friend. He began his graduate work on Webster's four-year-old campus outside Bangkok, then transferred to Leiden.
He estimates that his Western education and living expenses are costing his parents $25,000 a year, compared with $1,000 a year for an Indian degree.
Founded in the early 1900's by an order of nuns, the Sisters of Loretto, Webster started its international programs 25 years ago, partly to promote world peace by having students of different nationalities study side by side. It now has 15 campuses in eight countries. Since Sept. 11, Webster has experienced a 10 to 12 percent growth in enrollment on its international campuses, says Neil J. George, the university's executive vice president and vice president for academic affairs. Still, he laments the effect of visa restrictions on higher education.
''We move our faculty and students around the world based on their ability to get visas,'' Dr. George says. ''But we are saddened there's been a disruption in the opportunities for some members of the world community to move as freely.''
Oklahoma City University has also had a post-Sept. 11 enrollment increase in its programs in China, Singapore and Vancouver, British Columbia, which specialize in business and mass communications. The private liberal arts campus started its overseas operations more than a decade ago to increase revenues during an enrollment dip, says Bernie Patterson, provost and vice president for academic affairs. Now it plans to recruit students throughout India and Southeast Asia -- ''students who can't come to the United States either for financial or immigration reasons,'' he says.
Champlain College in Burlington, Vt., a private, career-oriented college, enrolls almost as many foreign students abroad as it does Americans at home; the college has 1,100 students in Dubai, Bombay and Tel Aviv and 1,600 in Vermont. A Budapest branch is also in the works, says its president, Roger Perry, a Peace Corps veteran. He says the college went global nearly a decade ago to gain an international edge as well as a new source of revenue.
While Champlain offers occupational degrees, Bard College just awarded its first crop of liberal arts degrees last June to 41 students at Smolny College in St. Petersburg, Russia. The joint program between Smolny and Bard, a college in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., about 90 miles north of New York City, was initiated six years ago by the Russians.
''It's not just about getting visas,'' says Susan Gillespie, director of Bard's Institute for International Liberal Education. ''Above all, they want an American-style education. We see growing evidence of this around the world, especially in emerging democracies.''
But American schools face competition overseas. China already has many degree programs in finance and management sponsored by a consortium of European business schools and Hong Kong entrepreneurs, says Frank Fletcher, director of M.B.A. admissions for Fordham University's Business School. Fordham, based in the Bronx, has run its own M.B.A. program in Beijing for five years in a joint venture with Peking University. Applications have steadily increased since Sept. 11 and, as a result, so has the quality of the program's students, Mr. Fletcher says.
He adds that prospective Chinese business students are also turning to universities in Europe, Canada and Australia for Western degrees, and that those institutions are ''more than willing to take advantage of the visa situation in the U.S.''
Of course, the easiest alternative for students who can't get a visa may be online study. The University of Maryland University College has more than 80,000 students in 29 countries. A spokeswoman, Andrea Martino, says that one of the more popular programs overseas, for a masters of distance education, has students from more than 10 countries learning how to administer online courses for schools and private industry.
Leslie Berger is a freelance writer in New York.
