Trent Hunter of the Islanders seems as unassuming as his hometown, Red Deer, Alberta, where he says there is no such thing as rush hour. He is unfailingly polite after the ugliest of losses. And while Hunter does not admit it, Shawn Bates, his teammate and housemate, says the 23-year-old Hunter is sensitive about his hairline, which has skidded from center ice to Mother Nature's blue line.
None of the above would describe a typical confident, young player in the National Hockey League.
''Not that he is, but he comes off as that big, dopey, kind of happy-go-lucky guy,'' Michael Peca, the team captain, said. ''He's just a real humble kid, and I think that's the thing that's going to make him successful in this league for an awfully long time.''
The short run has been far better than the Islanders expected. After their 4-2 victory over Buffalo on Saturday night, Hunter was tied for the Islanders' lead with 15 goals and led them with five game-winning goals. He leads all rookies in goals and is second among rookies in points, making him a favorite for the Calder trophy, given to the league's top rookie. The last Islander to win the award was defenseman Bryan Berard in 1997.
Hunter has more immediate concerns. He broke camp thinking he would be a supporting player, but his rapid development -- and injuries to Aleksei Yashin and Mark Parrish -- have placed a burden on him to produce. The Islanders' inconsistent play has not made it any easier.
''It's not something I thought would happen,'' Hunter said of his role after a practice this week. ''It's always something you hope happens. It's a great honor and it's been great for myself because I've really had to step up my game.''
How much of a long shot was he? Hunter, who scored 71 points in 70 games last season for the Islanders' American Hockey League affiliate in Bridgeport, Conn., was not with his current teammates in the Islanders' media guide. He was listed in the section titled ''In the System.''
Hunter played four games for the Islanders in the 2002 playoffs and eight regular-season games last season. He never stuck. Even his supporters point out that he is not the most nimble of skaters. His puck handling, however, has never been questioned. And his agility has improved, allowing him to capitalize on his stickwork, Peca said.
''I try to use other parts of my game down low in the corners and stuff, where you don't need all the speed in the world,'' Hunter said.
Hunter had his breakout in December, notching six goals and six assists to help the Islanders right themselves after a seven-game losing streak. They fell into another slump, and it is no coincidence that Hunter's production dwindled. Hunter had two assists in a 4-4 tie with Ottawa on Thursday to give him 12 for the season, but he did not have any points Saturday. He has one goal in eight games this month; the Islanders have won just two of them.
''When you do have success, that's when you start expecting more out of yourself,'' Hunter said.
At 6 feet 3 inches and 205 pounds, Hunter has gradually become more physical. He finishes his checks to the satisfaction of Islanders Coach Steve Stirling, and, Bates said, he has become a more reliable defender.
But being a pure scorer, Hunter has noticed increased attention from the best defensemen.
''Teams are trying to be more physical with him, but that just plays right into his game,'' Peca said.
Stirling said: ''He's got the kind of body type and the head and the skills that just when you think you got him lined up, people let up. Next thing you know, he slithers by them.''
Teammates say Hunter is as humble privately as he is publicly.
''It isn't necessarily the loudest guys who get the goals,'' wing Mariusz Czerkawski said.
SLAP SHOTS
CLIFF RONNING and KENNY JONSSON scored power-play goals in the first period Saturday night and the Islanders never trailed in their 4-2 victory over the Buffalo Sabres before a crowd of 15,126 at Nassau Coliseum. In breaking a three-game slide without a victory, the Islanders (21-19-4-1) jumped into a tie with the Rangers for eighth place in the Eastern Conference. ''The biggest thing is, we feel we're headed in the right direction,'' said Ronning, who made his Islanders home debut after signing as a free agent Jan. 9.
HOCKEY
