SHE'S a fiery horse, ready to explode every 30 seconds, as one rider put it. Star of the show ring, with the horse world's equivalent of a cult following, she is also a very strong business proposition.
The horse is Sabrina, an eight-year-old mare who was named Morgan Horse of the Year in 2002 and World Champion in her class the year before. Sabrina, who lives in Katonah, is so game and eager to get down to business (which most of the time is walk, trot and canter both ways around a ring), that it takes two people to hold her for her owner to climb in the saddle.
''The minute you put one foot in that stirrup, and she's off,'' said her owner, Clare Simpson, 70, who rides Sabrina in competitions around the country. ''Give her heel and she'll buck and do all sorts of silly things.''
Horse sense would seem to dictate that the last thing in the world any barn would want around is a high-voltage steel-willed mare. After all, mares, as Mr. Simpson explained, ''are the most difficult horse to show because they are so temperamental and a lot of it has to do with hormones.''
In the rarified world of show horses, breeding trumps manners. Sabrina's most striking qualities -- big eyes, dish face, slender muzzle, swan-like neck, pretty ears, rippling muscles and eagerness under the saddle -- are the most desirable Morgan traits. That is why she is such a promising business proposition right now, as the mother of embryos that breeders are lining up to buy.
''The show industry wants excitement,'' said her trainer, Rick Stevens, of Portsmouth, R.I., who says that Sabrina is one of the top 10 most athletic horses in the breed today. ''She's very much a standout.'' Most important, however, Sabrina is just like her mother. Genetically speaking, all the good stuff is not only there, it also gets passed on because the mare's genes are dominant.
Thanks to state-of-the-art equine breeding technology, Sabrina has generated a steady stream of inquiries from people who want to buy embryos made by high-technology reproductive means from her eggs.
The process of harvesting live embryos, transplanting them into brood mares and bringing them to term is a technique that used to require long stays in equine clinics and astronomical bills. Now, with FedEx, the Internet and a portable microscope, Sabrina's hometown veterinarian ships future progeny overnight.
Timing is everything, Mr. Simpson said. Breeders do not want a foal to arrive before the New Year. By convention, all horses turn a year older on Jan. 1. A horse born on Christmas Day, for instance, turns one year old a week later; a horse born on Jan. 2 turns one year old nearly a full year later.
A foal's average gestation period is 340 days, although newborns have come as early as 320 days and as late as a year, said Mr. Simpson, a retired media executive who has been breeding and showing Morgans for 32 years, and who bought Sabrina for $100,000 in 2000.
Sabrina's first egg harvest began in the last week of January 2003. For 10 days, she was given doses of Regumate, a progesterone-derived hormone that suppresses pituitary control of the ovaries, essentially shutting the reproductive system down.
Simultaneously, 2,000 miles away on a quarter horse farm in Missouri, a mare was selected from 300 to serve as a surrogate. Using the same hormone, her cycle is synchronized to Sabrina's. ''Most of the mares are fairly young, range animals,'' Mr. Simpson said, ''very quiet, big animals, not very pretty, but very good mothers.''
After two weeks, the hormone is abruptly stopped, said Dr. Matthew S. Eliott, the vet who engineered the process. Both mares' ovaries start producing egg follicles at the same rate.
Daily ultrasound checks monitor the growth of Sabrina's follicles. When a critical size is reached -- when the follicle is about the size of a silver dollar -- the call is put into the stud farm, in Sabrina's first case, in Maine. Semen is collected from a stallion and shipped overnight and artificially inseminated via pipette, ideally before the follicle ruptures and releases an egg.
''Sperm can live four to five days in the oviduct waiting for an egg,'' Dr. Eliott said. ''Eggs can only wait six to eight hours.''
The egg stays for six days in the oviduct and on the seventh day, having been fertilized, it descends into the uterus. In a standard pregnancy, it would implant in the uterine wall. In this case, though, liters of flush fluid wash the embryo into sterile glass containers, where the search for the embryo begins under a microscope. The embryo is then drawn up into a sterile tube, double wrapped and packed with ice in a thermostatically controlled container labeled: Fragile: Live Equine Embryo.
''Of course, that gets everyone's attention,'' Mr. Simpson said. ''You know, you got a baby in there.''
For Sabrina's first time through the process, Mr. Simpson said, the FedEx courier who came to collect the egg was anxious to know whether the outcome was successful. ''He's already delivered the semen to you,'' he said of the courier.
On day eight, the embryo arrives in Missouri. Once it is confirmed viable, it takes its place in the uterus of the surrogate mare who has been hormonally put through a journey that mirrors Sabrina's. Only her egg's eight-hour time limit expired. Once inside the new uterus, Sabrina's embryo starts releasing hormones, essentially telling the mare, as Dr. Eliott put it, ''Hey wait a minute, you're pregnant!''
Meanwhile back at the homestead, Sabrina got another shot. She was ready to breed again in seven days.
Sabrina's first foal is due any day. The second foal, sired by a world champion from Rhode Island, aborted in November. As for the third attempt, the embryo could not be found. Mr. Simpson said Sabrina will probably be harvested at least three times again this spring. ''The process is easy on the mare,'' Mr. Simpson said. ''She doesn't have to carry anything to full term. It's in no way harmful.''
Dr. Elliott said, ''In all likelihood, Sabrina will be able to produce viable ova until she is 20, and perhaps longer.''
Selling embryos of a breed has become a very good business, Mr. Simpson said. From a top mare like Sabrina, embryos sell from $25,000 to $35,000. The buyer is liable for all vet, stud and support costs. Show-quality Morgans sell for $200,000 to $300,000, Mr. Simpson said.
Since 2001, according to the American Morgan Horse Association, only 50 registered Morgan foals have come into the world through embryo transfer. There are 80,000 registered Morgans worldwide, with the majority in the United States and in pockets of Canada, England and Australia.
The Morgan, considered by many horse people to be the one authentic American original breed, has a body of lore that borders on mythology. The story of the Morgan began with a stallion named Figure, born in Massachusetts in 1789 and handed over to a schoolteacher and musician named Justin Morgan to pay off a debt. Moving to Vermont, he had the stallion clear fields by day and race at night, where he was unbeatable. Soon everybody wanted their mare bred to Mr. Morgan's stud. When President James Monroe went to Montpelier, Vt., in 1817, he rode Figure in a parade.
Illustrious history makes for a good marketing tool, not that Sabrina needs it. She does seem to need some patience, but Mr. Simpson said she has never thrown him. ''She's not a silly horse,'' he said. ''She knows what she's doing. You just better keep her happy.'' She is a favorite of the judges, who often smile at her feistiness and give her one second chance after another, Mr. Simpson said. She was acting up in a show recently , disturbing the other horses, and her trainer had to come in and escort her out of the ring, with Mr. Simpson still aboard.
Another trainer took Mr. Simpson aside, he said, and told him, ''Even getting led out of the ring and acting up, she's still the most exciting horse in the class.''
IN BUSINESS
