Mention Britten's opera ''Peter Grimes'' -- in connection with, say, the concert performance of the work by the London Symphony Orchestra this afternoon at Avery Fisher Hall -- and the Canadian tenor Jon Vickers comes quickly to mind. Mention Mr. Vickers, and Beethoven's ''Fidelio'' comes almost as quickly to mind.
For all his versatility, Mr. Vickers remains most closely identified, at the Metropolitan Opera and elsewhere, with his riveting portrayals of Grimes, descending into social isolation and madness, and Florestan, awakening half-crazed, in physical isolation. Those portrayals have been widely documented in recordings.
But here is another. The British historical label Testament offers what it calls the first official release of a ''Fidelio'' from the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, in 1961, with Sena Jurinac in the valiant title role and Mr. Vickers as the prisoner Florestan. Otto Klemperer conducts a formidable cast, including Hans Hotter, Gottlob Frick, Elsie Morrison and John Dobson. (Mr. Vickers and Frick are also in Klemperer's legendary EMI recording of the work with the Philharmonia Orchestra.)
The Testament performance, recorded live by the BBC and remastered for this release, has long circulated unofficially and rightly been praised for its intensity, notwithstanding a certain scrappiness in execution. In any performance of ''Fidelio,'' Florestan's first entry, from the gloom that opens Act II, is an event. With Mr. Vickers it is invariably a coruscating one, all the more so, in recordings, for anyone who remembers his manic command of the role onstage.
Another standout in the latest batch of recordings from Testament, also in its first official release and also notable for its intensity, is a stirring rendition of Mahler's ''Resurrection'' Symphony, with John Barbirolli conducting the Berlin Philharmonic in 1965. Barbirolli's fame stemmed in large part from his Mahler performances. (Mahlerians may know a 1970 recording of this work, with the South German Radio Orchestra, once available on the Hunt label.)
The Berlin Philharmonic, for its part, gave the premiere of the ''Resurrection'' Symphony in 1895, with Mahler conducting. But 70 years later, it was not the Mahler orchestra that it had originally been or that it has since become under the ministrations of Herbert von Karajan and Claudio Abbado. Mahler's music, banned by the Nazis, was only beginning to reclaim a place in the German repertory in the 60's.
Not that you would suspect any of that from this performance, which is committed, brilliant and driven. The mezzo-soprano Janet Baker, another superb Mahlerian, and the soprano Maria Stader join the St. Hedwig's Cathedral Choir of Berlin in the finale.
There are also other recent gems from Testament, but these should deplete anyone's post-holiday budget enough for the moment.
JAMES R. OESTREICH
MUSIC: HIGH NOTES
