IN the narrowing ground between the law and the laboratory, January has been a confusing month.
Two weeks ago, when Governor McGreevey signed the stem-cell research bill into law -- only the second such law in the nation after California -- supporters celebrated what they believed would create a life-saving wave of biotechnical innovation for New Jersey's scientists to pass on to the world.
The case had been made that experimentation with stem cells derived from adult tissue -- as well as from human embryos, which are destroyed in the process -- could hold spectacular keys for treating spinal injuries, multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and other seemingly incurable conditions.
''This has got to be the right thing to do,'' said Assemblyman Rafael J. Fraguela, a Democrat of Union City, and a former Republican who formally broke ties with the party last month when he voted in favor of the stem-cell bill.
''I listened to the debates, all of the debates,'' he said, recalling one of his last acts in office, ''and I decided to cast my vote for humanity.''
Yet New Jersey's endorsement of embryonic stem-cell research does little to resolve the increasingly complex tangle of science and politics. Beyond the official fanfare, even its supporters concede that it is a law without financing that is based on a scientific projection. It also appears to be at least partly at odds with the mainstream of federal research efforts.
For example, the new law also bans the reproductive cloning of humans but implicitly permits therapeutic cloning for potential medical treatment, also known as ''somatic cell nuclear transplantation,'' drawing the ire of anti-abortion groups.
''You're making people in a petrie dish and then taking them apart,'' said Assemblyman Michael Patrick Carroll, a Republican of Morristown, who opposed the stem-cell bill. ''That's a moral problem.''
Across the nation, at least six other states have passed laws with some form of ban on cloning, according to the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, and the Bush administration stopped federal financing for research employing new lines of embryonic stem cells in 2001.
Last year, the House of Representatives passed a bill that would end all cloning, and a similar bill awaits a vote in the Senate. Mixing matters up further, in November the United States led a coalition of 60 nations asking the United Nations General Assembly to pass a resolution outlawing the cloning of human embryos for any purpose, including therapeutic cloning, which genetically tailors new tissue by combining stem cells with a patient's own cells.
Medical ethicists are now expressing their own concerns about work with embryos, among them that New Jersey's law implies a promise of timely cures -- in part propelled by what supporters contend will be a surge in private investment -- that may overreach reality.
Dr. Walter M. Robinson, associate director of the division of medical ethics at Harvard Medical School, said that while he had observed little change in the moral polarities within the debate, the appearance of state endorsements like New Jersey's could have unintended consequences.
''I am less worried about the moral arguments of using embryos than I am about the commercialization of research,'' Dr. Robinson said. ''Commercial interests may exaggerate potential benefits from stem cells, and the commercial environment changes the way we evaluate research.''
He added that some supporters of stem-cell laws have probably overemphasized the potential for a great leap forward. ''My concern is that families of patients are having their hopes raised in a way that is not justified,'' he said.
As Dr. Robinson explained, ''A little knowledge of the history of science tells us that advances are generally not planned and can't be predicted, but come from accidents and serendipitous moments.''
Nor was Dr. Robinson alone in tamping down expectations.
Dr. Arthur Caplan, director of the center for bioethics at the University of Pennsylvania, said he had supported New Jersey's stem-cell bill, although he doubted claims that the new law would draw an immediate rush of investment to the state.
''The stem-cell law is going to have an effect, but I won't say it will be dramatic,'' Dr. Caplan said. He paused, and then continued: ''Yes, the research can be hyped. And I can tell you that it is so early in stem-cell studies that it's going to take some real proof before anybody is making any serious business plan to shape the research.''
Then he put a finer point on the issue. ''The investment community has already gone through one biotech bubble,'' he said, ''and they're not necessarily going to come running back for another one.''
STILL, Dr. Harold T. Shapiro, president emeritus of Princeton, found the law to be broadly encouraging, though he was quick to note that no provision had been made for state financing of the research.
''It is a useful thing,'' observed Dr. Shapiro, who served for six years as chairman of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission in the Clinton administration. ''But it doesn't have the impact, because the state sponsors little research of any kind.''
For his part, Governor McGreevey said through a spokeswoman that it was ''too early to say'' if state money for stem cell research would be dedicated in the new state budget to be introduced on Feb. 24.
Dr. Ruth L. Fischbach, director of the Center for Bioethics at Columbia University, was also encouraged by New Jersey's step, even as she tempered her enthusiasm. ''I am concerned about the hype,'' Dr. Fischbach said. ''People may start to get impatient for cures -- as they did with gene therapy, which hasn't brought the benefits we'd hoped for.''
She added: ''The law makes this research legitimate because it has been recognized by a governor and a legislature. That happens to be an important and courageous step by Governor McGreevey. Researchers using embryonic stem cells shouldn't feel as if they have to go undercover.''
In fact, it was legal to experiment with human embryos before Jan. 4, when the stem-cell legislation took effect. The law amounts to a proclamation in support of the science, and sets some ground rules for its progress, including the establishment of an ''institutional review board'' to monitor research.
After first passing through the state Senate a year ago, the stem-cell bill was withdrawn from the Assembly when critics contended that it could be interpreted to allow the reproductive cloning of humans. It was later amended to outlaw the practice -- and to make such cloning ''a crime of the first degree'' -- but most opponents were not pacified. Some Catholics and anti-abortion groups still reject the prospect of any experimentation involving human embryos, which can be obtained by researchers from in-vitro fertilization clinics.
Provoking critics further, the new law actually directs doctors to inform couples undergoing fertility treatments about the option of donating unused embryos for stem-cell research.
Richard M. Doerflinger, a spokesman for the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, called New Jersey's bill ''the most extreme law on human cloning in the nation, and possibly the world,'' and said the conference and other opponents had placed their hopes on a pending Senate bill that would override state laws and halt research.
''We have no problem with adult stem-cell research, as such,'' Mr. Doerflinger said, referring to experiments in deriving stem cells from the blood of an umbilical cord, placenta and other human tissue, but not from embryos. The practice of using adult cells is specifically approved within the state's bill.
''Our problem is that the New Jersey law says that anything short of live birth can be a field of research,'' he said. ''And we don't think that in-vitro clinics should be making spare embryos in the first place.''
For many scientists, the question remains open as to whether experiments with embryos or adult cells hold the greater promise. Most researchers have contended that work on both methods should go forward simultaneously to determine which is the speedier path or the more effective cure.
''It is not by any means a settled question,'' said Dr. Robinson of Harvard. ''Like most things in science, the answer tends to be, 'It depends.'''
Dr. Ira B. Black, chairman of the neurosciences and cell biology department of the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, described the potential of all stem-cell research as threefold. He said the expectation in the laboratory was for such cells to revive damaged and dead cells; to act as vehicle cells in introducing gene therapy; and, finally, to rally and harness the human body's own existing stem cells.
The end goal would be to replace brain cells lost to Alzheimer's, repair injured nerve cells causing paralysis and treat cancers, malfunctioning organs and other now-irreparable conditions.
To Dr. Black, the use of embryonic cells ''fundamentally constitutes the gold standard'' in medical research because of their purity and versatility. But he cautioned: ''This is a very young field. Our areas of ignorance are far greater than our areas of knowledge.''
Even so, it is not clear if any laboratory in New Jersey -- at universities or in the private sector -- has been conducting embryonic research. Debbie Hart, president of the Biotechnology Council of New Jersey, a trade organization based in Trenton, said that she was unaware of any private ventures to date, or of any company that had such immediate plans. The council, which represents 124 companies, was in the forefront of lobbying for the new law. She also refuted the notion that the law would ''commercialize'' stem-cell research.
''I don't see the down side of this bill,'' Ms. Hart said.
She added: ''It does not encourage reproductive cloning. It does not encourage abortion. It does not violate federal law. All research is dictated by strict protocols -- it has to be repeated and validated.''
On the other hand, Ms. Hart did confirm that a handful of companies were working on adult stem cells, including the Celgene Corporation, a biopharmaceutical company based in Warren. A Celgene subsidiary, Anthrogenesis of Cedar Knolls, is focused on deriving stem cells from placental tissue obtained in hospitals after childbirth.
So far, the company said, there are indications that the cells are as ''plastic'' -- or versatile in applications throughout the body -- as cells derived from embryos.
''If you think it through, you can get a lot of stem cells from the more than four million live births that take place in the United States every year,'' said John W. Jackson, chairman and chief executive of Celgene.
Mr. Jackson said that he thought state legislators should consider strengthening the effect of the law through state financing of research. Supporters of the New Jersey law point out that California's law, which passed in 2002, authorized the use of state money, which may have spurred significant private investment. For instance, an anonymous donor has since given $12 million to Stanford University to build a stem-cell research center there. In another gift to researchers, Andrew S. Grove, the chairman of Intel, donated $5 million to establish a stem-cell center at the University of California at San Francisco.
In New Jersey, federal dollars are paying for studies of adult stem cells at the Coriell Institute for Medical Research in Camden.
Dr. David P. Beck, president of Coriell, said that about 60 percent of financing comes from federal sources, and that experiments were under way with stem cells originating in blood and body fat, as well as tissue from the pancreas, muscles and cartilage. The institute, which is affiliated with the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, has no plans to pursue research using embryos, he added.
''It's not for any political or philosophical reason,'' said Dr. Beck, who is a geneticist. ''We made a decision to focus our labs because everything that we need to do can be done with adult stem cells.''
Then he referred to the larger conflict: ''The more important thing to the debate is that we do both kinds of research. Until we do, we won't know its value.''
IN their scrutiny of New Jersey's law, however, opponents still say the clause intended to outlaw reproductive cloning falls short of its mark, presenting a loophole. The law defines human cloning as ''the replication of a human individual by cultivating a cell with genetic material through the egg, embryo, fetal and newborn stages into a new human individual.'' In their interpretation, they say the wording would allow labs to ''grow'' fetuses to a stage just short of birth to possibly harvest tissue and organs.
''That language is troubling, and we passed this law very quickly,'' said Assemblywoman Alison Littell McHose, a Republican of Sparta, who voted against the stem-cell bill and was the first legislator in the Assembly debate to speak against it. ''It is not a sufficient protection against cloning, and I didn't get a satisfactory answer from the bill's supporters.''
Ms. McHose added, ''We now seem to be playing God with embryos.''
For their part, the medical ethicists said that a reproductive cloning clause might finally prove to be unnecessary insurance. Dr. Caplan of the University of Pennsylvania noted science's failure to yet clone even a primate, much less a human being. Instead, he said, he sensed that protest about the anti-cloning clause was more likely ''a stalking horse'' in which anti-abortion groups might seek to re-emphasize the sanctity of life, even at the cellular level.
Dr. Fischbach of Columbia noted that embryonic research of any stripe appeared to affect most people viscerally. ''You're either going to be for it very strongly or against it, and nothing else is going to change your mind,'' she said.
All three ethicists, along with Dr. Shapiro of Princeton, expressed a deep-seated opposition to the idea of reproductive cloning.
''Why would anyone ever choose it?'' Dr. Shapiro said. ''It is demonstrably unsafe. And there are much more pleasant ways of bringing babies into the world.''
Reflecting the division, the law's primary sponsor, Assemblyman Neil M. Cohen, a Democrat of Union, appeared to be jubilant at the bill's signing. It was an event that drew the actor Christopher Reeve, who was paralyzed in an equestrian accident in 1995, to the Kessler Institute of Rehabilitation in West Orange.
Assemblyman Cohen, a lawyer, said that his vigorous support of the bill came after reading ''1,000 articles about research in the United Kingdom, Australia and Israel.''
''This means hope for those who are going to be born, who won't have to suffer,'' he said. ''The worst thing that can happen is that it fails, and that scientific research shows it can't happen.''
