Origin of the 'Jungle'
Q. With the release of a list of violent public schools in New York, my mind raced back to the movie ''The Blackboard Jungle.'' I know it was adapted from a novel by Evan Hunter, but did it have a basis in fact?
A. With fortuitous timing, the 50th anniversary of the publication of ''The Blackboard Jungle,'' Mr. Hunter's first major novel, will be in October.
After serving in World War II, the would-be writer, then named Salvatore Lombino, went to Hunter College and majored in English. In his first job after graduation, Mr. Hunter recalled in a phone conversation, he worked as a student teacher ''at Machine and Metal on East 96th Street for a full semester.''
''Then I taught with an emergency license at Bronx Vocational High School for a very short period of time,'' he added. ''I really couldn't take it, unlike the hero of the book.''
Teaching in those schools was upsetting for him. ''I felt that I was giving my all and my best and trying to impart what little I knew to the kids there, and I felt there were no takers,'' he said. ''I would go home each night almost in tears.''
As in the book, those schools were infected with an air of impending violence. ''I never got into the fistfights the hero of the book does,'' Mr. Hunter recalled. ''But some my friends who were teaching elsewhere did. There was always the threat of violence. A lot of the kids were bigger and stronger than I was. And just like in the book, one of them told me, 'You don't bother me and I won't bother you.'''
Although Mr. Hunter has not been inside a New York school for years, he said: ''I don't think they were as violent when I was there as they are now. But the world is a more violent place today.''
For him, writing has gone better than teaching. He changed his legal name to Evan Hunter, a name ''made up out of whole cloth.'' He has written more than 90 novels under his own name and six other names, including the 87th Precinct mysteries, under the pen name Ed McBain.
Penguins in the City
Q. I was delighted to read the other day about the man who cares forthe penguins in the Central ParkZoo. With the recent cold snap,that got me to wondering: isn't New York City's climate rather warmfor penguins?
A. It's certainly too warm for the gentoo and chinstrap penguins in Central Park, which is why the exhibit there is climate-controlled. But for the jackass penguins in the Bronx Zoo and the blackfooted penguins in the New York Aquarium, it's a different story.
Christine Sheppard, the curator of ornithology for the Wildlife Conservation Society, which runs the city zoos, explains that jackass penguins, from Argentina, and blackfooted penguins, from South Africa, are actually used to much hotter weather than we generally get in the city.
''It is certainly true that our penguins nest in hot, arid environments, like Patagonia,'' Dr. Sheppard says. ''However, they spend the rest of the year at sea, where water temperatures are often extremely cold. Water is a tremendously good conductor, so all penguins have to be designed not to lose serious body heat when swimming.''
She added: ''Their feathers are very waterproof, and they have down underneath, and a layer of fat for more insulation.''
In warm weather, Dr. Sheppard notes, ''they like the wind near the shore.''
''When we have a real heat wave, we put on a hose so they can get a spray if they want to. And our birds can go into the water whenever they want to, and the water is colder than outside.''
GEORGE ROBINSON
F.Y.I. E-mail: fyi@nytimes.com
