I'M not one of those who turns directly to the morning sports pages. But even I can't help but notice that the lives of those who chase balls for a living actually look a lot -- O.K., a little -- like the rest of ours.
No, I'm not talking about their gambling addictions or their rape indictments. I mean their life-work conflicts.
Let's start with Andy Pettitte. When it comes down to it, all the man wanted was a shorter commute (and a proper level of attention from a notoriously difficult boss, but that's a whole other story). In that way, his departure from the Yankees to the Astros was exactly like John Pearson's departure from an advertising firm on Madison Avenue, to the GráficaGroup in Chester, N.J., where he is now creative director. Mr. Pettitte cut out the four-hour flight from New York to Houston; Mr. Pearson reduced his own trip from two hours to 15 minutes.
Mr. Pettitte effectively took a pay cut to be closer to home -- the Yankees' very belated final offer was $7.5 million higher than the one he accepted from Houston. In that way he is just like Adam Conrad, who moved from an investment bank in Manhattan to a smaller one in Cleveland last November.
Mr. Conrad and his wife grew up in the Midwest, and ''when we really started thinking hard about having a family we thought it would be better to be closer to our own families,'' he said. Then again, the money he gave up to do this is not close to the millions Mr. Pettitte sacrificed.
So now Mr. Pettitte will be wearing a different uniform. He'll get used to it, says Scott Fulgham, who left a job as a member of the Houston police force when he moved to Chattanooga six years ago to be closer to his wife's family. Mr. Fulgham faced obstacles, though, that Mr. Pettitte probably won't face: he had to be a rookie all over again, and jokes that he was the only ''bald cadet'' in his class.
Then there is Mr. Pettitte's good friend on the Yankees, Roger Clemens. He, too, missed being at home. He also decided to move back to his family in Houston. But unlike Mr. Pettitte, he did so without a job waiting for him. (At 41, he said he was planning to retire.)
Moving without a job was what Jennifer Arvin and her husband, Robert, did, too, when they moved to St. Louis from Bethlehem, Pa., three years ago. Mr. Arvin's mother became terminally ill, ''and it made us realize the importance of family and what our daughter was missing,'' Ms. Arvin said.
It is also what Dawn Van Osdell did last month when she and her husband, Garrett, left San Francisco. They both had work that they loved: he was a lawyer in a large firm; she ran product introductions for Autodesk, a software company. But their parents lived on the East Coast, and an offer for Garrett from a smaller law firm lured them to Charlotte, N.C. ''It was tough to walk away from that job, not knowing what I would do next,'' Ms. Van Osdell says.
All these stories seem to have happy endings. Autodesk offered Ms. Van Osdell her old job back, and she now telecommutes from Charlotte. Ms. Arvin found a job as manager of public relations at Barnes-Jewish Hospital in St. Louis, and her husband now works as the manager of a customer sales and service center for a software manufacturer.
Mr. Clemens seems to have landed well, too (unless, of course, you are a Yankees fan). The Astros asked if he'd like to resume his old line of work. And he agreed last week to a one-year contract for $5 million, perhaps setting a record for the world's shortest retirement.
Which brings us from baseball to football. All over the National Football League, retired coaches are being called back into action. Bill Parcells, 62, is back with the Dallas Cowboys. Joe Gibbs, 63, announced that he would take the helm of the Washington Redskins again, and, on the same day, the Giants hired 57-year-old Tom Coughlin. ''It may now seem,'' my colleague Bill Pennington wrote on the front page of this paper, ''that the average coach is older than a Rolling Stones band member.''
This makes sense to Ken Ostrum. He retired in October 2000 from Chemical Abstracts Services, which publishes chemical and other scientific databases, after 32 years on the job. The next month, he was back. ''I have an awful lot of life experience and work experience,'' he says, which is valued by his company, which is based in Columbus, Ohio. In fact, of the 40 employees who have retired there in recent years, 36 have returned, according to the company's newsletter.
But not, Mr. Ostrum notes wryly, for anything close to Joe Gibbs's $5 million contract. Then again, Mr. Gibbs does not get to work part time. Play Ball!
LIFE'S WORK
