MICHAEL H. WINER tries to stock the $740 million Third Avenue Real Estate Value fund with high-quality, well-managed real estate, including properties that are ripe for further development.
The fund does not own property directly. It holds shares of real estate operating and management companies, real estate investment trusts and other businesses that have a significant portion of their assets in real estate. These include retail businesses that own store chains or industrial companies that own excess land that can be developed, Mr. Winer said.
The development process is attractive, he said, because it ''creates assets at wholesale, not retail prices.''
The fund returned 19.2 percent a year, on average, for the three years through Thursday, compared with 16.9 percent for the average real estate fund, according to Morningstar Inc. The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index lost 3.5 percent a year, on average, during that time.
The fund returned 40.5 percent in the last 12 months, compared with 39.2 percent for its group and 25.1 percent for the S.&amp;P. 500.
Mr. Winer, 48, is also a portfolio manager for Third Avenue Management, the fund's adviser in Manhattan. The fund is highly concentrated, holding 30 to 35 stocks. Its top 10 holdings account for more than 50 percent of assets.
Many of the top 10 are real estate operating companies, because of their ability to retain and reinvest cash flow, Mr. Winer said. ''Real estate is a very capital-intensive business,'' he added, ''so the ability to access capital or retain capital is critical for growth.''
REIT's, which are required to pay out 90 percent of their taxable income as dividends, account for about 20 of assets. Because of the payouts, Mr. Winer said, REIT's ''don't have free cash flow left to buy or develop new properties, so it's difficult for them to grow without access to sources of new capital.''
He aims to buy what he calls ''safe, cheap companies,'' which he defined as ''well-financed companies with high-quality assets, management teams that we trust, businesses that we understand and financial statements with more-than-adequate disclosure.''
He tries to buy them for discounts of about 10 to 15 percent to the value of their underlying assets. ''In some companies, management is clearly an asset,'' he said, ''but we don't want to pay more than what the assets are worth alone.''
The fund generally holds companies for the long term; its turnover ratio was just 11 percent for the fiscal year ended in October; that compares with 129 percent for the average real estate fund. He says he sells shares when he believes that a company is no longer a safe investment or when they trade at premiums of more than 25 to 30 percent of his estimate of their net asset value.
Mr. Winer recently added to the fund's position in three stocks it has held since its inception in September 1998. One of them, Forest City Enterprises, based in Cleveland, owns, develops, acquires and manages regional malls, specialty retail centers, office buildings and other properties. (An affiliate, Forest City Ratner, is the development partner for the construction of the New York Times Company's planned headquarters in Midtown Manhattan.)Forest City management is experienced, Mr. Winer said, and holds a significant ownership stake. The company's cash flow has grown steadily for more than 20 years, and he forecasts annual net asset growth of more than 10 percent.
The fund has paid $36 a share, on average, adjusted for a stock split, for its position in the stock, which now trades at $49.20.
Another holding, the St. Joe Company, based in Jacksonville, Fla., is involved in commercial, industrial and leisure and resort development, and provides residential and commercial real estate services. The company has a strong balance sheet, Mr. Winer said, and owns nearly a million acres in northwest Florida.
The fund paid an average of $29 a share, split-adjusted, for its position. The stock is now at $38.00.
A THIRD holding is the LNR Property Corporation, a company based in Miami Beach that acquires, develops and manages commercial and multifamily residential properties. It also invests in high-yield loans collateralized by real estate, Mr. Winer said, and buys commercial mortgage-backed securities that are rated below investment grade.
LNR has a solid balance sheet with tremendous liquidity, he said, and above-average growth in net asset value. LNR's senior management has solid experience in all types of real estate cycles, he added.
He paid $36, on average, for his position.
The stock now trades at $49.54.
Investing With Michael H. Winer
