OUTSIDERS trying to break into the movies are typically seen as a comic sideshow to the real business. Producers talk about ''landing fish in the boat'' when they find rich sources of financing. And they sneer that ''We're not making widgets here'' -- their way of saying that newly arrived rubes cannot possibly decode the mysterious workings of the business.
A small but growing band of newcomers is determined to change all that. They have plenty of money, but they also have business skills they used to amass their first fortunes. The longest bull market in history and the technology boom of the late 1990's created many millionaires. The resulting bust and the bear market left those who got out in time sitting on a big pile of cash, with very few attractive places to put it.
Now they are challenging the idea that the only job for outside investors is to write checks. Their arrival is lifting the veil on the byzantine workings of the movie industry. And it just might bring some logic to a process known for chaos. ''I'm not doing this to lose money; I don't gamble,'' said the real estate developer Bob Yari, one of the most aggressive new producers. ''If you make enough films every year and one makes money, you get a predictable stream of revenue,'' he said. ''That's what the studios do.''
In the last year, Mr. Yari has practically established his own studio, setting up two production companies, Stratus Film and Bull's Eye Entertainment, and a film financing company, El Camino Pictures. Three movies he financed, starring Bruce Willis, Pierce Brosnan and Keanu Reeves, are due out this year. Twenty more are in stages of development and production, an amazingly fast start.
Mr. Yari has plenty of company. Among those who are making movie production a second career are Norman Waitt, a co-founder of Gateway; Mark Cuban and Todd Wagner, who founded Broadcast.com; Marc Turtletaub, the former president and chief executive of the Money Store; Roger Marino, co-founder of EMC; Jeff Skoll, co-founder of eBay; and Gary Gilbert, who made a fortune selling his mortgage banking company, Rock Financial, to Intuit. Companies formed by Fred Smith, the founder of FedEx, and Philip F. Anschutz, the founder of Qwest Communications, have each produced several movies, putting them at the vanguard of the group.
Outsiders have broken into the business before, most famously Arnon Milchan. After getting his start in arms procurement with Milchan Brothers of Israel and chemical manufacturing, he produced more than a dozen hits in two decades, including ''Pretty Woman.'' More recently, Steve Jobs, who founded Apple Computer, has established himself firmly in the industry with Pixar Animation Studios. Its most recent release, ''Finding Nemo,'' took in $339 million at the box office in 2003, making it the highest-grossing movie of the year, according to Variety. But a vast majority of outsiders give up, after losing their fortunes and, sometimes, their dignity.
THIS time, the odds are tilting toward the ''fish.'' The film industry, especially smaller operations, has endured an extended cash shortage. German and Japanese financing, long a staple of American movies, dried up when those economies declined. Banks that catered to the industry pulled in their horns when the American economy started to wobble. And the studios, many owned by conglomerates that demand accountability, are increasingly risk averse. ''We're not doing many financing deals,'' said Ken Suddleson, co-chairman of the entertainment division of Morrison &amp; Foerster, a law firm based in San Francisco.
As they search for money, moviemakers are taking a second, more respectful look at the outsiders they once ridiculed. That is partly because they realize that the economics of film may not improve soon. One prominent agent, who spoke on condition that he would not be named, now talks about the ''care and feeding'' of outside investors. ''If we treat these guys well and hook them up with good projects, we can go back and ask for more money'' he said. ''I don't know why we never thought of that before.''
There is also a growing sense that the new crop of investors may be too smart to take advantage of. ''A lot of this money is sophisticated,'' said Dan Halsted, a producer who runs Camelot Pictures, which is owned by Mr. Gilbert, the former banker. ''These guys are sober. They're going in with their eyes open, and they're driving hard bargains.''
They are certainly too smart to go it alone. Most form partnerships with established producers, who can open doors, handle the day-to-day operations and convey the necessary gravitas. Mr. Halsted, for example, was a producer of ''Nixon,'' the Oliver Stone film, and ''The Virgin Suicides,'' directed by Sophia Coppola, and other movies before working with Mr. Gilbert. David Friendly, who runs Deep River Productions for Mr. Turtletaub, was once in charge of production for Imagine Entertainment, which is owned by the director Ron Howard and the producer Brian Grazer. The investors keep the right to approve productions, and keep a close eye on the bottom line.
Beyond that, their approaches differ wildly. Mr. Gilbert moves slowly. He spent a year meeting movie industry people and reading trade papers before he wrote his first check. But after he did, spending $2.5 million to finance ''Garden State,'' starring Natalie Portman, he said he had no qualms.
''I knew I had a good partner, and the movie was inexpensive enough to easily make a profit,'' he said. Others, like Mr. Yari and Mr. Anschutz, move more quickly and spend more freely.
Mr. Anschutz generated snickers when he produced a $110 million remake of ''Around the World the 80 Days'' without a North American distributor. But the Walt Disney Company validated his gamble, and established him as a serious producer, by buying the rights last year.
Mr. Cuban and Mr. Wagner are spreading their risk. They own 2929 Productions, the Landmark Theater chain and a share in Lion's Gate Entertainment, a producer of ''Girl With a Pearl Earring''.
Things do not always go smoothly. Moviemakers and more traditional entrepreneurs often mix about as well as oil and water.
''Businesspeople are frugal, but the producers are used to a big car allowance and a house in the Bahamas'' said Ryan Kavanaugh, a banker who recently brokered a deal putting Mark Kimsey, the hedge fund manager, and Mark Canton, former chairman of Columbia Pictures, in business together. ''The producers have to learn to wait for the perks. The investors have to realize that producing a movie requires a big, upfront investment, instead of a gradual one.''
Mr. Halsted nearly turned down Mr. Gilbert's offer of a partnership when Mr. Gilbert asked him to put up a small amount of his own money for their first script. ''I was shocked,'' Mr. Halsted said. ''That's just not the way we do business here. But he had a more Midwestern attitude, and he wanted me to demonstrate my sincerity. I did it, and it cemented our relationship.''
A small attitude adjustment can be worthwhile for producers. A partnership with one of these new investors can be a plum job, offering far more autonomy than a studio would.
Some partners enjoy the process. Paul Brooks, who approached Mr. Waitt, the Gateway co-founder, about being a producer of ''My Big Fat Greek Wedding,'' said: ''Norman has a great mind for the larger strategic issues of how to grow the company. I have an understanding of the commercial framework. We work well together. ''
That movie, their first release, was a hit. But with most of these ventures still in their infancy, it is not clear whether they offer viable business models on a large scale and if there is room in Hollywood for more than a passive investor. Mr. Yari and Mr. Skoll will each release their first movies this year. Mr. Gilbert is at the Sundance Film Festival trying to sell his first film. Mr. Marino of EMC has yet to release his first project.
They will all need to reach two benchmarks if they want long careers. The first, of course, is making a profit. That allows them to reach the second, which is garnering enough credibility to bring in outside investors and get themselves off the hook. After all, real Hollywood players never spend their own money.
