FOOLS RUSH IN
Steve Case, Jerry Levin, and the
Unmaking of AOL Time Warner.
By Nina Munk.
Illustrated. 352 pp. New York:
HarperBusiness. $26.95.
THERE MUST BE A PONY IN HERE SOMEWHERE
The AOL Time Warner Debacle and
the Quest for a Digital Future.
By Kara Swisher with Lisa Dickey.
Illustrated. 306 pp. New York:
Crown Business. $24.95.
The catastrophic merger of America Online and Time Warner, announced in January 2000 and completed a year later, was, Kara Swisher writes, ''the heist of the very new century.'' AOL, which sells access to the Internet over telephone lines, managed to buy a storied media conglomerate that included Time magazine, the Warner Brothers movie studio, CNN, theme parks and book publishers, using wildly inflated dot-com wampum.
Why AOL would want to convert its overvalued stock into something more tangible, as the economic fever of the late 1990's spiked, was obvious. You might even call the acquisition savvy, except that it now appears that AOL's numbers were doubly inflated, both by mania and by questionable accounting. The tougher question is why in the world Gerald M. Levin, the chairman of Time Warner, decided to sell his company to a boring, dinky Internet service provider, or I.S.P., that was about to be swamped by faster services, including Time Warner's own cable systems.
In 2002, Robert Hughes, Time magazine's art critic, put that question to Levin in an e-mail message later published in Tina Brown's column in a London newspaper. ''How can I convey to you the disgust which your name awakens in me?'' Hughes asked. ''How can you face yourself knowing how much history, value and savings you have thrown away on your mad, ignorant attempt to merge with a wretched dial-up I.S.P.?'' At least three books have now tried to answer that question, and a fourth is on the way.
''Fools Rush In,'' by Nina Munk, a contributing editor at Vanity Fair, is the best so far. Marrying exemplary reporting with lively, lucid writing, she makes a convincing -- nay, devastating -- case that Levin wrecked the legacy of Henry Luce, the founder of Time Inc., in the service of his ego. Levin wanted to redeem his weak performance at the company's helm with what he liked to call a transforming transaction.
He had already transformed Time once, in 1990, when he helped engineer its merger with Warner Communications. That was another lousy deal. What he transformed in the AOL merger was $200 billion of his shareholders' money into nothing.
There is a larger point in Munk's acid portrait. No one stood up to Levin, though many later claimed to have seen the folly of the AOL deal. Levin had become, in his own words, an ''imperial C.E.O.'' Such chief executives, abetted by pliant boards, submissive underlings and craven accountants, bankers and lawyers, have the sort of arbitrary power of which despots can only dream.
Levin, who provided plenty of access to the authors of all three of the books on the merger, does not come off well in any of them, but he reserved his flakiest comments for Munk. ''It's absolutely true that I plotted the departure of Nick Nicholas after working with him for 20 years,'' Levin told her about the palace coup that got him the top job at Time Warner in 1992. ''And I don't have justifications for it other than that I'm a strange person.'' He did cite Albert Camus by way of explanation. As he explained to Munk in another context, his own philosophy was rooted in what he learned from Camus: ''That we impute meaning and purpose to things that are totally adventitious or accidental; that there is no God; that there just is; that there's no life after death.'' Fine for grad school, and probably true, but not exactly suited to the boardroom.
Levin's counterpart at AOL, Stephen M. Case, is famously bland, a vague and uninteresting figure. He likes khakis and expensive wine, and it is a good bet that he hasn't been reading much Camus lately. Levin has called him an ''automaton,'' with ''no spirituality.''
But Case was a good judge of character. In approaching Levin about the merger, he immediately offered to make Levin chief executive officer. ''If he'd said anything else, there's no way I would have gone ahead,'' Levin told Munk (minus a swear word for emphasis between ''no'' and ''way'').
Levin is gone now, having resigned from the company in December 2001. Case remains on its board, though he stepped down as chairman in May 2003. Time Warner reclaimed its maiden name last October. Case remains very rich, having sold hundreds of millions of dollars worth of AOL stock just before and during the merger. Levin was not a seller, and he rode the stock all the way down. That is a testament to his integrity and his obtuseness both.
''Stealing Time,'' another book about the merger, by Alec Klein of The Washington Post, came out last summer. It is a meaty, brisk and conventional work, based on Klein's vigorous investigation of AOL's unorthodox accounting methods. Klein's achievements really come to life, oddly, in Munk's book. In a riveting passage, Munk describes AOL Time Warner's disgraceful efforts to bully The Post into spiking Klein's articles. The company, itself the home of some of the nation's most respected journalists and a supposed friend of the First Amendment, reacted to questions from Klein by hiring one of the nation's most feared libel lawyers, Thomas Yannucci, and threatening to sue. The shameful episode captures in an anecdote Levin's folly in allowing AOL's corrosive values to find a home in his company. The Post, needless to say, did not bend.
With ''There Must Be a Pony in Here Somewhere,'' Kara Swisher, a technology columnist for The Wall Street Journal, has written a breezy, entertaining and glib book about ''the AOL Time Warner debacle,'' but it is only nominally about the merger. The deal, in Swisher's hands, is an occasion for remarks, and her book is a memoir and a manifesto. Its real burden is to make the case that, failed mergers and market collapses or no, the Internet is still important.
Swisher was a regular participant in many conferences devoted to the digital era. (Those conferences were the only consistently profitable product generated by the Internet economy.) Her book sometimes reads like comments from the dais. ''I am still a believer,'' she writes. ''In the wake of the crash, true faith in the eventual dominance of the Internet is not an easy thing to admit to. In fact, largely because of this one disastrous deal, saying you believe in the Internet as a revolutionary medium is a bit like admitting to a capital crime.''
The books by Swisher and Klein are lopsided, focused predominantly on AOL, the less interesting of the two companies. Munk is more balanced, and her digging went deeper. Sometimes, indeed, she provides too much detail: the precise amount of the mortgage payments Levin's parents made in 1932, the brand of hair gel used by an AOL salesman.
Swisher insists that AOL deserves a place in history, at least, ''by popularizing the online experience'' over the telephone. But there is no future in that, and AOL has not shown itself to be at all nimble in finding a way to make money from people who connect to the Internet at higher speeds. Swisher provides the better portrait of Ted Turner, by far the most interesting and authentic figure in the saga. Turner sold CNN and the rest of his cable empire to Time Warner in 1995 and lost $7 billion as the stock sank after the AOL merger. He was, Swisher writes, ''the voluble weather vane of the deal.''
Swisher's book's title is taken from a joke President Reagan liked to tell, later adopted by an AOL executive. Its upshot was an exclamation made by an optimistic boy encountering a pile of manure. One supposes she is making fun of Levin, Case and others, elbow deep in the synergistic muck, hoping to find something of value. But the title captures something of Swisher's own attitude. She remains, she says over and over, thoroughly optimistic about the transformative power of the Internet.
She has absorbed the jargon, certainly. Companies compete ''in the interactive space.'' Time Warner was at one point ''sniffing around the portal space.'' At another, it was ''nowhere to be found in the Internet space.'' AOL, on the other hand, was trying ''to break into the enterprise space.'' One wishes that Swisher, whose book is quite readable, had spent a little more time in the journalism space.
Adam Liptak is the national legal correspondent of The Times.
