He watched Super Bowl XXXVII as many Americans did, at a Super Bowl party at a friend's home, this one in Tampa with 35 people attending, ''where some came for the food, some came for the football and others just came to mingle,'' he said.
But unlike any other American, Tony Dungy followed that game disappointed that he was not coaching in it and remembering fond times with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, whom he had coached for six seasons. The Bucs won that championship last January without him. He had been fired as their coach the January before.
In the days preceding his firing, his mother died, his Bucs lost in the playoffs at Philadelphia and he had been left twisting in confusion over his status. After finally being pushed from the Bucs' plank, Dungy remembers his drive home.
It was a time for faith.
''I got in the car and immediately began trying to figure out what I was going to do,'' Dungy said. ''I do believe as a Christian that nothing happens arbitrarily. Maybe the Lord was directing me somewhere else, and I wasn't sure it was going to be football. I knew as an African-American coach that it was possible I might not get another chance quickly; I thought of Art Shell and how he didn't get hired again right away. In a couple of days when the phone did start ringing a couple of times, it was gratifying.''
One of those calls came from Jim Irsay, the Colts' owner. Because of him, Dungy remained unemployed only eight days.
Dungy became the Colts' coach and led them to the playoffs last season. This season he has taken them deeper, to the American Football Conference championship game against New England on Sunday afternoon in Gillette Stadium in Foxboro, Mass. The winner snatches a trip to Super Bowl XXXVIII on Feb. 1 in Houston. Dungy could achieve in two seasons with the Colts what he could not in six with the Bucs.
He was fired, in part, because he could not fix the Bucs' offense. He moved to a team that basically had only offense.
A town and a team have blended with a coach and his new wrinkles to push the Colts this close to the Super Bowl. Dungy, the defensive whiz, is winning with offense and with quarterback Peyton Manning's spectacular postseason play. This son of two teachers who grew up in Jackson, Mich., who played quarterback at the University of Minnesota, played three years in the N.F.L. as a defensive back and coached 15 years in the league as an assistant, has modified his approach to accentuate what his team has (offense) and disguise what it does not (defense).
For Dungy, it has been like hopping off a camel onto a cheetah.
''I think some of the players here even thought that I wanted to come in and dump all of the offensive players, trade them off and get defensive guys,'' Dungy said, laughing. ''I didn't see it that way at all. What I saw was an offense that could score, explode, run the no-huddle but at the risk of three interceptions and two fumbles and that was O.K. as long as it scored 35 points. I thought we could be sound and aggressive and mistake-free and do even more. All the while, we would try to build the defense to be fast and formidable.
''Now, when I get in games and it's 37-17 with a quarter to play, yeah, that's different for me. That still takes some adjusting. But basically, this is the way I looked at it when I took the job: This offense is like Niagara Falls. You want to give me the job of keeping the water running and you're going to pay me for that? I can do it.''
And adapt along the way and coach offense the way he does defense. Bucs linebacker Derrick Brooks knows about the latter.
''When I look at Indianapolis I see that Coach Dungy has grown a lot as a coach, that he's been through a lot, that he was hurt with the way he was let go here but went there and had that offense take on his personality in the way our defense took on his personality,'' Brooks said. ''The Indianapolis offense basically keeps their plays simple, executes and doesn't make mistakes. They want to line up and outexecute you and outman you. That's what we did on defense.
''You can't be around Coach Dungy for any time and not take on some of his personality. He is a man of faith. When we went out for our first game without him, one of our guys stopped us beforehand and said, 'What about the prayer?' That's something we always did with Coach. We stopped and did it then. He leaves marks with people that last. He's going to the Super Bowl. It's his time.''
Dungy's regular-season record is 76-52 and includes a payback 38-35 victory at Tampa Bay on Oct. 6. His Colts lost by 41-0 to the Jets in last year's playoffs but beat the Jets, 38-31, on Nov. 16.
He has made the playoffs in six of his eight seasons as a head coach. His playoff record is 4-5. This is his second conference championship game: he lost the 1999 National Football Conference title game when St. Louis beat Tampa Bay, 11-6.
''Coach Dungy is humble and smiling, but at the same time, you know he's about his business,'' said Colts defensive back David Macklin, a fourth-year pro. ''He wants us to let it loose, just use your talent. Have fun, but when you're on the field you're on your job. Take it seriously. Don't take a day for granted. Cherish each day in the N.F.L. and enjoy the moment. At the same time, know that tomorrow is not promised. He has a lot of impact on me, personally, how I should live, how I should treat this game and how I should respect this game.''
Dungy's coaching mentor is Chuck Noll, the coach he played for at Pittsburgh and who won four Super Bowl championships with the Steelers. Dungy said it was during his stay in 1977 and 1978 as a player in Pittsburgh that he became a man of faith.
''My grandfather was a minister and I had two uncles who were ministers but it was when I went to Pittsburgh and changed positions from quarterback to defensive back, an undrafted guy trying to make it at a position where the team already had stars, that I was exposed to some players who had a strong belief,'' Dungy said. ''These guys were different from the guys I had been hanging around. And I found that pro football had such highs and lows, that you could be close to a Super Bowl or no job, that you can make the Pro Bowl but lose everything as a player on one play if injured, that I had to have help to make it.''
What about the mix of faith and football, he was asked. Some of his peers have said that he unrealistically wants all his players and assistant coaches to be Christians although football is a game that requires a few nasty, dirty dogs.
''That is not true,'' Dungy said. ''I strike a balance. But I do expect my players and coaches to be a certain way, to be professional and disciplined. When it comes to Sharpies and cellphones used in celebrations, we won't have that. It doesn't help you win. And by the way, I've been around some Christians who were nasty, dirty dogs on the football field who you never wanted to mess with.''
Dan Rooney, the Pittsburgh owner, said that not everyone in the league may have deep respect for Dungy but that those who truly know him do.
''There appears to be a big difference in this Indianapolis team since Tony Dungy went there and I think it's trust,'' Rooney said. ''Players know what he is telling them is true and he means what he says. He does it without the yelling and screaming, but it works. He tells his players to do what they can, do what they do. He plays to his strengths. He says it like it is. He has brought them more stability.''
Dungy said that he has sessions with Manning where Manning gives him his read on an offensive play and Dungy tells him how defenses are likely to respond. Manning's approach to his job is much like Dungy's was as a quarterback. Dungy enjoys the fact that Manning relishes having control to change plays at the line of scrimmage. Dungy calls Manning ''a sponge.''
A husband and father of five children, Dungy knows what it would mean historically to become the first black coach to reach a Super Bowl. He also knows that the Patriots will not easily crumble.
''They've been there and done it, been in big games and won them,'' Dungy said. ''But we beat Tennessee when they hadn't lost a divisional game at their home. We just beat Kansas City when they had won 13 straight at home. We're 8-1 on the road. We've got to beat a team now that has a lot of confidence in close games. It's going to be a cat-and-mouse game.''
One in frigid cold where more than once he will deliver this message to his players: Just keep the faith, in themselves and their Super Bowl dream.
PRO FOOTBALL
