NOT so long ago, Long Island was a frontier area for the big-box stores. Wal-Mart and Home Depot had already become ubiquitous in less densely populated areas of the country, but they stayed away from the Island because it was so expensive to lease enough space to accommodate a store big enough to fill a few football fields.
Not anymore. Having overcome their qualms about the high price of Long Island real estate, the nation's biggest discount retailers took the plunge into the local market and quickly discovered a gold mine. Now Wal-Mart has nine stores on the Island and is in a turf war with Target and Kmart, which have eight apiece. BJ's and Costco megasupermarkets are springing up all over the place. Best Buy is selling Long Islanders electronics by the acre. Just when Home Depot seemed ready to exterminate every other hardware store on the Island, Lowe's has begun to mount a big-box challenge.
The only things holding back the big-box stores are a worsening scarcity of available space to build them and local governments that are throwing up roadblocks for fear of traffic congestion and other neighborhood concerns. But it appears that those two factors have begun to put the brakes on the big-box boom.
Mitchell H. Pally, a vice president of the Long Island Association, the region's largest business group, said that when the Targets and Wal-Marts finally decided to come to the Island, they found that ''most of the major sites were already developed or earmarked for development.''
''So now they are trying to fit these large stores into an already-developed area, which makes it difficult if not impossible,'' Mr. Pally said. ''In many cases, the towns have been very accommodating, but in other cases they have been less than accommodating.''
Local developers have had to deal with zoning restrictions for decades, but the trend truly became Islandwide only last November, when for the first time since the Town of Riverhead was founded in 1792, the town board voted to adopt a master plan to control development and protect existing businesses. The master plan created a ''destination retail zone'' extending east from the Tanger Mall for about 1.5 miles.
Philip J. Cardinale, the new Riverhead town supervisor, said that 90 percent of that strip is already developed but that the town is inviting ''destination retail and big-box stores to that area.''
''We don't want them to sprawl'' into downtown Riverhead, Mr. Cardinale said. ''The quality of the downtown area, its ambiance and the size of the stores does not lend itself to big-box stores. It is a traditional downtown and we want to keep it that way.''
The idea is to avoid a situation like that described by Ronald S. Lupski, whose home on Front Street in East Meadow is across the street from a Home Depot. ''The biggest problem is trucks that come in during the middle of the night,'' he said. ''They are supposed to unload between 7 a.m. and 6 p.m., but they have received summonses for not complying with that.''
''Since Home Depot moved here 13 years ago this has been a problem,'' said Mr. Lupski, whose father built the house in 1948 when the site of the store was a potato farm. ''They were delivering as early as 5 o'clock in the morning at one time.''
Neighbors' complaints caused Hempstead Town to enforce unloading restrictions, but Mr. Lupski said the problem then became trucks that would arrive early and idle until they could unload.
''In December, I had to call the police because they came as early as 3 in the morning,'' he said. ''The police came and told the driver to either shut the engine or move. And last week a truck came at 5:30 in the morning and sat idling. I called Home Depot three times before they told the driver to shut off the motor. You can't sleep.''
Mr. Lupski said traffic is a ''nightmare'' because of all the cars trying to get into the store's parking lot. ''Home Depot doesn't belong in a residential neighborhood,'' he added. ''It belongs in an industrial park.''
Developers, of course, tend to take a dim view of zoning restrictions. ''Unfortunately, we have non-progressive municipalities on Long Island that have put moratoriums on development or changed the zoning classifications to prevent large retail tenants from coming in,'' said Charles R. Serota of Serota Properties in Valley Stream, which has been developing commercial property on the Island for 40 years.
For instance, Mr. Serota said that under a new Brookhaven Town law, he is limited to a 65,000-square-foot building on a 14-acre plot. In the past, 135,000 square feet would have been O.K.
Mr. Serota said such restrictions were causing the Island to fall behind again. ''If you compare growth on Long Island to other parts of the country, we are stagnated,'' he said. ''We are not getting new business to come here.''
If the gold-rush era for big-box stores on the Island is indeed winding down, it will have lasted little more than a decade. Wilbur Breslin, president of the Garden City-based Breslin Realty Development Corporation, a major commercial developer on the Island, claims godfatherhood to the big-box invasion, saying it began when he brought KMart to the Island in 1992.
Mr. Breslin recalled that for that first deal he had to lower the rent, but got a percentage of the revenue if it reached a certain threshold. ''They figured I wouldn't see anything for 30 years, but I got it in the first year,'' Mr. Breslin said. ''Every one of the first four deals I did with them brought me a percentage rent the first year. They just projected way too low.''
In fact, he said, KMart's Bohemia store ''was their highest-volume store in the United States.''
In 1995, Mr. Breslin brought two Wal-Mart stores to Long Island -- one to Middle Island and the other to Centereach.
''When one retailer smells that another is doing business, they all come out,'' Mr. Breslin said.
In 1997, Wal-Mart took over a former Caldor's in Uniondale and did the same in Riverhead in January 2001. It opened one more store in 2002 and three last year, and plans to open another three by next year in Westbury, Farmingdale and Commack, according to Mia T. Masten, community affairs manager for Wal-Mart's eastern region.
''Long Island has been a very successful market for us,'' she said, though like representatives of other retailers she declined to provide specifics.
Mr. Breslin said that all the Long Island Wal-Marts are doing well. ''Centereach does about $85 million in business, Middle Island $75 million and East Meadow is over $100 million,'' he said.
Mr. Breslin said he had persuaded Wal-Mart to open the East Meadow store, arguing that it would succeed despite the fact that there was already a Wal-Mart 1.1 miles away in Uniondale.
''That shows you how strong Long Island is,'' he said.
''Right now, they are all fighting for location,'' Mr. Breslin said of the big-box stores. ''When they try to locate their size store in Nassau County, it is impossible. So you end up buying buildings and tearing them down, which is very expensive. But now that they know they can get the volume of business, they will pay the rent.''
That is precisely what happened at the Nassau Mall in Levittown, which at one time was an enclosed mall housing about 50 tenants occupying spaces as small as 800 square feet.
''It was a community center anchored by a grocery store, Pathmark,'' said Randall Briskin, director of retail leasing for the mall owner, the Feil Organization in Manhattan.
But in recent years, the mall has been transformed. When a BJ's Wholesale Club opens there later this year -- construction is scheduled to begin within 30 days -- it will have gone from ''an enclosed mall to a power center, where the bulk of the tenants are category killers like BJ's, which is a category killer for grocery needs, and Best Buy, which dominates the electronics market,'' Mr. Briskin said.
''These tenants are so strong that they draw from a much wider radius, therefore making them much more powerful and hence the name power center,'' he explained.
''There is no doubt in my mind that there is upward pressure on prices,'' Mr. Briskin said. ''But these are smart companies and at some point they cry uncle. Lowe's, Home Depot, Target and Wal-Mart are all scouring the market on Long Island looking for space. We had interest from Lowe's and Wal-Mart for the BJ's site.''
Edward Blumenfeld of the Blumenfeld Development Group in Syosset said he too has found that ''tenants are being very aggressive in their desire to get a location.'' And developers, he said, must in turn be creative in responding to their needs.
''You have to find ways to buy land in strategic locations, and sometimes you have to assemble'' property, he said. ''You buy one and then try to get others around it. Those who succeeded in Monopoly when they were very young succeed in this.''
When Wal-Mart opened in the Islandia Shopping Center on Veterans Highway last September, it took over a Pergament Home Center, which was shuttered after the chain filed for bankruptcy in 2001. But finding the room for it there and convincing other tenants not to fight the move took some doing.
Because the Pergament store was only 76,000 square feet and Wal-Mart needed 130,000 square feet, a neighboring Old Navy store was knocked down, according to the developer, Vincent M. Polimeni, owner of Polimeni International in Mineola.
''We razed about 100,000 square feet to build the Wal-Mart,'' Mr. Polimeni said. ''We were able to completely redo the box to accommodate Wal-Mart's needs. The site had already been properly zoned for the shopping center, but I had to get approval from the Village of Islandia to expand and to approve the new configuration.''
He pointed out that Home Depot was also interested in the Pergament site and would have moved into the store without expanding it. But the village preferred Wal-Mart and Mr. Polimeni said he opted for the Wal-Mart deal ''because at the end of the day it was a much better deal and Wal-Mart has the best credit in the world.''
''I now have a stream of income for the next 20 years that is gold,'' he said. ''I can go to the bank and leverage that rental income. I can borrow 80 or 85 percent against it, whereas with another company worth less I would be able to get 70 or 75 percent.''
But Mr. Polimeni said that before he signed the deal, he had to get some concessions from Wal-Mart to ensure that it did not hurt other merchants in the shopping center. For instance, he said, Wal-Mart agreed to dedicate no more than 5,000 square feet of space to the sale of pet food -- half the normal size -- because the Stop &amp; Shop supermarket also sells it.
To persuade Stop &amp; Shop and his other Islandia tenants not to fight the deal, Mr. Polimeni said he told them Wal-Mart was considering moving in across the street.
''I told them it would compete with them and knock their brains out,'' he recalled. ''With Wal-Mart here, we could restrict the 900-pound gorilla, which is what we are doing. And that's how I sold it to them.''
Municipalities are joining the gorilla-taming business because Long Island is quickly approaching the point of being overbuilt in big boxes, according to Jack O'Connor, senior vice president of C.B. Richard Ellis, a brokerage based in Woodbury.
''Now that Target and Lowe's and Wal-Mart are vying for the same property -- property that does not exist -- the towns are starting to resist the overbuilding of big box entities because they just add to traffic problems,'' he said. ''If we have 2.7 million people -- a figure that has gone up by only about 100,000 in the last five years -- and if you keep adding these stores, you are oversaturating.''
