Never the Top Dog, Political Animal Quits
That's it, Herman Badillo says -- no more political campaigns for him. Absolutely, he promises.
For nearly four decades, Mr. Badillo has been a prominent warhorse of New York City politics, from his 1965 election as Bronx borough president through his losing race for mayor in 2001.
That was his fourth unsuccessful run for City Hall, and there were two aborted bids as well.
But an election that he did win made him an ethnic pioneer nationally. Capturing a seat in the House of Representatives in 1970, in a district comprising parts of the Bronx, Manhattan and Queens, he became the first person of Puerto Rican descent elected to Congress from any state. He was re-elected three times, but gave up the seat after seven years when Edward I. Koch appointed him a deputy mayor.
But being elected the top dog at City Hall proved elusive, as Mr. Badillo failed to win four mayoral primary contests -- as a Democrat in 1969, '73 and '77, and as a Republican in 2001, when Michael R. Bloomberg trounced him. Many politicians saw Mr. Badillo's effort that year as quixotic, noting that he had little money, was facing a billionaire opponent and had little backing in the Republican Party for his bid.
Last week, Mr. Badillo, 74, said he had ''no intention of running again for mayor or any office.''
''I think that's enough for me,'' he said. ''I never said that before.''
Speaking by telephone, he stressed that purging the campaign bug from his blood did not mean he was ceasing his efforts to influence public policy. ''I find I can change policies without being in elective office,'' he said.
Indeed, as the appointed vice chairman and then chairman of the City University of New York from 1997 to 2001, Mr. Badillo successfully spearheaded a bitterly controversial effort to tighten admission and graduation requirements at CUNY and remove remedial courses from its senior colleges.
He is currently an adviser to Gov. George E. Pataki on reforming the state's Medicaid program. And he continues to practice law at his firm, Fischbein Badillo Wagner Harding, which is considered one of the most politically connected law firms in the city and where Mr. Badillo handles matters including real estate, banking and medical malpractice.
''I don't intend to retire,'' Mr. Badillo said.
He also has another goal. Family history has it that ''my great-grandfather in Puerto Rico lived till 108,'' he said, and ''I hope to tie that record.''
For Killing Spree, An Insanity Defense
In February 2002, a woman was found shot and grievously wounded in New Jersey, and she died after nine months in a coma. Two days after she was found, a car mowed down 18 people in Manhattan, one of whom later died; the driver fled. The next day a taxi driver was shot and wounded in Manhattan. The day after that, another car ran down seven people in Manhattan; the driver fled.
Ronald J. Popadich of Garfield, N.J., was arrested in connection with all the incidents. Mr. Popadich lived near the woman who was shot, Lisa B. Gotkin, and he is charged in New Jersey with murder in her death. They said he had hit the pedestrians intentionally and had shot the cabdriver, and he is charged in New York with murder in the case of the pedestrian who died, Neal C. Spicehandler, and attempted murder in the other injuries and the taxi driver's shooting.
Mr. Popadich, 41, is being prosecuted first on the charges in New Jersey, where he is jailed. In pretrial proceedings, ''the defense position, at least at this stage, is that he was legally insane at the time,'' the prosecutor, James V. Santulli of the Bergen County prosecutor's office, said last week. ''At this time, we don't agree, but they will provide additional information.''
An insanity finding, he said, would mean Mr. Popadich's confinement in a psychiatric institution for life, unless he is deemed no longer a danger to himself or others at some point. Mr. Popadich's lawyer, Melody Merola, declined to comment.
Following Up
