Under attack by his rivals at long last, Senator John Kerry could not have been happier.
After spending most of 2003 reeling from his own troubles and his rivals' successes and clamoring for attention, Mr. Kerry, once considered the leading prospect for the Democratic presidential nomination, joked that he finally seemed to be getting the breaks.
''Here it is, the strategy,'' he said Friday, pulling a four-leaf clover from his pocket as his motor coach cruised across northeastern Iowa in what was starting to resemble a Kerry Comeback Tour. Yet luck had little to do with Mr. Kerry's apparent surge into contention.
Interviews with dozens of new Kerry supporters and still-undecided voters this week suggest that many Iowans once enchanted by Howard Dean, but alienated by a steady diet of critical reports about him, have begun to swing Mr. Kerry's way. And Mr. Kerry, the maximally accessible Massachusetts senator, has been enjoying consistently favorable coverage for the first time.
More than anything, though, what is pushing Iowans into Mr. Kerry's corner appears to be as much the way he listens to them as what he has to say. A recurring scene has the candidate planting his duck boots or brown loafers in front of a skeptical audience and taking question after question, repeatedly asking for a show of hands to see how many are undecided, and waiting as the number drops toward zero.
Wednesday night in Des Moines, as 260 people listened in a theater and 170 more watched him on a closed-circuit TV in a spillover room, he took questions for nearly two hours.
''We're staying here till the sun rises, until we get you to agree,'' he said. Another few minutes, and half as many hands were in the air, and the questions kept coming, the heads kept nodding, and the candidate kept feeding off the energy in the room.
Ruth Mitchell, 42, approached Mr. Kerry afterward to say that he had won her over. ''I want to see someone who could converse honestly with people,'' she said. ''I'm tired of the stump speeches. I like his ability to do the give-and-take. His answers are concise, but concrete. I'm persuaded this is not something he came up with to run for president, this is his life.''
The next morning in Council Bluffs, Mr. Kerry spoke at a pancake breakfast to 250 people jammed into a basement meeting room. Linda Snyder, 54, said she had come because she thought Dr. Dean had ''a lot of flash and pizazz, but I don't know if we can trust him.'' Yet she said she worried about Mr. Kerry's lacked of charisma. ''Before, he was just yecch,'' she said.
Afterward, Ms. Snyder said she was worried no more and would now push her friends and neighbors to support Mr. Kerry. ''I feel much more confident in his ability to take his experience and get it across to the American people,'' she said.
Friday in New Hampton, Mr. Kerry gave an unremarkable speech but impressed Gladys Christoph, 51. She said she initially was drawn to Dr. Dean but not when she saw him in action. ''When he's asked a question, he doesn't respond to it, he gives a pat answer,'' she said. ''That sounds cute, but it doesn't approach what the people were asking. When Kerry answers a question, he is responding to the person.''
Ms. Christoph said she was now solidly for Mr. Kerry: ''There's a wonderful firm presence about him that seems he could be in command, and yet he's flexible.''
For months, Mr. Kerry's advisers watched as, each time Dr. Dean encountered trouble, something occurred to change the subject. ''There was a time when Howard Dean said crazier and crazier stuff, and kept getting more popular,'' one aide said.
But Mr. Kerry has been making his own luck this week. On Sunday, he took an unexpected phone call from Christie Vilsack, Iowa's first lady, offering her support; she is now appearing in commercials for him. On Wednesday, the state agriculture secretary endorsed him.
Those surrogates were campaigning for Mr. Kerry over the weekend, as were former Senators Bob Kerrey, Max Cleland and Gary Hart; the actor Scott Wolf and the band Blink-182, to court the youth vote; and the senator's wife, Teresa Heinz Kerry, and daughter, Vanessa, to woo women voters. Nearly every Massachusetts congressman has fanned out across the state, and Senator Edward M. Kennedy is to be in Iowa on Sunday and Monday.
While Mr. Kerry has said all along he was optimistic about his chances, he is showing it now. ''I believe in this candidacy,'' he said Friday. ''I believe in this candidate, I believe in myself, in what I can offer as leadership to the country. There's nothing made up here. This is real. This is me, 35 years of me, that I think is ready to lead.''
Late Friday, after rallying about 300 students at Clarke College in Dubuque, about 30 miles north of here, he spoke to his precinct captains there. He told them to ignore the polls. ''There's great capacity for people going to the caucus to surprise you,'' he said, unaware reporters were listening. ''We have to keep on being the surprise.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE SENATOR
