VOYAGE TO THE END
OF THE ROOM
By Tibor Fischer.
251 pp. New York:
Counterpoint. $23.
THE British novelist Tibor Fischer seems to have calculated, quite correctly as it turns out, that a spectacularly nasty review of a more celebrated writer would garner a great deal of attention for his own simultaneous offering. (Sorry, I tried, but I couldn't ignore the elephant in the room.) The British press jumped all over this story as if a man had bitten a dog, and the furor was reported here last summer as if we hadn't seen similar career moves on this side of the ocean. I only wish that Fischer's new novel, ''Voyage to the End of the Room,'' were as single-minded and intemperate as his now famous, crotch-kicking review in The Daily Telegraph of Martin Amis's ''Yellow Dog'' -- or for that matter, as intemperate as ''Yellow Dog'' itself.
The author of three previous novels and a collection of stories, Fischer is possessed of a quirky, acidic intelligence and a picaresque sensibility. His books take the form of zany, erudite travelogues -- packed with entertaining, if pointless, anecdotal diversions -- that make ''Tristram Shandy'' seem almost linear by comparison. His first novel, ''Under the Frog,'' which was shortlisted for the Booker Prize, follows the misadventures of two semiprofessional Hungarian basketball players in the years after World War II. His second, ''The Thought Gang,'' ricochets around France, where an epicurean, alcoholic Cambridge philosopher teams up with a one-armed psychopath to commit a series of bank robberies, some of them based on the thought of specific philosophers.
His new novel has a similar structure -- though ''structure'' is a word to be used only in the loosest sense in connection with Fischer's brand of narrative anarchy. In this case, it's as if he decided to write a sort of parody of his earlier work -- a kind of faux or anti-travelogue, from the point of view of a woman who never leaves her apartment. This conceit, which is presumably a comment on the futility of travel in the era of globalization, ultimately hamstrings the novel.
Here's the story: Oceane, an exotic dancer turned computer graphics designer, retreats to her apartment after helping to design a video game that makes her wealthy; one day she receives a letter from a dead lover, whom she met a decade before when she was working at a sex club in Barcelona. She hires a debt collector named Audley to do the legwork required to solve this mystery.
Housebound Oceane stages mock visits to such ''destinations'' as Helsinki, with the help of a travel agent who arranges a Finnish experience in her building. A few drunken Finns and a Finnish chef are recruited to act out the idea of a trip to Helsinki, to somewhat hilarious effect. The problem is that when Fischer contrives to get himself (and us) out the door by means of flashback and via Audley, who acts as a kind of surrogate traveler -- he is rigged with a video linkup to facilitate Oceane's ''travel'' -- the supposed destinations are rendered if anything less vividly than the fake Helsinki. In the case of the agoraphobic Oceane, this vagueness of detail may be part of the joke -- but the same lack of texture characterizes Audley's travels, and finally, the joke isn't rewarding enough to sustain a full-length novel.
As we all know, Barcelona is practically the hippest place on the planet right now, which may be why it's the nominal setting for a large portion of the book -- a flashback that sets up the mystery of the dead lover's letter. But don't get your hopes up. Fischer could just as easily have substituted Berlin, Prague or Seattle without changing another word in this long section. Oceane never appears to leave the building in which she works, the upper floors of which house a dormitory. Her room faces a brick wall, and the roof deck where she spends most of her time has walls too high to see beyond. She performs in a live sex show. But again, don't get too excited. There are a few generalized descriptions of the scenarios acted out onstage, but Fischer seems to want to have it both ways -- to give his book and his narrator the transgressive cred of the sex industry while maintaining such a no-big-deal distance from the specifics of her work that she might just as well be a dinner theater actress. ''After the first few nights it became like any other job.'' I don't believe this for a second. Anyway, the novelist's job is to show, to deal in particularity. (See ''Yellow Dog'' for detailed descriptions of life in the sex industry.)
Oceane's fellow sex performers, an international cast of misfits, are distinguished mainly by freakish back stories, which are admittedly diverting. Fischer's powers of invention are well-nigh heroic. But as much fun as the anecdotes may be, they don't create any plausible sense of character or plot. Fischer's fondness for the bizarre detail and for the workings of chance undermines his characterizations. (One of the Barcelona crew is killed by a cow falling out of the sky. Talk about deus ex machina.) This is fun in a Monty Python way, but it doesn't serve Fischer's larger purposes. I kept finding myself turning back to try to remember who was who when characters turned up later in the book. (Oh, right, the guy who wears the bondage face mask.) Walter, the lover whose letter jump-starts the plot, failed to make any impression on me whatsoever.
Audley's experience as a mercenary in Croatia, laid out in another long flashback, is similarly broad and featureless. When at one point he walks through a town subjected to ethnic cleansing, Audley says, ''I won't tell you about what we saw in the village.'' All we can say is, Thanks for nothing.
The pleasures to be had here, by no means insignificant, are those of language and observation. ''He has an extraordinarily wiry body. So many fingers have gone down so many throats in the dance world for such steeliness.'' Fischer is a distinctive stylist. For one thing, he has a habit of turning nouns into verbs: ''sweat ivies down his face''; ''loud music ketchups a multitude of activities.'' This sort of thing works less well with abstractions, as in the repeated phrase ''Audley visibles.''
Those who are already fans will find pungent, intermittent pleasures in this book. New readers are advised to check out Fischer's earlier novels. If his future work lives up to the promise of the previous novels, then maybe someday he can look forward to a really vicious review from an up-and-coming novelist.
Jay McInerney is the author of six novels, including ''Bright Lights, Big City,'' ''Brightness Falls'' and ''Model Behavior.'' He is working on his seventh.
