SITTING in the seventh row center at Symphony Space, enjoying a performance that had been a Christmas gift from him to her, the young couple were ready to be awed by their first real-life glimpse of Isaiah Sheffer, he of the golden public-radio voice.
But as they registered the doughy figure of the man onstage, from whom the familiar avuncular saxophone of a voice had issued, they felt as if they had come face to face with a ventriloquist, a creature who, now that he had been unmasked, was not at all what they had expected.
''I thought he would be younger,'' Shawn Taylor, an animator with long sideburns, said during intermission, his eyes widening with the shock of it. ''Maybe larger.''
''And taller,'' added his companion, Lazarus Nazario, a painter with a blond flip.
''His voice has such a presence,'' Mr. Taylor explained.
''And in a darker suit,'' Ms. Nazario said.
Incarnate, Mr. Sheffer was revealed to have thinning gray hair and a retiring physique that even at 5 feet 11 fell short of the stature of his voice. He wore a well-tailored sand-colored suit over a folksy blue gingham shirt. All in all, Mr. Sheffer did not cut a figure that would stand out in the hurly-burly of pedestrians on Broadway if Mr. Taylor and Ms. Nazario, who are from Staten Island, had encountered him as they emerged from the subway at 95th Street.
Yet it was the seductive power of Mr. Sheffer's voice that had drawn them and a sellout crowd of 828 others to Symphony Space on Wednesday night, despite 9-degree weather and snow, for the opening night of the 20th season, and the 200th performance, of ''Selected Shorts.'' When ''Selected Shorts'' began in 1985, who would have thought that a program in which actors read short stories out loud would become not just a New York institution but a national success, broadcast on up to 150 radio stations, and the most popular program ever offered at the 26-year-old cultural center?
You might think that going to the theater to hear short stories read out loud, by actors in street clothes sharing the stage with a cheap Persian rug and a vase of pink tulips, might be as bland as oatmeal, as daunting as a story by Donald Barthelme (yes, they've done him).
Mr. Sheffer, not only the host of ''Selected Shorts'' but also the impresario who had the foresight to turn a former wrestling arena into a cultural empire, says the popularity of the 13-week series has something to do with childhood memories of the pleasure of being read to. But people in the audience explained its genius in other ways. They said they liked being exposed to good literature in small doses. They said they liked being able to pay just $21 to sit close enough to spit at accomplished actors like Cynthia Nixon of ''Sex and the City,'' Karen Kandel of Mabou Mines and René Auberjonois of ''Star Trek: Deep Space Nine,'' who this evening were reading Eudora Welty, Zora Neale Hurston and T. Coraghessan Boyle.
Most of all, the listeners seemed lost in the power of those voices, Mr. Sheffer's and the rest, that left room for their own imaginations to do the work that television and the movies too often do for them.
Last year, Sylvia Rubens and Rachel Weinstein, friends who have attended every show for five years straight, had to walk out in the middle of the Tim O'Brien story ''July '69,'' as read by William Hurt, because it was so upsetting. ''William Hurt's so wonderful that you can imagine how horrible it was,'' said Ms. Rubens, shivering at the memory.
Wednesday night, the three actors gathered backstage to wait their turns. ''Do you think her name is Li-AH-ta?'' Ms. Nixon asked about a Welty character. ''No,'' Mr. Sheffer replied, ''it's Li-OH-ta.'' Ms. Nixon, a last-minute replacement for Barbara Barrie, who was rehearsing ''Fiddler on the Roof,'' began speed-reading her script out loud, as if she were saying a rosary.
Some short stories played out in private. Mr. Sheffer handed a sealed envelope to Mr. Auberjonois, who lives in Los Angeles. ''René, can you meet us after the performance?'' read the message inside, signed Fritzie, of Fritzie, Richie and Frenchy, who were inseparable junior high school pals of his ages ago in Rockland County.
People think that an actor reading from a text, rather than memorizing it, is somehow cheating. But memorization, said Mr. Auberjonois, is the least important part of the job. ''It's the interpretation, the character,'' he said. ''I was scared silly the first time.''
That night he read a story about a beautiful American woman who spurns her Scottish shepherd lover and is blown away during a highlands gale, never to be seen again. He read it with a hint of Scottish brogue. When he was finished, the couple in Row 7 discovered that like the bird woman, they had been swept away. They had been able to suspend disbelief, even over something as unexpected as the sight of Isaiah Sheffer, the man behind the Voice.
COPING E-mail: amh@nytimes.com
