The Sony Open clearly agrees with Ernie Els.
After shooting a four-under-par 66 Saturday, he is threatening to become a back-to-back champion here. He was one stroke behind the leader, Harrison Frazar, heading into the final round Sunday at Waialae Country Club.
But it was crowded at the top. Frazar also shot a 66 and was at 14-under 196. Davis Love III (63) and Frank Lickliter II (65) were two strokes back at 198.
The first-place check is worth $864,000. Els earned almost $2 million in winning the first two events on the Tour last year, and Love would not mind a fast start this year.
''It used to be the whole theory that the Tour started at Doral,'' Love said, referring to the March tournament in Florida. ''There wasn't as much money on the West Coast. Now there's tons of money. Like I said last week, Ernie Els was $2 million ahead of me before I even had a start. It shows you, the West Coast is important.''
For the third consecutive day, there was almost no wind at normally breezy Waialae, allowing players to attack.
''This golf course needs the breeze from somewhere to make it tough,'' Els said, ''and at the moment it's just dead calm.''
Els breezed through Hawaii a year ago, winning the Mercedes Championships and the Sony, setting the tone for a year in which he won seven times. Els did not want to be overconfident, but as the world's third-ranked player, he has reached the point where he expects to win often.
''Every week, I want to feel like I've got a chance to win,'' Els said. ''That's got to be my mind-set. That's the way I've been playing the last couple of years.''
Like many people, Love missed the presence of 14-year-old Michelle Wie, who missed the cut by one stroke Friday. Wie was at Waialae on Saturday, watching and doing some television commentary, but Love noticed that there was not the same electricity in the air.
''It seemed boring out there today,'' Love said. ''It was very exciting. I made a point of speaking to her, and I was watching her play just like everybody else. There was an argument whether she should be playing or not. But once she's here -- I mean, it's the talk in the locker room when I walked in there. The guys that got outhit and the guys that got beat. It's an incredible story. Just a year ago we were wondering if an L.P.G.A. or lady player could play out here.''
Frazar, a 32-year-old Tour veteran, birdied the final three holes. He will be after his first victory, but he has finished in the top 100 on the money list six consecutive years. The last time he held a 54-hole lead was last January at the Phoenix Open, where he finished tied for third.
Love, who won four Tour events last year, was encouraged that he shot a 63, the best score of the day, without playing his best golf.
''Obviously, you can always hit more fairways, but I think for the most part I'm just a little bit erratic with my irons and putting a little bit too much pressure on my putting,'' Love said. ''Maybe it's just concentration. I'm pretty close to playing real good.''
The second-round leader, Steve Allan, shot a 70 and fell into a tie for fifth at 11-under 199 with Paul Azinger (66).
GOLF
