I STARTED working in the warehouse at age 12. It was an upgrade. Everybody in my neighborhood picked berries -- agriculture in Oregon was, and is, a big deal. I got to work at my family's company, Columbia Sportswear, which began as a hat and cap company.
I never thought I would go into the family business when I got older, and I wasn't serious about work at all. I was very mediocre. I was much more interested in talking about jazz with a guy who worked at the warehouse than in completing orders.
For a time, my dad was importing products, and he was focused on putting the Columbia labels on the products we imported. My job was to retag this merchandise. I ultimately finished the work, but what should have taken a day or so took three weeks. I think that's about the time my father sent me to clean the elevator sump. Our building was in an old maraschino cherry factory, and there was a lot of gunk down there.
In 1970, I was a senior at the University of Oregon, studying journalism with a minor in political science. My intention was to go to law school or buy a newspaper. But my dad died unexpectedly, and I came home from school to help my grandmother and mother run the business. My dad had just taken out a loan, backed by my parents' house, my grandmother's house, all the assets of the family.
I made every mistake in the world. It was a tiny business, $1 million in sales in 1970. But by 1971, under our direction, we were at half a million.
We tried to sell the business but couldn't find any buyers. The bank gave us a few months to liquidate or turn around the business, which we slowly did. I look at the experience as a very expensive M.B.A. program.
Hunting and fishing are my favorite hobbies. I like solitude and the chance to challenge myself to outwit a fish or bird. I took a team of customers on a float trip down the Deschutes River in Oregon in the early 1990's. We fished hard for three days and didn't touch a steelhead. Our last night at camp, everyone headed in different directions to make the last few hours on the river count.
I rowed across the river in my drift boat and walked upstream to a spot that looked promising. I made a couple of casts and hooked a huge steelhead, fought it for 25 minutes, then landed it in the dark after having screamed and yelled the whole time. Because it was a wild fish, I had to release it, which I did. After I rowed back to camp and told my story, no one believed me, except one person who claimed he believed me, but I don't really think he did.
My dream hunting trip would be to Argentina, to shoot doves. There are so many birds there that even someone with my ability could do well. My son Joe is my favorite hunting and fishing partner. It's great to spend time with him, and he is already a much better shot and angler than I am.
EXECUTIVE LIFE: THE BOSS
