IMITATION isn't always flattering. Just ask the ''American Idol'' judge Simon Cowell. Mr. Cowell appeared earlier this month on Fox's ''World Idol,'' which pitted ''Idol'' winners from around the globe against one another. To his chagrin, the international panel of judges was largely composed of curmudgeons like him. ''They may as well have worn Simon masks,'' he said. ''It was embarrassing.''
Mr. Cowell's love-to-hate-him persona has played a key role in the success of ''American Idol,'' as it did in Britain's ''Pop Idol,'' the series from which ''American Idol'' sprang. So it's no surprise that similarly caustic critics were cast in the 16 versions of ''Idol'' begun in other countries.
Of course, viewers stateside won't have to accept substitutes. Mr. Cowell returns this week with his fellow judges, Paula Abdul and Randy Jackson, and the show's host, Ryan Seacrest, for the third ''American Idol'' season, which begins tomorrow night at 8 and will be followed by two more hourlong shows on Tuesday and Wednesday, also at 8.
Not much about the show will have changed, except for the contestants. And that's just the way Fox wants it. ''If it ain't broke, don't fix it,'' said Mike Darnell, executive vice president for alternative programming and specials at the network. ''People seem to love this formula.'' Thirty-eight million people, to be precise. At least that was the number of viewers who tuned in to the second-season finale last spring.
Viewers have enjoyed spotting raw talent ever since the 1948 premiere of ''The Original Amateur Hour,'' based on the long-running radio show ''Major Bowes' Amateur Hour.'' ''The Original Amateur Hour,'' with Ted Mack as host, began on the DuMont network and ran sporadically in prime time, with near annual shifts to competing networks, until 1960, when CBS scheduled it on Sunday afternoons until 1970. ''Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts'' was equally popular, becoming the top-ranked show for the 1951-52 TV season.
The genre's staying power may be the result of its kid-next-door appeal, said Tim Brooks, co-author of The Complete Directory to Prime Time Network and Cable TV Shows, 1946-Present. ''TV is an intimate medium, founded on the idea of people relating to people,'' he said. ''What's more relatable than seeing someone who could be your son or daughter show off their talent and make something of themselves?''
Mr. Darnell added that the promise of overnight stardom tapped into something quintessentially American. ''Almost everybody's dream is to be famous,'' he said, ''and talent shows are a quick ticket to achieving that.''
''Idol'' was followed by more than half a dozen copycats. Some achieved modest success, like ''America's Next Top Model,'' which began its second season on UPN last week; ''Star Seach,'' which returned yesterday to CBS; and ''Nashville Star,'' scheduled for another run on USA in March. Many imitators, though, fell flat, including NBC's tepid ''Fame'' and laugh-challenged ''Last Comic Standing'' and ABC's veiled beauty contest, ''All-American Girl,'' and trashy ''Are You Hot? The Search for America's Sexiest People.'' Even Fox's own ''Idol'' offspring, ''American Juniors,'' missed the mark, as did CBS's ''Idol''-like twist on relationship shows, ''Cupid,'' which was created by Mr. Cowell.
So what does the original ''Idol'' have that others don't? ''Like all great revivals,'' Mr. Brooks noted, ''it put a new spin on a TV staple.'' Take Mr. Cowell. Never before has a talent show judge offered such harsh words for would-be singers. ''They would have run him out of town in 1950,'' Mr. Brooks said, adding that Mr. Cowell's acerbity provides the hit reality show with a postmillennial dose of reality. ''In our cynical society, there's something genuine about his remarks.''
Perhaps more important to the show's success are its open auditions, which are also new to viewers. ''To see the good, the bad and the ugly gives the show credibility,'' Mr. Brooks said.
The auditions also provide some of the show's funniest moments. ''The show works because of its imperfections, not its perfection,'' Mr. Cowell said. ''There has to be that mixture of good and bad, rough and smooth, because it just shows up human nature better.''
And this season promises plenty of the bad, which seems to emerge primarily from Houston. ''Some of our worst auditions may have come from that part of the country,'' Mr. Darnell said, laughing. He also noted a few minor production changes. This season Houston replaced Austin as the show's audition hub in Texas, and tryouts were held in Honolulu and San Francisco in addition to Atlanta, Los Angeles and New York. The show is also aiming for bigger-name guest judges. Last season's roster included Neil Sedaka, the songwriter Dianne Warren and the Bee Gees' Robin Gibb -- artists not that familiar to the show's younger viewers -- but this season the producers have set their sights on superstars like Elton John, Paul McCartney and Stevie Wonder. ''We'd be happy to have one of them come through,'' said Cecile Frot-Coutaz, an executive producer on the series, ''but it's always tough to match up their availability with ours.''
Ms. Frot-Coutaz, who is also chief operating officer for production with FremantleMedia North America, the television company that produces ''Idol'' worldwide, noted that the series had succeeded wherever it had been shown, including the 22 countries in which ''Idol's'' pan-Arab version is telecast via satellite. Its success, she added, ''speaks to the fact that human beings have the same emotional reactions, wherever you go.''
Given the cyclical nature of most TV trends, one such reaction may eventually be a loss of interest in this kind of show. But Mr. Darnell is taking steps to prevent that. The key to prolonging the show's success, he said, is limiting its exposure. Although series like ''Survivor'' and ''The Bachelor'' produce two multiepisode competitions per season, Mr. Darnell believes the ''American Idol'' series of elimination rounds should be seen only once a season. Winners, he said, ''need to reign for a year, like Miss America.'' To crown more, he added, ''would water the show down.''
''American Idol'' is one of the few reality shows with a measurable afterlife, Mr. Darnell added. After all, while the audience may quickly forget who the last Survivor was, ''Idol'' fans are buying its winners' CD's. ''The end,'' he said, ''is just the beginning.''
COVER STORY
