ASIAN food is so much about subtlety of difference that when I first encounter it in a restaurant I find it hard to get a handle on. I leave thinking that the food was pretty good -- O.K., I guess. I'm not entirely sure.
The cuisine reveals itself slowly over time. A comparison of two restaurants is helpful in acculturating my palate to unfamiliar flavors.
This is the second of two columns about getting to know Thai cuisine via two restaurants on the shoreline: Siam Orchids in Branford and Som Siam in Guilford. Broadly speaking, the cooking at the two restaurants differs in style. Siam Orchids (203-483-6993) tends toward delicacy and subtlety, while Som Siam tends toward heartier tastes.
Because I haven't eaten in Thailand, I can't know what is authentic. But the distinctions that I inevitably make between the two places -- comparing menus, preferring this or that version of a dish -- leave me feeling that the cuisine belongs to me.
A difficulty I've had in getting to know Thai food is translating the menu. Beyond the familiar categories of soups, appetizers, salads, etc., the menus at the two restaurants also list several different types of entrees that early on were indistinguishable from one another. (It doesn't help that the spelling of the dishes changes between menus.)
Both menus list a group of dishes called ''curries,'' all made with coconut milk and some combination of vegetables. They're offered with a choice of meats, seafood, or vegetables. There is also a section of ''specialties.'' There are other dishes (labeled ''entrees'' at Siam Orchids, for example, or the ''crazy wok stir fry'' at Som Siam) also offered with a choice of meats, seafood, or vegetables. The menus identify these dishes by specific seasonings and vegetables, but they don't look so different from the ''specialties'' and ''curries.''
This kind of thing gets under my skin; I need to understand the differences in order to get my brain around the cuisine.
So this is what I discovered. As they are made at the two restaurants, a Thai curry (inherited from Indian cuisine) is a meat, seafood, or vegetable stew seasoned with an intensely flavorful curry paste made of toasted spices, fresh herbs, aromatics (such as lemongrass and garlic) and chilies. Red curry paste tastes predominantly of red chilies; green paste of green chilies, lemongrass and lime. Yellow curry paste tastes of flavors we would recognize as Indian curry spices (colored yellow by the turmeric). Massaman curry paste combines the sweet flavors of Indian garam masala (cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, mace, cardamom, cumin). Red curry paste is used in red curry, green paste in green curry, etc. (There are other types of curries too: give them a try.)
Curries are rich: the flavors are complex and coconut milk makes them relatively heavy. Siam Orchids' curries are thinner and lighter tasting (my preference) than those at Som Siam.
The specialties at both places seem to be distinctive in some way (perhaps regional cuisines?), with particularly engaging or unusual tastes. Many are stir-fries. Duck is popular at both restaurants: Siam Orchids' tamarind duck (tender roasted duck in a mildly acidic sauce that cuts the richness of the meat) and the duck panaeng at Som Siam are excellent. The wild boar basil at Siam Orchids is made with tender strips of pork, decorated with strings of Thai peppercorns and something julienned and pickled (it might be lime zest); it's delicious.
Other assorted entrees and stir-fries are everyday meat and vegetable dishes characterized by simple sauces (soy sauce, fish sauce and aromatics -- often with a little sugar) and some distinguishing element. The lemongrass stir-fry, for example, tastes mostly of lemongrass; pad kra prow is sweet and hot and tastes of fragrant Thai basil.
For dessert, I've fallen in love with the sweet, satisfying sticky rice with fresh mango. At Siam Orchids, the rice is dry and literally sticky, seasoned with a lovely balance of sugar syrup, salt and sesame seeds. At Som Siam, it's creamy with coconut milk.
Som Siam  63R Whitfield Street, Guilford  (203)458-0228
Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Informal, tiny, very pretty with delicate décor.  NOISE LEVEL -- Moderate.  SERVICE -- Friendly, quiet, helpful, a little slow when they get busy.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- All soups (particularly the superb wonton); curry puffs, spare ribs, yum ped grob, pad kra prow, emerald plate, fisherman's boat, ped jean, duck panaeng, house fried rice, pad see-ew, dessert tapioca.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers and soups: $4.95 to $7.95; Salads: $3.95 to $12.95; main courses: $8.95 to $15.95.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards accepted.  HOURS -- 11:30 a.m. to 9:30 p.m., Sunday through Thursday; 11:30 a.m. to 10 p.m., Friday through Saturday.  RESERVATIONS -- Advisable on weekends.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- Good.  Reviewed by The Times Jan. 18, 2003.  Ratings -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING
