RAMEAU: 'DARDANUS' AND 'LE TEMPLE DE LA GLOIRE' SUITES  Tafelmusik Baroque Orchestra, directed by Jeanne Lamon. CBC Records SMCD 5229; CD.
Like the many works by Handel rediscovered in the 1980's, the music of Jean-Philippe Rameau is once again finding an audience. And though the formidable William Christie is predictably leading the reclamation in Paris, others are helping, including Jeanne Lamon, the Canadian violinist who directs Tafelmusik.
For 25 years, Ms. Lamon and Tafelmusik have earned high marks playing mostly German repertory. But their new CD of suites from two Rameau operas shows that their talents are not parochial. Indeed, Tafelmusik reveals a pronounced enthusiasm for Rameau's music.
Though best known today for his keyboard and vocal writing, Rameau was a gifted orchestrator. His radical harmonic notions found elegant expression in his lyric tragedies and opera-ballets, works he did not begin composing until he was 50.
Among the most tuneful of these efforts are ''Dardanus,'' which had its premiere in 1739 and was twice revised, and ''The Temple of Glory,'' prepared in collaboration with Voltaire in 1745 to celebrate a French military victory. Only a portion of the orchestral music Rameau wrote for these works is played here, but what made the cut is an artful blend of woodwinds, brasses, strings and judiciously employed percussion. It will have listeners wondering why this music is not as well known as works by Bach, Handel and Vivaldi.
If it seems an exaggeration to mention Rameau's music in the same breath as Vivaldi's ''Four Seasons,'' just listen to the overture from ''The Temple of Glory,'' with its spirited rivalry between brasses and woodwinds. And the same opera's ''Air de Triomphe'' and ''Air Gai'' are as regal as anything in Handel's ''Royal Fireworks Music.''
Similarly, listeners not paying close attention to the rigaudons from ''Dardanus'' might mistake them for something in Bach's ''Brandenburg'' Concertos. Little in Baroque music rivals the vigor and élan of the opera's boisterous tambourins.
Still, the music's greatness might not be so obvious but for Tafelmusik's fine period style, with robust yet disciplined strings, focused brasses and mellifluous woodwinds.
DAVID MERMELSTEIN
RECORDINGS
