A rampaging fire tore through a six-story waterfront apartment building in Brooklyn yesterday morning, killing two men, injuring dozens of people, displacing scores more and bringing a broad swath of Sheepshead Bay to a frozen standstill.
More than 300 firefighters were called to the scene, at 3030 Emmons Avenue, in a rapid succession of five alarms made necessary by how quickly the flames spread, and by the challenge of searching and evacuating a populous and oddly shaped building, officials said.
Fire marshals were investigating the cause, but they did not suspect arson, said Jim Long, a Fire Department spokesman.
The police identified the dead men as John Ambrico, 56, and Lester Walton, 67, who lived in separate apartments in the building. Other residents of the building said that Mr. Walton was last seen knocking on doors in an effort to evacuate his neighbors.
''He stayed to help people,'' said Lamar Walton, 33, the victim's son, who added that his father was a retired civilian employee of the Fire Department. ''That was his nature.''
Mr. Ambrico, the other victim, lived in Apartment 1J, according to his brother, Donald Ambrico, 58, who lived in a separate apartment in the same building.
Mr. Long, of the Fire Department, said that the fire had begun in Apartment 1J.
Donald Ambrico said his brother was a Vietnam veteran with mental illness. ''After his wife left, he had a mental breakdown, and I've been taking care of him,'' Mr. Ambrico said. ''It's just the two of us.''
John Ambrico was last seen alive across the street at Shoreway Convenience Store around 6:45 a.m. Saeed Khan, 32, who works in the store, said Mr. Ambrico bought a pack of cigarettes. ''He joked around with us,'' Mr. Khan said. ''He was a little crazy, but he didn't bother anyone.''
''He smoked a lot,'' Mr. Khan added.
It took about five hours to bring the fire, which was first reported at 6:57 a.m., under control. The first firefighters arrived four minutes after the initial report, Mr. Long said. Within 63 minutes, four more alarms were called, summoning more than 60 units to the building, which has more than 130 apartments in several wings.
Witnesses and officials said that firefighters were thwarted by frozen fire hydrants and had to run hoses from blocks away.
''The wind started, and that didn't help,'' said Stephen Orlando, 56, a fisherman who lives in the building and whose apartment was destroyed.
''It didn't look that bad, then, boom, it took off.''
Mr. Long said the fire spread through recesses in the wall where pipes stretch between apartments. Flames started on the second floor and spread to the fifth.
''Once it gets in there, it can spread quickly,'' Mr. Long said.
The wind, the cold weather and the inaccessibility of the building because of its waterfront location compounded the difficulty of fighting the fire, he added.
Fire boats, capable of blasting river water from deck-mounted hoses, were called to the scene. Officials declared the flames under control at 11:57 a.m., Mr. Long said.
By then, a long stretch of Nostrand Avenue was blocked off, with long patches of slick ice covering sidewalks. A procession of fire trucks stood between empty city buses and cars.
From the street, firefighters could be seen on the roof of one wing of the building.
Through the top-story windows of another wing -- where the roof had been destroyed -- clear sky could be viewed through billows of smoke.
One by one, people were rolled out on stretchers. A companion of one injured woman grabbed at a news photographer's camera. In all, 20 firefighters were injured, mostly suffering strains, and seven other people were taken to hospitals to be treated for smoke inhalation.
The building's owner, Donald Lentnek, said that 66 of the more than 130 apartments in the building had been severely damaged.
''For Brooklyn, it's a luxury building -- terraces, air conditioning, a swimming pool,'' Mr. Lentnek said. ''I'm shocked. I've never seen a fire more serious.''
The Red Cross registered 58 families in need of assistance, and set up a relief center down the street at the Sheepshead Bay Yacht Club, where displaced tenants could talk with friends and family and try to find places to stay for the night.
Many people also received help from neighbors.
Ann Randazzo, 84, was given a bowl of soup and a glass of wine by her neighbors. She said she was haunted by memories of Mr. Walton.
''He was going around knocking on doors trying to get people out,'' Ms. Randazzo said. ''He was a lovely man. This should never have happened.
