FIDDLEHEADS NEW YORK is the name, but it refers not to Manhattan but to New York Avenue in Huntington. The restaurant is a spin-off of the five-year-old Fiddleheads in Oyster Bay, a tiny, stylish seafood grill. The words stylish and seafood also apply to the Huntington restaurant, but this spacious, two-level newcomer could never be called tiny. Carved out of the space that once was part of the long-gone Huntington Theater, it could hold three or four restaurants of its parent's size.
Patrons enter what looks like a small storefront before being led back to a cavernous dining room. Up front is a classy bar with an Art Deco mural, pressed tin ceiling, couch and small tables topped with white cloths and glowing lamps.
The dining room is both stark and sharply attractive with its all-black high-tech ceiling of heating ducts and pipes and a glassed-in kitchen. Some of the walls are old brick; others, sponge painted gold, double as a gallery for paintings by local artists.
The staff was young and eager to please but a bit tentative in the delivery of dishes. Most of the time, though, the sweet crew got the job done.
A few welcoming treats made a good first impression: flavorful bruschetta, a ramekin of red pepper butter and a basket holding glistening rolls -- some studded with black olives, others with peppers, a few topped with onions.
The dishes on the sophisticated menu range from Asian-inspired successes like the yellowfin tuna handrolls with jasmine rice and a clump of seaweed salad to the ''get your hands dirty'' New Orleans barbecued shrimp -- three jumbos in a spicy sauce, accompanied by rice and French dipping bread.
Other appetizer worthies were the all-meat Asian crab cakes paired with sesame soba noodles and Chinese greens, four lightly seared diver scallops escorted by a nifty mango salsa and a mound of fiery kimchee, four skewers of tender lamb satay with a coconut-laced peanut sauce and a flavor-packed lobster bisque bolstered by sherry and tarragon.
Salads get an A for looks but a B for taste. The stunning baby spinach with its mantle of deep-red amaranth greens looked like Christmas, but its Champagne vinaigrette, goat cheese, roasted shallots and bacon yielded little flavor. The lobster, asparagus and cucumber salad had the same defect. A cylinder of greens and asparagus wrapped in a long, thin slice of cucumber and crowned with chunks of sweet lobster was held back by its flavorless ginger-carrot vinaigrette drizzle.
Fish is the way to go at entree time. The sautéed Maine cod, a tall hunk of snowy white goodness that separated into ivory shards at the touch of a fork, could not have been better. Its caviar-leek-shiitake cream sauce was a fit partner. Another don't-miss fish was the porcini-dusted halibut with a wild mushroom-three potato hash. The hard-to-picture but easy-to-eat roasted catfish with a Southern-style bouillabaisse also more than made the grade. The perfectly cooked fish sat upon a tasty seafood stew. It worked.
The paella didn't. The shellfish were cooked correctly, but the dish had a put-together-at-the-last-minute taste. The flavors never melded.
My favorite entree was a quartet of colossal grilled shrimp set upon a portobello mushroom filled with sautéed onions, all arranged on a sea of creamy white cheddar grits. Shrimp and grits was the hot restaurant darling encountered on recent trips to Charleston, S.C., and Savannah, Ga., but none was as satisfying as Fiddleheads'. Another hit starred four baby lamb chops and three of those giant shrimp alternating to form a teepee with bones and tails crossing over a yummy white bean cassoulet.
For non-fish eaters, the rib steak with cowboy spices hit the mark, as did a large bowl of penne in a vodka-amatriciana mixture featuring pancetta, prosciutto, shallots and onions in a tomato-vodka cream sauce.
Desserts were as stylish and delicious as the rest of the meal. None disappointed. Most memorable were the thick and satiny crème brûlée, the eggnog cheesecake with buttered rum sauce and the moist bread pudding studded with dried fruit in a white chocolate custard. The virtuous should try the tangy blackberry-zinfandel sorbet but everyone should try Fiddleheads New York.
Fiddleheads New York  368 New York Avenue (Route 110), Huntington, (631)549-5757.
Very Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Large, stylish seafood grill.  SERVICE -- Eager to please but still learning.  SOUND LEVEL -- Loud when restaurant is full.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Crab cakes, tuna handrolls, barbecued shrimp appetizer, diver scallops, lamb satay, lobster bisque, halibut, grilled shrimp, catfish, lamb and shrimp ''chops,'' rib steak, penne in tomato-vodka cream sauce, all desserts.  WINE LIST -- Nearly 100 bottles ($22 to $135) with a quarter of them under $30. There are 17 by-the-glass selections ($6 to $9).  PRICE RANGE -- Lunch, entrees $10 to $18 plus a $10 prix fixe two-course meal (includes a nonalcoholic beverage). Dinner, appetizers $5 to $16; entrees $18 to $32; desserts $8.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards.  HOURS -- Lunch, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Dinner, 4 to 9 p.m. Sunday, 5 to 10 p.m. Monday through Saturday.  RESERVATIONS -- Recommended.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- A few steps to one dining area. Restrooms not accessible.  REVIEWED BY THE TIMES Jan. 18, 2004.  RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING OUT
