Democratic presidential candidates campaigned furiously across Iowa on Saturday as they approached the conclusion of a competitive and complicated fight that party officials said would set the tone for the rest of the nomination battle.
What until last week had seemed like a two-way contest for first between Howard Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri has turned into what Democrats described as a four-way free-for-all with two days remaining before Monday's caucuses. In campaign headquarters across this unseasonably warm capital, senior advisers struggled to figure out who was up and who was down, prompting a dizzying volley of attacks.
At the center of those campaign-closing calculations was Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, who in recent days suffered an erosion in his position here and across the nation, according to Democratic officials and Dr. Dean's advisers.
Several Democrats said that the very thing Dr. Dean had long offered as his greatest strength as a candidate -- his ability to confront President Bush with a strong ideological challenge, fueled by huge numbers of new voters and millions in campaign contributions -- had been undercut by attacks from his opponents, as well as missteps by Dr. Dean.
Together, those combined to raise questions about his electability and his credentials to be president in a year when polls and interviews show that Democratic primary voters are hungry to oust Mr. Bush, and when his rivals have been seeking to present the nomination of Dr. Dean as a recipe for disaster this fall.
''It's gotten tighter; it's gotten a lot tighter,'' said Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager, as he tried to shepherd his campaign through its first actual electoral test. ''The hammering that we've been taking has taken a toll.''
A poll of likely caucusgoers to be published by The Des Moines Register on Sunday underlined the sense of of uncertainty about Monday's vote, with victory in reach of any of them. Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts had 26 percent, followed by Senator John Edwards with 23 percent and Dr. Dean with 20 percent.
The poll had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four points, meaning that the differences are statistically insignificant. Mr. Gephardt was the choice of 18 percent of the 605 voters surveyed.
And a New York Times/CBS News poll taken this past week noted a jump, to 20 percent from 12 percent, in the number of Democratic primary voters nationwide who said they held an unfavorable view of Dr. Dean. More ominous for Democrats assessing which candidate might be the strongest to unseat Mr. Bush, the poll found that 29 percent of all registered voters held an unfavorable view of Dr. Dean -- a notably high number for this early in a campaign.
In Council Bluffs, on the western edge of Iowa, Kathleen Sailors, a retiree, said she was reconsidering her support of Dr. Dean as she watched him in these final days of the contest. Mrs. Sailors said electability would be her No. 1 criterion when she attends her first caucus on Monday night, and she said she was no longer sure that Dr. Dean was her party's strongest candidate.
''I thought he was going to be the only chance we had to get one of our guys in there,'' she said. But now, she said, ''I'm just not sure anymore that he's the best one to beat Bush.''
Dr. Dean also said the race was tightening but told reporters he remained optimistic because of the vigor of his organization.
''Today we're up, yesterday we were down,'' he said before learning of The Register's poll, a reference to the daily tracking polls that are published here. ''The polls at this point cannot predict who's going to caucus and who isn't going to caucus.''
From the first light of a gray, dank morning here through nightfall, the presidential contenders spread out to town halls, coffee shops and village squares across the state, traveling by bus, airplane, car and, in Mr. Kerry's case, by helicopter.
''Work, work -- organize, organize,'' Mr. Edwards shouted at a rally with campaign workers at his headquarters, summing up what every campaign sees as the key to victory.
In Clinton, Mr. Kerry fired back at Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt for challenging his support for farmers because he had once called for cutbacks in the Agriculture Department. ''It's obvious that my campaign is moving, because two of the major candidates have chosen in the last two days to engage in a smear effort on my farm policy,'' he said.
Mr. Kerry was unapologetic. ''If the other candidates want to defend U.S.D.A. and its representation of the small farmers, let them go ahead and do that,'' he said.
Polls in Iowa are famously imprecise, given the difficulty of determining who actually attends caucuses and what they might do in the course of what is supposed to be two hours of deliberation. The only other candidate running in Iowa is Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio.
Given the peculiar nature of the caucuses, a campaign organization can, by recruiting supporters and getting them to the meetings on Monday, overcome any qualms about a candidate -- and that clearly was how Dr. Dean's aides were hoping to carry him out of this valley.
Democratic leaders here said that based on that organization, and on the enthusiastic way his supporters have embraced his candidacy, they continued to believe Dr. Dean was in a strong position.
The streets here were teeming with youths and not-so-youths in orange caps and knapsacks, who had come in from out of state to try to muscle Dr. Dean to victory. Dr. Dean said that 3,500 volunteers were here and 2,000 were on the way.
His aides suggested that this out-of-state brigade was a powerful counter to the labor support assembling behind Mr. Gephardt and the Iowa Democratic machine support that Mr. Kerry has put together. If that proves the case, this last-minute story line of a tight race, if heart-stopping for Dr. Dean and his aides, may prove to be a hidden blessing for the Dean campaign, because of the way victory has come to be measured in this first-in-the-nation contest. Dr. Dean now, as opposed to as recently as four days ago, is now in a position where he will be able to portray even a narrow victory as a ratification of his candidacy and a sign from voters that his troubles are behind him.
One way or another, the results here seem certain to provide the framework for the rest of the campaign. And the final results will go a long way toward determining how long it will be before the Democratic Party knows who its nominee will be.
Dr. Dean's advisers said they were still hopeful that he would win convincingly here, and follow with a victory in New Hampshire, allowing him to coalesce the party around him and head off a growing challenge from Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who is skipping the Iowa caucuses.
The other possible outcomes suggested a more extended struggle.
The challenge to Dr. Dean has come at the same time that General Clark, in New Hampshire, has shown signs of undercutting Dr. Dean's dominance there. That has forced Dr. Dean to divide much of his time between Iowa and New Hampshire.
Dr. Dean took a break from campaigning in Iowa to hold a conference call with reporters on Saturday evening to express optimism about his New Hampshire effort. He has increased spending on television advertisements in New Hampshire, where he is now heavily outspending General Clark, Democratic officials say.
Mr. Kerry could also prove to be a factor in New Hampshire should he end up doing well here on Monday, Democrats said. He won the endorsement on Sunday of one of the state's most prominent newspapers, The Concord Monitor.
Iowa's vote will be the first in a campaign that has been shaped from the start by an overriding dynamic among Democratic voters: a search for a candidate who can beat Mr. Bush.
''We have never seen polling and anecdotal evidence that suggests that electability is one of the primary considerations influencing voters,'' said Chris Lehane, a senior adviser to General Clark, who earlier in the campaign was a senior adviser to Mr. Kerry.
That dynamic shaped the candidates' appeals right through the final hours of the Iowa campaign, with many Democrats using it both to promote their own candidacy and to attack Dr. Dean's credentials.
''In the end, it's also my experience that people are voting for,'' Mr. Gephardt said in Cedar Rapids on Saturday. ''They want somebody who can actually get these things done. And they want to know who can beat George Bush. And I really believe that when they bear down on that issue, they'll see that I have the best chance to beat Bush.''
Both General Clark and Mr. Kerry, citing their résumés and war records, have made their own electability a central part of their overall appeal to voters. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who is also bypassing Iowa, argued that his moderate views on issues like taxes and trade would made him a stronger challenger to Mr. Bush.
Dr. Dean, declaring himself in ''full combat mode'' as he hopped through three important Iowa cities, again sought to counter claims that he would be a weak candidate in the general election by arguing that he would turn out millions of new voters.
''I think we're the candidate most likely to beat George Bush, and I think we're the campaign best able to govern after beating George Bush,' Dr. Dean said.
Some Democrats said Dr. Dean might be paying a price for being viewed as the front-runner too early in the process, allowing time for his opponents to attack him and for, at least to some extent, a premature display of the kind of ''buyer's remorse'' that presidential candidates often have to grapple with when a perception takes hold that they have won the nomination. And some Democratic voters who are making up their minds now may be less likely to support Dr. Dean than the hard-line Democrats who rallied around his tough message from the start.
The uncertainty here has been fostered by the difficulties Dr. Dean has encountered over the last few few weeks, such as when he asserted that the nation was no safer after the capture of Saddam Hussein, a statement for which Democrats as well as Republicans attacked him. One result of these difficulties, Mr. Trippi noted, is that there has been more attention paid to Dr. Dean's scrapping with his rivals over what he has said than to his original appeal.
Mark Penn, Mr. Lieberman's pollster, said: ''They want someone who they believe can take on Bush. And they thought initially that his strength and his argument on the war meant that he can take on Bush. But I think he's fallen short on some of the other areas about whether he can really take on Bush, or whether Bush would slice him and dice him.''
Paul Maslin, Dr. Dean's pollster, disputed that. ''We've asked the question 'Who could beat George Bush?' for a long time,'' Mr. Maslin said. ''Howard Dean has had no competition on that question.''
Mr. Trippi said he thought that Dr. Dean had regained his footing in the race by returning to the themes of opposing the war and presenting himself as the only Democrat who would take on Mr. Bush.
''I really think the governor turned the corner two or three days ago, when he came in and said to us, ''I'm going to let it rip,' '' he said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE DEMOCRATS
