Joseph A. De Laine Jr.  Briggs v. Elliott
Mr. De Laine, now 70, was a teenager when his father, the Rev. Joseph De Laine, fought to secure a school bus for black children of Clarendon County, S.C. Students had to walk up to nine miles each way to their all-black school (above, the route). The bus was denied. His father went on to persuade black parents to participate in Briggs v. Elliott, a lawsuit that would become the first of five cases making up Brown v. Board of Education.
''Everything regarding segregation sticks in my mind. I knew that when I went into town to the dry cleaner, if I was taking something for my mother I had better call her by her first name and not Mrs. De Laine. Blacks were not referred to as Mr. or Mrs. It's Janie, it's Beulah. It's putting you in your place. I never went to a movie as a child because I wasn't allowed to go into a segregated movie and sit in the buzzard's roost, as we call it, which was up in the balcony. My brother recalls sneaking into the movies and my father having a fit.
''In 1951 our home was destroyed by arson. The fire department refused to put the fire out because it was 20 feet across the town line. We have no idea who started the fire. I feel very certain, though I have no proof behind it, that regardless of who burned the house it was instigated by a white power structure.
''Then in '55 my father was given 10 days to leave town or die. Tensions began to heat up. My father, who was a minister, had been forced to take a job at a church outside the county. He was living in Lake City, where this other church was. There was vandalism on the church parsonage. On the seventh day the church was destroyed by arson. On the 10th day there was a delegation, or posse or whatever you want to call it, who paid a visit to the house, and then there was about three rounds of gunfire. On the third round, my father began to shoot back. He allegedly shot some people,'' though no one was killed. ''After this happened my father escaped and ended up in New York. He was safe, but the warrant remained for his arrest until 2000.
''He died in 1974.''
John Stokes  Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County
In 1951, Mr. Stokes helped lead a strike to improve conditions at the all-black Robert R. Moton High School in Farmville, Va. The strike eventually led to one of the suits that went before the Supreme Court.
''I can play it back as if it were today. You have to go back to around 1915, when they started building schools for white kids made out of brick. The brick schools had indoor toilets, running water, indoor heating. As of 1951, the blacks had only two brick buildings in Prince Edward County. All the other elementary schools were made of wood. There was no running water, which meant no matter how hot or cold it was they had to go out to the outdoor toilets, which were terrible, really. There was no flushing. Sometimes you looked down and there were maggots crawling around.''
The high school ''was built for 180 students. There were three tar-paper shacks that had been put up to accommodate the overcrowding. When I went there, there were about 456 kids. The tar-paper shacks had potbellied stoves. Those things were fired up in the winter time and the person that was sitting on top of them burned their butts up and those individuals sitting in the far corners had to sit with their coats.
''Eventually, we decided that we had had enough. We came up with the concept'' of a strike. ''All 456 students took part. It worked. Sometimes I look around and wonder how the powers that be could be so dumb as to not realize how much power we had.
''My twin sister and Barbara Johns,'' the student who led the strike, ''addressed a letter to the N.A.A.C.P.'' W. Lester Banks, executive secretary of the Virginia State Conference, ''met with us and he told us and all the parents that the only way we could get this thing through was to fight for integration, not equality. And we agreed to go back to school. On the 23rd of May, the N.A.A.C.P. and our parents filed suit.
''What we did back then opened the way for black kids. In 1951, no one had heard of Martin Luther King on the national scene. Martin Luther King took a page out of our book on nonviolence, and no one has ever given us credit for it.''
THE CASES
