Conrad M. Black, the British media baron, is near a deal to sell his controlling interest in Hollinger International to David and Frederick Barclay, brothers who own London's Sunday Business and The Scotsman, for more than $200 million and outstanding debts, according to executives briefed on the discussions.
The deal for control of Hollinger, publisher of The Daily Telegraph of London, The Chicago Sun-Times and The Jerusalem Post, could be announced as early as Sunday, the executives said. Still, they cautioned that the talks were continuing and the deal could collapse.
Lord Black faces inquiries by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Justice Department into more than $32 million in allegedly unauthorized payments that he and his top executives collected. He owns a 72 percent vote in Hollinger International, and a 30 percent economic interest, though a private company called Hollinger Inc.
According to the executives, the deal with the Barclay brothers, who also own the Ritz Hotel, is a complex transaction in which they would take control of another Lord Black company called Ravelston, which in turn owns a 78 percent stake in Hollinger Inc. But any deal by Mr. Black to sell his stake may run afoul of agreements made Friday between Hollinger and the S.E.C. intended to prevent Lord Black from doing so.
New of the possible sale comes as a special committee of Hollinger International is conducting an investigation and as Lazard, the investment banking firm hired by the company, seeks to find a way to restructure Hollinger International.
Hollinger International's executive committee announced Saturday that Lord Black ''has been removed as non-executive chairman of the company, effective immediately.''
In addition, the special committee created to investigate accusations of unauthorized payments to Lord Black filed a lawsuit on Saturday against him and the company's former president, F. David Radler.
The suit charges that Lord Black and his top aides systematically diverted company funds. The complaint, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, asserts that Lord Black and the others directed more than $224 million in payments for themselves that were far in excess of any services they performed, among other accusations. The lawsuit goes into extensive detail describing how, it says, Lord Black misled the company.
Despite earlier accusations that he had arranged unjustified payments, the suit stunned investors who have followed the company. ''It shows that the allegations of shareholders who have been angry for a long time were true,'' said Herbert Denton, an informal adviser to several institutional investors of Hollinger. ''It all shows the depth and scope of what the special committee is going after and how enormous it is.''
If Lord Black tries to sell his stake, the head of Hollinger's special committee, Richard C. Breeden, a former chairman of the S.E.C., would become a special monitor under the authority of the federal court to protect the interests of Hollinger International and its shareholders.
On Sunday, Lord Black faces a deadline to make an $850,000 payment to Hollinger under an agreement he and two associates reached to give back $7.2 million in noncompete payments that Hollinger had paid them without board approval.
