Many parents have been there: snug to the kitchen table with a struggling tween, pencil poised -- and totally lost. ''Middle school is the place where kids have the most problems, the place where parents reach the level where they're not able, or willing, to help the kids with math anymore,'' says Johnny W. Lott, president of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, an association with some 90,000 teachers as members. To help out, the council developed 80 math ''challenges,'' kicky standards-based problems for fifth to eighth graders. ''We thought these would suck in kids and families,'' Mr. Lott says. The council hopes to devise problems for early grades, too. More challenges are at figurethis.org.
A. Is the Statue of Liberty's nose too long? Figure this: The arm of the Statue of Liberty is 42 feet long. How long is her nose? (Hint: How long is your nose? How long is your arm?)
B. It's raining! Who sees more: the driver of the car or the truck? Figure this: Which wiper cleans the greater area? (Hint: Draw models of the areas, then cut them out and compare.)
C. If each side of the triangle in Figure 1 is one inch long, this means the triangle has a perimeter of three inches. Suppose you continued the pattern
in the diagram until you reached Figure 5. What is the sum of the perimeters of all the white triangles in Figure 5? (Hint: Find the sum of the perimeters for all the white triangles in each of the figures above. What pattern do you see?)
D. The costs of combinations of frowns, smiles and neutral faces are shown. How much is a smile worth? (Hint: Find a way to combine two rows or columns that have something in common.)
E. During the 100-meter dash in the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea, Florence Griffith-Joyner was timed at 0.91 seconds for 10 meters. At that speed, could she pass a car traveling 15 miles per hour in a school zone? (Hint: How many meters in a mile? How many seconds in an hour?)
1. What letters, when written in lowercase, can be read the same upside down as right side up?
2. Spread out your fingers and look at your hand. Do people with big hands have larger angles between their fingers? Figure this: Estimate the measures of the angles between your fingers when you spread out your hand. (Hint: When you hold your hand so that your thumb and index finger form an ''L,'' the angle formed measures about 90 degrees.)
3. Mark McGwire became baseball's home-run king in 1998 with 70 home runs. His 70th home-run ball sold for slightly over $3 million in 1999. Babe Ruth, an earlier home-run king, hit 60 in 1927. His home-run ball was donated to the Hall of Fame. Suppose that Ruth's ball was valued at $3,000 in 1927 and, like many good investments, doubled its value every seven years. Would you rather have the value of Ruth's ball or McGwire's? (Hint: How many times would you need to double the value of Ruth's ball to reach the value of McGwire's?)
4. Are you superstitious? Do you avoid the number 13? Figure this: Is there a Friday the 13th every year? (Hint: If Jan. 1 were on a Monday, on what day of the week would Jan. 13 fall? What about Feb. 1 and Feb. 13? Other months?)
5. Your team is down by one point. Your teammate, who makes free throws about three-fourths of the time, is at the free throw line. She gets a second shot if she makes the first one. Each free throw that she makes is worth one point. If there is no time left, what are the chances you win the game with no overtime?
(Hint: Tossing two different coins can be used to represent making or missing a shot. What are the outcomes when you toss two coins? How can you use this to model the free throws?)
6. I forgot the combination to my lock! I'm ready to cry. How many combinations will I have to try? Figure this: A combination lock uses three numbers from 0 to 39. It opens when these numbers are dialed in a particular order: right, left, right. How many possible combinations are there?
(Hint: Think about how many choices you have before dialing each number.)
7. At least two people in a school have the same initials? No way! Figure this: How many people would have to be in a school before it contained at least two people with the same first and last initials? (Hint: Consider a simpler problem. How many people would have to enter a room before it contained at least two people with the same first initial?)
8. Do you have a radar bill in your pocket? Figure this: Paper money, such as dollar bills, with serial numbers that read the same backward as forward are sometimes called radar bills. How common are radar bills? (Hint: Serial numbers on United States bills have eight digits. How many different serial numbers are possible?)
9. In March, the National Collegiate Athletic Association holds a basketball tournament. As soon as a team loses one game, it is out of the tournament. The last unbeaten team is the winner. There were 64 teams in the 1999 men's tournament. In 1985, there were only 32 teams. How many more games were played in the 1999 tournament than in 1985? (Hint: When the final winner is determined, how many teams will have lost?)
10. The water control valve on the cover of a fire hydrant has five sides of equal length and five angles of equal measure. Many common household wrenches will not turn these valves. Why not? (Hint: Think about an ordinary household wrench. Most wrenches have two parallel sides; that is, the sides are the same distance apart everywhere.)
11. Suppose the ''standard play'' setting on a VCR allows two hours of recording with an ordinary 120-minute tape. Changing the setting to ''extended play'' allows six hours of recording. After taping a 30-minute show on standard play, the VCR is reset to extended play. How many more 30-minute shows can be recorded on this tape? (Hint: What fraction of the tape was used to record the first show?)
QUIZ ANSWERS
Detailed solutions are at figurethis.org. Discuss the problems online at nytimes.com/educationlife.
1. Depending on the way the letters are written, l, o, s, x and z can be read the same upside down and right side up.
2. The size of your hand does not make any difference in the size of the angles. The angles are approximately 90 degrees, 45 degrees, 20 degrees and 20 degrees.
3. Babe Ruth's ball would have greater monetary value than Mark McGwire's. If the value of the Babe's ball started at $3,000 and doubled every seven years since 1927, its value in 1997 would be about $3,072,000, and even more in 1999.  4. There is at least one Friday the 13th every year.
5. The probability that your team wins is 9/16 (or 3/4 x 3/4) or about 56 percent of the time.
6. There are 64,000 (or 40 x 40 x 40) different combinations for the lock.
7. At least 677 people must be in a school. There are 26 letters in the alphabet, so there are 26 possibilities for the first initial. Consider all the possible pairs of two initials.
8. In the 100 million eight-digit serial numbers from 00000000 to 99999999, there are 10,000 that read the same forward and backward. Considering this fact, you might expect one in every 10,000 banknotes to be a radar bill.
9. 32 games. Here's one way to solve the problem: Consider that every team except the winner loses exactly one game. If there are 64 teams in the tournament and one winner, then there were 63 losing teams. This means there were 63 games. If there are 32 teams and one winner, there were 31 games. So, 63 - 31 = 32 games.
10. Most household wrenches will not work on the valves of a fire hydrant because there are no parallel sides on the five-sided (pentagonal) valve.
11. Nine more shows. You can consider this problem in terms of minutes or units of half-hour shows. One way to solve it: On the standard-play setting there are four half-hour shows in two hours. One half-hour show used a fourth of the tape. Three-fourths of the tape is left. With extended play, you can do 12 half-hour shows, and then you have enough tape for 3/4 x 12, or nine shows remaining.
A. The actual length of her nose is about 4 feet 6 inches.
B. The car wiper cleans a greater area.
C. 15 3/16 inches. As the figure numbers increase, the side length of each white triangle is halved, and the number of white triangles is tripled. This means that the sum of the perimeters in any particular figure is: 3 x 1/2 or 1 1/2 x the sum in the previous figure. The sum of the perimeters in Figure 5 would be 243/16 or 15 3/16.
D. A smile is worth $15. A frown is worth $10.
E. Her speed would be about 24.6 miles per hour; she could pass the car.
POP QUIZ
