Think of two new Palmer Vineyards reds as Sunday and Monday wines.
Sunday's -- serious, deep, indeed impressive -- is the 2000 Select Reserve Red. It's what you uncork when company comes and everyone eats formally in the dining room.
Monday's -- lighter, quaffable, with Beaujolais-like bounce -- is called N 41 Degrees, W 72 Degrees, and it's a 2001 merlot. This is an everyday red wine meant for the dinner table, Palmer says. The table in the kitchen, that is.
The Sunday red's gravitas is signaled by its price at the winery, in Aquebogue on the North Fork: $25. The back label explains further: The wine is a Bordeaux-style blend consisting of 63 percent cabernet franc, 25 percent merlot and 12 percent cabernet sauvignon grapes.
Besides the technically deft hand of Tom Drozd, the winemaker, behind them, the Palmer pair have something else in common: Both deliver clear-cut pleasure.
North 41, West 72 (accompanied by a front-label map with crossed hairs) is the latitude and longitude of the North Fork. It is also the coordinates for great merlot, the back label advertises.
O.K., great merlot can be found on the North Fork, but, more modestly, good merlot, quite tasty in fact, is found in this bottle. Normally, you don't buy great merlot for $9.99 and then serve it with your favorite pasta, pizza or roast chicken dish, as Palmer recommends.
A sweet fragrance virtually jumps out of the glass, my notes say. Plenty of berries. This light-bodied red is very easy drinking, almost for slurping. A good, honest wine.
As for the Select Reserve Red, produced only during exceptional vintages, Mr. Drozd has a clear bead on what he has generated.
''I consider this to be a rustic-style red wine with beautiful white pepper, herbal and earthy notes from the cabernet franc, hints of black cherry from the merlot and added depth and weight from the cabernet sauvignon,'' he wrote.
To which my notebook jottings add: The bouquet is smoky and sultry. You inhale and taste candy-store licorice, detect pencil lead and violets in the bouquet and a virtual sweetness in the flavor, along with hints of ham and bacon. The wine is seamless, has a silken texture and is muscular. Good show.
HOWARD G. GOLDBERG
LONG ISLAND VINES
