A FRIEND of mine decided after a performance one evening that she hated contemporary opera. ''I don't want to hear that ugly modern music,'' she said.
''But there are beautiful melodies in that opera,'' I replied.
''What beautiful melodies?'' she said, sneering, and she half-sang a remembered line of the chorus -- ''Peter Grimes, Peter Grimes!'' -- to show how ugly it was.
''But you're singing the right notes,'' I said. ''Even though you didn't like it, it stuck in your head.''
And what about ''Embroidery in childhood,'' the lovely soprano arioso for the character Ellen Orford? What about the great quartet in Act II, four women singing sadly and wisely about the ways of men? Or if it's easy melody you want, what about the teasing jingles of the two Nieces, the pretty young women who pass for the red-light district of the small fishing village where the opera is set?
Yet there was nothing for it. My friend didn't like modern music, and ''Peter Grimes'' was written in 1945. Therefore ''Peter Grimes'' was ugly.
That's the problem Benjamin Britten has today. His music is too conservative for new-music aficionados but on the wrong side of the dateline for anyone afraid to test the waters of the 20th century. None of his works illustrate this better than his masterpiece ''Peter Grimes,'' his first large-scale opera and perhaps his grandest, which Colin Davis and the London Symphony Orchestra will present in concert at Avery Fisher Hall today.
When it was first performed, in London in 1945, some of the musicians involved in the premiere protested the difficulty of the music. One academic described it as ''the noise of a motorbike starting up.'' Other hearers patted it on the back for its conventionality. Virgil Thomson, the American critic and composer, patronizingly called it ''a rattling good repertory melodrama.''
It was certainly popular enough to bear out his claim. ''Peter Grimes'' drew tremendous critical attention. People flocked to it. It rapidly went to other theaters (the Metropolitan Opera first performed it in 1948), and it has remained in the repertory. Yet it -- like Britten's music in general -- is underrated. It is still branded a ''contemporary'' opera, with ugly music. Or a melodrama in the standard opera-Broadway musical vein.
Ugly it is emphatically not. It's not even atonal. Britten's dissonances may stretch and strain, but they tend to resolve into an established key, always speaking in an idiom that is sharply distinctive, immediately recognizable. ''Peter Grimes'' is a tuneful opera, the whole solidly constructed and held in place with clear musical markers: folksy melodies to express the feelings of the simple villagers; articulate arias for the main characters; and the six orchestral interludes, often excerpted in symphony concerts, establishing atmosphere and mood in watercolor sea music.
The only thing ugly about the opera is its overwritten libretto. Montagu Slater, Britten's second choice as librettist (after Christopher Isherwood turned him down), evidently never said anything straightforwardly if there was a way to render it purple. His language becomes a little paradoxical, because the opera, based on the long epistolary poem ''The Borough'' by the 18th-century English writer George Crabbe, is about life in a small, provincial village. It is hard to imagine that the town whores would daintily observe, ''A man is always lighter, his conversation brighter, provided that the tête-à-tête's in threes.''
Decoding what the characters are saying can take time. But it hardly matters, because the story is so clear and the music so strong. ''Peter Grimes'' is the story of a fisherman. Like many of Britten's operas, it is at bottom the story of an individual alone against society.
Grimes is seen as an odd bird in his little village. When his first apprentice dies, tongues wag. When he gets another apprentice, the villagers whip themselves into a frenzy of suspicion that not even Ellen Orford, the village schoolmistress waiting patiently to marry Grimes, can quell. A mob forms and marches to Grimes's hut; hearing them coming, he hurries his apprentice out the back door so fast that the boy falls off the cliff to his death. This event drives the already unstable Grimes to madness. Ellen tries to save him, but his friend Balstrode advises him to take his own life.
''Peter Grimes,'' in short, has all the requisites of grand opera: love and death, big choruses and ensembles, a mad scene, a storm scene and dollops of local color. Those ingredients are a reason people call the opera conventional -- tantamount to saying that flour and sugar are too conventional as ingredients in a cake. That attitude is further evidence that the craft of writing opera is neglected today to the point of being nearly forgotten. Composers tend to heap music earnestly on a libretto and, when enough seems to have been produced, serve up the whole mess eagerly.
BUT Britten understood the craft of opera beyond the craft of composing music: the way to shape a story into effective theater. His devices are no more or less modern than those of Alban Berg, whose ''Wozzeck,'' though also tightly structured and dramatically effective, is not seen as conventional, because it is atonal.
Where the melodies of ''Peter Grimes'' are catchy, they belie the music's intricacy; where those intricacies are revealed, some performers throw up their hands and simply approximate. (Even Jon Vickers, one of the best Grimeses ever, was casual about the exact notes of the mad scene.)
The opera's central theme of otherness resonated with Britten, who struggled unsuccessfully to ''fit in,'' artistically and personally, in a society in which -- self-conscious about his homosexuality -- he never quite felt he belonged. Some stage directors conceive of Grimes as a latent homosexual; the part, after all, was written for Peter Pears, Britten's partner. But that idea is beside the point. ''Peter Grimes,'' like any great opera, is strong enough both to withstand updating and not to need it. Its timeless relevance, as well as its brilliance, is what helps lodge it -- story and music alike -- in even a reluctant listener's mind and heart.
MUSIC: TUNING UP/'PETER GRIMES'
