AFTER an initial growth spurt 20 years ago, one-story multitenanted office buildings are once again on the rise in Suffolk County, with mansard-roofed stone buildings of the 1980's being joined by modern glass and stucco curtain-walled facades of the 2000's.
According to realtors, an increase in new homes and small businesses in the past five years has created a heightened demand for services from the kinds of professional offices that are often located in these buildings. These sites are typically categorized as Class B offices -- meaning they are in good locations but do not have the advanced amenities of a Class A office building.
The one-story buildings' lower rents and such features as individual entrances and curbside parking are important to an increasing number of tenants, realtors say. The average annual asking rent for Class B office space on Long Island is $21.70 a square foot, compared with $26.51 for Class A buildings, according to CB Richard Ellis, the real estate services company.
GERRY O'SHEA, the owner of the 25-year-old O'Shea Enterprises in Bohemia, which in December opened its second single-story office building within two years, said: ''We are looking to service a practical, not extravagant, market. We are not competing for Class A tenants, but we do see a trend for people going into business for themselves, and this is a logical step once they have developed a staff.''
The company owns and manages more than one million square feet of industrial, commercial and office buildings in Suffolk County.
O'Shea Enterprises' two U-shaped one-story buildings, which can house a total of more than 40 tenants, are along Veterans Memorial Highway in Ronkonkoma and Bohemia. Both were built on speculation and the first building, adjacent to Long Island MacArthur Airport, is completely occupied.
The second, which opened in December, has several tenants. Depending on how it rents out, Mr. O'Shea said, ''we will be glad to build another.'' He added, ''We are heading for building small office space; that is the future for us, depending on the availability of land.''
Each suite in the O'Shea office parks has a kitchen, conference room, restrooms and private offices, and the individual tenants have control of their own heat and can come and go as they please, he said.
Pelops Damianos, a principal in Damianos Realty Group, a 36-year-old commercial real estate company based in Smithtown, said: ''There is an absolute need for this type of building because of all the new homes being built. It comes with new development because there is that increased demand for offices for local services such as orthodontists, financial planners, lawyers and accountants.''
Damianos owns two one-story office parks: the Davis Professional Park in Port Jefferson, where 60 percent of the tenants have a medical connection, and the Stony Brook Medical Park. Mr. Damianos said he was considering building another on about 20 acres on Route 112 in Port Jefferson that he owns with Richard Nelin, a Port Jefferson developer.
Since about 3,000 to 5,000 new homes have been built in the past five years from Mount Sinai to Rocky Point (a span of about five miles from Port Jefferson), ''you can see the need,'' Mr. Damianos said.
In October, Soundview Property Management in Port Jefferson Station purchased -- for $9.5 million -- the 105,000-square-foot complex of 10 one-story buildings in Medford formerly owned by the town of Brookhaven. For 15 years the complex had housed most of the town's offices in eight buildings until they moved into a single, three-story office building that the town purchased for $21 million from Allstate in 2002.
The old complex, which will be renamed the Brookhaven Executive Center, will be renovated, its current 12 tenants will remain and space will be leased to at least 10 new tenants, said Paul Elliott, a principal at Soundview, which is the development arm of Prudential CRES, a commercial real estate broker in Port Jefferson Station.
''There is a certain tenant that prefers the one-floor walk-in, walk-out office park with no elevators,'' said Walter T. Hurney, a Prudential broker. ''The feature of this type of building is that there is no loss factor. If you rent 5,000 square feet, you pay for 5,000 square feet, as opposed to being in a large single building where you pay for common areas, such as lobbies and cafeterias.'' People also like the flexibility, because it often offers them the opportunity to expand into adjacent spaces, he added.
Roy Fedelem, the principal planner at the Suffolk County Planning Department, said that one-story office complexes -- often composed of several buildings in a campuslike setting -- were built primarily in the 1980's in Suffolk County. ''If you had the land, they were less costly to build than those with multiple stories,'' he said. ''The 1980's were a landmark era for office buildings, but by then most of the land in Nassau had been developed so they didn't have the space for one-story buildings like they did in Suffolk.''
Built in 1987 on 19 acres, the Brookhaven Executive Center was originally called Strathmore Office Park under a different owner and has for the past 15 years been identified by a roadside sign that simply reads: ''Brookhaven Town Offices.''
The park consists of 10 buildings that average 15,000 square feet each and is half a mile from the Long Island Expressway on Route 112, a main north-south thoroughfare. Thirteen tenants, including a delicatessen and a dentist, have been leasing 38,000 square feet, paying annual rents ranging from $11.41 to $18.49 a square foot. All except one tenant, which leased 1,200 square feet, will remain, Mr. Elliott said.
In March, Soundview and Prudential CRES will move their headquarters from a Port Jefferson Station shopping center to 6,000 square feet in the Brookhaven Executive Center.
Mr. Elliott added that there were plans to fix up 7,500 square feet for Kiddie Kampus, a child-care facility, which is expected to move into the park in June.
He added that Soundview is in negotiations with an educational facility that is looking to occupy 60,000 square feet of contiguous space for a satellite campus.
When he purchased the 20-year-old office park, the buildings were ''structurally sound, but tired and in need of some renovations,'' Mr. Elliott said.
Since the purchase, $375,000 has been put into reroofing and re-siding the buildings and upgrading the landscaping and signage, he said. Tenant improvements will be made as needed, he said. Rents will start at $15 a square foot, and tenants will also pay a proportionate share for community maintenance and taxes.
ABOUT 15 miles southeast, along Veterans Memorial Highway, the two O'Shea office parks are being offered at an asking rent of $20 a square foot annually.
''Because the 55,000-square-foot building in Ronkonkoma was all rented within a short time, we were motivated to build another,'' Mr. O'Shea said.
Both buildings, constructed with a steel superstructure covered by a green and white stucco-type curtain wall, were built in a horseshoe shape to increase the window space and each tenant has windows and entrances on two sides of its space.
Tenants can take any multiple of areas covering about 1,600 square feet, which are defined according to the window patterns, Mr. O'Shea said.
The Ronkonkoma building, which is on six acres, was laid out for 27 units and has 20 tenants.
The 25,000-square-foot Bohemia building, which is on three acres, has 14 units. Its first tenant, Chase Manhattan Bank has taken three units for a branch office, according to Amy Knauf, O'Shea's general counsel. Wells Fargo will be moving into two units, and an accounting firm has contracted for another unit. Mr. O'Shea said, ''Most of the tenants are those that don't need the prestige and charges that come with the extra amenities of a large Class A building.''
He added that the one-story office parks ''suit a little market niche'' where tenants, like accountants who work till midnight in March and April, want to control their own utilities, have doorstep parking and access to their office any time and every day.
Commercial Property | Long Island  Correction:  January 25, 2004, Sunday  The Commercial Property column last Sunday, about increasing interest in one-story office buildings in Suffolk County, misstated the name of a company that develops them and misspelled the given name of its owner. The company is O'Shea Properties, not Enterprises; the owner is Gerry O'Shea, not Jerry.
