UNLESS embattled Gov. John G. Rowland resigns, there is the not so small matter of his governing the state while he fights for his political life. With the State Legislature back in session in about two weeks, there is a fear among some officials that he will be just too distracted to govern effectively.
Amid calls for resignation from Democrats and from members of his own party, on Wednesday Moira K. Lyons, the speaker of the House, said a bipartisan committee would be formed to investigate the governor, and if necessary, draft articles of impeachment, a process that could last months.
The governor said he has no intention of resigning and welcomes a fair inquiry. So some officials are concerned the business of the state will go unattended while the governor strategizes with Dean Pagani, his chief of staff and spokesman about how to quell the firestorm or pours over documents with his in-house counsel Ross Garber and his private lawyer, William F. Dow III.
''Look, Ross Garber isn't reviewing potential judicial nominees; he's analyzing the governor's subpoena,'' said George C. Jepsen, chairman of the Democratic State Central Committee, who has repeatedly said the state was ''paralyzed'' by the scandal. ''Dean Pagani is on full-time damage control. The state is being run by Marc Ryan and he's not an elected official.''
Mr. Ryan is the secretary of the Office of Policy and Management and the governor's budget chief.
Despite weeks spent earnestly courting Democrats and his fellow Republicans with relentless apologizing, Mr. Rowland has been unable to change the prevailing consensus: A trust was broken when he admitted lying about who paid for improvements to his Litchfield cottage. His personal records were subpoenaed Dec. 6, ratcheting up the possibility he will be indicted for accepting gifts from people who have received state contracts. Last weekend, Republican Congressman Rob Simmons called on the governor to resign and on Monday Congressman Christopher Shays, also a Republican, said the same thing.
Martin M. Looney, a Democrat who is Senate majority leader, noted that the governor's crisis will no doubt impact the business of the General Assembly when it opens Feb. 4. The session will begin with a state budget deficit of at least $80 million.
''The whole process is going to be difficult with the charges against him,'' he said. ''It's going to cast a pall over everything we do.''
State Senator David J. Cappiello, a Republican who called for Mr. Rowland's resignation on Jan. 9, said the governor is bound to face difficulties negotiating with the Legislature. Mr. Rowland's ability to veto a bill may be threatened, Mr. Cappiello said.
''He can lose a few of us, but he needs almost unanimous support from both the House and the Senate to veto,'' said Mr. Cappiello, who lives in Danbury. ''His veto power is going to be seriously diminished.''
Mr. Pagani said the controversy won't affect the governor's work. On Wednesday, Mr. Rowland was preparing a budget proposal for his Feb. 4 State of the State address, Mr. Pagani said. While Mr. Rowland has spent time in the last few weeks dealing with the controversy, Mr. Pagani said he is focused on doing the job he was elected to do. The support of the Legislature will follow good bills, regardless of personal feelings about Mr. Rowland, he said.
''If it is a good, sound policy, it will be adopted,'' Mr. Pagani said. ''People vote for a bill, not the person who proposed it.''
Already the scandal has derailed one state project. On Dec. 16, the Department of Public Works terminated its contract with the TBI Construction Company to build a new $29 million juvenile detention center in Bridgeport. Construction of the center was court-ordered to address severe shortages in housing juvenile defendants. TBI is one of several companies owned by the Tomasso family, one of the state's largest construction firms. Mr. Rowland admitted that in 1999 employees of a company owned by members of the Tomasso family performed exterior work at his Litchfield cottage. The Tomasso companies are the subject of a federal investigation in connection with the granting of multimillion-dollar state contracts, law enforcement officials have said.
''Although I am not privy to any of the facts surrounding the ongoing federal investigation, I believe that the present circumstances substantially affect the developer's ability to perform the work in a timely manner,'' said James T. Fleming, public works commissioner.
Bill Finch, a Democratic Senator whose district includes Bridgeport, said the collapse of the project illustrates that the scandal is beginning to interfere with providing services to the public. When the General Assembly opens, Mr. Finch predicted a further break down.
''He's not going to be able to get majorities on any of his initiatives,'' he said.
Although the Department of Public of Works has adopted a new controls and reformed selection process following the federal investigation into the awarding of state contracts, legislators will be approaching contracts cautiously, said State Representative Andrew M. Fleischmann of West Hartford, who sits on the Appropriations and Government Administration and Elections Enforcement committees.
''When there is so much controversy surrounding contracts that the Rowland administration arranged previously, it is going to be hard to have confidence in the ones they are trying to get right now,'' he said.
In terms of accessing federal money, Mr. Rowland, a former congressman and once chairman of Republican Governors Association, has enjoyed good Washington relations.
At least one Washington lobbyist, Ron Kaufman, political director of the campaign of former president George Bush, said those relationships remain intact. Mr. Kaufman, who noted that Mr. Rowland has not been criminally charged, described the governor as a ''good friend'' of the current President Bush, Tom Ridge, the secretary of homeland security, and former New Jersey Gov. Christine Todd Whitman.
''John's vast network of people in the administration and in Congress respect and like him immensely,'' Mr. Kaufman said. ''That doesn't change when someone is going through a bad time.''
But Mr. Rowland decided not to attend a fund-raiser for the president scheduled for Jan. 29 in Greenwich.
''Given the current circumstances, the governor does not want to detract from the president's evening,'' Mr. Pagani said.
For a man whose legendary powers of persuasion are underpinned by a striking blend of confidence, charm, and intimidation, Mr. Rowland's bad time and new-found penitence has been jarring. During a Jan. 7 live broadcast from his office at the State Capitol, Mr. Rowland took his apology public by way of former President Bill Clinton; he bit his lip, swallowed hard and choked up.
Herb Shepardson, the chairman of the Republican State Central Committee, said the governor's apology allowed Mr. Rowland to ''put a public face'' on the problem and was a step toward healing.
''He was also able to hint at the tremendous things he's done for this state and its cities,'' Mr. Shepardson said. ''People need to understand that he knows what he did was wrong, but it doesn't rise to the level of an impeachable offense.''
But the ''act of contrition,'' as it was dubbed by William A. Aniskovich of Branford, a Republican who is Senate minority leader, seemed to have done little to restore Mr. Rowland's credibility.
Both Mr. Aniskovich and Robert M. Ward, a Republican who is House minority leader, have been cautious about criticizing the governor. But their resolve appears to be weakening.
''When someone lies to me, it's going to be hard to believe them the next time,'' Mr. Ward said, even before the televised appeal, when Mr. Rowland was offering mea culpas to his fellow party members.
Ken Dautrich, a University of Connecticut political science professor who directs the university's polling institute, said the fact that Governor Rowland's troubles stem from tangible issues, makes it less likely the public will forgive him.
''People can relate to a hot tub, kitchen cabinets, and landscaping,'' Mr. Dautrich said.
Howard Reiter, the chairman of the political science department at the University of Connecticut, said as Governor Rowland continues to lose more and more of his base, those legislators on both sides of the aisle who have remained loyal to him through bruising union contract negotiations and budget battles, it will be increasingly difficult for him to stay on.
''It would take a miracle for him to stay on,'' Mr. Reiter said. ''The state will face three years of very ineffective, weak leadership if he wants to remain governor.''
Connecticut
