LONG ISLAND'S largest business group has come out swinging against Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's campaign for a property tax break in New York City. Matthew T. Crosson, president of the Long Island Association, is arguing that city taxpayers' gain may turn into an additional tax burden for the suburbs.
Though a court has mandated that New York City schools be better funded by this summer, Mr. Bloomberg wants to give back 18.5 percent of the city's property tax revenue to city taxpayers. In a statement issued on Jan. 7, Mr. Crosson described the proposed $250 million one-time rebate as ''highly inappropriate under the circumstances facing the city, the city's suburban neighbors and the state.''
He was alluding to a ruling last June by the state's Court of Appeals, which found that New York City's public schools do not provide a ''sound basic education'' for city students and ordered the state to re-examine the formula by which it dispenses more than $14 billion a year to school districts across the state. The plaintiffs, a group of advocates for inner-city schools, have estimated the cost of compliance at an additional $2 billion a year.
Facing an April deadline for presentation of a new state budget, a commission appointed by Governor Pataki has been conducting hearings before producing a plan to bring the state into compliance. Now that Mayor Bloomberg has proposed the tax rebate, Mr. Crosson is arguing that the tax load will fall inordinately on the suburbs.
''The issue is who is going to pay for it,'' Mr. Crosson said in an interview. ''This will put them $250 million deeper in the hole, and taxpayers outside of the city will have to pay.''
Jordan Barowitz, a spokesman for Mr. Bloomberg's office, said: ''The Long Island Association should focus on Long Island issues and not try to take money out of New York City taxpayers' pockets.''
Long Islanders foot the bill for the bulk of their own education costs, paying an average 72 percent of school funding, according to Mr. Crosson. He said residents of New York City currently pay 47 percent of their school costs, with the rest covered by the state and federal governments. The city spends about $11,500 per pupil, nearly $2,500 less than the amount spent on the average Long Island student.
''Long Islanders do not spend more money on education because New York State sends us the money,'' Mr. Crosson said. ''They spend it because they have made a policy decision that the education of their children is worth taxing themselves. New York City has made a policy decision not to spend as much on education as Long Island does, and not to tax its residents for that purpose. That was the wrong choice, and the condition of the city's schools shows the result.''
A recent study by the L.I.A.'s chief economist, Pearl Kamer, showed that middle-income families on Long Island pay much more in local taxes than families in the five boroughs. A Brooklyn family with an income of $36,000 would pay 43 percent less in property and local income taxes combined than if they moved to Hempstead, even thought there is no local income tax there, the study reported.
Mr. Crosson said he would not be complaining about the proposed city tax rebate had it not come on top of the court's findings on the city's failing schools.
''It's going to cost a lot of money,'' Mr. Crosson said. ''We think New York City taxpayers have not paid their fair share in the past, and Long Islanders shouldn't be asked to fix New York City's problem.''
Mr. Bloomberg's proposed tax rebate, an average check of $400 to about 600,000 owners of co-ops, condominiums and one- to three-family homes, comes a year after a $1.8 billion property tax increase, and will have to be approved by the State Legislature as well as the City Council. ''If there is any possibility that Long Island has to pay for this, we will urge legislators in the suburbs not to approve it,'' Mr. Crosson said.
The rebate is relatively small given the size of the city and state budgets, said William Johnson, superintendent of Rockville Centre schools, but it is more symbolic. ''It makes no sense,'' said Dr. Johnson, a past president of the State Council of School Superintendents. ''New York City is saying 'we don't have the money to educate our children,' but then they want to give this money back. How do they expect us to support that?''
Dr. Johnson said the Bloomberg proposal sets up another battle between the suburbs and the city, reminiscent of the debate over Mr. Bloomberg's campaign to renew the commuter tax on people who work in New York City but do not live there.
The tax was collected until 1999, when it was abolished by the State Legislature under prodding from Governor Pataki and suburban representatives. But with the city's economy in a slump after 9/11, the mayor proposed reinstating the tax in November 2002. Mr. Pataki refused to endorse the idea, and suburban legislators heaped scorn on it. Instead, the Legislature raised the city income and sales tax rates last May to produce an estimated $400 million a year in additional revenue.
A supporter of the rebate proposal, State Senator Serphin R. Maltese of Glendale, Queens, said he didn't think there would be a big fight over the issue. ''I think we can work out an agreement,'' he said. ''There's no reason to pit one part of the state against another.''
Mr. Maltese said that the rebate ''won't come at the expense of school districts in other areas'' and added that people outside of the city should be advocates for their own districts.
As he put it: ''Let them govern the suburbs. Let the mayor govern the city.''
