TWO novices on their way to Sundance. . . . Now there's an idea for a movie. Matthew Bonifacio and Carmine Famiglietti, two Swedish guys from the boroughs -- no, let's make them Italian -- hit Sundance like a cross between Bill and Ted and the wild-and-crazy guys on ''Saturday Night Live.''
Opening scene: a dining room this month in Flushing, Queens, in a house with a plastic picket fence.
Mr. Bonifacio, 31, a film nerd from Brooklyn, had written a script about a porky Italian who moves to the Catskills to lose weight. And Mr. Famiglietti, who at 30 is still living with his parents, was his inspiration and co-writer. A lot of moviemakers make sacrifices. Mr. Famiglietti lost 170 pounds, more than half just to prove he could -- and to pry $180,000 out of investors.
Then Mr. Bonifacio directed the film, starring Mr. Famiglietti, and titled ''lbs.'' It was brave of them to make a film about a man's battle with the bulge, showing Mr. Famiglietti without a fat suit and looking like the kind of person who would hide from a camera. Pronounced ''pounds,'' it is sure to be talked about when it makes its debut on Wednesday at the Sundance festival in Park City, Utah.
Seated at the Famiglietti dining table, the filmmakers sifted through pictures of Mr. Famiglietti at his heftiest, seeking the least flattering ones for their publicity. Nearby was their poster, with the tag line ''A waist is a terrible thing to mind.''
Pictures chosen, they headed to the Queens Center Mall. ''Forty to 50 percent of the day I think about where I'm going to eat,'' Mr. Famiglietti said. ''I think about it constantly.'' Last fall, he said, after slimming down for ''lbs.,'' he ''porked up 30, 40 pounds.'' To really lose weight, he advised, ''you gotta go to the gym.''
Their first mission was festival attire. They had already selected their festival colognes: Dolce &amp; Gabbana and Sonia Rykiel for Mr. Famiglietti, and Joop for Mr. Bonifacio. They had their sunglasses and jewelry. Mr. Famiglietti had decided to get a facial; Mr. Bonifacio had consulted Aveda. They had plans to buy a Playstation for their hotel room and said, no matter what, Sundays would find them watching football.
But they still had to decide on their ensembles. ''I plan to put gel in my hair and wear a suit to my premiere,' Mr. Famiglietti said. To a festival known for scruffy ski jackets, goofy knit hats and the smell of soggy wool socks? Way to stand out, guys.
And so, into Macy's. ''Men have three sizes,'' Mr. Famiglietti said. ''Armani Exchange, the Gap and the Big and Tall shop.'' Right now he was at Gap and determined to dress well. ''That Sean Jean is pricey stuff,'' he said, staring at a display. ''Probably like $250.'' He looked at a tag. ''Ah,'' he said, ''$275.''
Mr. Bonifacio looked at a parka with a fur-lined hood. ''Very George Lukas,'' he said.
They insisted this was a scouting trip until they found leather jackets on sale. For Mr. Bonifacio, a mustard Tasso Elba, evoking Kojak and costing $169. For Mr. Famiglietti, who had already picked out a bright orange tie, an Alfani black blazer: $200, or what he called ''a car payment.''
''Cash is king,'' Mr. Famiglietti said, hauling out a roll. ''We pay everything in cash.''
Next stop, Napa &amp; Sonoma, a steakhouse near the Whitestone Bridge with a scene in their movie. They were greeted like heroes, ones who pay cash.
Mr. Bonifacio had the beef tips; Mr. Famiglietti, on his diet, had lobster bisque, filet mignon and creamed spinach. Then they talked film: Mr. Famiglietti's favorite comedy, ''Midnight Run,'' and ''Cinema Paradiso,'' a favorite of Mr. Bonifacio, who never went to film school but read all the books. ''Matthew likes higher-end stuff than I do,'' Mr. Famiglietti acknowledged.
They could agree on one thing: the total excellence of the television series ''Average Joe.'' Mr. Famiglietti said, ''Average Joes, they don't have a chance.''
The camera pans away, to the Cross Island service road and the sparkling lights of La Guardia Airport. Then a zoom back and close-up on Mr. Famiglietti, who says to a departing photographer, ''Whatever you do, make me look thin.''
A Night Out With
