THE directors of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center surely meant well when they came up with Sound Investment, a series of four concerts beginning on Tuesday at Alice Tully Hall. The initial concept seemed exciting. Since its founding in 1969 the society has commissioned and performed 132 works. So why not acknowledge its 35th anniversary by performing works from that list in a minifestival?
The artistic director, David Shifrin, and his colleagues wanted to include as many works and composers as possible. But for budgetary reasons, they received a go-ahead for just four programs. The only out, Mr. Shifrin determined, was to perform portions of the works (43 of them, as it turned out), either single movements or excerpts, none to exceed eight minutes.
''This was a difficult -- I almost want to use the word 'excruciating' -- decision,'' Mr. Shifrin said recently. He hopes that the concerts will be a stimulus, he added, ''a jump start'' that will call attention to the wide array of works the society has brought into being.
Many of the selected composers, when asked whether they would be willing to have their works excerpted, were taken aback. Performing only the first movement from, say, Bright Sheng's 1993 Concertino for Clarinet and String Quartet is bad enough. Even worse, the composer and dynamic clarinetist Derek Bermel was asked to suggest an excerpt from his ''Soul Garden'' for viola and string quintet, a 13-minute work in one movement.
After its premiere in 2000, Mr. Bermel made adjustments to the score in preparation for a release by Composers Recordings. ''Now it's done,'' he said the other day. ''It's exactly the way I want it.''
When asked to cut it, Mr. Bermel was ''a little weirded out,'' he said. He asked Mr. Shifrin, a fellow clarinetist, why the society was doing this. ''I think David was weirded out, too,'' Mr. Bermel added, ''but he said he had no choice.''
After anguishing about it, Mr. Bermel refused to excerpt the work. Instead, he said that the violist Paul Neubauer, for whom it was written, and the other performers should play just the first eight minutes, then stop. ''I didn't want to do the piece any harm,'' Mr. Bermel explained.
He has a point. Audiences, you could argue, will get a better sense of the piece by hearing the first two-thirds of it as intended. And as things stand at press time, that's the way ''Soul Garden'' will be performed on Jan. 30, in the third program of the series.
Faced with the same exasperating request, the composer David Del Tredici reluctantly sanctioned a performance of an excerpt from ''Haddocks' Eyes.'' In the middle of this continuous 20-minute work comes a soprano aria, the only section that will be performed in the opening concert. But the aria is not really a distinct section, Mr. Del Tredici said: ''It doesn't have an ending. It just stops abruptly and segues into something else.''
''I considered saying no,'' Mr. Del Tredici added. ''But I wanted to be performed. Also, they did commission the piece. There was a lot of good will on my part. I don't know what it will sound like. Afterward my feeling may be quite different. But I'm giving them the benefit of the doubt and being a good sport.''
Mr. Del Tredici felt considerably less sanguine when he found out that some longer works were being performed complete, including John Harbison's ''Twilight Music'' (16 minutes) and Elliott Carter's Piano Quintet (11 minutes). Whatever the musical, programmatic or diplomatic rationale for including some complete works in the festival (Mr. Carter is, after all, a living master), the decision is bound to create bad feelings. ''If everyone is suffering the same fate, fine,'' Mr. Del Tredici said.
Showing off the diversity of works the society has commissioned seems to be a greater priority than performing the works to their best advantage. ''It does somehow put the composer in second place,'' Mr. Del Tredici said. ''That's not comfortable.''
Could the series actually injure the works it is meant to celebrate? Suppose a chamber ensemble decided to honor the Viennese Classical era with a couple of sampler concerts offering single movements from trios, quartets and the like by Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert. Music lovers would howl in protest.
Sound Investment has to be seen in the context of the society's sometimes uneasy relationship with contemporary music. In its early days the organization took a lot of heat for its mainstream thinking. Most concerts offered the great works of the past interpreted by the great players of the present, which debunking critics characterized as celebrity sight-reading.
The society has done better by contemporary music in the last two decades. Still, though not to be niggling about numbers, 132 works over 35 years averages to fewer than four per season, and this season, typically, offers more than 30 programs.
In 1989 the cellist Fred Sherry, a passionate champion of living composers, took over as artistic director, determined to jolt the society's programming with a larger dose of challenging contemporary works. His vision met with resistance from tradition-minded administrators and audiences. Mr. Sherry left the post after three years, but he remains a valued member of the society.
A five-year project the society introduced, Music of Our Time, wound up backfiring. This was a series of concerts, usually three, devoted to new and recent works. The programs were bracing, the performances excellent, the audiences enthusiastic. The concerts were held not at Alice Tully Hall, the society's main stomping ground, however, but at the much smaller Merkin Concert Hall. One result was to ghettoize contemporary music, to make concerts of new music seem like separate events for insiders.
In one program in 1998, two of the four works were utter knockouts: Stephen Hartke's ''Horse With the Lavender Eye'' and Judith Weir's Piano Trio. These electrifying scores would have resonated powerfully with standard fare in one of the society's subscription programs at Alice Tully Hall. Why should they have been consigned to some offshoot series? Now curious music lovers will have to content themselves with hearing excerpts of each in Sound Investment.
If Mr. Shifrin and the society had truly wanted to celebrate the 43 composers they selected for the festival, the obvious solution would have been to include their works complete in subscription programs throughout the season. In place of one or two works in a French program last fall, for example, the society could have played ''Winter Pages'' by Ned Rorem, the most French-influenced of living American composers. Instead, only a short movement for solo cello from that 12-movement, 30-minute quintet will be performed in Sound Investment, next Sunday.
And might not Lukas Foss's String Quartet No. 5 have been substituted for one of the quartets by Prokofiev, Beethoven and Schubert that the Orion String Quartet played in November? Perhaps Mr. Foss should not complain. He will get to hear two (count 'em, two!) of the four movements of his Fifth Quartet on Tuesday.
The society presents a Mendelssohn program next month. Did no one think about giving Mendelssohn lovers a refreshing change of pace by injecting music of William Bolcom, Steven Mackey, Joan Tower, Ellen Taaffe Zwilich or one of the other composers whose works are about to be performed in excerpts?
Paradoxically, there are many genuine champions of contemporary music on the current roster of society artists, including Mr. Shifrin, who points proudly to his Delos recording of five works commissioned by the society and written for him. You have to wonder.
MUSIC
