WHEN Charlie Rubin and Susan Shapiro married in July 1996, it seemed, as Mr. Rubin put it, a ''ridiculously intelligent'' thing to do. But then for a while it seemed more ridiculous than intelligent.
They started not only madly in love, but also nearly exactly alike. Both writers, they liked the same poets (like Gregory Corso), the same food (sushi), the same neighborhood (Greenwich Village) and the same inhuman work hours.
''He was the only guy who understood 'I'm on deadline, go away for 48 hours.' '' Ms. Shapiro said a week ago. She added, ''There was never a fantasy of 'Let's have dinner together every night.' ''
But after a few years, they seemed less and less alike to each other.
''Susan likes large groups,'' Mr. Rubin said. ''I like very few people. We discovered this, and some of it was really rough. When she would give a party, I would basically lock myself with a few people in one of the rooms of our apartment.''
By the fall of 1999, Mr. Rubin was working on three television shows and commuting between Seoul, Tokyo, Toronto, Los Angeles and New York. Meanwhile, Ms. Shapiro was unsuccessfully trying to sell a book, getting close to 40 and really wanting to have a child.
''If you're going through fertility, and someone is not around, that's a serious problem,'' she said. ''It was making me sad, and I felt really lonely.''
Mr. Rubin became even more absent when his father was dying of cancer. ''All I wanted to do was work,'' he said. ''I didn't want to be a husband. I didn't want to be a father.''
Still, they went to see a fertility specialist. He told them Mr. Rubin had a low sperm count, and that was just the beginning of the bad news.
''In a one-in-a-billion shot, we both tested positive for Tay-Sachs,'' Mr. Rubin said, referring to the genetic disorder, which is fatal if passed on by both parents.
Their doctor suggested a sperm donor. She was willing. He refused. ''I felt like, 'You're not letting me have the baby, and you're not giving me a real marriage because you're always out of town working,' '' she said.
So, when an old boyfriend called her in July 2000, she found herself primping to meet him for lunch, with butterflies in her stomach. ''If I had had a life, I probably wouldn't even have returned his call,'' she said. ''But at the time my whole life felt literally, physically empty.''
That was the beginning of a long examination of the choices she had made. She eventually looked up four more of her old flames, interrogating them on why they had not married her. She flirted but never crossed the line.
''Because things weren't going forward, going backward was kind of fun,'' she said.
And she started writing a book about her reunions, ''Five Men Who Broke My Heart,'' which is to be published by Delacorte Press this month.
To her surprise, meeting her old boyfriends and writing about them saved her marriage. ''I realized he was the right man all along,'' she said. ''And ultimately, I feel like, maybe I am happier having books than having babies.''
Now, Mr. Rubin and Ms. Shapiro say, they feel they are perpetually on a second date -- fascinated by each other and impatient to meet over sushi at the end of the day.
''At first, you worry, 'What if our marriage isn't perfect?' '' Mr. Rubin said. '' 'What if I'm not the person I expected I would be? What if I'm not good enough for this woman?' And then one day, you realize all those things are probably true, and it's O.K.''
STATE OF THE UNIONS
