IT was class that drove suspects to underestimate Lieutenant Columbo. Peter Falk's coarse accent and humble demeanor always lulled rich, sophisticated killers into a false sense of superiority.
On ''Monk,'' the USA Network's series about an obsessive-compulsive detective played by Tony Shalhoub, sanity is the dividing line. Strangers humor Adrian Monk, learning too late that his tics are part of a keen sensitivity to detail --and disorder -- that unmasks the cleverest criminals.
''Monk'' has updated the ''Columbo''-style detective show, but not too much. And that may explain its inexplicable success. The series was such an unexpected hit two years ago that starting this week, new episodes will be shown on USA on Fridays, while old episodes appear on Saturdays on ABC. (The broadcast network passed on the pilot developed for it by Touchstone Television, which is also owned by Disney. Now, it must content itself with reruns from USA.)
Mr. Shalhoub, who won an Emmy last year, brings subtlety and sophistication to a role that could easily fall into silly caricature. But essentially, the series has the same sprightly appeal as ''Columbo,''  ''Ellery Queen,''  ''Murder She Wrote'' or ''McMillan and Wife,'' popular series of the 70's and 80's that showcased eccentric detectives and far-fetched crimes.
Mysteries are often divided into two sorts, either the gritty realism of Raymond Chandler or the cheery country house artifice of Agatha Christie. Actually, plenty of people like both. All good detective stories offer a pillowy retreat into the rules and reliable expectations of the genre; the only real difference is one of tone: dark or light.
The same is true of television crime shows. ''Murder She Wrote'' or ''Columbo'' were popular for the same reasons that ''Law &amp; Order'' has so many devotees now. Whether the story line is grisly and disturbing or sunnily contrived, viewers know that someone will be murdered before the first commercial, and the investigators will run in and around red herrings until the murder is finally solved just before the last commercial.
Edmund Wilson, in his famously grouchy 1945 essay, ''Who Cares Who Killed Roger Ackroyd?,'' dismissed detective stories as a vice ranking ''somewhere between smoking and crossword puzzles.'' Actually, their virtue is that they fit neatly between the two: a ''Matlock'' episode or a Nero Wolfe mystery can be enjoyed more passively than a crossword puzzle (a puzzle, no matter how easy, requires a pencil and full participation), but it soaks up more time and attention than a cigarette.
''Monk'' stands out mainly because it is a lighthearted, 70's-style crime show in a contemporary television landscape of blood, DNA samples and mean streets. There are no morgues, high-tech forensic laboratories or blood-soaked crime scenes in ''Monk.'' Murders take place at sun-dappled country fairs, expensive resorts or quaint villages as cozy as Jessica Fletcher's Cabot Cove. On ''Law &amp; Order'' and its spin-offs, detectives and prosecutors are hemmed in by legal technicalities and tough defense attorneys. Monk is paralyzed by a crooked picture frame or a germ-ridden telephone receiver.
Death, however blithely rendered, was not a frivolous matter on television 20 and 30 years ago. Despite their playful nature, shows like ''Columbo'' and ''Murder She Wrote'' were always nominated for Emmys as a dramatic series; last September, Mr. Shalhoub won an Emmy for best actor in a comedy. Partly, that was a strategic decision by the show's executive producers, who felt ''Monk'' had a better chance of winning in that category. But it is a reflection of how graphic and hard-boiled most other detective shows have turned that ''Monk'' seems to have more in common with ''Everybody Loves Raymond'' and ''Friends.''
For all its whimsical turns on neurosis, the show does center on a murder mystery. Monk, a former star detective with the San Francisco police department, is brought in as a consultant on particularly baffling cases, because, like Sherlock Holmes, he notices seemingly insignicant details -- a drawn shade, a missing shoe -- and  deduces the most elaborate criminal schemes.
Delicate, sheltered Monk has an earthy sidekick, Sharona Fleming (Bitty Schram), the nurse he hired to help him curb the phobias that consumed him after his wife was killed by a car bomb. He regularly outwits the officers who grudgingly seek his help, Capt. Leland Stottlemeyer (Ted Levine) and his doltish deputy, Randall Disher (Jason Gray-Stanford).
Some of the most popular detective shows have highbrow roots. Much of Lieutenant Columbo's personality was borrowed from Porfiry Petrovich, Dostoyevsky's courteous, plodding investigator in ''Crime and Punishment.'' The debt of ''Monk'' to Arthur Conan Doyle becomes most obvious this week, when John Turturro guest-stars as Monk's older brother Ambrose. Like Holmes's older brother Mycroft, Ambrose is smarter than Adrian. He is also more phobic. Mycroft Holmes was a homebody. Ambrose Monk is an agoraphobe who has not left the Monk family home in more than 30 years, but calls his brother after he deduces that his neighbor murdered his wife. Like Mr. Shalhoub as Adrian, Mr. Turturro is odd, funny and oddly touching in the role of a brainy hermit who makes his living writing instruction manuals for electronic gadgets.
Starting with the theme song by Randy Newman (''It's a Jungle Out There''), the show keeps up an arch tone. Even its Web site features a list of phobias, from hyelophobia, a fear of glass, to pterenophobia, a fear of being tickled by feathers.
But one of the less peripheral pleasures of ''Monk'' is that even its less clever writing is put to the best possible use by the theater and film actors who appear as guest stars, many of them, like Mr. Turturro, friends of Mr. Shalhoub, who has a long career in theater and film in addition to his stint on the sitcom ''Wings.'' Besides Mr. Turturro, Glenne Headly (''Dirty Rotten Scoundrels'') and Betty Buckley (''Frantic'') have appeared in ''Monk.'' So has Brooke Adams (''Days of Heaven''), Mr. Shalhoub's wife in real life, who stars opposite him in a new independent film he directed, ''Made Up.''
But the show's main draw is what probably drove ABC to pass on it in the first place -- faithful adherence to the conventions of a very old-fashioned murder mystery formula.
TELEVISION
