CALL ME THE BREEZE
By Patrick McCabe.
341 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers. $24.95.
Beware of the story that comes bearing many typefaces. While an aggressive use of italics and exclamation points is the intrepid writer's prerogative, in the case of the two-time Booker Prize finalist Patrick McCabe's eighth novel, ''Call Me the Breeze,'' these graphical distractions, along with a jumble of increasingly unreadable fonts, serve only to partition what would otherwise remain an undifferentiated mash.
McCabe's third novel, ''The Butcher Boy'' (1993), established him as the primary chronicler of a type of pre-''Angela's Ashes'' wasteland, an Ireland devoid of treacle and pomp. For Joey Tallon, the hapless narrator of ''Call Me the Breeze'' -- he is a lost child of the 70's and a fan of steak and kidney pie -- that wasteland is his hometown, Scotsfield, a powder keg right on the border between Ireland and Northern Ireland. The dark crimes in the history of that town, and in Joey's own life, are told through what Joey refers to as his ''archibe,'' an assortment of ruminations, journal entries, novels, film treatments, manuscripts, letters and memos that chronicle his rise from a felonious lover of blow-up dolls to an acclaimed novelist, amateur politician and filmmaker.
Joey, as the reader learns, is haunted by a series of deaths centered in Scotsfield's reservoir, which has swallowed his father's unhappy mistress, Mona, as well as the victims of Scotsfield's Provisional I.R.A. forefathers, who've dispatched a visiting Englishman, among others, to the reedy underworld. By the time Joey's friend Bennett, overcome by guilt for his part in a murder, asphyxiates himself in his van by the water's edge, the reservoir has come to represent, to Joey, the dying center of the town, a noisy graveyard of regret and recrimination. ''When you sat there listening,'' Joey writes, ''you could hear the rustling of the leaves, with the wind coming through them as though it were their voices trying to reach you in order to explain.''
Fueled by the drugs and music of the era, Joey embarks on a series of quixotic ventures to bring Scotsfield's ghostly voices to a larger audience. He kidnaps Jacy, with whom he is obsessed (she reminds him of Joni Mitchell). This lands Joey in jail, where he writes what will become a popular novel about his childhood in Scotsfield. Upon his release, he's installed in Scotsfield's youth center as a writing tutor. There he conceives of a grand project to rid the town of its guilty past: a film that will re-enact Scotsfield's own history in the Troubles -- and name the former killers and bombers now masquerading as businessmen.
In the bar where the Englishman was abducted, Joey explains the project to a former I.R.A. leader: ''The effect I hope to achieve is that, while we'll know it's the past, it will still hit us hard. We'll allude to each and every single tragedy. Within reason, of course! The band being blown up, the Peace Rally atrocity and, of course, the senseless slaying of Detective Tuite by Sandy and Boyle Henry. Subject matter which is obviously sensitive but will be treated in an appropriate manner.''
Joey's pursuit of artistic redemption -- and, against all reason, his increasing success -- is the great joke of this novel: in McCabe's view, Ireland, desperate to distance itself from its brutal history, will welcome even the most deranged interpretations of its tortured past. Unfortunately, the great flaw of the novel is that McCabe's joke is almost entirely on his readers; they're the ones who must absorb Joey's dense reminiscences, plow through unmediated excerpts from Joey's novels and screenplays and entertain Joey's thoughts in all their frantic, unexpurgated glory.
And make no mistake: the slog through this novel's variegated text is dismal. For the first half of the book, a typical entry from Joey's youthful journal reads: ''The things you dream, at times you feel them so deep it's like someone is saying to you: 'Reality? There is no reality. This is the reality. The reality is you and you are the reality.' '' Another asks: ''Note to self: Is the world real? Is it an illusion? With form? Without form?'' These adolescent ruminations may be satire, but they possess the tedium of the real thing.
Between sections entitled ''Thoughts/Reflections to Self'' or ''Idea,'' the adult Joey, picking and choosing from his personal time capsule, periodically intrudes to comment on the proceedings. These interpolations give the reader brief hope that some sense of order will be imposed on the narrative, but the mature Joey is, if anything, less of a stylist than his youthful counterpart. ''There is a drunkenly scrawled note stuck in here with the rest of the papers which is . . . well, let's say it doesn't readily yield up its meaning,'' he confides at one point. At another, he declines to share a portion of his diary, as it's ''quite banal and tedious, with one day the same as the next.'' After Joey decides that a few unseen documents ''make absolutely no sense and are mostly concerned with the songs of the birds and the noise the water was making,'' the reader can be forgiven for observing that the visible selections from Joey's ''archibe'' are hardly more illuminating.
Like Francie, the murderous child at the center of ''The Butcher Boy,'' Joey is meant to stand for the violent disintegration at the heart of Irish culture, the peace that eludes Ireland's collective psyche as well as its streets. But the central problem of the novel is that the crudely drawn Joey, as off-putting as your basic village maniac, is neither as interesting nor as likable as Francie, and his dimwitted musings -- unlike Francie's raw, hectic vernacular -- are more onerous than ironic.
McCabe has also forgotten that using the archival form -- a modernist cousin to the epistolary novel -- means his book will sink or swim depending on the archive's contents. In the case of Joey's journal, McCabe slips from a depiction of a drug-powered stream of consciousness to a striking rendition of the real thing. And while Joey can inform us that he's a best-selling author -- why not a baker or a candlestick maker? -- this character's ''novel'' could only be a bestseller in Babel.
In a peculiar meta-defense, McCabe has Joey rail against those who've expressed ''reservations'' about his creative efforts. ''What bothered me most was their insistence on story,'' Joey recalls. '' 'What does that matter?' I kept saying. 'It's the feel that's important!' '' McCabe's taken his character's views too much to heart. There's a story in this ragbag somewhere, but he's done everything but tell it.
Lizzie Skurnick is a writer living in Baltimore.
