WHEN Camille Lavington, who coaches executives, arrived for a meeting set up with a human resources manager at a large company about two months ago, she waited 30 minutes before someone came to greet her. The executive she had spoken to, and made the appointment with, then sent a subordinate out to grill her about who she was and why she was there. She was ultimately sent away without seeing the executive.
Ms. Lavington, who, as it happens, specializes in helping companies train managers and executives in civility and professionalism, said that she frequently confronted rudeness, whether it is executives meeting her with their feet on the desk or the nonmeeting episode she recounted.
Based on her experiences, she said, rudeness is becoming increasingly common in the workplace. ''No one seems to understand that there is a standard of behavior and self-discipline,'' she said.
In a study on workplace incivility released in May, Lilia Cortina, an assistant professor of psychology and women's studies at the University of Michigan, found that 834 of 1,167 office workers she interviewed experienced mistreatment at work. ''Workplace incivility is still a major issue,'' she said.
It is hard to measure accurately an increase in rudeness at work, according to Peter Post, a director of the Emily Post Institute and the author of the book ''Essential Manners for Men'' (HarperResource; 2003). ''But people certainly care about this issue much more now than 10 or 20 years ago and want to do something about it right now,'' he said.
The number of calls he gets from corporations wanting the institute to lead seminars in interpersonal skills has increased sharply in the last year, he said. And some business schools have also started calling for the same training.
''As organizations have gone casual, there are fewer obvious cues as to what constitutes proper business behavior,'' said Lynne Andersson, a professor of human resource administration at Temple University and an expert on incivility in the workplace.
Still, few employees complain, she said, because they do not want to be seen as uncooperative, or because they are convinced that controlling incivility is not a priority of management.
College campuses may serve as breeding grounds for uncivil professionals, said Gregory S. Prince Jr., president of Hampshire College, in Amherst, Mass.
''I think there is an overexpansion of the importance of individuality on some campuses,'' he said. ''That can lead to a lack of sensitivity for the needs of others.''
Jeffrey E. Garten, dean of the Yale School of Management, agreed. ''Competition makes it more difficult to be civil,'' he said. ''Executives have fallen down in the trade-off between quick profits and consideration for the people around them.'' The need for short-term results is undermining consideration and civility, he said.
While both research and anecdotal evidence would suggest that rudeness has become relatively commonplace in many workplaces, Professor Andersson points to the legal profession as a petri dish of bad behavior. ''Civility is one of the hottest topics in law,'' she said.
Judge Peter Lauriat of Massachusetts Superior Court said that he sanctioned lawyers more frequently now than he did in the past. And though the Massachusetts Bar Association does not keep track of the number of sanctions issued by courts, Judge Lauriat, who is actively involved in his bar association, said that he believed that sanctioning had generally increased over the last two years.
G.Marshall Mundy, a senior partner at Mundy, Rogers &amp; Associates in Roanoke, Va., said that in a recent case, his co-counsel from another firm became angry with the opposing attorney and asked him to step into the parking lot to settle the dispute physically.
Mr. Mundy said he pulled the lawyer into the hallway for a quiet talk. ''You should be able to fight like hell for your client and then go out for a drink with the opposing counsel, but that doesn't happen very often now, and never with younger attorneys,'' he said.
Lawyers are not the only ones to forget decorum, however. A broker at a Morgan Stanley office on the East Coast said that he lost his appetite recently when another broker took a visitor with an infant into the company lunchroom.
''We have a very active kitchen with tables where everyone, including a number of highly paid professionals, eats lunch,'' the broker said. ''I went in and there was the visitor, accompanied by the broker, changing her baby's diaper. The broker was standing there grinning.''
But the broker was philosophical. ''When I'm back in my office, there are two urgent messages and an important e-mail,'' he said. ''So I don't address it.''
Andrea Slattery, a spokeswoman for Morgan Stanley, said the firm had a code of behavior but did not have a specific policy addressing babies or diaper changing.
Inconsiderate behavior at work can be disturbing because many workers spend so much time at the office, Mr. Post said.
''It's not just a salary and a secure job that's important to people now,'' he said. ''A job needs to give us a pleasant work environment. People care about what happens to them during the day at work.''
He said corporate boards and chief executives need to understand that there is validity in putting a premium on manners.
Indeed, workplace incivility can actually reduce productivity, according to Professor Andersson. Those who experience rudeness at work, she said, ''lose enthusiasm for work, loyalty to the organization and respect for its leadership.''
There are signs of interest in more civil workplaces. Dean Garten said that Yale's management school is in the process of developing a professional code of behavior.
''How you conduct yourself and how you think of others is one way of creating leadership that is imbued with the right kind of values,'' he said. ''Business has become more complex. It requires a high degree of civility to make sure your co-workers' needs are being met so they are more productive.''
Hampshire College has a set of discourse standards that place a high value on civility and respect between colleagues, which were developed by Mr. Prince, the president.
And some companies include civility among their core corporate values. For example, the Target Corporation's business philosophy emphasizes ''environment, teamwork, respect, performance and fun,'' according to Lena Klofstad, a spokeswoman.
Ultimately, the cost of rudeness can be personal. Skills and talent can be enough to land a job, Mr. Post said, ''but once you're in the door it's your personal skills that will make the difference.''
''You are going to beat the guy next to you because you didn't pick your nose in the meeting.''
