Jobs here remain few, health care a mess, education in shambles, the government in debt. But the people of the North-West Frontier Province can rest easy: store mannequins have been officially deemed obscene.
Just before the new year in this provincial capital, storekeepers were putting away mannequins and large advertising posters displaying women's faces, complying with a Jan. 1 deadline. It was the latest initiative of the provincial government, which is controlled by a hard-line Islamist coalition, the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal.
While it might suggest that the Talibanization of Pakistan is under way, many here say it really amounts to window-dressing.
It has been a year since the coalition took power, riding a wave of anger among Pashtuns opposed to President Pervez Musharraf's support for the American campaign against terrorism and of disenchantment with the secular parties. The coalition declared that it would impose strict Islamic law. But it has moved more slowly than expected -- and often has had to backpedal. It has also found governing to be difficult, its officials concede.
''It's very difficult to be at the helm of affairs,'' said Inayatullah, the provincial health minister and a member of Jamaat-e-Islami, a decades-old Islamic political movement and coalition member. ''When you come to the government you become a bit realistic. When you are outside, you are emotional.''
A World Bank official offered another assessment: despite the province's image as a backwater, it was the site of a battle between the Islamists and modernizers.
''We are optimistic that the modernizing part of society -- with some help over time from the international community -- can get the upper hand,'' the official said.
On the surface, those wanting to turn back the clock have had their way. The government quickly banned alcohol and playing music in public transport, and in June, the provincial assembly passed legislation requiring provincial laws to follow Islamic law, or Shariah.
Alcohol, however, was already forbidden, as was the music, although enforcement has become stricter. And Pakistan's Constitution already recognizes the supremacy of Islamic law. But committees to bring education, the judiciary and the economy in line with Shariah have made little progress.
The government has had to retreat on a plan to put an ombudsman in every district to settle disputes and regulate public morality. A ban on Western trousers in schools has been little enforced, mostly because of resistance from schools. And although the government closed the town's two bars, which had served foreigners, alcohol and hypocrisy continue to flow in great quantity.
Two young bootleggers said business had never been better. Their customers included the military, the police, doctors, ministers and even members of the religious coalition, whose secretaries often made the purchases, they said. The only impact of greater restrictions was higher bribes for the police.
Store owners scoffed at the antimannequin campaign. ''We don't worship those mannequins; they're lifeless things,'' said Karam Elahi, who owns a dress shop. Breasts jutting out, eyes gazing glassily, his mannequins sat dismantled and undressed in a dim upstairs corner.
Most shopkeepers complied because they feared not the police, but vigilantes loyal to the coalition.
Often, the vigilantes rampaged through town, tearing down and defacing billboards with women on them while the police stood by. Now the police do the job themselves rather than have their authority usurped.
For the same reason, the police promised to restrict the public celebration of New Year's Eve, which the coalition deems immoral.
Haji Ihsan Ul-Haq, a bookseller who is the coalition's Peshawar district general secretary, outlined the problem in a letter to clerics: ''At 12, the lights are switched off and everyone is at liberty for whatever until the lights come on. Some Westernized men and women use this to satisfy their dirty desires.''
For the past few years, stick-wielding vigilantes have roamed the city, ensuring that no New Year's parties took place. Two years ago, they ended up in a shootout at the Peshawar Press Club.
But now, the coalition is in power. Mr. Ul Haq said, ''It's our government; it's our police.''
''Pity us,'' one police official said.
The transformation of this province into what Mr. Inayatullah called an Islamic welfare state, which would provide economic and social justice, has proved has proved perhaps the greatest challenge. The province's economy is in dire straits, with little industry and hardscrabble agriculture. The chief minister and other government officials made so many promises to various constituencies last year that the annual development plan ended the year at three times its annual budget. The government is now having to ''rationalize'' -- meaning back out of -- many of those promises.
The World Bank has yet to agree to the second of three $90 million credits, although it says the governing of the province is improving. An official said the government's priorities were sensible, its public stance supportive of women's rights. ''They want to be in for the long haul, so they have to be moderate,'' one bank official said.
The Asian Development Bank has at least 15 operations here, worth a total of $400 million, help the provincial government is eager to retain.
''We have a major women's reform agenda -- the empowerment of women,'' said Marshuk Ali Shah, the bank's country director. ''So if they do take a stringent view, it will definitely affect our relationship.''
That does not mean the Islamists have not put down long-term roots. Both of the main coalition parties, in a major reshuffling when they took power, have used the bureaucracy to reward supporters.
They are also building women's educational and medical institutions to address what they say are cultural concerns among conservative Pashtuns. But some worry that the long-term goal is segregation of women from men.
Unlike the Taliban in Afghanistan, ''they are very conscious of the world -- they are very smart,'' said Afrasiab Khattak, a leader of the opposition Awami National Party.
Jamaat, a party of professionals -- doctors, teachers, the military and engineers -- structured much like the Communist Party, is especially smart, by many accounts. Many members already were in government jobs, and it has skillfully moved in more. That has caused some to worry, given the party's long-term vision of institutionalizing theocracy.
''It will be very difficult in certain cases to reverse the process,'' said Sikandar Sherpao, a member of the opposition.
The other main coalition partner, the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam, led by Maulana Fazlur Rehman, a prominent cleric, in contrast, has come mostly out of the Islamic schools, or madrasas, and most members are new to government.
Before taking office, they had promised to use their mosques as offices to give people easier access to them and said they would not take official cars -- at least not new ones. Instead, critics say, they have taken to the perks of power as readily as their predecessors.
A senior Pakistani official in Islamabad said General Musharraf and his allies, who were surprised by the coalition's electoral success, felt that the best way to undermine the Islamists was to ''let them misgovern for another four years.''
Mr. Elahi, for one, was already discreetly redressing his mannequins and planning to display them inside. ''How long will they stay in power?'' he asked. ''It's a temporary thing.''
