The groundbeaking ceremony for the new academic building at the New York University School of Law two years ago was somber. It took place on Sept. 28, 2001, 17 days after the attack on the World Trade Center. Speakers, including Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the Supreme Court, invoked the importance of the rule of law, a theme that will be echoed at a dinner on Thursday dedicating the building.
The nine-story, 170,000-square-foot, red-brick structure at 245 Sullivan Street, which opened last week to students and faculty, almost doubles the law school's space. There will be no increase in the enrollment of about 1,800.
Linked to Vanderbilt Hall, until now the school's only academic center, through a basement passage connecting two libraries, the structure, to be known as Furman Hall, includes 20 classrooms and seminar rooms, a flexible model courtroom, offices for 17 legal clinics and nine faculty apartments, which have a separate entrance.
One goal of the sleekly modern design by Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates, said Judith Alpert, associate dean for real estate planning, was to significantly increase the space for students to congregate in groups or study by themselves. Benches and lounges are scattered throughout the building, and corridors are deliberately wide.
Two of the more impressive spaces are the faculty colloquium room on the top floor, which is surrounded on three sides by terraces and views, and Alumna Hall, a lecture hall lined with photographs of the 50 women judges who are graduates.
Furman Hall's exterior recreates the facades of Poe House, a row house occupied briefly by Edgar Allan Poe, and Judson Hall, an annex of Judson Memorial Church. Announcement of plans for the law building ignited opposition to the impending demolition of those two structures. A compromise was fashioned recreating the earlier facades and reducing the new structure's height.
The building cost $98 million and is named for Jay Furman, a trustee and real estate executive.
The dedication ceremony will hark back to a notable moment in the history of the school, founded in 1835. Speakers will address the same topics discussed 52 years ago at the opening ceremonies for Vanderbilt Hall. Elena Kagan, dean of Harvard Law School, will discuss ''Law Education in a Unifying World,'' and Richard Revesz, dean of the N.Y.U. Law School, will talk about ''The Mission of a Law Center.''
NADINE BROZAN
Postings
