Three American soldiers and two Iraqi paramilitary fighters were killed early Saturday when the armored vehicle they were riding in was struck by a large roadside bomb in this town about 12 miles north of Baghdad, the United States military said.
The American soldiers were with the Fourth Infantry Division, which has oversight for much of the volatile region north of Baghdad. The area had been the base of support for the government of Saddam Hussein. The two Iraqis were with the Iraqi Civil Defense Corps, a paramilitary organization formed by the occupying authorities to help the Americans improve security in Iraq. Two American soldiers were wounded in the attack.
The deaths of the soldiers on Saturday and another death on Friday in Mosul of a soldier by what the military classified as a ''nonhostile'' gunshot brought the number of American soldiers killed in operations related to Iraq to 500. Most died after May 1, when the end of major combat operations was declared.
The Americans and Iraqis who were attacked Saturday were patrolling in one of three Bradley armored vehicles surveying Taji for roadside bombs. About 7:45 a.m., the first vehicle in the patrol was struck by a bomb made of at least two 155-millimeter artillery shells and an ''unknown amount of explosives,'' said Maj. Josslyn Aberle, a spokeswoman for the Fourth Infantry Division. The blast set the Bradley on fire.
''We woke up to the sound of an explosion,'' said Qasim Khalaf, a 40-year-old chicken farmer whose house is about 500 yards from the site of the attack. ''I heard the Americans yelling. I came out and saw the tank on fire.''
The soldiers from the two other vehicles cordoned off the area and detained three Iraqis who were fleeing the scene in a white truck, Major Aberle said. In the truck, they found materials that could be used to make bombs, she said. The initial investigation of the attack indicated that the bomb was ''command detonated,'' which means it was triggered by assailants via wires connected to the bomb. Many roadside bombs now are ''remote detonated,'' triggered by a cellphone or a doorbell device.
On Friday morning, insurgents attacked the south-central headquarters of the American-led Coalition Provisional Authority in Hilla, about 60 miles southwest of Baghdad, killing one Iraqi and wounding several others, American authorities said in a statement. The Americans gave no other details of the attack.
Also on Friday, saboteurs blew up a pylon supporting a high-voltage line leading from the north-central town of Baiji to Kirkuk, plunging Kirkuk into darkness. Since the summer, insurgents have been particularly active around Baiji, focusing their efforts on destroying oil pipelines from the oil-rich region around Kirkuk. As a result, Iraq has so far been unable to export oil from the area through a pipeline to Turkey.
The road where the Taji attack took place is one that local residents, rather than the military, use often, Major Aberle said. But American soldiers and Iraqi Civil Defense Corps members at a base on the edge of Taji described the area where the attack occurred as hostile.
Mr. Khalaf said Americans regularly patrol the road, which is near a fuel depot, although they travel at varying times, and that other attacks had occurred along it. American soldiers near the scene of the attack were clearly jumpy. A tank crewman from the Fourth Infantry Division tried to grab a camera from a photographer with The New York Times who was walking near Mr. Khalaf's farmhouse, and dragged her toward his tank until her use of English convinced him she was not a local resident.
Kadhem Jawad, an Iraqi driver from the fuel depot who was allowed to pass through the military cordon, offered a hint of the atmosphere in Taji.
Of the casualties, he said, ''All of them are dead, thank God.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: ATTACK
