It is nearly impossible for many Californians to comprehend the sum of $14 billion, the current estimate of the state's budget deficit next year, and the cuts and contortions that Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger has proposed to make it disappear.
So think about $320 a month, the price for Esther Bush to include her 8-year-old daughter, Natalia, on her employer-paid health plan. She says she cannot afford it. Governor Schwarzenegger says the state cannot afford to insure Natalia, either.
Ms. Bush, a medical social worker at a nonprofit agency in Los Angeles, is not poor -- she earns nearly $30,000 a year -- but neither has she climbed into the middle class. Ms. Bush, 33, shares a two-bedroom apartment in a dicey Los Angeles neighborhood with her sister and brother-in-law and their three children. She drives a 1989 Ford Tempo, pays $300 a month for after-school care for her daughter and lives, she said, from paycheck to paycheck.
Until last spring, Natalia received medical coverage under Medi-Cal, the state's Medicaid program. But when Ms. Bush received a small increase in her salary, she no longer qualified for the program and instead was told to apply to Healthy Families, a state-federal health insurance program for the near-poor.
Because of computer and paperwork problems, her application was delayed, as the state's fiscal situation continued to deteriorate. Governor Schwarzenegger, in his budget presentation last week, proposed capping enrollment in the Healthy Families program at the current level, 732,000 children. An estimated 300,000 additional children are eligible, but could be enrolled only as new slots open under the cap.
New applicants, like Natalia, will be placed on a waiting list, as Ms. Bush put it, ''for God knows how long.'' In the meantime, Ms. Bush prays that no emergencies befall her. As it is, she spends four hours waiting to see a doctor at a neighborhood clinic when her daughter has an ear infection or stomachache.
In his campaign last fall, Mr. Schwarzenegger, a Republican, praised the Healthy Families program and vowed to do whatever he could to make sure all those who qualified for the program were enrolled. But in his budget, which is certain to be modified by the Legislature, Mr. Schwarzenegger proposed $2.7 billion in cuts in social service programs, including the cap on enrollment in Healthy Families.
Virtually every state safety net program for the poor -- including Medi-Cal, welfare and programs for the infirm, the aged, the severely disabled and those living with AIDS -- faces substantial reductions under the governor's spending plan.
Mr. Schwarzenegger also proposed a 10 percent reduction in fees to doctors and other medical providers under the Medi-Cal program, a move some fear will drive many providers out of the overburdened system. A court has blocked a 5 percent reduction in Medi-Cal reimbursements imposed last year, so the $462 million Mr. Schwarzenegger hopes to save from the larger reduction is hypothetical at this point.
The governor's proposal would cap health care payments for illegal immigrants, reduce state payments for in-home care of the elderly and disabled and suspend the scheduled 2005 cost-of-living increase in the state's share of the Supplemental Security Income program.
More than 75,000 legal and illegal immigrants and 110,000 children in low-income families would lose health coverage in the first year of the plan, according to Health Access, a nonprofit group that advocates expansion of coverage. The California HealthCare Foundation estimates that the plan would add 350,000 Californians to the ranks of the uninsured over the next two years.
State Senator John Burton, the liberal leader of Senate Democrats, called Mr. Schwarzenegger's first budget ''unworthy'' of the progressive tradition of California.
''I don't think people voted for him to take away money from the elderly, blind and disabled,'' Mr. Burton said this week. ''I don't think they voted for him to take health care away from young children.''
Mr. Burton and other Democrats say they believe tax increases will be needed to balance the budget without devastating cuts in programs for the poor. Passage of the budget requires a two-thirds vote of the Legislature, which is dominated by Democrats.
''It seems the only people being asked to share in the pain are those that are the most vulnerable,'' said Francisco Estrada, public policy director in Sacramento for the Mexican-American Legal Defense and Educational Fund. ''The most affluent are not being asked at all to share in the pain of resolving California's fiscal crisis.''
Schwarzenegger aides defended the decisions as necessary to correct the state's troubled finances. They said cuts were not aimed at the poor. They noted that health and human services would consume nearly a quarter of the state's $99 billion in spending for the fiscal year starting July 1, so it appeared the poor would take a disproportionate hit.
''Anyone who characterizes it as balancing the budget on the most vulnerable is just not accurate,'' said Rob Stutzman, the governor's communications director. ''The pain is balanced throughout government.''
Mr. Stutzman said social services cuts were made with ''scalpels rather than battle axes'' and were designed to slow the growth of expensive programs to bring deeper savings in future years.
According to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a national group that analyzes the impact of government programs on the poor, 34 states have imposed cuts or caps on Medicaid and children's health plans, causing as many as 1.6 million low-income recipients to lose health coverage. Florida, which froze enrollment in its children's health program last year, had a waiting list of more than 40,000 children by late fall.
The Florida official who helped Gov. Jeb Bush design his most recent budget, Donna Arduin, is now Mr. Schwarzenegger's budget director.
''These are not easy decisions, to be sure,'' said H. D. Palmer, spokesman for Ms. Arduin, ''but we tried to strike a balance between unsustainable rates of growth and going in and removing people who are currently receiving services. We think we found a middle ground.''
In addition to the cuts in state social programs, the governor has proposed a $1.3 billion reduction in payments to local governments. City and county officials warned that those cuts imperiled local health and welfare programs, as well as public safety and other services.
David E. Janssen, the chief administrative officer for Los Angeles County, said that his county, the state's most populous with 10 million residents, would lose $289 million under the governor's plan, even as it had to cope with the cuts in services.
''This really represents a frontal assault on health and human services programs,'' Mr. Janssen said. He said denying basic health coverage to thousands of low-income residents would drive them to underfinanced community clinics and overcrowded emergency rooms. The counties and cities foot the majority of the bills for those services, he said.
Mr. Janssen also noted that Mr. Schwarzenegger's budget depended largely on California voters approving a $15 billion deficit-reduction bond on the March ballot. Without that money, the state will run out of cash in June and the budget hole next year will be at least $3 billion deeper.
Mr. Janssen said that borrowing to finance current spending was fiscally irresponsible, but utterly necessary given the state's plight.
''It's lousy government,'' he said, ''but it has to pass.''
