IF Jim Testa represents something other than a genuine repository of New Jersey rock 'n' roll arcana, it is, regrettably, the state's best hope for a ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy'' makeover.
His side-parted brown hair, oversized glasses and middle-age paunch suggest insurance salesman -- his Manhattan day job -- much more than the aging hipster he definitely is. His two-story house in Weehawken, where he toils nightly in front of a computer to produce JerseyBeat, the rock fanzine he started in 1982 that now reaches a national readership of 2,000, is covered in cat hair, papered in old Ramones posters and decorated, front and center in the living room, with a lamp fashioned out of a prosthetic woman's leg in a ripped fishnet stocking; a toe pointed toward the ceiling supports a yellowing shade.
Try to schedule an interview with him, and Mr. Testa, 49, is forced to shuffle engagements at clubs where he is dutybound to check out bands for his zine, which appears about four times a year, or at clubs where he performs his own music as a singer-songwriter. Once he has committed to combing the archives of JerseyBeat to tell his story, though, he is prone to being carried away on waves of guitar noise-tinged nostalgia.
Riffling through the loose-leaf, typewritten pages of JerseyBeat's second issue, dated April-May 1982 and priced at 50 cents (it is now $3, by subscription from 418 Gregory Avenue, Weehawken, 07087), sets Mr. Testa off on a zigzag soliloquy about the Hoboken punk quartet the Bongos, who graced its black-and-white cover. (They signed to RCA, put out one record and broke up, he recalls; one member then opened a guitar shop in Hoboken.) Flipping years forward, he is compelled to offer up an oral history of Maxwell's, the Hoboken haunt that has peppered JerseyBeat's pages with its rock finds for decades but closed briefly in the 90's after rocky change in ownership. Holding forth the spring 1998 issue, he points to a historic tagline: ''R.I.P. Maxwell's,'' it reads. ''End of an era.''
More issues, fatter and better bound as the 90's slip into the current decade and the bands between the covers slink toward obscurity or brighter spotlights, produce reminiscences about acts that earned their first publicity in JerseyBeat. There are the Wrens, from Secaucus, a four-man pop outfit now playing sold-out shows in Manhattan; Ted Leo, the punk hero from Bloomfield, whose most recent record made The New Yorker's 2003 year-end list of favorite records; and the Ours from northern New Jersey, a band that put out two records on the major label DreamWorks in recent years and scored an MTV video or two.
JerseyBeat began, Mr. Testa explained, soon after he graduated from Rutgers and lost a regular assignment writing about New Jersey bands for Discords, a fanzine based in Washington, D.C., when a friend who ran it had to abandon it because of family complications. To avoid forfeiting the entree that that job had afforded him into rock clubs and the basements of emerging bands, he formed JerseyBeat, for which he has since served as editor, publisher and lead writer -- he now writes nearly 25 percent of the material for its nearly 200 pages.
But it is in poring through JerseyBeat's bylines that he professes the most pride. Rock journalists who have emerged from its pages include Jim DeRogatis, formerly of Jersey City, who reviewed records and wrote articles for JerseyBeat in the 1980's and is now the pop music critic at The Chicago Sun-Times -- ''Roger Ebert's counterpart,'' Mr. Testa said.
Some of his other writers have had articles in Spin, Creem, The Village Voice, Salon.com and Mojo, and Mr. Testa maintains high hopes for the current crop of about 20 contributors. Among them are Lucy Rayberg, a 17-year-old Atlanta high school student who found JerseyBeat online and asked to help with record reviews, and Rich Quinlan, a high school English teacher from Huntington, N.Y., who also reviews records.
Editorially, Mr. Testa maintains a lightness and a looseness. Articles can be uneven, but they don't unravel or skitter toward unreadability. In JerseyBeat's latest issue (fall/winter 2003), the cover story is an article by Mr. Testa called ''Things I Hate.'' They include ''Web sites with empty pages'' and ''bands that show up for a gig, play their set and then pack up and leave, taking all their friends with them -- and often loading out while another band is playing.'' A page later comes a well-researched article, ''JerseyBeat Shore Report: The Future of Asbury Park and the Music Industry'' by Josh Davidson, which pulls readers toward the pulse of what Mr. Testa calls the state's ''diverse, talented and woefully underappreciated'' rock scene.
Farther in, various interviews, presented Q.&amp;A. style, precede hundreds of reviews, each a fat paragraph. Mostly, they cover independent bands whose CD's and demo tapes arrive on Mr. Testa's doorstep from towns like River Edge (an alt-rock outfit known as Canyon), Bayonne (the female punk trio Erase Errata) and Hillsdale (a quintet of ''off-key clowns'' who ''scream horribly'' called Escape Engine).
Reviews of compilation CD's, DVD's, books and rival zines (Twenty Eight Pages Lovingly Bound With Twine, produced in Danville, Ohio, earns an endorsement, but Urban Rag, out of Tannersville, N.Y., is panned for ''trying to look like something that is way beyond its means'') merit back-of-the-zine sections.
Art consists of often grainy black-and-white photographs taken by contributors, or impressively detailed hand-drawn cartoons and sketches, some by Mr. Testa. Advertisements, occasionally with obscene artwork, derive from independent record labels promoting individual bands for a readership of ''insatiable rock fans from all walks of life, a couple hundred of which are music professionals,'' Mr. Testa estimates. The $75 he charges for a full-page ad on the back cover goes a long way toward explaining why JerseyBeat is not a money-making enterprise.
''People will wonder why I do this if I'm not making a profit, but it's the friends that are the best part of this,'' Mr. Testa said. ''There are very few musicians I've admired that I haven't gotten to meet.''
His stature as the go-to guy in New Jersey for rock trivia earns him repeat invitations to South by Southwest, the music industry's annual conference based in Austin, Tex., that is also a barometer for up-and-coming stars and trends in pop music. There, through the years, he has stood face to face with Ray Davies from the Kinks, Johnny Cash and Tony Bennett.
Mr. Testa, who occasionally is asked by fellow editors to rank the best hardcore records of all time, nonetheless said that meeting Mr. Bennett caused him to go ''totally tongue-tied.''
When he was growing up in Hoboken and Weehawken, he recalled, his father loved music. ''Sundays after church my mom and grandmother would cook the traditional big Italian meal,'' he said, ''and my dad and I would sit in the living room and play records. He loved Tony Bennett. It was the first music I was exposed to.''
One unexpected benefit of a hobby as consuming as JerseyBeat is the hours it forces Mr. Testa to log at home. Since his mother died several years ago, he has been the main caretaker for his father, who lives downstairs and suffers from a form of dementia.
Mr. Testa votes yearly in The Village Voice's ''Pazz and Jop'' poll of top records. He has also written an essay for Rolling Stone's ''Alt Rock a Rama'' anthology and is completing a chapter to be included in his old friend Mr. DeRogatis's forthcoming book, ''Kill Your Idols.'' The concept of the book, he said, ''is for the younger generation of rock critics -- not that I'm young anymore -- to rebut the classic picks of the boomer generation; albums like 'Sgt. Pepper's' or the Beach Boys' 'Pet Sounds.' My pick is 'Never Mind the Bollocks: Here's the Sex Pistols.' In my opinion, they stole a lot of credit from the Ramones.''
Once that deadline has passed, Mr. Testa will step up his own performance schedule. He was encouraged by ''a nice blurb'' in The Village Voice recently about his self-released record, ''Songs My Father Never Sang (and Other Tales of Post-Boomer Angst).'' ''I think it makes you a better critic to experience life on the other side of the footlights,'' he said.
In addition, he needs to keep an eye on a heap of new bands. ''There's this band out of Jersey City called Rye Coalition,'' he said, by way of example. ''They're an archetypical Jersey City group -- fat, sloppy, they don't care what their hair looks like -- and they're a loud, really loud, pedal-to-the-metal old-fashioned rock band. They're also being produced by Dave Grohl,'' former drummer for the band Nirvana.
''They could be huge,'' Mr. Testa said. ''For them, it's a case of, You can take the guys out of Jersey, but you won't take the Jersey out of the guys.''
For once, he said, ''that's a good thing.''
IN PERSON
