I confess.
Well, on second thought, maybe not.
Let me think it over. I'll get back to you.
These were my thoughts after reading ''Webstalker,'' Katha Pollitt's very personal essay in The New Yorker last week about her obsessive craving for information about her ex-lover and the frenzied nightly Internet sessions that satisfied it. Trolling from Web site to Web site in search of tidbits about him, she tried, like an insane electronic bloodhound, to piece together his new life.
This was on the heels of David Denby's new memoir, ''American Sucker,'' about how he became greedily obsessed with money during the dot-com explosion. Mr. Denby, a film critic for The New Yorker -- what's come over that place? -- lost nearly $1 million when bust followed boom. He also spent some time addicted to Internet porn, but sex was more or less out the window once his money lust took over.
Let's face it, the impulse to spill the beans about ourselves is a potent one. We're all ashamed of something or other; we all have secrets that don't want to be secrets, unspoken thoughts pressing on our vocal cords. Especially now, in a culture that rewards self-aggrandizement (I mean, please, Donald Trump is still a celebrity?) to such a warped degree that some people find even their most grotesquely squalid distinctions aggrandizable. Jerry Springer and Montel Williams would not be household names if that weren't so.
There is a difference, of course, between the combatants on ''The Jerry Springer Show,'' who aren't self-aware enough to be ashamed of what they are admitting to, and writers like Ms. Pollitt and Mr. Denby, who are too self-aware not to be. And it's probably significant that for both writers, technology enabled them to pursue their foibles alone and in private. Cyberspace becomes for both a subject of rumination. It's a new world, with new moral guidelines, new mistakes to make, new ways to be ashamed. This is how self-reportage qualifies as news.
The confession, however, still begins with the pronoun I. And never have we lived in an age when more writing -- including this essay -- is contemplated and carried out in the first person. It's possible, in fact, that the confessional urge may be greater among writers than other people. After all, we express ourselves for a living, so we always need something to say, and our secrets are so juicy and so close at hand. They're a journalist's dream, an intimate exclusive: facts, unreportable by anyone else, with the potential for emotional resonance, psychological depth and the titillation of gossip.
It's tempting territory to explore. The proliferation of Weblogs is proof of that. But it's also true that distinguished work, even great work, has come from those who have not resisted the impulse. Thoreau's ''Civil Disobedience'' is a confession of a sort: I did it and I'm proud of it.
Writers have been foisting their guilt-ridden consciences on the literate world ever since St. Augustine. Purifying oneself through soul-baring is not only a sanctioned spiritual enterprise but a literary tradition, nowhere more so than in this country. In how many Edgar Allan Poe stories is the narrator's conscience audibly athump?
''The Great Gatsby'' has a strong confessional subtext; Nick Carraway's narrative reeks of rue at his having been seduced by the phoniness of Gatsby's American dream. Mark Twain in ''Huckleberry Finn'' and nearly a century later, J.D. Salinger in ''The Catcher in the Rye'' invented the confessions of young innocents who understand lying to others but haven't yet discovered the advantages of lying to themselves.
And in a modern classic of the genre, Philip Roth's ''Portnoy's Complaint,'' the narrator's admissions are delivered to his psychiatrist. The intimacy of his revelations, concerning, among other things, masturbatory shenanigans involving dirty socks and a slab of raw liver, were sensationally shocking in 1969, when the book was published.
''Portnoy's Complaint'' was a watershed book in a lot of ways. Like Lenny Bruce, Portnoy tapped into a national relish for frankness. That appetite grew out of the cultural rebellion that turned the repressed 1950's into the chaotic 1960's. After that, societal taboos in the arts and entertainment fell more rapidly, which may well be something Mr. Roth understood could happen.
But perhaps an unintended consequence of Portnoy's revelations was a blurring of the traditionally accepted wall between author and narrator. So intimate, so brutally self-scorning, so proudly and madly, well, confessional, was Portnoy's rant that many readers couldn't help associating Mr. Roth himself with his character's habits and neuroses. Jacqueline Susann, whose own novel ''The Love Machine'' was competing with ''Portnoy's Complaint'' at the top of the best-seller lists, remarked to Johnny Carson that though she thought Mr. Roth a fine writer, she wouldn't want to shake his hand.
This is amateur literary history, but it seems evident that in the past 35 years these several elements -- the spreading of the confessional culture, the vanishing of virtually all taboos, and the diminishment, in popular perception, of the divide between the creator and his or her creation -- have led literature in a direction that has rarely been traveled in the past.
Why shouldn't writers find a niche in a culture increasingly defined by its most solipsistic elements? Moviemakers like Woody Allen have transcribed his neuroses onto the screen and embodied them himself. Theatrical monologists have portrayed themselves in their own life stories. There is, too, the rise of poetry slamming, with its narcissistic narratives and thoroughgoing theme of self-empowerment for the poet; the ever-expanding, it seems, universe of stand-up comedy; the self-help gurus and the ethics and relationships columnists in popular magazines who turn personal experiences into universal life lessons.
The darker recesses of the mind have always been literary territory. People behave badly, or at least peculiarly, and the behavior has consequences. Why do they do this? To answer this question is, by and large, why people become writers. And it has always been a tenet of writing that in order to write well and powerfully, you have to descend into yourself, look honestly into your black heart, write what you see there and thus know to be true. That's painful stuff, and writers have conventionally masked their revelations in fiction.
In our confessional age, when there is evidently less to be ashamed of than ever before, is that necessary any more? Memoirs like ''The Kiss'' (Random House, 1997), Kathryn Harrison's account of her affair with her father, and ''The Sexual Life of Catherine M.'' (Grove Press, 2002), Catherine Millet's explicit account of her own dalliances, argue that it is not. So does the recent work of Ms. Pollitt and Mr. Denby. Is it desirable? Well, literary confession is, in its way, an act of hubris. So your sins (or at least what you make of them) better be original. Otherwise, they're hardly worth reading about, which is why I confess only that I have nothing to share with you.
