FOR the artist and poet Christine Boyka Kluge, the conjoined interests of art and writing have always fed on the same sources: nature, the senses, dreams and the subconscious.
Ms. Boyka Kluge, who has received five Pushcart Prize nominations and the 1999 Frances Locke Memorial Poetry Prize from The Bitter Oleander, a poetry journal, says that these two art forms borrow from the landscape around her and the one in her imagination. In the hope that her readers will follow her into even deeper and darker places, Ms. Boyka Kluge has journeyed into the uncharted territory of the heart, blood, muscles and flesh in her first book of poetry, ''Teaching Bones to Fly,'' (Bitter Oleander Press, 2003, $14).
Ms. Boyka Kluge, who in this collection explores the larger themes of love, loss, yearning and rebirth, believes that both literally and figuratively, ''our experiences are of the body, taken in through the senses, seen, breathed, felt, smelled, circulated and tasted.''
Ms. Boyka Kluge, whose chapbook manuscript ''Domestic Weather'' won the 2003 Uccelli Press Chapbook Contest in December, also believes that to really live, ''one has to open one's pores to the world, to pay complete attention, to drink it in with passion.''
''This is what joins us together in universal experience, as humans, in joy and sorrow,'' said Ms. Boyka Kluge, who lives in North Salem, in a house built by her husband, a high school science teacher.
She spoke recently about poetry, art and the ties that bind them.
Q. When did your interest in poetry begin and how does this art form tie in with your work as a visual artist?
A. I feel like I've always loved to read, write and draw. From the time I was a small girl, I've wanted to make things: stories and poems, paintings and drawings, books, photographs and collections. My mother was a powerful influence on the creative aspect of my life. As a writer and artist herself, she encouraged me by example and by providing raw materials like sketchbooks, books of poetry, diaries, fountain pens and colored pencils. She took me on trips to libraries and museums. I still cherish my well-worn copy of the editor Helen Ferris's children's anthology, ''Favorite Poems Old and New,'' bearing my mother's left-handed inscription. In school, writing and art were perfect areas for a shy girl to shine. I lived for the art teacher's weekly arrival with her cart full of magical supplies. I also lived outside in nature, spending hours observing the woods, fields and swamps. I collected ''treasure''-- fall leaves, acorns, moss, milkweed, seeds, ladybugs and violets. I paid attention to colors, shapes and textures. I fell in love with the landscape. These preserved images still feed my eye, my writing and art.
Q. A poem, ''Light and Air'' in your book, is a beautiful, unflinching look at your mother dying. Talk about leaving ''that darkened room in search of light and air.'' How difficult was it for you to go there?
A. ''Light and Air'' was written following one of the largest losses in my life, during a period of many losses, both for me and for those close to me. The poem portrayed the dark feelings of grief and despair of that phase. Although it was emotionally difficult to relive that experience in words, it was also enlightening and calming. It's necessary to look directly into the face of death. The poem captured and preserved a time that was heart-rending but strangely beautiful. I did feel all the voices, past and present, crackling like static in the air of that hospital room. My brothers, husband and some of my aunts, uncles and cousins were all there, sharing that air for hours on Christmas Day, on into the eerie first and final hours of the next. Seemingly beyond speech or movement, my mother's last act was to lift her face to mine. It was extraordinary. I truly shared her last breath. I'm grateful I could be there. I hope the poem connects with others who have suffered similar losses -- that it can help diminish their pain.
Q. You have written a lot of prose poetry. How distinct are the lines between prose and poetry?
A. Prose poetry is a hybrid form, a blend of poetry and prose. In paragraph form, it looks like prose, but it feels more like poetry to me. There's an intensity to it. You travel far within its small space. From my point of view, the line between its two elements is blurred. The prose poetry anthology, ''No Boundaries,'' from Tupelo Press, edited by Ray Gonzalez, bears that title partially for that reason. In my experience, the genre provides a direct wick to the unconscious. The paragraph's rectangle opens like a door to dream states and hallucinatory images. It's a mode of transport. Somehow, it offers freedom. anything goes. It seems less structured than ''regular'' poetry, but that is probably more attitude than reality. After all, it's just a framework. There are no hard rules for poems.
Q. The poet Jeffrey Levine has called you a ''translator of experience,'' and has also commented that you teach us -- the listeners and the readers -- to listen with our bones. Why do you think your poetry stimulates such a visceral response?
A. Jeffrey's comment comes from the beginning of one of the poems in the book, ''The Edible Grave'': ''Eyeless, I forget the light above. / I listen with my bones.'' I hope my readers will follow me to deep places, absorb my experience through the imagery on the page, take it seriously, take it to the core, the marrow. I invite the reader to look through my eyes, to wear the gloves of my hands. I think it's necessary to go so deep that I arrive somewhere beyond myself, tapping into the limitless depths of dreams, of the subconscious. That written place seems to arise from a hidden part of me that is more primal, more expansive, oddly communal.
Q. Talk about the collaborations that you did with another artist and composer.
A. The collaboration that I did with Rick Mullarky and Kala Pierson was for Born Magazine, an online publication. It was the most fun I'd had in a long time. I discovered Born, which is a ''marrying of literary arts and interactive media,'' in the usual circuitous way in which one travels link-to-link among Internet offerings. I found some delightful and intriguing collaborations there. I was quite moved by a piece that Rick had done with a wonderful poet, Eliot Khalil Wilson, so I contacted both to let them know that I admired their project. They both graciously responded. When the editors accepted a poem of mine, Rick and I requested working together. Earlier, Kala, an innovative young composer, had contacted me to ask permission to use the test of my prose poem, ''One Claw Into the Dream,'' that she had read online in Pedestal Magazine, for an experimental opera. I thought it would be interesting to invite her to join Rick and me, to work on the sound for the Born piece. It was a wonderful experience. I discovered that I enjoyed seeing how others interpreted my words, and relished the whole unpredictable route we followed to get to the fascinating end result.
Q. Do you plan on doing more collaborations?
A. Yes. For someone who tends to work in solitude, joining others injects a new energy into projects.
The Absence of a Heart Leaves an Hourglass Shape
Overnight, she is different.
Now she breathes only sand and salt,
clouds of talcum and dust.
Her chest is a hole
dug in a desert dune.
She inhales to fill it,
exhaling only shadows.
The absence of a heart
leaves an hourglass shape.
It takes so much time
to replace the missing weight.
Tears spent, she ignores thirst.
She doesn't remember food.
She closes tight, as a seed,
storing herself for later.
She no longer craves even air.
But, oh --
The possibility of lightning,
like a crack in the purple-black sky,
the sweet chances of rain!
She dreams of flowers
like hundreds of crimson mouths,
parting their lips
among cactus thorns.
From ''Teaching Bones to Fly'' by Christine Boyka Kluge. This poem is also featured on the Web site www.bornmagazine.org/projects/heart as part of a collaboration with the artist Rick Mullarky and the composer Kala Pierson.
