INVESTORS who poured more than $1.5 billion into gold and precious metals mutual funds in the last year got a shock last week.
The price of gold plunged 3.2 percent on Thursday and was down 4.6 percent for the week, to $407. For the year, gold has fallen 2.2 percent.
What happened to gold stocks was even more painful. Even before the price of gold plunged on Thursday, two leading precious-metals indexes fell sharply. By the end of the week, the gold index of the Chicago Board Options Exchange and the gold and silver index of the Philadelphia Stock Exchange were each down more than 10 percent. That led to an average loss of 10.4 percent through Thursday for the precious-metals funds followed by Lipper Inc.
Despite this sell-off, investors kept moving money into precious metal funds, adding $53 million in the week ending Wednesday, according to AMG Data Services. Investors, in this case, seem to know what they are doing. Though gold has stumbled, the gold rally won't fade for good until the dollar stops declining.
The dollar rallied briefly last week, setting off the decline in gold prices, but mixed signals from the Bush administration, the Federal Reserve and European central banks and finance ministers suggest that nothing fundamental has changed.
Still, the sudden fall in the price of gold is a warning that the road ahead for gold and gold company stocks is likely to be much less smooth than the rally that brought gold back over $400 an ounce last month. The current sell-off is a reminder that chasing gold at these prices is much riskier.
John Hathaway, a gold fund portfolio manager at Tocqueville Asset Management, said the plunge in gold stocks was easy to explain: the stocks were ahead of the metal. ''By our own reckoning,'' he said, ''the stocks were discounting gold at $500 an ounce or a little more. At some point you have to see a pullback, and maybe that is what we are getting.''
Jean-Marie Eveillard, co-president of First Eagle funds, said the gold stocks might lead gold lower for the next couple of weeks or months. But he is holding his ground. ''I am not a trader so it does not bother me,'' he said of gold's fall.
The dollar's decline is likely to resume despite protests last week from Europe, the strongest statements to date of unhappiness with the falling dollar and a rising euro. Jean-Claude Trichet, president of the European Central Bank, made the most pointed remark, saying that ''brutal moves'' in exchange rates were unwelcome.
This jawboning did help the dollar rise more than 3 percent last week, but comments alone will not stabilize the currency.
IN any case, the Bush administration doesn't appear to mind if the dollar moves lower, because a decline helps revive American exports and keep the recovery going along nicely in a presidential election year.
The administration is asking the Japanese to stop intervening in the foreign exchange market to slow the fall of the dollar against the yen, and the Chinese to loosen their peg of the Chinese yuan to the dollar. If both oblige, the dollar will fall further.
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, expressed little concern in a speech last week about the nation's record current account deficit. Many analysts, however, say that the difficulty in closing this gap with money from abroad will push the dollar lower. Mr. Greenspan ''didn't say anything to make me think he is nervous about the dollar,'' said Rebecca Patterson, global currency strategist at J.P. Morgan.
And the Europeans themselves are not really opposed to a weaker dollar. They want the dollar to weaken more against the yen and the yuan because that would ease some of the upward pressure on the euro. So they support the Bush administration's lobbying of the Japanese and the Chinese.
Altogether, this adds up to a policy mix in which the dollar continues to fall. Ms. Patterson of J.P. Morgan is forecasting that the euro will be at $1.40 by year-end. That would be a dollar decline of more than 11 percent from current levels, enough to rekindle the gold rally.
PORTFOLIOS, ETC.
