Bob Goodnough
Chappaqua Library Gallery, 195 South Greeley Avenue, Chappaqua, (914)238-4779. Through Jan. 31.
Art can be fun, fanciful, and it can even provoke laughter. It can also be controlled and calculating with a hint of lyricism. All this and more can be gleaned from the current show of works by Bob Goodnough, a longtime Westchester resident, at the Chappaqua Library Gallery.
Mr. Goodnough's versatility is demonstrated by the placement of his new debris-laden ''Large Dinny the Dinosaur (With Presents)'' (2003) near his signature hard-edge paintings. He has two esthetic fronts going: the comedically reckless constructions he has been making since high school, which look like what crops up in abandoned lots on the Lower East Side where industrious outsider artists have their way; and the cool and crisp Abstractions that express an unflinching desire for order. Somehow, these two artistic paths feed off each other. The odd rhythms he creates with alternately colored blue and red plastic foam cup halves, which make up the jagged back of a rickety dinosaur in the aptly named ''Cup-O-Saurus 1'' (2002), is echoed in the cascading pattern in one of Mr. Goodnough's more precisely executed ''serious'' works, ''Soaring Vertical'' (1994).
The fluid expression in ''Running Horses II'' (oil on canvas, 1997) may have been inspired by the wave-like aluminum assemblage in the courtyard nearby, titled ''J.N.T'' (1989). The juxtaposition is just one more example of how Mr. Goodnough's two distinct approaches to art making emit a remarkable synergy. This is a perfect show for those who feel lost when viewing Abstract art. If you look carefully here, you can find your way.
Winter Solstice Exhibition
The Studio, 2 Maryland Avenue, Armonk, (914)273-1452. Through Jan. 25.
''Winter Solstice Exhibition'' at The Studio features many of the artists who have shown here in the past. The exhibition is a mixed bag, with more than a few works worth seeing.
Adrienne Cullom's ''Playing Field'' (2003) is the show's strongest piece. Working with collaged burin engravings, Ms. Cullom creates a delightful field of characters that fall somewhere between the quirkiness of Alexander Calder's ''Circus'' characters and Saul Steinberg's coarse, yet comical representations of city dwellers.
A mixed media work on paper by Robert Kaupelis called ''Better Bite Site'' (2002) is frenzied, forceful and a bit whimsical while Christopher Magadini's two teeny paintings ''Bio'' (2002) and ''Squared'' (2003) achieve a formidable sense of spatial relations and visceral expression within a minimal amount of space.
Tedd Stratis's ''Untitled (0803)'' (oil on canvas, 2003), reveals itself slowly through numerous glazes of colorful thick lines. The interlocking, overlapping loops that fill the canvas's surface create a succession of visual echoes that register a certain cognitive depth, leading one to imagine the artist's thought process.
Natasha Cohen's ''Germination'' (2003), a mixed media assemblage, has a peculiar, Gothic look -- as if one might find it in a medieval curio shop. Miko Goodnough, Bob Goodnough's wife, offers a lovely collage, reminiscent of Romare Bearden.
The Art of Printmaking
Noel Fine Art, 80 Kraft Avenue, Bronxville, (914)337-4050. Through Feb. 20.
''The Art of Printmaking'' is the first in a series of exhibitions at Noel Fine Art that explore the various forms in a specific genre or field of art. In this instance, Noel DeGaetano, the gallery's director, has invited 11 artists who make prints using a variety of media, presenting a broad array of styles and subjects. Leonard Stokes's Iris prints that were digitally created take a page from R.B. Kitaj, who also had a very special way of mixing perspectives to create his more exotic narratives. Jenna Pallio finds her muse in what look to be vintage Brownie photographs, focusing primarily on backlighted images of children. Ms. Pallio's nicely modulated sepia-toned palette works well in these intimate monoprints.
Gino Civale is the master of kitsch. His romantic, even sweet, approach to the peasant life is particularly appealing. Linda Adato's crisp cityscapes and interiors are traditional in feel, while Rieko Fujinami's digital collages push the traditional subject to a new, more compelling place. Michael Torlen's monoprints never disappoint, as he continues his homage to his father's seafaring life. Like Alvin Most's ''Trout Quintet'' (1994-96), Mr. Torlen's marine content counters nicely with his serious quest.
Dale Leifeste's two botanical digital prints are clever, focused and pure, while David Humphrey's ''Sno, Tree'' (2003) boldly stretches the term ''representation.'' Deborah Freedman's elusive landscapes project the elegance of memory.
The quirkiness of Michael Mueller's Surreal silkscreen print ''Head, Joy'' (2000) makes it this exhibition's most unforgettable piece.
ART REVIEWS
