If ever fashion needs to crank up the laugh track, it can always consult the program notes designers concoct to explain their inspirations. Assuming that consumers need stories before they can understand new clothing, designers tend to oblige with some pretty loopy flights of fantasy.
For the fall 2004 men's wear collections shown in Milan, which ended on Thursday, there were Teutonic invitations from Jil Sander to join a New Order of gentlemen; from Ralph Lauren to fall in with the classic preppy styles characterizing an Old Order of same; and from Versace to indulge in the house's usual Rock Glam, this time with ''a twinge of Anglomania'' (ouch!).
The designer Neil Barrett invoked the ill-fated Antarctic explorations of Ernest Shackleton, explaining in an interview that ''I always like a bit of snow.'' Ennio Capasa, the designer of Costume National, set aside his usual Mick Jagger fixation and spoke of the heroes of action films. At Pringle, there was a whiff of the Scottish Highlands (and kilts). At Etro the invitation was to discover the ''right spirit'' of the knight in a medieval Snakes and Ladders exercise called Il Gioco dell'Oca, or the Game of the Goose.
And why not? Goose games sound sexier than the plain truth, which is that nearly everyone here is conspiring to bring back the suit.
The notion may seem odd from a business standpoint, since earnings in the $55 billion men's wear industry have been deflating for years, with suit sales in particular down by 11 percent in the United States since 2002, according to the NPD Group, a market research company. And yet, despite the gloom, this proved to be an excellent season for Italian men's wear, one that buoyed retailers and also suggested that a separate underlying narrative may be driving a return to something like optimism about men's clothes.
Much was made here of a sartorial revival, with an unspoken reference to the tailoring traditions in which Italy has long led the world. Ever since this country joined the European Union, a current of nostalgia has emerged here for an Italy that is swiftly passing out of existence, a mythical place amalgamated from local cultures that, however deep-rooted, may not prove strong enough to resist the global market juggernaut. ''They have the mills, they have the looms, they have the craftsmen, they have the tailoring,'' said Robert Burke, the fashion director of Bergdorf Goodman. And yet, Mr. Burke pointed out, there is a move afoot to replace the treasured Made in Italy label with one that reads Made in Europe, so that manufacture can be cheaply outsourced throughout the European Union.
In reaction, Italian designers seem suddenly mobilized to reclaim their cradle culture. The most sincere example is provided by Dolce &amp; Gabbana, whose collections for both men and women are consistently nourished by images from a vanishing past. The Fellini Rome invoked by a plaster backdrop of the Trevi Fountain used to showcase Dolce &amp; Gabbana's fine men's wear collection is now basically a figment from late night TV. Most of the people in the audience were probably too young to know that Rie Rasmussen was impersonating Anita Ekberg when she stepped into the fountain and ruffled her platinum mane.
But revivalism, well conceived, can result in showings like Dolce &amp; Gabbana's, which paired natty suit jackets in jacquard wools, gigolo velvets, subtle tweeds and fur-front sweater jackets of Marcello Mastroianni vintage with the low-slung baggy trousers adapted from the hip-hop scene. Of all the designers at work now, this team seems best placed to exploit a formula of high/low dressing to establish themselves as an indispensable brand for a generation new to the work force and its constricting uniforms.
Older men, of course, have already been broken to the suit and to ties knotted without irony around the neck. For those guys, the return of Jil Sander to her own house, after a dispute with the company's owner, Prada, is decidedly welcome news. ''Art dealers can breathe a sigh of relief,'' said one buyer. In her heyday, she was the designer of choice in SoHo, Chelsea and along 57th Street.
The art dealer demographic tends to skew older than the pubescent types on whom Ms. Sander likes to present her clothes. That does not mean that the subtly tailored slim suits are not for men who shave every day.
Worn with the wing-tip shoes that were everywhere, Ms. Sanders's strong clothes deployed restraint in silhouette, in palette and in styling. There were postman-blue suits, olive drab coats, mouse-color pinwale corduroy jackets stiffened with canvas to keep them from looking like costumes for a revival of ''Dead Poets Society.'' There were coats with epaulets, slender flannel jackets and a blue shearling coat as tidily shaped as a hand-rolled cigarette. It goes without saying that stuff of such economical effects is bound to cost a fortune, as, in Ms. Sanders's case, it always has.
While it remains unclear whether Italian clothing exports can recover from their 2003 slump, when sales to the United States fell a drastic 10 percent, the week gave hope that the Italian fashion industry can regain lost drive and focus. Who knows? Perhaps the suit will actually catch on. ''Suits are very strong for us now,'' said Kal Ruttenstein, the fashion director of Bloomingdale's. ''Ties, too, believe it or not.''
If it does, consumers will have an unusually fine array of choices, among them the chalk-stripe suits (with cuffs!) at Versace, intended, as the designer Donatella Versace said, to evoke ''extreme elegance'' and old-school tailoring ''alla Milanese.'' The tone-on-tone shirts and nipped waists on ventless midnight blue jackets seemed more characteristic of a snappy Neapolitan than the sober gents of Milan. And the Anglophile twinge in the secondary Versus line seemed like nothing that two aspirins and a good night's sleep wouldn't cure. The collection reflected a serious effort by Versace to recapture the late Gianni Versace's small-town Calabrian ideas of glamour, notions persuasive enough that they actually transformed a personage as occupationally chic as Diana, Princess of Wales.
At Valentino, the reference was Rome, whose tailors are probably second only to the Neapolitans in their ability to suit the man who sees himself as a dandy. There were wide collars and deep pocket flaps, narrow shirts with silk piping, wool jacquards and shaved shearling blousons and, somehow, a believable suit in red. The most unlikely comeback story of the past couple of seasons came last year with Valentino Garavani's R.E.D. collection, which discovered in southern Italian resorts inexhaustible mines of imagery. This season's R.E.D. collection continued the successes of the last, with sandblasted corduroys and low-riding velvet trousers and with blouson jackets that, against all odds, looked cool.
Despite the idiotic French braids and rattails woven into the models' hair, the collection telegraphed a belief in an evolving market for serious men's clothing, and a need that the urban wear designer Marc Ecko spoke about when he said in Florence last week that sooner or later a blazer must come into every man's life. Alexander McQueen expressed a similar sentiment with his first men's wear collection in years, shown against a backdrop of an erotic film about his friend Annabelle Neilson and a Danish model whose name Mr. McQueen could not recall.
''I had the experience of wanting the clothes and I couldn't find them,'' said the designer, who famously began his career as an apprentice on Savile Row. ''I don't think subtlety is very much evident in men's wear right now,'' he added. ''There's a little too much extra in the clothes.'' To remedy that, he presented a line of clothes inspired by, among others, Mick Jagger, the elegantly anachronistic Orthodox Jews of Antwerp, and Starsky and Hutch. Of these influences, the frock coats inspired by Belgium's Hasidim were best.
Calvin Klein presented a show that shared Mr. McQueen's sensibility, the designer Italo Zucchelli showing trademen's jackets with quilted panels and emphasizing leather, lean shapes and fringed scarves that might be worn by creative types.
What one might call a misguided level of extraness seemed to characterize the collections shown by Prada, Etro and Ralph Lauren, to name three designers not often mentioned in the same sentence. At Prada, unlined coats and jackets purposely creased to look as though their owners had lost the dry cleaner's number, seemed conceptually unresolved. At Etro, a presentation involving jesters, a game board and theatrical beards interfered with some lively offerings that included corduroy suits in pink, lilac and powder blue. At Ralph Lauren, the exploration of American upper class folkways came closer than ever to self-parody.
The bulky tweeds, flashy socks, wool and leather camp moccasins and swallowtail coats tended to obscure a more appealing selection of fitted suits that reprised an earlier Milan show of Mr. Lauren's, at which he anticipated by a year the tailoring trend. The show's capper came when the lanky Mipam Thurman, Uma's brother, appeared wearing a floor-brushing shearling greatcoat for evening, which was accessorized with pumps and a silver-headed cane. ''That is for your next pimp wedding,'' remarked the editor of one major men's magazine as the crowd made its exit. Kid Rock will officiate.
Hokey archetypes, for once, made a scant showing at the collections, which may have added to the general air of relief among retailers who have sometimes had trouble figuring out how they were going to sell men on dressing like cowpokes or porn stars or Kurt Cobain. The response to Tom Ford's final men's wear show for Gucci, which drew on the image of a debonair hedonist wearing a body-molding suit and with a whiskey and cigarette in hand, was such general elation that his corporate bosses may want to reconsider and bring him back for a series of farewell shows.
If there was one designer whose vision seemed wayward it was Giorgio Armani, whose refusal to bow to trends can be read as principled, or else as a sign of someone whom success has isolated from vital information. Unlike his near contemporary Calvin Klein, Mr. Armani evinces no particular aptitude for assessing a landscape in which ideas of masculinity seem to change by the hour. Mr. Armani's showing of soft cardigan jackets, flowing trousers and high-buttoned tunic coats were taken by one critic as a sign that the designer had cottoned to the new ''metrosexual style.'' It happens that this discovery comes at a time when any right-thinking metrosexual seems best advised to take his inner woman over to Barneys and get her a crisply tailored suit, the better to frame all those complex masculine/feminine dualities.
FASHION REVIEW
