TODAY'S GAMES  NATIONAL football CONFERENCE  Carolina Panthers (13-5) at Philadelphia Eagles (13-4)  6:45 p.m., Fox
If Philadelphia and Carolina were not playing for a berth in the Super Bowl, they might be sitting back and admiring each other. For two teams that have come from opposite ends of the spectrum, they have a lot of similarities.
The biggest one is that neither team has looked terribly impressive, even during big winning streaks. The Eagles have won 11 of 12 games, but do not have close to as much talent as they did the last two years in making the N.F.C. title game. They man the running back position with a committee. Quarterback Donovan McNabb looks awful for some stretches, wonderful for others. Their most explosive player, Brian Westbrook, is out for the playoffs with a torn triceps tendon. Their defense gives up rushing yards by the dozens.
The Panthers' one star is running back Stephen Davis, who has a terrible habit of getting hurt, requiring the backup DeShaun Foster to step in. All but the most devoted N.F.L. watchers would struggle to pick their quarterback, Jake Delhomme, out of a lineup. Their defense is solid, but, outside of end Julius Peppers, unheralded.
All both teams have done is win.
Now, for the differences: if the Eagles do not make it to the Super Bowl, McNabb and Coach Andy Reid will be deluged with doubts about their abilities. The Panthers, in contrast, are two years removed from a 1-15 season and have little pressure on them.
The game figures to be relatively low scoring because even when Carolina is on a roll, it favors its running game and tries to control the clock. Even if Davis does not play because of his pulled quadriceps, Foster should have success against the Eagles' 22nd-ranked run defense.
The key will be containing McNabb. Panthers Coach John Fox, a defensive coach, needs his front four to put pressure on McNabb in the pocket and keep him from escaping straight up the middle as he did against Green Bay last week -- no easy task.
The best bet is this game will be close and one quarterback will make one stunning play when the game is on the line.
LYNN ZINSER
