MELISSA JAMES GIBSON'S play ''[sic],'' a hyper-verbal drama about three struggling 30-somethings living in neighboring New York apartments, received enthusiastic reviews and sold out when it opened at SoHo Rep in 2001. Her follow-up, ''Suitcase or, those that resemble flies from a distance,'' which is also about overeducated New Yorkers, starts performances at SoHo Rep on Thursday. The play is about two doctoral candidates, Sallie and Jen, avoiding their dissertations and their boyfriends, Lyle and Karl. In this excerpt, Sallie and Jen procrastinate by talking on the phone.
JASON ZINOMAN
SALLIE: Tell me if this sounds pretentious, but I'm beginning to see my romantic life as alarmingly Aristotelian.  JEN: When should I tell you?  SALLIE: It's just that Lyle never does anything inadvertent, Jen. He's so intentional, Jen, he just doesn't veer. Is it too much to ask for a partner who's capable of shunning purpose on occasion? I called my adviser's voice mail----  JEN: It's a good word though, Aristotelian.  SALLIE: ----and then hung up. Sure, but try saying it fast three times.  JEN: Why did you do that?  SALLIE: Because I can't stop thinking about him.  JEN: Aristotle?  SALLIE: My adviser, my adviser.  JEN: Aristotelian, Aristotelian, Aristotelian.  SALLIE: See?  JEN: I thought you said he wasn't attractive.  SALLIE: He's not, but I find him attractive.  JEN: In what possible context would you find yourself needing to say Aristotelian three times in a row?  SALLIE: Um, say you felt like being emphatic?  JEN: Can you even think of one thing you would characterize as being super-duper Aristotelian?  SALLIE: O.K., um: Life is hard for human beings; I am a human being; life is hard for me.  JEN: That was Aristotelian, but I wouldn't say it was super-duper Aristotelian.  SALLIE: O.K., well, what if someone kept calling something Platonic when it was actually Aristotelian?  JEN: Uh huh, and to correct this person you would just sort of yell Aristotelian in his or her face three times?  SALLIE: Exactly.  JEN: It's your adviser's power over you that you find attractive.  SALLIE: I find his power over me annoying. Actually, I find just about everything he does annoying. If he uses the word moreover in conversation with me one more time I'll, I don't know----  JEN: So you find your adviser annoyingly attractive.  SALLIE: I don't know, I just want him to think I'm smart and admire my breasts.  JEN: Have you ever tried to say Platonic three times fast?  SALLIE: Or maybe I just want him to think my breasts are smart.  JEN: Yeah, but Sallie, at a certain point a person needs to choose between looking good and accomplishing something because it's just not possible to do both.  SALLIE: Platonic, Platonic, Platonic.  JEN: That sounded much easier.  SALLIE: It was.
THEATER: EXCERPT
