THE Criterion Collection's new DVD of Jean Renoir's ''Rules of the Game'' isn't a perfect disc, but it is much better -- clearer, cleaner, more detailed and sensuous -- than any version of the film seen in the last 45 years and probably as good as we will ever see.
In the mid-1980's, Criterion -- which specializes in restoring classic films and lacing them with scholarly commentaries -- put ''Rules of the Game'' out on laser disc. Its picture quality, though superior to the 16-millimeter reels that most people had seen at art houses or college film societies, was unacceptable by the standards of today's DVD's: soft-focused, murky and way too dark.
The laser disc was mastered from a print of the film's 1959 reissue. (The film -- a tragicomedy about love, jealousy and slaughter during a weekend in the country with the French upper classes -- was originally released in 1939, to scathing criticism, then drastically edited. For its 20th anniversary, friends of Renoir's pieced together a version as close to the original as they could manage, and redistributed it to great acclaim.)
Today, for anyone serious about making DVD's, a film print is an inadequate source. The ideal source is the original camera negative. But the negative for ''Rules of the Game'' was stored in a French warehouse that was bombed during World War II.
If the negative is unavailable, the next best source is the 35-millimeter ''fine-grain master,'' which is processed straight from the negative. The next best after that is a duplicate negative, which is made from the fine-grain master. A print is made from the duplicate negative. That's three generations from the original camera negative -- a copy of a copy of a copy of the real thing, each copy looking less pristine than the one before.
When Peter Becker, the president of Criterion, set out to make a DVD of ''Rules'' in the summer of 2001, he knew he had to find a better source than a mere print.
His executive producer in Paris, Fumiko Takagi, learned that a French film lab called GTC possessed a duplicate negative -- one generation closer to the original. Examining the lab's records, she discovered that it also owned a fine-grain master, made from a negative for the 1959 reissue -- another generation closer. But nobody at the lab could find it.
For two years, she begged and cajoled them to look harder. Finally, she gave up. The duplicate negative looked pretty good -- better than any existing copy, on video or film. So last June, Lee Kline, Criterion's technical director, flew to Paris to make a DVD from the dupe negative.
''It really bothered me that a fine-grain master existed someplace and we were going with something worse,'' Mr. Kline recalled. ''But this was all we had.''
Meanwhile, Ms. Takagi kept pestering GTC. Suddenly, last August, just after she'd given up all hope, the lab told her the fine-grain master had been found. Mr. Kline, who had finished his work and returned to New York, flew back to Paris to take a look.
''It wasn't awesomely better, like when they found the original camera negative for 'The Grand Illusion,' '' he said, referring to another Renoir masterpiece on Criterion DVD. ''But the difference was big enough to justify doing it over.''
Mr. Becker planned to release ''Rules of the Game'' in November 2003, in time for the holiday season. With the discovery of the fine-grain master, he pushed back the release to mid-January, at considerable cost.
I viewed both versions -- the almost-released and the actually released DVD's -- side by side, on monitors at Criterion's Manhattan offices. The version made from the fine-grain master has more detail, especially in dark scenes. The ''gray scale'' -- the range of shadings between black and white -- is far richer, subtler, more textured and real.
The outcome is not just aesthetically pleasing. In the rejected version (and more still on the laser disc and earlier film prints), the contrast between dark and light is glaring; the characters' faces seem harsh, their vast palaces icy. In the version used for the DVD, the natural grays soften this impression; the people look more sympathetic; their environments are lush. Renoir's film is a biting satire about the French aristocracy between the two world wars, but it is also about universal human frailty (''Everyone has his reasons,'' one of the characters famously says), and the DVD, finally, lets us feel this.
