''WE ARE LINCOLN MEN''
Abraham Lincoln and His Friends.
By David Herbert Donald.
Illustrated. 269 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
Lincoln is such a central figure in American memory that the writing about him never ends, and never should end. There are always topics that have not been exhausted, angles of vision that have not been expressed. And because he is such a national monument, one can take his life as a template for the treatment of perennial topics -- as David Herbert Donald does in this engaging book with the topic of friendship.
Donald writes about Lincoln with unmatched authority. When, for example, he takes up Lincoln's law partner William Herndon in '' 'We Are Lincoln Men,' '' he can draw upon the only full-length biography of Herndon -- which he wrote himself. And he can find that his perspective now has altered. ''I was very young when I wrote it,'' he says of that book, ''and was readily persuaded by Herndon's claim of great intimacy with Lincoln. Now -- over half a century later -- I have grown much more skeptical.''
When, in passing, he deals with Ann Rutledge's place in the Lincoln story, he can survey the vicissitudes of the supposed romance through his own long career. It was Herndon who first brought Ann into the Lincoln narrative; the renowned Lincoln scholar J. G. Randall, for whom Donald was a research assistant, took her out; Donald's own authoritative biography of Lincoln gave Ann a ''mild endorsement''; and now as a senior historian looking at the question anew, he has ''reconsidered'' his position and returns to a negative opinion.
It is mildly distressing to read that when Donald was on a publicity tour in 1995-96, the question most frequently asked about the greatest of American political leaders was whether he was gay. Donald gamely takes four pages to explain patiently that the relationship between Lincoln and Joshua Speed was not sexual, not homoerotic.
Donald's theme is that Lincoln, although a much-liked man with dozens of apparent friends, had almost no intimate ones. He is surprised, and a reader is surprised, that he found only four men (Speed, Herndon, Senator Orville H. Browning and Secretary of State William Henry Seward) to whom he can give a full chapter. Two others -- John Nicolay and John Hay -- who shared a room in the Executive Mansion, now share a chapter in this book.
Speed came the closest of anyone in Lincoln's life to being an intimate friend. The two were young adults in Springfield, Ill. But when Speed returned to Kentucky, a slave state, and Lincoln's career developed as an antislavery politician, their intimacy diminished.
Donald draws on psychologists to explain Lincoln's lack of intimate friends. His mother died abruptly when he was 9, without any preparatory period of illness, a blow to her son that possibly inhibited any new emotional investment. His father, Tom Lincoln, could not offer compensating warmth. Little Pigeon Creek, in southern Indiana, where Lincoln spent his early years, was not even a village, just a scattering of a few families over a wide area, with a distinct paucity of candidates for friendship for a growing boy. Most boys in their early teens find a close friend -- a ''chum,'' in Harry Stack Sullivan's term. Boys who don't have a chum, the theory goes, have trouble in later life establishing close, warm human connections. Donald ends this discussion with a succinct sentence: ''Lincoln never had a chum.''
And Donald presents Lincoln as still chumless when he became president. ''Lincoln came to Washington in 1861 without a single intimate friend in his entourage,'' Donald writes. And later: ''Surrounded by people all the time, he was the loneliest man in the capital.'' Would Lincoln's chumlessness make a difference in policy? In an afterword Donald mentions presidential errors that a wise friend might have helped him avoid, but then rather withdraws the point because of Lincoln's independence of mind.
But was Lincoln really the loneliest man in the capital? One might suggest that the conceptual frame of this readable book requires a bleaker picture than may have been the case, especially given the often charming concrete material Donald himself presents. If we set aside the ideal of perfect friendship and consider instead the kinds of friendships that conceivably would have emerged in an open, mobile society, then we might say that social circumstance had as much to do with the shape of Lincoln's friendships as did his celebrated ''shut-mouthedness.''
After all, by any realistic standard, Lincoln was by no means bereft of companionship. By some slip-up in God's assignments, this unusually ambitious boy with superlative powers was misplaced into the remote Hoosier woods. Shaping himself, he rose to unimagined heights, and in the contentious world of politics. It was not a life trajectory that offered the settled conditions for deep friendships. There wasn't any little red schoolhouse, there weren't any bright college years, and when he read law, Lincoln read by himself. Nevertheless, when he arrived in the White House -- a notoriously difficult place for developing new friendships -- Lincoln made three of the six friends who merit chapters in this book. Is there a match in any other White House to the lifelong devotion of Lincoln's two secretaries, and the reciprocating warmth and care extended to them by the boss they called ''the Tycoon''? And then there is Seward, a surprise entry on the short list, or any list, of Lincoln's friends.
Seward was understandably crushed when the presidential nomination he expected went instead to this ''little Illinois lawyer.'' The two men warily circled each other in the first months of the administration, Seward trying to be premier, Lincoln carefully not letting him take the first trick, or the second or third trick either. For there even to be a possibility of friendship required one of Lincoln's many acts of magnanimity: he had to put aside Seward's immense early presumption. But Donald shows that after a cabinet crisis of December 1862 these two rivals did become something very like friends. He likes to imagine, and I do too, an incident, possibly apocryphal, when this president and his secretary of state were strolling down Pennsylvania Avenue. The president pointed to a sign saying ''T. R. Strong,'' and wisecracked, ''but coffee are stronger,'' and the two collapsed in laughter.
In short, David Herbert Donald has given us a good book to read. He has also given us a good book to argue with.
William Lee Miller, a scholar in ethics and institutions at the Miller Center of Public Affairs at the University of Virginia, is the author of ''Lincoln's Virtues: An Ethical Biography.''
