DURING the height of the dot-com boom, Henry Blodget, then an analyst for Merrill Lynch, shouted from the rooftops -- and the studios of CNBC -- to herald the unparalleled power of the Internet. So it is perhaps fitting that after the Securities and Exchange Commission decided that his exuberance had gotten the best of him and barred him from the industry for life, he chose the Web for his second act.
Mr. Blodget, a celebrity stock picker who made as much as $12 million a year, is now working as a freelance writer for Slate, an online magazine owned by Microsoft, where he has been writing about the Martha Stewart trial. When Ms. Stewart enters the courtroom to answer charges that she misled investigators and the public about her reasons for the sale of her ImClone Systems stock, Mr. Blodget will serve as a Boswell on the proceedings, filtering her travails through his own recent public abasement.
Mr. Blodget may be choosing to step back into a spotlight that once left him deeply seared, but he does so gingerly. After the bottom fell out, he made a very quick media trip from pundit to piñata, and he was very chaste and careful during a recent interview at a cafe in the West Village in Manhattan.
Given Mr. Blodget's iconic status, it is a bit jarring to sit across from an actual person who belongs to the name. At 37, he still manages to be boyish, with a mop of blond hair, and he has a solicitous manner. But there is no evidence of the unalloyed optimism that so endeared him -- for a time -- to the media and the investing public.
Mr. Blodget, however, can discern a bright side when he sees one. ''All things considered, I prefer writing about an investigation to being the subject of one,'' he said, taking a bite of salad.
Having been escorted out of an industry where he once moved markets with his pronouncements, Mr. Blodget knows a thing or two about comeuppance. ''Martha Stewart is sitting at the intersection of the stock market, law, politics, celebrity and the economic cycle,'' he said. ''A year ago, in a less visible way, I was sitting at the same intersection.''
In a culture of seemingly endless forgiveness, Mr. Blodget is testing some limits. Many average Americans who threw their college savings down a new-economy rat hole have not forgotten that he was one of the digital evangelists who pointed the way while his firm made millions doing the banking for iffy initial public offerings. A graduate of Yale with a degree in history and no training in finance, Mr. Blodget was seen by some as the biggest bubblehead in the bubble economy.
Jacob H. Zamansky, a Manhattan lawyer, won a $400,000 settlement from Merrill Lynch on behalf of Dr. Debases Kanjilal, a Queens pediatrician, after arguing that Mr. Blodget's advice was deeply compromised. Mr. Blodget's research was ''misleading because it failed to disclose his conflict of interest,'' Mr. Zamansky said. ''He was being paid based on the banking business he generated and did not believe what he was writing in his reports.''
Mr. Blodget sprang from the relative obscurity of CIBC Oppenheimer, where had worked as an analyst. In 1998, he boldly suggested that Amazon.com, then trading at about $240, would surpass $400 a share. When the prophecy was quickly fulfilled, he was hired by Merrill Lynch, which had been left out of most of the lucrative underwriting business in the boom and was looking to raise its visibility.
THE assignment came with an explicit conflict -- analysis and banking, supposedly distinct, had blurred in an overheated era -- and Mr. Blodget was handed a very big megaphone at a very tender age. He was perfectly cast. Self-effacing and whip-smart, the camera loved him and so did the viewing public. He made a lot of money for many newly hatched investors, not by picking good companies but by picking stocks that would go up -- and up and up. It was a great strategy until the bubble burst.
But after agreeing to pay $4 million to settle his case with the S.E.C. last year, Mr. Blodget was not willing to wear the hair shirt forever. Early in his career, he worked in journalism, at junior levels, at CNN, Harper's magazine and Audubon magazine, so his current assignment represents something of a return. And there are echoes of his time as an analyst.
Last Monday night, he was in a familiar chair at the CNBC studio, spouting opinions and making pronouncements to news anchor Maria Bartiromo, this time about Martha Stewart. He may not get the kind of attention he once received, but he is hardly keeping his light under a bushel.
Given how badly his last trip through the crucible of public opinion ended, why would Mr. Blodget again submit his analysis for public scrutiny? ''I actually liked working in the public eye,'' he said. ''You couldn't do your job if you weren't willing to wake up in the morning, open your mouth and get hit in the head with a two-by-four. What I wasn't wild about was becoming a symbol. Hopefully, someone else can play that role next time.''
An examination of his stock recommendations at Merrill suggests that his stint there has been rendered in cartoonish ways. Even as he fanned the flames of the digital revolution, Mr. Blodget reminded investors that they should not put more than 10 percent of their portfolio in volatile Internet stocks and that 75 percent of Web-based companies would eventually come to naught. But those cautionary notes were remembered less than his relentless suggestion that the biggest risk was to remain on the sidelines of a paradigm shift in technology and investing.
Mr. Blodget ended up in the cross hairs of both the legal system and the court of public opinion precisely because of his occasional candor. Caught, like a bug in amber, in a stock rating system where up was down and buy meant sell, he played along.
He said he did so in part because he truly believed that the Internet had changed everything. Perhaps, as some have said, he also did so because he was well compensated for waving the pompoms on behalf of Web-based companies that Merrill Lynch was hoping to do banking business with. He never once issued a ''sell'' recommendation on Internet stocks he followed. In the summer of 2000, while he publicly recommended the stock of InfoSpace -- a company that was interested in buying Go2Net, a Merrill Lynch client -- he privately confided in e-mail messages to colleagues that he thought it was a ''piece of junk.''
When the market cratered, the hosannas stopped and the e-mailed death threats began. After he left his job at the end of 2001, he ended up with time on his hands. ''I followed the Martha Stewart case extremely closely, because as it developed, I was in the middle of some regulatory proceedings of my own,'' he said. ''I found myself scrutinizing the indictments in several cases, including Martha Stewart's, and at some point, I though it would be interesting to write about.''
A friend recommended that he call Jacob Weisberg, the editor of Slate. Mr. Weisberg met with Mr. Blodget and decided that it was worth a shot. ''Henry has a rare understanding of the legal issues in the case, and he also has a unique access to the psychological issues,'' Mr. Weisberg said. ''I think that already his analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the case is the best that anyone has done.''
THE disclosure statement he wrote for Slate that accompanies his coverage is a classic of the genre, basking in some of the parallels of the situation.
''Like Stewart, I was, for a while, bathed in the golden glow of prosperity, a symbol of American capitalism and the optimism of the Internet age, and, now, like Stewart, in the harsh light of the bust, I am seen by some as a symbol of 'excess,' a 'fallen star,' a 'disgrace,''' he wrote. ''Like Stewart, I have been charged with securities fraud. Like Stewart, I have been the object of adulatory and venomous press coverage.''
Undoubtedly, some will suggest that Mr. Blodget's coverage is stunt journalism, akin to having Tonya Harding report on figure skating. ''I don't know that Tonya Harding has anything interesting to say,'' Mr. Weisberg said. ''Henry is very committed, and I think that at this point, he owns the story.''
Taking the trip through the swinging doors of the courtroom and coming out with something interesting each day is a very different matter, one that has Mr. Blodget nervous, but excited.
Michael Lewis, the author of ''Moneyball'' and ''The New New Thing,'' who covered the Microsoft antitrust trial for Slate, said he thought that Mr. Blodget had some assets as a reporter.
''The problem with this sort of reporting is how little most reporters know,'' Mr. Lewis said. ''I think it's wonderful to have someone who knows this world intimately writing about it.''
''I don't think you are dealing with a fundamentally dishonest character here,'' Mr. Lewis said. ''His vice was his gift for enthusiasm at a time when enthusiasm was toxic.''
WITHIN the industry, the inflated recommendations were accepted by some with a wink. But many small investors who flocked to the markets when it seemed money was there for the taking, were not in on the code. They took Mr. Blodget's ratings as gospel and, in the process, made and then lost a great deal of money.
David Denby, a film critic and staff writer at The New Yorker, was one of them. He was romanced by Mr. Blodget's optimism and intelligence, so they began to have lunch occasionally. He has since written a book about his own adventures in the stock market called ''American Sucker'' (Little Brown). He credits Mr. Blodget as a good writer, but says his choice of subjects is revealing.
''There is an enormous displacement going on here,'' said Mr. Denby. ''His obsession with Martha Stewart is a way of denying his own legal difficulties and his own ethical problems.''
But like many who know Mr. Blodget personally, he cannot bring himself to wish him ill. ''I am rooting for him,'' said Mr. Denby. ''But now he is a writer, which is my turf, and I would advise him to come clean, as soon as he can.''
That won't be happening. One of the requirements of his deal with the S.E.C. is that he not characterize his own guilt or innocence, an issue that he is likely to have strong opinions about. The closest he can come is the following:
''I take responsibility for everything I said,'' Mr. Blodget stated. ''Some of it I am proud of and some of it I now regard as moronic.''
In explaining why he ended up in the public stockades, Mr. Blodget is willing to point to a favored quotation, in ''A Short History of Financial Euphoria,'' by John Kenneth Galbraith: ''The final and common feature of the speculative episode -- in stock markets, real estate, art or junk bonds -- is what happens after the inevitable crash. This, invariably, will be a time of anger and recrimination and also of profoundly unsubtle introspection. The anger will fix upon the individuals who were previously most admired for their financial imagination and acuity.''
Others take a little less historical view of Mr. Blodget's rise and fall.
''Blodget's role at Merrill might be compared at least partially to William Hurt's role in 'Broadcast News,''' said Eric Von der Porten, a manager at Leeward Investments, a hedge fund based in the San Carlos, Calif. '' I don't think he was ever a great analyst, but he knows how to tell a good story, he's very personable, and he comes across well on television. He was also willing to play the game of backing Merrill's I.P.O.'s and supporting investment banking.''
William Fleckenstein, a money manager in Seattle who took a dim view of Mr. Blodget's research during the boom, said his role had been inflated. ''If I were going to make a list of corporate and Wall Street war criminals, he wouldn't make my top 20,'' Mr. Fleckenstein said. ''I think he had a conscience, unlike a lot of these guys.''
Gary Lutin, an investment banker in New York, said that while Mr. Blodget had plenty of competition in frothy analysis, he did not serve investors well. ''He knew what he was doing,'' Mr. Lutin said. ''He could have kept himself in shoes and food without misleading the public.''
A part of Mr. Blodget seems to envy Ms. Stewart, who although quite bloodied, will get her day in court. ''In the court of public opinion, one is guilty until proven innocent and, in the court of law, one is innocent until proven guilty,'' he said.
Mr. Blodget was less surprised than many others by Ms. Stewart's rapid trip from America's most admired homemaker into a tar baby of suspected corporate malfeasance.
''I am not amazed, because I have seen it before,'' he said. ''It is startling how quickly what one is a symbol of can change.''
