It was a throwback to the old days, when presidential campaigns were carnivals of razzle-dazzle, the days of parades, bonfires and monster rallies, the days of Harry S. Truman, Hubert H. Humphrey and George Meany, the labor boss with the oversize cigar. They did not actually play ''Happy Days Are Here Again,'' but they might as well have.
Labor pulled out all the stops on Thursday night for Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri. Loudspeakers blared tunes by Pink and Bachman-Turner Overdrive. Enormous tractor-trailers from near and far rolled up to a motel near Marshalltown in central Iowa, air horns blasting, to be greeted by hundreds of beefy men in sateen trade-union jackets. When Mr. Gephardt stepped out of the cab of the last one with James P. Hoffa, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, the place dissolved in a swirl of color.
Flags! Placards! Chants! Cheers! And in short order Mr. Hoffa and a phalanx of other labor heavy-hitters denounced President Bush, the unions' bête noire. One of them, Terence M. O'Sullivan, president of the laborers' union, whose membership includes landscape gardeners, hailed Mr. Gephardt as ''the warrior for working Americans'' and promised he would help to ''rip the Bushes right out of the White House.''
Discarding his usual mild manner, Mr. Gephardt joined in the uproar. He told his labor supporters that he had but three goals -- ''jobs, jobs, jobs'' -- and reminded them that he was the only Democratic presidential candidate who had voted against Nafta and the World Trade Organization. He recalled that his father was a Teamster who drove a milk truck in St. Louis. He accused Mr. Bush of costing Iowans 30,000 jobs.
''I have worked with five presidents,'' he said to rapturous acclaim, ''and this one is by far the worst.''
Later, in a more reflective moment, Mr. Gephardt described the rally as part of an all-out effort by blue-collar unions to reassert their political influence, which has been declining for decades along with their membership. Only 8.7 percent of American private-sector workers are unionized.
''A lot of labor people see in me a last chance to bring back some of the highly paid jobs that have been lost,'' he said in an interview. ''They know that protectionism won't do it, but they want to be able to compete. My party got sold a bill of goods, and we turned over trade policy to the big corporations, whose main goal is to drive their wage costs down, down and down.''
Iowa's caucuses on Monday night are also a last chance at the presidency for Mr. Gephardt, in all probability. He won here in 1988 but lost the nomination to Michael S. Dukakis, and he has said repeatedly that if he loses Iowa this time, he is through. Probably so, although the late tightening of the race raises the possibility of a virtual two- or even three- or four-way tie, which might enable him to prolong his campaign even if he loses narrowly.
Unions have a mixed record in the Iowa caucuses, as acknowledged years ago by Chuck Gifford of the United Auto Workers here, who for many years was the leading labor figure in the state. Many union members are Republicans or independents and do not participate in the Democratic meetings; many others disregard their leaders' wishes.
Mr. Gephardt has the backing of 21 international unions that he says represent 95,000 Iowans; Howard Dean, a main rival, is supported by white-collar unions said to represent 21,000, including the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, which helped Gov. Tom Vilsack win the Democratic nomination in 1998. A deep cultural cleavage divides the two groups, with the blue-collar workers who have come here from all over the country profoundly resentful of the young ''Clean for Dean'' volunteers. The Gephardt backers are confident they will prevail.
''You tell me,'' said Chuck Rocha, the national political director of the steelworkers' union. ''Two people ring your doorbell on Monday. Which are you more likely to listen to -- your labor brother or sister, or an ear-piercing kid from Seattle or somewhere?''
Mr. Gephardt is more cautious.
''There are lots of good strategies, lots of good game plans,'' he said. ''We know what we can do. But you have to get it done. On Monday night, you have to execute the fundamentals better than any of the other guys.''
Even with the record turnout predicted by Iowa's secretary of state, Chet Culver, only 125,000 to 130,000 Democrats will attend the meetings. So if just a small proportion of Mr. Gephardt's potential labor support materializes, it could have a sizeable impact. Entrance polls during the 2000 caucuses showed that 33 percent of participants had a union member in the household.
As he said, ''In Iowa, 15,000 people can be a very big deal.'' In addition to labor, Mr. Gephardt is counting on rural voters; he carried 64 of the state's 99 counties in 1988. But just as the ranks of organized labor have been shrinking, so have the ranks of farmers and small-town residents. Towns like Rockwell City, which proudly bills itself as ''the Golden Buckle on the Corn Belt,'' look worn and tired, and the businesses that line the squares surrounding their elaborate courthouses are having a tough go of it. Riding west along U. S. 20 from Fort Dodge on Friday morning, Mr. Gephardt passed one abandoned barn after another, forlorn against the winter sky, and houses in dire need of paint. The loss of family farms, he had said the night before, means the loss of a school, the loss of a church, the loss of a Main Street and ultimately ''the disappearance of a way of life and a culture that meant a lot to this country in terms of its values and its ethics.'' That, too, was an echo from the past, an elegy similar to those delivered by Mr. Humphrey, Walter F. Mondale, Bob Dole and other candidates.
A couple willing to identify themselves only as Bill and Linda, who awaited Mr. Gephardt in the basement of Rockwell City's tidy Carnegie Library, epitomized the plight of rural Iowans. Until 10 years ago, they lived fairly comfortably on the income from their corn and soybean farm. Now he works as a prison officer, she as a secretary in the city government, and they do their best to keep the farm going. Uncommitted like many others in northwest Iowa, they hung on the candidate's words. Mr. Gephardt is still blond and boyish at 62 in his well-pressed khakis, open-necked shirt and black V-neck sweater, with only the suggestion of pouches under his eyes betraying the inevitable fatigue of the campaign. A television producer commented that he had pulled out tape of the 1988 campaign, compared it with tape of this year's and found the two Gephardts, separated by 16 years, impossible to tell apart.
The candidate does his best to identify with small-town Iowans. His flat accent, the twang of the Midwest, identifies him as one of them. He preaches the virtues of corn-based ethanol and soy-based diesel fuel as routes back to prosperity, and he dwells on the ills of agribusiness and big hog lots rather than the Sept. 11 attacks, the war on terror or the campaign in Iraq. The contrast with Dr. Dean could hardly be more emphatic.
But there are a few similarities, too. Both tell their audiences that they can change the way things are done in Washington, and both hope to draw people to the caucuses who have not attended in the past -- Dr. Dean appealing mainly to younger people, Mr. Gephardt mostly to an aging audience. Mr. Gephardt must hope that few share the views of Paul Hogan of West Des Moines, a retired office manager for an insurance company, who dismissively described Mr. Gephardt to a reporter Thursday as ''yesterday's news.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CONGRESSMAN
