In a test being developed by Neal Schmitt of Michigan State University, students are asked to decide which alternative they would be most likely to take in a given situation and which they would be least likely to take.
1. You discover your roommate, who works hard to pay for her education, is writing essays for other students in return for substantial amounts of money. What actions would you take?
a. Nothing. You don't want to impose your values on the person.
b. Confront the roommate and suggest alternative methods of making money that are more legitimate.
c. Confront her and tell her to stop. If she doesn't, you will turn her in for cheating.
d. Offer to loan her some money.
e. Just warn her of the consequences if she is caught cheating.
f. Tell her that you are aware of this activity and disapprove, but do nothing.
g. Leave the person alone. She is just trying to make money to pay for college. Besides, the customers are the ones cheating.
In questions designed by Robert Sternberg of Yale to measure judgment, students are given a common situation and options for handling it. They then rate the quality of the options on a 1-to-7 scale.
1. Extremely bad
2. Very bad
3. Somewhat bad
4. Neither bad nor good
5. Somewhat good
6. Very good
7. Extremely good
2. You have been assigned a 15-page paper in the area of your major, due at the end of the term. It is now midterm. If your goal is getting a top grade in the course, rate the quality of each of the following options.
a. Talk to the professor as soon as possible, and keep her informed of your progress on the project throughout the term.
b. Choose a topic soon and begin an outline of things to include in the paper.
c. Concentrate on the assigned reading and participating in discussions until three weeks before the due date; then choose a hot topic from late in the term for the paper.
d. Submit a rough draft to the professor for comments, then a revision on the due date.
e. Ask a few friends to read the paper and comment critically before you submit it.
f. Choose a topic close to the professor's area of research.
g. Seek advice from other faculty in addition to the professor of this course.
h. Choose a topic you are already familiar with from other courses, reading and assignments.
3. Another Sternberg creativity challenge: Come up with a story inspired by any number of these images.
COLLEGE BOARD
