It has been more than 40 years, but Phil Shinnick still feels cheated. He still feels the emptiness.
''My deepest meditation told me that I had to do something about the record, it got too deep inside me,'' he said. ''I had no antidote for the suffering it brought me. I really care about the record. I always will.''
''The record'' is the world long-jump record. Shinnick, 60, now a Manhattan acupuncturist, says he broke it on May 25, 1963, at a meet in Modesto, Calif. A group of witnesses agrees. But the United States and world track federations never recognized it. Last month, after a vigorous domestic campaign, Shinnick scored a victory with USA Track and Field. His jump of 27 feet 4 inches was retroactively registered as an American record for its day.
But after dozens of phone calls, e-mail messages and letters, from Seattle to Senegal to Monte Carlo, Shinnick is still waiting to hear from the I.A.A.F., the international track governing body. He is used to waiting. It comes down to a breeze that witnesses say barely blew, about the absence of a wind gauge and about a man's inability over the course of his life to feel fulfilled. It is about 20-year-old Phil Shinnick knowing he had broken Igor Ter-Ovanesyan's world long-jump record by three-quarters of an inch, and about meet officials saying it wasn't so.
''The biggest thing that happened is that, after the jump, people changed the way they related to me,'' Shinnick, now a grandfather, said recently. ''They'd say, 'You got robbed by an official' or 'Tough luck, kid,' thousands of times. I developed a consciousness. I didn't want to be a victim.''
He is certain of one thing: ''Absolutely, that it was a fair jump.''
It should have had celebration written all over it. But there was a problem.
When Shinnick jumped, taking all of four seconds, the one wind gauge at the meet was being used for the nearby 220-yard low-hurdles race. No official wind reading, no official world record.
But in examining old newspaper clippings and affidavits that Shinnick and his supporters gathered for appeals to the track associations, a reasonable person can draw only one conclusion: he should have been awarded the world record.
The evidence shows:
*Shinnick was among the best long jumpers in the world during this period;
*Witnesses said then and recall now that there was nary a breeze;
*The wind gauge for that 220 race read 1.6 meters a second, under the limit of 2 meters a second (about 4.5 miles an hour);
*Before Shinnick ran down the runway for his jump, he asked his teammate Brian Sternberg to test for the calmness of the wind; a handful of grass fell softly to the ground, the two men say.
Documentation ranges from comments from meet officials quoted in the newspapers of the time to recent affidavits from Shinnick's long-jump rival Ralph Boston, from the son of the wind gauge judge and from Sternberg.
''We need to put this injustice of Phil's to rest,'' Sternberg, a onetime world-class pole-vaulter, wrote last September in his affidavit to the track organizations. ''Justice is never timebound. Everyone who saw it, including all the officials next to him on the runway, testify to the same thing -- that it was legal. He did his job, and now it is time for others to do their job and accept it.''
Phil is a friend of mine, and has been for 30 years. I have to admit that until recently, I didn't understand his fixation on this record. In the course of world and sports events, it seemed so irrelevant, so, frankly, selfish, fighting for a record in an event -- nay, in a sport -- that is past its own prime. In some ways, I've thought it is akin to an aging cowboy's battling to revive his mark in history for, say, stagecoach racing.
Who, in the end, really cares? What does it matter to be on a list that only a handful of people care to examine: World Records, Long Jump, Men? Worse yet, it would have been a fleeting mark. By Sept. 12, 1964, Boston flew past Shinnick's unofficial record with 27-4 1/2. Shinnick's supremacy would have lasted just 16 months.
Still, it turned into his obsession; he contacted anyone he knows -- or doesn't know -- to make his case.
''I want the record more than I want to be humiliated,'' he told me once.
My long-term attitude: ''Get over it.''
But, then, I looked around and listened. Sports statistics are created out of thin air everyday -- best road team on Tuesdays against opponents whose quarterback majored in biology, or most walk-off home runs to end a game in a Canadian stadium by a Venezuelan shortstop.
And I paused.
Sports is based on records, statistics, comparisons and, fundamentally, fairness. If an athlete is the best -- for a moment or 474 days -- shouldn't he get his due? Should he not be remembered? This battle might be a self-consumed pursuit of a man seeking his name on a list to show to his grandchildren. Or it could be broader than that. It is about an athlete seeking personal justice in an institution that, most times, is cold, black and white, seeing no grays, allowing no reconciliation.
For most of us, the chance to gain a place in history comes only once. In Shinnick's case, it came on that Saturday in Modesto. It is time for the winds to blow in his favor, for an official at the world track organization to say: ''All right, enough already. Give him the record.'' It's time for Shinnick to celebrate, and to rest.
BackTalk Jay Weiner is a sportswriter for The Star Tribune in Minneapolis.
