WHERE to put the new firehouse?
The question has flummoxed the hamlet of Millwood for a dozen years. The fire district has recently homed in on the site of the lumber supply store in the center of town as the best spot for a 16,000-square-foot upgrade to its 80-year-old building on Millwood Road, and has notified the property owner that it is investigating the possibility of taking the land by eminent domain.
But the property owner, Leo Rotta, has complained vigorously, taking out an advertisement in the local paper opposing the move, arguing that the lumber store, Millwood Supply Company, which claims to be the oldest continuously operating lumberyard in the county, is a crucial part of the Millwood community and his family, as well as an important source of rental income for him. The fire commissioners have voted not to condemn the supply company property, which is also on Millwood Road, just a few blocks away from the current fire station, unless another suitable location can be found for the business within Millwood, which is a hamlet of New Castle, said Barbara Weltman, one of the five members of the fire commission, an elected, unpaid board.
Meanwhile, space and location issues are growing worse for the Millwood Fire District. The district continues to outgrow its home, situated on a blind curve, and can no longer safely use its sagging second floor, said Mark R. Blitstein, a spokesman for the fire commissioners. The fire district had to ask that a fire truck be shortened by two feet to fit in the current building, and Mr. Blitstein says officials believe that the next equipment it buys will not fit in.
There used to be a freezer on the second floor, he said. ''We had to take it out because the floor was so weak it was beginning to tilt,'' he said.
The fire commissioners have researched at least a half-dozen sites, and have chosen the land beneath Millwood Supply Company as the front-runner. It has been a painful process in a town that has few vacant spaces, Mr. Blitstein said. The fire company, which has two firehouses, protects 9,000 people living in an area of 9.18 square miles. Mr. Rotta and his family no longer own the lumber company, but he owns the land beneath the company and the rights to its name. He said his parents, who came from Italy, bought the business in 1932. ''Those times were tough, very tough, and they were having trouble just getting by,'' he said. ''When they decided to take on the supply business in Millwood, it was the biggest gamble of their lives, even bigger than leaving their homeland for America. But they did it.''
Retail property on the site is worth about $40 per square foot, Mr. Rotta estimated. ''Why would you want to put a firehouse where you can get $40 a square foot?'' he asked.
Mr. Rotta says he receives $100,000 a year in income from the land. Establishing what price it might bring if sold is difficult, but both sides have given rough estimates of the property's worth as around $1 million. Mr. Rotta's supporters point out that if a property is taken by eminent domain, the price is set by the government and not by the open market. He has a strong sentimental attachment to the business as well. ''It's always been part of me, part of my life,'' he said.
Mr. Rotta's family sold the company in the 1970's, and it was sold again in the 1990's, to Fred Cohen, who runs it now and who is concerned about keeping the business going. ''Where the fire station is, is not the primary issue for Millwood Supply Company,'' he said. ''It's the ongoingness of Millwood Supply.''
Mr. Rotta suggested a variety of other sites in town for the firehouse, including one across the street, the home of Hudson Valley Motorcycle, and two sites on Route 100, a parcel occupied by a Shell station and one that is now a park with a ball field. ''Why would you take what is the best and most prominent piece of commercial property in Millwood for a firehouse?'' he asked.
But Ms. Weltman, a fire commissioner, said the motorcycle site is too large, has more tenants to be relocated, and could probably not accommodate a large enough septic system. The Shell site would be worrisome because of the possible need to clean up underground storage tanks. And using the park would require legislation to be passed in two sessions of the State Legislature, and would incur the wrath of the town recreation department and the parents of anyone who uses the ball field, she said.
That leaves the site of the Millwood Lumber Supply Company. ''Since the news has come to light, the only opposition has been this absentee landlord,'' she said, referring to Mr. Rotta, who lives in Eastchester. ''A task force formed by the town directed us to this site. We had not looked at that site prior to task force's steering us in that direction.''
Mr. Blitstein, who is also a Millwood firefighter, said he wished the firehouse could be expanded where it is, but it would be prohibitively expensive to expand the current building and bring it up to code.
The fire commissioners said that the Millwood Supply site has the lowest relocation costs and few tenants. They also contend that it is also easier to relocate a lumberyard than a commercial building and that the current business cannot expand where it is. But the commissioners have resolved to keep the lumberyard in town.
''I don't know what I would do on a Saturday morning if I couldn't go down to the lumberyard,'' Mr. Blitstein said.
Others agreed.
''I think it's a horrible thing for the guy who owns the business over there,'' said Duane Alexander, a sales manager at Hudson Valley Motorcycle, across Millwood Road from the lumberyard. ''If they can't find a place for a firehouse, how are they going to find a place for a lumberyard?''
DEVELOPMENT
