It would seem that Vanity Fair, the breathless chronicle of all things glamorous and shiny about New York and Hollywood, would be in love with the 108th mayor of New York City.
For years, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg seemed to embody the same qualities found in many of the magazine's subjects -- a love of fancy restaurants, deep pockets for the charity circuit and real estate of considerable size in requisite tropical, European and urban locations.
Further, the editor of Vanity Fair, Graydon Carter, runs in similar social and professional circles as Mr. Bloomberg did in his pre-mayoral, media mogul days, before he began choosing meatloaf on Staten Island over cheese courses at expensive Midtown restaurants. The two share a certain number of accouterments: Manhattan town houses, finely tailored suits and fat Rolodexes. Each has been known to be long on lady friends.
They were, in Mr. Carter's estimation, friends. But that was before Mr. Bloomberg imposed an almost total ban on indoor smoking in public places in New York City, infuriating Mr. Carter, who enjoyed lighting up in restaurants, bars and, according to three summonses he has received from city inspectors, his office at the sleek West 42nd Street headquarters of Condé Nast. Mr. Carter has called the enforcement of the new law harassment, among other things.
''It is an important issue,'' said Mr. Carter. ''It is about freedom and your own civil liberties, and it is about the city. This is not Denver, it is not Seattle, it is a big rough turbine that is fueled by cigarette smoke and food and liquor. People want to go out at night. If your best friend smokes, it makes it very awkward.''
Over the last six months, Vanity Fair has been ripping into Mr. Bloomberg on almost a monthly basis, vexing the mayor's staff and angering Mr. Bloomberg at times, too. In September, the magazine ran a lengthy profile of Mr. Bloomberg that was far from flattering, referring to him as ''waiflike.''
Mr. Carter has also devoted no fewer than three editor's letters to criticizing the mayor. In the latest, in the February issue of the magazine, Mr. Carter says the mayor is ''like a husband who returns home after the honeymoon and announces to his new bride that he has decided that henceforth they will be vegans.''
For that same issue now on newsstands, Mr. Carter commissioned an article by Christopher Hitchens in which Mr. Hitchens chronicled his minor crime spree throughout the city -- feeding pigeons, smoking in a luxury car -- painting Mr. Bloomberg's New York as something just short of a police state.
''I did it because I thought it would be fun journalism,'' Mr. Carter said. ''It was to explain something.''
He said, ''I see some 86-year-old man getting a ticket for feeding birds in the park and I don't get it.''
But Bloomberg administration officials say Mr. Carter has crossed a line. ''It certainly raises the question of whether it is ethical journalism for an editor to use his magazine to push his agenda,'' said Edward Skyler, the mayor's press secretary, who last week accused Mr. Carter of ordering up a series of hatchet jobs on his boss.
Buzz Bissinger, who wrote the lengthy profile of Mr. Bloomberg, believes the administration protests too much.
''The piece was generally positive,'' Mr. Bissinger said. ''I concluded that in his own idiosyncratic way, he's been an effective mayor.'' If the mayor's staff believes otherwise, he said, ''It's pathetic.''
A seminal song from the 1970's performed by the band War comes to mind: ''Why Can't We Be Friends?'' A sample verse: ''I seen ya around for a long long time. I really remember you when you drank my wine.''
Indeed Mr. Carter has drunk Mr. Bloomberg's wine, and snacked on his potpies as well. The two met several years ago when Mr. Bloomberg invited Mr. Carter to lunch near Mr. Bloomberg's corporate headquarters. Mr. Carter was later invited to dinner at Mr. Bloomberg's London and New York homes.
The two shared an affinity for social cachet, with Mr. Bloomberg at points embracing Mr. Carter's endeavors.
When Mr. Carter, 54, stopped playing host for dinner for the Serpentine Gallery in London, Mr. Bloomberg, 61, moved to quickly take it over. When word got out that Vanity Fair would no longer be holding the annual party after the White House Correspondents' dinner, Kevin Sheekey, an aide to Mr. Bloomberg at his company and in the administration, hopped in a cab and rushed to the Russian Federation Trade Ministry with a check to secure that party for Bloomberg L.P.
They have had their little jokes. Just last year, Mr. Bloomberg sent Mr. Carter a mock proclamation for a local law affecting ''middle-aged men with long hair,'' stating that they ought to ''cut their locks immediately.'' (Mr. Carter's coif is Baldwinesque: pick a brother.) ''Regular inspections will be led by the Office of Emergency Management to begin at Da Silvano restaurant,'' the proclamation read.
And then the smoking ban came last spring.
Mr. Carter's resistance to the mayor's mandate has become so well known around Condé Nast that when the sprinkler system went off last year, the rumor mill immediately concluded that it was activated during another act of rebellion.
Mr. Carter denies it. ''There was a fire in a fashion closet,'' he said. ''I never set off the sprinkler system.'' He said that he does not smoke much in his office these days -- ''Not really.''
However, Mr. Carter continues to light up in public spaces from time to time, as if he just wanted to vex the mayor. He once lit up not far from the mayor at the Four Seasons.
Mr. Bloomberg maintains that most New Yorkers support the smoking ban, and said pointedly on his weekly radio show on Jan. 9 that there was only ''one magazine editor who's apoplectic about this.''
He added, ''His own people turned him in because he was breaking the law.''
Mr. Carter insisted that he thought Mr. Bloomberg was a good mayor, and that he would vote for him in a re-election.
''He's rich; I'm not. He doesn't smoke; I do. But we have common interests,'' Mr. Carter said. ''He is an interesting guy -- he is great enjoyable company -- but we just disagree on this one issue. I would be very happy to see him in a room.''
