Stupidity and Tears: Essays on Teaching and Learning Under Pressure. By Herbert Kohl. The New Press.
Herbert Kohl, who founded the open school movement in the 1960's, has written passionately about teaching for many years, most notably in the classic ''36 Children.'' His latest book consists of six loosely connected essays that range broadly, from a year he spent in Spain decades ago to proposals for improving research into child development. At heart, they are about what makes for good teaching, how to overcome constraints on teaching and learning, and ways to understand and reach students.
The core issue is stupidity, but by this he does not mean ignorance. He is referring to what bad schools do to both teachers and students, and the ways they respond to keep themselves sane. Stupidity, he says, is ''a form of institutional and social coercion that traps people into acting in ways they consider to be stupid and, in the context of teaching, counter to the work they feel they must do to help their students.''
Luis, a fifth grader Mr. Kohl taught in the 60's, acted stupid -- he misbehaved in class and made visible efforts to avoid learning -- in part because teachers viewed him that way.
On getting to know Luis, Mr. Kohl found that the child ''felt trapped in a system and didn't know a way out of stupidity.'' Luis ''needed strategies and support to 'un-stupid' himself.''
Through examples full of interesting characters -- including green teachers who unintentionally make unruly classes worse -- Mr. Kohl shows how hard it is for adults to understand how children hear them, which is usually different from how they intend to be understood. The lesson is about teachers, but it may matter even more to parents.
Mr. Kohl insists that the policies causing such stupidity -- high-stakes testing, uniform curriculums -- can be overcome with enough determination. His is a call to arms. ''Teachers should be as resistant and resilient as their students,'' he says, ''and learn the fine art of defying ignorant authority intelligently.''
TIMOTHY A. HACSI
BOOKS
