'Betty Holliday'  Port Washington Public Library, One Library Drive, Port Washington, (516)883-4400. Through Jan. 30.
Surveying a roughly 25-year period, from the late 1950's through the early 1980's, this selection of Ms. Holliday's work focuses on portraiture and figure study. Best known for her larger than life-size figure drawings, the artist handles oil and acrylic paint as dynamically as she uses charcoal.
Three of the large drawings illustrate a restless imagination that remains unsatisfied with elegant solutions to the problem of capturing the body's vitality and constantly sees further possibilities. A small, rather academic early drawing of a figure at rest makes an interesting comparison to Ms. Holliday's mature work, in which the body and the space it occupies engage in a rhythmical pas de deux. Erasures appear less as corrections than as evidence of alternatives pursued in stream-of-consciousness fashion.
The paintings are not as spontaneous but no less acutely observed, without the necessity of detailed description to convey temperament and mood. Sometimes facial features are missing altogether, allowing color and form to suggest character. In ''Mrs. Bennett,'' one of the show's highlights, the subject's face is blank, but she comes across as a vivid personality by virtue of the setting. Bright reds and oranges set off the spiky rhythms of a wicker chair, which are echoed in the figure's contours.
One of the earliest works is an affectionate study of the artist's mother seated in a chair, seemingly lost in reflection. The soft-focus brushwork and muted tonality recall Larry Rivers's portraits of his mother-in-law, Berdie, done a few years earlier. A reviewer for Art News, Ms. Holliday was no doubt familiar with them. As her work developed, however, she found a distinctive approach that combines character study with abstracted form and structure, as in the powerful ''Charlotte with Hat,'' from the late 1960's, and ''Giovanni Seated,'' painted about 1980, with its slabs of color compressed against the picture plane.
'Reminiscence'  East End Arts Council, 133 East Main Street, Riverhead, (631)727-0900. Through Feb. 7.
Memory is the theme of this juried show, selected by Arlene Bujese, an owner of an East Hampton gallery. From reflections on personal experience to collective knowledge passed down through generations, the influence of the past is paramount.
The show was inspired by Naomi Grossman, whose installation, ''Shreds of Memories,'' is on view here. During visits to senior citizen centers, Ms. Grossman took casts of elderly people's hands while interviewing them and having them photographed. Their words and images, as well as the casts, are arranged around the room, and excerpts from the audio tapes provide a compelling sound track for this intimate history lesson. The project affirms the value of listening to, and learning from, one's ancestors.
The continuity of generations is apparent in William Grabowski's sculpture, ''My Father's Hand,'' which uses an old manual typewriter to symbolize the inheritance of personal traits, in this case, the hand itself, as the artist sees his father's reflected in his own. Modern memories of ancient skills are the subject of K.D. Eaglefeathers's ''These Cheyenne Hands,'' a photographic meditation on the importance of maintaining continuity with ancient traditions.
Many of the artists look back to their own histories. The old neighborhood is evoked in Martin Silverman's lively print, ''Memories of Childhood,'' and Shirley Haubner's amusing ceramic sculpture, ''The 'Apotment' House.'' ''Golden Days,'' Judi Culbertson's assemblage of toy fragments and home movie reels, and Lester Sprague's ''Snapshots,'' a collage of family photographs, sheet music and other memorabilia, serve as enhanced scrapbooks. Ruth Hamill and Lori Hollander have re-worked images of relatives to amplify their stories, bringing their memories to life through art.
'Time's Witness'  Shelter Rock Art Gallery, Unitarian Universalist Congregation, 48 Shelter Rock Road, Manhasset, (516)627-6560. Through Jan. 27.
Fred Stein's black-and-white photographs also deal with remembrance, but on different terms than the works in the Riverhead show. Mr. Stein fled Nazi Germany -- first to Paris in 1933 and then, in 1941, to New York. He viewed both cities with an outsider's fascination and curiosity, as well as a deeply humanistic interest in urban life. Like all great street photographers, he interpreted as he observed.
His scenes are now tinged with nostalgia for the skylines and streetscapes of yesteryear, but one senses he was aware of the tension in the air. One cannot look at his ''Paris Evening, 1934,'' in which an isolated couple casts a long shadow in the mist, without feeling a frisson of foreboding. What happened to them when war came? And what of the cluster of urchins who study a 1936 newspaper, perhaps seeing frightening pictures of conflict in Spain? Or are they just engrossed in the comics?
Wartime New York reflects many of Paris's qualities -- the grittiness, the paradoxical sense of community and isolation in a city. The children and the old people look remarkably similar; perhaps Mr. Stein was attracted to the same types in both cities. The youngsters sharing a snack in ''Friends, New York, 1943'' are all the more touching for being generic.
The show also includes a selection of Mr. Stein's portraits of notable personalities, from his famous one of Albert Einstein in 1946 to later, less familiar images of Helen Keller, Frank Lloyd Wright and Gypsy Rose Lee, who mugs impishly for the camera. But it is his candid yet carefully considered slices of city life that illustrate his special feeling for time and place, and for the people who inhabit them.
ART REVIEWS
