IT does not take long to make a compact disc at Color Film Corporation in Norwalk.
There are two production lines in the 40,000-square-foot manufacturing plant and each line produces 20,000 CD's a day, or one CD every three seconds.
The production line runs 24 hours a day, 7 days a week at the private company where 60 people are employed.
''We are the only CD manufacturer in the state of Connecticut,'' said Brad Lareau, the executive vice president of Color Film.
Color Film's main customers are advertising agencies, and many of the company's clients live in Connecticut.
''You can do what we do overseas,'' Mr. Lareau said. ''But can you take care of the customer? Our niche is that we are local.''
Color Film, which has $12 million in annual sales, was founded in 1949. The company used to be in Stamford, at the site of the UBS headquarters.
The company makes CD's for publishers, retailers and pharmaceutical companies that are the high-tech, interactive equivalent of marketing brochures.
Production starts with 1,700 pound bags of little plastic pellets, made of a material called optical grade polycarbonate. The pellets go into an injection molding machine, where they are melted and then shot into a mold at high speed to form a CD. The molding process is also where the content is imbedded into the CD. The final touch is to silkscreen the art onto the exterior of the CD.
When Target stores started an on-line bridal registry, Target sent out 320,000 CD's made by Color Film to subscribers of the magazine Bridal Guide. On the CD, viewers can see animation that describes the Target service and connects the user to the Club Wedd Web site.
One advantage of the CD, according to Color Film, is better accountability, namely, that Target can track which of the people who received the CD actually logged onto their site.
Color Film also made a CD for McNeil, a drug company, which included the disc in a USA Today weekend edition. On the CD were interviews with people who used Concerta, an attention deficit disorder drug.
And while Color Film does not actually manufacture them, the company has the capacity to record or program and duplicate 10,000 videotapes a day and 20,000 DVDs a day, and 2,500 Memory Sticks a day.
Steve Sanford, the director of sales at Color Film, said late last month: ''Everyone is coming to us now to spend every penny of 2003 money. It's a big crunch.''
MADE IN CONNECTICUT  Correction:  January 25, 2004, Sunday  The headline of the Made in Connecticut article last Sunday, about the Color Film Corporation, misstated the speed of its CD production line. The company produces one CD every 3 seconds, not 30.
