From eye level, all they can hear is the talking. In his Southern drawl, Peyton Manning is barking to running backs. Yelling to receivers. Howling at linemen. His arms are flailing, pointing to defenders, waving into new formations, a symphony of signals for the conductor of the most explosive offense in the National Football League playoffs.
The wait on the other side of the line is interminable, because the Indianapolis Colts have probably been at the line of scrimmage for almost the entire length of the play clock, giving Manning plenty of time to look over the defensive players and try to toy with their minds.
Manning's facility with the audible is an eye-catching primer in the art of deception. Sunday's American Football Conference championship game is a chess match and a head game rolled into one: the master of the audible opposing a flexible and diverse defense that has held quarterbacks to 11 touchdown passes. The Patriots forced seven quarterbacks into their worst touchdown-to-interception ratio of the season.
It is the premier matchup of the playoffs, and the last man outwitted does not go to the Super Bowl. Is Manning really changing the play, or is he just giving the defense one more thing to think about before the snap? If he sees the safety heading toward the line of scrimmage, will he check out of the run, or is that safety merely feinting and will he scoot back again with the snap? Every player is trying to answer those questions in less than half a minute.
''It's the cat-and-mouse games you play,'' Jets Coach Herman Edwards said.
The Colts run what is called a check-with-me offense. In the huddle, Manning calls several plays -- perhaps two runs or a run and a pass. Then, when they get to the line of scrimmage, Manning begins to read the defense. Are the safeties sneaking up, expecting a run? Or have they dropped deep, to take away the big play? Are the cornerbacks in man-to-man coverage? Is there a mismatch anywhere?
Manning quickly makes those determinations and begins to communicate with his offense. If it's a pass, he will sometimes make protection calls for the offensive linemen -- that's when he is pointing to defenders, indicating who blocks whom. He also lets his receivers know who may have to run a hot route or a sight adjustment -- say, if a blitz comes. In a road game, Manning will frequently move up and down the line and briefly turn his back to the defense to talk to his running backs, so everybody can hear.
Of course, this could all be a ruse, and not just for the defense's benefit. When the Colts run a no-huddle offense -- primarily to limit defensive substitutions and force mismatches -- they sometimes stay at the line of scrimmage until the play clock has nearly expired.
''They'll try to tire out the crowd, so they won't be yelling for the whole 30 or 40 seconds,'' said the Houston Texans' defensive coordinator, Vic Fangio, who was the Colts' defensive coordinator from 1999-2001. ''They feel the crowd eventually gives up.''
Jets quarterback Chad Pennington says he thinks many of Manning's machinations this season are dummy audibles. Manning is forgoing the chance to move the Colts from a good play into the perfect one, a trap he may have fallen into during last year's 41-0 playoff loss to the Jets.
''He has been much more patient, more relaxed,'' Pennington said. ''I've heard Coach Dungy talk about how Peyton has done a good job sticking with his reads. It seems like his success with audibles is when he sees the opportunity to take advantage of a big play or maybe get them out of a bad play.''
The defense will try to disguise what it is doing, to force Manning to wait until the last possible moment to make decisions. The Patriots could show a blitz, then back off. They could show a defense called middle closed, where the safety is in the middle of the field, so Manning sees man-to-man coverage on the outside. At the last second, the Patriots could move a safety over and allow a cornerback to roll up into the flat, so that if Manning calls for a hitch to a receiver he will throw into coverage.
Manning's signature play is the play-action pass, designed to freeze the defense for a moment because it thinks the Colts are running. Then Manning unloads. Most of all, the Patriots must resist the urge to try to decipher what Manning is doing.
''The biggest mistake is trying to anticipate,'' Patriots linebacker Mike Vrabel said. ''If you assume you're going to get one thing and you load up on it, that's when you're going to get hurt.''
Edwards said: ''He's not so much trying to confuse the defense as he's baiting you. He's trying to watch if you're going to show him what you're going to do. You have to make sure you don't show him what you're trying to do. But you also have to make sure that you aren't disguising so long you can't get into position.''
Defenses by Patriots Coach Bill Belichick have opposed Manning nine times (four times when Belichick was coordinator for the Jets, five times as New England's head coach). Manning's record is 4-5, with some notable disasters. He has thrown 15 touchdown passes and 14 interceptions, and twice he has had three-interception games. But in 2000, he finished with a perfect quarterback rating and a 30-23 victory. And in the regular-season game between the teams at the RCA Dome on Nov. 30, Manning had four touchdown passes and the best quarterback rating of the season against the Patriots.
In that game, Pennington noticed, New England played a simple defense, the Cover 2, most of the time. That defense, in which the safeties play back in a zone, is designed to take away the big play. The more plays they run, the thinking goes, the more chances the Colts will make a mistake, the more chances for the Patriots, who had 29 interceptions this season, to tip the ball or force an underthrow on third down.
The theory worked, to a degree. The Colts had 370 yards of offense but lost, 38-34, on a goal-line stand by the Patriots with time expiring. ''They didn't throw a lot at them,'' Pennington said of the New England defense and Belichick. ''It's going to be interesting to see if he tries to play real vanilla, to not allow the Colts to have a lot of big plays, or if he will apply more pressure.''
In the playoffs, the Colts have scored 10 touchdowns in 17 possessions. Pressuring Manning, to throw off his rhythm, is the key against him. The Patriots will blitz, especially if they see that Manning is not unloading quickly. And for all of Manning's maneuvers, the Colts use the same couple of formations and not much motion. The teams played six weeks ago, and the Patriots will be better equipped to read the formations.
''You have to blitz some, then rush hardly anybody and drop everybody,'' Fangio said. ''I think extremes are the best way against him. Not just rushing four and playing standard defenses.''
But even in this battle of wits, the danger might be in overthinking. ''Peyton is one of the smartest guys in the league,'' Patriots linebacker Tedy Bruschi said. ''If you get into a chess match with him, you're probably going to lose.''
EXTRA POINTS
New England center DAMIEN WOODY will miss the game Sunday after tearing a ligament in his right knee on the first play of the Patriots' game last weekend against Tennessee, The Associated Press said. RUSS HOCHSTEIN, who started one game this season, at left guard, will probably start in his place.
PRO FOOTBALL
