THE most important political figure in Iraq today is Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, an elderly Shiite Muslim cleric. He has not set foot outside his home in six years, yet the white-bearded ayatollah has effectively commandeered the Bush administration's planning for postwar democracy.
His pronouncement on who may write a new constitution (only Iraqis elected by Iraqis) forced Washington to upend its timetable for granting the country its independence. Last week, the ayatollah rejected the American proposal for choosing an interim legislature through caucuses, immobilizing the transition. His backers took to the streets to support him.
The ayatollah's influence recalls that of another once-reclusive Shiite cleric, Ruhollah Khomeini, who 25 years ago took the helm of the Iranian revolution and created an Islamic republic implacably hostile to the United States.
Ayatollah Sistani, though, is no Khomeini. At least that is what his own background and the recent history of Iraq's Shiites would indicate. His teachings have always reflected what is often called the quietist school of thought in modern Shiism, one that says that clerics should not run governments. Iran's system, the diametric opposite, invests clerics with absolute legal and political authority.
The two theories have never been put to the test side by side. But that, perhaps, is about to change.
In Iran, reformers have boldly challenged the Khomeini legacy by demanding that clerics accept truly free elections by giving up their power to disqualify candidates for the coming parliamentary vote. At the same time, in Iraq, where the long-oppressed Shiite majority is clamoring for power, Ayatollah Sistani is being drawn deeper and deeper into the fray.
''Sistani is incredibly sensitive to public opinion and what people say about him,'' said a Shiite member of the Iraqi Governing Council. ''He renounces political power and yet, at the same time, he has to respond to the fact that people are hungry for a leader.''
Although most of Iran's Shiites are of Persian descent and Iraq's are Arabs, religious teachers and students flowed back and forth between the two countries for centuries. Ayatollah Sistani, for example, was born in Iran but pursued his religious studies in Iraq. Until the Iranian revolution in 1979, Iranian pilgrims came to Iraq in droves to visit the Shiite shrines in Najaf and Karbala.
Ayatollah Khomeini himself spent the 15 years before the revolution in Najaf, and it was there that he refined his theory of ''wilayat al-faqih,'' or the rule of the jurist. The theory, that an eminent Shiite cleric can be the absolute legal authority, is the foundation of Iran's present political system.
Even then, in his adopted city, his was the minority view. Ayatollah Sistani's teacher and the highest-ranking cleric in Iraq at the time, Grand Ayatollah Abu al Qassim al-Khoei, firmly believed that even the most learned of Shia scholars have no right to rule.
Still, many religious Iraqi Shiites, denied political power for more than 500 years by the Sunni minority, recall feeling thrilled at the birth of Iran's Islamic government.
The feeling did not last long. Fearing for his rule, Saddam Hussein intensified his persecution of Iraq's Shiites, imprisoning and executing anyone suspected of sympathizing with Iran. With the Iran-Iraq war in 1980, the image of Iran's mullahs was further poisoned.
As a result, many Iraqis say, the Iranian experience with clerical rule never developed a real following, except as a theory.
One of its few supporters among the senior clerics, Ayatollah Muhammad Yacoubi, described the doctrine of rule-by-clergy as an idea whose time has not yet come. ''There's nothing wrong with Khomeini's theory,'' he said. ''The negative elements came from the implementation. The people can't absorb and support the theory of an Islamic state. People are not mature enough. Even the Iranians were not mature enough.''
Jalaluddin al-Saghir, an official of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, one of the Shiite political parties with a seat on the Iraqi Governing Council, said: ''It would be a huge mistake to borrow a model from others. We intend to establish a system that reflects the nature and history of our own country. And we live in a multiethnic society.''
Ayatollah Sistani, who is 73, has not put forth his own preferences, if he has any, concerning the form or nature of a new Iraqi government. Nor has he said what he would like to see in a new Iraqi constitution, which presumably would clarify whether the Muslim clergy would have a role in vetting or writing laws, as they have in Iran.
In his recent published statement, Ayatollah Sistani limited his political input to insisting on direct elections for the national assembly.
His declaration created a political crisis on the American-appointed Iraqi Governing Council, which is supposed to decide on a mechanism for choosing an assembly. Most of its 25 members are Shiites; all have said they are bound by the ayatollah's opinion, despite the acknowledged difficulty of holding elections without a national census and with the country under occupation.
Ayatollah Sistani's emphasis on elections, say people close to him, reflects the clergy's fears that the Shiites could somehow be marginalized, as they were under British rule in the last century.
''We remember that under the British, the national assemblies were based on nominations,'' said Muhammad Hussein al Hakim, the son of another senior ayatollah in Najaf, Muhammad Said al Hakim. ''We never had the proper representation in those parliaments.''
Iraqis who have met with the Ayatollah Sistani said that over the past two months, he has displayed an increasingly avid interest in the minutiae of negotiations over the transfer of sovereignty. His aides have called Shiite political leaders to complain about their statements in Iraqi newspapers and on television.
The ayatollah is now said, by those who have spoken with him, to want the opinion of United Nations experts on the question of holding elections quickly. His request will be transmitted this week to Kofi Annan, the general secretary, Iraqi leaders said.
Divining Ayatollah Sistani's views on such details has become a full-time activity for council members, the American occupation administration and the rest of Iraq. And the ayatollah appears, from all accounts, to thoroughly enjoy the attention. A council member who spoke with Ayatollah Sistani earlier last week described him, with a measure of surprise, as ''very eager to express his views.''
Some political figures who are not Shiites have started to complain privately that Ayatollah Sistani has begun to exercise a religious veto on political issues, much as the mullahs of Iran do. But his supporters say that he would not cross the line between influencing politics and participating in politics.
''We have political concerns,'' Mr. Hakim said, ''but we don't have political desires.''
Theocracy and Democracy
