In its final acts last week, the state Legislature passed measures to toughen automobile emission rules and standards on drunk driving as well as bills to tighten the code of ethics for lawmakers and to ban drivers from using hand-held cellphones.
The auto emissions bill, which Governor McGreevey signed into law later in the week, compares with California's requirements, the nation's strictest. Environmentalists lobbied furiously for the bill, which mandates that by 2009, carmakers must produce 40,000 hybrid vehicles, running on gas and electricity, and 128,000 low-emissions vehicles, using a conventional gas engine but cutting tailpipe emissions by at least 70 percent, for sale in the state.
The California plan has been adopted by New York, Massachusetts and Vermont. The states mandating stricter rules have settled on a single standard so that manufacturers, who are given more leeway by federal law, do not have to make different cars for each state. But manufacturers and auto dealers maintain that the costs of advanced technology will be onerous and will depress the market by forcing higher prices for consumers.
Also sent to the governor for signature were bills to lower the legal limit for driving while intoxicated, to 0.08 percent from 0.10 percent, and to require jail time for repeat drunken drivers.
On Tuesday, the governor signed three new ethics measures. They prohibit lawmakers from hiring relatives as legislative staff, restrict gifts given to legislators or government employees by lobbyists and prohibit a lawmaker who takes health care benefits as part of his legislative service from taking additional health benefits from other public jobs.
The legislature also gave final approval to a ban on using hand-held phones while driving, although drivers can be fined only if stopped for another offense. New York adopted such a ban in June 2001, becoming the first state to do so.
On Monday, Mr. McGreevey signed into law a measure to grant some financial and legal benefits to same-sex couples in domestic partnerships. It was passed by the legislature on Jan. 8.
A new legislative session began on Tuesday, with Democrats taking control of the Assembly and the Senate, ending a historic chapter in which Democrats and Republicans each held 20 seats in the Senate and were forced to share power. Now, Democrats will hold the majority in both houses and the governor's office, leaving Republicans on the outside and in the same position the Democrats were in eight years ago.
BRIEFINGS: LEGISLATURE
