AT 78 feet, the steeple on the Congregational church appears to be the highest structure in Orient, a historic hamlet rich in 19th-century houses on the rural eastern tip of the North Fork.
Now, to the distress of some in Orient, the steeple may have some competition. A 120-foot-high cellphone tower, designed to look like a flagless flagpole, will rise behind the Orient Fire Department if the Town of Southold gives its approval.
The Orient Association, an influential civic group with more than 200 members, is leading the opposition to the plan, but opinion in the hamlet, which has about 800 year-round residents and 2,200 in the summer, appears to be divided.
The proposed tower would include space, at the 90-foot level, for new antennas that would improve fire and police emergency communications, the Orient Fire District commissioners say. They say he district would also earn up to $40,000 a year in rents from cellphone companies whose equipment would be at higher elevations on the tower.
The tower would be built and paid for by Beacon Wireless Management, whose principal is Vincent Cannuscio, a former Southampton town supervisor. The fire commissioners say this will save the district about $150,000, their estimate of the cost of replacing its 60-foot antenna, which they say is inadequate.
In April, the town's building department disapproved the tower based on zoning restrictions. The district is applying to the Zoning Appeals Board for a variance, citing public safety. A hearing is scheduled for Feb. 26. The tower will need a Federal Communications Commission permit.
''It will be a tall structure, and it's certainly not a pretty thing, but we are trying to make it as unobtrusive as possible,'' said Martin Trent, the chairman of the five fire commissioners, all elected.
The fire commissioners signed a lease for the tower in October 2002, but in the months since, the proposal has faced a growing challenge from the Orient Association.
''It's an ugly structure in an inappropriate place, and the necessity for it has not been proven,'' said Ellen J. McNeilly, an Orient resident and the co-chairwoman of the association's committee that has been investigating the tower issue.
A brochure distributed by the association raises a long list of questions. Its cover shows a view of the tower as it might appear from the Orient Causeway, a particularly scenic stretch of Route 25. A line on the cover asks, ''Is This Necessary?''
Improving communications for public safety is one thing, the association contends, but doing it by building an unsightly tower to the benefit of a private enterprise is another.
Mr. Cannuscio, a developer, was Southampton's supervisor from 1995 to 2001, and he was frequently at odds with environmental groups who tended to see him as a stalking horse for development interests. He has accused the association of doing a disservice to Orient. ''Several members have hijacked the association,'' he said. ''If they have their way, it really will be a less safe community.
''These people in the Orient Association can bury their heads in the sand or they can realize that what is proposed will be a great assistance to public safety and personal and business communications.''
Mr. Cannuscio, who approached the fire district with the tower proposal, said the brochure's cover exaggerated the tower's height and was meant to mislead the public. ''We are talking about improving public safety and communications with the somewhat negative impact of a pole standing at a height of 120 feet,'' he said. ''The only way you will see it is if you go out looking for it.'' He said the tower would have room for four cellular companies.
Ms. McNeilly said the brochure's depiction was prepared by an architect using information Mr. Cannuscio's company offered at a community meeting in September.
The association president, Anne Hopkins, said she believed the group reflected a local view that more information was needed about the tower: ''I would say that a lot of people would say, 'Do we need this?' They want to be convinced.''
Ms. McNeilly, a retired publishing executive who lives part-time in Manhattan, said association members who are communications experts believe that the fire department's problem might be antiquated equipment, not antenna height. ''The real threat to public safety is that they are using 25-year-old equipment and have never really investigated what is causing their communications problems,'' she said.
Mr. Trent, the fire commissioners' chairman, rejected that notion. ''It's not because we don't have good enough equipment,'' he said. ''It's because we don't have a good enough antenna.'' But Mr. Trent added that the department had hired a radio engineer to study how tall its new antenna should be. If it could be lower than 90 feet, then the total height of the cellphone tower might be less than 120 feet.
Mr. Trent said the tower would benefit cellphone users dialing 911 in a local emergency. He said that in some areas in the fire district, callers had trouble with their connections or were routed to emergency dispatchers in Connecticut. Ms. McNeilly said a 190-foot tower planned on Shelter Island should resolve any local cellphone problems.
While the tower has proved controversial, Sprint leases space for cellphone equipment in the steeple of the Orient Congregational Church. The difference is that the equipment is hidden behind fiberglass panels that replaced wood siding. ''You would never know,'' said Donald Van Cleef, the church's moderator. ''That was the whole glory of it.''
