TWO weeks ago, six residents in a Brooklyn apartment building -- three of them children -- narrowly escaped death when paramedics responding to a call determined that there was carbon monoxide in the building.
Last Monday, carbon monoxide from gas-burning furnaces filled two houses -- one on Long Island and one in East Lyme, Conn. While the residents of the Long Island home survived, three people in the Connecticut home died. And on Tuesday two members of a Bronx family died of carbon monoxide poisoning caused by a suspected leak in a gas boiler ventilation pipe.
According to Underwriters Laboratories, the product-testing organization based in Northbrook, Ill., more than 500 people in the United States are killed each year in carbon-monoxide related incidents. Of that number, more than 200 are killed by carbon monoxide emitted from a consumer product like a stove or water heater. Another 10,000 seek medical attention after accidental carbon monoxide poisoning.
''You can't hear, taste, see or smell it,'' said Paul Patty, Underwriters Laboratories' resident expert on carbon monoxide. ''It's nicknamed the 'silent killer' because it sneaks up on its victims and can take lives without warning.''
Carbon monoxide (chemical symbol, CO) is a byproduct of incomplete combustion, Mr. Patty said. Sources of CO include malfunctioning appliances -- including furnaces, stoves, ovens and water heaters -- that burn fossil fuels like natural gas or propane. Other sources include vehicle exhaust, blocked chimney flues and gas or charcoal grills that are used in the home or in an unventilated tent, camper or garage.
Mr. Patty said the initial signs of carbon monoxide poisoning are flulike symptoms, including nausea, fatigue, headaches, dizziness, confusion and difficulty breathing. ''Because CO poisoning often causes a victim's blood pressure to rise, the victim's skin may take on a pink or red cast,'' he said. ''Young children and household pets are typically the first affected.''
Fortunately, relatively inexpensive devices can detect harmful levels of carbon monoxide even before the symptoms of CO poisoning are felt.
Ken Giles, a spokesman for the Consumer Product Safety Commission in Washington, said that while early versions of carbon monoxide alarms were somewhat unreliable -- some would detect atmospheric carbon monoxide and trigger a false alarm -- alarms on the market today recognize carbon monoxide from a fuel-burning appliance in the home and then trigger an alarm before CO levels become dangerous.
''A carbon monoxide alarm today is triggered by a combination of the amount of carbon monoxide and the duration of its presence,'' Mr. Giles said. For example, he said, a carbon monoxide alarm should sound when it detects 30 parts per million of CO for 30 days; 70 parts per million for 180 minutes; 150 parts per million for 50 minutes; and 400 parts per million for 15 minutes.
Heather Peets, vice president of operations for Senco Sensors, a Vancouver-based manufacturer of carbon monoxide alarms, said there are three different technologies used in CO detectors: biomimetic, metal oxide semiconductor, and electrochemical.
Biomimetic detectors, Ms. Peets said, use chemicals that darken when carbon monoxide is present, thereby blocking an internal light source from reaching a receiver and sounding the alarm. While biomimetic technology is still used, such detectors are sensitive to temperature and humidity and are not as precise as newer technologies.
With a metal oxide semiconductor detector, Ms. Peets said, carbon monoxide is detected through the periodic heating of a chemical in the unit to 300 degrees Celsius. While such detectors are accurate, they are typically ''hard wired'' to the home's electrical system. The most advanced technology today is electrochemical, which uses platinum electrodes imbedded in an electrolyte solution to form a sensor. Such units are precise and battery-operated and can provide instantaneous monitoring of carbon monoxide at even very low levels.
Senco's Model One -- which was highly rated by Consumer Reports in a 2001 study -- has three distinct danger-level alarms: low, high and crisis. The portable battery-powered unit has a digital display and a test function that displays an instant carbon monoxide reading in any room or near any appliance. ''A typical detector takes a reading once every minute,'' Ms. Peets said. ''But we have a test mode that allows the unit to take two readings per second down to 10 parts per million.'' The Model One, she said, retails for about $50 (www.sencosensors.com).
Joe Hlavacek, product manager for Aprilaire, a Madison, Wis., manufacturer of air-quality products, said one big problem with carbon monoxide detectors is that none last indefinitely. ''The sensor degrades,'' he said, adding that in most cases, carbon monoxide detectors should be replaced at least once every five years.
His company's detector constantly monitors itself, he said, and will sound an alarm when it is no longer functioning efficiently.
''The Aprilaire carbon monoxide alarm actually informs you when it's working, when it needs a new battery and -- most importantly -- when it needs to be replaced,'' Mr. Hlavacek said.
The Aprilaire unit, sold and installed by local dealers and contractors, costs $45 to $75 installed. (Dealers are listed on the company's Web site, www.aprilaire.com.)
Another Aprilaire product -- CO Detectagas -- can be used by homeowners who want to make sure their existing carbon monoxide detectors are functioning properly.
Lauren Hackett, a spokeswoman for Consumers Union -- the Yonkers-based company that publishes Consumer Reports -- said that while most carbon monoxide detectors have a test button, pushing that button generally means that you are checking the electrical circuits, not that the sensor is responding to the presence of CO.
It is possible to check the functioning of the sensor, however, by using Aprilaire's CO Detectagas kit.
To test an alarm, she said, the detector is sealed inside the plastic bag provided with the kit, a hole is punched in the bag and a five-second burst of canned carbon monoxide is injected into the bag, which is then sealed. ''The alarm should respond within 15 minutes,'' Ms. Hackett said, adding that the test uses an amount of CO that is small enough not to be a cause for concern. (Ms. Hackett said Consumers Union purchased the kit online for $18 plus shipping at www.gogeisel.com.)
She said that all homes should have at least one carbon monoxide detector but ideally alarms should be installed on each level.
YOUR HOME
