WHEN the Riverhead Charter School opened in September 2001 in Calverton, there were high hopes among the parents of its 187 students. They were seeking an alternative to their public school districts and were eager to put their children in a smaller, more structured institution with a longer school day a vigorous academic program.
Now, two years later, all is not bliss at Riverhead, which is run by Edison Schools, a 12-year-old private company that operates charter schools in 21 states. Riverhead, the Island's third charter school, has grown to 335 students in kindergarten through the sixth grade. Kindergarten and first graders occupy a 1928 school building, and second through sixth graders are housed in a 10-room modular building.
Since September, 30 students have transferred to other schools, and three teachers have resigned. The compliance officer resigned last month, charging that Edison was billing the school for services that were not being provided.
A review by the State Education Department in November cited several areas of concern: the school failed to provide enough teachers and aides for its special-education students, it was $800,000 in debt in the 2002-03 school year because localities were slow in paying tuitions, students were found in the halls or outdoors when they were not supposed to be, visitors were not consistently stopped at the front door, classroom space was inadequate, and the school has no gym and no cafeteria.
Last month, a group of Riverhead Charter School parents demanded improvements after the resignation of Darlene Troge, the compliance officer, in charge of seeing that the school complies with the state's charter law. The group, which says it has more than 20 members, called for the resignation of the school's executive director, Steven Cohen, and its five trustees.
''We are very frustrated,'' said Lavonia Scaggs of Shirley, the head of the parents' group whose 9-year-old son is in the fourth grade. ''Other parents who decided to take their kids out of the school told me that they were tired of waiting for services that their kids weren't getting, tired of waiting for a new school building that has been promised to us to handle the overcrowding conditions, and concerned about the lack of security in the building.''
Natalie Shepherd, whose two sons, 7 and 9, attend the charter school, agreed. ''When I walked into the school to visit, I saw a place that was noticeably disorganized,'' she said. ''One of the biggest problems is that the special-education children at the school are not receiving the services that they require. Many behavioral issues stem from the fact that there are not enough teachers to give them the attention they need, and the situation is worse because there is no gym or cafeteria, and the kids are kept in one room all day long, with only a half-hour for lunch.''
Ms. Troge, the compliance officer and a founder of the school, said that she resigned because the trustees put the interests of Edison ahead of those of local taxpayers. ''While the board sat idly by, its management company billed the school for services that were not provided and overcharged for its services,'' she said.
She also contends that Edison's plan to build a new school will cost $3 million more than a $6.2 million bid by a local developer and that financing the new building with a bond issue will add almost $1 million in project management and development costs.
But as with most controversies, there are two sides. Stephen Charkow, the trustees' president, rejected Ms. Troge's accusations. ''We have been working diligently to explore our options for construction of a new building, before making any final decisions on the preferred developer,'' he said. ''Now we are satisfied and prepared to move forward to work with the local developer. We hope to find a bond broker and begin construction in three months, with the goal of having a new school building ready in one year.''
Cathleen Zeno of Yaphank, who has three children at the charter school and serves as vice president of its parents' advisory committee, said that the protest group did not reflect the views of most parents. ''They are a small group who do not represent the majority of parents,'' she said. ''They say they want to save the school, but their actions are disruptive. We're still a new school, and naturally there are mistakes, but parents need to come together to build and strengthen the school, not to tear it apart.''
''I have always found the administration to be upfront and honest about everything, and open to all of my questions and concerns,'' Ms. Zeno added.
Mr. Cohen, the school's executive director, said he had no plans to resign. ''I'm very proud of the progress we've made since the school opened,'' he said. ''Based on demographics, free lunch and initial test scores, we are more typical of a New York City school than a Long Island school, and among the 120 Edison schools, we showed the third-best improvement in reading and math. When the state did its review, our academics were 100 percent on target.''
Mr. Cohen said that the school's policy on special-education students was to integrate them into the regular classrooms and to offer them additional services in a separate resource room.
''That's what the parents wanted,'' he said. ''In many cases, they chose to send their kids to the charter school because they didn't want them classified as special ed and kept in a separate self-contained classroom. Because of the lack of space, we have not been able to provide the ratio for those students classified as special education, of 12 children to 1 teacher, mandated by the state.''
''Parents understood that,'' he added, ''and most still chose to keep their kids at the charter school. But since the state review, when we were told that our policy didn't comply with state law, we have made every effort to help those students return to their home district to get the necessary services until we have a new building and can better accommodate them.''
A state review is normal for every charter school in its third year, Mr. Cohen said. ''Many of the issues cited in the state review, including our financial problems, were related to inadequate space,'' he said. ''We have already implemented many improvements in our security system and other school conditions, to satisfy all state requirements, to respond to the concerns of our parents, and to best serve all of our children.''
A new building will be necessary for the school for meet its goals, Mr. Cohen said. ''After five years in operation, a charter school is required to have an enrollment of 600 students,'' he said, ''and to be able to do that, we need more space. That will solve many of our other problems, like the lack of a gym and cafeteria. We are moving in that direction.''
