NORTH CAROLINA 86, CONNECTICUT 83
Of the handful of measuring-stick games on the schedule for the Connecticut men's basketball team, the Huskies' visit to North Carolina on Saturday figured to be among the more challenging ones.
In the end, with the Dean Smith Center fans screaming and thumping their feet, the clock ticking down and Connecticut's No. 1 ranking on the line, the Huskies did not measure up.
Rashad McCants, a sophomore forward, made a 3-pointer from the wing with 6.2 seconds remaining to break a tie, and guard Ben Gordon could not match it at the buzzer as No. 9 North Carolina held on for an 86-83 victory.
It was the 10th time that a Tar Heels team had knocked off a No. 1 team, and North Carolina tied U.C.L.A. for the N.C.A.A. record. For Connecticut, the loss snapped an 11-game winning streak.
Emeka Okafor, UConn's junior center, set a career high with 29 points, had 13 rebounds and 6 blocks and continued to demonstrate why he may be the best college player in the country.
But it is unlikely that Connecticut (14-2) will be the top team in the next Associated Press poll. The Huskies will probably lose their No. 1 ranking to North Carolina's archrival, No. 2 Duke, which beat No. 4 Wake Forest, 84-72, earlier Saturday.
''We had a streak coming in and we believed coming in we were the better team,'' Josh Boone, a Connecticut freshman forward, said. ''We got down early in the first half. I think we really fought back in the second half. It just wasn't enough.''
McCants, with 6 quiet points in the first half, finished with 27 for the Tar Heels (11-3). He was 10 of 16 from the field and scored the final 10 points for North Carolina, including a 3-pointer to tie the score at 83-83 before burying the winner.
''He rises to big games,'' Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun said of McCants. ''He's always been a great player. He's one of the most talented kids in America. He was immense today.''
It was redemption of sorts for McCants, who has faced the wrath of Coach Roy Williams more than once. McCants was sent to the locker room during a game earlier this season when he failed to stand and cheer his teammates while on the bench. He was benched in another.
''The boy's been criticized more than anybody other than Saddam, made a big-time basket out there,'' Williams said. ''I think it was fitting for him.''
And perhaps fitting for the Tar Heels, who have played a difficult schedule. North Carolina had lost to No. 14 Wake Forest in triple overtime, to No. 8 Kentucky and at unranked Maryland on Wednesday leading into this game. Connecticut was North Carolina's final nonconference game before facing the heart of the Atlantic Coast Conference schedule.
''What a game,'' Williams said. ''That's by far the best we've played at crunch time.''
It was further indication that Williams, who left Kansas to return to his alma mater as head coach this season, has the Tar Heels on their way back to the elite level of college basketball. Under Matt Doherty, the Tar Heels missed the last two N.C.A.A. tournaments.
North Carolina appeared to be headed for a rout in the first half, when it built a 50-36 lead. But Connecticut came back in the second half, tying the score at 67-67 with 9 minutes 42 seconds remaining when Boone tipped in a rare miss by Okafor.
The game remained close down to the final seconds, neither team able to build a substantial lead. When Okafor scored with 1:30 remaining, he gave Connecticut an 83-80 lead. But McCants responded, making a 3-pointer from the wing to tie it at 83-83 with 1:15 to go.
In the final minute, Gordon missed on a drive to the basket and Jawad Williams, the Tar Heels' junior forward, grabbed the rebound with 30.6 seconds remaining, his only rebound of the game.
That set up the final play for McCants.
''It's just about stepping up,'' he said. ''Big players make big shots at big times. I just wanted to be that. Coach pulled my card and he wanted me to take the shot. He had confidence in me, and that's all you can ask for in a coach.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
