BY the end of the year, more than 2,000 military families living in southeastern Connecticut will have a new landlord. The United States Navy is preparing to select a contractor to operate and improve its housing near the Naval Submarine Base in Groton.
The public-private venture is expected to result in the construction of 150 new apartments and a complete renovation of 1,400 others, said Capt. James E. Ratte Jr., the base commander. Negotiations taking place over the next several months could also result in such improvements as new sidewalks, playgrounds and lighting in the housing complexes that surround the base, he said. The only change for service personnel will be that they will have to sign over their housing allowance to the contractor instead of the Navy, he said.
The Navy has identified three contractors that are eligible to take over management of the housing and is in talks with them to select one contractor next month to begin exclusive negotiations in March. The Navy hopes to sign the deal by next October.
The contractor selected would be able to use the guaranteed revenue stream to obtain mortgages to do the construction and renovation work immediately. Under federal law the Navy cannot borrow money for the work, but must rely on Defense Department appropriations that fluctuate from year to year, making planning difficult.
Captain Ratte said the agreement would call for the renovation and construction to be done in about four years. ''We couldn't hope to get those homes done under the military construction program in less than two decades,'' he said. ''The entire Department of Defense is moving away from housing management and moving toward the public-private venture as a way to provide housing more efficiently and effectively.''
Privatization of military housing was allowed under the National Defense Authorization Act of 1996, and so far the Navy has signed public-private venture agreements covering 16,000 units of housing nationwide.
In the first eight public-private ventures authorized in other parts of the country, the Navy put up about $135 million in seed money and private contractors put in $478 million, enough to renovate or replace 3,200 existing homes and build 2,500 new units.
In the offering that includes Groton, the Navy is seeking to turn over 5,215 units of housing at bases in New Jersey, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Maine, including 2,101 in Groton. The Navy said the public-private partnership would sell 28 units of housing in Fairfield, Conn.; 145 in Newport, R.I.; 510 at Mitchel Field in Hempstead and Mitchel Manor in East Meadow, N.Y.; and 43 in Earle, N.J. None of the housing or land in Groton has been designed for sale.
In addition to the sales, the partnership is to demolish another 562 units, rebuilding 348 of them. In Groton, 192 are to be demolished and 150 rebuilt.
''This is a great deal for the sailors,'' Captain Ratte said. ''It provides them with the kind of homes they deserve, a quality of life they deserve and need, and it will not cost them any more than it costs them now.''
Currently, sailors who live in Navy housing are not paid the basic allowance for housing received by those in non-Navy housing. The allowance ranges from $753 a month for a seaman recruit, the lowest enlisted rank, to $1,817 for a one-star admiral with dependents. Under the privatization plan, they will receive that money and turn it over to the contractor each month.
The privatization of base housing also means that the town will soon be collecting taxes on the apartments, because the contractor will own them, Captain Ratte said. That will mean a windfall for the town.
The Groton assessor, John S. Philip, said this would also mean a lot of work for his office, since the units have never been subject to a formal valuation process because they were federal property. He estimated that apartments are worth $16,000 to $40,000 each and will raise the town's tax base by at least $32 million and tax revenues by some $700,000.
''It's like a new Marriott,'' Mr. Philip said, referring to the tax generated by the town's newest luxury hotel, the Mystic Marriott.
BUT the program has its skeptics.
''If the program works the way we are told, there shouldn't be much of a change for families except they're writing a rent check and signing a lease,'' said Debbie M. Estes, chairwoman of the Ombudsman Council, a group that represents spouses' interests to the Navy. ''But is the contractor going to follow through with what they promise? It looks good on paper, but there are a lot of what ifs, and the families will be the ones who pay if there is a problem.''
Karen S. Torkelson, who lives in the Nautilus Park housing complex, said she had had problems with her furnace four times this year, and each time the Navy housing office had someone there in less than six hours. She questioned whether a private company would be as responsive.
''I have friends who lived in San Diego when they did a public-private venture there, and when it got to the end of the year, they didn't come out to fix leaky faucets and things like that for two or three weeks, because they ran out of money,'' she said.
The two women said many families are also worried about a provision that allows the contractor to rent apartments to civilians if the Navy does not fill them quickly enough. Mrs. Estes said that when her daughter was born last year, her husband, Chief Machinist's Mate Todd L. Estes, was out to sea, so her neighbors at the Trident Park complex took care of her son and fed her Rottweiler.
''That's just the way it is,'' Mrs. Estes said. ''You don't think twice about it; you just support each other. I like the tight-knit community you get in Navy housing, because I know someone will always be there for me, and I like to be there for other people.''
Mrs. Torkelson expressed similar sentiments. ''There's a sense of community here that most people remember from the 1950's,'' she said. ''Our second family is the people around us. We rely on each other and depend on each other.''
Captain Ratte said if the contractor does not fulfill the requirements of the agreement, the housing could revert to the Navy. And while the Navy must provide a tenant for every open apartment within 30 days, he noted that there is a waiting list for the housing now, and even if no active-duty sailors want the housing, preference would be given to reservists and civilian Defense Department employees before it would be open to others.
''The process is there in case we go to four submarines in Groton and suddenly we don't have enough sailors to fill the housing,'' Captain Ratte said. There are currently 18 submarines in Groton.
Nicholas Palmerone of Palmerone Realty Group in Groton said the market would welcome any units in Navy housing that are available, however, because the 20,000 employees at the two casinos about 10 miles north of the base have made the market very tight. ''People are calling my office all the time looking for rentals, and I don't have anything to offer,'' Mr. Palmerone said. ''If I had a two-bedroom apartment today, I could probably fill it tomorrow.''
But, he said, unless there is a drastic change at the base, even opening the Navy units to civilians will not have much of an impact, because every Navy family moving out would have to find another apartment in the region.
The town has also been scrutinizing the proposal. Frank O'Beirne, a retired Navy captain and former town mayor, said he was initially concerned when he heard of the privatization of the housing that the town might lose its Department of Defense Impact Aid, federal financing that goes to the Groton schools because the Navy pays no taxes on the apartments. This payment amounts to about $6 million this year.
''All of a sudden we're going to be in a situation where we're going to get tax money on the buildings -- not on the land, but on the buildings -- and I can imagine someone down in Washington saying, 'They're getting money from taxes now, so we can reduce the impact aid,' '' Mr. O'Beirne said. ''At the moment I am told that is not going to happen, but it's something we are going to have to watch very closely.''
The Groton town manager, Mark R. Oefinger, said there was also a question about whether the contractor would want the town to pay for plowing, sanding and maintaining the roads through Navy housing or to provide services that now come from the Navy like trash removal.
In addition, utilities are not currently metered at individual houses, but the privatization will require meters for electricity and water on all apartments, and it is unclear who will foot that bill. Groton has publicly owned electric and water utilities.
In the Region | Connecticut
