SOME stock pickers look for companies in which management has a substantial ownership stake. When the people running a company have their own money in it, the theory goes, they are better aligned with shareholders.
Using this approach is difficult, however, in mutual funds. Fund companies are not required to disclose whether managers have an ownership stake in their funds, and only a relative handful provide this information.
Those that do so include the Davis Funds, Longleaf Partners, Tweedy Browne, the Torray fund, First Pacific Advisors and the Oakmark funds. Citing privacy considerations, none reveal the actual holdings of individual managers. For example, First Pacific, which manages $5.2 billion, recently disclosed that its 32 employees had $8 million invested in its offerings; it did not elaborate.
With the spotlight now on managers because of scandals involving mutual funds the industry may be forced to abandon its reticence. A bill passed in November by the House of Representatives would require disclosure of the ownership interest of managers in their mutual funds as well as the structure of portfolio managers' compensation. The bill is pending in the Senate.
The prospects are ''pretty good'' that such disclosure will eventually become mandatory, said Paul G. Haaga Jr., the chairman of the Investment Company Institute, the fund industry trade group. ''That information should be available to shareholders,'' he said.
Mr. Haaga is also executive vice president of Capital Research and Management in Los Angeles, an investment firm that does not disclose the ownership stakes of managers of its American Funds. Mr. Haaga said that there had been no public demand for such disclosure until now. While he did not provide details, he said, ''In our case, managers have a substantial stake in their funds.''
In the view of Don Phillips, managing director of Morningstar Inc., mandatory disclosure of manager holdings -- combined with disclosure of trading records by managers -- would have prevented some of the market timing abuses uncovered in the fund scandals. ''Do you think those managers would have been trading their own funds if they knew their transactions would be disclosed?'' he asked, referring to recent accusations brought by regulators.
Companies that now provide some public information about managers' stakes in funds generally say that such ownership is a boon to shareholders.
CHRISTOPHER Davis, a manager of the Davis New York Venture and Selected American funds, said that ''it's no coincidence funds with large ownership stakes have low turnover, lower risk and good long-term returns.''
''When you're investing your own money, you behave differently,'' he added.
The Davis family and directors and employees of Davis Advisors have invested $2 billion in the firm's offerings, according to statements by the company. The firm manages $42 billion. Mr. Davis said that ''it would be perfectly acceptable'' if he were required to be more specific about his fund holdings.
Christopher H. Browne, a managing director at the Tweedy, Browne Company, said: ''Nothing is a better governor on whether you're going to take a risk or focus on the long term than if you're an investor yourself. We've always thought of ourselves as being in the business of managing our own money and that clients co-invest with us.''
The firm says its current and retired partners, their families and employees have $82.1 million invested in the firm's two mutual funds, Tweedy, Browne Global Value and Tweedy, Browne American Value, which have a total $5.2 billion in assets.
Mr. Browne asserts that having a large ownership stake in funds provides a financial incentive to do well for one's shareholders as well as oneself. ''It's a sign we're sitting on the same side of the table, that we have a community of interests, not a conflict of interest,'' he said.
Robert Q. Wyckoff Jr., a partner at Tweedy, Browne, said, ''If you own a substantial interest in your own fund, the last thing you want is a bunch of market timers coming in and hurting your returns.''
At Longleaf Partners, employees, family members, trustees and others affiliated with the fund company have more than $400 million invested in the firm's mutual funds, according to Lee Harper, spokeswoman and principal at Southeastern Asset Management, the adviser for the Longleaf funds. The funds have a total of $10.1 billion in assets. ''It's the ultimate in accountability,'' she said. ''Owner/operators act differently than hired hands.''
Robert Torray, co-manager of the Torray fund, said that the Securities and Exchange Commission ''should require managers to disclose if they have a stake in their fund.''
''I would not put my money in any situation where we were not investing along with management,'' he said, referring to executives at the companies in which he invests.
Officers, trustees and others affiliated with the Torray fund control fund shares worth $80 million, according to company filings and Mr. Torray. ''The largest percentage -- about 70 percent -- is mine,'' he added. The fund has $1.6 billion in assets.
The mutual funds offered by companies whose managers own stakes in the fund have generally performed better than their competitors over the long run. Of the 19 such funds with 10-year track records in the Morningstar database, 15 fared better than the average of their peers. Last year, 10 of the 19 funds did better than their competitors.
Some fund companies and money managers remain opposed to detailed disclosure of manager stakes. ''The essential point we're looking at here is the alignment of interests between managers and shareholders,'' said Brian Mattes, spokesman and principal at the Vanguard Group. Shareholding by managers, or the absence thereof, can easily be misconstrued, he said. It may be interpreted as a manager's positive or negative endorsement of a fund when it may just reflect individual circumstances, he said.
''We believe the use of incentive-based advisory fees, which would be increased or decreased based on performance, is an appropriate and suitable alternative to the disclosure of manager shareholdings,'' he said.
John C. Bogle, founder and former chairman of Vanguard, differs with his former company. Mr. Bogle said senior executives and portfolio managers should be required to disclose their stakes along with their trading records. ''It's a glaring omission in the system,'' he said. ''We all like our privacy, but is a mutual fund so different from other companies that it should be immune from the same rules?''
He also said that when investors shop for funds, they should look for those in which management stakes are significant. ''If you call up a fund company and ask them how much the manager has in his or her fund and they say, 'None of your business,' go someplace else,'' he said. ''Of course it's your business.''
Fidelity Investments has not been a proponent of disclosing manager stakes. ''We have not supported that in the past,'' said Vincent Loporchio, a spokesperson for Fidelity. ''It's not clear that it would help shareholders in choosing a fund. Investors viewing the number of shares held by a manager would be doing so in a vacuum. They wouldn't know how that piece of information fit in with the manager's goals, time horizon or risk tolerance.''
Even fund managers who reveal their stakes in their own funds draw the line at putting a dollar value on the investments. William Nygren, a manager of the Oakmark and Oakmark Select funds, said that a majority of his liquid assets were in his two funds. ''That ought to be enough,'' he said. ''All that would be gained by putting a dollar number on that statement would be to whet the sensationalist appetite.''
Mr. Nygren said that he did not want to give up his privacy and that fund managers might leave the industry if they were required to disclose their personal investments. (In December, Oakmark said that employees of the fund's adviser, Harris Associates, as well as fund officers and trustees, together had more than $145 million invested in the Oakmark Funds, which had $21.2 billion in assets; Oakmark did not provide further details.)
Money managers also argue that ownership stakes can go only so far in ensuring that the interests of managers and shareholders are aligned.
''It's only one element of many,'' said Robert Rodriguez, the chief executive of First Pacific Advisors and manager of the FPA Capital and FPA New Income funds. ''It gets down to the ethics of the person. Do they have a good moral center?''
Mr. Rodriguez, for one, would not like to see the dollar value of his stake in his funds disclosed, as is required of executives at public operating companies.
Ms. Harper of Southeastern Asset Management is also not a fan of disclosing the actual dollar amount of manager positions. She and others prefer that disclosure be in the form of ranges of dollar value or percentages of liquid assets invested in the funds.
''There are some security concerns in this day and age,'' she said.
MR. PHILLIPS of Morningstar disagreed with such assessments. ''Frankly, I get mad when I hear a manager say they have money in their fund, but they won't give you a number. You need to prove it,'' he said. ''I have not heard a single reason why it should be different for mutual funds than operating companies.''
In discussing his attitude toward ownership disclosure, Mr. Davis drew an analogy to the fight over disclosure of proxy votes.
''Disclosing proxy votes creates a lot of opportunity for mischief,'' he said, noting that fund companies can become targets for pressure groups. But, he said: ''It's the shareholders' money; people are entitled to that information. He said that he felt the same way about the disclosure of management stakes.''
Russel Kinnel of Morningstar said: ''The most valuable reform would be disclosure of manager incentives and what they have in their funds.''
