Marie G. Davis Middle School -- its sprawling campus hemmed in by low-rise public housing, worn-looking buildings and an abandoned grocery store -- seemed an unlikely darling of suburban parents. But never mind appearances. Families throughout Charlotte-Mecklenburg County clamored to get in, trying their luck through admissions lotteries and waiting lists. Once in, they used provisions that gave siblings an automatic seat. They put their children on school buses, sometimes for long rides.
Magnet programs in communications and college-prep work had turned Marie G. Davis into one of the strongest schools in the district. Framed certificates, touting high achievement levels on state tests in the 1990's, still line the entrance hallway. And with the district's elaborate desegregation policies determining who got in, the middle school boasted a near-equal mix of black and white students.
Marie G. Davis today is something quite different. A year and a half ago, the enrollment was 44 percent white and 46 percent black; this year, only eight white students, or 1 percent, are enrolled. The median household income, $25,353, is half the county average. Wait lists are gone. The school's parent group struggles to attract volunteers. The principal, Terry L. Cline, worries about some struggling sixth graders who can barely transcribe sentences from the board. ''Our kids don't read'' at home, he laments.
When a court order unraveled the district's desegregation policies beginning in August 2002, 32 years of busing came to an end. So did voluntary efforts like Marie G. Davis's magnet programs, which drew children from all over the county. The new student assignment plan, called the ''school choice plan,'' enrolled children mostly from surrounding neighborhoods.
Marie G. Davis became the district's most transformed school -- and a litmus test on whether black students can succeed without desegregation policies.
Charlotte-Mecklenburg's busing plan was ordered by a federal court in 1969 and backed by the Supreme Court in 1971. Many stunned parents perceived the ruling as forced social policy. But Charlotte eventually emerged as a national model for peaceful integration. The district assigned students to create racially balanced schools, then developed strategies like magnet schools to encourage voluntary desegregation. In 1997, a white parent sued to end the use of race in magnet-school admissions. Six more white parents joined the suit the next year, broadening it to exclude race from all aspects of student assignment.
The school board and black parents unsuccessfully challenged the lawsuit. Charlotte-Mecklenburg isn't the only district to end longstanding desegregation plans -- court actions in Denver and, last year, Kansas City, Mo., have ended decades-old integration efforts.
In Charlotte-Mecklenburg, advocates hailed the new choice plan as a means to build communities. Critics saw a renewal of ''separate but equal.'' Affluent suburban schools, with predominantly white students, would have high levels of achievement. Poorer city schools, with mostly black enrollments, would struggle to meet standards.
To prevent that, officials have promised more resources to struggling schools. They will get what they need, fast. When Mr. Cline asked for new computers, they came in time to train students for the state computer exams. Perhaps equally important, the district took great care in many of its staff decisions.
Mr. Cline came to Charlotte five years ago from Virginia, where he was credited with turning around a failing middle school. He took over Marie G. Davis when the new policy kicked in. At 6 feet 2 inches and 285 pounds, he can be both imposing and teddy bearish. He silences misbehaving children with a glare or shout down. Yet students swarm to him for hugs and advice. ''Being African-American, there are things I can say that others can't say,'' says Mr. Cline, who in addition to being principal is a pastor at a Presbyterian church in a neighboring county. He leaves an open Bible on his desk.
No one expects Marie G. Davis to post state test results as high as they were during the school's heyday, when more than 90 percent of students scored at or above grade level. But Mr. Cline and the teachers feel pressure to succeed. They changed around classes midyear to put the weakest students with the strongest teachers. They checked students' scores on practice tests every quarter to see how they compared with peers around the district.
Results pleased the district: 60 percent of students hit the mark on state test scores. ''I got a call from several board members,'' Mr. Cline recalls. They told him: ''Thank you for showing the choice plan can work.''
''But at the same time,'' he says, ''we kicked our own butts trying to get that done.''
Strong teachers, strong principals and a commitment to providing resources may mean that dismantling desegregation policies does not mean the end of good schools. Still, isolated voices of discontent have emerged. Arthur Griffin, the school board's most ardent defender of the desegregation plan, recently left the board after 17 years. He fears no one will continue pushing for poor children, and that new policies rely on current good will, not assurances built into the system. Promises of extra resources could evaporate as soon as the superintendent or board members leave. And what about when Mr. Cline moves on?
Mr. Griffin fears that lower expectations are becoming part of the school climate. ''The folk who know better left'' schools like these, he says. ''They know, 'If my kid is going to be successful to get in the state universities of North Carolina, they're going to have to do much better.'''
Mr. Cline shares these concerns. ''Our children live in a diverse world,'' he says. ''You want them to be in a diverse school. Because of where we're located, because of the perception of our children, we'll always be a hard sell.''
D'Asia Bennett, 13  Marie G. Davis Middle School, Charlotte, N.C. (95 percent black, 2 percent Hispanic, 1 percent white)
''I have never been to a predominantly black school before. I was moved up to a higher math class. To me, that was good -- I was being challenged. Just because the school is in the neighborhood it is, and it's predominantly black, you can still be challenged. It's not as bad as they think it is. There's only four people in our geometry class. We can spend more time learning. We really get attention.''
RESEGREGATION Celeste Smith is an education reporter for The Charlotte Observer.
