With nearly all of the other Democratic candidates racing across Iowa in the final hours before that state's caucuses, this was the only show in New Hampshire, where the first primary in the nation is only 10 days away. More than 1,800 people, including a flotilla of former Clinton administration officials, Hollywood headliners and former senators, jammed into a high school gymnasium here on Saturday to cheer Gen. Wesley K. Clark.
Michael Moore, the filmmaker and author, whipped the crowd into a frenzy with barbs at President Bush and praise for General Clark, who Mr. Moore conceded was an unusual candidate for him to be supporting.
Others on the stage included Rahm Emanuel, a former Clinton White House official and now a representative from Illinois; Mickey Kantor, Mr. Clinton's secretary of commerce; John H. Dalton, Mr. Clinton's Navy secretary; Barry Levinson, the film director; Samantha Power, the author of a Pulitzer prize-winning book on genocide; and former Senators Dale Bumpers and David Pryor of Arkansas.
''They are all great Democrats,'' the general said, bringing his troops to their feet. ''And they all agree with me that it's time to put a Democrat back in the White House.'' General Clark was expected to receive the endorsement of George S. McGovern, the vehemently antiwar Democrat who suffered a landslide defeat to Richard M. Nixon in the 1972 presidential election. Aides to General Clark said that Mr. McGovern would endorse him on Sunday.
General Clark is skipping the Iowa caucuses. On Saturday, he was the only candidate in New Hampshire, and the campaign event came at the end of a week in which the tide here seemed to shift somewhat in his favor. Published polls -- and some of the candidates' own polls, their campaigns said -- suggested that he had moved ahead of Senator John Kerry in the state and had sufficiently narrowed the gap with Howard Dean that he was within striking distance of winning the primary here.
For months, the conventional wisdom was that Dr. Dean held a substantial lead in New Hampshire, that Mr. Kerry would come in second and that the only real question was whether someone would finish a strong enough third that he would not appear to be a loser. (In point of fact, no candidate in the last 50 years who ran in New Hampshire and finished lower than second place went on to win his party's nomination.)
''Two weeks ago, I thought there was no way to touch Dean,'' said Dick Bennett, who posts a new poll on the Internet every day tracking voters' views of the candidates. ''But now I sense an electricity in the air about Clark.''
David W. Moore, who runs the Gallup poll in New Hampshire, said he still believed that Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, was ''the odds-on favorite'' but that the lead was not insurmountable.
In a conference call with reporters in New Hampshire Saturday evening, Dr. Dean said he thought he would win the primary. ''We don't think we need to change anything,'' he said.
A possible explanation for the race tightening, the experts said, is the reluctance of voters here to back those considered front-runners. Walter F. Mondale in 1984, Bob Dole in 1996 and George W. Bush in 2000 were among the many front-running presidential candidates who lost in New Hampshire.
The one difference this year, said Dayton Duncan, who has been involved in Democratic politics in New Hampshire since the 1970's, has written a history of the state's primaries and is supporting Dr. Dean this year, is that in all those cases, the candidate who won the primary was running against the Establishment. Now it is Dr. Dean who is the outsider.
He clearly has the largest, and most enthusiastic, statewide organization. The campaign has 14 offices around the state, about 125 paid staff members, 250 full-time interns who have been in New Hampshire all this month and thousands of young volunteers from around the country who come and go day by day.
On the other hand, General Clark seems to have benefited here from not campaigning in Iowa, a strategy that helped Senator John McCain win New Hampshire's Republican primary four years ago.
The Kerry strategy is the opposite of General Clark's. Mr. Kerry has been spending nearly all his time in Iowa, hoping for so strong a showing in the caucuses there that it leads to victory here.
The strategy of using Iowa as a gateway to New Hampshire was employed successfully in 1984 by Gary Hart. He finished a distant second to Mr. Mondale in Iowa. But that was better than most people expected, and he parlayed it into a victory in the Democratic primary here. Many other candidates, however, have won in Iowa and then faltered in New Hampshire, including Representative Richard A. Gephardt in 1988.
In 2000, the strategy Mr. Kerry is using this year backfired on Bill Bradley, who did more poorly than he had hoped in Iowa and then finished behind Al Gore here.
''Bradley was going gangbusters here,'' recalled Linda L. Fowler, a political scientist at Dartmouth. ''But there was a lull in his campaign in the middle of January, and that's when Gore nailed it down.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FIRST PRIMARY
