MANHATTANVILLE COLLEGE's president, Richard Berman, says he remembers how it used to be and can smile at how it is. It's nice, he says, to think you've done something right.
Mr. Berman was the driving force behind creation of the men's and women's ice hockey programs at Manhattanville, which have become national powerhouses in just their fifth seasons.
The women's team is ranked first in the nation in a poll by United States College Hockey Online, having recently upended the defending champions, Elmira College, 2-0. The Manhattanville women were second in the nation in the last two years, falling to Elmira both years in the Division III national title game.
The men, who defeated the United States under-18 national team in an exhibition earlier this month, are ranked ninth in the nation by the same organization.
The college has used a combination of academic and need-based scholarships to attract players from hockey-rich Canada. This season, 24 of 29 players on the men's squad and 11 of 24 on the women's team are Canadian.
''The hockey is not necessarily better,'' said Nicole Kirnan, the second-year women's head coach. ''It's just there are more people playing.'' Keith Levinthal, who has served as men's head coach from the outset, noted he chose many players from blue-collar Western Canada.
''I'd prefer a kid who has a summer job working on an oil rig in Alberta than someone selling piña coladas on Martha's Vineyard,'' he said. ''Those kids really appreciate the opportunity to get here. They want to take advantage of it.''
Mr. Berman has been a vocal fixture at home games.
''He's unbelievable,'' Miss Kirnan said. ''He's the guy banging on the glass and cheering everybody on. He's our No. 1 supporter. That kind of support trickles on down and makes everyone want to do well.''
Mr. Berman, Manhattanville's president since 1995, regards the fast-growing sport as a way to increase the college's profile and attract more and better students to the 1,528-student school.
Since the teams' inceptions, yearly undergraduate applications have jumped from a little more than 2,100 to more than 2,900, and the president said hockey was a a significant factor. At the outset, Mr. Berman said, the idea of introducing hockey was ''very controversial.''
''It was clear not all the faculty was as excited about the introduction of hockey as I was,'' he said.
Some argued the money could be better spent elsewhere, said Mr. Berman, who said that an anonymous donor contributes $100,000 yearly to hockey.
And there was also the student issue. ''One of the worries was that we would attract not the most intellectually rigorous students we could find,'' Mr. Berman said.
Mr. Levinthal, 31, who became Manhattanville's athletic director last spring, said that when interviewing for the coaching job, he understood: ''Given the climate of the campus, it was imperative that we have quality kids. We had to change some people's thoughts.
''The best thing to happen to this program is there was such a microscope on these kids,'' he said. ''People were waiting for them to take a step off the line and mess up. The microscope forced the kids to be really good at what they were doing.''
The players excel not only on the ice (where last year the men were 18-6-2 and the women 27-4), but also in the classroom. During the 2002-2003 school year, the men's team had a collective grade point average of 3.4 and the women, 3.35.
''It's organization and some late nights,'' said Steve Hoffart, a sophomore from Wilcox, Saskatchewan, a town of 300 that has two rinks.
The players, who help out at local youth hockey practices, log as many as 30 hours a week doing hockey-related activities, Miss Kirnan said.
''My athletes have a higher G.P.A. than nonathletes and are more involved in campus life and community service,'' Mr. Berman said. ''I think they're perfect role models for other kids.''
Recalling her first season, the senior goalie Renee Kirnan, a psychology major from Syracuse and the coach's sister, said: ''We were told not to let the professors know we played for the hockey team. Now we have a couple who are at all our games.''
Nicole Kirnan said players like the team captain, Nicole Stephens, helped change perceptions.
Miss Stephens, from Saugus, Calif., who transferred in on a partial academic scholarship, was an on-campus math tutor before obtaining her undergraduate degree in math last spring. She now teaches at Rockland Country Day School, while pursuing a master's degree in education at Manhattanville.
Many Manhattanville players decided not to play hockey at a Division I school, which is typically bigger. Ms. Stephens is one.
''At D-I, it's nothing but hockey,'' Miss Stephens said. ''Here there is so much more.'' If she had gone D-I, she probably wouldn't have gotten as much playing time and wouldn't be on as successful a team, she added.
Both coaches characterized the campus's proximity to New York City as a huge draw.
''Most competitive hockey programs are in the middle of nowhere,'' Miss Kirnan said.
Myles See, 22, of Dauphin, Manitoba, a sophomore business management major, said: ''It's just the opportunity. It's not often guys from a little town of 8,000 get to go to New York to play hockey and get an education, basically for no charge.''
Jami Grasby, a sophomore from Blenheim, Ontario, chose Manhattanville over Maine, a Division I school. At Manhattanville, she said, players get individual attention, and coaches give one-on-one instruction -- and are also aware of grades. Players whose G.P.A.'s fall below 3.0 must attend study hall.
''The coaches want to make you a better person on and off the ice.'' she said. ''It's the same for the entire campus. It's family-like, basically.''
Mr. Berman, whose goal is to see both teams win a national championship but is superstitious enough to withhold predictions about this season, said the beauty of Division III is that academics are the priority. Division III teams, he acknowledged, are a notch below the Division I peers.
But, he added: ''That doesn't mean there's less commitment, less passion, less love. It still means we want to be the best.''
SPORTS
