I'VE always been susceptible to motion sickness. Once, after a choppy airborne arrival in Albuquerque, my companion informed me that my eyelids were green. On ferries, I'm the one clutching life ropes at the stomach-settling helm, no matter how clement the weather. This past August, knowing I would soon have the great joy of traveling through Sri Lanka, but fearing bumpy flights in and out of Colombo during the southwest monsoon season, I secured a prescription for a couple of scopolamine ear patches. The plane trips were silky smooth. But Sri Lanka's roads undid me.
In preparing for this trip, a research expedition on the tea industry, I had read colonial histories of the island. They all began with long, detailed accounts of road building. Dimbula to Lindula. Brookside to High Forest. Norwood to Upcot. I thought it was a bore -- until I actually saw the place. The history of Ceylon (as this paradise was then known) is a tale of tropical abundance and unyielding topography. Today's roads follow the same crooked bullock-cart paths that the 19th-century British carved around towering rocks and steep ravines, through dense jungle and wind-swept plateau, over rivers and waterfalls, as they plundered, planted and plucked their way to riches.
The first week, I got around mostly by bus, traveling with a congenial group of American tea traders. The second week, I roamed by car, in order to spend more time with planters, workers and brokers. It is commonly assumed that, gastrointestinally, car travel is less perturbing than bus travel. Not true. No matter how high or low the ride, driving through such gorgeously irregular landscape is both jarring and terrifying. Every few seconds brings a blind switchback or hairpin curve. Vehicles regularly lurch to a halt to accommodate throngs of people strolling, cattle roaming, dogs dozing and sometimes iguanas creeping across the asphalt. After a few days, it was no surprise to see a minibus hanging poised over a cliff or an open-bed truck shear off the crown of an overhanging tree.
For Americans accustomed to superhighways and steadying horizons, the result is a kind of mal de terre. My own symptoms were all too familiar. The blood drained from my face. My upper lip went damp. My breathing quickened. And my stomach, well, everyone knows that feeling. I stopped seeing the scenery, except to scope out places where, if necessary, we could pull over.
Of course, jolts on the road -- in the sense of psychic disequilibrium -- are among the great rewards of travel. I like to leave home in order not to know what's around the corner or where I stand in the cultural landscape. Travel is a riot of stimuli that can't be smoothed out. Unfortunately, that's true physiologically as well. Motion sickness sets in when our eyes, inner ears and skin sensors bombard the brain with conflicting signals about our position in space. The jumbled intelligence is then dispatched downward.
Sri Lankans don't seem to get sick on these twisting roads. Somehow, that's fitting. Motion sickness should be reserved for the newcomer; the natives know where they are and what's coming.
But for me, driving in Sri Lanka continually brought fresh dislocations, both psychic and physical. I was, by turns, thrilled to be in this new place and preoccupied by landscape-erasing nausea.
The national driving style didn't help. Take the informal rules for passing. On these exceedingly narrow roads, the rule is to pull up within three inches of the object you intend to pass, toot your horn a few times in warning, and make your move. Pay no attention to the car or truck hurtling toward you from the other direction -- hesitation is a sign of weakness.
Ubiquitous tuk-tuks add another layer of stimulation. These open three-wheeled little vehicles are driven by barefoot men who cross their feet at the ankles and press down on a single pedal, unleashing a sharp, insect-like drone. Weaving in and out of traffic, tuk-tuks instantly transform a one-and-a-half-lane road into a three-lane affair. With no dividing lines or warning signs or stoplights to help, the very act of driving in this country is more like a faith-based initiative.
I wasn't the only afflicted passenger. On the bus, a queasy cadre self-selected as front-seat occupants. Outwardly, we didn't look especially feeble. A sturdy, bearded guy in a safari hat even joined our ranks. But our seats looked like a mobile infirmary, stocked with crackers, Coke, chewing gum and peppermint candies. I had discovered the antidote of holding my hand out the window to catch the air. That exasperated our driver, who worried that he would be liable for amputation if another vehicle passed too close.
AT one point, squeezed in a minivan on an especially winding road, I turned pale and sweaty. Disaster loomed. A kindly soul squeezed the acupressure points on my wrists and instructed me to breathe deeply. It didn't work. The options were stark: ask the driver to stop and let me collect myself, thus delaying the group's already tardy arrival, or risk the worst. I asked the driver to stop. Once on stable ground, I sat on a small grassy rise, face in hands, eyes closed, to compose my brain and my belly.
When I finally looked up, I saw a plantain tree across the road. It wasn't the first plantain tree on the route. But it was the first that I really saw. Its squat, broad-leaf, fan-shaped wackiness riveted me. I was glad that my illness had halted the tour's blur of forward motion.
My moving image of Sri Lanka has since shifted many times over. Traveling on my own, I talked with planters' families about how they survived the bloody conflicts of the 80's and 90's. I interviewed exporters about the failed experiment with nationalization. I asked women who plucked tea leaves about their daily routines. That brought another kind of disorientation. The more I learned, the less sure my assumptions about the country became.
At home, to anchor myself once again, I've been paging through an album of photos. What they bring back is not my fleeting physical misery but the chastened sense of having glimpsed another world. The still pictures make me want to go back, to lose my bearings once again.
Essay MADELINE DREXLER is an author and a journalist based in Boston.
