EXHIBITIONS
''50 Years and Counting: Artists Respond to Brown v. Topeka'' Works by more than 20 artists commissioned to comment on the Brown decision. National Civil Rights Museum, Memphis; civilrightsmuseum.org; until Feb. 28.
''Courage: The Carolina Story That Changed America'' The story of the Rev. Joseph A. De Laine and his neighbors in Clarendon County, S.C., who brought about the first Brown lawsuit, Briggs v. Elliott. Levine Museum of the New South, Charlotte, N.C.; museumofthenewsouth.org; Jan. 30-Aug. 15.
''Marching Toward Justice'' Howard Law School began a year of observances in October. This exhibit examines the 14th Amendment and the role of the law school and the N.A.A.C.P. in the Brown decision. Howard University School of Law Library; www.brownat50.org; May 5-July 31.
''Separate Is Not Equal: Brown v. Board of Education'' Artifacts, graphics and audiovisual material tell the personal stories and broad themes of Brown. Smithsonian National Museum of American History; americanhistory.si.edu; runs for a year beginning May 15.
EVENTS
The Legacies and Unfinished Business of Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka The federal government's 50th Anniversary Commission has been holding public forums around the country. This is the final forum. Participants include Gary Orfield, co-director of the Civil Rights Project at Harvard; John Stokes, a student leader in the protest that led to Virginia's desegregation lawsuit; Tony Brown of ''Tony Brown's Journal,'' on PBS; and Lani Guinier, Harvard law professor. University of Kansas, Lawrence; kuce.org/programs/bbec; March 14-17.
Looking Back, Moving Forward: The Unfinished Business of Brown v. Board of Education Civil rights history tours of Frederick, theatrical production on Brown, exhibits and speakers, including the scholar Cornel West and the former N.A.A.C.P. president Julian Bond. Hood College, Frederick, Md.; www.hood.edu/brownvboard; March 18-21.
Brown v. Board of Education National Historic Site The Monroe Elementary School was one of four in Topeka, Kan., that black children, including Linda Brown, had to attend. It opens as a museum devoted to the legal struggles of blacks; interactive exhibits will record and play visitors' comments; nps.gov/brvb; opens May 17.
BOOKS
''From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and the Struggle for Racial Equality,'' by Michael J. Klarman (Oxford University Press, January). Mr. Klarman, a professor of law and history at the University of Virginia, evaluates the impact of Supreme Court decisions.
''Black, White and Brown: The School Desegregation Case in Retrospect,'' edited by Claire Cushman and Melvin I. Urofsky (CQ Press, March). Essays assembled by the Supreme Court Historical Society examine the legal arguments of the case and their impact on constitutional law and American life. Preface by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
''Simple Justice: The History of Brown v. Board of Education and Black America's Struggle for Equality,'' by Richard Kluger (Knopf, April). First published in 1976, the history of the Brown decision is being republished with a new preface and final chapter by the author.
''Remember: The Journey to School Integration,'' by Toni Morrison (Houghton Mifflin, May). The Nobel Prize-winning author narrates historical photographs of the desegregation movement.
THE CASES
