A STAR from high culture can get points for swinging low. When Plácido Domingo sings ''Yesterday'' or Mikhail Baryshnikov drops in on ''Sex and the City,'' they're being good sports. But when entertainers aspire to high art, they get shot down. (People still cringe at the very idea of Paul McCartney's ''Liverpool Oratorio.'') So what do you call it when Susan Stroman takes a leave of absence from Broadway to mount a new full-length ballet for the New York City Ballet? Is it hubris? Nerve? A sign?
A five-time Tony Award winner for choreography and directing, Ms. Stroman has to her credit a list of hits that runs from ''Crazy for You'' to ''The Producers'' by way of ''Show Boat,''  ''The Music Man,''  ''Contact'' and ''Oklahoma!'' (and such misfires as ''Steel Pier'' and ''Thou Shalt Not,'' which had their moments). Joan Acocella, the dance critic for The New Yorker, has acknowledged Ms. Stroman's ability to create ''a big, wild, set-the-house-on-fire number'' and her ''enormous stage smarts.''  ''What Ms. Stroman doesn't have,'' in Ms. Acocella's view, ''is any new ideas,'' adding that the choreographer's ''themes are ordinary, clichéd, shopworn.''  ''But she's got craft,'' the critic concludes, ''and a lot of oomph.''
Well, maybe craft and oomph are qualities the thoroughbreds up at Lincoln Center are feeling the need of. If so, City Ballet has arranged for a dose of both with Ms. Stroman's ''Double Feature,'' opening next Friday, one night after the hundredth birthday of George Balanchine. Significantly, it will be the company's first original full-length ballet since Balanchine's own plotless, three-act ''Jewels'' in 1967. (Balanchine liked ballet that was all dance, all the time, and most full-length works reach full length by means of endless filler.)
Unlike ''Jewels,''  ''Double Feature'' tells a story, or rather two. First half melodrama, second half slapstick comedy, the show is a valentine to movies of the silent era.
Throughout the centennial, City Ballet is contextualizing this or that facet of Balanchine's wildly eclectic canon with material by other choreographers, contemporary and long gone. The notion of these ''tributes,'' as the offerings are called, is far more quixotic than it may appear. The full-length ''Swan Lake'' and ''Sleeping Beauty'' as danced in his native St. Petersburg formed an integral part of his heritage, as no one denies.
But Balanchine refused to live in the past. For his own company in America, he distilled ''Swan Lake'' into a single magnificent act. As for ''Sleeping Beauty,'' he sublimated its lessons into crystalline plotless creations like ''Divertimento No. 15,'' which in the phrase of Arlene Croce, Ms. Acocella's redoubtable predecessor at The New Yorker, contained more dancing than five Sleeping Beauties. His showbiz pizazz, if you're looking for it, turns up in ''Stars and Stripes'' and ''Who Cares?''
Does it really make sense for City Ballet to turn back the clock for full-length story ballets, when Balanchine left them behind? ''Put a man and a girl on stage,'' he said, ''and there is already a story; a man and two girls, there is already a plot.'' Needless to say, these are not the sort of plots spun by Ms. Stroman.
Sweeping any such considerations aside, City Ballet has billed ''Double Feature'' as a tribute to his ''pioneering work in Broadway musical comedy during the 1930's and 40's'' -- lost numbers no one bothered to document, irrelevant to his enduring reputation.
True, along the way Balanchine temporarily made his living on Broadway and in Hollywood, but only until Lincoln Kirstein -- his prophet, cheerleader and fundraiser in chief -- could establish the necessary financial basis for the school and permanent classical ballet troupe Kirstein had invited Balanchine to America to create. Give Balanchine the choice of a ballerina or a hoofer, and you knew which way he'd jump.
An outline of ''Double Feature'' reads nothing like that of any known Balanchine ballet. Touched with Goreyesque strokes of the sadistic and macabre, the first act is a tongue-in-cheek Cinderella story for the jazz age. The second is adapted from the play ''Seven Chances,'' immortalized on screen by Buster Keaton as a bashful Joe Millionaire, pursued at the climax by a surreal posse of gold-digging brides.
Rationalizing her inspiration, Ms. Stroman cites Balanchine, who once said of the company: ''We are a silent minority. We only dance.'' But something else played into the idea as well: the example of two sublime movement artists who made the silent screen their canvas. ''Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton had complete control over their bodies,'' Ms. Stroman says, ''as much as any ballet dancer. Don't forget that Rudolf Nureyev said Chaplin was the greatest dancer in the world.''
''The Producers'' squeaks by with a cast of 27. At City Ballet, Ms. Stroman has at her disposal 60 dancers, hand-picked from observation of performances, class and their informal interactions during breaks in class. (The company ruled out auditions.) Both the most senior and the most junior of the company's ballerinas made the cut: Kyra Nichols, cast against type, as a wicked stepmother; Alexandra Ansanelli as a turn-of-the-century ingénue. The glamorous Maria Kowroski and Damian Woetzel step out as a pair of romantic screen idols. The airy Janie Taylor is cast as Mabel, the Cinderella type. The bantam Tom Gold takes to the air as Buster Keaton, complete with porkpie hat. And as in every Stroman show, memorable cameos abound for ranking principals, for youngsters on the rise, even for some little bunheads from the School of American Ballet.
At run-throughs in late November, before the holiday run of ''The Nutcracker,''  ''Double Feature'' was a lot of fun, and that was in the bare studio, without benefit of the production values of such veteran Stroman collaborators as Robin Wagner (scenery), William Ivey Long (costumes) and Mark Stanley (lighting), working in a black-and-white palette attuned to the dominant conceit. The score consists of songs by Irving Berlin and his long-time associate, Walter Donaldson, arranged for a 65-piece orchestra. (On Broadway, no pit band exceeds 23.)
Peter Martins, a former dancer for Balanchine and his chosen successor, says he always wanted ''Double Feature'' in the Balanchine centennial but hoped to introduce it seasons ago. ''So I could sell tickets!'' he blurts out pre-emptively. ''There! I've said it. We have to fill 2,700 seats every night.'' And Ms. Stroman knows about filling seats. Alas, she was not available before.
Impressed by her work on Broadway, Mr. Martins first approached her five years ago for a brief contribution to a joint celebration of Duke Ellington by City Ballet and Jazz at Lincoln Center. She obliged with the 10-minute bonbon ''Blossom Got Kissed,'' starring Ms. Kowroski as a flapper with two left feet. Audiences ate it up.
Already, Mr. Martins had been contemplating a full-evening's ballet to the music of Irving Berlin, but his request for the composer's permission was rebuffed. ''He was 99 at the time,'' Mr. Martins recalls, ''and his letter was very unfriendly. 'No. I don't want my music to be danced by ballet dancers.' Then he passed away.'' Mr. Martins thought Ms. Stroman might have better luck with the Berlin estate, and she did.
As is her wont, Ms. Stroman arrived on the first day of rehearsal with a detailed plan, worked out in weeks of preproduction (or ''homework''). Indeed, the anatomy of steps, story and music was so complete that she and her assistants could teach it by counts alone, a process Ms. Nichols, for one, found disorienting: ''I need to hear the music,'' she says.
Ms. Stroman, for her part, was startled (and delighted) by the dancers' sheer athletic prowess. ''Everything's beautiful at the ballet,'' she said recently at Lincoln Center, echoing ''A Chorus Line.''  ''I've been waiting all my life to say that! But it's true. The dancers pick everything up right away. With Broadway dancers, there's always a negotiation. Which side is better for a turn? How high can you kick? If you saw 'The Music Man,' that was what I envisioned in my head. Here, the ideas are magnified a hundred times. The dancers here can jump higher and stay in the air longer and sustain positions more powerfully than I could ever imagine.''
But unlike Balanchine, Ms. Stroman is as much a storyteller as a maker of dances. For Mr. Gold, the emphasis on character brought back memories of Jerome Robbins, City Ballet's other founding choreographer, who cast him, barely out of school, in the leading trio of sailors in the evergreen ''Fancy Free.'' ''Balanchine said, 'Just dance,' '' Mr. Gold says. ''Jerry said, 'Just act.' Even in an abstract ballet, Jerry was always asking: 'Who are you focused on? Who are you? Where are you coming from?' Dancing a whole story like Susan's is wonderful: a whole journey, with peaks and valleys. It's the difference between a sprint and a marathon. God has smiled on me.''
He is hardly alone in his euphoria. After initial misgivings, Ms. Nichols has warmed to the challenge of the evil stepmother, so contrary to her usual gentle, sympathetic image: ''I had to find the confidence not to hide behind Kyra, to be free enough to do things I might think don't look so great, non-ballerina-ish.'' Having danced for Balanchine, does she find affinities to his work in Ms. Stroman's? ''With Balanchine,'' she replies, ''if I don't remember the steps, I listen to the music, and the steps come back, because the music tells me where my body wants to go. It's the same with Susan. There's nothing forced. Things flow together beautifully.''
Flexing his long legs at the barre, Mr. Woetzel agrees. ''Does Stro have a command of the classical grammar? Absolutely. She may have different names for things -- but Jerry had odd names for steps sometimes, too. Often I find her being descriptive, which is enough for me.''
One thing that leaves everyone feeling wistful is the brevity of the show's first run: ''Just seven little shows,'' in Mr. Gold's bittersweet phrase, and no repeats yet scheduled. Having bet more than $750,000 on Ms. Stroman to score another bull's-eye, Mr. Martins will have to wait years to capitalize on it if she does.
His colleague André Bishop -- the artistic director of the Lincoln Center Theater, who nurtured Ms. Stroman's ''Contact'' from humble beginnings as a basement workshop to glory at the Tonys, a three-year run on Broadway, a national tour and a closing-night PBS telecast on ''Live From Lincoln Center'' -- views the possibilities with something that sounds very like envy:
''In the theater, generally, shows have a run, and that's it. In music and dance, there are no long runs, but things come back. Like Jerry Robbins's 'Fancy Free.' Sixty years old, and it's still here.'' Sure enough: Robbins's first hit -- in fact, his first ballet, created for American Ballet Theater, now a repertory staple at City Ballet -- dates back to 1944. Definition of repertory: a hit that just keeps running.
DANCE
