PRESIDENT BUSH'S speech last week announcing goals for a manned mission to Mars delighted many with the prospect of a new era of space exploration. But the plan had its critics, including some former astronauts and space agency officials, who wondered how much it would cost. Mr. Bush offered roughly $12 billion, most of it taken from the existing NASA budget. This was far less than the estimated cost in 1989, when President Bush's father proposed a permanent base on the Moon and a manned mission to Mars.
In his new book, ''Lost in Space: The Fall of NASA and the Dream of a New Space Age'' (Pantheon), Gregg Klerkx, a former manager at the SETI Institute in Mountain View, Calif., which is dedicated to the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, writes that NASA scientists pronounced the senior President Bush's vision technically feasible. All that was needed for people to reach Mars, they said, was a bigger space station, a new kind of rocket, a more powerful space shuttle and a way to mine oxygen from the moon's loose soil, or ''regolith.''
''And it could all be done,'' Mr. Klerkx sarcastically comments, ''on schedule and on budget (making it an anomaly in NASA's history) for a mere $400 to $500 billion of taxpayer funds.''
Whether or not this mission ever gets off the ground, however, it's a good bet that Mars and Martians (even if only bacteria) will continue to fascinate science fiction writers and interplanetary travel proponents, as it has at least since H.G. Wells published ''The War of the Worlds'' in 1898. Here are a few pages from the works of space dreamers.
''A Princess of Mars,'' by Edgar Rice Burroughs, published in 1913:
I opened my eyes upon a strange and weird landscape. I knew that I was on Mars; not once did I question my sanity or wakefulness. ..
Springing to my feet I received my first Martian surprise, for the effort, which on Earth would have brought me standing upright, carried me into the Martian air to the height of about three yards. ...
The man himself, for such I may call him, was fully 15 feet in height and, on Earth, would have weighed some 400 pounds. ... And his mount! How can earthly words describe it! It towered 10 feet at the shoulder; had four legs on either side; a broad, flat tail, larger at the tip than at the root, and which it held straight out behind while running; a gaping mouth which split its head from its snout to its long, massive neck.
''The Martian Chronicles,'' by Ray Bradbury, published in 1950:
June 2001:
It was so cold when they first came from the rocket into the night that Spender began to gather the dry Martian wood and build a small fire. He didn't say anything about a celebration; he merely gathered the wood, set fire to it, and watched it burn.
In the flare that lighted the thin air of this dried-up sea of Mars he looked over his shoulder and saw the rocket that had brought them all ... across a silent black space of stars to land upon a dead, dreaming world. ...
He watched the other men and waited for them to jump around and shout. It would happen as soon as the numbness of being the ''first'' men to Mars wore off. ... But they stood thinking it, nevertheless, thinking of the honor and fame, while their lungs became accustomed to the thinness of the atmosphere, which almost made you drunk if you moved too quickly.
''Mission to Mars: An Astronaut's Vision of Our Future in Space,'' by Michael Collins, published in 1990:
Regardless of weather, the colors in the Martian countryside were spectacular. At one end of the spectrum, crystalline rock strata sparkled like diamonds in the sunshine. At the other extreme, black glass formed by lava flows was dull as asphalt. In between, the Red Planet lived up to its name. There was every variation of red, depending on the composition of the surface and the angle at which the sunlight struck it. Cliffs could be maroon at dawn and then lighten to crimson and blood red as the Sun rose.
THE READING FILE
