QUESTIONS of faith and morals consume the tormented trio at the heart of ''Agnes of God,'' John Pielmeier's 1982 play, later made into a film. The work is receiving a well-acted revival at George Street Playhouse under Ted Sod's taut direction.
Part classic ''who-done-it,'' part enigmatic foray into the mysteries of Catholic doctrine, the play poses myriad questions that remain largely unanswered. One leaves the theater feeling more manipulated than intellectually sated.
The plot comes straight from the tabloids. Agnes (Maria Dizzia), a novice in a convent, described by her mother superior as ''different, special, blessed with the voice of an angel,'' is found unconscious in her room with a dead baby in a nearby wastepaper basket. The young woman claims to remember nothing of how the baby got there and refuses to confront the reality of the event. Who is the infant's father, and who was involved in the baby's murder?
Charges are being considered against Agnes, but not before the chain-smoking court psychiatrist, Dr. Martha Livingstone (Suzzanne Douglas), completes her brutal, at times unprofessional investigation of the disturbed girl's psyche. Mother Miriam Ruth (Laurie Kennedy), the convent's mother superior, might know something about what happened. But her desperate desire to protect the fragile Agnes, and her distrust of the cynical ''lapsed Catholic'' psychiatrist, prove near insurmountable barriers to totally honest communication. Meanwhile, Dr. Livingstone has emotional baggage that curiously, and too glibly, parallels that of both Agnes and the mother superior.
Mr. Pielmeier has loftier aims here than merely solving the mystery. A rousing theological debate on the nature of miracles, virgin birth and sainthood runs through this two-hour mental wrestling match, with Agnes's soul as the winner's purse.
Not everything that is thrown into the spiritual hopper impresses as overly profound. How seriously can you take Ms. Douglas's know-it-all psychiatrist, as she looks dreamily at her audience and mouths the Hallmark bromide: ''God isn't out there. God is you, or rather, you are God.''
Mr. Sod's direction underscores the obvious craft behind Mr. Pielmeier's work. The author pushes the right buttons to create a theater piece that engages visually. Ms. Dizzia has her share of bleeding stigmata, and counters her luminous other-worldliness with a hypnotically induced, shockingly vivid reenactment of the birth of her child.
As the mother superior, Ms. Kennedy's serene demeanor and humorous twinkle belie a fevered determination to keep inviolate her faith and the faith of those around her. It is hard to understand why this woman's two children from her ''first marriage'' would have cut her from their lives, but then, mothers who are close to monsters seem to be the only kind allowed in ''Agnes of God.''
''Agnes of God'' is at George Street Playhouse, 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick, through Feb. 1. Information: (732)246-7717.
THEATER REVIEW
