The Nets promised a playoff atmosphere Saturday night, and the Indiana Pacers delivered one.
An unusually large crowd of 18,856 at Continental Arena saw all the reasons the Pacers are a legitimate threat to the Nets' hopes of winning the Eastern Conference title for a third consecutive season.
In a 90-84 victory, Indiana looked more like the team that went to the N.B.A. finals the past two years, playing with the poise of a champion in the final minutes. Meanwhile, the Nets wilted in the fourth quarter as if they had never been there before.
Over a 24-hour span, the Pacers upstaged both of last season's finalists -- first the San Antonio Spurs, then the Nets. It didn't seem to matter that the Pacers trailed by 11 points heading to the fourth quarter. They are the third-best defensive team in the N.B.A, and they showed why at the end.
In the fourth quarter, Indiana held the Nets to 10 points on 21.7 percent shooting, and the Nets had 6 turnovers. Coach Byron Scott said it was ''as bad as we've executed and shot in the fourth quarter.'' He probably could have gone all the way back to Game 6 of last year's finals to find a comparison.
''We just shut down,'' said Kenyon Martin, who scored 4 points in the second half and was hampered by foul trouble. ''We gave the game away. They applied pressure and it shouldn't have bothered us.'' After a pause, he admitted, ''They're the best in the East -- for now.''
As Richard Jefferson thought about the reason for the Nets' fourth-quarter futility, he repeated the same line five times: ''We just couldn't make a shot.'' He had an open 3-pointer that would have given the Nets the lead in the final minute, but he misfired. Jermaine O'Neal then drained a jumper with 29.9 seconds remaining to seal the outcome.
After the Nets won at Indiana last month, Coach Rick Carlisle challenged his players and called them immature. Since then, the Pacers have won 10 of 11 games and taken aim at the Nets. Playing with five fouls for most of the fourth quarter, O'Neal scored 20 points. Ron Artest sprained his left thumb in the first half, but stayed in the game and recorded 18.
''We can't make a big deal out of this,'' Artest said. ''We still have a lot of improving to do.''
The Nets reacted much more enthusiastically when they beat the Pacers at Conseco Fieldhouse last month, proclaiming themselves the team to beat in the East. But they have lost three out of four games and will play seven of their next eight games on the road.
Coach Byron Scott had promised playoff intensity Saturday, and he said these two teams ''don't necessarily love each other.'' At one point, Martin looked as if he might attack Jeff Foster for under-cutting him on an alley-oop. Martin kept his cool, but the Nets did not.
Having lost some confidence in his bench, Scott left Kidd and Jefferson on the floor for 45 minutes, and they eventually showed the effects. Jefferson did not score a point in the second half, and Kidd did not score in the fourth quarter.
Kidd missed Saturday's shoot-around for personal reasons and arrived late to the arena because he said he was stuck in traffic on Route 17. It appeared nothing but traffic could hold him up. Through three quarters, he had 21 points and 11 assists, but he went cold just as Jamaal Tinsley and Anthony Johnson warmed up for Indiana. ''I got down on myself instead of forcing the tempo,'' Kidd said. ''We missed some easy ones and got ourselves in a bind.''
The bind promises to continue. The Nets go on the road for three games starting Tuesday, then return to Continental Arena for a game before heading back out for another four. Within that stretch, they take two separate trips to Texas and two to Florida, and they will face powerful teams like Dallas, San Antonio, Houston and New Orleans.
''It's crazy,'' Martin said. ''I've talked to some of the guys and I don't know if anybody has ever done anything like this. It's the first time for us. But it's got to be done.''
REBOUNDS
ANTHONY JOHNSON, the former Nets guard who now plays for the Pacers, took exception to comments made by BYRON SCOTT after the Nets beat Indiana last month, when Scott said the Nets were still the best team in the Eastern Conference.
''Byron Scott does a lot of talking,'' Johnson told The Indianapolis Star. ''Who really cares who's the best team in the East on Dec. 27? Do they want cookies? That's very immature that he would even be talking about who's best in the East.''
Scott responded: ''I want cake, first of all -- German chocolate.'' He added, ''Anthony Johnson was a big help here, but until somebody beats us in May and June, we are the best team in the East, period.''
PRO BASKETBALL
