The Rangers wore their retro jerseys for the first time Saturday night. More important for the Rangers, Aleksei Kovalev appears to have turned back the clock to the last few seasons, when he emerged as a 40-goal threat.
Kovalev prevented the Rangers from losing to the Montreal Canadiens in regulation when he tied the score with 5 minutes 6 seconds remaining in the third period. The Rangers then killed off a four-on-three power play for the final 1:38 of overtime to gain a 2-2 tie.
With 47 points, the Rangers (18-16-7-4) are tied with the Islanders (21-19-4-1) for eighth place in the Eastern Conference.
Since Kovalev, at the urging of his wife, Eugina, decided to go back to the sticks he used last season, he has scored four goals in his last six games. He tied the score Saturday by driving to the net and banging home a pass from Eric Lindros.
''It definitely makes me more confident,'' Kovalev said of playing with his old sticks. ''Now, I'm not thinking about whether the stick is going to break on every shot. I'm not just shooting more now; I'm shooting harder. And pretty much on every shot, I'm hitting the net.''
With a goal and an assist against Montreal, Kovalev leads the Rangers in scoring with 35 points on 10 goals and 25 assists.
The Canadiens took a 2-1 lead at 3:17 of the third period on a power-play goal by Michael Ryder. Less than a minute later, the Rangers' Chris Simon had a goal disallowed because his stick was above the crossbar when he took a backhand swipe to knock the puck out of the air in the slot.
Montreal came into the game riding the coattails of its rejuvenated No. 1 goaltender, José Théodore. In their last 10 games, the Canadiens had gone 7-1-1-1.
The Rangers, meanwhile, had recorded at least a point in 9 of their previous 12 games and were trying to move three games over .500 for the first time since Feb. 10, 2002.
With the Canadiens wearing jerseys from their Stanley Cup-winning season of 1945-46 and the Rangers wearing jerseys like those they wore from 1976-78, Montreal took a 1-0 lead into the first intermission on Pierre Dagenais's 10th goal of the season.
Dagenais scored on a 35-foot slap shot from the top of the right circle over Mike Dunham's glove hand at 9:01.
Petr Nedved nearly tied the score for the Rangers with 10 seconds remaining in the period. He beat Théodore with a wrist shot from the right circle, but the puck bounced off the left post.
The Rangers evened the score at 1-1 at 5:08 of the second period on Bobby Holik's 12th goal of the season. He scored on an odd-man rush with his linemates, Martin Rucinsky and Kovalev.
Montreal Coach Claude Julien expressed unhappiness with the officials that his hard-shooting defenseman, Sheldon Souray, was made to leave the ice to change jerseys after Rangers defenseman Dale Purinton pointed out that Souray was playing with blood on his jersey.
As a result, Souray missed about half of the Canadiens' power play in overtime. Rangers Coach Glen Sather called Purinton's observation ''the play of the game.''
SLAP SHOTS
Rangers left wing CHRIS SIMON returned to the lineup after serving a two-game suspension. CHAD WISEMAN was a healthy scratch. . . . Rangers forward JAMIE LUNDMARK, who has been out since Dec. 4 with sprained ligaments in his right knee, took part in the morning skate and said afterward he felt close to being ready to participate in a full practice. ''Hopefully, within a week, I'll be skating with the team,'' he said. . . . MARK MESSIER, the Rangers' captain, turns 43 on Sunday.
HOCKEY
