WITH just over one-fourth of the fiscal year left to go, voters in Regional School District 8 still have not approved a budget for R.H.A.M. High School and Middle School, rejecting 10 budget proposals by ratios of as much as 70-30 and raising fears that the budget year will draw to a close before the financial deliberations are finished.
Two days before Christmas about 3,300 people from the three towns rejected, by a 65 to 35 percent ratio, the latest proposal of $17.14 million, down $52,000 from the last vote. The budget includes a $2.15 million debt payment for the new school complex, which is expected to be completed in February.
''I really think we've gotten to the point now where it's no longer about the dollars, it's just become an emotional issue,'' said First Selectwoman Nancy S. Bader of Marlborough. ''It's going to be a question of getting the different groups to sit down together, understand each other, and build some trust.''
Mrs. Bader said another cause of the stalemate is that the state requires a vote every four weeks until the budget passes, which does not allow for a review of spending and enough time to explain it to the public. The next vote is Tuesday.
''We've had to rush from one referendum to the next with having time to do the groundwork that we should be doing,'' Mrs. Bader said. District 8 has not set a record for budget battles. That distinction belongs to the Amity Regional School District, which comprises Bethany, Orange and Woodbridge. Amity turned down 17 budgets during the 2002-3 fiscal year. But in the three-town District 8 -- R.H.A.M. stands for Regional Hebron, Andover and Marlborough -- the difficulty stems from disputes over what constitutes legitimate budget growth. Those who favor passing the budget contend that the towns need the money to run the new middle and high schools that were approved in a referendum four years ago; opponents argue that there have been too many years of too-large increases in spending.
Some officials said R.H.A.M. could be a harbinger of taxpayer revolts against school budgets, which account for the bulk of spending in most towns. Thomas J. Hanley, a member and former chairman of the R.H.A.M. Board of Education, said the former school building was constructed almost 50 years ago and was outdated, and people have to realize that with new buildings come higher costs.
''Everybody's feeling the cost of government in their pocketbook, and where can you act on it? In the local budget referendum,'' Mr. Hanley said. ''If you're upset about anything to do with government, you can vote 'No' and make your voice heard.''
Lynn H. Archambault, another district board member, said she is also disappointed that fewer than one-third of voters have cast ballots in any of the referenda, and many of the no-shows have been parents of students. But she also said that the number of votes has been taking a toll.
''On one of the days I had to be reminded twice to go vote myself,'' Ms. Archambault said. ''It's lost all meaning to most people.''
People against the budget, however, are more committed to turning out, said Donna J. McCalla, a spokeswoman for Hebron Dollars and Sense, a taxpayers group, which has led the charge against the budgets.
''People are really waking up. You're starting to see these taxpayer revolts all over the state,'' said Ms. McCalla, a former member of the Hebron Board of Finance. ''We're hearing from people all over about what they have to do to get something like this started in their own town.''
Robert A. Wilcox of Marlborough said he has voted against the current school budget each time it has come up. He said he has lived in town 20 years, and for most of those years the budget was passed by a handful of people at a town meeting. But he said as the budget grew, the administration and school board did not take taxpayer concerns seriously.
''Every time the board lost a referendum they would say things that didn't make a lot of sense, like the 'yes' votes just didn't turn out, or people were on vacation,'' Mr. Wilcox said. ''They were in denial. They thought each time that the next referendum, they would win.''
''And the administration hasn't proposed any serious budget cuts until the last few days, hoping that the next one will pass, and now here we are on the 11th referendum,'' Mr. Wilcox said.
He said he hasn't made up his mind about the new budget and wants to see some analysis of how the cuts were made, but he said if the new spending plan passes it is not necessarily a vindication of the board.
''People are getting weary of this, but I think unless there's some turnover in the school administration we could be in for the same thing next year,'' Mr. Wilcox said. ''I'm still mulling over how I might vote. It's not a slam dunk.''
Patrice A. McCarthy, general counsel for the Connecticut Association of Boards of Education, said that while she isn't convinced most towns will need more than 10 tries to get a budget passed, ''We definitely saw a more difficult budget year last year than we've seen in a long time.''
''And next year is not going to be any better,'' said Dr. William M. Silver, the R.H.A.M. superintendent of schools. ''Just moving current programs forward we would probably be in the range of a 6 to 8 percent increase, and that's not even accounting for any additional enrollment or new requirements of the federal No Child Left Behind Act.''
The Hebron Board of Finance is already looking toward next fiscal year. It has voted to request that the district seek no more than a 3.5 to 4 percent increase for 2004-5, said Chairman Brendan T. Shea.
''We've got to slow the rate of spending increases,'' Mr. Shea said. ''We can't sustain that kind of spending growth.''
This fiscal year's $17.14 million budget proposal is a 9.5 percent increase over last year, which was up 7.5 percent from the year before. The first budget proposal for the fiscal year, which voters rejected, was 17.97 million, up 15.5 percent. Ms. McCalla said that the board has done little to really trim the budget. Four times, on budget votes six, seven, eight and nine, the package was virtually unchanged. She said based on the growth in the town's tax base, a budget of $16.4 million to $16.9 million is more appropriate.
Supporters of the higher figure said that would mean there would be less money for programs than the previous year because of the new expense for school construction.
Mr. Shea, head of the Hebron Board of Finance, is also the chairman of the Tri-Town Committee, a regional finance board created last year to supervise spending at R.H.A.M. High School and Middle School at least until a budget has passed. While the group has only been trying to improve management of the district's money, and has not rejected any spending requests, ''we might have to start taking a more aggressive approach.''
''We will not be setting any kind of policy -- we won't be saying, 'we think you should have so many teachers per student' -- but we may say, 'we think you can cut $100,000 out of the personnel account, then it's up to them to figure out how to do it,'' Mr. Shea said. ''That's the fine line we have to walk, and it can be difficult at times.''
Dr. Silver, the superintendent, said it's getting late in the year to achieve any kind of savings from the proposed budget. Even if the school lays off a teacher today, with the notice required and the unemployment benefits the district would owe, it would save no more than $10,000 to $12,000, and for aides and support personnel the savings would be even smaller.
And any cut to the annual budget now would have to be phased in over about four months, which means that a 4 percent cut now would have the effect of a 12 percent cut for the rest of the year.
Jeffrey P. Watt, who was elected chairman of the R.H.A.M. Board of Education after the November elections, said officials have to realize that the issue has polarized people into one camp that feels cutting money will harm the quality of the education, and another that thinks education has become too expensive.
''It's sheer economics,'' Mr. Watt said. ''I don't think this has a thing to do with attitudes about education, it's about what people can afford. We need to convince the community that we have looked at the budget and cut as deeply as we possibly can.
''It is the board's responsibility to find the middle ground, to bring the two sides together and find a solution that satisfies everyone,'' Mr. Watt said. ''And I wouldn't have taken this job if I didn't think that could be done.''
