AS the sun sets on Monday, Iowa voters will take part in a 32-year-old tradition, gathering in their village-square caucuses to choose among the Democratic presidential candidates. The examination of the candidates here has been going on almost since the last presidential election, and the process inaugurates the party's competition for its nominee.
And it may be the last time this happens.
For all the charm and idealism that have become attached to this distinctly American practice, the caucuses in Iowa, and the New Hampshire primaries that follow eight days later, are under siege as never before. (So far, this pressure is coming only on the Democratic side; Mr. Bush's victory in the Republican caucuses in 2000 pretty much assures that no Republicans are going to tinker with them for now.)
This is far from the first time Democrats have talked about revoking the first-in-the-nation advantage these two states enjoy, the populist anchor put in place after Vietnam by reform-driven Democrats to help reduce the power of party bosses.
But a confluence of factors this year may overcome the inertia that has held back the forces of change in the past, giving new impetus to those Democrats who argue that this system is no more democratic -- with a small ''d'' -- than the nominating process it replaced.
''I'm worried,'' said Gordon Fischer, the Des Moines lawyer who is Iowa Democratic chairman, as he basked in the fame that comes with the job (he had just got off the phone with Tom Brokaw) every caucus season.
''Every cycle, folks come after Iowa and New Hampshire and try to take away the first-in-the-nation status,'' he said. ''It seems like the last couple of years it's gotten even more intense.''
To begin with, Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut made calculated decisions to snub the state and spend their time campaigning in New Hampshire. General Clark and Mr. Lieberman concluded that they faced a drubbing here -- and for General Clark, at least, it is looking like a smart move.
General Clark is doing quite well in New Hampshire, and his absence here has meant he has escaped the body blows that everyone else in the race took-- a lesson that the next round of Democratic presidential candidates will surely learn.
''If Clark is the nominee, Iowa certainly becomes less important,'' said David Yepsen, a columnist for The Des Moines Register who has been covering the caucuses since 1975. ''It may even become irrelevant. He will be the first guy who has ever pulled it off.''
If Howard Dean wins the Iowa caucuses and follows that with a victory in New Hampshire -- the one-two punch strategy that he is looking for -- he will be on his way to becoming his party's nominee. And if he wins the presidency, ''the Iowa caucuses are guaranteed for another four years,'' said Jenny Backus, a Democratic consultant.
Senator Tom Harkin, the popular Iowa Democrat, said that before he gave his endorsement to Dr. Dean, he received a promise from the former Vermont governor that he would leave the system alone should he be elected president.
''I just couldn't endorse someone who did not want to keep the Iowa caucus system,'' Mr. Harkin said. ''I feel too strongly about it.''
But if Dr. Dean does not defeat Mr. Bush -- a prospect that many Democrats here view as a distinct possibility -- it could lend force to the argument that the process produces candidates who run to the left and thus have trouble winning general elections. (Bill Clinton did not have to worry about Iowa in 1992 because Mr. Harkin was running for president, turning the contest into a nonevent).
Still, the train may be pulling out of the station, if slowly. The party's national chairman, Terry McAuliffe, quelled a campaign by Michigan to hold its nominating contest before Iowa's this year, by agreeing to appoint a commission after the election to study whether to change the calendar.
Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, who has become the biggest advocate for pulling New Hampshire and Iowa from the front of the line, said he thought that if anything the argument was growing stronger with time.
''We should not have any states dominate continually,'' he said. ''The first caucuses and the first primaries ought to be rotated.''
Mr. Levin may not be alone in this crusade. Seven states will hold contests on Feb. 3, just a week after New Hampshire's primary. By all reports, local Democratic leaders, and not a few voters, like all the attention from presidential candidates already coming their way.
''Other states are feeling more emboldened and empowered because they taste it,'' said a senior party official, who asked not to be named because of the sensitivity of the subject. ''They taste what it means to be early. And they want to be the earliest and get even more attention.''
The arguments against having Iowa and New Hampshire lead off the presidential nominating process are not new, and even ardent advocates of the current system acknowledge that they are compelling.
New Hampshire is 96 percent white, according to the 2000 Census, while Iowa is 94 percent white. Someone could drive through hundreds of miles of farmland and small towns without seeing a single African-American.
And in Iowa, voting is not just a matter of showing up at any time of the day at a polling place. Voters must arrive at the local caucus site at 6:30 p.m. sharp, and then stick around through two hours of talking and trading.
The winner of this competition tends to be the candidate with the best organization; hence its reputation for being ''dominated by special interests'' in the recently famous, if now retracted, words from 2000 of none other than Dr. Dean.
In the end though, the calendar may resist change. As Mr. Yepsen noted, a whole generation -- several generations -- of consultants, candidates, reporters and analysts have become quite comfortable with this routine, which takes them first to Iowa and than to New Hampshire, too very manageable states, every four years.
And if people of either party are serious about change, they better act fast. The caucuses are on Monday. And next week, Rudolph W. Giuliani -- who many Republicans think might run for president in 2008 -- is coming to town to address the Chamber of Commerce.
Caucused Out
