MY apprehension was beginning to grow. All around us was a thick forest canopy, but there was a clearing near one large tropical hardwood where a tiny wooden platform was perched, about 200 feet above the ground. A rope dangled from the top of the platform down to the forest floor. I couldn't imagine what this was for. I thought it must be something the guides were using for training. Still another terrifying possibility loomed.
''If we're going to climb that tree,'' I told my wife and two daughters, ''I'll stay here.''
''Don't worry,'' they all replied. ''Look, Dad,'' said my elder daughter, ''there's even a couple of 12-year-olds on this trip. You can do it.''
Clearly, I was going to lose face if I was the only one in a group of 20 -- ages 12 through 55 -- to wimp out.
We were on a canopy tour, part of a five-day trip to a Costa Rican rain forest near the resort town of Quepos, in the southwestern part of the country. We would be traveling through the treetops to look at the forest's upper canopy. That sounded good -- unless you have a fear of heights.
My family led me to believe that this would be a unique way to view plants and bird life in the forest's upper extremities. I'd pictured safe wooden walkways with railings, photo ops of smiling three-toed sloths and colorful toucans. I had visions of observing a group of howler monkeys. Instead, I was expected to jump off trees and travel at breakneck speeds through the upper canopy.
To get to the base camp, we'd traveled in the back of a covered truck for about an hour, crossing the Coto River some 40 miles from Quepos, where we were staying. We were a group of five, including my brother-in-law. Each of us was given a harness with sturdy leather belts encircling our waists and thighs. Reinforced leather gloves completed the outfit.
The first part of the tour was a half-hour trek up the side of a mountain. We walked single file, with several guides, into the green gloomy interior.
We stopped and looked at prehistoric ferns, a 300-year-old ceiba tree and a small palm tree with elevated roots that one of our guides said literally walks through the forest in search of sunlight.
But then I found myself climbing a wooden platform on top of a mountain, gazing down at a steamy jungle floor hundreds of feet below me. A hefty steel cable stretched out across a ravine to another tiny platform several hundred yards away.
A Costa Rican named Diego greeted me with an upbeat question.
''Are you ready?''
I wanted to say no, but nodded nervously.
Diego hoisted me up like a slab of beef and attached my harness to a pulley on the cable.
''You just jump off and slide to the next platform,'' he said. ''And remember, keep your feet up. Otherwise you could get hurt.'' I took a deep breath and launched myself into the void. Suddenly I felt myself airborne, gravity free, flying through the treetops. I was zipping along on a steel cable. My body swiveled on the pulley. I marveled at the sensational views of the lush green mountains in the distance even as I felt the adrenaline rush that comes with fear overwhelm me.
My canopy tour had begun. My heart was in my throat as I realized I was about to come in for a landing.
''Feet up!'' yelled another guide.
I felt my hat slip off my head, and I grabbed it with my teeth. I didn't quite make the platform, but strong arms grabbed me and pulled me to safety. Several others in our group were there, clutching a rope tied to a tree trunk. Only then did I fully comprehend that I'd landed on top of another enormous tropical hardwood tree. The platform was only several feet wide. No railing. Nothing between me and the forest floor 150 feet below. The guides hooked my harness onto a safety line attached to the tree but this did little to allay a wave of panic.
''Are you all right, Dad?'' inquired my two beaming daughters. Neither seemed overly concerned at my anxiety. I nodded, clutching my safety line.
''It's awesome,'' they both said.
I smiled weakly.
Two hours, eight zip lines, some rappelling down trees and 16 platforms later, I can say that I survived, however shakily, and finished with the twin rewards of a little bravado and a great sense of relief.
The biggest shock came halfway through the tour when on top of one high tree I realized that there wasn't another steel cable in sight. No ladder. No stairs. Just a long rope. There really was no alternative here. I had to rappel down a 150-foot-high tree. Each of us was given a 10-second explanation. Left hand on the upper portion of the rope, right hand on the lower portion. Release slowly. Fear is an understatement to describe my state of mind as I stepped off the relative safety of the platform into space. Even through the thick leather gloves protected my hands, they were burning as I slowed my descent. I came down like a slow-moving three-toed sloth.
My girls, however, were like two squirrel monkeys. Screams and yells filled the forest air as the brave young thrill seekers dropped off the platforms to experience the full power of gravity. They took the express ride down. This is like bungee jumping. You jump off the platform in a free fall and rely on the guide below who holds the rope to stop you before you hit the ground.
Miraculously, nothing went wrong.
Some therapists will tell you the best way to conquer your fears is to confront them head on. Perhaps so, but I'm not convinced a zip line has to be involved.
Canopy Safari, Apartado 351, Quepos, Manuel Antonio, Costa Rica;(506) 777-3079 or (506) 777-0100, fax (506) 777-3623; www.canopysafari.com. Five-and-a-half-hour canopy tours are $65 a person.
ROBIN LLOYD is a freelance journalist based in Washington.
