THE Iranian filmmaker Jafar Panahi did not come to New York last week for the premiere of his new feature, ''Crimson Gold.'' In fact, Mr. Panahi, who is probably best known in the United States for his 1995 film ''The White Balloon,'' has not been to America since a disastrous visit in 2001. He arrived without a proper visa, declined to be fingerprinted by immigration officials and was handcuffed, put in leg irons and held overnight at Kennedy International Airport.
But neither is Mr. Panahi a particularly welcome figure in Tehran. ''Crimson Gold,'' about the life of one marginal citizen of the Iranian capital, has been banned there, even for private screenings, because of its sharply critical look at Iranian society under the mullahs.
''They have interrogated me twice so far,'' said Mr. Panahi, referring to the Iranian intelligence service, which routinely questions dissident artists. ''The first thing they always say is that we are spies for the West. This is what all the government newspapers call us: spies. It's like they can't believe you can be independent.''
''The White Balloon,'' with its audience-pleasing story of a 7-year-old girl on a mission to buy a plump new goldfish in celebration of the New Year, made the tour of the world's film festivals and even achieved modest commercial success during its American release. But the film is more than an affectionate study of childhood stubbornness; beneath its apparently sentimental surface is a corrosive study of a society closed in upon itself, drained of freedom and cursed to continually relive the past.
Mr. Panahi, 43, has since moved on to adult protagonists. His 2000 film ''The Circle,'' also unseen in Iran, illustrated the situation of women in Islam through an interlocking series of incidents that begins with a group of prostitutes freshly released from prison and ends with a woman back in jail. ''Crimson Gold'' is the story of Hussein (played by a nonprofessional actor, Hussein Emadeddin), a shuffling, overweight army veteran who works as a pizza delivery man. A daily round of petty humiliations leads him to a desperate, bloody attempt to rob a jewelry store.
Like most of Mr. Panahi's films, ''Crimson Gold'' has a circular structure, beginning and ending with the fatal robbery attempt. ''You can see the same thing in 'The White Balloon,' which was my first film, as well,'' he said through a translator, during an interview at the 2003 Toronto International Film Festival. ''We find the balloons and the person who sells balloons in the beginning and then at the end we reach him again. We start 'The Mirror,' the second movie, with a closed door and we end with the same closed door of the school. All these are that circle that is trapping the people inside. And humanity is trying to escape from this circle.''
In the first two films, Mr. Panahi continued, when the stories were from children's points of view, they were less harsh and more innocent. ''But now that we are not using children as a pretext,'' he said, ''now the truth is bare and ugly. The truth is you can tell from the beginning what Hussein's fate is going to be. And Hussein can't bear being humiliated in his own society.
''Maybe all these stories are trying to show the circle that the circumstances are making for us and trying to find a way around it. Every little social problem or circumstance shown in these films will make people think, and people who can look clearly will not accept what they see.''
The title, ''Crimson Gold,'' alludes to the grisly aftermath of Hussein's botched robbery -- a tangle of blood-soaked gold jewelry. ''When gold comes into Hussein's life, it's a bad sign for him,'' Mr. Panahi said. ''The way that we chose the title was exactly the way that we chose to tell the story from the ending,'' he continued, referring to his collaborators, including his mentor, the celebrated Iranian filmmaker Abbas Kiarostami, who wrote the screenplay. ''We just wanted to tell the audience in advance what's going to happen at the end, so they can only focus on why it happens.''
Mr. Panahi is a brilliant formalist, who creates cool, detached, geometrically composed images in a way inspired by Mr. Kiarostami. But Mr. Panahi is also a gifted director of nonprofessional actors, who contribute a documentary-style realism to his work.
''There is no real formula to it,'' Mr. Panahi said about his technique. ''That depends on every single one of the actors' characteristics. With one of them you have to be kind, the other one you have to be logical, with the other you have to open the story for them.''
''The actors were hard,'' he continued, ''each one, for their own reasons. But I confess that the hardest one was Hussein. Hussein really was a pizza delivery man, but he was also schizophrenic. And the conditions were very, very hard. People like him, schizophrenic, they're always thinking about a different thing. They're always daydreaming and think there is a conspiracy going on. A lot of times when two people were talking in the corner of the room I noticed that he was just gazing at them. If one of them touched his forehead even, he felt that this is a secret code for starting World War III. He tried to break some people's necks in the crew. He broke and destroyed things on the set.
''And then one day he broke everything and left. The day after I went to his place and I asked: 'Why? What's happened?' And he said: 'You have some of the commanders of the neo-Nazi army in your crew. And because they know that I can telepathically communicate with children of the world, they want to get rid of me so they can get rid of all the children in the world.' ''
Though Mr. Panahi said that he considered himself to be above all a social filmmaker, he tries not to impose particular political readings on his work. ''Because we respect the audience and we think that the audience can decide for themselves, we never show directly to them what the problem is and we don't want to make any statement. We let our audience decide for themselves. Is it political or economical or geographical or religious?''
''If you tell them exactly what the problem is, then they won't think about it again after the movie. But if you let them fill the blanks themselves, they're going to think about the movie for a long time afterward.''
FILM
