JOHN DOWD has read Pete Rose's new book. ''I concluded after reading it,'' Dowd said, ''that he never read my report. He's autographed it and sold it but never read it.''
Dowd is the Washington lawyer whose 1989 investigation of Rose and his betting habits led to the lifetime banishment from baseball that Rose is trying desperately to escape from during his lifetime.
Commissioner Bud Selig has shown no inclination to reinstate Rose. Should he ever take that step, Selig will very likely rule out the possibility of Rose's managing again or even taking a meaningful front-office job. If Rose is reinstated so he can be eligible for the Hall of Fame, his chances of election by the writers seem to be slim and by the veterans committee virtually nonexistent.
''He doesn't seem to get it; he probably never will,'' a baseball official said after following the fallout from Rose's book and his comments in interviews.
Dowd's assessment of Rose's lack of reading comes in part from a passage in his book, in which Rose relates that at a November 2002 meeting he told Selig, ''I never made any bets from the clubhouse.'' The 225-page Dowd report details on dozens of pages telephone calls Rose's betting buddies made to his clubhouse office at Riverfront Stadium in Cincinnati in the hours before Reds games and then to bookies, presumably to place Rose's bets.
''One of the most impressive exhibits we put together was when we combined the telephone records in that period in 1987 with operators' records at Riverfront Stadium,'' Dowd said. ''It was one of the most damning pieces of circumstantial evidence I've ever seen.''
If that evidence was the best Dowd developed during his investigation, a subsequent encounter with baseball officials was the most puzzling aspect of post-investigation developments. In 1998, Major League Baseball filed a complaint with the District of Columbia Bar contending that Dowd had violated lawyer-client privilege.
''Probably the worst thing was when Bud Selig's lawyers tried to take my law license,'' Dowd said. He referred to Bob DuPuy, currently president and chief operating officer of Major League Baseball. ''Here I was defending the decision of the commissioner of baseball and they didn't want me to do it.''
It almost seemed as if baseball was siding with Rose against Dowd, but DuPuy said that was never so. ''At the time,'' DuPuy said, ''John was repeatedly and consistently commenting on the work he had done for baseball and the Rose case. Pete had an application for reinstatement pending, and we didn't think it was appropriate while that application was pending for a lawyer to be talking about the case. We asked John to stop commenting and he refused.''
Dowd said: ''It was clear they wanted me to shut up. But there was no privilege. Everything I had I gave to Rose's lawyers.'' He did so, Dowd said, under instructions from A. Bartlett Giamatti, then the commissioner.
''It's no fun when someone goes after your meal ticket,'' Dowd said. ''It was especially difficult when it was the commissioner of baseball doing it.'' The bar council, however, dismissed the complaint.
''In fairness,'' DuPuy said, ''we have not had any occasion to address that issue with him since then. No one here has challenged the efficacy or protocol of the work that John did.''
In fact, baseball assigned another lawyer to redo the Rose investigation, and it came out the same way. That would have been two strikes against Rose if he hadn't had three.
Fifteen Minutes of Fame
Of the 32 players on this year's Hall of Fame ballot, the two at the top of the voting, Paul Molitor and Dennis Eckersley, received enough votes to gain entry. The two players at the bottom, Danny Darwin and Bob Tewksbury, received none. Zero votes. Not one of the 506 ballots cast named either pitcher.
The question then arose: is it better to be on the ballot and receive no votes, or is it be better not to be on the ballot at all?
Tewksbury, who pitched for the Yankees as the first of six teams he played for in 13 seasons, said he was flattered to have been on the ballot and not embarrassed at his shutout.
''Think about what you're talking about it; how could you be disappointed not getting any votes?'' Tewksbury said. ''Whether you get one vote or 15 votes, being on the ballot is a nice novelty. Just to be considered is nice. Not everyone who plays major league baseball gets to have their name on the ballot. Some people want to be a big leaguer for a day. I got my name on the ballot for a day.''
Tewksbury, who compiled a 110-102 record in 13 major league seasons, may not seem to be a Hall of Fame candidate, but he was one of the best control pitchers ever and the best of his time. He is 22nd among all pitchers, registering 1.45 walks per nine innings.
But this will be his only year on the ballot because he didn't get enough votes to qualify for future consideration. No problem, said Tewksbury, who worked last season as a television analyst for the Boston Red Sox.
''Two guys got into the Hall; two didn't get any votes,'' he said. ''Those four should be easy to remember. It's the other guys who have a problem.''
Evaluating an Administrator
When teams hire general managers these days, they usually choose between an administrator and a talent evaluator. In September 1999 the Milwaukee Brewers were hiring a general manager, and they selected Dean Taylor, an administrator, over Omar Minaya, an evaluator. They liked Minaya, they said, but he lacked administrative skills.
This was the same Omar Minaya who, upon becoming general manager of the Montreal Expos two years ago, assumed control of a team devoid of front-office and minor league staffs (not to mention computers) and put together an organization in a matter of weeks.
Minaya, signing and trading players deftly, has directed the Expos to two seasons of competitive baseball. The Brewers, who were placed on the market Friday, had three losing seasons under Taylor, extending their streak to 10 seasons, then fired him and hired Doug Melvin, an evaluator.
Clemens's Higher Authority
In deciding to unretire and play this year for the Houston Astros, Roger Clemens had to consider a variety of factors. The most important, as he related them, seemed to be his mother. Clemens was concerned that delaying his eligibility for the Hall of Fame could affect his mother's presence when he was elected.
Players have to wait for five years after they retire to be eligible for the Hall.
''My mother is 74 years old,'' Clemens said. ''She has emphysema. She has trouble breathing, and she's on oxygen all day. But she has a strong will.''
She gave Clemens her blessing to play.
''She cried and she said she would be with me at the Hall of Fame,'' Clemens said. ''She said if nothing else, her spirit would be there. She said, 'Even if you're talking to an empty chair, I'll be there.' ''
On Baseball
