WHEN the Tony Award-winning theater director Gerald Gutierrez died suddenly late last month at the unripe age of 53, the stories about him immediately began to flow. An actor's director, who understood exactly how to elicit emotionally moving performances from his casts, he had an obsession with detail that made each production tick like a perfectly calibrated clock. His back-to-back Tonys for best director in 1995 and 1996 -- for revivals of ''The Heiress'' and ''A Delicate Balance,'' respectively -- honored what the actors, playwrights and other theater people who worked with him already knew very well. His style and flair may have seemed effortless, but his research for every production -- both classic revivals and new plays -- was ferocious. Mr. Gutierrez, who apparently died of respiratory failure from the effects of the flu, was a cancer survivor who came out of the experience ''full of life,'' as the actress Cherry Jones says. He was an impatient man with enormous patience, a serious student of the theater with a wicked sense of humor, a private soul who took his Yorkshire terrier Phyllis to the 1995 Tony Awards (''It was deflective behavior,'' he said in a 1996 interview with Alex Witchel in The New York Times, ''if you look at the dog, you're not looking at the scars'' from the cancer surgery). Here are a few of the stories that Mr. Gutierrez's colleagues and friends have been telling about him.
JONATHAN MANDELL
KEVIN KLINE  Actor
Gerry and I were at Juilliard together, in Group I, the first graduating class. I was in the first play he ever directed, the one-act ''The Diary of Adam and Eve,'' an adaptation of a Mark Twain story, which we did during spring break. During rehearsal, we got into an argument, I think it was over some comic business that he wanted and that I didn't want to do. To his dying day, we disagreed about what happened next. I always said I walked out of rehearsal. But he would always say that he threw me out. He last directed me in ''Ivanov'' at Lincoln Center a quarter-century later. While he trusted me more, there was no let-up in his passion or exactitude. If he thought you did something really well, he gave you a dollar. I don't remember his doing that at Juilliard; I don't think he could afford to. At the opening night of ''Ivanov,'' he gave me a framed dollar bill.
JOHN LEE BEATTY  Set Designer
I started designing sets for Gerry in 1974. I did ''A Delicate Balance,''  ''Most Happy Fella,''  ''A Life in the Theater,''  ''Dinner at Eight'' -- you name it. Deep into the technical rehearsal of ''The Heiress,'' the lighting designer Beverly Emmons was so behind in the lighting cues that our two stars, Cherry Jones and Frances Sternhagen, were left doing their climactic jilting scene completely in the dark. Gerry exploded from his seat in frustration, then ran to the back, where he wildly stared at the stage. By the time he reached me, though, something had changed. ''I know I should be furious,'' he said, ''but, John, are you thinking what I'm thinking?'' By that time Beverly called out from her desk, ''Gerry, I'll fix it, I'll fix it.'' Gerry grinned at me and yelled, ''Beverly, I have a surprise for you.'' So Cherry was to break the audience's hearts in the dark from then on, and everyone in the room was nominated for a Tony.
CHERRY JONES  Actress
During rehearsals for ''The Heiress,'' Gerry would be telling stories and making jokes. He had just come back to the stage. He had had cancer and had come through it, so he came to us full of life. It was like ''The Gerry Show.'' We all fell in love with him, and I knew something was being accomplished, but it seemed awfully chaotic at times, a little unfocused. Once we got into previews, however, he was like a laser beam. He wanted the play to go like an express locomotive. He actually sacrificed a couple of performances in previews by making us go at an absurdly accelerated rate in order to get that kind of energy and speed in our bones. Every night we would be given the times of the first act and the second act. It was imperative that we never add a minute to either act. If we went over, we would get a call from Daddy.
After the Tony Award, I had prided myself on keeping my performance very simple. Apparently, I had not succeeded. He came up to me after the show to talk about a line I said in the last act: ''Let us have some lemonade.'' He said, ''It now sounds as though you have Barbara Stanwyck with her hand on her hip in your throat.''
Actors don't really perform for the audience; they try to please their director. So it's sad when the director is no longer attending performances. But now and then I would hear a slight jingle in the back of the house, and my heart would soar. I knew it was Gerry coming in, because that was Phyllis's dog collar. I lived to hear that little jingle in the back of the house.
TOM DONAGHY  Playwright
Gerry had three great obsessions -- theater, music and the law -- and he managed to incorporate all three into rehearsals. He had studied piano and directing at Juilliard, and plays were music to him. In rehearsals, most directors tell the actors, ''Begin when you're ready.'' Gerry would say, ''Hit it!'' -- as if he were a bandleader.
For a time, he stopped directing to attend Yale Law School. My play ''Boys and Girls'' was the first one he directed after that. During rehearsals, breaks became ''recesses.'' At the end of the day, we ''adjourned.'' If an actor had a question, Gerry would say, ''You may approach the bench,'' and when the discussion was finished, he would bang his dog Edna's chew toy on the desk like a gavel [Phyllis died in 2000]. One day, one of the actors suggested a change in blocking. Gerry was silent for a full minute. ''The court will consider it,'' he said.
WENDY WASSERSTEIN  Playwright
Gerry and I had a great deal in common -- he grew up in Brooklyn and so did I -- so when he directed my play ''Isn't It Romantic'' in 1984, we became extremely close friends. One time when we went to a wedding or a bar mitzvah together, my Aunt Florence said to me, ''Is he more than a director to you?'' From then on, Gerry would sign notes to me ''More Than a Director'' or just ''MTD.'' He also became close to my sister Sandra. He used to say that the two of them were people who had opinions. He wanted to do a talk show with her called ''Opinions Are Us.''
Gerry had no interest in anything that didn't stem from emotional truth. When there were jokes that he thought were not integral to a character, he would tell me I was spritzing the stage with them. I had to cut them. There was a piece of dialogue in ''Isn't It Romantic'' where somebody tells Janie [the heroine], ''You're clutching your purse,'' and she says, ''I have valuables.'' Gerry said, ''You know what, just cut it.'' So I cut it.
About four years later, I put it in ''The Heidi Chronicles.'' On opening night, that line was said, and I heard a howl of laughter in the audience. Gerry came up to me afterward: ''That's a lovely play, but you're spritzing the stage with your valuables.''
ANDRÉ BISHOP  Artistic Director, Lincoln Center Theater
We were friends and colleagues for 25 years. When I first met him, I was struck by how intensely alive he seemed. Ruth Goetz, the co-author of ''The Heiress,'' told her daughter that Gerry seemed ''like a very brilliant child with a late-afternoon fever,'' and that's how I saw him too. I also had never met anybody who drank dry gin martinis at lunch. One of his great gods was Noël Coward. Every Dec. 16, which is Noël Coward's birthday, Gerry and I would meet at some fancy bar and drink martinis and pretend to be smoking cigarettes and call everybody darling, in honor of Noël Coward.
Of all the directors I've worked with, he was the most open to listening to what I had to say about the production. Usually, you spend half your life chasing directors down hallways who are trying to escape. But Gerry would chase me, when he was ready: ''Now I want to hear what you have to say.''
EDWARD ALBEE  Playwright
I always had the suspicion that it was Gerry's dog Phyllis that was really doing all the directing, because she seemed so bright and so on-target and communicated with me so well. She did such a good job: she spent so much time thinking about the play, she spent so much time doing her homework, she spent so much time with detailed analysis of character, and she spent so much time sitting on my lap, which is what all good directors should do. I'm glad she dragged Gerry along with her.
ELAINE STRITCH  Actress
In ''A Delicate Balance,'' I felt very emotional about that part because I had been an alcoholic -- I still am an alcoholic, but I'm a recovering alcoholic. Gerry Gutierrez, with great sensitivity and understanding, taught me how to play a drunk sober. You think you know all about it -- if you're a drinker, you can play a drinker. That isn't necessarily true. We had a disagreement once, a strong disagreement -- he wanted [the character] to be less dramatic about being alcoholic -- and I was terribly upset about it. I went home and cried my eyes out because I couldn't believe I wasn't agreeing with him. I wrote him a letter; he wrote me a letter, and he said, ''Just try it tomorrow night.'' I was getting a standing ovation when I took my curtain call; so when somebody tells you to change something, you go: ''What? Why the hell should I change it? It's working.'' He said, ''I'm the director, and you're the actor, so what are you going to do, Elaine?'' I said, ''I'm going to do what I'm told.'' I trusted him enough to try it his way. I tried it, and I got a longer standing ovation.
GEORGE GRIZZARD  Actor
Sometimes very good work comes out of a little friction. In ''A Delicate Balance,'' we shouted at one another a lot, though it was over the next day. He had a golf book for me to read. I said no, I'd be reading the latest John Updike. He said that the house was my [character's] ancestral home; but it says right in the script ''I built this house.'' He had me in a black shirt in the beginning of the play. I said, ''That's not right.'' I insisted on a pink shirt because I thought it was WASP-y. When he won the Tony, he said to the designer, ''It was the pink shirt.''
I was delighted we were going to work together again, in ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof,'' but I wanted to talk to him first. I wanted to make sure it was his choice to cast me [as Big Daddy], not somebody from the Kennedy Center, because I didn't want to show up and have him make a face. He was very gracious. ''Of course it was my choice,'' he said. ''I would be very grateful if you would play this part.'' I was honored. He was willing to forgive and forget, and so was I.
MARIAN SELDES  Actress
I was one of his teachers at Juilliard. I remember sensing he would be a director very early on. He responded more to being on the other side of the footlights. I cast him as Treplev in ''The Seagull'' by Chekhov. It pleases me that 25 years later, he became my director and my teacher in another Chekhov play, ''Ivanov.''
His notes were enormously helpful to me. I wrote down everything he said in my script.
One time, he said: ''What I love is the sound of an audience listening. The only thing I love more is the sound of an audience laughing.''
He said: ''Where you can go is limited. What you can do is very specific. Detail, detail, detail.'' Of course, that is one of the things that made him such a brilliant director, that attention to detail. Above that I scrawled in my script that he said: ''I never want to lie to the audience.''
At the final rehearsal of ''Dinner at Eight,'' he said: ''Beautiful acting moves me. I cry, even if it isn't sad.''
I used to watch him constantly and would see his eyes fill with tears as he followed a scene well played by actors he loved.
THEATER
