AS prices soar and affordability plummets, new housing appears to be falling out of the reach of many New Jersey households.
Our recent report on home-price bubbles disclosed big increases in the state's shelter prices. From 1998 to 2003, house prices grew by 51.7 percent in New Jersey. While we concluded that this increase had not created an unsustainable bubble, it does represent a major price spike far in excess of income growth and inflation.
Certainly, one culprit is the increasing difficulty of building on the state's remaining greenfields, a result of growing efforts to preserve open space and increasing development constraints on the metropolitan edge. Smart-growth public policies aimed at reining in sprawl are likely to intensify and further constrain greenfield housing production. This will contribute to additional home price increases and declines in housing affordability. As mortgage rates move up from 40-year lows, shelter that is reasonably priced will be further reduced.
But there is a neglected upside to the affordability problem that is generating public and private benefits and creating both a need and an opportunity to address the high costs of housing.
A drive through any of New Jersey's older post-1950 tract-house suburbs shows considerable evidence of an upsurge in revitalization and reinvestment. This is occurring in many areas that a decade or two ago appeared to be increasingly shopworn places that households were rapidly trading up and away from. But spiraling new home prices have increased the demand for, and the prices of, the existing housing supply.
As the price of trading up to new housing soars, existing homeowners experience a private windfall. They find the value of their homes increasing significantly. This gain provides homeowners with the economic incentive to reinvest and remodel and to remain in their community with significant public benefits for the municipality. Over the last five years, this process has intensified and is now a visible part of the state's housing landscape.
Similarly, new vitality is increasingly evident in new construction or rehabilitated housing in most of our more urbanized areas along with declining retail vacancies and the arrival of national retail chains. The rediscovery and resurgence of many older developed parts of the state that once appeared destined for a troubled future is a direct consequence of declining housing affordability and increasing anti-sprawl constraints on new housing production, as well as new demand stemming from substantial immigration.
For more than 50 years, the state was engulfed by a tidal wave of metropolitan expansion, with new development constantly pushing ever outward. In the 1950's and 1960's, for example, families moved into Levittown-style dwellings -- 900-square-foot tributes to modesty -- at a rate of 1,000 a week for more than 1,000 consecutive weeks. This yielded a million new housing units over 20 years, overwhelming such in-lying counties as Bergen, Essex and Union.
Subsequently, it was the state's ever-expanding periphery where the newest and, with the exception of our older elite communities, most desirable housing proliferated. This process relentlessly drew the upwardly mobile from older in-lying suburbs and cities. Massive housing production on the ever-expanding metropolitan edge resulted in affordable homes and opportunities for new households, particularly immigrants, to acquire a first home by a filtering process that increased the availability of units at the bottom of the housing ladder first in urban areas and then in older suburbs. But this developmental process came with significant environmental and congestion costs, the loss of millions of acres of forest and farmland and deteriorating left-behind areas.
We are in the process of achieving the smart-growth planners' holy grail; namely, constraining sprawl and directing increased private reinvestment into older developed areas. But the old adage to be careful what you wish for has again come home to roost in the form of substantial decreases in housing affordability. We no longer can achieve, as we did for a half of a century, continued housing affordability by sustained large-scale housing production on an ever-receding undeveloped regional periphery. Direct public investment will be required to ensure housing opportunity and affordability in the future.
Where will such financial resources come from at a time of widespread fiscal constraint? Two sectors should be explored: significant resource (or tax) savings are being achieved by not having to develop infrastructure and service systems on the periphery, and new resources (taxable value) are being created when older areas are revitalized. Affordable housing needs should have some claim on both of these resource and tax benefits stemming from our new growth patterns.
SOAPBOX James W. Hughes is dean, and Joseph J. Seneca is university professor, at the Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy at Rutgers.
