Nassau and Westchester turned their county medical centers into semi-independent health care agencies in the late 1990's, entering the new world of hospital deregulation.
The State Legislature formally created the entities as public benefit corporations, which are tax exempt and nonprofit.
Today those two big suburban agencies have much more in common -- most of it trouble.
Both are in crisis and fighting for survival. Their budgets are running in the red by tens of millions of dollars. They are laying off workers by the hundreds. And their deficits threaten the credit ratings of the two sponsoring county governments.
Now state and local officials are debating whether to rescue, revamp, shrink or even close the institutions. On Tuesday, Gov. George E. Pataki's senior advisers met with Westchester officials to wrestle with the future of Westchester's hospital.
But the highly publicized problems of the Nassau and Westchester agencies do not stem from their unusual status as public benefit corporations, and they might have been even worse off had they not converted, several health experts say.
Instead, their troubles reflect wider financial difficulties facing most hospitals in the state: reduced federal Medicare rates, limited state Medicaid rates and cost-cutting under managed care.
''In New York, all hospitals are in the same boat,'' said Jeannie H. Cross, vice president of the Healthcare Association of New York State, which represents 210 hospitals.
''There's no flaw'' in public benefit agencies, she said. ''It doesn't much matter; if you're a hospital in New York, you're in trouble. No one governance model is going to save you. In 2003, we set a record for hospital closures, seven -- and more announced plans.''
But unlike the problems of many hospitals, the travails of Nassau and Westchester are laid bare in the public spotlight in excruciating detail.
That is because they are still political creatures. They started as municipal hospitals, legislators remolded them, elected officials appoint their current boards, and the counties subsidize the systems and back their bonds.
''What catches your eye, understandably, is that they are publicly owned,'' said State Senator Kemp Hannon, who lives in Nassau and is chairman of the Senate Health Committee.
The two agencies, formally known as the Nassau Health Care Corporation and the Westchester Health Care Corporation, have some differences from regular hospitals, besides their public benefit agency format.
Critics say that the two agencies have not completed their transition from government operations into fully competitive hospitals. The agencies also bear the mission of serving nonpaying patients, a costly burden.
Nevertheless, despite their common format and problems, the Nassau and Westchester agencies have different histories and appear headed for different fates.
The core of the Westchester agency is the Westchester Medical Center. It ranks as the premier hospital between New York City and Albany, providing care like organ transplants, and local officials are striving to preserve it as a vital regional institution. But that reputation was questioned last week when the family of a 12-year-old boy who died in the hospital's care filed a notice that they would sue the institution, alleging wrongful death.
In Nassau the agency's main component is the Nassau University Medical Center. Its care is considered to be good, but other choices abound in the county. They include North Shore University Hospital, which the AARP magazine Modern Maturity rated as the nation's best.
Nassau officials, who are focused on the county's recovery from its own fiscal crisis, want to limit the future drain of health care on the county budget. They are considering shrinking the medical center to serve mostly poor and uninsured patients.
The Nassau agency's president, Richard Turan, said that he envied the support rallying around the Westchester Medical Center and complained that his institution did not get the respect and help he said it deserved. ''I fear some people are looking at this only from a financial point of view,'' he said.
State Assemblyman Richard Brodsky, who lives in Westchester and is chairman of the Assembly committee that authorized the public benefit corporations, opposes downsizing the health care agencies. ''A decision to have a two-tier system, one hospital for the rich and one for the poor -- that's bad, that's wrong,'' he said.
The solution is more money, Mr. Brodsky said.
''These are like the canaries in the coal mine,'' he said of the Nassau and Westchester agencies. ''This is not complicated. The county, state and feds have to come up with enough money to pay for the services, or close it.''
The finances of Westchester's agency have deteriorated sharply, reaching deficits of $58 million in 2002 and an estimated $80 million last year. A few board members suggested bankruptcy. One rating service downgraded the agency's credit to one step above junk bonds and issued a credit watch on the county, jeopardizing the triple-A rating that Westchester has had for three decades.
By contrast, Nassau's agency began in a deep hole but is improving. It paid the county $82 million as the price of taking over its hospital, nursing home and medical clinics. Critics said that the deal unfairly saddled the agency with debt, to bail out the county's own deficit. Westchester transferred its medical center to its new agency for a symbolic $1.
But the Nassau agency is making fiscal progress. Although it reached a deficit of $42 million in 2001, it steadily pared its losses to $14 million last year. Still, its debt remains the biggest question mark for the county budget, which is under special state oversight because of past mismanagement.
Despite the problems in Nassau and Westchester, a third new public benefit agency is in the works upstate. Last week Erie County legislators approved the sale of the county medical center in Buffalo, a nursing home and 42 health clinics to the new Erie County Medical Center Healthcare Network. Erie's county executive, Joel A. Giambra, pushed the conversion as a way to get new revenue for health care operations, whose deficits have grown to $34 million a year. The plan will also give the hard-up county $85 million.
''We were familiar with the ins and outs and ups and downs of Westchester and Nassau,'' said Mr. Giambra's chief of staff, Bruce L. Fisher, adding that Erie was trying to avoid the pitfalls. The local market is tough, with Catholic hospitals and a nonprofit hospital network plagued by deficits.
Proponents say that the public benefit model for public hospitals sheds cumbersome government rules, giving the flexibility to conduct business like other hospitals, said Jim Tallon, president of the United Hospital Fund, a nonprofit policy group. No longer able to count on local government to balance their budgets, public benefit agencies need to raise revenues and hold down costs.
With their semi-independence from government, the agencies are more insulated from political pressures in making unpopular changes like layoffs. ''There's some organizational and political distance,'' said John Rodat, president of Signal Health, a consulting firm.
But there are drawbacks. Local governments may try to wean the agencies from needed subsidies, and some vestiges of government stay latched onto the new entities. For example, most workers remain in government unions with shorter work schedules than at many other hospitals. And the public benefit hospitals cannot shirk their mission to care for uninsured patients.
''Nobody has really seen how to put the blue sky out there that is going to solve their problems,'' Mr. Tallon said. ''If costs are up, incomes down and debt is high, no matter how you do the organizational form, you're going to be in trouble.''
Public benefit hospitals in the state date to 1970, when New York City's new Health and Hospitals Corporation took over the city Department of Hospitals. Today, it runs 11 hospitals and four long-term care centers in the city. Despite some ominous financial projections, health care experts point to it as a public benefit agency that has worked.
It posted balanced budgets and surpluses through the 1990's, cutting costs by reducing beds and shortening patient stays, and using city subsidies. But expenses are draining reserves, so the agency faces annual $500 million deficits in coming years, said Kenneth Bleiwas, a deputy state comptroller. The agency plans to cut 1,000 jobs and is looking for other savings as it lobbies Albany and Washington for more money.
With both state and federal governments struggling with their own budget problems, Mr. Bleiwas said, the city hospital agency is unlikely to receive an infusion. Nassau, Westchester and now Erie face similar hurdles.
