Nicole M. POTEBNYA, a second-year law student at Seattle University, never thought she had a stake in gay rights. She's straight -- a married 32-year-old. But when she took a course on sexuality and the law last semester, she was shaken. ''I'm not an emotional person, but I found myself crying,'' she says. ''I was so frustrated by how excruciatingly obvious the unfairness was.'' Cases on adoption, job bias, harassment and marriage rights left her feeling that discrimination against gay people ''is the last total wrong that's left'' in American law.
Ms. Potebnya, who plans a career in family law, is part of a surge in enrollments in law-school courses about gay issues. Since the Seattle seminar was first offered in 1993, it has routinely attracted 12 to 15 students. In the last year, enrollment jumped to 60, and most of the students are straight.
Law professors nationwide confirm that demand is intensifying on the heels of recent court rulings that have put gay legal issues center stage. William Eskridge Jr., a professor of jurisprudence at Yale Law School, had 75 students in his last course on the subject, and had to turn away dozens more. Not so long ago, he was teaching 8 to 10 students. At the law school at the University of California at Los Angeles, which with Yale is considered a leader in this new field, an entire program has been created with the explicit goal of training a generation of lawyers to promote gay civil rights.
The subject is also coming up in courses on taxes (deductions for domestic partners), trusts and estates (inheritance rights) and constitutional law (can a state ignore the marriage laws of other states?). ''All of a sudden, gay issues permeate the law school curriculum,'' says William B. Rubenstein, a professor of law at U.C.L.A. and author of a casebook used in many gay-law courses. Professor Rubenstein is personally ''jubilant'' over court rulings bolstering gay rights: in November, the highest court in Massachusetts ruled that same-sex marriage was permissible under the state Constitution, and last June the United States Supreme Court decided, in Lawrence v. Texas, that states could not bar consenting adults from having sex with same-sex partners.
Headline-grabbing cases are a big reason more students -- gay and straight -- are taking courses on law and sexuality. But another is that students no longer fear that such a course could hurt their careers.
''People used to worry about having a course on sexual orientation on their transcripts,'' says Edward Stein, co-director of the Program in Family Law, Policy and Bioethics at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law at Yeshiva University in New York. ''It was like having your transcript printed on pink paper,'' he says. Now, most law firms ''wouldn't think twice about it.'' Professor Stein, who teaches a seminar on sexual orientation, gender and the law, says he sees firms recruiting at conferences on gay legal issues. ''This is a hot issue,'' he says.
Lynn D. Wardle, a professor of law at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, publishes extensively on gay legal issues but strongly opposes expanding gay rights. While he has not created a course, he is constantly adding material on gay issues to his classes on family law. Only a fraction of his students favor expanding gay rights, Professor Wardle says, but all of them want to learn more. ''These issues are front and center and my students want to know what it will mean for them and their children.''
Just as Professor Rubenstein's center at U.C.L.A. trains lawyers to promote gay rights, Professor Wardle has an aim for his students. ''I hope that they are motivated to be activists and advocates, and to take a stand on principles that would support and defend the traditional institution of marriage.'' To do so, he says, they need to study gay law.  THE COURTS Scott Jaschik is the former editor of The Chronicle of Higher Education.
