Health officials announced Saturday that tests had confirmed more cases of Asia's twin health threats this winter, bird flu and SARS.
Vietnam said four more people had fallen ill with the H5N1 strain of flu currently spreading through Asian poultry. China said two people previously categorized as suspected cases of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, had been reclassified as confirmed cases.
World Health Organization officials said they had not yet confirmed either the additional Vietnamese cases or the reclassified Chinese ones, and needed more information.
The W.H.O. has begun describing avian influenza, popularly known as bird flu, as the bigger threat. Influenza tends to be more infectious than SARS, the organization said, with influenza outbreaks moving swiftly around the world each winter and killing tens of thousands of people in a mild year and hundreds of thousands or more in a bad year.
Not one of the latest cases of bird flu appears yet to involve person-to-person transmission, said Bob Dietz, a spokesman for the W.H.O. in Hanoi, Vietnam. But as people become infected from chickens, doctors warn that the easily mutating virus could mix genes if someone with a human flu strain contracted a bird flu strain as well. A combined flu virus could be more readily transmissible among people.
The H5N1 strain of flu has been detected in flocks of chickens in at least 15 Vietnamese provinces, with possible cases in 10 others as well as in a few flocks in Japan and South Korea. An H5N2 strain, which might be less dangerous, has turned up in chickens in Taiwan.
The H5N1 version is especially feared because humans have little immunity to it and it is hard to create a vaccine against it. Some evidence suggests that H5N1 is also unusually lethal. An outbreak here in 1997 killed 6 of the 18 people infected. The current outbreak in Vietnam has killed at least four people.
The Vietnamese Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development told the W.H.O. on Saturday that more than a million chickens have already been killed in just two of the provinces with outbreaks. But Mr. Dietz, the W.H.O. spokesman, said the organization was worried that the workers who had killed the chickens had been given little or no protection from becoming infected themselves.
''You've got guys wading into flocks of chickens,'' he warned.
More people with respiratory illnesses are being admitted to two Hanoi hospitals with which the W.H.O. works closely. But it is unclear whether these are patients with H5N1 or whether provincial hospitals are simply referring more flu patients in case they have the avian strain, Mr. Dietz said.
While the W.H.O. has not confirmed the latest four H5N1 cases announced by Vietnam, samples sent to a Hong Kong laboratory from an earlier case did show the presence of H5N1, Mr. Dietz added.
Hong Kong and mainland Chinese officials announced separately that samples sent here from a 20-year-old waitress and a 35-year-old businessman in Guangzhou, a city in southern China 80 miles from Hong Kong, had been confirmed as showing the SARS virus, which comes from a family of viruses known as corona viruses. But Roy Wadia, a W.H.O. spokesman in Beijing, said the same samples also tested positive for another corona virus that causes the common cold, and that further tests were needed.
Hong Kong has some of Asia's best medical labs, so the W.H.O. and some Asian governments tend to send samples here for testing.
