THE gray granite monument tucked away in a quiet corner on the side of the high school parking lot is inconspicuous to say the least.
Mutely eloquent, with the carved names of the members of the community (many of them young graduates of Mamaroneck High School) who lost their lives during World War II, the monument and its small surrounding park are at the center of a fierce debate within the community.
The school district says it needs to redesign the high school campus to make it safer, and add another athletic field for the increasing number of student athletes, so it plans to move the monument and set up a memorial park elsewhere on the campus. But the move has brought opposition, much of it quite heated.
The superintendent, Dr. Sherry King, says playing space is necessary. ''We're in a field-starved county,'' Dr. King said.
District officials say Mamaroneck, which has two varsity playing fields, is facing a particularly severe shortage. During the past decade, said a spokeswoman, Joan Rosen, the student population has grown by more than 25 percent. Participation in athletics has grown by 27 percent, with girls' involvement up by 32 percent.
The athletic schedule calls for 1,944 practices this school year, and 246 games each year, all outside activities that need fields. Competition for athletic fields is also fierce because of pressures from community programs, like the Midget Football League and Little League. The district has said the only place where a field can be added, either on campus or in the community, is on that site, a position disputed by opponents of the plan, including the family of the late Lt. Richard M. Kemper, for whom the memorial park is named. The monument was designed and erected, and the park land was donated by the parents of Lieutenant Kemper, a Mamaroneck man who died at age 24 in World War II when he was leading his platoon in an attack on an enemy machine gun post in Normandy, and whose name is on the monument.
Mamaroneck is one of several local districts involved in a lawsuit concerning girls' soccer, now on appeal to the Second Circuit; the school districts lost in the district court last spring. One issue is that because of inadequate fields, girls' soccer is played in the spring rather than the fall.
Those challenging the district's position argue that the need for more fields can't be more significant than the war memorial.
The Kemper family, and various community groups like the Larchmont Historical Society, have vehemently opposed the proposal, filling the local papers with letters and opinion pieces.
''The school board is positioning us as the bad guys,'' said Richard Cantor, nephew of the late Mr. Kemper. ''We were the benefactors. It's very unfair to us.''
The debate isn't simply a matter of pitting soccer parents against other community interests.
''I'm not against athletic fields,'' Jan Northrup, mother of three sons, one of whom is a Mamaroneck High School sophomore, and former president of the Larchmont Historical Society, said in a telephone interview. ''I'm more about just respecting the wishes of the donor, and respecting what the land stands for. It's a great idea to have something like that on school property so the students can learn from it. To me, war memorials are sacred.''
Part of the problem, said those close to the situation, is that when the district originally proposed moving the memorial in 2000, as part of a $50 million bond for capital improvements slated for spring of 2001, members of the Kemper family weren't contacted. The plan suggested building the field on the .59 acres of parkland.
Bob Martin, president of the Mamaroneck school board, said a needs study by the board three years ago resulted in the decision.. ''''We were unaware that the family was still in the area, and inadvertently antagonized them,'' he said.
Last spring, the board met with Kemper family members in an effort to move forward on this issue. There has been no further conversation since last fall, but Cecilia Absher, another school board member, said: ''We hope to work jointly with the family to make a more attractive and prominent setting, a reflective and room-like setting, that would be much more accessible to students and the public, and encourage people to visit it. It involves a relocation.''
The board seems determined to move the memorial, even if only a short way, and use the park for a field, while the family and other opponents of the plan seem determined to keep it where it is. Negotiations seem to have ground to a halt, and hurt feelings and misunderstandings seem plentiful.
''The issue, in a nutshell, is that the district made a mistake,'' Mr. Cantor said. ''They're too arrogant, and too powerful , to acknowledge it. You can have more fields, you can have more parking, you can make a more beautifully landscaped campus. You don't have to touch one inch of the memorial park.''
IN THE SCHOOLS E-mail: wested@nytimes.com
