''College Prowler''  Here's a quote you won't see in a New York University admissions brochure: ''The men and women at N.Y.U. are hot, but you'll find a lot of pretentious idiots and spacey Phoebe-types'' (as in ''Friends''). That's the point of the new series of student-written guides ''College Prowler'': give incoming freshmen the real lowdown on campus life, from dorms with the highest weekend vomit levels to the promiscuity policies of coeds. ''When I was looking at schools, I couldn't purchase a book with true insider information on where I was about to spend the next four years of my life,'' says Luke Skurman, the 23-year-old chief executive of ''College Prowler,'' who hatched plans for the guides for an entrepreneurship project at Carnegie Mellon. The company, formed with four fellow collegians, has published 100 slim, graphics-sparse books. Each covers one campus and is based on quotes from current and former students. Another 100 guides will be added this spring. A sampler:
On campus dining at the University of California, Berkeley: ''Get the smallest meal plan you can because most people end up eating cereal, wilted salads and frozen yogurt.''
On the guy/girl ratio at Carnegie Mellon: ''During my freshman year in the computer science department, there were more guys named David than there were girls, period.''
On drug use at N.Y.U.: ''Weed falls from the sky.''
On diversity at Georgetown: ''You know there is a definite lack of diversity when you find yourself in discussion with other students who are defending the school's diversity by saying, 'Hey, what about that guy with the dreadlocks who plays guitar on Copley lawn?'''
''Students Helping Students''  Following the axiom ''it takes one to know one,'' two recent Wesleyan graduates, Nataly Kogan and Avi Spivack, started the ''Students Helping Students'' series last year. ''The whole angle is students sharing their learning and personal experiences,'' Ms. Kogan says. ''The best advice I have ever heard is from other students.'' The publisher, Natavi Guides (named for the college sweethearts, who have since married), hires students and new graduates to conduct campus interviews. These are the kinds of guides a guidance counselor might love, with a mentor's nurturing tone. Among the 11 titles: ''Leaping From a Public High to a Top U.,'' ''Conquering Your Undergraduate Thesis'' and ''Find Your Passion.''
On singing at Northwestern University: ''There is nothing quite like the feeling of being an a cappella superstar and receiving the privilege of being waved at, screamed at or chased while walking across your college campus to class.''
''The Insider's Guide To the Colleges''  The granddaddy of the student-to-student genre, ''The Insider's Guide'' was first published in 1974, when the staff of The Yale Daily News saw a market for empirical research on the college experience. The book today takes an irreverent snapshot of social life at more than 300 colleges and universities, as viewed through the eyes of students who attend them. The guide sells about 30,000 copies a year and has a big-city publisher, St. Martin's Press. But the campus paper still runs the show, with some 70 student writers and editors keeping the content at ground level.
On the student body at the University of Chicago: ''Smart to the point of geeky is what I heard and what I expected and what I see.''
On the common path at Babson College: ''The standard-issue vehicle is pick-a-number-series BMW.''
On the opposite sex at the University of California, San Diego: ''Nine of 10 girls in San Diego are pretty and the 10th one goes to U.C.S.D.''
On the opposite sex at the State University of New York, Binghamton: ''For a school without a football team, we have a ton of really big and buff guys.''
On dating at Harvard: ''You wouldn't believe how many friends I had who graduated not kissing members of the opposite sex.''
On dating at Skidmore: ''There are more random hookups than there are bricks in this school.''
LAURA RANDALL AND KIMETRIS N. BALTRIP
BLACKBOARD: PEER REVIEW
