WHEN hundreds of passengers disembarked here recently from a train from nearby Guangzhou, they faced a gantlet of medical workers in face masks and white latex gloves.
First the new arrivals walked in front of an infrared camera that measured the temperature of each person's skin and clothing; a health worker carefully watched a computer screen attached to the camera for the faces showing in red, indicating possible fever. A little farther along, a nurse directed people who looked the slightest bit unhealthy to another pair of nurses who took their temperatures using a digital ear thermometer; all children, regardless of health, also had to be checked with the thermometers, since the infrared cameras might not record their temperatures accurately.
Finally, the arrivals were allowed to approach immigration officers and hand them their passports or identity cards, along with health cards distributed on the train. The cards asked for their recent travel histories and whether they had come in contact with the disease everyone here still fears: SARS.
''We have screened out many people with flu and other respiratory infections,'' but none yet with SARS, said Dr. Henry Kong recently as he supervised the screening of the train passengers.
After trying to forget the face masks and half-deserted streets that accompanied the arrival of SARS last winter, residents of Hong Kong and the rest of southeastern China are now hoping that the confirmation of this winter's first SARS case is not the precursor of another outbreak.
Scientists confirmed on Jan. 5 that a 32-year-old freelance television producer in Guangzhou, 80 miles up the Pearl River from Hong Kong, had contracted severe acute respiratory syndrome, and announced three days later that a 20-year-old waitress in Guangzhou was suspected of having the disease as well. A 35-year-old man in Guangzhou became the third suspected case last week. Guangdong Province, which surrounds Hong Kong on three sides and has Guangzhou as its capital, responded by slaughtering civet cats, an animal used as food, that also appears to carry the disease. The first known cases of SARS occurred in November 2002 in and around Guangzhou.
The World Health Organization maintained as of press time that it remained completely safe to visit Hong Kong and the rest of southeastern China.
Microbiologists say it is unlikely an outbreak will occur on the same scale as a year ago, because the disease is better understood, especially the need to quickly quarantine patients and all of their close contacts. But even without any cases yet within its borders, Hong Kong, as Asia's busiest air travel hub, has been especially cautious.
All passengers entering or leaving Hong Kong by air, sea or land have been required since last summer to fill out health forms and pass in front of infrared cameras. All vacations have been canceled this winter for immigration health workers, with more staff members assigned to meet trains from Guangzhou in particular. Another 200 ''tourism development assistants'' have been trained to help tourists through procedures.
Filling out the health declaration form takes less than a minute, and walking past the infrared cameras takes no extra time at all. There are enough staff members with ear thermometers at the airport and train station that families with children seldom face delays of more than a minute. Passengers in transit are screened, as well as people entering Hong Kong to stay. Anyone with a fever is sent to a doctor for a further checkup. Other Chinese cities have similar health forms and infrared cameras.
Because SARS victims spread the virus most quickly when they are very sick, Hong Kong has declared a ''yellow alert.'' SARS tests are conducted on anyone who contracts pneumonia; hundreds of isolation wards are now available for people who may be suspected of having the disease. Tourists and residents alike are being reminded to wash their hands frequently, which Dr. Lam Ping-yan, Hong Kong's health director, describes as the most important measure people can take. Tour guides have been briefed on how to prevent SARS, and hotels have been told to clean public areas more frequently. Roads and alleys remain almost spotless after a cleaning campaign during the last outbreak, but battalions of street cleaners are still at work, and the city is stepping up its already considerable efforts to trap or poison rats.
Hong Kong has banned the import of live civet cats or their meat for years, and has been testing the small population of wild, tree-dwelling civet cats in remote areas. Not one has been found to carry the SARS virus, which appears to have been endemic among civet cats tested in Guangzhou's wild animal markets before their slaughter.
Hong Kong is prepared to declare a ''red alert'' and take tougher measures if any SARS cases actually surface in its own territory. Revisions to the health laws give extensive powers to the police in tracking down SARS patients and people they associate with and quarantining them. According to the police, an American who objected to providing personal information to a police officer without a warrant last spring during one such investigation was informed that no warrant was needed under the health statutes; an American consulate official confirmed that Americans were subject to all local laws while in Hong Kong.
All the measures are aimed at reducing the chances of an outbreak, and minimizing the spread of the disease if any cases occur. But 400,000 people cross Hong Kong's land border with Guangdong Province both ways each day. Dr. Lam warned that given these numbers, if SARS became a serious problem in Guangdong again, it would be hard for Hong Kong to escape having any cases.
CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT
