THE MAN IN MY BASEMENT
By Walter Mosley.
249 pp. New York:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.
WALTER MOSLEY is best known for his Easy Rawlins books, a series of drawly gumshoe noirs, set in postwar Los Angeles, that bucked the trend for drunk, womanizing white detectives (Chandler's Marlowe, Hammett's Sam Spade) by starring an intermittently sober, married African-American detective. The edges of these novels frayed into something far more interesting than the mystery genre normally permits, and they rightly won Mosley critical and popular admiration, along with the ambiguous accolade of being one of Bill Clinton's favorite novelists.
Despite the success of the Rawlins series, it is obvious that over the last decade Mosley has felt increasingly fidgety in terms of genre. He has objected several times to being pigeonholed as a mystery writer, and he has published two nonfiction polemics, two spooky-kooky works of science fiction and ''RL's Dream,'' a novel about an imaginary bluesman named Soupspoon Wise. Now we have ''The Man in My Basement,'' a book that clearly aspires to be both literary fiction and a state-of-the-nation address. Trying too hard be both, however, it succeeds in being neither.
The novel's narrator, Charles Blakey, lives alone in his family's old and sprawling house in ''a secluded colored neighborhood way back from the highway.'' His life, like that of so many of Mosley's principal characters, is on the skids. Fecklessness and anomie have rotted him away into an ''unemployed, drunk loudmouth'' with a serious debt problem. Charles is down to pretty much his last bottle of whiskey when a ''small white man'' named Anniston Bennet shows up on his doorstep and asks if he can move into his ''stand-up basement'' for the summer. Bennet proposes to pay Charles nearly $50,000 for 65 days' accommodation; Charles's only duties will be to feed him and to keep the basement clean.
Shortly before Bennet is due to begin his stay, several large boxes are delivered, the contents of which Charles assembles in his basement according to precise instructions. The result is a nine-foot by nine-foot iron cage, with an elaborate system of locks and hasps. Bennet arrives as arranged on July 1, and moves into the cage. He brings with him a formidable library, including works by Lawrence Durrell and T. S. Eliot, ''Moby-Dick'' and ''a book called 'Vineland.' '' There are also, Charles notes, ''two sets of powder-blue pajamas decorated by red dashes at all angles to one another. All in all it was like a summer camp for a cracked adult.''
With its grille-like walls, the cell unmistakably resembles a confessional box, and so it proves to be. The remainder of the novel recounts the two months Charles and Bennet spend together, and the bizarre, sadomasochistic dance of dialogue they perform. Bennet has come, he tells Charles, for ''a punishment . . . not a vacation,'' in secular atonement for crimes so chilling that he at first refuses to name them outright. This apparently unremarkable man has, he tells Charles flatly, ''broken every commandment'' on almost every continent.
It turns out that Bennet has had a career in what he calls ''reclamations.'' A reclaimer is someone who will, for the right price, fetch anything for anyone -- he is the ultimate Jeeves. Thus Bennet once ''gave a 9-month-old infant as a present to a man's dog,'' because the man ''wanted to see if the myth of wolves raising men could be true.'' He has procured gemstones, human organs and human beings, and trafficked them throughout the world, beyond the reach or even the knowledge of the security services. ''People like me move around, but no one knows our names,'' he tells Charles. As the novel progresses, and Charles is brought to meditate more and more explicitly on the subject of evil, it becomes apparent that Mosley has designed Bennet as a symbol rather than as a believable character. He is the agglutination of all that America would like to forget about, a demon summoned into being by the rapacities of global capitalism.
Mosley has always had a strong sense of himself as a spokesman for a collective: the diagnostician of group pathologies and the prescriber of group cures (see, for instance, his recent book ''What Next: A Memoir Toward World Peace''). ''The Man in My Basement,'' with its heavily allegorized characters, is obviously intended as a stylized commentary on the ethics of contemporary America. The first half of the novel, which Mosley spends getting Bennet into his cell in Charles's basement, feels like a fairly flimsy pretense for the ensuing dialogues on evil. The result is a book that could, without much wastage, easily be turned into a one-act play of pseudophilosophy -- the curtain rising on a white man in a cell being overemblematically catechized on the nature of evil by his African-American warder.
There are numerous minor problems with the novel, including Charles's voice, which veers implausibly between the barfly (''Life meant nothing, but I was having a good time'') and the lyricist (a woman's skin is described as being like ''a parchment, incredibly old and almost erased by age and rain, the slight gradation of color coming from sepia glyphs whose secrets were now gone''). The book's major undoing, however, is that neither Bennet nor Charles has anything insightful to say on the subject of evil. Here, for instance, is Charles on American guilt: ''I guess we all have some blood on our hands. If America does something, then the people do it too. That's why they call us Americans.'' On Iraq: ''We just fought a war against a supposedly evil man, but then if you ask what evil is, everybody has a different answer.'' And here is Bennet on American myopia: ''You think that you can have the easy life of TV and gasoline without someone suffering and dying somewhere?'' These, dismayingly enough, are the intellectual diamonds of the debate.
It would cheat Mosley out of what little suspense his novel possesses to reveal the ending; it is enough to say that it neither revokes nor redeems the triviality of what has gone before. This is a book that masquerades as a literary thriller and as a philosophical fable, but is not concentratedly strange enough to provoke tension or intelligent enough to provoke reflection. Read Hannah Arendt, read Dietrich Bonhoeffer, read St. Augustine; these writers, none of whom is alive, have far more to say about contemporary iniquity than Walter Mosley does in ''The Man in My Basement.'' Mosley's book, intended as an exposure of the banality of evil, suffers instead from the evil of banality.
Robert Macfarlane's most recent book is ''Mountains of the Mind,'' a memoir and history of mountains and the Western imagination.
