SNOW falling, the temperature plummeting and, wouldn't you know, here on the corner of Norfolk and Rivington at Schiller's Liquor Bar, the latest venture of Keith McNally with the Golden Touch, they were three-deep at the bar and waiting an hour and a half to sit down to eat. Even with the snow starting to freeze the city Wednesday, it was busier than the night before, when Kelly Tisdale, who started a tea shop in the neighborhood with Moby, had come in, and Cynthia Rowley and the New Yorker cartoonist Michael Crawford had had a late dinner after their weekly painting class. Six months old and the place has the feel of a raucous bohemian bistro that's been there forever.
''There are frequently lovely, eccentric people with accents,'' said Mr. Crawford, who comes down from the Upper West Side a few times a week on his Vespa. ''The first time, I was there about five minutes and somebody asked to buy me a drink.''
Keith McNally, 52, a schlump of a guy with graying hair and a wool sweater so old it is developing pills, was uncharacteristically going over to two tables, chatting with customers. Old friends, it turned out. Normally, he prefers being in the background.
Mr. McNally can be a funny man. It is he who devised the ratings for the house wines: ''Cheap,'' ''Decent'' and ''Good.'' It is he who designed the busboys' T-shirts, putting the instructions for dealing with a choking victim on the back of the shirts; he who took it a step further and called the Health Department to see if that would suffice for the sign every restaurant must post. Nobody quite seemed to know what he was talking about, he said.
But more often, his is a mordant sense of humor, delivered with a working-class British accent and the optimism of Oscar Levant. ''I don't know a lot of celebrities,'' he had said earlier in the day. ''I'm sure you're going to write it in such a way that looks like I do, and I don't.''
There is a paradox at the heart of Keith McNallyland. He has built an empire of stylish brasseries, each in its turn white-hot with New Yorkers willing to direct their taxis to neighborhoods they would not have dreamed of visiting. While many find themselves waiting, friends of the house are given a phone number that assures them a table.
On the other hand, Mr. McNally, unglamorous and shy, is the opposite of the power maître d'hôtel who welcomes customers and arranges a seating chart as if he were an orchestra conductor. He does not have a press agent and insists he does not court celebrities, particularly at Schiller's on the Lower East Side, after his two most recent successes, Balthazar and Pastis. Nicole Kidman? Mr. McNally had invited his old friend Anna Wintour to have lunch at Schiller's, he said, and she brought Ms. Kidman and the director Baz Luhrmann, and they sat around for four hours. It will fall to others to tell you about the night they spied Chelsea Clinton and Ian Klaus in a corner, or the evening James Gandolfini walked in. Mr. McNally reports none of this.
''The most famous person in the last couple of weeks was Charlie Rose's brother,'' he said. That evening, Mr. Rose himself walked in.
''For the longest time, I thought he was Charlie Rose's brother,'' Mr. McNally said, deadpan.
For years, Mr. McNally has created a line of winners. Asked how he does it, he says he just builds places he would like to be. But it is clear that his eye for detail extends to everything.
Tuesday morning at 10, Mr. McNally was at Schiller's for the staff meetings he schedules on weekdays. He held two crumpled paper napkins with notes from the night before, which he copied onto a yellow legal pad. The first gathering was with the general managers of Balthazar, nearby in SoHo, and Pastis, which is in the meatpacking district. There was a problem with a host at Balthazar who was ''confrontational'' with customers who lied about having reservations. Mr. McNally considered hiring a ''spotter'' to pretend to be such a customer.
And then, oh yes, there was the matter of Pastis needing to close for several hours on Feb. 26. Why would that be?
''Woody Allen shot one of his films there and he's not happy with one of his actors, so he wanted to reshoot it,'' Mr. McNally said.
A waitress stopped by. ''Pardon me, Anna Wintour -- Balthazar, 12:15.'' Mr. McNally made no response. (Later, he said he would not be dropping by to see Ms. Wintour; his staff just likes to keep him up to date on V.I.P. diners.)
The second meeting was with the young managers of Schiller's, where the focus was on service. A waiter wasn't right and would have to be fired. The young woman manager, whose job it would be, was worried. ''I've never fired anyone,'' she said.
''You've had a boyfriend -- what do you do?'' Mr. McNally said.
''Wait for them to go away,'' the woman said.
No detail is too minor for Mr. McNally's attention. The name Schiller's, he explained, came from a butcher shop in the nearby Essex Street Market that had a big part in the community's life. The chicken-wire glass windows were taken out of old factories. He loves the texture of hammered wire glass, he said, it has a look and feel that contemporary wire glass does not have.
Those wine bottles with stenciled letters that line the wall?
''I just like them,'' Mr. McNally said. ''I got 1,200 Bordeaux bottles and a corking machine, and I had my two daughters and two of their friends stencil them, 1 to 1,200. Then I filled them with wine. I could have put dyed water in them, but that didn't seem right, so I filled them with wine.''
A few people arrived for lunch. Mr. McNally pointed out Michael Portnoy, a tall, colorfully dressed man with two lengths of fabric, which may or may not be wrapped hair, descending from his hat. A neighborhood character, Mr. McNally said. Mr. Portnoy recently found the restaurant too noisy, so the staff set up a table for him downstairs, in the common washroom with the antique sink. Mr. McNally invited him to come back again that evening.
''Comp him,'' he instructed a waitress.
It occurs to this interloper that Mr. Portnoy may be as much a visual detail as the stenciled bottles and the hammered wire windows.
Schiller's cost $2 million to open, Mr. McNally said. He's yet to start paying off those costs. But the project was never about money.
''When I built this place, it was in reaction to rejecting this wonderfully wealthy guy's offer to have a Balthazar in Las Vegas,'' he explained. Steve Wynn, the hotel mogul, had wanted him to open a branch at Le Rêve, a resort scheduled to open next year. ''I was about to build another Balthazar there, and I became, um, sickened by the whole idea of being out there and reproducing another thing that I had already done,'' Mr. McNally said. ''So I returned to New York, rejected the offer and looked in the least prosperous neighborhood. I was almost cleansing myself by coming into this neighborhood and not being in Las Vegas.''
Can Mr. McNally discuss that moment of being sickened?
''I'm often sickened,'' he said. ''Which one?''
The one in Las Vegas?
''Oh, yes. Just seeing working-class people on the slot machines, and they are just the people who are paying for everybody's free hotel rooms and expensive hotel rooms.''
Mr. McNally's father was a London dockworker and cabbie, his mother an office worker; both, he has said, would have been ''terrified'' at the prospect of eating out in a fancy restaurant.
The Odeon, which Mr. McNally started in 1980 in TriBeCa with Lynn Wagenknecht, who became his first wife, and his brother Brian, was the first success. He and Ms. Wagenknecht, who had three children before their divorce, went on to create Lucky Strike and Cafe Luxembourg. Brian McNally, meanwhile, opened 150 Wooster, Indochine and Canal Bar. His latest restaurant is Cafe Lebowitz. There was a rocky period when the brothers did not speak for several years.
Keith's restaurants have made him wealthy. There's the Greenwich Village brownstone he renovated, and the place on the Vineyard. He and his second wife, Alina, 36, have an 8-month-old son, George.
Standing in the kitchen of his art-filled living room on West 11th Street, where a nanny was helping with the baby and Mr. McNally's 82-year-old father was downstairs in his own apartment watching horse races on television, Mr. McNally was wolfing down sushi, and had no desire to talk about his past.
''Boring to talk about,'' he said, crankily. Okay, he'll tell one thing: His working-class background has been helpful when it comes to understanding that some people may be intimidated by walking into the kinds of places he runs.
Mr. McNally once told a British newspaper that growing up, there was a lot of acrimony in his household. Could he elaborate?
''That's the best thing about my childhood -- none of us got along, including Mom and Dad,'' he said. ''Always arguing and fighting.''
Did they drink?
''They didn't have time to drink,'' Mr. McNally said. ''They were arguing too much.''
He went to a door off the basement and hollered down.
''Dad, come on, get up, you're needed,'' he yelled, then, to this reporter he said, ''Don't tell him the family didn't get on.'' A little laugh. ''He wouldn't agree.''
Dad, when he ambled upstairs, is trim, with a full head of gray hair.
Mr. McNally seemed to know little about his brother's latest projects. ''It's none of your business,'' he said, when asked. Later he apologized. ''I'm sorry I got testy talking about my family,'' he said. ''It's terrible I don't get along with either of my brothers, but it's a fact. It was a fact I didn't get along with them while I was growing up, so there's a consistency in the relationships.''
The lack of brotherly camaraderie is confirmed, in a joking style eerily like Keith's, by Brian. He acknowledged that his brother is ''really good'' at the business. ''No animosity or something,'' he added. ''We have different sets of friends. As well as we have any friends at all.''
When was the last time Brian saw his brother?
''I saw him in the street the other day,'' he said. ''I thought it was him. He's put on a bit of weight.'' A pause. ''He's fine. I don't feel comfortable talking about this.''
Has Brian been to Schiller's?
''Not as such.''
On Wednesday evening, at the restaurant, things were somewhat shaky. As the snow fell and this reporter was chatting with Mr. Portnoy, the artist, in the vestibule, Mr. McNally came to seek her out.
''Would you leave?'' he said. ''You're making me very nervous. This is like the interview that will never end. I'm getting physically nauseous.''
The tone was jokey, but he did go on. Are you really getting sick, Mr. McNally?
''No. Yes. Come in, have something to eat.''
Twenty minutes later, when the writer went to say goodbye, the anxieties were going another way. ''Call me tomorrow,'' Mr. McNally said. ''Ask me anything you want.''
