NAMES FOR SNOW
By Judi K. Beach.
Illustrated by Loretta Krupinski.
Unpaged. New York:
Hyperion Books for Children. $16.99. (Ages 2 to 5)
SNOW MUSIC
Written and illustrated by Lynne Rae Perkins.
Unpaged. New York:
Greenwillow Books/HarperCollins Publishers.
$15.99. (Ages 3 and up)
TRACKS IN THE SNOW
Written and illustrated by Wong Herbert Yee.
Unpaged. New York:
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $15.95. (Ages 2 to 6)
If it is really true that every snowflake is different from every other, then perhaps every book about snow differs from every other. Certainly these three superb books -- all for pre-readers -- present varied and lovely takes on that meteorological phenomenon that clogs our roads and charms our children.
Two or three things every Canadian knows about snow:
1) You ought to get it off the hockey rink before you start to play.
2) It's no fair packing the snowball so hard that it really hurts.
3) Forget that urban legend about the myriad Inuit words for snow. You can see what I mean by visiting www.urbanlegends.com/language.
Judi K. Beach, a poet, repeats this urban legend in an author's note at the beginning of ''Names for Snow,'' but I'm not letting that prevent me from hailing her book. Loretta Krupinski, the veteran illustrator of ''Mouse of My Heart'' and other books, gives us light snow, drifting snow, blowing snow, covering snow and even April snow (which Sigmund Romberg and Dorothy Fields wrote so tender a song about). Set in the form of various almost Zen-like answers to the question ''Mama, what is snow?,'' the panorama of wordplay that follows (''Call it Kitten when it sleeps in the crook of a window . . . Eyelet when it embroiders spruce . . . Tradition when it comes on Christmas'') reminds me of Wallace Stevens's ''Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird.''
While I find Krupinski's style a trifle cute, the success of her work indicates that mine is a minority opinion. The grace of the book's figurative language kept me attentive. Which then raises the perennial question: Will this delight a 2-year-old as greatly as it delights me? Who is ''Names for Snow'' for, anyway? What I suspect is that the reader will enjoy the prose and the viewer the illustrations. Each will push the other into turning the page, proceeding to the peaceful, reassuring finale.
The information page of ''Snow Music'' contains this summary: ''When a dog gets loose from the house on a snowy day, his owner searches for him and experiences the sounds of various animals and things in the snow.'' Summaries don't always do complete justice to a story. (''A lippy, wandering orphan kid named Oedipus knocks off an old man on the road to Thebes. That's when his troubles really start!'') ''Snow Music'' focuses a reader's attention on the details -- the whispers of single snowflakes hitting the ground (''peth peth peth''), the tracks of single birds -- a tactic parallel to James Joyce's snow-was-falling-all-over-Ireland scene that concludes ''The Dead.''
Viewers and readers alike will welcome the final page, which takes the entire semirural scene that we have been exploring and packs it into a snow-dome paperweight. It's the story beyond a story, the sign that -- as with all artifacts -- what you read here can be reread in another way, transformed into another kind of story. Through the dome and the window as well, the reader sees snow covering the entire narrative setting.
In the meantime, the reader-aloud can take up the story's invitation to imitate various sounds, like cars and snowplows. Just as the story works on all kinds of levels, so does its retelling, and not all of its sound is caught in language. ''Snow Music'' offers a sophisticated experience, yet that richness is accessible to all. Perkins's previous work has leapt on to more than one listing of notable books. So will ''Snow Music.''
When Poe wrote of ''crystalline delight,'' he could not have had Wong Herbert Yee's ''Tracks in the Snow'' in mind, but it would be appropriate (in case Poe is still listening). The low-key quest that occupies the narrative space -- the search for another that in fact turns out to be a self-discovery -- seems a theme as old as story itself. The little girl who narrates the tale in rhyme -- a pair of eyes and some hair trapped in a snowsuit -- learns much on her brief journey. Nonetheless, her return to the warmth of her tea-pouring mother gives us a taste of that joy we derive from Sam Gamgee's last words in ''The Lord of the Rings'': ''Well, I'm back.''
The text and illustrations work together, though Yee's illustrative style is less sharp-edged here than in his well-beloved ''Fireman Small.'' The delicacy of the colors and shapes reminds me of the subtle tones of Japanese scroll painting, which call into question the permanence of the world we perceive. In a symbolic sense, the little girl's walk represents the longer journeys we all undertake. The easy, unforced rhymes may appeal to adult reader and child viewer alike, while the contrast between the fallen snow and the warm tones of flesh and covering (wool, fur, brick) sets up a delightful balancing act. The final revelation: the girl herself was the maker of the mysterious tracks that eventually lead her right back to home. ''Tracks in the Snow'' lays down a trail well worth following.
These books share resemblances that go beyond a weather condition: they all take place in far suburban or exurban locations. Where do city children go in search of snowy adventure? Lots of places: parks, garbage-can lids, street-corner snow piles, schoolyards. The Toronto poet Dennis Lee's ''Alligator Pie'' is one of the few of those books-read-to-kids-and-later-by-kids that in fact don't restrict childhood to some idyllic rural location (it's out of print, but try the Web), while Ezra Jack Keats's classic ''Snowy Day'' continues to give street credibility to snow and is widely available.
Sure, city snow gets salted, slushed, shoveled, and generally gritted and grotted up. So what? Snow domes aren't the only way to view the world. Children's books need to break out of those Christmas-cardy glass bubbles more. Meanwhile, these offerings will beguile us all.
Children's Books Dennis Duffy teaches a new first-year program at the University of Toronto.
