A few years back I wrote a comic novel about an obsessive-compulsive business traveler whose highest goal in life was to amass a cool one million frequent-flier miles. I called the novel's setting Airworld, that climate-controlled limbo of first-class cabins, airline club rooms, suite hotels, car rental counters, newsstands and franchise restaurants that, in my view, had never been claimed for literature despite its suffusing presence in everyday life. The book was published in July 2001 to enthusiastic reviews and healthy sales; I'd caught a cultural wave, it seemed. But that changed on Sept. 11, when Airworld changed and no longer stood for the things I'd made it stand for: restlessness, mad optimism, escape, material opportunity and the promise -- however foolish or emotionally unworkable -- of perpetual self-renewal through forward motion.
As the headlines lately keep reminding us (a series of canceled flights from Europe and Mexico, multiple scramblings of fighter escorts and the initiation of a program to photograph and fingerprint some deplaning foreign visitors), there is no such thing as civil aviation now. From check-in to landing, flying has become a sustained paramilitary operation, and the flier himself a reluctant citizen soldier, caught up Yossarian-style in a conflict he has precious little information about, even as he's being asked to fight it -- possibly to the death. Off somewhere behind the ticket counters, shoeshine stands and baggage carousels, hidden commanders and government officials are waging a war whose troops are coach-class ticketholders. Welcome to J.F.K. International Airport -- you're in the army now.
How quickly we've grown accustomed to wearing our uniforms -- and to taking them off upon request. Not long ago, while passing through security on a flight from Bozeman, Mont., to Minneapolis, I stood behind a swaggering United States senator as he meekly stepped out of his fancy black cowboy boots and joked about the odor of his old socks. The guards didn't smile, they just carried on searching people, opening laptops, clawing through toilet kits and confiscating anything with an edge. Any sense of violation was long gone. It was a drill, this procedure -- right foot, march. Indeed, there were many in line who seemed competitive about their mastery of the maneuvers, disassembling cameras, unbuckling belts and producing pocketed mobile phones in one continuous swift determined motion that reminded me of boot-camp graduates breaking down and cleaning their M-16's.
These fliers didn't just want to stay safe; they wanted to win. They wanted to prevail, partly by rapidly proving that they weren't terrorists so as to free up the security staff to spend more time eyeing and hassling those who might be, and partly by setting such a lofty standard for cooperation with the authorities that anyone with less than honest intentions would suffer a panic attack or run away. For the good guys, and I count myself among them, every commercial flight at every stage is an act of low-level aggression toward the hypothetical bad guys looming nearby. Our willingness to salute and follow orders -- to cheerfully surrender forgotten nail clippers, repeatedly flourish driver's licenses and passports and serenely sit out mysterious flight delays -- is a pointed display of martial discipline. We're united, we're tough and we're patient, it tells the bad guys. With seatmates like us, you cowards won't have a chance.
But after a while, battle fatigue sets in. We miss our footloose old civilian lives and wonder what, in fact, we're flying and fighting for. To get places quickly? That's no longer possible, since the shortest commuter hop takes a solid five hours now and could easily take twice that long (or never come off at all), depending on the alert status that day. To relax and enjoy the view? That's hard to do with an F-16 off the right wingtip and the young man beside you bending to tie his shoelace, which suddenly looks eerily like a fuse. To please the parents with a holiday visit? Well, my mother, for one, goes pale and sleepless the instant that I announce I'm flying to see her, and her fears don't subside until I'm safely back home -- particularly if I'm flying with her grandkids. Just call me more often, she tells me. Don't be a hero.
The airlines know it's a battlefield up there -- perilous, uncertain and exhausting -- so they're struggling to give people new reasons to fly. Take Song, Delta's new service, which markets itself to travelers as a luxury entertainment experience -- a kind of foreshortened Caribbean cruise. Then there's United Airlines' new spinoff, Ted, whose cutesy name seems designed to hide the fact that it's an airline at all. Ted's planes will carry their own house brand of beer and offer multichannel entertainment systems for a truly womblike flying experience akin to the one now provided by JetBlue, which will soon add onboard satellite radio to complement its in-flight television programming.
But in the end the soundest reason for individuals to fly these days (someday it may be the only reason) is to keep the collective flying, to boost morale. A central principle of aerodynamics holds that lift is a function of momentum, and when this momentum slows, the aircraft sinks. Right now the whole nervous country is an aircraft, and it feels as if it's up to us, the soldier passengers, to keep it airborne. We're marching in the skies. Yes, it's unpleasant; yes, it's frightening; and yes, it's chronically humiliating. But retreat is an option only on the ground. The terror war is chiefly an air war.
And so we shut our eyes and flap our arms, hoping, grimly hoping, it's enough.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-18-04 Walter Kirn, a frequent contributor to the magazine, is the author, most recently, of ''Up in the Air,'' a novel.
