PICKUP trucks bearing Japanese nameplates are nothing new in the United States. Nissan started selling such a truck, the Datsun 1000, in 1959.
But for decades, while the Japan-based auto companies wedged a toe into the passenger car market -- followed by a foot, an arm and a couple of legs -- they confined their pickup efforts mostly to small, inexpensive, relatively economical models. Detroit's Big Three had the full-size truck market, with its remarkably loyal customers, locked up.
Toyota's first effort at making a larger truck, the T-100, wasn't enthusiastically received. Its second try, the Tundra, did better, but it was not quite full-size either, falling short of pickups from Chrysler, Ford and General Motors in physical dimensions, power, payload and towing capacity.
While Toyota took a common-sense approach, reasoning that customers might appreciate a pickup that was a bit smaller, a little gentler and a tad more polished, Nissan is confronting the Big Three head-on. Its 2004 Titan is just as big as high-volume models from Chevrolet, Ford, GMC and Dodge, and it matches or exceeds those trucks in power, towing capability and payload.
Nissan concentrated on one basic truck with two types of cabins: the King Cab, with two rear-hinged back doors that interlock with the front doors, and the Crew Cab, with four regular doors hinged at the front. In testament to how strong demand for roomy cabins has become, Nissan will not build Titans with the conventional two-door, one-seat, regular-cab configuration.
Nissan also decided to forgo an 8-foot cargo box, offering instead a 6 1/2-foot box for the King Cab and a 5 1/2-foot box with the Crew Cab. With these configurations, Nissan avoids the very long versions that are awkward to maneuver and hard to park.
All Titans share a very stiff, fully boxed steel frame with an independent coil spring front suspension and a solid rear axle with dual-rate leaf springs. The rear shock absorbers are positioned outside the frame for a better ride. Brakes are four-wheel discs with an antilock function and electronic brake-force distribution.
All Titans have a new 5.6-liter V-8 engine, a double-overhead-cam power plant that develops 305 horsepower and 379 pounds-feet of torque -- the pulling power that is crucial in hauling and towing. The engine matches up well against G.M.'s 5.3-liter V-8 (295 horsepower and 330 pounds-feet); Ford's 5.4-liter V-8 (300 horsepower, 365 pounds-feet); and Dodge's 5.7-liter Hemi V-8 (345 horsepower, 375 pounds-feet).
Nissan offers a choice of two- or four-wheel drive, but only one transmission, a five-speed, electronically controlled automatic. In this class, only Nissan and Dodge have five-speed automatics.
The shifter is mounted on the steering column on models with bench seats, and you can shift manually (or hold the transmission in a gear) by moving a small toggle switch on the lever. On versions with individual captains' chairs, the shifter is in a console between the seats.
Four-by-four versions can be shifted into four-wheel mode, or out of it, while moving (''on the fly''). But you must stop the truck to shift to low range for slow, heavy-duty operation. In one instance in which the Titan falls short, it has a part-time four-wheel-drive system that shouldn't be used on dry pavement. Dodge has joined G.M. in offering trucks with full-time four-wheel drive.
Nissan put a lot of thought into its cargo box. Standard on the LE and effectively $1,800 extra on the SE, the box is factory-coated with a spray-on liner, and there are tracks with adjustable tie-down cleats -- a boon to owners who carry odd-shaped cargo. A locking storage drawer, under the bed on the driver's side, holds small items.
Unfortunately, Nissan's heavy tailgate is hard to close. Ford's tailgate, with torsion-bar assist, has the advantage here.
The Titan's safety equipment also sets a standard for pickups, with available front-seat side-impact and side-curtain air bags, an option that costs $850 plus an additional off-road package. (The Dodge Ram now offers side curtain bags, but not side-impact bags for the front seat.)
In addition, the Titan's front air bags are dual-stage units that deploy with varying force, or not at all, based on safety-belt and occupant-position sensors. Nissan says the Titan, with its lowered front frame, complies with voluntary standards for crash compatibility with cars.
Nissan has priced the Titan aggressively, about $2,000 less than the competition. But the Big Three's trucks currently come with rebates of up to $2,500 plus low- or no-interest financing.
My test truck was a two-wheel-drive SE Crew Cab with a base price of $26,700. The total sticker was $30,300, with a $900 package that included a split front bench seat and several audio and convenience features; a $950 off-road package; an $850 towing package with an electronic stability control; and the $900 cargo-bed upgrade.
If the aggressive styling doesn't convince you, a drive quickly makes it clear that Nissan has met the Big Three head-on, rather than dancing around them as Toyota did with its seven-eighths-scale Tundra. (However, the new, larger 2004 Tundra Double Cab is fully competitive.)
While Toyota aims for refinement, Nissan emphasizes machismo. Toyota, Chevy and Ford trucks are smoother, quieter and, well, slicker.
The Titan's engine roars while accelerating and drones while driving. That makes it more like the Dodge, and no doubt has just the effect that Nissan wanted -- to advertise the truck's considerable power.
Some of the Titan's good response, especially at low speed, can be attributed to the five-speed transmission, one of the smoothest-shifting gearboxes I have encountered in a car or a truck. The extra gear makes for strong pulling power at moderate speeds, yet allows a proper cruising gear that improves fuel economy on the highway. My test truck was rated at 14 m.p.g. in town and 19 on the highway, not very good but comparable to other trucks'.
Despite my truck's off-road specifications, the ride was acceptable. There was some jiggling and nervousness on rough roads, but control over large undulations was excellent. In general, the ride was not as good as the Ford's but easily better than the Dodge's.
On washboard pavement, the stability control stepped in to prevent the rear axle from hopping around. A six-inch snowfall provided a test of winter traction, which proved very good for a two-wheel-drive pickup, with the stability control helping to keep the rear wheels from spinning.
The Titan has rack-and-pinion steering with variable power assistance. On the highway, the steering was nicely weighted and the response felt correct. But in low-speed maneuvers, the response seemed slow, requiring considerable winding of the steering wheel.
The cab is roomy, especially the rear seat of the Crew Cab. The front bench seat is comfortable, with a wide center armrest full of storage compartments.
The rear seat is split into two sections, with both folding up against the rear wall to create a large, flat floor. This arrangement, also used by Ford and Dodge, is much better than the station-wagon system of the G.M. and Toyota pickups, whose back seat folds down onto the floor.
There are other thoughtful touches: the windows in the Crew Cab's rear doors roll down all the way. The King Cab's rear doors swing out nearly 180 degrees, making it easier to load packages in tight parking lots.
For most of the things a big pickup needs to do, the Titan performs just as well as the trucks from G.M., Ford and Dodge, but the Big Three need not worry too much right away. Nissan will build only 100,000 Titans this year, in a market of 2.3 million full-size trucks, at its new plant in Canton, Miss.
How does the Titan fit into the mix? After a week with one, I'd say that truck buyers looking for smoothness might be happier with pickups from Toyota or Chevy/GMC, but those looking for a tough, macho-looking package would do better with the Nissan than the Dodge. Still, the new Ford F-150, which successfully blends slickness with toughness, remains my favorite full-size truck.
INSIDE TRACK: Just out of the box but already worth watching.
Behind the Wheel
