IN the nearly 12 years Randy Florke and his partner, Sean Maloney, have been together, they have renovated 11 homes, created four businesses, opened a restaurant and adopted three children. And while all this was going on, one of them ran the office of a United States president.
One or two of these endeavors would surely tax the equilibrium of a moderately even-keeled couple. But Mr. Florke, a designer and entrepreneur, and Mr. Maloney, a lawyer and the staff secretary in President Bill Clinton's second term, seem preternaturally mellow.
The other day, Mr. Florke, 41, and Mr. Maloney, 37, juggled an interview with the diversions of their daughters, Daley, 3, and Essie, 1, in the living room of their just-renovated 11th home, a 1,400-square-foot prewar apartment on East 28th Street. (Their son, Jesus, 14, whom they adopted when he was 3 1/2, had just gone back to his second year of boarding school, in a New Hampshire town not far from the one where Mr. Maloney grew up.)
''Life is nuts and you have to find what grounds you,'' Mr. Maloney said. In Washington (house No. 4 was near Dupont Circle), Jesus played both Little League and soccer and Mr. Maloney never missed a game. His presence was a testament to the Clinton administration's ideas about family, he said, and his own discipline. ''I just walked out the door,'' he explained. ''Sometimes that's all it takes.''
Mr. Maloney likes to say that gay parenting is the ultimate version of planned parenthood, but theirs has been as accidental as some first pregnancies.
Four months after the two met -- Mr. Maloney was on the advance team scouting New York for the Democratic convention that year and Mr. Florke was working for the decorator Juan Pablo Molyneux -- Jesus appeared. He was the grandson of Mr. Molyneux's chauffeur; Mr. Florke had been told of the man's worries about the boy, whose parents were battling drug addiction. Mr. Florke asked if he could help out one day. Soon, Jesus was spending weekends with Mr. Maloney and Mr. Florke. When Jesus's mother died, they adopted him.
''I always knew I wanted to have children,'' Mr. Florke said, ''but I never really knew how it would be possible. You worry: 'Do I have enough money? Do I have the right job?' What you realize is it just falls into place.''
In 1994, Mr. Florke opened the Rural Collection, a store on Perry Street from which he sold the chipped-paint, country-style furniture of his native Iowa. Jesus took his naps in the whitewashed drawers of the old dressers. Mr. Maloney, who post-convention had spent six months working in Little Rock, came back to New York and joined Wilke, Farr and Gallagher, a law firm; Mr. Florke and Mr. Maloney started looking for a house in Sullivan County.
Farmhouse No. 1, as we'll call it, was a total redo, and that process -- the reimagining of a 19th century tear-down into a spiffy abstraction of itself -- shifted Mr. Florke's job description from designer with a good eye into a kind of superstylist, a packager of rural life. (He is also a contributing editor at Country Living magazine.) It took a few houses -- three in three years, Mr. Maloney said with a sigh -- for Mr. Florke to realize that not only could he remake a house for himself, he could spot them, sell them, and redo them as a business.
His store windows were soon papered with photographs of Sullivan County houses, and Mr. Florke got his real estate license. Before long, the houses took over. The store became a brokerage, the Rural Connection.
Eight years later, Mr. Florke, a former model and the son of a farmer, has almost single-handedly repackaged his part of the Catskills into his own Willa Cather-like vision. He even has a restaurant, the Kitchen.
One house, an 1820's parish house slowly disintegrating in a cemetery in Sullivan Country, was Mr. Florke's platonic absolute. He obsessed about it for years; when the town condemned it, he bought it for $1, and then took it apart, piece by piece. He numbered and diagrammed not just the components, but the angle they'd been set at. He wanted the house exactly as he'd seen it, its clapboards slightly parted and listing at oddly appealing angles. Two years later, the house was up, all the bits perfectly askew.
''BECAUSE of building codes, we essentially built a new house and slipped the elements on top of it, like the siding and flooring,'' Mr. Florke said. ''It made me realize I could do the whole thing new.''
It was a gotcha moment. He started his third business, a modular-home company. The kits are cleaned-up versions of his parish house, with prices from $125,000 to $300,000 (www.theruralconnection.com).
One night in 1998, Mr. Maloney was in India, at a state dinner with the president, when he received a cellphone call, intricately patched through Air Force One. Mr. Florke had seen a house in Harlem and, well, he'd bought it. ''I said, 'Uh, it's not really a good time to talk,' '' Mr. Maloney said. ''This is sort of the pattern. He pretends I'm part of the decision, but he's gone ahead and done it anyway. This is how Daley arrived. I was in Los Angeles, and I got a phone call. She was just 5 days old, and Randy said, 'What do you think, I don't want to do this without you.' And it turned out later he'd adopted her on the spot.''
The Harlem house is on Sylvan Terrace, a cobblestone dead-end street near 160th and St. Nicholas Avenue. The street is weirdly timeless -- in part because it's traffic-free -- lined with clapboard row houses built in the middle of the 19th century. They bought the house for $168,000 and sold it last year for $700,000, a record for Harlem and Washington Heights, according to Todd Stevens, their broker at Douglas Elliman.
It was in many ways the perfect family house -- and also all wrong. ''We had two babies -- Essie had arrived -- and they just wanted to hurl themselves down the stairs,'' Mr. Florke said. ''It wasn't an easy place to childproof.''
The apartment on 28th Street, which they bought for $665,000 and spent about $25,000 renovating -- they made three bedrooms out of two -- has the feel of a house, and some roots, too. ''I wanted to get into politics, and we wanted to find a permanent place,'' Mr. Maloney said. After the White House, he helped start Kiodex, a risk-management, commodities and derivatives company. He'd like to run for City Council in 2005. ''It seemed right to do it in the neighborhood where we met and started a family,'' he explained.
Mr. Maloney said that all those years ago, a friend counseled, ''Shouldn't you tell your parents you're gay before you adopt a child with another man?'' ''I was 25,'' Mr. Maloney said, ''and I hadn't come out yet. I think in some ways Jesus made it easier. It gave my parents and I some common ground. Whatever their fears and preconceived notions were about what it meant to be gay had to be integrated with the healthy family they saw us creating.''
Habitats | East 28th Street  Correction:  January 25, 2004, Sunday  The Habitats column last Sunday, about a couple who have adopted three children and renovated 11 homes in the last 12 years, misspelled the name of a law firm that once employed Sean Maloney, one of the adoptive parents. It is Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, not Wilke.
