Foot soldiers for Howard Dean are bivouacked near here in a rustic church camp, where they relish sleeping on bare, plastic-covered mattresses and bundling up for midnight trips to nearby bathrooms as part of their service in the Iowa caucus campaign.
''It is really not that much hardship,'' Kristen Clardy, an 18-year-old University of Oregon student who is one of about 65 Dean volunteers bunking at what they have dubbed Camp Dean about 20 miles outside Des Moines, said on Saturday. ''It is a really great way to meet Dean supporters from all over the place. We are just a community.''
Ms. Clardy is just one of thousands of political activists who have taken up temporary residence in Iowa to play a role in Monday's caucuses. Some have been here for months, burrowing into communities around the state. Others like Ms. Clardy arrived in the past week. Some are drawing checks, others paying their own way. Many have taken an extended leave from their previous lives, saying goodbye to jobs, friends and family to hit the pavement for their candidates in the first stage of the 2004 presidential race.
''My wife supports me 100 percent on this,'' said Jack Carte, a West Virginia steelworker who has been in Iowa since Jan. 2, as he worked Saturday to turn out caucusgoers for Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri.
Steve Chasse, a field organizer for Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, has been here much longer. Mr. Chasse, 32, is a former high-tech consultant who sold his possessions in a garage sale and moved his wife and two young sons to Iowa from Boston last May to work for the Kerry campaign. While his wife, Julie, supported the move, she seldom catches a glimpse of him. The two hours they spent at a recent Warren County Democratic Committee supper was the closest thing they have had to a date in months, and he was on the opposite side of the room most of the night, working the crowd.
''There have been some difficult sacrifices,'' Mr. Chasse said. ''But they've been well worth it. This is what I came here to do.''
For campaign staff members like Mr. Chasse, the low-paid workhorses of the Democratic campaigns, these last days before the Iowa caucuses are their chance to prove that the months of making contacts, memorizing talking points and honing political skills have paid off.
Many of these workers, who execute on the ground the strategy created by campaign organizers, arrived four to eight months ago for jobs that pay as little as $1,000 a month. For that, they spend their days courting supporters with telephone pitches, door-to-door canvassing and schmoozing at local events.
In the summer and early fall it was not uncommon for staff members from competing campaigns to hang out together, talking politics and sharing tips for living on the cheap. Relationships, romantic and otherwise, took root. But as the political stakes here have grown higher, the workdays longer and the barbs between their candidates nastier, the mingling has ground to a near halt.
''We're all working 15 to 18 hours a day at this point,'' said Laura Capps, 31, the Iowa press secretary for the Kerry campaign. ''Maybe at 11 o'clock at night, when we're near the end of a hard-fought day we might relax for a minute. Maybe.''
Jeri Powell, a field organizer for Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, made a point to get the West Coast feed of HBO when she moved into an apartment with three fellow staff members, so she could catch her favorite show, ''Curb Your Enthusiasm,'' after 11 p.m.
She said the closest thing to down time she had enjoyed recently was a self-congratulatory midnight pause for pizza and beer after Mr. Edwards stopped by headquarters to tell his staff that he was being endorsed by The Des Moines Register.
''It was so great and spontaneous,'' said Ms. Powell, 26, a North Carolina native who quit a job in Los Angeles as talent agent trainee to join the Edwards campaign.
Responsible for building support in 30 precincts in Des Moines, Ms. Powell, like field organizers in other campaigns, cultivates and manages relationships with precinct captains. She calls them daily with updates on the day's talking points and to trade information on new and potential supporters.
''We're doing very well, so don't stress out,'' she told a dispirited precinct captain who had called to say that he was having trouble reaching people by phone on a sunny, unseasonably warm Saturday afternoon.
When she first arrived, Ms. Powell vowed to eat at least one healthy meal a day. Most days now, the closest she comes to a fruit or vegetable is the pink grapefruit-flavored lip balm she dabs on between phone calls and events.
Far away from the crowded campaign scene in Des Moines, Matt Baldwin has been running a seat-of-the-pants field operation in Algona, a rural town in the north of the state.
After graduating from Yale last May, Mr. Baldwin, 22, drove to Iowa with a friend to volunteer for Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont. In September he was rewarded with a paid position as the campaign's sole organizer for Kossuth and Hancock Counties.
Arriving with no computer, patchy cellphone service and not nearly enough money to cover rent and office space, Mr. Baldwin relied heavily on the kindness of strangers. He queued for computer time in high school libraries and made campaign calls from the kitchen of Iris Hinton, a 75-year-old widow who took him in rent free -- a living arrangement common for campaign staff members in rural areas.
The free housing was supposed to be for just a week. ''But after the second week he said he sure did like staying here,'' Ms. Hinton said. ''So I told him he could stay as long as he liked.''
The relative isolation -- Algona is a two-and-a-half-hour drive north from Des Moines -- has forced Mr. Baldwin to mix almost entirely with local residents, a situation, he said, that though awkward at first has been a huge plus.
''I've lived in New York all my life, so it's cool to live someplace where people say hello to you when you walk into a place,'' Mr. Baldwin said. Mr. Chasse, the Kerry campaign worker, says that while some of these younger people may have joined the campaigns to expand their résumés, he is willing to withstand the poor hours and poor pay for another reason.
''For me, it's about trying to make sure we have the candidate who can provide the best future for my children,'' said Mr. Chasse, who is older than most of the workers and one of the few with children.
Few of these entry-level staff members are guaranteed jobs with their campaign when the caucuses are over. Some may move on to New Hampshire, which holds its primaries on Jan. 27; others may return to wherever they came from.
''Right now everyone's just focused on the 19th,'' said Mr. Baldwin, as he prepared for an afternoon of meetings with Dean supporters in a final push to encourage them to attend the crucial caucuses on Monday.
''We'll think about January 20 when it gets here.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CAMPAIGN WORKERS
