PRESIDENT BUSH prides himself on thinking big, whether it's a $1 trillion tax cut, a huge expansion of Medicare or, as this past week, sending Americans to Mars.
But if there is a single consistent theme to the current White House and Congress, fiscal hawks say, it's buy now and pay later.
From Medicare and Mars to the expansion of tax-free retirement accounts, these critics say, the Bush administration and Congress are contemplating commitments that work like balloon mortgages: small costs up front and huge bills down the road.
Administration officials contend that the prospective problems are overblown and that the deficits will decline sharply as a result of spending restraint and faster economic growth, which will lead to higher tax revenues.
Martin Anderson, a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, who served as the domestic policy adviser to President Ronald Reagan, says critics of Mr. Bush are misguided because long-term deficits are almost impossible to calculate and because so much depends on the pace of economic growth.
''If you want to do something that's really scary, go back four years and see what people were projecting then, or the four years before that,'' said Mr. Anderson, noting that forecasters failed to predict the flood of tax revenue that came during the boom of the late 1990's and failed to predict the economy's recent resurgence.
''Did anyone predict the last 8.2 percent growth that we had in the third quarter?'' Mr. Anderson asked.
Stronger economic growth is already lifting tax revenues. The Treasury Department noted that corporate tax revenues jumped by about one-third compared with a year ago in the three months from October through December.
But some government officials say they are growing nervous about looming bills. Douglas Holtz-Eakin, formerly the chief economist on President Bush's Council of Economic Advisers and now director of the Congressional Budget Office, said the growing pile of unpaid bills could become a drag on future growth.
''Growth, in the end, is about giving up something now in order to invest it in the future,'' Mr. Holtz-Eakin remarked as Congress was struggling to pass the new Medicare prescription drug benefit. ''If you look at the budget proposals, many of them are not about giving up stuff now. They are about getting stuff now.''
The federal budget deficit this year is likely to approach $500 billion, a record. President Bush has vowed to cut that number in half over the next five years, a goal that many analysts say is unrealistic. But even if he succeeds, consider the bills that could come due after that.
The new space mission would cost only $1 billion in new money over the next five years -- $11 billion will come from other NASA programs. But that would be just a down payment.
The cost of establishing a base on the moon by 2020, as President Bush proposed last week, could easily cost $150 billion or more, said John E. Pike, director of GlobalSecurity.com, a research group in Arlington, Va. The cost of a manned mission to Mars almost defies projection, but when the first President Bush proposed a Mars mission in 1989 the estimates were about $400 billion.
The virtue of the space mission is that Congress can abandon it long before the heaviest spending is required. But it will be harder to escape many other bills that start to come due about 10 years from now.
Consider the cost of eliminating the so-called inheritance tax, which is supposed to be phased out slowly. Richard Kogan, an economist at the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, a liberal-leaning research and advocacy group, estimates the Treasury would lose $26 billion in 2009, $60 billion when the tax is fully repealed in 2010, and more each year after that.
Likewise, most of Mr. Bush's tax cuts are scheduled to expire at some point over the next decade, but the president has vowed to make almost all of them permanent. Similarly, scores of small tax breaks are routinely extended by Congress. The Congressional Budget Office estimated last summer that retaining all these tax provisions would increase the federal deficit by $1.5 trillion by 2013.
Then there is the alternative minimum tax, which was intended to prevent wealthy taxpayers from using deductions and tax shelters to shield much of their income.
The legislation creating the tax did not allow income to be adjusted for inflation, meaning that millions of additional nonwealthy families will fall under its requirements and face sharply higher taxes in the years ahead.
Republican and Democratic lawmakers all want to stop that from happening, but the cost in lost tax revenue through 2014 would be more than $400 billion.
The next big bills to come due will be those for the new Medicare prescription drug program, which Congress passed late last year. The program is expected to cost $400 billion through 2013, but that is just the start. Given the rapidly growing numbers of retirees, the Congressional Budget Office estimates that it will cost more than $1 trillion over the decade that begins in 2014.
Prescription drug costs are just one piece of the biggest bill of all coming due: the cost of health care and retirement benefits for some 75 million baby boomers who will start to reach retirement age early in the next decade.
''There is a fundamental disconnect between these big sweeping agendas and the limited-government tax policies that the administration is pursuing,'' said Robert L. Bixby, executive director of the Concord Coalition, an advocacy group that lobbies for tighter fiscal discipline. ''In any particular year, this is something you can afford. But in order to be manageable, you have to have somebody managing. And right now, there is nobody managing.''
Conservative Republican lawmakers are starting to rebel.
''We've got to change our whole mind-set,'' said Representative Sue Myrick, Republican of North Carolina and chairwoman of the House Republican Study Committee. ''I come from an area where people are real supportive of space exploration, but they are saying we ought to deal with the problems at home first. We cannot afford to keep spending the way we have and expect to get away with it.''
Get Ready for 2014
