SEARCH PARTY
Collected Poems of William Matthews.
Edited by Sebastian Matthews
and Stanley Plumly.
314 pp. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company. $26.
IN MY FATHER'S
FOOTSTEPS
A Memoir.
By Sebastian Matthews.
278 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $24.95.
Some poets get noticed because they sound like no one else; others become representative voices, symbols or symptoms of their group or generation. William Matthews, who died at 55 in 1997, belongs to the latter category. Matthews's three decades of wry, conversational verse display the attractions and faults of a period style; his son's memoir finds in the poet's life the tastes, habits and privileges that made the poems what they were.
Raised in Ohio, educated at Yale and the University of North Carolina, Matthews joined the great expansion in the teaching of university-based ''creative writing'' that marked the late 1960's and early 70's, climbing to posts at Cornell, the University of Colorado and the University of Washington before departing in 1983 after charges of sexual misconduct. Matthews decamped to New York City, which he loved; he taught in the CUNY system and worked in arts organizations, becoming president of the Poetry Society of America. Matthews once said that such work showed him ''the world of ordinary life, business, journalism, publicity, rentin' the hall, gettin' the crowd out.''
Even before he took on such jobs, Matthews sought to depict ordinary life, and addressed an imagined crowd in his own poems, describing his Midwestern childhood, his favorite jazz, his travels, romances, rivalries and daily complaints. His first collection, ''Ruining the New Road'' (1970), offered a quiet lyricism with surrealist touches; Matthews later grew more discursive, drier, given to longer anecdotes. Yet Matthews did not change suddenly, or very much; his work offers no surface difficulties, and little formal bravura. Instead his technique approximates offhand speech: ''The new road runs into / the old road, turn / west when your ankles hurt.'' The poems depend on our accepting his personality as interesting and likable, his declarations as intuitive truths.
Matthews shared these goals with many poets his age or somewhat older, from Gerald Stern to Stephen Dobyns or Stephen Dunn. He differs from them largely in seeming more attentive to an audience, more sociable, with a ''desperate American friendliness'': ''the poem will be the party,'' he wrote, ''to honor whomever I read it to.'' Later poems compare themselves implicitly to gossip, ''truest about who says it'': like gossip, they want to be repeated and passed on. He therefore favored epigrams, detachable sentences made easy to quote; these often describe an undefined ''we'' or a generic ''you.'' ''What we have lost / you may guess by what we have kept.'' ''We're most ourselves when we know surely / what we love, and whom.'' ''You are the story of your childhood / and you're under constant revision.'' Echoing Martial and Horace (whom he translated), Matthews's poems also tell jokes (masturbation is ''a spot of body work at O' / Nan's Auto Service'') or incorporate chatty asides: ''I hate the way / academic life can function as a sort / of methadone program for the depressed.''
Like his beloved jazzmen, Matthews tried to make his craft sound easy; sometimes he succeeded too well. As the introduction to ''Search Party'' explains, a truly collected Matthews would include more than 800 published poems; this volume has just 165, with 26 previously unpublished in book form and 139 from his 10 earlier books of poetry, including the posthumous ''After All.'' Even in this selection by Sebastian Matthews and Stanley Plumly, the poems (especially those of the 1980's) become disconcerting in their professional fluency: Matthews, like a busy touring musician, completed each performance, and then moved on.
The analogy is not mine alone. In his memoir, ''In My Father's Footsteps,'' Sebastian Matthews writes that his father ''led the working poet's life,'' with its ''countless part-time gigs and readings,'' ''nights in hotels'' and ''fans who loved you or wanted a piece of you.'' To say this is to take poetry for a lifestyle: Sebastian's memoir tries to understand that lifestyle, and to find something in it to admire. His father was, Sebastian writes: ''A loyal friend who, in his own estimation, failed completely in marriage. A generous and beloved teacher who hit on his students.'' Matthews played many sports enthusiastically, but ''smoked and drank too much,'' ''bought wine by the case and drank it nightly by the bottle.'' ''That he slept with his students was an open secret. I don't think he could help himself.''
Matthews's life and his poetry together suggest the disadvantages of a system (academic creative writing) and a period style (accessible, autobiographical free verse) that asked poets to be only themselves writ large. Those hypertrophied selves, in life and in art, became spectacles of appetite, with readers, colleagues and students invited to watch: the poet was having more fun than anyone else -- he had to be holding court in order to feel comfortable,'' his son writes -- and his guests were free to join in.
These situations encouraged a few good books (think of John Berryman's ''77 Dream Songs''), but they depended on concentrated male privilege and on institutional support for it, in ways that now seem shocking (and are rightly penalized, too). Matthews's poems can suggest his sexual exploits, but do not reveal their extent. Planning a trip out of town, he once arranged for ''one of his University of Washington graduate students'' to stay in the house with Sebastian (then in 11th grade); after holding a class at home, ''my father took me aside and told me I could choose whomever I wanted. . . . They'd all agree to stay, he was sure, so it was my choice. I caught on.'' Sebastian later ''wanted to ask my dad if he hooked me up with the baby sitter on purpose,'' thus ''making me complicit in a life lived on the edge of control.'' The incident seems, on the contrary, a demonstration of control: Matthews proved that he could get any of his women graduate students to sleep with his son. When trouble came, Sebastian felt bad for his father, ''blacklisted from the academic world.''
The delights of Manhattan helped him recover. ''Through three official marriages and two unofficial ones, my father somehow always remained a bachelor,'' and ''a cool father, as fathers go.'' The memoir begins and ends at William's death; in between, Sebastian sees his parents divorce, spends grade school with his mother, high school with his father and his 20's on his own, trying ''to look like him, dress like him,'' writing poems as he did and ''getting drunk and fooling around with as many young women as I could.'' Later chapters build up to Sebastian's realization that ''I had inherited my issues concerning sex from my father''; in Ann Arbor, hoping ''to prove, once and for all, that I was a capable lover,'' Sebastian dates one of his own students before meeting his wife, Ali, and mending his ways.
Sebastian's prose can have the transparency and the unguardedness of a good monologue; parts might sound right on public radio. Other parts sound (to put it tactfully) unpolished: ''Ali's demon happened to be the two-headed monster of depression and arthritis''; ''A hailstorm of grief and harm came raining down on his head.'' Sebastian's mother, Marie Harris -- who suffered as ''Mrs. Professor, Mrs. Poet's Wife, cook, cleaner, chauffeur'' -- finally became a writer of some distinction (she is now the poet laureate of New Hampshire); Sebastian quotes his mother's poems alongside his father's, and appreciates her later life.
Most readers of Sebastian's book, however, will go there to learn about William; they will find it kinder, but less insightful, than William's poems. His prose poem ''Gossip'' explains: ''They thought me miserable because they couldn't imagine themselves behaving so badly out of weakness or choice, but only if they were overcome by a superior force. . . . I behaved badly on my own, and they can do it, too.'' Such self-disparagement gave Matthews his most effective tone. At his best (''Spring Snow,'' ''Mingus at the Showplace'') Matthews's focus on his subjects overrides his garrulity to give the work notable form. Less exceptional poems may include well-observed moments: a poet is ''like a weather vane, a rooster / soldered to his useless work.'' Then there is the wonderful opening to ''The Accompanist,'' words to live by disguised as advice for jazz sidemen: ''Don't play too much, don't play / too loud, don't play the melody.'' No one will say, in a few years, of a new poem, that it sounds like William Matthews and like him alone; we may read him, though, to see how one cohort of American writers felt, what pleasures and what regrets accompanied their lives.
Stephen Burt is the author of ''Randall Jarrell and His Age.'' He teaches at Macalester College in St. Paul.
