IT has become fashionable to bemoan the state of French cuisine in its natural habitat, particularly in Paris: its top chefs are said to have lost their creative edge, and its restaurants are deemed too expensive.
Hogwash. Paris is the best eating city in the world. Far from being the Fabulous Invalid, its restaurant scene is based on what may be the world's most solid bedrock of talented, well-trained chefs. The city has the best, the largest and the broadest selection of really good restaurants offering great price-quality ratios. The list of places where you can get a seriously good three-course French meal for $60 or under a person is nearly inexhaustible.
There are the restaurants that have always been bargains (l'Ambassade d'Auvergne, for example) and, more recently, the restaurants created by graduates of Christian Constant's kitchen at the Hotel Crillon, with dinner menus at under $35 or $40. Yves Camdeborde, at the popular La Régalade, in the 14th Arrondissement, was the first of these mavericks. Now Mr. Constant himself has joined the crowd. Near his one-star Violon d'Ingres in the Seventh Arrondissement, he has just opened Café Constant, a tabaclike setting where a three-course dinner of very good bistro-bar food can come to under $30, not counting wine.
No, these are not earth-shaking gastronomic experiences like those of Ferran Adrià, at El Bulli in Rosas, in Catalonia. But truthfully, is that what you want to eat every night? Rather, this is the comfort food that might be served in heaven. Creative or textbook classic, it is as reassuring and life-affirming as a perfect spring day. Oh, by the way, Parisians themselves eat in these restaurants.
Chez Michel
Thierry Breton, a graduate of Christian Constant's kitchen, could easily have earned a couple of Michelin stars. Instead, he opted to serve delectable three-course meals for $38 a person. On a pretty corner behind the church of St.-Vincent de Paul, Mr. Breton has taken over the location and name of a former two-star restaurant, Chez Michel, keeping much of the red-velvet-banquette mullioned-window décor, though he's cut a gaping hole in the dining room to open up the basement, creating a total of 70 places.
A son of Brittany, Mr. Breton highlights local, seasonal foodstuffs. The flavorful bird called coucou de Rennes, for example, or a sensational salad of roasted langoustines and artichoke hearts. These dishes generally appear as blackboard specials, usually seasonal -- and they always carry an additional cost. Though they can substantially boost the price, I have always found the specials to be worthwhile. Nevertheless, on a recent visit, a friend and I stuck with the menu, which was equally tempting.
A generous serving of mussels and clamlike coques, cooked in a tinfoil packet, in a beautifully seasoned broth is one of the most popular appetizers. It is simply excellent, as are Mr. Breton's Jerusalem artichokes. He cuts them into chunks, cooks them until they are all but melting and serves them, topped with a poached egg, in a soothing broth mixed with cream and bacon.
His fricassee of farmhouse veal, served in a deep copper pan and garnished with white beans from the Breton town of Paimpol, features chunks of fork-tender meat in a light, creamy sauce scented with tarragon. Long-braised beef cheeks were also tasty and tender but were upstaged by gorgeous baby vegetables, including the tiniest beets and carrots I've ever seen.
No matter how often I've eaten at Chez Michel I have always ordered the same desserts. I take the sublime Breton puff pastry called kouign amman, and I induce my companion to order the Paris-Brest. The latter is a classic French confection named after the circuit of a bike race; it consists of a doughnut-shaped sandwich of choux pastry encasing voluptuous hazelnut butter cream.
Aside from Breton ciders and beers, Chez Michel's wine list offers a handful of very nice wines, including the 2001 Côtes du Rhône ''Les Laurentides'' ($25.60), a steely syrah from the Domaine de Gramenon.
Finally, it testifies to my enthusiasm for Thierry Breton's food that I keep returning: the service, snippy and unwelcoming, is among the worst I've experienced in Paris.
C'Amelot
Another graduate of the Crillon, Didier Varnier has brought the country to the city in his restaurant near the Cirque d'Hiver. And an idealized countryside it is: an extremely narrow stone-walled, wood-beamed dining room is separated into three sections, its niches filled with crockery and conserves. The wood tables are bare. Kitchen towels serve as napkins. And the prices are country thrifty: there is a single $41 menu -- the only choice you get to make is dessert -- and it's extremely appetizing.
On a recent night, a tureen of creamy pumpkin soup was brought to my table for three to start. Each of us got a bowl scattered with diced pumpkin and delicious croutons. We ladled as much soup as we wanted on top, returning for seconds. The soup, rich with flavors of dill and star anise, was delicate, soothing and very, very good.
I don't think I have ever had rouget cooked better than it was here. The fish -- meaty but with a delicate flavor -- came on a bed of mouthwatering eggplant caviar and was topped with an arugula salad, all accented by a light meat and basil jus. Then came succulent quail, this on a bed of superb mashed potatoes. Comfort food, indeed.
Our favorite of the three desserts on offer was molten chocolate cake with flavorful vanilla ice cream. Yes, we've had this chocolate cake a million times, but when it's perfect, that's just fine. A compote of prunes stewed in spiced wine came with surprisingly tasty fennel ice cream, and the riz au lait, rice pudding topped with dried fruit and nuts, demonstrated why this homey classic is often served to cure hangovers.
From a list featuring organic wines, we enjoyed a 2000 Marsannay blanc ''Les Aiges Pruniers'' ($28), a lightly oaked white from Domaine Fougeray de Beauclair.
La Braisière
Jacques Fassat spent 10 years working at Alain Dutournier's venerable Au Trou Gascon before setting up his own shop in the very residential 17th Arrondissement. The most expensive as well as the plushest of the restaurants in this lineup, La Braisière looks like a solid, ambitious restaurant in the French provinces: nicely spaced tables, crisp white linen, comfortable furnishings. What is clear is that Mr. Fassat is starting out with a restricted budget and is making the sagest choices possible.
Here is a chef who likes to play with contrasts of both flavors and textures. And he's got a very fine hand with seasoning. An appetizer of ceviche of lobster with a jelly flavored with Madiran (red wine) could be a signature dish as it so elegantly -- and deliciously -- displays Mr. Fassat's strong points. It is presented in a coupe like a fancy ice cream dessert; the ceviche recalls a spicy gazpacho, but each layer reveals another texture, another flavor: succulent lobster, savory jelly, then a smoky note from creamy tarama, the crunch of diced cucumbers, and a bit of a kick from piment d'espelette, a mildly fiery red pepper from the south of France. A main dish, veal, tender as butter, braised in a cocotte with carrots and artichokes, exemplified the kind of sophisticated comfort food the French do so well.
Desserts sampled were wonderful. Tortière, a Gascon specialty, consisted of whisper-light, phyllolike pastry stretched thin over prunes steeped in cinnamon and Armagnac, and garnished with sensational prune ice cream. The tarte mirliton with figs wins my Best Fig Dessert of the Year award: buttery, fragile pastry encasing almond paste and succulent figs. All this was nicely complemented by delicate peach sorbet.
The very good wine list has tantalizing choices in all price ranges. We loved the 2002 Alsace Sylvaner Vieilles Vignes, from Domaine Ostertag ($31), a fresh, floral white, as well as the 2002 Moulin-à-Vent from Dominique Piron ($45), a beautifully structured cru Beaujolais.
Le Petit Pontoise
On a side street off the Quai de la Tournelle, this minuscule restaurant -- it seats 35 at tiny wood tables -- offers big-hearted cooking. Between the numerous blackboard menus (including a separate one for fish), the large gilt-framed mirrors and coat hooks, the walls are pretty much covered. By the door, an upended wine barrel serves as a stand for two wheels of Parmesan.
On top of this, on a recent visit, there was a wood crate filled with freshly gathered girolle mushrooms. It's the season, and the mushrooms were too tempting not to order. Quickly sautéed so that they remained juicy and slightly chewy, they were perfectly accented with garlic and parsley. Coincidentally, they paired very pleasantly with a tasty appetizer of licorice-accented pain d'épices topped with thick slices of roasted pear and creamy young goat cheese.
It's also the season for scallops. Here they were fat, sweet and seared, then sauced with a garlicky tomato sauce. A stew of pig cheeks and vegetables came in its own cast-iron casserole. The fork-tender meat, infused with flavors of sweet spices, was just what I wanted on a cold night. It also made a convert of my skeptical companion and went beautifully with a '99 Cap de Faugères ($42), a delicious red from Côtes de Castillon (next door to St.-Émilion).
Desserts were the essence of homeyness: chocolate cake ''like my grandmother makes it'' (as described on the blackboard) was dense and fudgy with thick, delicious icing; île-flottante, making a comeback in Paris, was appropriately cloudlike.
Le Pré Verre
Once upon a time the Delacourcelle brothers updated French classics by combining them with exotic spices in a nondescript, expensive restaurant in the depths of the 15th Arrondissement, a neighborhood of equally nondescript modern buildings where few tourists tread. They recently moved to a more central location, around the corner from the Sorbonne. The restaurant is as friendly, as casual, as come-as-you-are as the neighborhood; its small tables set cheek-by-jowl, its walls decorated only with vintage jazz LP covers like Ella Fitzgerald's ''Lady Time'' and Coltrane's ''Soultrane.''
As for prices, I don't know where you could find better value than their $15.40 lunch. Dinner, too, is a bargain: all appetizers cost $10.25; main dishes, $18; and desserts, $6.40. Everything is listed on the blackboard.
While there are fusiony touches here, the food, for the most part, is good, solid bourgeois French cooking, as in two appetizer terrines. The first was a hearty blend of cold daube of beef cheeks studded with carrots and capers; the second, a napoleonlike layering of mashed potatoes and foie gras, a suave combination nicely complemented by a garden-fresh mesclun salad dressed with hazelnut oil vinaigrette.
Cinnamon and star anise gently seasoned milk-fed piglet and its delectable lightly creamy gravy; lamb shanks were equally toothsome and satisfying and came with what seemed like puréed ratatouille spiked with hot red pepper. Roasted figs with olives and ice cream were surprisingly delicious, with just a suggestion of olive oil.
The wine list alone is enough to win my devotion. We chose the 2001 pinot blanc ($34.50), a beautifully fragrant Alsace white from Barmes-Buecher, and the 2000 Faugères ($37), a rich, structured red from Léon Barral.
Bill of fare
Estimated prices, at $1.28 to the euro, are based on dinner for two with a bottle of wine. Each of the restaurants accepts major credit cards. With the exception of Chez Michel, service is uniformly friendly and attentive.
Chez Michel, 10, rue de Belzunce, 10th Arrondissement; (33-1) 44.53.06.20, fax (33-1) 44.53.61.31. Closed Monday for lunch, Saturday and Sunday. The prix fixe menu is $38; blackboard specials carry supplements ranging from $6.40 to $25.60. About $100. A nonsmoking section can be arranged.
Au C'Amelot, 50, rue Amelot, 11th Arrondissement; (33-1) 43.55.54.04, fax (33-1) 43.14.77.05. Closed Saturday and Monday at lunch, all day Sunday. Prix fixe menu: $41 (dinner). About $100.
La Braisière, 54, rue Cardinet, 17th Arrondissement; (33-1) 47.63.40.37, fax (33-1) 47.63.04.76. Closed Saturday lunch and Sunday. Menu: $38.40 (lunch). About $130. A nonsmoking section can be arranged.
Le Petit Pontoise, 9, rue de Pontoise, Fifth Arrondissement; (33-1) 43.29.25.20. Open daily. Appetizers run $8.30 to $19; main courses $15.40 to $30.70; desserts $9 to $11.50. Dinner about $130.
Le Pré Verre, 8, rue Thenard, Fifth Arrondissement; (33-1) 43.54.59.47. Closed Sunday, Monday for lunch. Menus: $15.40 (lunch); $32 (dinner). Dinner about $85. A nonsmoking section can be arranged.
CHOICE TABLES JACQUELINE FRIEDRICH, who lives in Paris, is the author of ''A Wine and Food Guide to the Loire'' (Holt).
