THE risk-taking gene gets all the press. But when the researchers hit a lull, they should take some time to isolate and examine what might be called the gene of photosensitivity. Fueling a passion for sensation no less than its bungee-jumping cousin, the photosensitivity gene drives its possessors to stop and play ''I Am a Camera.'' Taking a hard look, they wonder, Is it right? Production designers, decorators, florists, artists -- all are consumed with making sure that it, whatever it is, looks transcendently right, if only for the blink of a shutter.
This gene is firing on all cylinders in the person of Arianne Phillips. A fashion stylist and costume designer, Ms. Phillips has staked a claim for herself at the intersection of the fashion, film and music worlds, rising to prominence as the stylist of choice for risk-taking celebrities like Madonna, Lenny Kravitz and Courtney Love, and the costume designer for films like ''Swept Away,'' ''One-Hour Photo'' and ''Girl, Interrupted.'' As such, she spends all too much time in the mirror, in the looking-glass world of fashion. At home, south of Hollywood, she prefers her own brand of reality, where she is photosensitive in a more literal sense.
''I am always attracted to things that reflect light,'' she said. ''When I lived in New York, I had a big dark loft, so when I moved here, the first thing I did was find a place with lots of windows.'' For heightened effect, her apartment has abundant touches of chrome: the base of a Florence Knoll table, the base of 1930's mirrored lamp and metal mesh curtains made by Michael Schmidt, a designer and a friend.
And her favorite possession, a 1960's objet d'art made of elongated triangles of mirrored glass, is the best reflection of her affinity. Ms. Phillips found the mirror a few years ago at Fat Chance, a midcentury furniture store in Los Angeles, for $350, and it has leaned against a wall in her living room ever since.
While the mirror reflects light, it refracts one's identity with a jagged edge that might be unsettling to some, recalling the fantastic house-of-mirrors denouement of the ''The Lady From Shanghai.'' ''It distorts your face like a circus mirror,'' Ms. Phillips said with glee.
''I've never been comfortable with having plain, practical mirrors around,'' she added. ''I've bought Venetian mirrors, Art Deco mirrors, ones that are more like objets d'art. The one mirror I use is a $10 mirror from Rite Aid.''
The living-room piece also reflects Ms. Phillips's attitude that an object need not come from a Chelsea gallery to be worthy of the name art. Harking back to the era when designers and craftsmen like Alexander Girard and Verner Panton were experimenting with textiles, plastic, metal and glass to create objects for spaces traditionally occupied by art, the mirror is less a look at the self than a window away from it.
''I love how the simplest thing can be an object of art, valid on its own,'' she said. When she saw the mirror for the first time, her first thought was, simply, ''I bet that would photograph well.''
She wasn't quite right. Even the plainest mirror is not easy to shoot. Still, from the facets of a humble mirror has sprung an ever-changing Cubist portrait of her living room. ''I find it oddly comforting to come home to,'' Ms. Phillips said.
After a long day of focusing, perhaps, this mirror is easy on the eyes.
POSSESSED
