JEAN-RIGARD LEESSE is a Haitian immigrant who has worked as a maintenance man at St. Anne's Roman Catholic Church in Garden City for two years.
Officially he is a candidate for political asylum, which allows him to work legally in the United States, and he hopes to become a legal resident later this month after an immigration hearing. But before advocates at Catholic Charities, an agency of the Diocese of Rockville Centre, helped put his asylum case in motion, he lived nearly a year as an undocumented immigrant. He had strong praise for the immigration proposal presented by President Bush this month.
''It's a humane action,'' Mr. Leesse (pronounced lay-ESS) said last week as he waited to meet with his counselor at Catholic Charities' offices in Amityville. ''America is a good country, but when you live as an illegal here, it is very hard. It's difficult to get a job or do something to even get an I.D. card or a driver's license.''
The president's plan would offer legal status to millions of illegal workers. He has stressed that it is not an amnesty program because immigrants would be required to have a job with a sponsoring employer and would be expected to return to their home countries after their work periods expired.
Many immigrant advocates have criticized the program for not going far enough, noting that it only provides temporary worker status for renewable three-year periods. But Mr. Leesse said: ''It's still a good thing. It's better than nothing, because otherwise you're illegal with no hope at all.''
The president's proposal has drawn mixed reviews on Long Island. Immigrants and their advocates praise it for finally recognizing the need to grant undocumented immigrants some form of legal status. Employers say they hope it will make it easier to fill jobs with legal workers. Advocates and employers say it might reduce the crowds of unemployed immigrant workers at informal streetcorner gathering places around the Island, where they wait for contractors to pull up and offer them a day's work.
But opponents of illegal immigration harshly criticize the president's plan and warn that it will only encourage more illegal immigration and leave less work for American citizens. The number of workers clamoring for day jobs in major ''shape up'' sites in Farmingville, Farmingdale and Freeport will just increase, they say, and the immigrants' overcrowded living conditions will continue to vex neighbors and ruin property values. Labor leaders add that they fear that the program would officially create a class of lower-paid workers that would depress wages for everyone.
Steve Levy, the new county executive in Suffolk County, which has been home to acts of anti-immigrant violence that have drawn national attention in recent years, gave it qualified praise. ''I believe that we should be seeking immigrants through proper legal channels,'' he said, adding that the program could help ''mitigate the exploitation of workers and put those businesses that are playing by the rules on a fairer playing field.''
But he also criticized the president's proposal as an amnesty program and said, ''I don't think preference should be given to those who have broken the law and wound up here on Long Island.''
Even before he was elected county executive Mr. Levy said he wanted the county to go after contractors who hire illegal day workers and he opposed creating a hiring hall for undocumented workers in Farmingville, where protesters still march six days a week, carrying signs that read: ''Deport Illegal Aliens.''
Last week, Mr. Levy said he planned to gather interested parties from throughout the county to develop a plan for dealing with undocumented workers. Within a few months' time and probably long before the debate over Mr. Bush's proposal concludes, Mr. Levy said he hoped to have Suffolk County police officers conducting sting operations ''against those employers who are cheating on sales tax, unemployment and workers compensation.'' When employers do business off the books, he said, ''Our coffers suffer as a result because taxes don't get paid and employers who do play by the rules are undercut and can't compete.''
Robert Wieboldt, the executive director of the Long Island Builders Association, said that requiring employers to establish the credentials of their workers would be a tremendous burden. ''The average contractor is not competent to determine if a green card is real or not,'' he said. ''But if the president's proposal makes it easier to get certified workers and to establish legality, that's a good thing.''
The construction industry on Long Island has long acknowledged that some contractors use undocumented workers, he said, adding that the president's program would finally recognize the fact that ''there are legitimate labor shortages that cannot be filled with our local work force.''
Mitchell H. Pally, the vice president for government affairs at the Long Island Association, said the broader business community would probably welcome the program. ''Obviously we have a large number of immigrants who are here doing productive work for the people of Long Island, and I think any method in which they can become legal would be welcomed because it would ensure their continued employment.'' He said most employers would probably be willing to step forward and sponsor their undocumented workers as long as there was no penalty.
But local opponents of illegal immigration have already started contacting members of Congress to campaign against the president's plan. Sachem Quality of Life, a Farmingville group that has been outspoken against illegal immigration, has been riven by internal disputes, but the two factions of the group are united in their opposition to Mr. Bush's program.
''He says it would bring in workers as needed, but it's just going to enable corporations to fire American workers and replace them with foreign workers,'' said Ed Person, leader of one Sachem faction. ''President Bush is encouraging lawbreaking, because illegal aliens will see that they're rewarded for breaking the law.''
Ray Wysolmierski, a leader of the other faction, agreed that the proposed program would bring more illegal immigrants to the United States.
''Everybody knows what's going to happen,'' he said. ''After three years, they won't go back and the liberals will all say these people have been paying taxes and contributing to the economy so it would be a terrible thing to make them go back, and they'll wind up staying here.''
Jack Kennedy, president of the Building and Construction Trades Council of Nassau and Suffolk Counties, said he feared that the program would ''open up the floodgates to immigration, and as far as I'm concerned and middle-class workers are concerned, that's a real heavy threat to middle America.'' He said that small employers who already operate in the underground economy of undocumented workers would probably not participate in the program, but he feared that large employers would, giving potential union jobs held by American citizens to guest workers from abroad.
Still, Mr. Kennedy said, ''I don't think we're going to be able to stop it, so I think the next move for us is to take a real hard, serious look and try to organize these people, because if not, we're going to see a spiraling down of what we consider a livable wage.'' Immigrants may be happy to work for $7 or $10 an hour, he said, but middle-class Long Islanders simply can't afford to make that little.
Advocates for immigrants stressed that the vast majority of undocumented workers already have regular jobs and that the president's program would finally recognize them, put them on official payrolls, collect taxes from them and provide some job security for them.
Ed Hernandez, a spokesman for the Long Island Immigrant Alliance, a coalition of 24 service and advocacy groups, said that in Farmingville, where the number of undocumented workers is estimated at 900 to 1,500, only about 200 workers can be found on any given day rushing up to contractors' trucks looking for a days' work. ''That means that most of them are steadily and gainfully employed,'' he said. ''The streetcorners are really the unemployment line for undocumented workers.''
Many of these people have come to Long Island because their fellow villagers have come here, Mr. Hernandez said, but if companies elsewhere in the country were encouraged to participate in the guest worker program, ''maybe it will reroute some of the folks who are coming up here.'' He added, ''it wouldn't eliminate all the issues around illegal hiring and labor practices, but it would certainly reduce them.''
Mr. Hernandez and other immigrant advocates said, however, that there were aspects of the president's plan that needed refinement. They argued that an adequate grace period should be included for those workers who lose their jobs to remain in the country while looking for another job, and that safeguards should be included to prevent unscrupulous employers from using the threat of deportation as a way to intimidate their workers.
Carmen Maquilon, director of immigrant services for Catholic Charities, said she applauded President Bush for finally grappling with the issue of undocumented workers, but added, ''His remedy is not good enough because it doesn't lead to any permanent status and it doesn't address the need for family unity.'' Once a person has been in this country for a few years and has established roots, she said, ''if they proved they are taxpayers and good for the country, they should be allowed to get some type of permanent status and it should include their families.''
Men are most likely to participate in a guest worker program, thus leading to the creation of de facto immigrant bachelor societies, she said. ''A person who's here trying to make money only sees tomorrow, not next week or next year,'' she said. ''So he will be happy to just have some type of legal status, but this program will keep families apart.''
One much-sought-after service at Ms. Maquilon's offices is help navigating the system when an undocumented immigrant marries an American citizen and can then apply for legal status. Ms. Maquilon said she and her staff screen couples to make sure their unions aren't simply marriages of convenience.
Elizabeth, a 34-year-old immigrant from Bolivia who was meeting with a Catholic Charities counselor but declined to give her last name, said she would have welcomed President Bush's program when she first came to Long Island four years ago.
She said she worked two jobs when she first arrived, one making $5.15 an hour packing food for a lunch wagon and another making $7 an hour at a bakery. But first she had to buy a fake Social Security card that allowed her to work on the books, and every day she lived in fear of being discovered.
''Even if this is just temporary, at least you can renew the status and you can go home and visit,'' she said. ''Otherwise you can't even go back if your parents die.''
Her husband, Mike, is an American citizen. They met three years ago while he was working as a volunteer at an outreach program in Bay Shore and she stopped by in search of a donated couch. ''I think it's fantastic if people who want to work here can do it legally and not have to lie about what they are anymore,'' he said. ''The ideal for immigrants is living with their families in a nice house, not hiding and living in basements.''
Elizabeth said that life in America has been much more difficult than she imagined. ''It's totally different from what they say before you come,'' she said. ''Only the hardest work is left for us and you have to be always afraid.''
Then she turned to her husband, took his hand and said, ''I told him, he is my angel.''
Long Island
