IT had been decades since the trickle that was Pamela Duncan's fan mail dried up, but in recent years the odd accolade, handwritten and stamped, has arrived at her bedside. ''The Undead'' and ''Attack of the Crab Monsters,'' the 1950's films for which she is best known, have taken on new life as cult classics, rediscovered and devoured by film fetishists, Ms. Duncan says. But more than anything else, it was her role in a 2001 film of an altogether different genre that resuscitated a career otherwise headed for the horror flick slag heap.
''Curtain Call,'' a 30-minute documentary that caught eight residents of the Lillian Booth Actors' Fund Nursing Home here on camera as they shuffled through memories of careers in entertainment and several days of assisted living, was nominated for a ''best documentary'' Academy Award three years ago and was broadcast on HBO. It promised the kind of exposure that any past-her-prime celebrity would welcome, especially when the average age of those at the nursing home is 87 and chances of a return to the red carpet are out of arthritic reach.
''But the sad part is there's almost no one left,'' Ms. Duncan, now wheelchair-bound, white-haired and shaky of voice, said, referring to the deaths of most of her fellow ''Curtain Call'' film subjects. Among them were Bernard Flood, a member of Louis Armstrong's band; Tessie Moreno, a Ziegfeld Follies dancer and protégée of Bill (Bojangles) Robinson; Rosetta LeNoire, a star of the TV series ''Family Matters''; and Dalton Dearborn, a Ringling Brothers clown.
The home is the only one in the nation with a mission to serve former show business professionals. It admits only those who can prove that they or a close relative logged 15 years of service to a union such as the Screen Actors Guild.
Its residents numbered 109 earlier this month, 67 of whom live in an extended-care wing where they receive round-the-clock care.
To fend off sadness caused by routine passings, residents of the home partake of such diversions as shopping and attending the opera or theater weekly; ''sitercising,'' a form of wheelchair exercise, up to four times a week; gathering for monthly discussions of plays led by Ben Nelson, a professor from Fairleigh Dickinson; and staging their own performances, taking shows on the road to other nearby centers for the elderly, retirement homes and libraries.
Still, Ms. Duncan suggested that the camaraderie that propelled ''Curtain Call'' to find its wide audience -- the ''show must go on'' spirit that pervaded the walker-friendly corridors here in 2001 -- is somewhat diminished.
Indeed, the 550,000-square-foot, 43-year-old residence has much going for it, including its strollable gardens, dotted along six rolling green acres that afford an unfettered view of the Manhattan skyline; perquisites like Broadway tickets provided by the Actors' Fund of America, the Manhattan-based nonprofit organization that subsidizes the home; and an above-average ambience for nursing homes, with an entryway series of pen-and-ink celebrity caricatures donated by the artist Al Hirschfeld and libraries filled with scripts and playbills.
But the footlights that shone brightly here a few years ago show signs of dimming.
Behind Closed Doors
Ilene Faye, who recently resigned as director of recreation to take a job elsewhere, said many of the residents ''like to keep to themselves,'' shutting the doors to their roughly 14-by-20-foot rooms even when musicians are brought in for weekly socials. And though Alvan Small, the administrator of the home, noted proudly that it is routinely praised in surveys by state inspectors for its high quality of care -- ''it's evident in the way the residents look, the kind of food they're served, the care we take with security'' -- he acknowledged that fund-raising by the Actors' Fund was down, along with Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements. A few residents are able to pay for their care with their own funds. Most, however, rely on Medicare and Medicaid.
''Like everybody else we were hit hard by 9/11,'' Mr. Small said. ''The Actors' Fund of America may not be able to provide the funding they'd like to.'' This, despite efforts that include an annual golf tournament fund-raiser.
For 2002, the Actors' Fund covered a deficit of $881,000 through membership bequests and special events for its three homes -- the one here in Englewood as well as the Palm View residence in Hollywood for entertainment professionals with H.I.V./AIDS, and the Aurora Residence in Manhattan, which takes in low-income groups including seniors, working professionals and people with AIDS.
The home here was renamed for the philanthropist Lillian Booth just last spring, after she presented it a $2 million gift. Mrs. Booth, not a part of the Booth theatrical family, is the widow of Ferris Booth, a private investment counselor and heir to an I.B.M. fortune.
''We've tried through ingenuity and creative ideas to make sure residents do not feel that which didn't come through,'' Mr. Small said. ''They don't ask, 'How come we don't have this?'''
Figures for 2003 were unavailable. But as the yearly deficit has grown harder to cover since the cheerful days of the making of ''Curtain Call,'' the home's cast of characters, few of whom can be found on a winter weekday morning save for a cluster congregated around a large-screen TV in the common room, are sensing the pinch.
In looking back on 10 years at the home, Jean Bruno Spindelman, a 77-year-old actress who co-starred with Forrest Tucker and Burt Parks in a national tour of ''The Music Man'' in the late 1950's and again with Mr. Tucker in ''Showboat'' in the early 1980's, reflected most eagerly on friends who have come and gone.
''This was an ideal place to be among your peers,'' she said. ''I met Imogene Coca, who did a TV show and whose husband was King Donovan, also an actor. And there was Betty Lord, who was the wife of the former actor and teaching coach Philip Lord. As soon as people heard you were an actress they'd come up and say, 'I saw you in so-and-so.' We were a family, because all show people are a family. But in the last several years a lot has changed.'' (Mrs. Ford, who recently turned 100, has lived at the home more than 30 years, longer than any other resident.)
Ms. Spindelman's main complaint, however, concerns food.
''The people are dear -- volunteers will come in and do special things for you, like sewing if you need it,'' she said. ''But I don't have complimentary things to say about the accountants, because it seems to me the cuts go in the kitchen. You don't find a nice rare lamb chop for dinner much anymore, except maybe on your birthday.''
'Things to Talk About'
Joseph Endes, 65, who was also featured in ''Curtain Call'' and has among his credits more than 500 theater and television performances and a bit part in the movie ''Taxi Driver,'' now has multiple sclerosis and says he seldom ventures out of his room to take in in-house performances and musical events.
''I'm too young for most of it,'' he said. ''It's bands for older people.''
''We find things to talk about,'' he continued, ''and we make a good audience when we go to the theater because a lot of us have the background. But although there are people I like a lot, there are very few actors left here.''
Perhaps the most famous residents of the home were Joseph Sultzer and Charles Marks, better known as the comedy team of Smith and Dale, who were the inspiration for ''The Sunshine Boys,'' Neil Simon's hit play and movie.
Other marquee names who lived out their final years at the home include Fay Templeton, a vaudeville star once was hailed as the queen of burlesque; Myrtle Tannehill, who starred with George M. Cohan in ''Broadway Jones''; Oliver Treyz, a former president of ABC Television; and the ''Merry Mailman,'' Ray Heatherton (father of Joey Heatherton).
Ms. Faye estimates that 50 percent of the current residents were performers themselves, with the remainder split between behind-the-scenes production people and non-showbiz relatives.
Even with the infiltration of less-celebrated residents, the schmoozing and the preening associated with Hollywood types remains very much in evidence among the high-profile coterie.
''Naturally the residents hold themselves in high esteem,'' Mr. Small said, ''and the ones who were in the industry are very much entrenched in it. If there's a new person, they'll question them, and they'll question me: 'Who are you letting into this facility? Anybody?'''
Ms. Faye agreed. ''In general they're more dramatic than you would expect about their everyday needs,'' she said. ''A lot of them can be very look-oriented. They're big on getting their nails done and their hair done -- they love going to the hairdresser -- and once they're dressed and out, they make sure to compliment each other: 'Oh, you look so cute today.'"
Such self-consciousness sometimes spills into the weekly group outings. And visits by celebrities are common. On a trip last spring to a museum in Tenafly for an exhibit of photographs by the actress Ellen Burstyn -- Ms. Burstyn was there especially to greet the Actors' Fund guests -- Ms. Faye and her entourage happened upon a photo advertising a movie Ms. Burstyn had starred in, and the credits listed a member of the group as the producer of the movie.
''I can't give you his name, though,'' Ms. Faye said, ''because he wanted it kept under wraps. I don't know how public it is that he's here.''
Despite the signs that, in a parallel to its beloved Broadway, the Actors' Fund home has fallen on hard times since its 2001 star turn in ''Curtain Call,'' it remains unshakable in its commitment to honoring the acting craft.
''They keep pushing me,'' said Rose Aster, the program coordinator.
The regular script-reading and small performance groups that she assembles are often short-lived and can be frustrating because many residents can no longer see to read or hear very well. But Ms. Aster persists, and by all accounts succeeds, in engaging the residents who care to remain active in their passion for performance.
For her part, Ms. Spindelman said that performing was her ''incentive for living.'' To that end she encourages, and eagerly participates in, any creative endeavors that Ms. Aster can pin down, no matter how fleeting.
A little more than a year ago, Brigette Zillieu-Davis, an actress based in New York, approached Ms. Aster about volunteering in some capacity.
''I considered it part of my intergenerational programming,'' Ms. Aster said. ''Most people think it's just the very young who can do intergenerational things with the elderly, but I thought, why not do something with 30-year-old and 40-year-olds, too? That's a different generation.''
Ms. Zillieu-Davis came in with the idea of adapting newspaper profiles of ordinary people for the stage.
''She turned them into dramatic readings,'' Ms. Aster said, ''and we ended up taking them around to various places, including the U.N. in New York, where we had an audience of people from the Netherlands.''
Don't Call Them 'Old Folks'
When Ms. Aster isn't running readings or exercise or organizing outings, she is booking in-house entertainment for dances and socials.
''Getting older isn't a life sentence to doing nothing anymore,'' she said in typical nursing home parlance, ''which is something we see here all the time. When musicians come in they think they're dealing with old folks, and I tell them play music that's going to get us going. Then they can't believe what they see.
''There's a movie where old people take a pill and they act like they're young again'' -- the 1985 Ron Howard film ''Cocoon'' is the one she means -- ''and we're the sequel. We're going to pump it up in 2004.''
