Frank Cashen, the venerable former general manager of the Mets, would occasionally talk about ballplayers as performing artists. A second baseman and a shortstop turning a snazzy double play, he once said to me, reminded him of ballet dancers. ''And if you like theater,'' he said, pronouncing it the-AY-ter, ''baseball is great theater.''
Cashen, an omnivorous sports fan, hadn't seen Peyton Manning play quarterback yet -- Peyton's father, Archie, had only just retired -- but you couldn't watch Manning's performance for the Colts against the Chiefs last week and not be reminded of his point, that sports imitate art and vice versa. Manning's passing, in its variety, accuracy and efficiency, was state-of-the-art football, but that's not what stood out as art for art's sake. He's on a streak that is prompting comparisons to isolated episodes of brilliance, like Phil Simms's 22-of-25 performance in Super Bowl XXI. But the point is, there's something to compare it to.
What no one has ever seen before, however, is Manning's signal-calling, which involves the semaphore of a third-base coach, the ritual steps of an Arthur Murray class and the unpredictable rhythm of a Coltrane solo. He emerges from the huddle as though he knows what to expect, the way an orchestra conductor can hear the music as he raises his baton, and at times in the Chiefs game, as he weaved among the behemoths like a motorcycle slithering through traffic, his movements achieved the level of pure choreography.
Of course, football often takes on the elements of a complex dance. Or a simple one. Remember the Ickey Shuffle? And last Sunday there was that silly jitterbug the Colts performed as a group in the end zone after a touchdown, bobbing and swaying in a huddle like guests at a Sweet 16 doing the hokey-pokey. No one had ever seen that before, either.
But pointing at his receivers, gliding along the line of scrimmage to bark instructions at the interior linemen and tapping one or more of them on the bottom, lifting a leg to set off a timed count and screaming who knows what over the din of the crowd, Manning was not celebrating. His dance was not only aesthetic, it was utilitarian, even necessary, an organic element of the game. It had both authority and grace, embodying his status as star player and coach-on-the-field, choreographer and principal dancer, Balanchine and Baryshnikov.
Indeed, like any performing artist, Manning was working with the elements of space and time, manipulating them for a purpose. Have you ever seen any quarterback get his team to the line of scrimmage so quickly, play after play? Every down, it seemed, he gave himself 10 or 15 or even 20 seconds of performance time before the ball had to be snapped. And even if he didn't use the time in a consciously aesthetic way -- I suspect he had other things on his mind -- it was lovely, as well as exciting, to watch.
Consider a sequence at the end of the third quarter. The Colts were ahead, 31-24, but the Chiefs had scored on a Dante Hall kickoff return, the crowd in Kansas City was going ape and Manning was looking at a third-and-8 from the Colts' 21. The whole game he had been slow dancing at the line of scrimmage, but this time he saw an opportunity. The Chiefs were dilatory in making substitutions, so Manning went with a quick snap and caught them with too many men on the field, earning the Colts 5 free yards.
On the next play, Manning threw the Chiefs his slowest changeup. The Colts broke from the huddle with 29 seconds to go in the quarter, and Manning dialed a full complement of moves. He approached the line, but a yard before reaching the crouched-over center, backed up into the shotgun, raised his left foot and put it down again, reached across his body with his right arm and pointed with the forefinger at the ground in front of his left leg.
Abruptly, he held his hands up and forward as if to receive the snap, then yanked them down again and, crossing his arms in front of him at the wrist, approached the line. Then he seemed to deliver quick words of instruction to several teammates, leaning over the left guard, tapping his center on the rear and slide-stepping to lean over the right guard. This was followed by a swift retreat back into the shotgun, one more quick leg lift and, finally, the snap.
For a full 15 seconds, meanwhile, the Chiefs were trying to react, the down linemen antsy, the linebackers showing blitz with Manning in the shotgun and retreating into pass coverage when he approached the line. The enterprise played out like an impromptu ballet with a mammoth, violence-minded company and one lithe principal improvising a solo. And Manning saved his slickest jeté for the finale. He took the snap with 14 seconds left in the quarter. A mere second later, Reggie Wayne, running a slant from the left side, had the ball in his hands. First down, Colts.
If you like the-AY-ter, it was great the-AY-ter. The curtain goes up again today.
PRO FOOTBALL: CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
