Izailde Souza, nine months pregnant with her sixth child, is a prisoner in her two-room shack. She says she is so afraid that thieves roaming the slum will steal her meager possessions that she never leaves her cramped quarters -- not to look for work, go to market or walk her children to school.
The last time she remembers going out was more than a year ago, to vote for the politician who fought for her right to squat here on public land next to the city dump: José Edmar.
''He climbed on our rooftops to defend us when the police came to bulldoze our homes,'' she said. ''He's our father here in Estrutural.''
Estrutural is a sprawling slum where the shanties look like collages of scrap lumber, rusted metal and chicken wire. It is part of an illegal housing development, one that its critics say is highly organized. Vote-hungry politicians encouraged the poor to settle on public land, then provided them with a school, a clinic and other services to attract more people, environmentalists and prosecutors say.
Estrutural fits a pattern of squatter settlements across Asia and Africa, where explosive growth is expected to nearly double the population of many large cities in the next 15 years, according to the United Nations. Already, a third of the world's urban population -- almost a billion people -- live in slums.
The United Nations Human Settlements Program, in a report last year titled ''The Challenge of Slums'' described the phenomenon in the developing world, where ''squatting became a large and profitable business, often carried out with the active, if clandestine, participation of politicians, policemen and privateers of all kinds.''
Estrutural itself is a half-hour drive from Brasília, the nation's futuristic capital, built in the 1950's in the shape of an airplane, symbolically taking the country off into a bright future. But as the carefully planned capital has grown, so has Estrutural, with its haphazard maze of jerry-built shanties. The yawning gap between the prosperous capital city and the impoverished slum mirrors the deeper disparities in Brazil, one of the world's most unequal nations.
Squatter settlements like Estrutural have filled a crying need, urban planners say. Government and the market economy have failed to create affordable housing for millions of poor Brazilians who have streamed from the countryside to the cities.
''What you see in Estrutural is structural,'' said Edesio Fernandes, a professor of urban planning at the University of London who spent last year as director of land affairs in the Ministry of Cities, created by President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil. ''It's not an exception. This is the main characteristic of our urbanization process and it needs to be recognized before we can change it.''
For Estrutural, named for the highway that runs alongside, the ambiguities in the process of urban growth are embodied in Mr. Edmar, an influential representative in the capital district's legislative assembly. For desperately poor squatters like Ms. Souza, Mr. Edmar is a patron saint who has championed her family's right to stay put. Federal prosecutors say he is a swindler.
Mr. Edmar was arrested in July and accused of heading a ring that schemed to get false titles to public land, sold plots and laundered the profits through foreign exchange dealers. His role in Estrutural is not part of the criminal case, but prosecutors say he has cultivated the slum dwellers as a political base. ''He's not just corrupt,'' said Carlos Eduardo Vasconcelos, a federal prosecutor. ''He's the leader of the gang.''
On a recent morning, Mr. Edmar, 52, was confident and dapper in a navy blazer and light blue shirt, open at the collar to reveal a heavy gold chain. He depicted himself as persecuted by his opponents for casting his lot with the poor. ''They say I'm a ringleader, a bandit, a money launderer,'' he said, ''but where's their proof?''
He gestured to a panoramic photograph of Estrutural that hung prominently behind his desk, one of many in his office. When he emerged in August after 29 days in jail, hundreds of supporters waited in darkness to greet him. They handed him a 12-foot cross emblazoned with the words ''A Life in Defense of the Right to a Home,'' which he carried through the crowd like a latter-day martyr.
''My children and the children of other people have a right to live in the city,'' he said. ''They can't be evicted just because of their social conditions.''
In 1997 and 1998, the governor, Cristovam Buarque, a leader in the Workers' Party, opposed legalizing Estrutural and tried to relocate the residents. The facts are in dispute, but Mr. Buarque said the police went there not to force people out but to look for criminals. When they rode in on horseback, however, the residents saw it as an assault on their right to live there. As many as six people were killed.
Mr. Edmar's party returned to power, and the federal district has since officially recognized Estrutural as an urban area, now home to more than 20,000 people. But the environmental concerns that underlay Mr. Buarque's opposition to Estrutural remain.
The slum, which hovers over a water basin, has no sewage system. Residents dig holes in their dirt floors and put a toilet on top. The raw waste seeps into the ground, contaminating the water. The cost of installing underground sewer pipes with a city already in place would be high.
''These people like Edmar stimulated the poor to settle in open areas owned by the government,'' said Paulo Salles, a professor of ecology at the University of Brasília. ''They create problems for the whole city without any consideration for the environment or sustainability. These words don't mean anything for them. They're just interested in votes and making money for themselves.''
Mr. Edmar denies such accusations and denounces environmentalists' arguments as ''lies.''
He was instrumental in the construction of the Museum of Blood, a two-story pavilion in Estrutural dedicated to making sure the people there never forget what the police did during Mr. Buarque's term or Mr. Edmar's defense of them.
The letters of the museum's name drip with red paint that mimics blood. The walls, painted red, are lined with panels that document the violence of that day. ''People of Brasília Don't Forget!'' a sign exclaims. The cross Mr. Edmar carried when he got out of jail is displayed, and albums of ''history'' are emblazoned with large photographs of him. ''Our struggle isn't a struggle anymore,'' he said. ''It's turned into a war.''
In Estrutural, everything -- from peoples' homes to their clothes to their very skin -- seems to be stained with the reddish brown clay the city is built on. Children splash in dirty puddles left by the seasonal rains.
Ms. Souza, 32, is grateful for Mr. Edmar's efforts on behalf of the slum dwellers, but she does not romanticize life here. She describes it as a level of hell a notch higher than the rural life she left at age 14. In the countryside, the poverty was so deep and medical care so distant that people often died of sickness and hunger.
In Estrutural, her husband can sometimes find work as a day laborer. Churches donate food and clothes. A school and clinic are nearby. But crime is a curse. Her every waking hour is devoted to guarding her family's tenuous hold on a ramshackle shanty that leaks buckets of water when it rains.
''The bandits come out on the streets,'' she said, rolling up her T-shirt, looking for respite from the searing heat. ''They boast about people they've ripped off. They have no shame, and the law of silence rules. They'll come get you, your kids or your husband if you talk.''
She put her hand up to shield her face, trying to hide the tears that slipped off the tip of her nose.
''The boys and men can leave, but not me,'' she said. ''The women have to bear it. We need this place to live.''
