My partner and I are considering buying our first home. An acquaintance purchased a house from a bank that had foreclosed on it, acquiring it for half its value with no down payment. Some foreclosures result from investment firms making poor decisions -- I have no problem with that -- but others are the result of an individual's misfortune. The idea of profiting from a family's losing its home gnaws at my conscience. Is it ethical to buy such a house?
David W. Machacek, Avon, Conn.
It is not just that you didn't cause any family to lose its home -- you did not -- but that foreclosure can be an acceptable part of a financial system. No bank lends money unless it is confident of being repaid. Using the home itself to back a mortgage allows people to buy one who otherwise could not, albeit with the risk that they may fail to make their payments and, sadly, could lose their homes.
What is necessary is that the borrower be given every opportunity to repay. Contingencies must be established to cope with illness or job loss or other unexpected catastrophes that could befall a borrower. That is, the mortgage system must be fair, flexible and humane. If it is, foreclosures should be few and buying a home that has been through one is legitimate. You might query the bank about its policies and about the history of the particular house you want to buy.
That said, I myself would be reluctant to buy one. A home is suffused with feeling; it's where you live. I wouldn't want it tainted with the residue of the previous owner's ill fortune. But it is emotion, not ethics, that would keep me from buying a foreclosed house. (Except one previously owned by a disgraced former head of a Fortune 500 company.)
I worked my way through a prestigious university but, because of economic circumstances, never graduated, something that still leaves me ashamed. When colleagues ask, ''When did you graduate?'' I often answer, ''I finished in 19xx,'' creating the impression that I graduated. I don't have to disclose my every failure, but I regret being deceptive. Should I make it clear that I did not graduate from Prestigious U.?
D. A., Redwood City, Calif.
The real answer is psychological, not ethical: have some self-respect. There's no dishonor in not graduating from, for example, Harvard. Nearly everyone on earth hasn't graduated from Harvard. To work long hours while shouldering a rigorous academic burden is something to be proud of. Why not just say you went to Prestigious U. but dropped out to make a living? That will only add glamour to your life. You've become a productive member of society while overcoming obstacles.
You're doing what 17th-century English Catholics living under Protestant oppression called ''equivocating.'' Rather than be drawn and quartered, some Catholics would deftly respond to an inquisitor with an answer that was in some sense true but likely to be misinterpreted. Q: Have you engaged in forbidden religious practices? A: I have not. (The rationale being, they are not forbidden by God.) Many were as troubled as are you by this evasion.
To deceive people, even passively, is (in most cases) not ethical. But avoiding the question altogether is fine (if socially awkward); no casual acquaintance is entitled to demand a curriculum vitae.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-18-04: THE ETHICIST
