If you were robust enough to stare down the blustery winds and bone-chilling temperatures last week and go for a midwinter stroll along the Brooklyn waterfront, you probably noticed, every 20 minutes or so, a cab-yellow boat sturdily bobbing through the harbor.
Like the United States Postal Service, New York Water Taxi, which runs the boats, takes a plucky attitude toward foul weather.
''We go all year round,'' said Frank Gardini, a captain from Tottenville, on Staten Island. ''If it becomes too icy, the Coast Guard will tell us to stay off the water. But that hasn't happened yet.''
The real question, of course: how plucky are the riders?
In summer, the water taxis are popular among sightseers and commuters; on a peak day, the ferry service carried 1,000 passengers. But given the recent Arctic fury, the question arises whether New Yorkers are as thrilled to traverse the East River in a draftier-than-drafty boat.
''Well, ridership does tend to fall off a bit during the winter,'' said Mr. Gardini, who said he believed that that the 20 percent decline during the winter was due to the fact that potential commuters tend to sleep in. (Mr. Gardini this day was up at 4 a.m.)
On Thursday morning (with a low in the single digits), one of the stops, the Fulton Ferry Landing in Brooklyn, was deserted except for two men in Carhardt overalls salting the pier. Waves smacked the waterfront like fists; across the East River, fog shrouded the city.
Just as the boat pulled in, two commuters emerged and hopped aboard, upon which Mr. Gardini piloted the near-empty vessel across to the South Street Seaport in Lower Manhattan.
There, three people boarded, including a woman from New Jersey who was working at a construction site in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn. It was her first month riding the taxi. ''I don't know if I'd do this again,'' said the woman, who was sipping coffee and bundled up in gloves and a scarf. If you miss a boat, she said, there is no warm place to wait for the next one.
''What do I think about waiting in the cold?'' she asked. ''It's not printable.''
As the boat traveled back and forth -- from Fulton Ferry to Pier 11 at South Street to the Brooklyn Navy Yard in Bay Ridge -- chugging along because of poor visibility, the familiar staples of the commuter life emerged -- coffee cups; cellphones; a very serious man buried in the business section of a newspaper. The ride, in fact, had a frontier quality to it, making it easy to pretend you were bucketing along through rugged waterways like the Bering Strait, especially since the windows were fogged up, canceling any view of the city. Outside, you could hear the wind whip and howl across the harbor as the boat wobbled amid the waves.
But sitting in the captain's chair, a small heater warming his feet, Mr. Gardini seemed content.
STEVE KURUTZ
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NEW YORK WATERWAYS
