WHEN the Civil War began, New Jersey, which had voted against Lincoln, was the only Northern state that still legally permitted the ownership of slaves. The state again voted against the President in 1864.
At the same time, there was strong support for the Union among much of the population. The state's Quakers did not own slaves, but as pacifists, they opposed the war. The Underground Railroad ran through New Jersey, helping bring slaves clandestinely to the North.
''We were a very conflicted state,'' said Anna Aschkenes, executive director of the Middlesex County Cultural and Heritage Commission.
The commission, which develops arts, history and preservation programs countywide, has recently completed a two-year research project on New Jersey's experience in the Civil War era. The result of its work is an exhibition at Cornelius Low House, the county museum, as well as a series of lectures, educational workshops for school groups and a traveling show on the role of the Union Navy in the state, designed for schools and historical societies.
The traveling show includes a large model of the Weehawken, one of seven ironclad ships built in Jersey City for the Union. The model was created from the original blueprints.
Six scholars participated in the research. They include Sterling Bland, an associate professor at Rutgers University who specializes in slave narratives; Delight Dodyk, a professor at Drew University who has written on women's history in New Jersey; and David Martin, a teacher at the Peddie School in Hightstown who founded and runs Longstreet House Publishing Company, which publishes books on the Civil War.
The commission is financed by the state and county, and also receives money from the National Endowment for the Arts.
Ms. Aschkenes said the exhibition at Low House, which fills nine rooms and includes about 600 objects, is the largest Civil War exhibition that has appeared in the state. Its focus is the everyday life of civilian and soldier during this period.
''We didn't want to concentrate on the battles,'' she said. ''There are so many books on that already.''
To that end, the show has displays on African-Americans, the lives of soldiers between battles and the role of women. It includes historical artifacts and photographs. Among the artifacts is a silverplate pot made by Tiffany &amp; Company that was used by General George Brinton McClellan of Trenton to make tea.
''It contrasts wonderfully with the tin wear that the average soldier was carrying around with him,'' said Joanne DeAmicis Bulla, curator of exhibitions at Low House.
McClellan, a Democrat who ran against Lincoln in the presidential election of 1864, was governor of New Jersey, from 1878 to 1881.
New Jersey still had slaves when the war began because of the state's Gradual Manumission Act of 1804, Ms. Aschkenes said. Under this law, anyone who was a slave would stay a slave, but no one free could be made a slave. Slave owners could kept their slaves' children enslaved -- women until age 21, men until 25.
''We think of slavery as a Southern issue, but it was allowed in all the states,'' Ms. Bulla said.
New Jersey sent approximately 76,000 troops, 2 percent of the Union total, to fight in the war, said Dr. Martin, who has a Ph.D. in classical studies from Princeton University and has written several monographs on Civil War battles. Of those troops, 2,900 were black.
The state lost about 6,000 men -- 2,700 to battle and 3,300 to disease. One of the largest prisons for Confederate soldiers was on Fort Delaware on Pea Patch Island in the Delaware River: the 2,436 prisoners who died there were buried in Finn's Point National Cemetery in Salem.
''New Jersey had strong ties to the South through trade,'' Dr. Martin said. ''It sent leather goods, furniture and clothing. Then the state became heavy manufacturers of equipment for the Union, especially Newark and Trenton.''
Also, he added, many Northerners opposed the war. These included prominent newspaper editors in Trenton, Newark and Plainfield, who published invectives against taking up arms against the South, he said.
The exhibition tells the story of Harriet Tubman, a freed slave, who helped approximately 300 slaves escape through the Underground Railroad before the Civil War. But in the summers, to earn money for her endeavors, she worked as a housemaid in Cape May, Ms. Aschkenes said. ''She was a spy for the Union side,'' she said.
''Our Long Endurance: The Story of New Jersey in the Civil War'' is at the Cornelius Low House/Middlesex County Museum, 1225 River Road, Piscataway, through December 2005. Information: (732)745-4489.
