WHEN Jessica Kaminsky met Dave Rock in Los Angeles in 1997, one of the first things she noticed was a tattoo, ''Katie,'' peeking out from under his shirt. She found his optimistically romantic gesture endearing.
''I thought it was every girl's secret dream that someone would mark himself for you,'' said Ms. Kaminsky, who had moved from New York to Los Angeles to put her zany humor to use writing for sitcoms. ''I asked how long he and his girlfriend had been dating.''
Actually, for Mr. Rock, then a drummer for a rock band, the indelible Katie was no longer in the picture. ''I said, 'That's going to be a big bummer for your next girlfriend,' '' recalled Ms. Kaminsky, 30, the daughter of the writer and former publisher Howard Kaminsky and Susan Stanwood Kaminsky, a novelist.
Months later, she realized that she was to be Mr. Rock's next girlfriend.
They wound up at a poolside barbecue in Los Angeles on New Year's Eve 1998. Ms. Kaminsky's boyfriend had chosen not to talk, let alone to accompany the group to festivities afterward. Mr. Rock, deep in the throes of a crush on her, moved in for a midnight kiss.
After that, Mr. Rock's flesh-and-ink tribute took on a life of its own. ''Within the first month, I said, 'Let's talk about the tattoo,' '' Ms. Kaminsky recalled. '' 'It's gotta go.' ''
Eight hours of painful needlework later, ''Katie'' had been transformed into a Japanese-style filmstrip of a koi fighting its way upstream.
Ms. Kaminsky was undergoing a transformation of her own. ''She is incredibly clean, and everything she touches is beautifully put together,'' said Amanda Lasher, a lifelong friend. ''Dave was a poster boy for grunge,'' she added of Mr. Rock, now 33 and a partner in Workaround Films in Hollywood.
And then there was his rambling, run-down house, which he shared with a group of loud-living musicians. ''When she spent the night in this pit, I knew she must love this guy,'' Ms. Lasher said.
She continued: ''She's introduced him to the finer things in life. I know he's changed her, but sometimes I have trouble figuring out exactly how.''
Last New Year's Eve, they were married at the spare, vaulted Gagosian Gallery in Manhattan, where glass cylinders filled with flowers and berries stood in for artwork.
The bride wore a strapless fairy princess gown that, she acknowledged, needed months of exercise to adapt to.
After the ceremony, guests decked themselves in party hats and danced to a frenetic Latin jazz band. As expected, writers were out in force, including Jules Feiffer, A. R. Gurney and Justice Edwin Torres of State Supreme Court, who wrote ''Carlito's Way.'' He also officiated.
At about 1 a.m., Mel Brooks, who began life as Melvin Kaminsky and is a cousin of the bride's father, arrived from a cast party for ''The Producers,'' his Broadway show.
Before the wedding, the bride said Mr. Brooks had provided support for her career as a television comedy writer. (Ms. Kaminsky wrote last season for the ABC sitcom ''Hope and Faith.'')
''I love writing, and comedy is kind of in my blood,'' said Ms. Kaminsky, who views her relationship with her husband in literary terms. ''Dave is my best editor,'' she said. ''He sees everything before anyone else, ever.''
Mr. Rock sees it a little differently. ''One of the novel things about this relationship over others I've had is that it keeps improving instead of deteriorating,'' he said after the wedding. ''It's a very healthy, satisfying relationship, pretty modern, pretty autonomous. We do our own thing, but when we're together we have a lot to share.''
Mr. Rock will not be getting a tattoo that says 'Jessica' any time soon. ''I guess it's a curse,'' Ms. Kaminsky said at the thought of her name indelibly etched on her husband's body. ''I don't think you should do it if you want the relationship to last.''
WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS: VOWS
