Scott Stevens, a white rose pinned to the lapel of his navy blue suit, never said a word to the big crowd Saturday afternoon. He did not have any good news for the fans.
Stevens, 39, the Devils' captain, was honored before the team's 2-1 overtime victory over the Washington Capitals for playing in more games than any N.H.L. defenseman. But Stevens did not play Saturday, and he will be out indefinitely because of what he said was most likely postconcussion syndrome.
Patrik Elias scored his second goal of the game by sweeping a rebound past Washington goaltender Olaf Kolzig 2 minutes 17 seconds into overtime. It was Elias's fourth overtime goal of the season for the Devils (22-11-10-1).
''I think we deserved this game,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said. ''We worked hard at it.''
Stevens was the story Saturday, missing his fifth straight game. The Devils had said until Thursday that they thought Stevens was out because of flulike symptoms.
Although General Manager Lou Lamoriello said Thursday that Stevens was being treated as if he had possibly sustained a concussion and that he would miss another 7 to 10 days, Stevens said Saturday that he had no time frame for his return. He said he had spent almost all his time resting. ''It's very difficult to do nothing,'' Stevens said during an interview after the first period.
When asked if he was concerned that his 22-year, 1,635-game N.H.L. career was in jeopardy of ending, Stevens said: ''I'm not even thinking about that. I'm doing what I'm told. It's tough enough to cope with that.''
Stevens said he and his wife, Donna, traveled to Montreal on Thursday at their expense to see the neurologist Karen Johnston, who is considered an expert on concussions. Stevens said she told him that he probably had postconcussion syndrome.
Stevens, one of the N.H.L.'s hardest hitters, said he did not know when he might have incurred a concussion. He was hit in the ear by Pavel Kubina of Tampa Bay in a playoff game in April and felt the effects of the blow into the off-season. He played in 38 of the Devils' first 39 games but was feeling run down and lost about five pounds because of a lack of appetite. He also said he had a touch of a stomach ailment, but he was able to participate in family activities.
''I didn't have as much in the tank the last few games,'' he said.
He was encouraged when he regained his appetite, but he did not want to predict when he would be able to return to the ice. Stevens had played in all but 2 of 301 games over the last three full seasons.
''This is something I'm not used to, I'm not familiar with,'' said Stevens, who has not missed more than seven games in a season since the 1991-92 season, his first with the Devils.
The Devils ran their record without Stevens to 2-2-1-0 by rebounding from a 1-0 deficit. The backup goaltender Corey Schwab, playing his third game of the season, stopped 18 of 19 shots, and all 14 after Jaromir Jagr gave Washington (13-26-5-2) the lead.
''We've gotten used to Schwabby playing once in a while,'' Elias said.
Schwab stopped three shots on a two-man Capitals advantage that lasted two full minutes. Schwab punched Washington center Jeff Halpern in the head after Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer was called for a roughing penalty.
''To shut them down there was unbelievable,'' Devils left wing Jay Pandolfo said.
Schwab, who has allowed only two goals in three games, said he felt fine after the game, too. He has been bothered for most of the season by a groin injury. As a result, Burns has not been able to give his starting goalie, Martin Brodeur, as much rest as he would like.
''It's usually the day after that I've felt something,'' Schwab said. ''Hopefully, I'll feel good tomorrow, and build from that.''
Stevens is simply hoping to feel a little bit better each day. Asked if he had a plan in the event Stevens would be lost for a while, Burns said, ''There's not much of a plan you can have.''
The Devils seem to understand that he could be out indefinitely and that they need to keep covering for him.
''You can't replace him, that's for sure,'' Pandolfo said.
HOCKEY
