ARE you comfortable? O.K., let's start.
Once upon a time, there lived an old woman who loved painting and making fruit preserves. Her name was Anna Mary Moses, but everyone called her Grandma on account of her age. While her preserves won prizes at the county fair, nobody gave a fig for her paintings.
One day in 1938, an art collector found several of Moses's paintings hanging in a drugstore in Hoosick Falls, N.Y. He bought them. The next year, with the collector's help, Moses was included in a survey of folk and naïve artists at New York's Museum of Modern Art, and the next year she was given a solo exhibition at a swanky city gallery. It sold out. The 78-year-old artist was a new, shining art star.
Resorting to the language of fairy tales is one of many ways to characterize Moses's remarkable life and work. It is also the path the Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art has taken for its Moses retrospective, surrounding the paintings with all kinds of sentimental claptrap from laudatory wall texts and press clippings to cheesy documentary films extolling the artist's ''primitive genius.'' Together, it reads like a bedtime story.
The truth of Moses's paintings, like her life, is more mundane. She couldn't much paint, at least in the academic sense, possessing little or no understanding of color, scale or perspective. Looking at her pictures, you see crude, puppet-like figures populating generic farmyards filled with slanted, roughly delineated barns, stick-like trees and turkeys as big as horses. She also painted fast, turning out potboilers at the rate of one or two a week in the last 30 years of her life.
And yet Moses is a national folk art heroine. In 1949, President Truman received her at the White House in Washington, while in 1960 Governor Nelson Rockefeller proclaimed her birthday, Sept. 7, ''Grandma Moses Day'' in New York State. From 1946 on, her works were circulated nationally on Christmas cards, and in 1953 she was featured on the covers of Time and Life magazines. They even made postage stamps of her paintings.
At this point in the art review, it is customary for the critic to pick out a few exemplary paintings and show how they illustrate wider exhibition themes. I'm not going to do that, or at least not yet, for I think the impulse behind the virtual canonization of Moses is far more interesting than the artworks themselves. Which brings us to the nub of the issue: What national yearning does this clumsy artist fulfill?
Moses was born in 1860, the year the Civil War began. Mostly, she painted humble scenes from her provincial rural childhood in a direct, naïve style with bright colors. Quaint, folksy and unchallenging, they arouse powerful feelings of nostalgia for the lost simplicity of an idealized rural past.
The truth, of course, was another matter. Moses and her husband, Thomas Salmon Moses, had a tough life, laboring for more than two decades as tenant farmers in Virginia's Shenandoah Valley. Here she bore 10 children, five of whom died in infancy and were buried on the property. In 1905, the family was able to buy a small farm in Eagle Bridge, N.Y., where Moses began making embroidered worsted pictures, embroidery yarn on fabric.
Some of her early worsted pictures are in the Wadsworth exhibition, which is a scaled-down version of a larger show that has been touring for the last couple of years. Although bunkum as art, they lay out the blueprint for her paintings: a rectangle divided by a mountain range, with a foreground barn or village scene bisected by a road, path, fence or river. This became her signature style.
''Pumpkins'' (1959) is one of the few paintings to diverge from this formula. It is an odd picture, depicting three figures threshing what looks like grain from husks of corn (or that's my guess) inside a barn without front or back walls. The missing back wall of the barn frames the countryside beyond, which seems smaller, further away than it should be. Is this just bad painting, or is it actually an image of an image on the inside of the barn wall? At any rate, it makes you pause and think a little harder about what you see.
Which brings us back to the artist. Although her life was hard, Moses preferred to paint a rose-colored vision of her childhood and early years as a tenant farmer. Why, we don't know. But the upshot was to transform her life experiences into a visual folk tale that resonated with millions of Americans. At the same time, she became an American archetype -- the ordinary person as celebrity. Herein lies much of her appeal.
''Grandma Moses in the 21st Century'' is at the Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art, 600 Main Street, Hartford, through Feb. 15. Information: (860)278-2670.
ART REVIEW
