For more than a decade, the Air India building here was a towering reminder of the tensions between India and Pakistan. In 1993, it was the flagship target in a spate of deadly bombings attributed to Pakistan-backed militants avenging the razing of a mosque by Hindu nativists. At the building's base today, as if in an effort to purge those memories, a billboard proclaims: ''Greater friendship. Shorter flying time. We now fly through Pakistan airspace.'' In a region accustomed to war, peace is, quite literally, in the air. The question now is whether it can take hold on the ground.
On Jan. 6, Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee of India and President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan announced that their countries would restart formal peace talks next month. Bitter neighbors since their partition in 1947, predominantly Hindu India and predominantly Muslim Pakistan have gone to war three times and were on the brink of a fourth in 2002.
The barrier to rapprochement remains the Himalayan region of Kashmir. Two-thirds of the area is under Indian control, but a majority of its inhabitants are Muslim. Kashmir's symbolic importance cannot be overstated. It is seen as the incarnation of each country's founding ideal: for Pakistan, an inextricable part of a Muslim homeland; for India, testimony to its secular pluralism.
In exchange for India's willingness to negotiate over Kashmir, General Musharraf has pledged to end Pakistan's support for an Islamic insurgency in the Indian part of the region. Skepticism prevails on both sides of the border as to whether the negotiations will translate into an agreement. But rather than being viewed as a stumbling block to peace, Kashmir should instead be imagined as the solution.
For the sake of both India and Pakistan, as well as the wider region, Kashmir could be reunified as a semi-autonomous, neutral province. In an age of ever-deepening global integration, this would mark a new kind of peace, drawing Indians and Pakistanis into friendship through the compulsions of shared space.
Plans for South Asian integration are already under way. In 2006, a South Asian Free Trade Area will link India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, the Maldives, Nepal and Sri Lanka. Mr. Vajpayee has proposed even more ambitious plans for a supranational currency, parliament and bureaucracy. Architects of the plan call it the South Asian Union. As a neutral space within that union, Kashmir could host the capital for its administrative machinery. The city could adopt the name Shantinagar -- Hindi for ''peace town.''
It is a borderless solution to an endless argument over borders. In 1947, departing British colonizers ordered 562 Indian princes to join either India or the new Islamic Republic of Pakistan. Kashmir's Hindu maharajah ignored the decree, favoring a free state. But when Pakistani tribesmen abetted a local rebellion, he turned to India for protection -- a perceived betrayal of his Muslim-majority subjects. War ensued, and in the cease-fire of 1949, Pakistan kept one-third of the kingdom. The two countries fought all-out wars over Kashmir in 1965 and 1971. Since then, a Pakistani-backed uprising has incited skirmishes that have claimed thousands of lives.
Hard-liners in each country claim Kashmir wholly for their side. A settlement based on borders will, therefore, redraw the maps without resolving the rage. But a borderless peace has the potential to halt the firing -- and then to rally two vast peoples around the project of their own development.
Shantinagar would rope India and Pakistan into habits of association and foster links of trade, travel and innovation. It would catalyze millions of personal diplomacies -- the one-to-one acts of international contact that render war between leaders insupportable to their citizens.
The people of Kashmir would govern domestic matters like taxation and education. The South Asian Union would police Kashmir and coordinate union-wide policy on issues like development and counter-terrorism. Tourism revenues would be reinvested in the province, with a levy paid to India and Pakistan. Reunification would make Kashmir a hub for international attention and investment. It would also satisfy India's and Pakistan's more particular desires.
For Pakistan, the settlement would grant the Muslim-majority population the basic powers of self-government. Thus, Pakistan would get what it has long demanded: a cross-border referendum in which Kashmiris resolve their destiny. The new Kashmir would also put Pakistan on the map of power. Globalization flowers in international spaces like New York and Hong Kong. Pakistan will join the club of integrated nations only when it can claim a global hub of influence like Shantinagar.
The plan would also revitalize Pakistani tourism. South Asian Union policing would allay the worries of foreign visitors. India's middle class would make forays into what are now Pakistani areas of Kashmir. And with its economy booming, India will invest heavily in Kashmir -- with clear ripple effects for Pakistan.
For India, there would be equivalent gains from tourism. In the mid-1980's, Indian Kashmir's flower-filled lakes and snow-dusted mountains drew more than 600,000 domestic tourists a year. With the uprising, that number dropped into the hundreds.
But the real benefits to India are in geopolitics. In a region fragmented by class, caste, community and creed, India currently lacks the legitimacy to speak for all seven countries, and thus to drive regionwide reforms required for progress. But in a neutral space, through neutral institutions, India would be free to orchestrate strategy for South Asia on issues like terrorism, trade and development.
Perhaps even richer gains for India lie beyond South Asia. India, with one-sixth of mankind, aspires to be an ambassador for developing nations. For its voice to resonate with those nations, it must address the world from a neutral mountaintop, not a combat zone littered with Muslim bodies.
As for the Kashmiris themselves, whose interests are too often neglected, this settlement would bring two of the things they most desire: self-determination and money from tourism.
Why should this plan succeed where others have failed? Perhaps because it permits mutual face-saving. Pakistan can say that a Muslim-majority state is at the heart of the new South Asia. And India can claim Kashmir as the foundation for what is, effectively, Greater India. A plan for a borderless peace makes the most of a global moment. The insight of our age is that borders sanctify difference, but that borderlessness spurs partnership. Our century may enrich the Asian tigers. But it will belong to the snarling lions that learn to hunt in packs.
Op-Ed Contributor Anand Giridharadas, a former journalist, is a management consultant.
