I have two kitchens, one in Manhattan, the other on Long Island. Each has a table that seats six. The one in the city is made of stainless steel and was built by a shop on Grand Street that does sheet-metal work for Chinese restaurants. Normally the shop doesn't bother with individuals, but one of the owners had a young son named Jason and made an exception in my case. The table in the country is an old, somewhat battered reproduction of a round-topped table that might have been in use when the house was built in 1790 and was left behind by the previous owner when I bought the place in the 1960's. Until I was asked some years ago by a food magazine to write something about my kitchen I hadn't noticed what has since become obvious to me: these two kitchens bear a strong family resemblance, despite the different tabletops. It was as if I had designed them with a common ancestor in mind.
For years, between marriages, I seldom visited the other rooms in my Long Island house, spending most of my time in the kitchen reading in a comfortable blue chair beside an old brick fireplace. I had what, in retrospect, seems to have been an aversion to the bedrooms upstairs to which, I imagined, foolishly, my grown children might someday return. I slept in a room off the kitchen. Only when more than six people came to dinner did I use the dining room, reluctantly, and still do. The same is true in the city. I prefer to read and write in the kitchen and almost never sit in the living room. This part of the apartment has always seemed off limits to me, like the front parlors of Victorian houses with their rubber plants, stuffed birds and antimacassars. Only on the grandest occasions do we use the dining room with its gleaming Louis XV table surrounded by crammed bookshelves and old silver candlesticks made into pink-shaded lamps.
When I sat down in my city kitchen to write the article and looked toward the ceiling for inspiration, I noticed for the first time that the varnish that had been applied 10 years previously to the wainscoted walls and ceiling had by now turned the color of honey. I wondered how long it would be before these walls acquired the look of the ancient pumpkin pine of which the cabinets and countertops in my country kitchen were made. It was then, in a flash of memory, that I saw with sudden clarity the ancestor from which these two kitchens with their paneled walls and utilitarian Garland stoves derived: it was my grandmother Ida's kitchen in Maine, where I spent my most vivid, most pleasant and perhaps most formative childhood years.
My grandparents lived atop a steep hill in what seems to me in memory to have been a very large house whose rooms ran one into the other. There was very little central heating, so in winter, when frost formed sharp peaks on the heavy storm windows, everyone sat in the kitchen, warmed by the big wood stove with nickel trim and the words Model Home Fireside above a temperature gauge on the oven door. My own perch was to the left of the stove, atop a wood box painted robin's-egg blue, from which I could observe the activity around me: my grandmother in a faded apron and oxford glasses removing a towering apple pie from the oven; an aunt at the sewing machine between the windows, beyond which I could see the wind-whipped snow swirling against the blackness of the open barn doors and my friend Raymond, who would grow up to be a priest in Canada, trudging uphill on his wooden skis. Pete, the old English bulldog who once rescued me unnecessarily from a snowdrift by tugging at my sleeve, growling softly, was asleep on a blanket beneath the oven door. The walls were wainscoted from floor to ceiling like the walls of my present kitchen, but the varnish was older and mellower. The copper plumbing at the black slate sink must have been added later, since it was bracketed to the walls and groaned and rattled whenever the faucet was opened.
On summer days when the kitchen became uncomfortably warm and the fumes of melting tar on the road clutched at our throats, I would retreat to read in a large, cool pantry -- called the shed -- off the passageway that led to the barn. It was in this shed, with its remnant of winter cold, that my grandmother kept her preserves: shelves of peaches and green tomatoes, figs in syrup, pears, rhubarb and purple plums, eggplant, applesauce, cucumbers and peppers in shiny jars, which in memory I have conflated with my grandmother's gleaming oxford glasses and their gold chain. Old patchwork quilts were piled in a corner where Pete spent the night.
Whether my grandmother was a good cook I can't say, but she was said to be, and mealtimes, when the family gathered around the large oak table, were always a joy. I remember in summertime bowls of coleslaw, pickled cucumbers and green tomatoes, beet soup, platters of fried or roasted chicken, apple pies and, in winter, double brisket and braised root vegetables, breast of veal stuffed with Swiss chard, lamb braised slowly for hours.
My grandparents were immigrants from the Crimea who joined other family members who had already settled in Maine to become peddlers and later shopkeepers. They were not religious, but on holidays my grandmother, as a matter of pride, cooked and baked for the synagogue, and the family, most of whom were strictly nonobservant, shared her ethnic menu at home: chicken soup with dumplings, pickled fish, stuffed cabbage and so on. When the chickens she fattened were ready to be killed, it was my job to carry them in a burlap sack down the hill to the ritual butcher who cut their throats and turned them over to a weakminded nephew who sat in a dark corner and plucked their feathers. When he had finished, I put the chickens, wrapped in the Yiddish newspaper, into the burlap sack and trudged back up the hill. Next door to the butcher's shop was a secondhand bookstore, where a studious cousin, then in college, found a five-volume edition of Macaulay's ''History of England'' and asked me to help carry it up the hill. Though these books probably weighed no more than the chickens, they felt much heavier in the summer heat. I remember gasping for breath as I finally reached the summit of Prospect Hill. To this day, I cannot think of Macaulay without recalling the ritual butcher and his speechless nephew pulling feathers in the darkened corner.
I have never taken much stock in psychoanalysis, with its emphasis on repressed memory. It has always seemed to me that the important roots of human suffering are to be found within the shared failings of the species itself, modified by personal genetic determinants, and not primarily amid the accidental encounters of one's childhood. Nevertheless, I am grateful for the occasion to have uncovered the source of my affection for varnished wainscoting, for the robin's-egg-blue kitchen armchair where I like to read and my preference for the kitchen as a place in which not only to cook and eat but also to read, write and contemplate the world, and of course my habit of bracketing England's great Whig historian with a plucked chicken wrapped in a Yiddish newspaper.
My grandmother's chicken potpie was a family favorite, but I didn't like her crust, which, no matter how shiny on top, was gummy underneath. When I began to make my own chicken pies I saw that an obvious way to avoid this was to bake a puff-pastry crust separately and serve it in a wedge, like a gaufrette, atop the contents of the pie.
Chicken Potpie  3 tablespoons vegetable oil  4 8-ounce skinless and boneless chicken-breast halves, cut into 1-inch cubes  8 tablespoons butter, plus extra for greasing parchment  20 pearl onions, blanched and peeled  3 carrots, cut in  1/2-inch rounds  1 celery heart in  1/2-inch dice  20 button mushroom caps or  1/2 pound porcini mushrooms, stems cut off, cut into 1-inch pieces  4 cups strong homemade chicken stock or 5 cups of organic chicken broth from a carton, reduced to 4, plus extra if needed
1/2 cup all-purpose flour  1 1/2 cups half-and-half or heavy cream  1 sprig fresh rosemary, leaves finely chopped, plus extra for garnish  1 tablespoon chopped thyme leaves  1 tablespoon chopped Italian parsley  3 tablespoons dry sherry  Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste  3 tablespoons lemon juice  1 pound homemade puff pastry (or Dufour brand ready made)  Egg wash (1 egg yolk beaten with  2 teaspoons heavy cream).
1. In a Dutch oven, heat oil over medium heat and sauté the chicken, in batches, until lightly golden but not cooked through. Set aside.
2. In the same, cleaned pan, melt 2 tablespoons butter. Sauté the onions until golden brown, about 5 minutes. Remove to bowl with the chicken. Repeat with carrots and celery and then mushrooms. In a separate pan, heat stock to boiling.
3. Clean Dutch oven again. Melt remaining butter over medium heat. Whisk in flour and cook until pale gold, 2 minutes. Whisk in boiling stock, half-and-half, herbs, sherry and salt and pepper and heat to a slow boil. Reduce heat and simmer 5 minutes or until thick enough to coat a spoon. (If too thick, add more stock.) Stir in 2 tablespoons lemon juice, the chicken and vegetables. Cover with buttered parchment. (Pie can be prepared ahead to this point and refrigerated until 1 hour before cooking.)
4. Preheat oven to 425 degrees. Roll out the pastry into a square just less than  1/2 inch thick and, using a very sharp knife, cut a round the size of the pot. Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment and invert the round on top. (Sprinkle the scraps with sugar, twist them into corkscrew shapes and bake them as cookies.) If using Dufour, follow package directions.
5. Brush pastry with egg wash, without letting any drip down the sides, which will prevent it from rising evenly. Prick all over with a fork. (For a flatter, denser crust, omit the wash, cover pastry with a second sheet of parchment paper and a second sheet pan on top, forming a sandwich. This keeps the puff pastry from rising and provides a crunchy, buttery pastry.)
6. Bake pastry until puffed, browned and crisp, 15 to 20 minutes. Reduce heat to 350 degrees and bake until cooked through, 15 to 20 minutes longer.
7. Reduce oven temperature to 275 degrees. Bake chicken mixture until sauce is bubbly around edges and chicken is just cooked through, about 30 minutes. Place baking sheet with pastry in oven to reheat the last 10 minutes of cooking.
8. To serve: Remove parchment from Dutch oven and taste sauce. Adjust seasoning and stir in remaining lemon juice if needed. Slide pastry onto chicken mixture and display your pie. Back in the kitchen, cut the crust into wedges with a serrated knife. Spoon chicken onto warmed plates, stick a corner of a wedge into each serving and garnish with rosemary.
Yield: 6 servings.
Note: Reheat chicken in a microwave or double boiler -- it may scorch over direct heat.
FOOD
