VIJAY IYER AND MIKE LADD -- ''In What Language?'' (Pi Recordings) is an album-length ''song-cycle about people in airports,'' by jazz musicians (including the pianist Vijay Iyer) and hip-hoppers (including the rapper and poet Mike Ladd). The basic idea, explored in 17 different vignettes, is what happens to dark-complexioned travelers since Sept. 11 -- the quest to be a citizen of the world versus the didactic lessons of Homeland Security. With a seven-piece band playing odd-meter funk, lulling ambient chords, blots of rhythm under Indian-accented raps, it's that elusive thing, underground political music that sounds good. And though its points of origin are far from the mainstream of either hip-hop or jazz, let's count it as a breakthrough hip-hop-jazz fusion. Because if we do, it's one of the smartest I've heard, and one of the few that really works. (Mr. Ladd and Mr. Iyer will perform at Joe's Pub in the East Village on Tuesday.)
MIGUEL ZENÓN -- The ambitious young alto saxophonist Miguel Zenón is powered by the desire to incorporate Latin rhythm into the leading edge of mainstream jazz, and by a lot of the compositional stuff he's heard from his New York peers since he moved here five years ago. His second album, ''Ceremonial,'' just out on Marsalis Music, goes a step forward from the last one, ''Looking Forward,'' while working on the same basic areas. He wants an instrumental music with intelligent, hustling chromatic lines as well as a strong, affecting vocal music (Luciana Souza sings wordlessly on ''Transfiguration'') that goes beyond simple song forms. And he wants a rhythmic music that mixes Puerto Rican roots percussion into the complicated new world of jazz rhythm sections. This record covers a lot of territory: sometimes the harmonies are a little too sweet for my taste, then sometimes the music goes the other way, into a hammering cerebral feeling, then toward a nearly hymnlike earnestness. But at the middle of things is a really gorgeous saxophone sound -- light but full and shining, suggestive of Charlie Parker's ballad tone.
DONALD LAMBERT -- He was one of the first-generation pianists to play the stride style, which keeps an oom-pah pattern in the left hand while the right pushes and pulls against it. He was also a musician who spent much of his performing life, of his own volition, playing in small New Jersey bars. (He died in 1962 with such a low profile that he wasn't even listed in Grove's Dictionary of Jazz until the 2002 revision.) Lambert didn't love recording studios, either; there were a few singles recorded in the 1940's and some audience tapes that were made into obscure LP's in the 70's, which are now collected on CD as ''Recorded 1959-1961,'' on the Storyville label. Why do we care? Well, he wasn't Art Tatum, improvisationally; nobody else built ziggurats in the air like Tatum. But central to stride playing is rhythmic drive, and Lambert's earned him the nickname the Jersey Rocket. On a succession of inadequate pianos, he proves this over and over on the disc, his left hand pumping along through pop songs, James P. Johnson tunes and jazzed classics (like Grieg's ''Anitra's Dance'') at fast tempos, while his right hand flitters gracefully. And in the nature of all great solo performances, the tunes are built of shifting sections; they're heavily, and carefully, arranged.
GILBERTO GIL -- Mr. Gil didn't prove himself a great popular songwriter until 1967 or so; like most artists, he didn't arrive full-blown and had to learn his craft and make a living. In the early 1960's, while studying business administration at the University of Bahia in Brazil, he cut a few songs under the direction of Jorge Santos, who mostly recorded commercial jingles; that period is laid out for all to hear on the album ''Salvador, 1962-1963'' (Warner Brazil). These rare singles contain some sweet, bouncy Carnival marchinhas and samba ballads, but no incredible songs; one of the records, ''Povo Petroleiro,'' was financed by an executive at Petrobras, Brazil's major oil company, and contains the lyric ''our petrol is Brazilian gold; it's the pride of a petrol people.'' But as an early look at a great artist in the making it's instructive, like Andy Warhol's 1950's shoe drawings.
JOEL FRAHM WITH BRAD MEHLDAU -- Mr. Frahm, an underrated tenor saxophonist who's played in the singer Jane Monheit's band for a few years, has a handsome, schooled, sensible, take-its-time sound. Here, on ''Don't Explain'' (Palmetto), a duo recording with the pianist Brad Mehldau, he stamps harmonic variations on standards, including ''Get Happy,'' a few different takes of ''Round Midnight'' and a medium-slow ballad version of Sonny Rollins's traditionally breathless ''Oleo.'' Jazz is hard to talk about sometimes, and this is a good example: here's a record that revels in small clashes, silences, key changes, broken-up rhythm patterns. But it never becomes abstract -- not once -- because both these musicians have such a sense of continuity and logic in their improvisations.
MUSIC: PLAYLIST
