FOR years the residents of Berrian and Elizabeth Roads and Wykagyl Terrace in New Rochelle used to complain about speeding drivers in their neighborhood, like the frantic commuters who went barreling through the narrow residential streets at high speed en route to or from the nearby Hutchinson River Parkway.
Still, it was the car that went airborne and then got stuck on top of a boulder in the middle of a neighborhood traffic island that convinced many residents that they still had a grievous speeding problem problem in their neighborhood, which has both a large number of children, as well as synagogues, that encourage their members to walk to services.
''There is no way that a car could wind up sitting on a boulder on a traffic island unless it had been speeding,'' said Lynn Halpern, a resident and a member of the Wykagyl Crossways Neighborhood Association, which represents 400 homes in the area.
More and more, Wykagyl residents are voicing complaints about speeding issues, Mrs. Halpern said, and they are not alone. Law enforcement officials throughout Westchester generally say that they have perhaps not noticed a dramatic increase in the actual number of speeders, but they have certainly noticed over the last five years -- and the last two years in particular -- that more county residents are complaining about them, , often loudly, and with persistence. In certain parts of the county, like Somers, at least some of the complaints, they say, have been prompted by a number of recent and very bad speeding-related accidents, while other complaints have come from residents who say that they are tired of being victimized by speeders in their neighborhoods.
The rise in speeding complaints does not surprise Steven Brown, a traffic engineer.
''Neighborhood intervention against speeding is increasing across the country,'' said Mr. Brown, of Fehr &amp; Peers, a transportation consulting company based in Lafayette, Calif., ''largely because people are both more aware of the tools that can be used to control speeding, but also because quality of life has become so much more prominent of an issue over the last decade.''
Still, according to statistics from the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles, speeding may be more than just a quality-of-life issue in Westchester. The number of speeding tickets issued between 1993 and 2002 rose to 48,947 from 41,999. Oddly, the number of drivers convicted for speeding in the county dropped to 22,940 from 29,108 in the same period, The number of accidents that had unsafe speed as a contributing factor rose. In 1993, there were 1,072 such accidents countywide, while in 2001, the latest year for which statistics are available, there were 1,749 such accidents.
Some Westchester residents are fed up. There are stories of residents who double-park their cars along narrow residential streets to foil would-be speeders, as well as those who say they routinely step into the path of speeding vehicles, shouting epithets or making angry gestures. Then there are residents, like Robert Stevens, a retired liquor company salesman who lives in Valhalla, who have changed their driving habits. Two to three times a week, Mr. Stevens and his wife, Helen, take the Sprain Brook Parkway from their home to the superstore Stew Leonard's in Yonkers. When they do, Mr. Stevens said, they travel in only the right lane.
''I see cars on the Sprain zipping in and about at 80 miles an hour all the time,'' Mr. Stevens said, ''and the only time you see a police officer is when there is an accident.'' He is convinced that highways like the Sprain, as well as Route 22, going toward North Castle, are now patrolled less frequently for speeders than they were 15 years ago.
Lately, some parts of Westchester have been gaining notoriety as speeding hot spots. One is Central Park Avenue, which runs through communities like Yonkers and Greenburgh, and where the speed limit, depending on the location, is either 30 or 40 miles per hour. A growing number of young men are using the six-lane road, especially on Thursday nights, to speed up to the Sprain Brook Parkway, which they are using in turn as a drag strip, said Francis Intervallo, the commander for the special operations division of the Yonkers Police Department. The police have clocked an ''alarming'' number of drivers traveling between 70 and 80 m.p.h., as well as some going more than 100 m.p.h., he said.
Yonkers police officers began cracking down on the speeders last September by teaming up with Greenburgh officers, as well as with the county and the state police. During the first effort, a Thursday night in early October, the officers arrested two drivers for especially egregious instances of speeding -- one of whom was conducting speeding contests -- and issued summonses to 45 other drivers.
In some parts of the county, like the fast-growing Town of Somers, congestion seems to be spurring a rise in speeding complaints. ''It's almost counter-intuitive, but it seems that as more people get on the road, drivers are becoming more easily frustrated, and that is leading to a greater tendency to speed,'' said Paul Meyer, a town councilman.
Some roads in Westchester may actually encourage speeders. In Hastings-on-Hudson, Margaret Walker, a planning consultant, said that her village is trying to find a way to redesign its portion of Route 9, because the busy four-lane road, which has few traffic signals on it, has so many speeders that local residents are reluctant to take walks or ride their bikes there.
In Somers, Police Chief Michael W. Driscoll said that although his town does not seem to have more speeders than other northern Westchester communities, it does have a number of long stretches of semirural road -- like Lovell Street, Mahopac Avenue and Route 118 -- where drivers can easily pick up speed and hit 70 m.p.h., with almost no effort. His department began a ''ticket blitz'' last year, aimed at reducing speeding on specific roads, as well as keeping track of just how fast drivers are traveling.
So far, efforts to curb speeders in Westchester County have tended to focus mostly on stepped-up traffic enforcement, rather than on the so-called traffic calming measures that use physical means like speed humps, traffic circles and diverters to curb speeding. While such traffic measures have been used in Europe for about 30 years, so far in the United States they have picked up proponents mostly on the West Coast.
In Westchester, efforts to curb speeding have occasionally run into jurisdictional differences. The city of Yonkers, for example, is reponsible for enforcing a 30-mile-per-hour speed limit on its portion of Central Park Avenue, as well as the 40-mile-per-hour speed limit on the portion of the road that is owned by New York State, and which now runs between the Town of Greenburgh and the New York State Thruway. Lately, however, enforcement efforts throughout the county seem to have picked up.
In Rye, police officers wrote almost twice as many summonses for speeding in 2002 as they did in 2001, and last summer the city hired its first full-time officer for conducting radar patrols, according to William Connors, the police commissioner. He said that while the number of speeders in his community does not appear to be growing, enforcement is still up since speeding is a ''very real concern'' for the city's 15,000 residents, both on the busy Boston Post Road, and on the city's residential streets, some of which are old and narrow. ''The speed limit here is 30 miles per hour,'' he said, ''but we've clocked people going 50 or 55.''
In White Plains, Mayor Joseph M. Delfino said that since he became mayor in 1998, speeding issues have turned into a main area of concern for him and that recent speeding complaints helped prompt a six-month-long ''safe streets'' traffic enforcement and education campaign last year.
In the last two years, he said, White Plains has more than doubled the number of patrol cars or motorcycles that are equipped with radar, trained a dozen more police officers how to use radar, and added six new speed-detection displays that are either mounted on poles, or are part of street-side readout trailers. In the Wykagyl area of New Rochelle, Mrs. Halpern said that her local police department has been quick to respond to speeding complaints in her neighborhood, and that police officers, usually two or three times a year, will post a speed trailer in the area to give motorists a digital readout of their speeds. Still, New Rochelle has just one trailer for the entire city, which covers 10 1/2 square miles, and when the trailer is taken away from Mrs. Halpern's neighborhood, the speeders come back. ''We would love to have a speed indicator on every street,'' she said.
While residents complain, law enforcement officials say that it is very easy for bystanders to overestimate a car's speed. As a result, someone who seems to be driving 40 to 45 m.p.h. may be going only about 30 m.p.h., said Lt. George Masseo of the New Rochelle Police Department.
''We're getting a lot of complaints about speeders here, yet this is more of a perception than an actual problem,'' he said. ''There are people speeding out there, especially on highways, but I don't see it as a big problem on city streets.''
But some residents are adamant that they have serious problems in their neighborhoods. One is Florence Katz, a 45-year-long resident of Paine Avenue in New Rochelle, who says that she screams and waves her arms at speeders almost every day because her street, which has no stop signs, has turned into a high-speed thoroughfare for drivers trying to travel quickly between North Avenue and Pinebrook Boulevard.
''I'm not letting this issue rest,'' she said. ''I'm incensed about it.''
LAST fall, a group of concerned New Rochelle residents held a meeting at the corner of Paine Avenue and Bayeau Road to complain about local speeders to a New Rochelle city councilman, Noam Bramson, and to Jeffrey C. Coleman, a deputy public works commissioner who is also the traffic engineer for the city.
At the meeting, the residents discovered that a recent traffic survey by the city had found that while some drivers appeared to be traveling about 38 m.p.h. along Paine Avenue, the average driver was traveling about 30 to 31 m.p.h. The residents also discovered that the intersection where they were holding the meeting was ineligible for a four-way stop sign because only about 900 cars were passing through it every eight hours, and state and federal guidelines require a minimum of at least 4,000 vehicles during that time period for a four-way stop sign.
When the residents asked about the possibility of having a traffic island installed at the intersection, they were told that a traffic island, depending on size and complexity, might cost between $2,000 and $40,000, and that they would probably have to pay for it themselves because of the current budget deficit in New Rochelle.
Martha McCann, president of the Paine Heights Neighborhood Association, which represents 210 homes in the area, said that her group wants a new traffic count, because the last one was conducted in August, when road traffic is generally light. She said that her association plans to draft a letter to local residents, urging them to press the city to station a police officer along Paine Avenue during peak traffic times, like the evening rush hour.
Still, even when speeding deterrents are put into place, many drivers routinely ignore them, say some Westchester residents.
Kathleen Donahue, a part-time psychiatric nurse who lives on Pelhamdale Avenue in Pelham, says she is outraged by the number of speeders on her block. Her house sits between Colonial Avenue and Boulevard, and it has long been used as a flyway by local drivers who are looking for a quick way either to the center of the village or to the nearby train station.
In the mid-1990's, Ms. Donahue helped circulate a petition that eventually led to a 15-m.p.h. speed limit for her block during school hours. Still, in November 1999, when she was parking on the street so that a gutter-cleaning service could use her driveway, she was hit by a car that she strongly believes was speeding. The accident left her right leg severely fractured.
Ms. Donahue's block has large, yellow blinking signs at both ends that are meant to warn drivers that speed is restricted to 15 m.p.h. between 8 a.m. and 4 p.m. Even so, she says that she routinely sees cars zooming by at least twice as fast.
Richard Slingerland, the village administrator for Pelham, said that Ms. Donahue's complaints were the first that had been voiced about that section of Pelhamdale Road in a long time, and that the village planned to look into them. Ms. Donahue, meanwhile, says she is surprised by how many speeders wave to her while she is walking her two sons, Scott and Eric, to their elementary school, which has grounds backing up onto Ms. Donahue's block. She now realizes that the speeders on her block are not necessarily interlopers from other communities, but some of her neighbors, as well as the many business people who both live and work in the area.
Some communities in Westchester say that they have made the same, surprising discovery lately. In White Plains, Mayor Delfino said that it was ''ironic'' that 31 percent of the summonses his city issued last year during its safe-streets campaign went to its own residents.
''People just don't know that it is their neighbors who are speeding,'' he said. ''That is one of the messages that we still have to get across.''
Slowing Down the Speeders
SOME local officials in Westchester say that speeding problems are often the most difficult and frustrating problems for a municipality to tackle, and that even a seemingly simple solution may backfire. If a street has too many stop signs, for example, some drivers start to ignore them, while other drivers actually speed up to make up for lost traveling time. In general, traffic engineers say, stop signs are more useful for controlling traffic flow than for stopping speeders.
Lately, many Westchester communities have been turning to digital speed displays to discourage would-be speeders. Still, many local traffic experts say that these displays -- as well as the three-foot-high, people-shaped fluorescent green signs that are increasingly popping up around the county -- are most effective for educating would-be speeders, rather than for stopping them.
To deter speeders more effectively, some towns and cities in the United States -- especially those with populations of 100,000 or more -- have been turning lately to a variety of traffic calming measures. These measures can include speed humps and speed tables, raised crosswalks, traffic circles, diagonal diverters and chicanes, which are curb extensions that alternate from one side of a road to the other, forming S-shaped curves.
In general, traffic engineers say, traffic calming measures that try to narrow the width of a particular road appear to be less effective at reducing the number of speeders than those that work vertically, like speed tables and humps. Still, not all vertical traffic calming measures are created equal. Many traffic experts think that speed bumps, for example, should be installed in parking lots only, and that speed humps or speed tables are less jarring to drivers on the open road.
Even then, communities can expect tradeoffs. Speed tables, for example, are made to have flat tops so that they will be less jarring to emergency vehicles like fire trucks, but they are slightly less effective at reducing road speed than speed humps, which are simply rounded, raised areas placed across a roadway.
SANA SIWOLOP
Correction:  February 8, 2004, Sunday  An article on Jan. 18 about speeding in Westchester misstated figures for speeding summonses issued in Rye. They increased by more than 9 percent in 2002 over 2001; they did not rise to almost twice as many in 2002.
The article also referred incorrectly to Rye's hiring of its first full-time officer for conducting radar patrols; the officer was already on the force, and was reassigned to radar patrols last summer from other duties.
