To the Editor:
This article poses a problem that requires all parties to be willing to give a little. I have served as a director of three land trusts (Norwalk Land Trust at present) and know how hard it is to find people willing to donate land or contribute big money toward its purchase. At the same time, the best donors understand that land stewardship under a land trust is for the benefit of wildlife, ecosystems, habitats, wetlands and the whole natural environment as much as to preserve the donor's property value, scenic views and quality of life.
I am a member of the Natural Organic Farmers Association of Connecticut, whose credo is to keep food production local. That requires farmland and people willing to be farmers. Energy conservation (to reduce the number of trucks of produce and meat from traveling the highways of the country to get to us) and a clean pesticide and smog-free environment demand it. Much of what remains of our Connecticut farmland has been turned into sod and nursery stock for landscaping, a much more pesticide-intensive kind of ''farming'' which has nothing to do with keeping food production local.
In the case of the Stuart Family Farm, these people are just the kind of small farmers we want to keep in the state. After attending the 2003 Celebration of Connecticut Farms, Food, and Wine on Beaver Brook sheep farm in Lyme in September, my husband and I have been purchasing our beef from Deb and Bill Stuart because it is grass-fed, free of antibiotics and delicious. We make the trip to Bridgewater because it's worth it to purchase food from the source. As farmers, they are trying to do the best for the land and at the same time raise enough food to sell to support their family. It's unfortunate that their weekend neighbors feel they can dictate the rules for another family's attempt to make a living.
The real problem here lies with the Bridgewater Land Trust not having spelled out their policies explicitly before accepting the land. An ''implicit'' commitment to preserve the property as a farm without allowing farming beyond a subsistence level had to be clarified in advance, and a ''gentleman farmer'' found who would be willing to become the tenant farmer under those conditions.
Perhaps the three donors should find that kind of a farmer for the land trust, or come to a more reasonable agreement with the Stuarts. Perhaps the Stuarts could establish a direct link to their customers to sell their meat without a farm stand; but they alone know how many cows it will take for them to make ends meet. Wolf Neck Farm in South Freeport, Me., has operated like this for years. Lastly, the land trust must get its policies in explicit order for future offers of land or money. If they end up having to take on the maintenance of the Stuart farm without an endowment to cover the expense of mowing, haying, building upkeep they had better start fund-raising right now.
A word of caution to all land trusts: know your donors before accepting their land.
Marny Smith  Norwalk
