AS of Jan. 6, Gov. John G. Rowland's political future depended heavily on his fellow Republican lawmakers. He planned to meet with a group of them the next morning at his mansion to ask for loyalty as a federal investigation ensnared his administration.
But just 24 hours later, three Republicans had asked the governor to resign and, by the next day, two more would follow. Those first Republican defections were, in some ways, a ''Goldwater moment,'' one Republican state senator said. He was referring to 1974 when Senator Barry M. Goldwater told President Richard M. Nixon that Republicans in Congress would not stop his impeachment and conviction if he decided to remain in office. No longer could the president blame his troubles on the media or partisan politics. It was time to go.
''Nixon knew then it was over,'' said the senator, who asked not to be identified.
Indeed, some lawmakers and political observers said the tide had already begun to turn against the governor, but others said the Republicans who first told the governor to leave were influential in isolating him.
''It is a Goldwater moment,'' said John Orman, professor of politics at Fairfield University. ''It's also the turning point in the whole incident. Once Republican lawmakers spoke out against him it showed everybody in Connecticut that it wasn't a partisan witch hunt to get John Rowland.''
Since the first five Republican lawmakers -- Representatives Kevin Witkos, Robert Peters and Diana Urban and Senators Anthony Guglielmo and John Kissel -- asked the governor to resign, calls for his resignation among party members have flooded in. Dean Pagani, the governor's spokesman, has repeatedly said the governor has no intention to resign.
Last Monday, when United States Representative Christopher Shays asked the governor to resign, he cited a passage from the play ''Julius Caesar.''
''There is a little bit, as I walk into this room, of 'And you too, Brutus,''' he said, acknowledging the weight of the knife in his hand.
Why did it come to this?
Republican lawmakers said they waited to see what the governor would do after he admitted he had lied about taking gifts from state contractors and political appointees for his Bantam Lake vacation cottage. That disclosure came out on Dec. 12. Meanwhile, Republicans said they were hoping the governor would come clean and tell the public about any further misdeeds.
But after the holidays, they realized that the governor would not offer further disclosures. Meanwhile, newspapers were publishing articles revealing new aspects of the scandal every day.
Mr. Witkos, who represents Canton, and Mr. Peters, who represents Berlin, both asked the governor to resign, said Michael Downes, press secretary for both representatives. They were the first.
''They responded with what was in their hearts, which was that the governor needed to resign,'' Mr. Downes said.
Ms. Urban said she was concerned about the impact of the constant stream of new revelations about the governor.
''It becomes the death of a thousand cuts,'' said Ms. Urban, a representative from North Stonington. ''At what cut do we say, 'You really have got to resign.'''
She was the first Republican lawmaker to ask the governor to step aside while a federal investigation ran its course and among the first five to ask him to resign.
The governor did not invite her to the mansion to plead for her support, presumably because he already knew how she felt, she said.
''That was what was understood,'' Ms. Urban said. ''That he wanted people around him who would tell him what he wanted to hear. You need to talk to the people who have doubts. You need to convince those people you are fit to govern.''
Mr. Guglielmo, a Republican state senator from Stafford Springs who was also one of the first five, was invited to a meeting that Thursday, the day after the governor's speech.
Mr. Guglielmo said the decision to ask the governor to resign was difficult and came only after some soul-searching and a long talk with his wife.
''I just tried to think, 'Under what set of circumstances would the state be better off if the governor stays?' And I couldn't think of any,'' he said.
Though Mr. Rowland appealed to the Republican leadership to support him, those leaders left the decision of how to respond up to individual lawmakers. Republican leaders in the State Legislature never pressured anyone to stand in line, said Robert M. Ward, the Republican House minority leader. Neither Mr. Ward nor Louis C. DeLuca, the Senate minority leader, appealed to Republicans to support the governor.
''I recommended to members of my caucus that they should speak what their conscience told them to say,'' Mr. Ward said. ''My sense is that he's let the Republican Party down, not the Republican Party letting him down.''
Senate Republican leaders took a similar stance.
''We're a pretty independent group,'' Mr. Guglielmo said of the Senate Republicans. ''Lou's a great leader for us. He's laid back and he didn't press on us.''
Politically, the Republicans are better off if Mr. Rowland is gone, Dr. Orman said. Lt. Gov. M. Jodi Rell, also a Republican, is popular in the state and could help Republicans regain political clout if Mr. Rowland stepped down, Dr. Orman said. The Republicans could then further distance themselves from Mr. Rowland's misdeeds.
''That's why you see them coming out,'' he said. ''They want Rowland to go as soon as possible.''
But Republicans said they had another reason to abandon the governor. Though he was well-liked by many Republican lawmakers, he often failed to stand by his party, they said.
Though the governor has enjoyed bipartisan support in the Legislature, that support came with a price. He alienated many of his fellow Republicans, Ms. Urban said, especially when he brokered deals with Democrats during last year's budget talks to raise taxes.
''The Republican troops supported him and then he turned around and cut a deal with the Democrats,'' she said.
What further hurt Mr. Rowland, various Republican lawmakers said, was his reluctance to use his political cachet to help them get elected. When it came to election time, he had no coattails, they said.
''In my district, he waves as he goes by,'' said Senator George Gunther, the senior Republican in the Senate. ''When he'd run, he'd run for John.''
Mr. Gunther, who asked Mr. Rowland to resign last week, said the governor ignored his party for too long.
''John wants you to throw yourself on a funeral pyre for him, but that kind of loyalty you have to earn,'' he said.
Representative Lenny Winkler, a Republican from Groton, recalled an event she attended with the governor a couple of years ago on the submarine U.S.S. Connecticut. A member of the committee that worked on the submarine project had a question for her that she couldn't answer. So, she asked the governor if she could speak to him about the question.
''I asked him if I could speak to him for two minutes and he said, 'I am not being lobbied today,''' Ms. Winkler recalled. ''That was two minutes of his time. That's all I asked for.''
So, two weeks ago, when the governor asked Ms. Winkler to come to the mansion to hear his pleas for forgiveness, she decided not to show up.
''He was obviously going to try to lobby us,'' she said. ''So I thought 'I am not being lobbied today.'''
