IT'S cold outside. In fact, it's very, very cold outside. It was very, very, very cold last week. And that is a challenge to people responsible for warning of us of the latest wind chill: not that many words in English can describe how cold it is.
Oh, there is chilly, freezing, frigid and, perhaps when temperatures rise to that balmy realm above 30 degrees Fahrenheit, nippy. But beyond the elemental, we have to resort to strings of adjectives to capture the light yet implacable, numbing, sneaky, malevolent, vicious, dry-iced air that wrapped itself around New York City last week like whatever is the opposite of a warm blanket.
It is widely believed that some languages contain numerous words for subtly different versions of the same thing -- that Eskimos, for example, have hundreds words for different kinds of snow. But that is bunk, said Geoffrey K. Pullum, a professor of linguistics at the University of California at Santa Cruz. Eskimos use a variety of suffixes to describe different kinds of snow more precisely, much as speakers of English use adjectives, but do not have many more nouns for the fluffy stuff itself.
''Talking about something does not depend on how many words you have for it,'' Professor Pullum said. ''There are things for which we don't have words at all. Let me cite, for example, the feeling of having an orgasm. It is indescribable in words -- that is, there are no words for it -- but that doesn't matter.''
The problem is more general, he and other linguists said. Apparently we as a species have not proved adept at concocting words to describe sensations, whether visual, tactile, olfactory, auditory or otherwise.
''If you think about the job of a food critic, it's very hard,'' said Robin T. Lakoff, a professor of linguistics at the University of California at Berkeley.
''It's 'delicious,' it's 'terrible,' it's 'crunchy,' it's 'creamy,' but I really don't think there are words, at least in English,'' that capture the experience of taste, she added.
Asked about the challenge of finding words to describe cold in particular, Ms. Lakoff paused, then said, ''That's why I came to California.''
The problem is a lack of imagination in using the words that are available to describe day after day of icy cold, through similes, metaphors and wild exaggerations, Professor Pullum said. The focus on the number of words available, he said, is misguided.
''It's as if you feel you're not having a new thought unless you have a new word, as if thoughts and words are in a one-to-one correspondence,'' he said. There are not nouns for every thing, or adjectives for every characteristic, or adverbs for every way of doing something, he noted. But combining the words available works perfectly well, he added.
''Don't worry about running out of words,'' Mr. Pullum advised. ''You have to worry about original thoughts to put across. If you have an original thought, the English language will not let you down.''
