MICHAEL WATT doesn't like to admit that he is ''Ask Mr. Long Island,'' the know-it-all answer man on the www.longisland.com Web site. But as director of the site, Mr. Watt, 44, is the one who helps surfers find information they need. . While he calls being Mr. Long Island ''my secret life,'' Mr. Watt recently decided to come out of the trivia closet.
''It's a real snapshot of Long Island,'' Mr. Watt said of the wide range of questions he has been asked. Longisland.com is a search engine owned by Invision.com, an Internet solutions company based in Great River.
Since he launched the feature in 1999, Mr. Watt said he has answered close to 20,000 questions. Some are simple matters of fact: the highest point on the Island, for example, is Jayne's Hill in West Hills County Park in Huntington. Others demand a subjective judgment -- like where the South Shore ends and the North Shore begins.
''In Nassau County it's more Old Country Road,'' Mr. Watt said. ''In Suffolk, the L.I.E. is the dividing line. It's a rule of thumb. I am just trying to be helpful here.''
And when a visitor to the site from Washington who will soon be relocating to the Island for a job in Plainview asked Mr. Watt to suggest ''as urban an area as possible'' that wouldn't involve a treacherous commute but would be a ''hip place to live,'' Mr. Watt proposed Long Beach.
He was less comfortable answering where to go on a romantic first date.
''If you're relying on Mr. Long Island for romance, the only thing I can guarantee is that there's a pretty good chance you won't be needing any ideas for a second date,'' Mr. Watt wrote in response to a recent query. Even so, he suggested a candlelit dinner followed by a drive to Jones Beach, Robert Moses State Park or ''any place with a boardwalk.''
But he was flummoxed by a query about the best escort service. ''Imagine that,'' said Mr. Watt, who lives in Babylon. For the record, he is happily married, the father of two boys and doesn't have a clue.
For the easiest and most common inquiries -- for example where to find a hotel, how to get to MacArthur Airport or where pet owners could let their dogs run free -- he added a ''Frequently Asked Questions'' section to the Web site. That's also where you'll find his recipe for Long Island iced tea, though he has no clue how the drink got its name, or who concocted the first one.
The queries are right up his alley. Growing up, Mr. Watt, was fascinated with the problem line feature that then ran in a daily newspaper on the Island.
''Being the king of useless information sometimes that comes in handy,'' Mr. Watt said.
On occasion, Mr. Watt goes out of his way to answer a question. When Stephen Krupinski, who grew up in Islip Terrace but now lives in Hawaii, wrote to Mr. Watt in November, telling him he had cancer and wondering how to find someone to take a picture of his childhood home, Mr. Watt drove to the house, took snapshots and e-mailed them to Mr. Krupinski.
Mr. Watt usually searches the Web for his answers but admits he can't always find them, like whether Mary's grave, the subject of a local legend, is in Huntington, Head of the Harbor or Amityville. And since being Mr. Long Island is a part-time gig, he often just points to a Web site that might help. Library sites like www.suffolk.lib.ny.us. are a favorite source.
He said he could tell when a query, worded the same way and submitted several times within a day or two, is a homework question. When that happens, he begs off. ''I am not going to do people's research for them,'' he said.
Mr. Watt's other hats include teaching marketing at Nassau Community College and Dowling College. He also works with the Long Island Partnership, an economic development coalition.
Sometimes Mr. Watt approaches his task with his tongue firmly in his cheek.
When a woman wrote to say that she would be vacationing in Montauk and wondered if her family could walk from there to Jones Beach, Mr. Watt replied, ''Yes, if you have a lot of time and you are in good shape.''
The Flu at Its Worst
Josephine Bacchi of Smithtown remembered that when the influenza pandemic struck in 1918, her father made each of his six children wear a string of garlic around their neck to ward off the illness.
''Everyone was dying,'' recalled Ms. Bacchi, who asked that her age not be published but allowed that she was 13 years old in 1918 (you do the math), and living in the East New York section of Brooklyn at the time. The garlic, of course, was an old wives tale. Though none of Ms. Bacchi's siblings came down with the flu, her uncle fell sick.
His wife called the doctor, smeared a mustard plaster on his chest for his cough and rubbed him down with alcohol.
''His fever was spiking,'' Ms. Bacchi said. ''He got so bad, he died suddenly from it.''
There was no room left at the funeral parlor, she recalled.
''They said they were dropping like flies and they couldn't bury them fast enough,'' Ms. Bacchi said, adding that the funeral director said that ''his entire cellar was full of dead bodies from the flu.''
As this year's flu season builds to a feverish peak, tales of the flu pandemic of 1918 that killed more than 500,000 people in the United States and more than 20 million worldwide are reminders to those not already sniffling or under the covers with aches and pains to get a flu shot. And those who are old enough to remember the episode are being encouraged to come forward with their anecdotes.
''We are asking seniors who want to make a difference in public health to become, in effect, poster children for influenza immunization,'' said Susan Vassallo, community affairs spokeswoman for Henry Schein Inc., of Melville, a national distributor of flu vaccine. ''No one can make the case more effectively than those who lived through the horrible pandemic that took so many lives.''
Dr. David Graham, director of the division of public health for the Suffolk County Health Department, said that while it takes two weeks for the shot to work effectively, it wasn't too late to get a flu shot this year.
''We encourage them to continue to seek it out,'' said Dr. Graham, noting that his department will offer flu shots as soon as supplies are renewed later this month. ''It still is very valuable to get it even in January or February because the season continues on into the spring. It still can be very protective.''
Among those who offered testimony of a time when flu destroyed more lives than the bombs and bullets of World War I was Mary Kline of Syosset, grandmother of Ms. Vassallo's husband.
Ms. Kline, 97, now of Syosset, was living in Austria-Hungary in 1918. Both she and her sister caught the flu.
''My mother and my grandmother would go to the well and get real cold water,'' Ms. Kline recalled. ''They took some sheets and dipped the sheets in cold water and rolled them up and wrapped the sheets all around us to try to get the fever down.''
Soup helped. So did the liquor her father added to the hot tea their grandmother prepared. Still, Ms. Kline said, her fever was so high she became delirious.
''There were an awful lot of people that died at that time,'' Ms. Kline said.
Escaping pogroms in a Ukrainian village near Kiev, Murray Panetz and his family arrived at the Romanian border, where they found shelter in a large hall lined with mattresses on the floor. But their safe haven soon became a nightmare, recalled Mr. Panetz, now 93 and a resident of Hoffman Manor, a senior home in Long Beach. His little sister, Eva, and his brother, Yossi, came down with the flu.
''While we were there, the influenza was going around and they both got ill and they both died,'' Mr. Panetz said. ''It's never out of my mind.''
Madeline Brewi was a 7-year-old with thick blond curls living in Babylon village and attending St. Joseph's Academy in January 1919.
''I just remember coming home from school with terrible aches and pains,'' said Sister Madeline, a Dominican nun and retired teacher who currently lives in Amityville. ''I told my mother and she immediately called the doctor.''
Young Madeline spent the next six weeks in bed, quarantined from her five siblings. ''In those days they didn't give shots,'' Sister Madeline said. The flu was the worst illness of her childhood, worse than the measles or the mumps, she said. Even her curls thinned.
''Now I get a flu shot,'' Sister Madeline said.
LONG ISLAND JOURNAL E-mail: lijournal@nytimes.com
