A controversy has erupted over a SoHo condominium building where the Corcoran Group, one of Manhattan's largest real estate firms, is said to be barring rival brokers from getting in.
Some brokers say that Corcoran, which has long been an outspoken advocate of sharing listings and commissions with other brokers, appears to be backpedaling in the case of the 102-unit luxury building at 505 Greenwich Street.
For the last week, both Corcoran, whose division for marketing new developments has the exclusive contract to sell the condos, and the developer, Metropolitan Housing Partners, have allowed only prospective buyers on a so-called priority list to see the apartments. Agents who have called to arrange a viewing have been told that the building is not yet open to the public, brokers say.
But they say that in some cases their clients have been invited to see the apartments if they agree to leave their agents behind. Christopher Mathieson, managing partner of JC DeNiro &amp; Associates, a small brokerage firm with two offices in Manhattan, said he sent two clients to the building, where prices start at $600,000 for a one-bedroom apartment and go up to $3.5 million for a penthouse. Both clients signed contracts and made deposits, although one has since withdrawn from the deal, Mr. Mathieson said.
He said he felt he had been deprived of a commission he deserved. Brokers who take buyers to a property traditionally split a commission, paid by the seller, with the selling agent. ''So here I am doing their marketing job for them, and there's no way I can get paid,'' he said.
Pamela Liebman, chief executive of Corcoran, said the building would be opened to other brokers shortly. ''The developer has chosen to accommodate the people on the priority list before the formal opening, and Corcoran Group Marketing works at the direction of the developer,'' she said. She added that Corcoran Group's brokers, who work for a different division of the company, were also barred from the building.
Jane Gladstein, a principal at Metropolitan Housing Partners, said the building's sales office was not ready to show to the brokerage community. ''I haven't even printed floor plans, and our displays aren't even hung up on the wall,'' she said. For another week to 10 days, she said, the developer and the Corcoran sales agents will limit showings to about 400 people who called the telephone number on a billboard outside the building and asked to be put on the priority list. ''We are not excluding the brokers,'' she said. ''We love the brokers.''
She said she expected brokers to be invited into the building within a week to 10 days.
But brokers who are missing out on their commissions say that is no help to them. Michael Shvo, an executive vice president at Douglas Elliman, one of the city's largest real estate firms and a Corcoran rival, said an agent in his office had lost out on a commission when she was forced to send one of her clients to 505 Greenwich alone. That client bought an $830,000 apartment.
Mr. Shvo said he would file a complaint against Corcoran with the ethics committee of the Real Estate Board of New York, a trade group that represents most of Manhattan's real estate brokers. Mr. Mathieson, of JC DeNiro, said he was considering filing a complaint as well.
Eileen Spinola, a senior vice president at the board, would not comment directly on the case. But she said the board's rules mandating that members automatically share all listings with competitors within 72 hours and agree to share commissions with any member broker did not apply to agents representing new buildings, only to those selling existing apartments.
In addition, she said, by New York State law, brokers must follow the instructions of their selling clients.
Although some brokers, including Mr. Shvo, believe that the rule should be changed to include new development, others say it would be impractical.
Rules aside, some marketing specialists said Corcoran should persuade the developer to admit brokers immediately. Louise Sunshine, who has marketed some of the city's highest-profile new developments, including Time Warner Center, said that the developer was being ''penny-wise and pound-foolish'' and that Corcoran was ''not acting wisely.''
She said brokers have long memories and in down times might not bring clients to the building.
Corcoran's Ms. Liebman said the company ordinarily advised developers to allow it to share listings and commissions right away. ''We co-broke all our listings,'' she said.
