The Dallas Mavericks are going backward. They are still a very good team, still extremely talented, still fun to watch. But even after last night's 108-104 victory at Portland, they have a 24-16 record, well below their 31-8 at this time last season.
The problem is chemistry, the lack thereof. Too much instability and change -- even though the moves made them more talented -- have turned the Mavericks into a team of mismatched strangers.
Steve Nash, Dallas's All-Star point guard, was stunned when he looked around the locker room in late October and saw only a few players remaining from the team that reached the Western Conference finals last season.
''That's been tough,'' Nash said. ''We went from a little bit of solidity, to the Western Conference finals, 60 wins, and then to come back and have five guys back -- that's difficult for any team, especially a team that was close to their goal and was on a relative high.''
The Mavericks and their owner, Mark Cuban, seem to be addicted to change for change's sake. They definitely needed another piece or two after falling in six games to San Antonio in the conference finals. But why trade Nick Van Exel, their heart and soul during the playoffs, for Antawn Jamison when they had Dirk Nowitzki? Even though they robbed Boston in a lopsided trade, why add Antoine Walker?
All that change and Dallas still did not get what it really needed, a big banger. ''We don't have an ideal mix of guys,'' Nash said. ''We've got three guys who play the same position -- Dirk, Antoine and Antawn -- so that's difficult to fit together and to understand each other and make each other better. So on offense, even with all the firepower, it's really difficult for us.''
Now, there is talk of more change. Jamison has been mentioned in trade talk involving Portland's Rasheed Wallace and Cleveland's Zydrunas Ilgauskas. Although Wallace would give Dallas the inside presence it seemingly needs to compete with the conference elite, he would also bring a carousel full of baggage and yet more change and instability.
One place the Mavericks are meshing well is the locker room. Jamison has accepted coming off the bench, and Walker has played unselfishly. That being the case, at least Jamison wants to give this situation time to work.
''I think if you make another change, then you've got to start it all back over again,'' he said. ''I just think it's a matter of time before we turn around that corner and get things rolling. So I just say, 'Just continue to let us work our magic and work this thing out, and eventually when it gets rolling, it gets rolling.' ''
Nash agreed, to a degree.
''I can honestly say, although the mix isn't ideal, there is a chance that, with all the pieces we have, we could be a tremendously versatile team and a deep team,'' he said. ''And I can also say that I really like all my new teammates and we get along very well. Change is always difficult in this league. It depends on what it is. I'm not saying that I wouldn't welcome it, but I'm pretty happy with the guys we have. I'm just not happy with the way we've played.''
Still Running the Show
The hiring of the elderly is not the only current trend in coaching. Despite the recent firing of Doc Rivers, former guards -- especially point guards -- are still in. Maurice Cheeks is hanging in during a difficult time in Portland, Scott Skiles replaced Bill Cartwright in Chicago, and Terry Porter is working wonders in Milwaukee.
The next young retiree to move from coaching on the court to coaching on the sideline could be Terrell Brandon, the two-time All-Star point guard, who is done playing despite remaining on the Atlanta Hawks' injured list. Brandon, 33, who has been sidelined for nearly two years because of a knee injury, is mulling over an offer from a group of investors interested in putting an American Basketball Association franchise in Portland, Ore.
''I thought it was a joke when I got the call,'' he said. ''I'll at least think about it. I never thought about coaching, but I've always been a coach because I'm a point guard, so it can't be that hard.''
Brandon, whose $11.1 million salary will come off Atlanta's payroll next month, said he had no dreams of a serious coaching career, though he would like to join the N.B.A. in another capacity.
''I want to do what Isiah Thomas is doing, where you orchestrate things,'' he said, referring to the Knicks' president of basketball operations. ''I know this game. If I have to do some coaching before I get that opportunity, that's fine.''
The 5-foot-11 Brandon is living in Portland, his hometown, where fans continually tell him how proud he made them. In 1996, he became only the eighth N.B.A. All-Star under 6 feet.
''People have been sending me letters and fan mail, saying congratulations on my career,'' said Brandon, who averaged 13.8 points and 6.1 assists over 11 seasons. ''That lets you know you did well. While you're playing, you don't want to think about that because you'll get complacent and not get any better. But now that I'm retired, I can look back at the trading cards and the statistics and say, 'You know, I had a pretty good career.' I feel like I overachieved because of what I was able to do at my height.''
Even if he does not coach, Brandon will be busy as the owner of several business enterprises. He has plans to build a hair salon, a coffeehouse, a recording studio and an apartment complex.
Maggette Starts to Blossom
The accolades just kept pouring in for members of the Los Angeles Clippers. Elton Brand made the All-Star team; Lamar Odom was compared to Magic Johnson. Darius Miles and Quentin Richardson even appeared in television commercials. Meanwhile, Corey Maggette toiled tirelessly under the radar.
Now, it is his time.
Maggette, 24, will not make the All-Star team this season, but he is emerging as one of the league's brightest young players. After a quiet breakout season, he has become the Clippers' leading scorer, averaging 20.4 points on 46.1 percent shooting through Friday. Maggette, a 6-6 small forward, is also grabbing 5.5 rebounds a game.
Many knew Maggette had this ability, but he took time to blossom. He entered the league after his freshman season at Duke, and is still blossoming in his fifth season. Both Maggette and his coach expect him to get much better.
''I think on a level of 1 to 10, where he is in his ability is a 6 or 7,'' Coach Mike Dunleavy said. ''He's got tremendous upside. He's a hard worker, and I expect over the next couple of years that his game will go to the next level and the next level.''
Maggette is not shy about his aspirations.
''I think highly of myself and I think you have to,'' said Maggette, who has a bodybuilder's physique. ''I think I can be the best.''
Learning That Enough Is Enough
Charles Barkley once said of Oliver Miller, the portly yet talented center, ''He's two words away from being an All-Star: I'm full.''
Miller's inability to mouth those words got him shipped out of the N.B.A. in 2000 after eight seasons with five teams. Now, he is back, playing well in 15 minutes a game off the bench for the Minnesota Timberwolves.
The 6-9 Miller, who weighed more than 375 pounds during his first stint in the league, is now listed at 315, thanks to a low-carbohydrate, low-sugar diet.
Miller, 33, spent the past three years trekking through minor leagues, most recently the Continental Basketball Association. During those rough times, he said, he could not bear to watch the N.B.A. on television.
''I never watched any N.B.A. games because I couldn't understand how they were always saying that I'm overweight, but I was more productive than guys that were underweight,'' said Miller, who signed with the Timberwolves on Dec. 13. ''So it was tough. But I just took the initiative and did what I had to do.''
Miller, who once averaged 12.9 points and 7.4 rebounds a game for Toronto (1995-96), knows he is not completely out of the woods. ''I'm doing well,'' he said. ''Now, I'm just being careful.''
East's Guards Are Productive
This season's Eastern Conference may rightly be considered one of the weakest conferences ever in the N.B.A., but one thing it has over the West is guard play. The Western Conference rules because it is home to nearly all of the league's superior big men, but more productive guards play in the East.
Eight guards from the East (Allen Iverson, Tracy McGrady, Baron Davis, Paul Pierce, Michael Redd, Stephon Marbury, Allan Houston and LeBron James) are in the top 20 in scoring, and five are in the top 10. Only two Western guards, Kobe Bryant and Sam Cassell, are in the top 20, and only Bryant is in the top 10.
Kidd and Marbury are the league's top two in assists, and Iverson and Davis lead in steals.
INSIDE THE N.B.A.
