WHEN Vladimir Polezhayev and his family arrived here in Sea Cliff from Moscow in 1990, none of them knew much English. ''Just what we learned in school,'' said Mr. Polezhayev who still speaks heavily accented English. ''A few words.''
But three of the family members spoke a more universal language -- music.
Mr. Polezhayev and his wife, Yelena, are pianists who met at the St. Petersburg Conservatory and before they left the Soviet Union had notable credits. He was a composer and arranger for the Pop Symphony Russian State Radio-TV Orchestra in Moscow; she was a member of a chamber ensemble that toured extensively throughout Europe and a teacher at both the St. Petersburg and Moscow Conservatories.
Their son Anton, then 13, had already created a buzz while studying violin at a children's unit of the Moscow Conservatory. Simon, then a 1-year-old, and Mrs. Polezhayev's mother completed the family group.
They left the Soviet Union, Mrs. Polezhayev said, because they were ''persecuted'' because of her Jewish roots. In the United States, they hoped to have a music career. ''But we came ready for anything,'' she said.
They settled in this North Shore village at the suggestion of an impresario who brought Russian performers to the United States. He was a resident of Sea Cliff and had met Mr. Polezhayev when the musician appeared on one of those tours.
''He, what you call it, sponsored us and found us an apartment to rent,'' said Mrs. Polezhayev, to whom Mr. Polezhayev tends to defer because ''her English is better.''
There were obstacles in the beginning. Mr. Polezhayev lost his first paying job because of music. He had been hired to wait tables at a nearby conference center and on his first day during a break, sat down at the piano and played.
''The boss heard him and told him: 'Don't come back tomorrow. You play so good, you'll leave right after I train you,''' Mrs. Polezhayev recalled in an interview in their small, two-piano home here. ''He served one dish.''
''With apples,'' he added.
''And it was over,'' she said.
But then Mr. Polezhayev, now 51, and Mrs. Polezhayev, now 50, took jobs as synagogue and church organists and choir directors. They also began teaching privately and now have about 40 students.
They formed the Long Island Piano Duet, which appears regularly on Long Island, playing pieces for four hands or two pianos. Sometimes Simon, now 14, joins his parents, performing on the bass.
A student at North Shore High School who has temporarily given up soccer because ''I have no time,'' Simon studies at the Julliard School's Pre-College Division and hopes to become a bass soloist.
''You hardly ever hear of famous bass players,'' he said. ''Hopefully, I'll be one.''
Sometimes, Anton, a violinist, makes the duet a trio. He will do so next Sunday at 2 p.m. when they appear at Queens College's Lefrak Concert Hall.
In 2002, Anton became a member of the New York Philharmonic, one of the youngest in the string section, his mother said. He is now 28.
Before that, he was a member of the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra. He attended both North Shore High School and the Manhattan School of Music. The young violinist said he would ''like to keep moving -- to a first violin chair up front, a principal, first chair, maybe even concertmaster.''
''You play as much as you can and the best you can,'' he continued. ''It's what everyone wants to do.''
''When we play, it's fun,'' Mrs. Polezhayev said. ''It's life. More like salvation.''
Information on the concert at Queens College: (718)997-5730.
MUSIC
