At Town Hall, Art
Sarah Bracey White is a published writer and arts lover who has served since 1993 as the executive director of cultural affairs for the Town of Greenburgh. For months Ms. White has also been moonlighting as an unofficial interior designer at Greenburgh's new Town Hall, seeing to it that the walls are hung with art.
Paul J. Feiner, the town supervisor, is so pleased with the results that he named Ms. White Employee of the Year and announced that he would honor her at a town board meeting.
''Sarah has turned our new town hall into a museum,'' he wrote in an e-mail message. ''Tens of thousands of dollars worth of donated art have been placed throughout our new building. We're probably the only municipal building around that is visited by many who want to enjoy our art.''
Besides an informal hallway exhibition, the building holds an art gallery that Ms. White runs.
Much of the art for the walls came from Ms. White's own collection - she has bought prints prodigiously over the years, she said, storing them under the bed and in closets - as well as from local artists, who donated their work or made temporary loans to the town. There are personal touches too - like the Declaration of Independence that Ms. White framed and hung in one office, and the plants that are lending color to the halls. It was hard work but rewarding to ''soften up'' a place like the town hall, Ms. White said. She added half-jokingly, ''I had no idea how important my job was until we moved into this building.'' The Greenburgh Town Hall is on Hillside Avenue, near Tarrytown Road. Information: (914)422-1038.
Soft Slippers for Balanchine
Wilhelmina Frankfurt, a former soloist with the New York City Ballet, has been working with students in the dance program at Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers on reconstructing excerpts from the repertory of George Balanchine, whose 100th birthday is being observed this year. The results, which stem from her personal experience with the legendary choreographer's work, will be presented in ''Barefoot Balanchine,'' a free concert next Sunday at 7 p.m. and on Jan. 26 at 4 p.m. in the college's Bessie Schoenberg Dance Studio. The students will dance in soft slippers rather than on pointe, as the dances are usually performed, said Sara Rudner, the director of the dance program. ''It's very unusual for the students to do Balanchine, which is a very specific style of dance,'' Ms. Rudner said. ''The repertory never has been taught in colleges or universities, but has been done only in dance companies.''
The program includes excerpts from ''Vienna Waltzes,'' a 1977 ballet with music by Richard Strauss; ''The Four Temperaments,'' a 1946 work with music by Paul Hindemith, and Ms. Frankfurt's own choreography based on her research of ''Luna Park,'' which Balanchine choreographed for a revue rather than as a ballet. After the performance Ms. Frankfurt will give a brief demonstration of different ballet styles, including that of Balanchine. In addition, a panel composed of members of the general college faculty will discuss the impact of Balanchine's work. Information: (914)395-2433.
If the Award Fits
The Westchester Arts Council is seeking nominations for its 2004 Arts Award. The award recognizes contributions made by individuals and organizations to the arts in the county , with an emphasis on vision, commitment and leadership. Nominations should be submitted in the categories of arts patron, artist and arts organization; awards are also given for community or education projects within Westchester. More than one award may be given in a particular category.
The nonmonetary awards, which are decided by a six-member independent panel, will be presented at the council's fifth annual Arts Award Luncheon on April 21 at the Rye Town Hilton, when each winner will receive a glass stars mounted on a base with the arts council logo.
''The purpose of the awards is to elevate the arts in the county and shine a light on the many talented individuals who live and work here,'' said Janet T. Langsam, the council's executive director, said.
Past recipients include the pianist Helene Grimaud, the writer Esmeralda Santiago, the muralist Richard Haas and the former poet laureate, Billy Collins.
Nominations must be received by Friday. A nomination form is available at the council's Web site www.westarts.com. Information: (914) 428-4220.
ROBERTA HERSHENSON
E-mail: westarts@nytimes.com
