In a matchup that included Julius Erving and Bill Walton, one of the most enduring memories of the 1977 N.B.A. finals had nothing to do with basketball. It was the sight of Maurice Lucas, Portland's feared power forward, squaring off like a prizefighter against Darryl Dawkins, Philadelphia's backboard-smashing center.
The scene did not escalate into a brawl, but to this day, fans still bring up the episode when encountering Lucas. ''More than anything else in my career, I've been reminded of that incident and reminded of the fact that I was a real physical player,'' Lucas said in a telephone interview last week. ''I'm not reminded of the fact that I was the leading scorer on those teams that I played on. But the old saying goes, 'As long as they remember you,' you can't be mad.''
Lucas, 51, is remembered as one of the most bruising players of his era, a style he said he developed at Marquette under Coach Al McGuire. But he also had enough skill to average 20 points a game two times during his 14-year career in the American Basketball Association and the National Basketball Association. In the 1977 playoffs, he led Portland with 21.2 points a game on the way to the championship. Although he is proud of his physical game, Lucas believes he did not get enough credit for being a cerebral player.
''I played very hard and very physical, but I thought I also played pretty smart because I studied my opponents rabidly,'' he said. ''So I knew their tendencies and things I could take away from them on defense that would increase my percentages of winning.''
After retiring in 1988, Lucas worked for one season as a Blazers assistant. Finding the experience less than enjoyable, he devoted himself full time to the travel agency he created in his playing days. Soon, he was promoting small concerts, golf tournaments and fantasy camps, and that led him to combine the enterprises into ML-Sports, a sports and event marketing company.
Lucas, who also owns a small security company, continues to live in the Portland area with his wife, Pamela. His oldest son, Maurice Jr., is in the Air Force and recently returned from six months in Iraq. His youngest son, David, is the starting power forward at Oregon State, and his daughter, Kristin, is a senior playing basketball at her high school.
Lucas said he and Dawkins never spoke after their fracas in the finals until seeing each other at the N.B.A. All-Star Game in Philadelphia two years ago.
''I ran into him, and we laughed and talked about it,'' he said. ''I hadn't seen him in 15, 20 years.''
PRO BASKETBALL
