Consider the wizard of Japan's political world, at ease in his private office away from the party's headquarters, suddenly clapping his hands in the air, once, twice, several times, as if to conjure up the revolution he had unleashed a decade ago but had yet to consummate.
Revolutionary, ultimate insider, former party leader with a title, party boss without a title, puppeteer, would-be man of the people, shadow shogun -- Ichiro Ozawa has been all these in the two decades he has held, won and lost power. Anointed, but then written off, he may yet have the last laugh.
After merging his shrinking Liberal Party with the Democrats last year, the new bloc has come close to grasping the holy grail of Japanese politics: wresting power from the Liberal Democratic Party, which has governed Japan almost continuously for half a century.
To Mr. Ozawa, the destruction of this virtual one-party system is the prerequisite to the birth of a new political order that will make politicians fully accountable to the public and steer Japan on a clear path after years of drift. He sees it as no less significant than the destruction of the feudal Shogunate that gave way to the 19th-century Meiji Restoration, a period during which Japan responded to change with single-minded resolve.
''I am not aiming to become'' the prime minister, Mr. Ozawa, 61, said on a recent day. ''In other words, what I am aiming at is overthrowing the Shogunate. Other than that, there will be no dawn in Japan. A new age won't arrive. Therefore, the Meiji Restoration once more.''
Indications are strong that Japan's peculiar brand of one-party rule is in its last years. In the November election, the Democrats picked up 40 new seats, winning 177 of the 480 seats in the lower house of Parliament. Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi's Liberal Democratic Party dropped to 237 seats but retained control through alliances with other parties. But its showing failed to meet expectations despite Mr. Koizumi's personal popularity.
The Democratic Party's generally younger and more dynamic candidates have made inroads among younger, urban voters. The governing party retains its strength in rural areas. Electoral reforms that will increasingly tip the balance away from rural areas should continue to yield more voters for the opposition.
More than at any point in Japan's history, a mature democracy seems at hand.
''This time, essentially,'' Mr. Ozawa said of the November election, ''we were divided into two substantial major groups and fought against each other. In that sense, I think this time around is Act II of Japan's political turnaround, at the same time, perhaps a real start.''
What Mr. Ozawa calls ''the first step in Japan's political turnaround'' occurred in 1993 when the Liberal Democratic Party was toppled from power for 11 months in a coup he orchestrated.
The window stayed open long enough for the passage of electoral reform laws that, 10 years later, are finally leading to the emergence of a genuine two-party system.
Under the de facto one-party structure -- called the ''1955 system'' after the year when the Liberal Democratic Party was founded -- party faction leaders fought among themselves for power and chose prime ministers. Party bosses were often more powerful than prime ministers and dictated policies to them.
But the ''1955 system'' will not be completely destroyed unless a new system takes its place. A competitive two-party structure, a strong prime minister's office, a focus on policies and a political order capable of leading Japan to profound change are all things Mr. Ozawa advocates. But is he capable of creating this new order? Or is he a Gorbachev-like figure, who will destroy the old system but prove unable to build a new one?
''Revolutionaries and builders are different,'' said Shigezo Hayasaka, 73, the longtime personal secretary to the late Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka and an associate of Mr. Ozawa's. ''Ichiro the destroyer, Ichiro the arsonist, he is good at setting fire and destroying things. But I have seldom seen him build more solid and firm architecture than what existed before.''
As it happens, it was postwar Japan's most powerful shadow shogun, Mr. Tanaka, who taught Mr. Ozawa all about power. As Mr. Hayasaka tells it, Mr. Tanaka regarded Mr. Ozawa with fatherly affection and took him under his wing. That began Mr. Ozawa's career in the Liberal Democratic Party.
After a political scandal and illness forced Mr. Tanaka off the political scene, Mr. Ozawa and two more senior politicians led the party, and Japan, from 1987 to 1992. But a series of events, including the crisis surrounding Japan's lack of participation in the 1991 Persian Gulf war and a power struggle in the party, transformed him into a reformer.
In 1993, after party rivals shunned electoral reforms that he had championed, Mr. Ozawa and his allies bolted from the party, bringing down the Liberal Democratic government. For the next 11 months, he held together a coalition of minor parties and pushed through far-reaching reforms, including changing multiple-seat districts into single-seat ones.
''I asked him whether he wanted to become prime minister,'' Tsutomu Hata, 68, who headed the coalition government for its last two months, recalled. But Mr. Ozawa, who clearly preferred orchestrating behind the scenes, said he was not interested.
But the coalition unraveled and the Liberal Democratic Party came back. Mr. Ozawa found himself in the unusual position of having to take his reform message straight to the public. Supporters even persuaded him to become the official head of a party, appear in public and campaign.
Mr. Ozawa hated the performance side of politics, said Sadao Hirano, 68, a lawmaker and longtime ally. ''He kept on saying for six months, 'You have made me into a male geisha.' He was really angry,'' Mr. Hirano said. But, he added, Mr. Ozawa gave it his all.
He appeared in television commercials -- including one in which he battled against a robot with the words ''old regime'' on its chest -- and tried to portray himself as someone who could take a joke.
Mr. Ozawa waved away the thought of those sometimes painfully visible efforts to soften his image.
''I am not that young to be able to change my style -- I am old,'' he said. ''I'm always angry. 'You are no good!' I'm always angry with the people, voters. 'You are the ones who have to decide. You talk about democracy, or sovereignty, you say things that sound big, but it is up to you, you have to decide what you are going to do.' ''
Nowadays, Mr. Ozawa is back in a familiar position. The official leadership of the Democratic Party belongs to somebody else -- in this case, Naoto Kan, a younger politician without Mr. Ozawa's fat résumé as a strategist.
The mission is personal for Mr. Ozawa. As an insider turned reformer, he compares himself to samurai who, grasping the need to change Japan, destroyed the very Shogunate system that had created them.
''In order to realize change in power, to destroy the old power structure and truly establish a new parliamentary democracy,'' he said, ''somebody has to unify allies and challenge the conventional power. Someone has to play that kind of role.''
