Q: Your new movie, ''The Dreamers,'' is set in 1968 in Paris and tells the story of three students who are obsessed with film and one another. The movie is steeped in the politics of that moment. Is that why the subject intrigued you?
My movies are all pieces of my life. I've made very few films -- the last was in 1998. It's not easy for me to face a new movie. Before I committed to ''The Dreamers,'' I thought of doing a sequel to my movie ''1900,'' which ended in 1945. I wanted to go on until the end of the century. I made ''1900'' in 1974. That was a magic moment in Italy. The collective faith in something new was very strong, and I thought the third act of ''1900'' would be interesting. But I was wrong -- Italy and, in general, the world today are in a state of political fatigue. Unlike the 70's, people are not committed to any particular ideal. They have lost that sense of optimism. If I did the third act of ''1900,'' it would be a kind of forgery, a fake. So I turned the clock back to 1968.
Did your decision have anything to do with the rise of Silvio Berlusconi?
The fact that Berlusconi came to power in 2001 did depress me. More disheartening, still, was that half of Italians voted for him. Berlusconi is a disgrace for this country. I kept thinking, How do people lose their idealism so quickly?
So Paris beckoned?
Yes. I felt I could best show a kind of idealism in a movie set in Paris in 1968. Back then, politics was personal and collective at the same time.
I was a little old -- I was 27 in 1968 -- but I was still infected. I was shooting a movie called ''Partner'' in Rome. My lead actor, Pierre Clementi, went to Paris every weekend. He came back with these wonderful slogans: ''It's forbidden to forbid.'' And ''Be Realistic, Ask for the Impossible.''
Have you always been a Francophile?
I was born in Parma, Italy, and Parma was once ruled by the French. Napoleon's wife lived in Parma. They still have excellent pastries there, and that's probably due to her influence. I grew up with the idea that I was part French. When I was 19, I went to Paris for the first time. In Italy, then, the cinema was dominated by neorealism. My perspective was much closer to Jean-Luc Godard's. In fact, when I directed my first movie, ''Grim Reaper,'' I insisted on doing my first interview in French. The journalist said: ''Why? We are both Italian.'' I said, ''parce que le français, c'est la langue du cinéma'' -- the language of cinema is French. And the press started hating me immediately.
Although ''The Dreamers'' was made in English, it is distinctly European -- the nudity, in particular. The studio has decided to accept an NC-17 rating and release the European version here, but they had originally asked you to trim it for American audiences. How did you react to cutting it?
Actually, I think it was more obscene than before. When you put fig leaves on Adam and Eve, it becomes much more titillating.
Did you have a ratings-board problem with ''Last Tango in Paris''?
No. It was released with an X. But it was difficult to cast. I wanted Dominique Sanda, but she was pregnant. I asked Jean-Louis Trintignant, but he was crying, saying, ''I can't be naked.'' Jean-Paul Belmondo thought it was a porn film and said no. Luckily, I thought of Marlon Brando. He was 48 or 49 then. He was incredibly attractive, and I fell completely in love with him. He didn't have any problem with the nudity. As for Maria Schneider, she was easy. She's a '68 girl. And she loved being naked. She was up for anything.
When did the 60's end for you?
For me, the 60's ended with Pier Paolo Pasolini's death in 1975. I worked for him when I started out. For me, it was like being around D.W. Griffith and the birth of film. Pasolini was a libertine and a filmmaker, and his death signaled the end of my utopian vision.
You have always been known as a filmmaker with a sense of political awareness. Do you miss the pervasiveness of that sensibility in filmmaking?
I have to be in the present. And that includes filmmaking. But I do want the kids of today to identify with the kids in ''The Dreamers.'' When I was shooting ''The Dreamers,'' there was youth around me every day. It was completely contagious. Even an old wounded elephant like me was infected. It's embarrassing to say this, but I felt younger than them.
Is it hard to shoot sex in the movies?
As your president says, a man has to do what he has to do [laughs]. Seriously, sex isn't as sexy in movies as it once was, which is too bad. I hear sex is being ruined by TV, but I don't watch TV. I don't disapprove -- I just fear addiction. And I don't want to ruin sex. Some things need to remain elusive and mysterious. If TV can ruin sex, I do not want TV.
Lynn Hirschberg
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-18-04: QUESTIONS FOR BERNARDO BERTOLUCCI
