THE city is spending hundreds of millions of dollars to repair the steel structure of the Manhattan Bridge, which runs high above the East River from lower Manhattan to Dumbo in Brooklyn. But along with a constant headache of structural problems, the 1909 span provides one of the grandest aesthetic experiences in the city -- the giant granite anchorages crossing Water Street in Brooklyn and Cherry Street in Manhattan.
They have the moody, craggy majesty of lost ruins -- and the Department of Transportation will get around to them too.
Preliminary designs for the Manhattan Bridge were made by early 1903. Drawings filed at the New York City Art Commission by the architect Henry Hornbostel called for gargantuan masonry anchorages enclosing great auditoriums for public meetings. The anchorages were heavily ornamented in the Beaux-Arts style with cartouches, complicated quoining and other decorative stonework that had the lacy delicacy of the present Grand Central Terminal.
A dispute over whether to use the older cable suspension system or newer technology was resolved in 1904 in favor of the tried and true, and also brought a change of architects. Carrère &amp; Hastings, designers of the New York Public Library at Fifth and 42nd, who are credited with introducing the Beaux-Arts style in New York, took over from Hornbostel. But instead of keeping or increasing the French character of the anchorage design they simplified it to a near-Roman severity.
The revised anchorage design resulted in a simple, muscular arch over the streets, and deep, shadowed recesses containing mysterious windows just under the bridge deck. At the deck level rise four screens of banded columns, massive and spare. Each granite anchorage, on the river face, also has gigantic sloped buttresses, to counteract the pull of the bridge on the cables.
A submission to the Art Commission, apparently by Carrère &amp; Hastings, said that the colonnades -- the screens of banded columns -- were meant to alert travelers that they had reached the anchorage portion of the bridge and to provide places ''where people can rest under cover on their way over and obtain a view of the distant city.''
Like any large industrial activity, bridge building can be brutal. More than 1,000 families were evicted from their homes for the Manhattan anchorage, and in 1908 one of the initial cables laid between the towers broke loose from the Brooklyn anchorage. The New York Times wrote that the 1 3/4-inch-thick cable, weighing several hundred tons, slithered along Plymouth Street ''like the lash of a huge whip.'' But there were no serious injuries.
In early 1909, however, a pipe feeding compressed air to the riveting hammers broke. John McShane, a riveter, was blown off the bridge ''like a chip of wood,'' The Times said, sending him plummeting to his death 120 feet down to Plymouth Street.
Later that year, as the bridge neared completion, Montgomery Schuyler, writing in the magazine Architectural Record, noted that the anchorages ''wear, indeed, an aspect of Egyptian immobility.''
''These anchorages,'' he continued, ''give visible promise of a duration equal to that of the great temple of Ramses, or the great pyramid of Cheops.'' Schuyler, a notoriously demanding critic, was moved to paraphrase Shakespeare's Cassius in ''Julius Caesar'': ''Why, man, it doth bestride the narrow street like a colossus, and we, petty men, walk under its huge legs and peep about.''
When the bridge opened in late 1909, The Times wrote that the 1,470-foot-long span ''was black with wagons, Brooklyn bound, laden with gifts from Manhattan stores.''
Writing again in 1911, Schuyler praised the relief given by the bridge anchorages to the monotony of Manhattan's street plan: ''How cheering to the wayfarer, wearied with the interminable monotony of the gridiron, to come upon such a glimpse and vista as occur when Cherry Street is carried almost through the anchorage of the Manhattan Bridge!''
In 1951, when cold war concerns were increasing, The Times reported that the F.B.I. had arranged batteries of 500-watt floodlights at the base of the bridge because of ''possible sabotage attempts under wartime conditions.'' The anchorages were sealed, and barbed wire was placed on the cables.
THE elaborate arch-and-colonnade plaza at the Manhattan end of the bridge was designated a landmark in 1975, but the anchorages were ignored, as they are by most guidebooks and similar sources.
Since the 1980's, the Department of Transportation has been dealing with serious structural problems on the bridge, in part caused by the subway lines that pass over it. Tom Cocola, a department spokesman, said that the next decade would bring cable repairs, seismic retrofitting and the rehabilitation of the lower roadway. At some point the anchorages will also be completely repointed and cleaned, he said. The department said that the entire program, from its start in the early 80's to its completion, is to cost about $800 million.
Although thousands walk across the Brooklyn Bridge, the Manhattan Bridge walkway, on its south side -- reached at Canal Street and the Bowery in Manhattan and Sands and Jay Streets in Brooklyn -- is often as empty as a Kansas prairie. The urban explorer is rewarded with a sweeping view of the harbor (framed by the Brooklyn Bridge to the south), passage through Carrère &amp; Hastings's colonnades, and a closeup view of the sinuous, nearly Art Nouveau steelwork on the towers.
Because the walkway hugs the outer edge, a crossing on the Manhattan Bridge yields a much more open view than that offered by its southerly neighbor. There are also heady views of the tenement rooftops on the Manhattan side, with cornices and laundry and windows just a few feet away. At the colonnades, the great cables make a grand curve over the saddles, evocative of some enormous industrial trebuchet or other medieval catapult.
The dark stains of rust and pollution on the colonnades, the solitude of the walkway, the open joints in the masonry, all suggest arrival at some ancient ruin, like an Egyptian temple almost completely covered by sand.
In Manhattan, the view along Cherry Street of the anchorage is clear and uninterrupted -- including colossal graffiti, like ''I
BIM'' in fluorescent orange on the north side. The sloping buttresses lead into a construction parking lot, and dripping rust from the deck above has stained the granite a rich orange, contrasting with giant white drips of road salts coming out of the joints.
But it is in Brooklyn that the anchorage is at its most powerful, crowded by surrounding industrial buildings that allow only fractional views of the stonework until right at the bottom, when a puny human is forced to look almost directly up. The streets there are undulating surfaces of Belgian block and curving rails from old freight sidings.
A visitor will find intoxicating the combination of the worn surface of the uneven street, the damp river air, the musty character of the factories and the great cliff of stone.
Indeed, the coat of deep charcoal gray is integral to the grandeur of this unexpected urban majesty -- the anchorages look as if nothing could harm them, certainly nothing so inconsequential as a coating of grit.
Looking east up the narrow slot of Water Street, one can see a view that rises up to the high colonnade -- at night, as the clacking subway trains rumble violently past the granite columns, sparks from the third rail cast an unearthly, fluttery light evocative of Fritz Lang's ''Metropolis'' or some other early black and white science fiction film.
Go.
Streetscapes | Manhattan Bridge  Correction:  January 25, 2004, Sunday  A picture caption with the Streetscapes column last Sunday, about the anchorage structures of the Manhattan Bridge, reversed two identifications. The 1908 photo was at the top and the contemporary picture at the left.
