EMERGING stock markets enjoyed significant gains last year, and few of those fared better than India's, which rose 74 percent in dollar terms.
Investors attributed the performance to an economy that has hit a sweet spot, with low inflation and interest rates and the best growth in many years. Those advantages, combined with extremely cheap valuations, intensified returns for businesses and investors.
''There were some absurdly undervalued companies,'' said Zaheer Sitabkhan, a fund manager at Lloyd George Management, a Hong Kong firm specializing in Asian equities. Lloyd George is the investment adviser for the Eaton Vance Greater India fund, one of the best performers in 2003 among 1,777 international equity funds in the database of Morningstar Inc.; the fund was up 117 percent.
''Throw together a cyclical upturn because of better rains, better prices in commodities, the restructuring process,'' he said, ''and all of a sudden little bits of sales are turning into great amounts of profits.''
The gains resulted not only from good things that happened, but also from bad things that did not. India has often been a magnet for misfortune, fund managers said.
''Usually what derails the market is something entirely unexpected,'' said Ted Pulling, a manager of Indian portfolios for J.P. Morgan Fleming Asset Management in Hong Kong. ''It can be a bad monsoon, a market scandal, a border war with Pakistan.''
The unexpected occurrence last year was that there was no unexpected occurrence, at least not a bad one. The monsoon season was benign, which is vital to an economy heavily dependent on agriculture, and the hostility that has long characterized relations between India and Pakistan appears to have diminished.
So has state interference in the economy, Mr. Sitabkhan said. Lately, he said, political stability has allowed the authorities to deal with business with a lighter hand, while putting into place effective financial regulation. ''The government seems to have control over power and is putting sensible policies into the banking sector,'' he said. ''Things are happening at an Indian pace, but in the right direction.''
What is happening much more swiftly is the growth of India's highly educated middle class, as industries like software and pharmaceuticals flourish in service-industry hubs like Bombay, Hyderabad and Bangalore. The expanding middle class has fueled a boom in consumer spending, Mr. Pulling said. That propels growth in other segments of the economy.
''The Indian consumer has more choices than ever, and he feels more comfortable taking on debt to finance a house, car or vacation,'' he said. ''There has been wage growth for those employed in the services sector, which has been growing strongly every year, and that has created more jobs in the middle class.''
Mr. Pulling said the improvement in India's fortunes reflected more than the typical cyclical upturn. The growth of the service and consumer economies is fast enough to persuade him that the economy is on the cusp of a new stage of development.
''It now seems that India is going to graduate to a higher plane of economic growth,'' he said. ''In the year through March it's likely that gross domestic product will increase by 7.5 percent. It hasn't really notched up growth of that strength for seven years; 4 percent to 5.5 percent is normal.''
He added: ''Just about everything is fueling that growth. That's what is so gratifying.''
Mr. Pulling's stock picks are drawn from several sectors. His choice of HDFC Bank reflects the growth in consumer spending, and debt to finance it. Two other favorites, Infosys Technologies and Wipro, both based in Bangalore, provide technology consulting services. He acknowledged that technology stocks rallied worldwide in 2003 but said that the case for these two was ''more subtle than that.''
''These Indian tech stocks are not plays on the U.S. consumer going out and buying a PC or DVD player,'' Mr. Pulling said, but more a play on corporate America's increased spending on technology. ''Corporate America is enjoying strong profitability and cash flow now,'' he added, ''but it's still attuned to cutting costs wherever possible. These Indian tech companies benefit on two fronts.''
Another selection is one of India's largest companies, Reliance Industries, a manufacturing conglomerate based in Mumbai.
''It's one of the very best stocks in India and one that will assume a global profile in the next five years,'' he said. ''People will mention Reliance in the same breath as Samsung,'' the Korean conglomerate that has developed a global presence in several industries.
Mr. Sitabkhan would not recommend Reliance or any other individual stock, but the five largest holdings of Eaton Vance Greater India as of the end of October, according to Morningstar, were United Phosphorous, Reliance, Satyam Computer Services and two carmakers, Maruti Udyog and Tata Motors. Satyam and Wipro trade on the New York Stock Exchange; Infosys trades on Nasdaq.
Mr. Sitabkhan's reticence reflects an unease about calling attention to a market that has had such a strong run-up. But he made a case for investment in India for the long term. He noted that India's growth potential in industries like mobile telephony and cars was huge, even when compared with China, another fast-growing darling of investors.
China has five million cars, he said, and India has just one million, although its population is only slightly smaller. China has 200 million mobile-phone subscribers and India merely 10 million, he said. Will India have 200 million someday? ''Yeah, I think so,'' Mr. Sitabkhan said.
He added that the diversified emerging-market portfolios with which he is involved had large investments in India, relative to the market's size.
Other fund managers with a regional or global perspective had mixed views of the Indian market. In Singapore, Hugh Young, head of global equities at Aberdeen Asset Management, said his Asian portfolios were ''heavily overweight'' in India.
''It is hard to argue that it is dirt cheap following its sharp rise, but we would say it is still reasonable on 15 times prospective earnings,'' he said. ''There are some great companies.'' He named Infosys and two affiliates of Western companies: Glaxo India, a subsidiary of GlaxoSmithKline, the global pharmaceutical company, and Hindustan Lever, a unit of Unilever, the consumer goods giant.
India is a good-news, bad-news market, he said. The positive aspects include ''experienced management, a developed sense of what is right for shareholders and decent economic growth.'' On the down side, he said, ''the major issue is the role of the government, which can still be very interventionist.''
''It is getting better,'' he added, ''but it's often a case of two steps forward, one step back.''
MR. PULLING said he understood the apprehension his colleagues might have about investing in a stock market that has nearly doubled in a year, and he conceded that with elections scheduled for this year, ''there's a modicum of political risk.'' Yet he remains an enthusiastic advocate.
''When I look at 2004 I see accelerating economic growth and a stock market that's not overvalued,'' he said. ''Over all, I see a country that is going to assume a higher profile. India and China are seen as bookends to the Asian growth story. Is 2004 going to be as lucrative as 2003? I hope so, but I doubt it. Is investing in India in 2004 going to be a good idea? I think so. More than at any time in the last 10 years, the stars are aligned for India.''
