If anyone asks, it apparently takes more than seven city officials and experts to change a light bulb.
A jury of seven designers and city agency representatives was formed this month as a first step in an effort to replace the cobra-head streetlamps, the standard gray lights introduced in the 1950's.
But that jury is just a first step. Its task is to invite other lighting experts to take part in an international competition to select a modern rendering of the cobra. That shape constitutes about 85 percent of the city's streetlamps, which number more than 300,000.
''We're looking for something innovative and bold and something that looks likeit could belong in the 21st century,'' said Tom Cocola, a spokesman for thecity's Transportation Department, which is sponsoring the project with thecity's Department of Design and Construction.
The competition may seem elaborate, but architects point out that lighting has the power to transform a space.
''We simply don't notice streetlights, but they are one of the most ubiquitous and largest elements of the streetscape,'' said Ralph Lerner, a professor of architecture at Princeton University who is an adviser to the competition.
Moreover, some critics say the cobra -- an octagonal, galvanized steel pole with a lamp shaped like a snake's head -- is not fitting for a great city.
''The cobra-head streetlamp looks like an outsized gooseneck desk lamp,'' said Vanessa Gruen, the director of special projects at the Municipal Art Society. ''It might be efficient, but adds no style or grace to our neglected streets and sidewalks.''
The jurors, who will judge the entries on aesthetics, cost and the ability to withstand graffiti and other urban elements, include the architects Peter Eisenman and Elizabeth Diller; Paul Marantz of Fisher Marantz Stone, a lighting design firm; and Guy Nordenson, a structural designer.
City representatives are Amanda M. Burden, chairwoman of the New York City Planning Commission, Judith E. Bergtraum, first deputy commissioner of the Transportation Department, and a juror still to be named from the Design and Construction Department.
Three finalists are expected to be announced in May, and the winning entry chosen in October.
With the cobra head facing possible extinction, some people have apparently decided that the time is right to sing its praises.
''The cobra,'' Mr. Cocola said, ''is the most efficient lighting system a municipal government can have.''
DENNY LEE
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NEW YORK STREETSCAPE
