After a snowstorm, there is a blessed window of time when all is soft and silent. Children run outside with sleds. Dogs run outside with owners. Frolicking ensues. But on the Brooklyn Heights Promenade, the frolicking must be done quickly, before the salt truck arrives.
There, as on pedestrian walkways in parks across the city, the Parks Department scatters coarse rock salt, which melts the snow but curtails sledding and irritates some dogs' paw pads.
On Thursday morning at 9:30, for instance, the snow still glistened. But by 12:30, when Antoine Mill arrived pulling his 4-year-old son, Cash, on a yellowsled, the salt had burned a wet trail down the sloped walkway leading to the promenade.
''It's a bummer for the kids,'' Mr. Mill said. ''But then I'm sure there are people who are older who need it. And there are other places to sled.''
For dogs, there may be fewer options.
''In the worst-case scenario, the pads start bleeding'' when the salt is spread, said Penny Kaufman, whose dog, by cruel coincidence, is named Salty.
Terrie Herrera, a local resident, said it was not always this way. ''When Raul was a puppy,'' she said of her Westie, ''I remember going down to the promenade and it would be just mounds of snow and ice and it would stay that way.''
Megan Sheekey, a Parks Department spokeswoman, said the promenade had always been salted, for safety, although in the past the city might have used a more expensive, milder chemical.
''Unfortunately, we don't have the resources now to use a milder salt,'' she said, adding that such treatment was reserved for areas with delicate stonework. The promenade, which recently underwent a $2.7 million renovation, is mostly concrete tiles and does not qualify.
Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz said he would search for an affordable alternative to rock salt. Until then, for local residents, the only solution is to try to beat the rush.
On Thursday morning, the promenade was still white when Ms. Herrera and her dog walked from one end to the other. But they weren't fast enough.
''Raul and I got halfway back and they had done half the promenade,'' she said. ''I had to pick him up and carry him the rest of the way.''
TARA BAHRAMPOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NEW YORK SNOW
