CONSUMER-DRIVEN health care, embraced by some employers as a way to contain medical costs, sounds so sensible: Educate workers about health care expenses and give them a financial stake in managing their own care, through individual cash accounts. Each year, employers deposit money in these accounts, which can be used for doctor's visits, prescription drugs and other medical expenses. Any remaining money may be rolled over to the next year.
By making employees active participants in managing their own care, they will spend more cautiously, and medical costs will naturally come down. At least that's the theory.
Only a tiny fraction of employers offer these plans, which typically also include a high-deductible insurance plan that kicks in once the fund is exhausted. So it is too soon to know whether costs will actually decline. But some health care experts are skeptical.
''They're just a way to make higher patient cost-sharing more attractive to employees,'' said Paul B. Ginsburg, president of the Center for Studying Health-System Change, a nonpartisan policy research group based in Washington.
There is no question that employees are already paying more. In 2003, on average, they paid 58 percent of the premium for family coverage in preferred-provider organization plans, up from 53 percent the year before, and 57 percent of premiums for health maintenance organization plans, compared with 50 percent in 2002, according to survey results released last month by Mercer Human Resource Consulting. The median out-of-pocket maximum for P.P.O. care within the network climbed to $2,000 from $1,500, according to the survey, and a third of employers required a co-payment of $20 or more for H.M.O. office visits, up from just 22 percent the year before.
Some health care experts and consumer advocates worry that throwing a pot of money at people and telling them to go manage their health is no cure for the system's ills. Won't poorer, sicker employees, they ask, be paying much more for care?
''The pivot is going to be designing consumer-driven health plans such that if people make high-quality, efficient choices, they actually pay less,'' said Dr. Arnold Milstein, a consultant for Mercer Human Resource Consulting and the medical director for the Pacific Business Group on Health, an association of large California employers.
Health care experts say some employers and insurers are taking promising steps toward making the consumer-driven model work. A handful of companies began testing the waters about three years ago.
Destiny Health of Oak Brook, Ill., offers a consumer-driven plan with a $600 personal medical account for singles, combined with a preferred-provider organization insurance plan that has a deductible of $1,000. To encourage people with chronic medical conditions to take the medications they need rather than hoard the money in their accounts, Destiny divides costs into ''controllable'' and ''uncontrollable'' buckets. If you have any of 110 or so chronic medical conditions that are deemed as having ''uncontrollable'' costs -- like diabetes, heart disease, asthma or high cholesterol -- the cost of medication for them comes out of insurance instead of your personal account.
About a year ago, the Ferguson Financial Group in Pecatonica, Ill., began offering a Destiny Health plan. ''It absolutely makes a difference,'' said Judy Meinders, 58, a customer service representative at the company, of the plan's chronic-medication benefit. Ms. Meinders says she has to take two pills a day to control her thyroid disease and high blood pressure.
Destiny Health also offers incentives to help employees make healthy choices. Workers earn ''points'' for getting flu shots, taking exercise classes or discussing chronic conditions with a nurse. The points can be redeemed for airline tickets, hotel accommodations and health club memberships, among other things.
Other companies also offer incentives. Plans designed by Lumenos of Alexandria, Va., an administrator of consumer-driven plans, might add $100 to someone's health account for filling out a health questionnaire or talking with a ''health coach'' to manage chronic conditions. At Anthem Blue Cross, which offers plans in nine states, employees can receive discounts on Jenny Craig weight-loss programs.
Keeping costs within the reach of lower-paid workers is a concern. One relatively simple solution is to link what employees pay to their salaries.
Rockwell Automation, an industrial automation company based in Milwaukee, has 17,000 employees in the United States, from factory workers to senior executives. An employee earning $35,000 a year with family coverage who signs up for the company's consumer-driven health plan has a $1,700 deductible and a maximum annual out-of-pocket cost of $2,500. Someone who earns $85,000 and buys the same family coverage, however, faces a $3,100 deductible and a $5,000 out-of-pocket maximum.
''Initially, you do get some pushback from higher-paid employees when you implement this,'' said Roger Freitag, the company's director of global benefits.
Tiered networks, in which providers are grouped into tiers based on cost or efficiency, are also being adopted by some employers and insurers. Consumers pay more or less depending on the tier they choose.
The tiered networks ''have the potential to help direct consumers to more efficient and better providers through financial incentives that actually give people more choice,'' said Gary Claxton, vice president of the Kaiser Family Foundation, based in Menlo Park, Calif.
BUT most tiering has been rudimentary. Some plans, for example, lump all teaching hospitals into a high-cost tier and community hospitals into a low-cost tier, or base the distinctions on costs for specific procedures. These measures, however, do not really deal with the cost of treating a patient through the course of an illness.
A few plans, like Premera Blue Cross in Seattle, are beginning to address this. Premera puts doctors into tiers based on their clinics' relative cost efficiency in treating particular conditions or diseases. That way, a doctor who charges more could still be in the preferred tier if he is better at avoiding complications or reducing unnecessary lab tests. Premera is developing ways to measure quality and patient satisfaction as well.
''They've realized it's a mistake to judge a doctor based on fees, because he may be more cost-effective,'' Dr. Milstein said.
MONEY &amp; MEDICINE Michelle Andrews is a freelance writer in Manhattan specializing in health care. Her column on its economics appears the third Sunday each month. E-mail: moneymeds@nytimes.com.
