AT a news conference last week to announce the blockbuster merger of J.P. Morgan Chase and Bank One, it was easy to spot the native New Yorker.
William B. Harrison, 60, the tall, courtly chief executive of J.P. Morgan, methodically made the case for the $58 billion merger that, in terms of assets, will create the second-largest bank in the United States, after Citigroup.
Off to the side, but relishing the limelight, was James L. Dimon, 47, the impetuous presumptive heir to a new financial colossus that aims to compete head-on with Citigroup, where he was once a rising star.
Mr. Dimon, the chief executive at Bank One, occasionally interrupted Mr. Harrison. He tossed out a one-liner about J.P. Morgan's investment banking capabilities of a few years back and, for good measure, lashed out at a financial analyst who had presumed to put a sell rating on his Bank One stock.
He came across more like a smart-alecky high school student than Wall Street's newest titan.
Oh, in case you are still wondering, Mr. Harrison was born in North Carolina; Mr. Dimon hails from Queens.
Just as the return of the Brooklyn-born Stephon Marbury to the New York Knicks electrified local fans, Mr. Dimon, whose grandfather immigrated from Greece and who went to the Browning School on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, has been hailed as a savior at J.P. Morgan. Employees greeted him and Mr. Harrison with a standing ovation at a companywide meeting on Thursday.
But this is no mere sentimental homecoming. In some ways, Mr. Dimon's return may herald the end of an era -- that of imperial Wall Street chief executives, more comfortable working a boardroom than sweating out complex financial formulas.
When Mr. Dimon formally becomes chief executive in 2006, he will be 49 years old, which may well make him the youngest boss of a major financial firm. Despite his youth, he is more experienced in the hurly-burly of Wall Street deal making than just about all his peers. While the heads of Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch and Morgan Stanley were toiling away in relative obscurity in the 1980's, Mr. Dimon was the essential cog in the deal-making machine of Sanford I. Weill, the current chairman of Citigroup.
And there may be many more deals to come. When asked if he was bothered by the fact that the new entity would have no retail brokerage network -- a hallmark of Mr. Weill's various companies dating back to the 1960's -- Mr. Dimon's response was telling.
''My dad is still a stockbroker'' at Smith Barney, he said. ''But we have to get this done and then dream about the next thing.''
In other words, before the deal making can begin, Mr. Dimon has to show the operational expertise he demonstrated in almost 20 years as Mr. Weill's top lieutenant, charged with integrating many mergers.
With combined assets of $1.1 trillion, the new banking giant runs a close second to Citigroup. Its market value, though, at a combined $132 billion, would still be about half the size of Citigroup's $255 billion. So there is much work that Mr. Dimon and Mr. Harrison must accomplish before J.P. Morgan can begin to challenge Citigroup's title as the world's largest financial institution.
A step in that direction, analysts say, would be for Mr. Dimon to make a bid for a brokerage firm with a chain of retail brokers.
While Mr. Dimon and Mr. Harrison have taken pains to say that the priority will be to ensure that the Bank One-J.P. Morgan merger is successful , analysts have noted that the lack of a brokerage network sticks out at J.P. Morgan, especially in light of the 12,200 Smith Barney brokers at Citigroup.
J.P. Morgan also lacks Citigroup's global scope -- and analysts would not be surprised by an overseas acquisition or two eventually. But like Mr. Weill, Mr. Dimon was never much of an internationalist. His focus in those years was always on building up a network of brokers who could cross-sell insurance, mutual funds and stocks nationwide.
''JAMIE has dealt with a big brokerage sales force before, and he likes the business,'' said Richard Strauss, a securities analyst at Deutsche Bank. ''Although it's still early, this deal does gives him the platform to eventually make another acquisition.''
Even during his three years at Bank One in Chicago, the ever-restless Mr. Dimon was sniffing around for deals on Wall Street, approaching executives at Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers about tie-ups, according to an investment banker who had been briefed on the talks.
Mr. Dimon bided his time, however, and with the J.P. Morgan deal has earned the grudging respect, if not the fear, of the Street.
''Win, win -- it's a good platform for a good operator,'' said the chief executive of a major Wall Street house. ''Jamie may never have had the premier role, but he was always the guy behind the gun.''
The chief executives of the major investment houses tend to act more like chairmen. They often spend their energy schmoozing potential corporate clients on the golf course in order to land the next big deal, as opposed to the grubbier work of sifting through spreadsheets.
Mr. Dimon, who doesn't even play golf, is a numbers guy, schooled by his mentor Mr. Weill in the art of squeezing better returns out of the many companies they bought together. Bankers who have worked with him describe him as relentlessly hands-on, eager to wrap his mind around even the most arcane financial problems.
When Lucent, the troubled telecommunications company, hired James B. Lee Jr., a vice chairman at J.P. Morgan, to advise the company about rescheduling its mountain of debt in 2000, Mr. Lee put a call in to Mr. Dimon, then the chief executive of Bank One, which also had significant exposure to Lucent at the time.
''I said, 'Look, Jamie, if we can't get this deal done we will all lose a lot of money,''' Mr. Lee recalled. ''So he gathered the facts, got himself smart and Lucent lived to fight another day. I was impressed.''
It is instructive to compare Mr. Dimon with Charles O. Prince, the current chief executive of Citigroup. While Mr. Prince may not possess the flash of Mr. Dimon, the two men worked hand in hand with Mr. Weill in the 1980's and 90's, performing the deal-related alchemy that turned a tiny consumer finance company in Baltimore into today's Citigroup. Mr. Prince, as Mr. Weill's corporate lawyer, handled the legal issues while Mr. Dimon crunched the numbers.
Glenn F. Tilton, the chairman and chief executive of United Airlines, spent countless hours holed up in a boardroom with Mr. Dimon, exploring the various options available to United and Bank One, one of its largest lenders, as the airline struggled to emerge from bankruptcy.
''There is a chairman style and there is a C.E.O. style; Jamie has a C.E.O. style,'' Mr. Tilton said. ''He has a voracious appetite for the business and he thoroughly enjoys it as well.''
The question remains, though: Can a meticulous Wall Street chief executive prevent the nasty surprises that have plagued others in recent years?
Mr. Harrison has publicly acknowledged J.P. Morgan's missteps in becoming a primary lender to Enron, although it is by no means clear that a more hands-on chief executive would have drawn the line and refused to assist Enron with the off-balance-sheet partnerships that would spell its demise.
Mr. Weill, despite his renown as a micromanager, did not prevent the conflicts of interest between investment banking and research departments that were a crucial part of an industry investigation. The point is that financial institutions like J.P. Morgan and Citigroup are so large that even the most relentlessly focused chief executive is hard pressed to prevent the occasional blow-up.
Which doesn't mean that Mr. Dimon won't try his best.
''Jamie will go into the level of detail that would kill most people, so no one can pull the wool over his eyes,'' said one investment banker who has worked with him over the years.
