Tower Records, one of the largest specialty retailers of music and video in the country and one of the last family-run dynasties in an industry increasingly dominated by mass merchants like Wal-Mart, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection yesterday.
The filing by Tower and its parent company, MTS Inc., comes at a time when the traditional record stores, where generations of Americans first discovered music, are under siege from big-box and electronics stores as well as from the growing availability of music online.
The filing is intended to reduce the company's debt by $80 million so that interest costs will consume less of the company's revenue.
Tower officials said that its 93 stores from California to New York would remain open and that neither its customers nor its employees would notice any change.
But some analysts said Tower's plight was a bad sign for the industry at large.
''The future looks particularly grim for all land-based music retailers,'' said Burt P. Flickinger III, managing director of the Strategic Resource Group, a consulting firm that has worked with retailers and record companies. He said such stores ''literally have a toe-tag on them and they're boxed up for the proverbial boneyard.''
With the demise of once dominant stores like Tower that specialize in selling every category of music and do it with great depth and range, Mr. Flickinger predicted that ''most consumers will move to a much narrower band of music -- what they hear of the top 25 songs that are programmed in vicious rotation by the FM radio stations or top 20 almost preselected MTV songs.''
Michael Dreese, chief executive of Newbury Comics, an independent chain of 25 record stores in the Boston area, said: ''If Home Depot has only 12 power drills to offer a carpenter, that's probably not desirable. But if the society loses 10,000 artistic voices, that's a disaster. Because music is the most accessible way that society communicates with itself.''
Tower, which has 8 stores in New York State, 44 in California and outlets in states ranging from Oregon to Tennessee, had been losing money and had tried unsuccessfully to find a buyer.
Under the planned restructuring, the Solomon family, which founded Tower, would give control of the company to its creditors.
''Our issues are financial, not operational,'' E. Allen Rodriguez, Tower's chief executive, said yesterday in a statement. He said the reorganization was expected to be completed within 45 to 60 days.
Tower is far from the first record retailer to encounter problems in recent years.
Numerous other stores and chains have closed. Mr. Dreese, who said his chain sold over three million compact discs last year, said there were some 50 to 70 regional record chains just 15 years ago and that now there were ''maybe 10.''
Mr. Dreese said Tower had been slow to make the technological innovations necessary to continue to compete.
But its biggest problem, he said, has been that shift of the bulk of the retail music business to stores like Circuit City, Best Buy, Target and Wal-Mart.
Some of those large chains, which offer a much narrower selection of CD's, became especially skilled at extracting marketing allowances from record labels, reducing the amount that went to companies like Tower, Mr. Dreese added. And the labels themselves have been facing their own difficulties.
''The whole industry caught the flu right at the same time disc burning was taking off,'' Mr. Dreese said, referring to consumers making their own CD's by copying them or by downloading free music from the Internet.
Josh Bernoff, an analyst for Forrester Research, a firm that studies trends in technology, said yesterday in an interview that he had found in a recent study that at least $700 million worth of CD sales annually had been lost because of Internet file sharing.
''The music industry is down between 15 and 20 percent in the past three years,'' he said, referring to CD sales in the United States. ''It's very clear that everybody involved -- the music labels and retailers -- are suffering. What we found is that we could prove that at least a portion of that is due to downloading.''
Martin Zohn, a partner in the bankruptcy practice group of Proskauer Rose, the law firm based in New York City, said that the challenge facing Tower Records after its restructuring would be ''to get customers into the stores and to get them to carry the product out of the stores.''
The competition is fierce,'' he said. ''And they have to compete not only on price but on the pleasantness of the buying experience.''
At Tower Records on Broadway at West Fourth Street in Manhattan, shoppers said yesterday that they would be lost without the store.
''This is probably the best classical record store in town,'' said Tom Mac Giolla Dheachair, 40, an art exhibit installer from the Lower East Side who was considering CD's by Schubert and Schoenberg. ''This store is like a musical oasis in the city.''
Correction:  February 13, 2004, Friday  An article and a picture caption in Business Day on Tuesday about a bankruptcy filing by Tower Records and its parent company misstated the location of a store in Manhattan. It is at Broadway and East Fourth Street, not West Fourth Street.
