Energy ministers gathering here on Monday for a meeting of OPEC members said stricter adherence to their current production quotas was needed to avoid a sharp decline in the price of oil this spring, signaling that formal output cuts could probably wait until next month.
Chakib Khelil, the oil minister of Algeria and the host of the meeting, said members were exceeding the group's quota of 24.5 million barrels a day by about 1.75 million barrels in extra daily production. His was one of several public acknowledgements by delegates that members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries were flouting quotas to profit from historically high oil prices.
Revenue from international sales by OPEC, which accounts for about a third of world oil production, surged nearly 25 percent in 2003 -- to $247 billion from $199 billion the previous year -- as oil prices climbed to their highest annual average level in two decades, according to Cambridge Energy Research Associates. This windfall has made it difficult for the 11 members of OPEC, many of them under fiscal strain, to adhere to their own quotas.
In trading in New York on Monday, crude oil futures for March delivery climbed 5 cents a barrel, to $32.53, while in London, Brent crude oil rose 12 cents, to $28.95 a barrel.
Despite predictions of softer demand as the Northern Hemisphere heads into spring, Ali al-Naimi, the oil minister of Saudi Arabia, OPEC's most powerful member, said there were ''formal and informal'' methods for reining in production. He said OPEC members needed to show greater discipline in adhering to production quotas.
There are signs that some OPEC member nations are already trying to enforce discipline on others. Saudi Arabia, for instance, reduced oil sales to large consuming nations like the United States, China and Japan by 470,000 barrels a day in October from the average in the third quarter, according to Deutsche Bank. That was an indication of Saudi Arabia's willingness to lose market share temporarily to support the present quotas, which were established at a meeting last September.
Mr. Naimi, the Saudi minister, said his nation would be pleased with an oil price of about $25 a barrel, which would be well within OPEC's self-proposed trading range of $22 to $28. OPEC's price target is the average price of crude oils of various quality; the OPEC price generally is a few dollars a barrel below the price of low-sulfur West Texas Intermediate crude that is the benchmark product in New York.
Still, other delegates gave few indications that they wanted to see prices fall to that level from their current perch of about $28.
''The current prices are at an acceptable level and we are worried about overproduction,'' Iran's oil minister, Bijan Namdar Zanganeh, and his Venezuelan counterpart, Rafael Ramirez, said in a joint statement issued Sunday in Tehran. OPEC's president, Purnomo Yusgiantoro of Indonesia, echoed those comments in a briefing with reporters at the closely guarded compound where OPEC is scheduled to convene formally on Tuesday.
''The price is in the upper part of the band, but we are also concerned about what is going to happen in the second quarter,'' Mr. Purnomo said. ''There is no room for OPEC to increase production.''
Delegates to Tuesday's meeting, the first OPEC gathering held in Algeria since 1980, said they also planned to discuss the weakness of the dollar against the euro. Oil is priced in dollars, but OPEC's members trade with Europe in euros; the dollar's recent fall in value against the euro has eroded its purchasing power in Europe. Several ministers have argued that higher oil prices in recent months are justified by the declining value of the dollar.
Yet while Mr. Purnomo and Mr. Naimi, the Saudi minister, did not definitively rule out a cut at Tuesday's meeting, prices have been supported recently by various factors like sluggish production and continued uncertainty over the recovery of the oil industry in Iraq, an OPEC member, and robust demand in China. Hence, OPEC's current focus on expectations of waning demand this spring, a perennial justification for cutting output.
Demand for oil is expected to decline by 2.6 million barrels a day in the second quarter largely because of warming temperatures, according to the International Energy Agency, a Paris-based organization that tracks energy trends. The expectation of weaker seasonal demand has spurred thinking among analysts that OPEC might opt to cut production at its meeting next month in Vienna after calling for greater adherence to its current quotas in its gathering here this week.
That strategy could appease large oil consuming nations, including the United States, that have remained unusually silent in recent months about the impact of higher oil prices on their economies. Still, waiting until next month to cut production risks the possibility of a price decline if OPEC members do not stick to their own quotas. Some OPEC members, including Libya and Venezuela, have recently said they would like a trading range that allowed oil prices to be sustained above $30.
''OPEC is laughing all the way to the bank,'' said Fadel Gheit, an energy industry analyst at Oppenheimer &amp; Company in New York, who estimated the United States pays $100 million more a day to import oil than it did three years ago.
