A report in an influential Chinese financial newspaper has fueled speculation among bankers and economists that the Chinese government is considering revaluing its currency over the next few months.
The report, which appeared in the weekly China Business Post over the weekend, quoted unnamed Chinese central bank officials as saying the government may allow the currency, the yuan, to rise by as much as 5 percent in value against the dollar as soon as March.
Officials from China's central bank dismissed the report on Monday. ''This is the newspaper's opinion; it isn't a central bank decision,'' an official from the bank told Dow Jones Newswires.
But economists and analysts here said that the central bank's denials left open the possibility that it was drawing up plans for less immediate changes to loosen the peg that has welded China's exchange rate to the dollar since the mid-1990's.
''It's notable the debate is moving from being an international one to a domestic one,'' said Chen Xingdong, chief economist for BNP Paribas Peregrine Securities in Beijing.
The China Business Post cited bank officials and experts as saying that the yuan may be allowed to rise in value next month within a 5 percent band, and that over the coming year China may broaden the band in which the currency can fluctuate.
''If the central bank decides to adjust the yuan's exchange rate, it is quite likely this will enter a substantive stage next month,'' the paper said.
By late this year, the fluctuation band may widen to 10 percent, eventually leading to a freely floating exchange rate, the paper said. Since 1994, the yuan has been virtually tied to an exchange rate of 8.27 yuan to the dollar, with only a hairbreadth trading band of 0.3 percent.
The China Business Post is, like all Chinese newspapers, government-controlled; it comes under the sponsorship of China's stock exchange authority.
Last year, as China's trade surplus with the United States topped $120 billion, a succession of Bush administration officials lobbied the Chinese government to allow the yuan to rise against the dollar, which would make China's exports more expensive.
Chinese officials, including the prime minister, Wen Jiabao, have said that China will gradually adjust its exchange rate policies. But the weekend report was the first to suggest changes are mere months away.
Finance officials in Beijing denied the China Business Post report, and the central bank's spokeswoman, Bai Li, said that it was ''fabricated.'' But the officials' comments also left open the possibility that China is drawing up longer-term plans to ease international friction about its exchange rate policies.
''The most important thing is maintaining the stability'' of the currency, the central bank's monetary policy director, Yi Gang, told Agence France-Presse. As to when the exchange rate changes could take place, ''there is no clear timetable,'' he added.
The official Xinhua News Agency reported on Monday that China might tie its exchange rate to a set of 10 currencies, weighted to reflect their respective importance in China's trade and investment inflows.
The news comes as the Group of 7 industrialized nations said over the weekend that ''more flexibility in exchange rates is desirable for major countries.''
Revaluing the yuan against the dollar would ease international pressure on China to rein in its exports and would make imports of steel, cotton and other important manufacturing items cheaper, but it would also dampen China's exports and foreign investment inflows, bankers and economists said.
''This is a political decision in the end,'' Mr. Chen, the economist, said, ''because whoever does it also has to bear responsibility for the problems, as well as the gains.''
