In a yearly ritual of the music industry, Clive Davis held court at a pre-Grammy Awards party Saturday night, mingling with an eclectic mix of singers and celebrities like Alicia Keys, Sidney Poitier, P. Diddy and Nancy Sinatra.
Mr. Davis, 71, the longtime record executive who has nurtured the careers of Janis Joplin, Whitney Houston and more recently Ms. Keys, started holding these parties in 1974, the year he founded Arista Records. This year's cocktail party and dinner, at the Beverly Hills Hotel, attracted 800 of Mr. Davis's friends and colleagues, and had two red carpets for them to saunter in on and more than 100 members of the news media to make them feel important. A circular bar in the center of the room served only martinis.
But the bash was not just notable for its level of excess. It was also a coronation, with a bit of a revenge-fantasy-come-true mixed in for good measure. Just four years ago Mr. Davis was forced by his bosses at BMG to relinquish control of Arista, officially because he had reached retirement age. But last week he capped the comeback of a lifetime, restoring Arista to his portfolio when he was named chief executive of BMG North America. On Saturday night he made his first public appearance in his new role as overseer of all of BMG's North American music operations (except for its country and classical labels), accepting congratulations all evening.
''I feel good,'' Mr. Davis said in an interview the morning of the party, insisting that he was not gloating.
His restoration is a testament to determination, a keen ear for hits, a newfound commitment to frugality and luck. While record executives have been wringing their hands over digital downloading and slumping CD sales, Mr. Davis has been making lots of money for BMG, churning out hit after hit, thanks to Ms. Keys, Luther Vandross, Rod Stewart and a gaggle of ''American Idol'' singers like Clay Aiken and Kelly Clarkson.
But it is also intriguing that at a time of industry-wide financial hardship and mergers, with the entire music business trying to adapt to the digital age, a major record company appointed as its leader one of the most analog guys around. Mr. Davis is a proudly old-fashioned executive, with a reputation for profligate spending and a complete disinterest in technology. He was willing, if not enthusiastic, to discuss these topics because, he said, he felt misunderstood and wanted to correct the record. He dismissed any talk of a comeback or suggestions that his age was an issue.
''How can it be that 'He's too old, and he's fine now?' '' he asked, annoyed, with his distinctive hybrid Brooklyn-London accent. ''There were simply different people, a different plan. There was some dislocation and the new administration came to me saying that mistakes were made, and would I please run the record operations?''
Age is a touchy issue with Mr. Davis, since his business is mostly about youth culture. It was also the reported reason for his ouster from his beloved Arista four years ago, when the two top BMG executives replaced him with the producer Antonio Reid.
But an uproar from the music world, particularly from the musicians who have always adored him, forced BMG, part of the Bertelsmann media conglomerate, to stake Mr. Davis to $150 million and a 50 percent share of a new BMG label, J Records. It thrived; Ms. Keys's debut album went platinum six times and won five Grammys in 2002. Busta Rhymes's ''Pass the Courvoisier'' ignited a nationwide craze for the drink. Mr. Davis signed Mr. Vandross for a comeback album, which went platinum.
Then luck entered the picture. Soon after Thomas Middelhoff, the chief executive of Bertelsmann, was forced out in 2002, the two top BMG executives, Strauss Zelnick and Michael Dornemann, left the company. The new worldwide BMG chairman, Rolf Schmidt-Holtz, bought Mr. Davis's share of J Records (though Mr. Davis remained in charge) and added the RCA Music Group to his portfolio, in November 2002.
Mr. Davis added hit makers like Christina Aguilera and the Dave Matthews Band to his already successful stable. And though he was not at first particularly enamored with the idea of producing the ''American Idol'' albums, he had best sellers with CD's by Mr. Aiken, Ms. Clarkson and Ruben Studdard, and soon changed his mind, he said.
Meanwhile Mr. Reid's Arista struggled financially, despite blockbusters like Outkast's ''Speakerboxxx/The Love Below.'' Several missteps, including a $100 million deal with Ms. Houston that resulted in two mediocre-selling albums, generated the kind of publicity about spendthrift ways once reserved for Mr. Davis. Arista, according to company executives, lost about $200 million over the last two years, and last month Mr. Reid was fired. Mr. Reid, who could not be reached for comment, will probably not be out of work for long. He is expected to be named chairman of Island Def Jam this week. (And on Sunday night at the Grammys, he was called up to the stage and saluted by OutKast, which won three Grammys.)
The spendthrift reputation is one Mr. Davis is eager to shed. He is credited with being the first to boost record deals into the millions of dollars in the 1970's, and he was fired from CBS Records allegedly for billing five-figure apartment renovations and a son's bar mitzvah to the company. More recently he advanced P. Diddy $50 million against the future profits of their joint venture, Bad Boy Records, a decision that amazed many in the industry.
Yet Mr. Davis insisted he ran a tight ship. ''My salaries are not the highest in the industry, and I'm prudent in my video expenditures,'' he said.
''I live a comfortable life,'' he added, probably referring to his butler and chauffeur. ''But that's different.'' His only reference to previous spending habits is his acknowledgment that ''we have tighter cost structures in the industry than we used to.''
Charles Goldstuck, who became president of BMG North America last week and was Mr. Davis's No. 2 at RCA, J Records and Arista, pointed out that Ms. Keys's debut video cost a relatively inexpensive $400,000, while budgets were easily reaching $1 million for other superstar acts. Other staffers said Mr. Davis made the most of free opportunities for marketing, personally calling the staff of ''Saturday Night Live'' to book one of his acts or accompanying them to appearances, the way he did with Ms. Keys when she was starting out. And the company now enlists sponsors for his annual bash, defraying part of the reported $1 million cost, which was traditionally billed to the company.
''I can't speak for the past, but in the five years we've been together he's made money for BMG,'' Mr. Goldstuck said.
In some ways Mr. Davis, who sends handwritten notes in lieu of e-mail messages and uses a Palm Pilot reluctantly, still lives in the past. But he insisted that he was not threatened by or unaware of technology and how it is changing the music business. ''I spend zero time on this issue,'' he said. ''My career began when the LP was ending. I didn't care when it went to cassette or to CD. I wasn't threatened by music videos. I don't care how it's distributed, as long as it's legal. I leave that to others.''
Although Mr. Davis has been known to stump younger staffers with his allusions -- he once referred to a woman as a young Lana Turner, sending them, one said, ''running to Google to figure out who the heck she is'' -- his musical knowledge is up to date.
''He listens to every song on the charts so he knows what his competitors are doing and where music is going,'' said Keith Naftaly, a former senior executive on Mr. Davis's talent-scouting team, now at Interscope Records. ''So his ears are remarkably young. Whether it was reviewing Notorious B.I.G. material while at Arista or the rap star Cassidy, he can listen to two of the grimiest rap cuts and tell you instantly which one will be a hit.''
And he has a rapport with artists that few other executives possess, even advising Aretha Franklin on where to buy a house in the Hamptons.
''There's dignity when you deal with him,'' said Carlos Santana, whose comeback album in 1999, ''Supernatural,'' was masterminded and produced by Mr. Davis and won eight Grammys. ''And he can always find the right songs for you.''
Now that he has recaptured Arista, Mr. Davis has no plans to give it up. ''I love the business,'' he said. ''Even now when I'm dealing with artists 20, 25 years old. In my head, I'm the same age, with experience. Why should I stop?''
Correction:  February 11, 2004, Wednesday  An article in The Arts yesterday about the career of Clive Davis, the BMG record executive, misstated the timing of two other executives' departure from the company. It was before Thomas Middelhoff, chief executive of BMG's parent company, Bertelsmann, was forced out in 2002, not soon after.
