As the St. John's men's basketball team pieced together a practice yesterday, with the head coach helping to fill out five-on-five drills, the university appeared to acknowledge that more supervision on the road was necessary by adding Ron Rutledge as a volunteer assistant to the coaching staff.
Rutledge, a former player and assistant coach at St. John's, has worked as an administrator at the university since 1998. He was an assistant for 17 seasons under Lou Carnesecca, Brian Mahoney and Fran Fraschilla. Rutledge watched much of Sunday's game against Boston College beside Carnesecca behind the St. John's bench.
''I offered my services and Dave and Kevin were receptive to the idea,'' Rutledge said in a statement, referring to Dave Wegrzyn, the athletic director, and Kevin Clark, the interim head coach. ''I'm looking forward to doing all I can in helping the program for the remainder of the season.''
Six players were suspended Friday as a result of their actions after a game against Pittsburgh on Wednesday. Several members of the team visited a strip club in suburban Pittsburgh early Thursday and had sex in their hotel with a woman they had met at the club. The woman made rape accusations, but one player produced a cellphone video of consensual sex and threats by the woman.
Grady Reynolds, a starting forward, was expelled. Tyler Jones was suspended for last Sunday's game against Boston College and could be reinstated for tomorrow's game at West Virginia.
The other four suspended players will appear at hearings beginning today. Elijah Ingram and Abe Keita will appear today before a panel of faculty members and students; the university is seeking to expel them. The reserves Mohammed Diakite and Lamont Hamilton will appear tomorrow before the dean of student life, Dr. Jose Rodriguez. The players are allowed to have legal representation, but only for advice, and they may request a second hearing if they do not agree with the outcome.
The panel and the dean will make recommendations to James P. Pellow, executive vice president of the university.
''The executive vice president will probably act fairly immediately,'' Jody Fisher, St. John's director of media relations, said.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
