Once cavemen figured out that almost any sharp object could scrape away facial hair, the male of the species seemed to have conquered his biggest grooming challenge. It was never so easy for women. In most cultures, the female ideal came to have a glorious head of hair and lush eyelashes, but otherwise resembled a Mexican hairless dog. It hardly mattered that life just isn't that perfect.
Before I reached my teens, I was begging to be allowed to shave my legs. That was not dainty enough. My mother instead offered me sandpaper, or at least it looked like sandpaper: a little gray mitt with abrasive surfaces that buffed away all unsightly growth, including several layers of skin. It was just painful enough to make me beg to wear long pants.
Comparing depilatory weapons has always been dependable girl talk. There is waxing, akin to putting strips of adhesive tape all over and yanking them. And electrolysis, in which hair is permanently -- and expensively and painstakingly -- plucked. Laser hair removal sounds like something for Chewbacca or for very determined women. Men were always spared such details, in much the same way as they got a pass on pantyhose and childbirth. Now they're getting in on the act, making salon appointments with women named Olga who wax backs, arms, legs -- any carpeted spot from nose to toes.
The manly pursuit of skin as slick as patent leather may have been prompted by professional athletes like swimmers and wrestlers, who shave to gain speed and to show off muscles. Or maybe men have finally begun to succumb to magazine and billboard ads, which rarely show hirsute males. Body hair -- once needed for warmth -- is superfluous in a world of masculine face creams, manicures and pedicures. A shy man isn't off the hook. Marketers offer them toothbrush-size hair removers -- the better to practice grooming at home on even the most sensitive body parts.
Men will learn the hard way: you can mow away that growth, but it comes back. And the next thing you know, when you talk about needing a wash and wax on the weekend, you're not talking cars.
CAROLYN CURIEL
Editorial Notebook
