FOR New York subway riders, they are three of the most irritating words in the MetroCard era: ''Please swipe again.''
They popped up for Jeremy Boyd last week at the 86th Street station on the Lexington Avenue line. That is an extraordinarily crowded station, one of the worst in surveys done by the Straphangers Campaign, the riders' advocacy group. At 8:40 a.m., when Mr. Boyd arrived there last Tuesday, people on the downtown side are typically backed up the stairs all the way to the street.
It is not a good place, and 8:40 a.m. is certainly not a good time, for things to go wrong.
But they did for Mr. Boyd, 34, an analyst for a communications company in Lower Manhattan. He swiped his 30-day MetroCard, bought for $70 on Jan. 28 and valid for unlimited riding until Feb. 26. ''Please swipe again'' appeared on the turnstile screen. So he swiped again. Then again. And again. And again.
He noticed the same problem at other turnstiles. Ordinary New Yorkers trying to get to work could not get MetroCards to function. Behind them, the lengthening lines began to be reminiscent of Bulgarian food shops in the communist days. Wading through the crowds to seek help from already-burdened booth clerks did not seem a sensible choice.
Frustrated, some went over or under the turnstiles. Mr. Boyd was one of those who went over.
He landed in the arms of waiting police officers, one of whom wrote a summons carrying a $60 fine. Nearby, Mr. Boyd said, some of his fellow jumpers were also being ticketed. It seemed ''like a sting operation'' to his wife, Sabrina, who was on hand.
''Fare evasion,'' the summons said. The officer wrote that he had seen Mr. Boyd ''jump over the turnstile to avoid paying fare.'' The flaw here is that Mr. Boyd did pay his fare -- in advance. He says he even proved it to the officer by running his card through a scanner at the station. ''I've never gotten on a train without paying the fare,'' he said.
The position of New York City Transit is that turnstile jumping, by definition, is fare evasion; if something goes wrong, you should appeal to the fare booth clerk.
That definition may have made absolute sense with the old subway token. Clearly, if you jumped the turnstile, you did not pay. But with prepaid MetroCards, and inevitable computer malfunctions, might new definitions be in order?
''If they charged him with turnstile jumping, that's one thing,'' Mrs. Boyd said. ''But they charged him with fare evasion, and he didn't do that.''
The governing regulation is Section 1050.4a of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's rules of conduct. It says in part: ''No person shall use or enter the facilities or conveyances of the authority, for any purpose, without the payment of fare or tender of other valid fare media used in accordance with any conditions and restrictions imposed by the authority.''
Don't feel bad if you had to read that a few times to get it. Bureaucratese is what it is. The rules also warn that violators could face ''ejectment'' from the system.
''Other valid fare media'' turns out to mean items like the MetroCard. As for ''conditions and restrictions,'' the transit agency says that this language covers the turnstile-jumping ban and the requirement that riders with card problems should go to a booth clerk.
BUT how is one supposed to know any of this? Nowhere is it spelled out, surely not at fare booths. True, the convention has long been that you don't jump turnstiles. But we are in a new computerized world. Riders might be forgiven for believing that they kept their end of the bargain by handing over as much as $70 upfront. They have indeed paid their fare.
There is also a common-sense question for the police. When machines become balky and presumably law-abiding people behave out of character -- especially at a station as packed as the one at 86th Street -- should an officer's first instinct be to reach for his summons book?
''If you're a traffic cop and the light's not working, you'll go and direct traffic and have an orderly flow, not hide out and wait to give people tickets,'' Mr. Boyd said.
He has until March 2 to answer the summons. If it is any consolation to him, a university student named David Palmer found himself in almost an identical situation last spring. Mr. Palmer went before the authority's Transit Adjudication Bureau, in Brooklyn, and explained what happened.
Before you could say ejectment, the hearing officer said he'd heard enough. He tossed out the ticket.
NYC
