For most of his presidency, George W. Bush has counted on a chorus of conservative newspaper columnists, radio hosts and television commentators to give powerful punctuation to his initiatives, proposals and defenses.
But in recent days, there has been an uptick in criticism of Mr. Bush from those quarters, underscoring strains between him and the Republican base that has so faithfully defended him in the past.
For example, Peggy Noonan, the Reagan speechwriter, had this to say on Sunday in opinionjournal.com about Mr. Bush's ''Meet the Press'' interview: ''The president seemed tired, unsure and often bumbling. His answers were repetitive, and when he tried to clarify them he tended to make them worse.''
George Will, the conservative columnist, wrote in his syndicated column on Sunday, ''It is surreal for a Republican president to submit a budget to a Republican-controlled Congress and have Republican legislators vow to remove the 'waste' that he has included and that they have hitherto funded.''
While most conservatives remain squarely behind Mr. Bush, the united front has not been quite as united.
Columnists like Robert Novak, conservative television hosts like Joe Scarborough of MSNBC and others on local radio and the Internet have raised questions about Mr. Bush.
''It's a critical departure,'' said J. David Hoeveler, a professor of history at the University of Wisconsin in Milwaukee, who said last week that he believed that his local conservative radio host, Charlie Sykes, had begun sounding less exuberant about Mr. Bush. ''Generally it's been whole-heartedly Republican,'' Mr. Hoeveler said of the tenor of the conservative media. ''It would suggest that those who would call themselves Republicans are quite possibly breaking ranks.''
Bush campaign officials say the frustration stems from an eagerness among his supporters to take on the Democrats aggressively, which they say he will begin to do soon. And some columnists and commentators who have voiced criticism of the president insisted on Monday that they were not breaking ranks and that he remained their standard-bearer.
Still, several conservative columnists and commentators said their pronouncements of disappointment resulted from growing frustration with what they saw as unbridled federal spending, Mr. Bush's mixed signals on gay marriage and his caution in meeting fierce critiques from a newly emboldened opposition.
Republicans who gave him poor grades for his performance on ''Meet the Press,'' for instance, said they were concerned that he was not in fighting form when the possible Democratic challenger, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, is.
Many critiques go beyond politics. For instance, until recently Mr. Scarborough, a former Republican congressman from Florida, was as energetic a booster of Mr. Bush as anyone. He said he began speaking out against the Bush fiscal policy about two months ago, as he grew alarmed by the growing deficit and what he said were needlessly expensive proposals, like a manned Mars expedition and an increase in financing for the National Endowment of the Arts.
''When I first started doing it, I had Republicans calling me up and saying 'Hey, why are you knocking a guy who's from your party?' '' he said. ''Two months later, everybody seems to be saying it. There's been no fiscal restraint and that's hurting the party and it's hurting the conservative cause.''
In one column last week, Mr. Novak criticized Mr. Bush for giving ''the most ineffective State of the Union address in recent years.'' And, he wrote, the failure to find weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and the admission that the president's plan to expand Medicare would cost more than initially estimated were ''a double blow to his credibility.''
Mr. Novak pointed out in an interview that despite his criticism, most Republicans are not likely to vote for the Democratic nominee. But, he said: ''The problem is not whether they vote for Kerry. The problem is whether they stay at home.''
Terry Holt, the president's campaign spokesman, said he expected it all to quiet down as soon as Mr. Bush went up against Mr. Kerry directly, should the senator capture the nomination. ''When the campaign enters a new period where Kerry will stand in direct comparison to the president, there will be a more intense focus on Kerry's record,'' Mr. Holt said, ''And I think what we're seeing from these folks is a sense that they are ready for that period to begin.''
