The closer Iraqis get to sovereignty, the more they voice fears that ethnic and religious differences could fracture their nation.
Generations of colonialism followed by Saddam Hussein's rule drove fissures through Iraqi society that are now widening as politicians and clerics appeal to religion and ethnicity in advancing their demands. In the angry clamoring of Shiite and Sunni Muslims, and of Arabs, Turkmens and Kurds in the north, many Iraqis, foreign diplomats and allied military officers say they discern the first smoke of broad communal strife.
''Wherever we see a spark, we have to dampen it quickly,'' said a senior allied military official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Neither the allied official, nor the Iraqi clerics, tribal sheiks, politicians, foreign diplomats and ordinary people interviewed over two weeks said civil clashes were imminent. But they said the potential was there, as politicians and allied forces try to forge one country out of ethnic and religious groups with conflicting grievances.
One flash point is the demand now being heard from the Shiite majority for swift elections. Sunnis, who provided the power base for Mr. Hussein, now worry that the discrimination they practiced against Shiites could be turned against them.
In the central town of Ramadi, Sheik Majid al-Dulaimi, a Sunni, summed up the feared outcome of elections: ''Destruction -- political, economic, social -- even civil war.''
Deadly riots between Arabs, Turkmens and Kurds have already shaken Kirkuk, the oil city in the north, as the groups battle for property and primacy.
The unease is amplified by the widespread belief that neighboring countries want to destabilize Iraq, with Iranian groups supporting the Shiites, for example, and Saudis buoying Sunni militants. That was underscored this week when American officials here confirmed that they had obtained a document asking Al Qaeda's leaders for help in waging ''sectarian war'' in Iraq.
Iraqis and foreign diplomats say the Americans have not proved themselves able to calm the tensions and contend that it will take a home-grown force to prevent a dangerous splintering.
''The new thing in Iraq is that we must take the initiative,'' said Aku Sada al-Khalidi, 34, from a Shiite family in Kerbala. ''And now people are speaking out, which is beautiful and frightening at the same time.''
''We used to blame Saddam for everything,'' he said, adding that ''now, it is our responsibility'' to prevent the nation from breaking up on ethnic or sectarian lines.
After a generation of oppression, each major group -- Sunnis, Shiites, Kurds -- claims to have suffered more than others, and each doubts others will treat them fairly after the Americans hand over power.
Iraqis and foreign experts said some clashes were likely, particularly given that militias hold sway across much of Iraq, and that there are ample arsenals available to various groups.
If serious trouble erupts after the transfer of power, it is not yet clear to what degree the American military could intervene, although a senior official with the Coalition Provisional Authority said the continuing presence of American troops could provide a strong deterrent. The future American role is being negotiated by the occupying authorities and the Iraqi Governing Council.
Iraqis and the military worry most about the rift between Sunnis and Shiites over the latter's call for elections. The most revered Shiite cleric, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, has asked the United Nations to determine their feasibility, and an assessment team has just arrived.
Ayatollah Sistani has indicated that if the United Nations recommends against elections before the June 30 deadline for the transfer of power, he will consider alternatives to achieve a representative government. He opposes the caucus system favored by the Americans.
''The Shia are willing to wait a certain amount of time to get one person, one vote, because then, who is the majority?'' said Maj. George Sarabia, the second in command with the Second Squadron of the Second Armored Cavalry, which is responsible for Sadr City, a poor Shiite quarter of Baghdad.
Greater apprehension is felt among the Sunnis. In Baquba, Shiites and Sunnis visit each other's mosques and intermarry. Yet a prosperous Sunni, Ahmed Taha al-Jibouri, could barely handle his anxiety as he sat in his living room on a recent day. His father is the provincial sheik of the Jibouri tribe, a mostly Sunni clan that sprawls all over Iraq.
Mr. Taha firmly opposes elections too soon, maintaining that they would favor the majority Shiites. ''Let the elections occur, and if they bring a government we don't like, we will have demonstrations to get rid of it,'' he said. ''And if that's not enough, we'll take it with weapons.''
The tension between Shiites and Sunnis, whose privileges are now threatened, was foreseen a decade ago by Kanan Makiya, a returned Iraqi exile, in his book ''Cruelty and Silence.''
''Overnight, your world has come crashing down, and you don't quite know what that means,'' said Mr. Makiya, who now heads the Memory Foundation here, which plans to document human rights abuses under Mr. Hussein's Baath Party rule.
In Ramadi and Falluja, Sunni farming towns west of Baghdad where insurgents regularly attack American soldiers, the air crackles with fury. Security is inadequate for elections, residents say, an argument that others elsewhere have also made. Sunnis charge that countless numbers of people are coming in from Iran with fake documents to vote for the Shiites. The Shiite leadership is not truly Iraqi, but Iranian, and therefore illegitimate, they say.
So far, Shiites and Sunnis have not openly clashed. Still, said Mr. Makiya, Shiite leaders could do more to damp Sunni fears by appointing Sunnis to high-level posts and meeting with their leaders. ''Only the Shia can assuage the fears of the Sunni,'' he said. ''If they don't, then Iraq could fall into civil war.''
Already, communal violence has broken out in the north. The Kurds who dominate that area are pressing for a large autonomous province that would include the choice city of Kirkuk. But Turkmens and Arabs in the region resist the idea. Each group has its own historical claims. Many Kurds who were driven away years ago under Mr. Hussein have returned to reclaim their old homes, now inhabited mainly by Arabs.
Dr. Mahmoud Othman, a Kurd and a member of the Iraqi Governing Council, said Kurdish politicians might be able to reduce tensions by putting off the question of Kirkuk and by encouraging Kurds to recover homes peacefully through the courts.
But Dr. Othman and others blamed other countries for deepening sectarian and ethnic rifts. Groups inside Turkey support the Turkmens, he said, underscoring the Turkish government's fear that a Kurdish province in northern Iraq could act as a magnet for its own large Kurdish population. In addition, he said, Syrians, Saudis and Iranians each want to see the American experiment in Iraq fail. ''If there were no outside influence,'' Dr. Othman said, ''Iraqis could reach solutions much more easily.''
Like many Iraqis who work with the American-led alliance, he said the occupying powers had not done a good job of mediating among Iraq's various groups.
The senior Provisional Authority official says he and his staff meet regularly with Iraqis. He said that while he had heard fears of civil strife, he thought that improvements in the economy, the presence of American troops and the gradual strengthening of civil society would prevent violence.
''However we see the future evolve, there will be some shepherding,'' he said, ''and the international community is not going to sit idly by if those danger signals persist.''
Iraqis themselves may offer the best hope to defusing the tensions.
In Baghdad, former political prisoners and their families stream into a mansion that was once owned by an adviser to Mr. Hussein and now is the headquarters of a human rights group. A clearinghouse for information about Iraqis who disappeared under the old government, the building should be ablaze with pain. The group's leaders acknowledge that they spend a lot of time trying to talk people out of retribution.
But some gathered there understand that suffering blanketed the whole country, not just their families or towns. ''We have nothing against the Sunnis,'' said Amina Hadi, a Shiite woman from Nasiriya in the south whose 16-year-old brother vanished into Mr. Hussein's prisons in 1991, never to be found. ''It was the Baathists. They took Sunni, too, and there were Shiites who worked for Saddam.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: BAD OMENS
