In 2003, Brazil's giant state oil company, in the midst of expanding operations across Latin America, entered Ecuador's potentially lucrative but exasperating oil industry after acquiring a controlling stake in an Argentine company that had operated here since the mid-1990s.
The purchase gave the Brazilian company, Petróleo Brasileiro, two big oil blocks that now produce 17,000 barrels of oil a day and part ownership of a new heavy-oil pipeline that foreign oil companies once said held great promise.
But today, oil analysts and a company official say, Petrobras, as the company is known, is quickly trying to unload much of its stake. Ecuador is blessed with plenty of oil, they acknowledge, but the country has a dismal record of managing oil contracts.
Oil consultants and the managers of 3 of the roughly 20 companies that operate here say that Ecuador has reneged on agreements, raised tax and royalty rates beyond what is palatable to investors and otherwise changed the legal framework governing how companies operate, alienating a host of international oil companies.
''Ecuador is still very attractive to oil companies,'' said the Petrobras official, who insisted on anonymity. ''There is oil, but the problem is above ground, not below ground.''
Oil companies are not abandoning Ecuador en masse, say government officials, who contend that Ecuador remains an inviting prospect for foreign oil investors. But some of the biggest companies, giants like Exxon Mobil and BP that could be spending billions of dollars to drive the development of Ecuador's oil industry, are long gone. Other companies are considering leaving or scaling back their investment, oil consultants and company officials say. Ecuador, analysts say, is not getting nearly the amount of investment that was once expected.
The complaints are recurring ones for energy companies that have explored here since the country's biggest oil deposits were first developed in the 1970's. But lately, the problem has become particularly acute, leading to a rash of complaints and tense meetings between President Lucio Gutiérrez and the general managers of several companies.
If several issues relating to taxes and contracts are not resolved, the ramifications could prove financially troubling for a country where the oil sector accounts for a fifth of output and 30 percent of government revenue.
Ecuador had been hoping to double production to 850,000 barrels a day by 2005 with the recent completion of a new pipeline built to carry the gelatinous heavy crude found in eastern Ecuador's Amazon region.
The line, which is officially named the Heavy Crude Pipeline, was built at a cost of $1.3 billion by a consortium of foreign companies and it was designed to carry 450,000 barrels a day. But with private investment curtailed and no new big discoveries, the flow remains far below the capacity, with only about 180,000 barrels running through the 300-mile tube each day.
And although overall production in the country is up thanks to foreign companies -- with output in Ecuador increasing from 389,000 barrels a day in December 2002 to 500,000 in December 2003 -- oil analysts said that production would have been higher had there been more private investment, as initially foreseen.
Production by the state oil company, Petroecuador, has, meanwhile, slipped to about 191,000 barrels a day from 221,000 barrels at the end of 2002 because the company has failed to develop big exploration projects.
''Their production is declining, and there is not sufficient exploration activity going on,'' José Valera, a Houston-based consultant to oil companies in Quito, said of Ecuador. ''The country is going to soon face difficult choices.''
Government officials publicly play down the problems and say that Ecuador -- which has 4.6 billion barrels of proven reserves, among the largest in Latin America -- is on the cusp of an oil boom sure to benefit dependable customers like the United States.
''Never has a company suffered a unilateral termination of its contract,'' Carlos Arboleda, the minister of energy and mines, said in an interview late last year. ''If companies leave, it is because they buy and sell rights. That is part of the dynamism in the oil sector.''
Oil companies and industry experts, however, have a sharply different impression.
''They are fed up,'' René Bucaram, an oil analyst in Quito and former general manager for Texaco in the 1980's, said of foreign companies. ''They talk about fiscal security. They talk about problems with the value-added tax, about the problems that Petroecuador and low-level officials cause for them.''
Petroecuador and the Ministry of Mines and Energy, oil analysts say, are too bureaucratic.
Much of the recent frustration began in August 2001 when tax authorities said that a value-added tax that had been reimbursed to the companies but taken back would not be restored to the oil companies.
Several companies filed suit, saying the government owed them nearly $200 million. Government officials countered that the companies were already compensated enough through their oil production.
''It's flat-out breaking of the law and breaking of contracts,'' one American oil official in Quito said of the dispute, which has yet to be resolved.
More recently, the government drew howls of protests with a new royalty arrangement for companies interested in drilling in four existing fields in northeastern Ecuador.
Though the fields contain an estimated 904 million barrels of crude, oil companies held off on presenting offers after the government announced that the effective tax rate would be about 50 percent; companies said a rate that high would make the projects not worth pursuing.
''The companies in this country interested in these existing fields let the president know they disagreed with the bidding process, since it carries legal, technical and economic risks,'' said René Ortiz, president of an association representing two dozen companies operating in Ecuador.
Late in 2003, the companies operating the Heavy Crude Pipeline also balked when Petroecuador announced that the state's share of heavy crude produced by private oil companies would be transported through an older, government-owned pipeline.
The decision meant that about a quarter of all the heavy crude produced in Ecuador would not flow through the new pipeline, even though the consortium operating the line has been scrambling to increase the amount of oil flowing through it.
Mr. Gutiérrez's government also came under harsh criticism after signing agreements in August with two Chinese companies, the China National Petroleum Corporation and Sinopec.
Critics in Ecuador's Congress said that Mr. Gutiérrez's government furtively offered the two state-owned Chinese companies exclusive rights to bid first on several fields that Ecuador planned to offer for private production, sidestepping congressional approval and giving the Chinese an unfair advantage over other companies.
Mr. Arboleda, the energy minister, has acknowledged disagreements, but said that the government ''guarantees judicial security'' and will work with companies to resolve the disputes quickly.
''We are going to improve commercial relations to a position of mutual coexistence, so they win and we win,'' he said.
