''Internal Bleeding: The Truth Behind America's Terrifying Epidemic of Medical Mistakes,'' by Dr. Robert M. Wachter and Dr. Kaveh G. Shojania. Rugged Land, $24.95
There is nothing quite like a tragic medical error to generate screaming headlines. Witness the death last February of Jésica Santillán, a 17-year-old transplant patient who accidentally received a heart and lungs of the wrong blood type. Or Betsy Lehman, a Boston Globe health reporter who died in 1994 after receiving the wrong dose of chemotherapy.
Medical error also made headlines in 1999 when the Institute of Medicine issued a report titled ''To Err Is Human,'' which estimated that as many as 98,000 Americans died annually as a result of medical mistakes. This report led to several developments, most notably federal financing to study the problem.
But these changes are inadequate, say two physicians, Robert M. Wachter and Kaveh G. Shojania, the authors of ''Internal Bleeding.'' Health care, they say, ''is not much safer than it was in 1999.''
The path to progress, Dr. Wachter and Dr. Shojania state, is a ''systems'' approach. ''Internal Bleeding'' is rife with stories, like those of Ms. Santillán and Ms. Lehman, that will break the reader's heart. But these stories are too often seen as isolated events with simple messages: recheck the doses of chemotherapy and the blood types of transplant donors and recipients.
What is lacking, the authors argue, is a coherent system that anticipates and prevents medical errors.
''Internal Bleeding'' is an erudite, readable and well-argued book. The authors describe the origins of the patient safety movement, which has drawn from a number of fields outside medicine -- most notably, the aircraft industry.
Errors during flights decreased only when pilots and other employees stopped keeping them secret.
Disclosure taught experts a key point. Obvious errors, like plane crashes, generally did not result from a single human blunder. Rather, there were usually a series of mistakes, any one of which, if detected, might have thwarted a tragedy. A systematic approach to discovering these events, therefore, was critical.
This type of thinking has come to dominate the patient safety movement, and the authors are two of its high priests. Most medical mistakes, they argue, ''can be prevented by thoughtfully applying principles of systems thinking.''
Among the remedies they advocate are greater use of computers, which can detect dangerous drug interactions and incorrect dosages, enrollment of health professionals in ''teamwork training'' and more open disclosure of mistakes.
Although the authors set the proper tone by divulging several of their own errors, this last goal may be the hardest. ''Nobody,'' they admit, ''likes a whistleblower.''
Perhaps the biggest obstacle to change is the sheer number of worthy reform agendas within medicine. Indeed, some of these other efforts may actually hamper the prevention of medical errors.
For example, the authors also confess that one system already in place as a result of attention to medical error, the reduction of work hours for physicians in training, may paradoxically increase the problem of mistakes -- at least temporarily. To get sleep-deprived house officers out of the hospital, there are now many more handoffs of patients between physicians, none of them having a complete grasp of a given case.
Still, ''Internal Bleeding'' makes a compelling case for creating a ''safety culture'' through a systems approach. Although health professionals and administrators will clearly benefit from the book, it is also geared toward the health care consumer. The authors provide several tips that patients can use to lower the possibility of errors, including asking questions about medications, speaking up whenever they feel uncertain and inquiring about new safety initiatives.
Ultimately, a book like ''Internal Bleeding'' not only describes the history of a particular subject but also becomes part of that history. Whether it will change that history remains to be seen.
BOOKS ON HEALTH
