Senator John Kerry is poised to win a string of crucial labor endorsements before the Wisconsin primary next Tuesday, labor officials say.
The Building and Construction Trades Department of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. is likely to throw its weight behind Mr. Kerry after a meeting on Tuesday, labor and campaign officials said.
The Alliance for Economic Justice, a coalition of 18 unions that had endorsed Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, is to hold a conference call on Wednesday and could endorse Mr. Kerry as early as this weekend.
PACE International, the paper workers union, which may not make an endorsement before the Wisconsin voting, has freed its local unions in that state to endorse candidates, and Mr. Kerry is strongly favored. PACE, a member of the Alliance for Economic Justice, is the largest industrial union in Wisconsin, with more than 40,000 members.
''There's overwhelming support for Kerry,'' said Richard LaCosse, the regional director for PACE in Wisconsin. ''It appears the stars are lining up in a very focused fashion for him. We're encouraging our members to support Kerry.''
Even the Teamsters, who warred with Mr. Kerry over his opposition to drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, are expected to come aboard, a union official said.
The Teamsters took out newspaper advertisements against Mr. Kerry in Florida and Iowa in 2002 over the Alaska drilling issue, and the union president, James P. Hoffa, went head-to-head with him over the same topic on the NBC program ''Meet the Press'' in September 2001.
But Mr. Hoffa met at Mr. Kerry's home with other leaders of the Alliance for Economic Justice on Thursday and was impressed by Mr. Kerry's ''evolving'' position on trade, a Teamsters official said.
''We see some good movement from Kerry,'' the official said. ''We all agree now that certainly we're not against trade, but we want strong language in the main body of trade agreements, not side agreements.''
''Kerry has made a strong argument as to why he should be endorsed,'' the official said Monday. ''The fact is he's got momentum, and that's got to be part of the decision.''
Several labor leaders cautioned that some individual unions in the alliance had urged the group to delay an endorsement long enough to see how well Mr. Kerry holds up over the next few weeks, because it is too late now for labor leaders to score points with Mr. Kerry by being out in front for him.
But several labor officials said the main concern was unanimity, however long it took to achieve.
''Everybody wants to keep the alliance together,'' a Teamsters official said, ''because we're also pretty aggrieved about those unions that went their own way.''
The Service Employees International Union and the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees split with unions backing Mr. Gephardt to support Howard Dean; this weekend, the federation withdrew that endorsement.
Mr. Kerry reported the endorsement on Monday of the Amalgamated Transit Union as he campaigned in Roanoke, Va., on the eve of the Virginia and Tennessee primaries, which he hopes will be his first Southern victories. Speaking to hundreds of people outside the city's Fire Station No. 1, he attacked the Bush administration over job losses.
''I heard just before I came in here that the president and the administration have released a new report, and in this new report they say they're going to create 2.5 million new jobs over the course of the next year,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''Well, I've got a feeling this report was prepared by the same people who brought us the intelligence on Iraq.''
''I don't think we need a new report about jobs in America, I think we need a new president who's going to create jobs in America, and put America back to work,'' he said.
''I want your amen,'' he said, playing the preacher for a moment. ''Yes, indeed -- amen.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
