The struggling Rangers confronted the present and took a peek at the future on Monday when they held their first practice after the All-Star Game break.
For the first time since training camp, Fedor Tyutin, a 20-year-old defenseman and the team's top prospect, went through a full practice with the Rangers. Because Tyutin has not played since he sprained the medial collateral ligament in his right knee on Jan. 8 while playing for the Rangers' minor league affiliate in Hartford, it remains unlikely that he will make his National Hockey League debut on Wednesday night in New Jersey against the Devils. Instead, Tyutin will most likely return to Hartford on Friday night.
But it seems to be just a matter of time before Tyutin plays his first game for the Rangers, who are in danger of missing the playoffs for the seventh straight season.
''I want to play here,'' said the 6-foot-2 Tyutin, who is listed at 217 pounds but said he weighed about 205. ''I feel good. I've been working 19 years to be ready to play here.''
The assistant coach Tom Renney, who ran Monday's practice for Coach Glen Sather, said Tyutin was recalled so the Rangers could ''evaluate where he is.''
''But we still have to protect the kid's future,'' Renney said, ''and he has to be 100 percent before he steps into a game in Hartford, never mind New York.''
Renney scouted Tyutin extensively in his native Russia and in European tournaments before the Rangers selected him in the second round with the 40th overall choice in the 2001 draft. In ranking the draft, the Rangers rated Tyutin as the 10th-best player available, Renney said. The Rangers chose goalie Dan Blackburn with the 10th overall pick, then were surprised that Tyutin was still available 30 selections later.
Tyutin said he was angry that he had not been chosen in the first round. But that may have been one of the few times Tyutin, a two-way defenseman, has expressed much emotion, Renney said.
''Sometimes you wonder if he has any pulse,'' Renney said. ''That can be outstanding for a defenseman. His boiling point is maybe different than other people. At the same time, some urgency might be good for him.''
The same could be said of the Rangers (20-24-7-4). With 51 points, the Rangers trail the Islanders by 8 points for the eighth and final Eastern Conference playoff spot.
The Devils are 21-1-13-1 against the Rangers during the regular season since Feb. 17, 1997. Unless Sather, who is also the Rangers' president and general manager, makes a trade at the league's general manager meetings this week, the Rangers will stay with the struggling Mike Dunham in goal.
SLAP SHOTS
The Rangers spokesman JOHN ROSASCO said Monday that ERIC LINDROS, who is out with the eighth concussion of his career, went to Ontario this weekend to go ice fishing. . . . Defensemen GREG DE VRIES (knee) and TOM POTI practiced Monday and both expect to play against the Devils on Wednesday. De Vries has not played since Jan. 8. Defenseman VLADIMIR MALAKHOV (wrist) attempted to practice Monday, but left the ice shortly after practice began.
HOCKEY
