As he flew one night from Kansas City, Mo., to South Carolina a few days before the Feb. 3 primary, Senator John Edwards sensed a big moment in the offing, a nationally televised speech, win or lose, on a day that would determine whether his campaign could move forward.
Aware of his potential audience, Mr. Edwards searched his mind for a way to drive home his message that the country had to remember those Americans who are struggling. An image came to him, that of a young, impoverished girl ''somewhere in America'' who ''will go to bed hungry, hoping and praying that tomorrow will not be as cold as today, because she doesn't have the coat to keep her warm.''
He began dictating to his campaign chief of staff, Miles Lackey, who tapped out on a Blackberry pager what became a central element of Mr. Edwards's victory speech in South Carolina.
His imagery has won him notice. Regardless of the outcome of the primaries on Tuesday and in the next few weeks, many Democrats and political experts say Mr. Edwards has proved to be one of his party's most impassioned speakers. For a time at least, he has put poverty back on the national political landscape.
It is a talent, Democrats say, that could serve Mr. Edwards well as a vice-presidential nominee, a post he says he is not seeking, or as a candidate for future national office.
''He is quite electric,'' Kay Wiseman, a retired history teacher who heard him speak in Bristol, Tenn., said. ''He reminds me of Kennedy in his ability to get across to the people. He has that energy.''
Stuart Rothenberg, editor of a nonpartisan political newsletter in Washington, said, ''I think he is the best communicator that the party has, certainly the best communicator in the race.''
Mr. Edwards's theme is that ''under this president, there are two Americas, one for the powerful insiders and another for everyone else.''
So committed is he to the speech that he has delivered it nearly word for word, gesture for gesture, expression for expression, the same way for more than a month. His speaking ability is a knack that served him well as a trial lawyer, whose opponents and allies alike attributed his success in good measure to stirring, emotional closing arguments to juries. The secret, Mr. Edwards says, is combining his ideas with a fiery delivery ''from here.'' He points to his heart.
His speech may use the imagery of a starving girl to draw attention to poverty. In one closing argument as a trial lawyer, he spoke of an injured girl in a product liability case ''who speaks to you through me.''
''The same qualities people are looking for in the courtroom they are looking for in the real world,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''Honesty, sincerity, credibility. It is at this stage of the campaign, the final part, where people are making their decisions. That's also true in a courtroom. It's time to drive your message home, to make people really feel it.''
''There's nothing magical about it,'' Mr. Edwards said on his plane, explaining how he thought up the girl he would speak about as the audience would be watching to see whether he could win in South Carolina. ''At first, I thought I wanted to find an individual child that I could refer to in the real world. And then I started worrying that some child or her family would not want to be singled out like that.
''I started visualizing in my own head some young child going to bed, living in poverty and how far removed it was from this place.''
He went on to place the idea of her before the public and to speak of 35 million Americans who live in poverty, unnoticed, unheard. Just as with a big case, he sought to draw together disparate arguments and ideas he had touched on over the last year into a single easy-to-remember summation of his campaign.
It bears some similarities to the ''two New Yorks'' that a New York City mayoral candidate, Fernando Ferrer, spoke of in 2001. Mr. Edwards's media adviser, David Axelrod, worked for Mr. Ferrer, but Mr. Edwards said he did not remember Mr. Axelrod's being involved in drafting the speech.
Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster, called Mr. Edwards the most effective communicator among the candidates but said his message was somewhat undercut by boyish looks that might make a general election audience doubt his heft.
''The good news for Bush is you can question whether it is smart to send a boy to do a man's job, because he looks so young,'' Mr. Luntz said. ''The bad news is Edwards is the most incredible communicator and an extremely effective debater.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
