''The Flu Season'' begins in darkness. Light comes up on a white set: floor, back wall, one table, four chairs. The set doesn't take up the whole stage area, though. It looks as if it could be snapped shut and hauled off like a suitcase, leaving us in the dark again. That's what the playwright, Will Eno, wants. The first voice we hear tells us: ''I could leave it all alone. I could let us shudder by ourselves. Leave us uncomforted by the shaky fiction of anything shared, of any common story. I could let us wreck ourselves in the dark, shiver closer to death, slowly, unnoticeably, instead of making such a big production out of it. But I won't.''
In ''The Flu Season,'' a Rude Mechanicals Theater Company production playing at the Blue Heron Arts Center through Feb. 28, a doctor (Scott Bowman), a nurse (Elizabeth Sherman) and two patients (Andrew Benator and Roxanna Hope) at a psychiatric institution provide that ''common story.'' But whenever the lights black them out, two figures calling themselves Prologue (Matthew Lawler) and Epilogue (David Fitzgerald) step forward. They want us to know that the playwright's the thing here, not just the play. They talk about how to write -- and rewrite -- the story.
Prologue says: ''Welcome to a play whose title is 'The Snow Romance.' It is a chronicle of love and no love, of interiors and exteriors, of weather, change, entry-level psychology and time; but oh, lo -- what chronicle isn't?''
''The time is almost winter,'' he continues. ''The lights fall.''
Epilogue is the corrective force here, the voice of the playwright checking his own romantic, realistic bent. Thanks to him, ''The Snow Romance'' became ''The Flu Season.''
''I come later,'' Epilogue says, ''after, more coldly and with a little less optimism: I'll revise a line, add an afterthought, subtract a feeling. I'll try to speak plainly.''
Speaking plainly isn't really the point, as you can see from the dialogue. But finding real characters and emotions in the maze of language is. In Mr. Eno's wars of words literal meaning squares off against context (against several possible contexts). This works because more is at stake than a writer strutting his linguistic stuff. In psychiatric institutions language is a power tool and a camouflage, a lie that tells a truth (and vice versa), a formula and a revelation.
Woman: ''You can't stop loving me overnight.''
Man: ''I started loving you overnight.''
Woman to Nurse: ''It was hard being away and then hard being home. Is that something like what you were looking for someone to say?''
Nurse: ''Just like, dear. Thank you. I guess we're all away from somewhere. Away from some house on some street, or from some position in relation to the body of the mother. By dint of our being here.''
The two patients fall tentatively in love; the nurse and doctor wander between obtuse formality and kindness. They all flounder and get confused. So do playwrights, and so do we, Epilogue declares.
''What if you were writing a play and your feelings changed?'' he asks. ''You couldn't keep going. The image disintegrated. Your mind wasn't up to it, or your heart. Would your claims to realism be lost if you didn't somehow incorporate the change, the not-knowing, the cold feeling?'' This is disingenuous and too rhetorical. ''The Flu Season'' doesn't lay claim to realism, it treats realism as a style that can be useful if we keep it at a distance, distrust its comforts.
The actors form a real ensemble, with the director, Hal Brooks, and the design team. (I especially liked David Korins's set and Mike Errico's music.) They move with conviction and confidence through Mr. Eno's maze of words and feelings.
Prologue and Epilogue do get a little out of hand, especially toward the end, when metaphor and wordplay are used to solve a painful emotional riddle. It doesn't need to be solved, it needs to be exposed as something more than a writer's dilemma.
Still, the play is alive and unpredictable. Don't look for perfection in the work of talented young playwrights. Look for a love of language. Look for characters who long to have their voices heard and their actions witnessed. Look for intimations of a larger world.
THE FLU SEASON
By Will Eno; directed by Hal Brooks; sets by David Korins; costumes by Becky Lasky; lighting by Mark Barton; sound by Sloan Alexander; makeup, Stephanie Pasicov; composer/music supervisor, Mike Errico; production stage manager, Douglas Shearer. Presented by the Rude Mechanicals Theater Company, Eric Siegel, artistic director; Matthew Lawler, executive director; Derek Cecil, associate artistic director. At the Blue Heron Arts Center, 123 East 24th Street, Manhattan.
WITH: Matthew Lawler (Prologue), David Fitzgerald (Epilogue), Andrew Benator (Man), Roxanna Hope (Woman), Elizabeth Sherman (Nurse) and Scott Bowman (Doctor).
THEATER REVIEW
