Joseph Volpe -- everybody who knows him calls him Joe, as do most who don't -- has a big job and a big personality. That makes his retirement as of 2006 big news.
His job is general manager of the Metropolitan Opera, the largest performing-arts organization in the world, measured tangibly by budget and intangibly by sheer performing opulence. His personality is the colorful stuff of a thousand gossipy tales, the growling mouth that launched a thousand news articles.
Mr. Volpe is a working-class anomaly at the blue-blooded Met, the underdog who made good. A former apprentice carpenter, he worked his way up through the ranks, was once rejected by a board of directors that thought him too uncouth, and was finally, 14 years ago, at the age of 50, coronated with the most powerful position in American performing arts administration.
Yet even the coronation came with a caveat: in 1990 he was named general director, not general manager, which is the prestige title in Met tradition. It was only in 1993 that he was granted the title he had long sought. But that still means that by the time he retires, he will have run the Met for 16 long years.
Mr. Volpe has had to balance the conflicting tastes of conservative board members against those within the company and without who want something more more venturesome. He has struggled, with considerable success, to sustain the quality of the Met's casting. And with Valery Gergiev as principal guest conductor supplementing James Levine, he has maintained quality in the pit. He has overseen the cautious broadening of the repertory and modernization of production styles.
No power is absolute, even for Mr. Volpe. He has had to deal with a shifting assortment of board chairmen (currently Beverly Sills) and also with Mr. Levine, who has held leading positions at the Met far longer than Mr. Volpe. He was artistic director when Mr. Volpe took over the administration, and the Met was widely regarded on the outside as Mr. Levine's company; Mr. Volpe was seen as a tough facilitator.
Yet Mr. Levine, for his many mysterious reasons, has gradually refocused his energies, so much so that he will now revert to music director starting next season. He confines himself largely to his own productions, to his Met concerts and to his outside symphonic commitments, first the Munich Philharmonic and, as of this fall, the Boston Symphony.
That has left Mr. Volpe in the curious position of being de facto artistic director, a job that he has no doubt coveted but for which he is perhaps less than ideally suited. Ever the hard-nosed administrator, he can crack the whip at recalcitrant singers and settle with the unions and placate his board and terrorize his underlings and prevent the centrifugal force of a thousand egos from spinning the Met out of control. His pleasure in his position is always evident and endearing. But can he plan repertory and oversee casting and productions with the requisite, insightful sophistication and taste?
For a long time such questions lurked half-whispered backstage. The Met was selling tickets, its huge endowment was swelled by the bubble of the late 1990's, and Mr. Levine was more of a presence than he is now. But in recent years, like so many American opera companies, the Met has fallen on relatively hard times. Relative, because the endowment, currently at $285 million, provides a comfy cushion. Deficits have run $10 million each of the last two fiscal years (although Mr. Volpe is hoping to balance the budget this year). Attendance has been down sharply, as have annual donations (with the implosion of Alberto Vilar's pledges, to the Met and others, only part of the problem).
These troubles call into question what opera's role in our society is and should be, what might be done to revivify the art and attract new audiences, and whether it's time for new blood and a fresh vision in the general manager's office. To what extent Mr. Volpe himself felt that, prompting his decision to retire, we are not likely to know any time soon.
With empty seats come renewed questions not just about Mr. Volpe's policies, but also about his methods, and especially his combative personality. Within the company more people are probably barked at by the general manager than is absolutely necessary; it's hard to give your best when you're constantly demeaned.
Mr. Volpe has never been accused of dishonesty or ethical shortcomings. Quite the reverse: he is painfully, aggressively honest in defending his autocratic opinions and the Met's prerogatives. Outside the company his confrontational role in the continuing soap opera that is Lincoln Center and its halting redevelopment has been painstakingly documented. Maybe, on any issue, he has been right, but he's not exactly a diplomat.
So now he has announced that he will step down at the end of the 2005-6 season. That gives the board ample time to search for a successor. But what kind of successor? What should the Met general manager do, other than wait for the current economic renewal to translate into increased attendance and donations?
The normal pattern in choosing a new chief executive officer is to swing to the other side of the pendulum's arc. Mr. Volpe is a tough guy, even (say many) a bully. So logic might dictate a smoother, tonier, more soft-spoken manager, more in line with patrician Met tradition. And maybe one with greater sophistication about the musical and dramatic side of opera.
What needs to be done? To figure out a way to fill the Met's vast, 3,900-seat theater with artistically respectable fare; even the most conservative audiences eventually grow tired of routinely cast Franco Zeffirelli productions of ''La Bohème'' and ''Turandot.'' To find new audiences without alienating the old ones. To sustain casting and conducting in an era when European artists seem increasingly loath to commit months of time in rehearsal and performances across the ocean. To develop and cultivate supportive yet progressive board members. And, one way or another, to corral those egos.
Even for those who might welcome a little more calm from the general manager's office, however, it will be hard to replace Mr. Volpe. He has steered this supertanker of an opera company through the turbulence of Mr. Levine's shifting commitments, through major changes in repertory and staging trends, through a recession and the complaints of crazed prima donnas and lawsuits by dead donors. His staff members may squabble among themselves and complain bitterly under his lash. But on some basic level they respect him, too.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
