The Moscow Metro was packed once again on Monday, the first workday after an explosion on a subway car took at least 40 lives on Friday in what officials now say was a suicide bombing.
But the atmosphere was not business as usual, as flags around the city flew at half-staff, a pile of red carnations sat on a subway platform near the site of the blast and officials warned of more attacks to come.
The first of the dead were buried Monday as more than 100 people remained hospitalized, including more than 20 reported to be in critical condition.
Three days after the explosion, President Vladimir V. Putin had made no further comment after oblique remarks on Friday. He said then that although there was no evidence, he was certain that Chechen separatists were involved.
Mr. Putin, who is expected to be re-elected easily next month, has presented himself as a strong and tough leader, and the war in Chechnya is seen by many people as his war.
Vyacheslav Ushakov, a deputy chief of the Federal Security Service, said investigators believed that the explosion was the work of a suicide bomber. He warned that future attacks could be directed at nuclear power stations as well as public transportation.
There has been a long string of terrorist attacks around the country that have been linked to Chechen rebels. But the bombing of the Metro, which carries 10 million passengers a day, has brought a heightened sense of insecurity to Moscow.
In this atmosphere, whispers of a government cover-up have found their way into print and onto a national television news broadcast.
The main television channel quoted a newspaper, Gazeta, as saying that the Moscow mayor, Yuri M. Luzhkov, had a secret list of the dead and that the toll was much higher than official reports said.
''Usually, information on fatalities is made public fairly quickly,'' Gazeta said. ''This time around, for some reason, it has been prohibited from publication.''
The attack has also sharpened a distrust here of people from the Caucasus, which includes Chechnya. Hard-line nationalist politicians have taken the opportunity to make racist comments.
Dmitri O. Rogozin, a leader of the Rodina political bloc, said: ''The enemy is here, within. This is ethnic crime, which is supporting terrorists arriving in Moscow, which owns property in Moscow and is imposing its will on the authorities.''
Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, whose platform gives a racist interpretation to his nationalism, demanded the expulsion from Moscow of all people from the Caucasus. He also called for the introduction of night patrols and possible curfews.
