Just in case there was any doubt that Vodafone was considering making a bid for AT&amp;T Wireless, the company came out and said it on Monday.
But contrary to dozens of newspaper reports here and in the United States, Vodafone has not yet decided whether it will submit an offer by the deadline on Friday.
Indeed, both Vodafone's management and its board are divided about whether to proceed with a bid, with some top executives and directors quietly opposing it, executives close to the company said on Monday. The board is expected to vote on the issue in the next couple of days.
While Vodafone is still very much up in the air about an offer, investors seem to have made up their minds. Vodafone's stock has already fallen almost 10 percent since early last month when news of the company's interest in pursuing a deal for AT&amp;T Wireless first surfaced. Shareholders have been dumping Vodafone's stock, worried that for it to make a winning bid, it would most likely have to overpay for AT&amp;T Wireless to beat a competing offer from the odds-on favorite, Cingular Wireless, a joint venture of BellSouth and SBC Communications.
And Vodafone would have to unravel its very profitable and stable investment in Verizon Wireless on potentially unfavorable terms. Under its partnership agreement, Vodafone, which owns a 45 percent stake in Verizon Wireless, cannot own more than 20 percent of Verizon Wireless and own a competing operation at the same time. Shares of Vodafone closed on Monday at 135.5 pence ($2.52), down from nearly 150 pence in mid-January.
''Buying AT&amp;T Wireless would incur high transaction costs and destroy value,'' Damien Chew, an analyst at ING, said in a research report. He added in the report that the reduction in the market value of Vodafone from the forced sale of its stake in Verizon Wireless, capital gains tax and a bid premium would be about 9 pence a share, or $11.2 billion.
Furthermore, analysts expect that if Vodafone were to acquire AT&amp;T Wireless, the deal would dilute its earnings for the next several years, perhaps by as much as 20 percent, according to some estimates.
The timing of the auction could not be worse for Vodafone. Arun Sarin, Vodafone's new chief executive, had hoped to spend his first year continuing to integrate the company's far-flung empire and possibly negotiate a deal to buy SFR, the French mobile phone company owned by Vivendi. After putting the company in order, he had hinted he would then possibly set his sights on the United States, where Vodafone has long sought control of its own wireless operation.
Verizon Wireless's network format, known as C.D.M.A., is not compatible with the standard that Vodafone uses elsewhere in the world, called G.S.M., while the AT&amp;T Wireless network is built upon a variant of G.S.M. Vodafone would prefer that its customers worldwide all be G.S.M. users, to make it easier for them to use the same phones everywhere.
But AT&amp;T Wireless's decision to put itself up for sale last month has forced Mr. Sarin to make a bet-the-company decision less than a year into his tenure.
And no matter the possible long-term strategic benefits of owning AT&amp;T Wireless, almost no analyst or investor thinks the deal could come without perilous risks. For example, the cash for a bid would come from the sale of Vodafone's stake in Verizon Wireless. But selling it immediately would generate huge tax liabilities, which it might be able to avoid if it had the luxury of more time and did not need the proceeds entirely in cash.
Even two of the biggest cheerleaders of such a deal, Emmet Kelly and Iain Johnston of New Street Research, said, ''Vodafone may find it difficult to create value from U.S. acquisitions, especially if bidding wars materialize.''
Even if Vodafone is able to extract itself from its relationship with Verizon Wireless on good terms, Vodafone would still have to pay more than Cingular, which has every reason to pay the most.
Indeed, in the end the supposed bidding war may not turn out to be much of a battle. According to analysts at Goldman Sachs, ''if Cingular is determined to get the asset, then its in-country system will probably support a higher offer than Vodafone could justify.''
Perhaps tellingly, Goldman, which is Vodafone's normal adviser, has decided in this case to advise NTT DoCoMo, an investor in AT&amp;T Wireless that may consider its own offer. Goldman and DoCoMo win no matter what, either through a successful takeover offer or the sale of DoCoMo's stake. Goldman could not say the same thing about representing Vodafone.
THE MARKETS: MARKET PLACE
