The Academy Awards are approaching (Feb. 29), and the studios of two films with multiple nominations have taken very different approaches to the release of their DVD's.
The Brazilian film ''City of God'' received nominations for its director, Fernando Meirelles, as well as for cinematography, adapted screenplay and editing. Miramax, which released the film in theaters more than a year ago, evidently hopes to sell some more tickets; it is reviving the theatrical run. Buena Vista Home Entertainment was to have released the DVD on Feb. 17, but it postponed the release last week and rescheduled it for June 8.
With ''Lost in Translation,'' which also has four Oscar nominations, Universal and Focus Films are trying to have it both ways. They expanded its theater run to nearly 600 screens from about 350; this is considered most unusual because the film already came out on DVD, on Feb. 3. Usually a video release kills what's left of a theater run.
''Oscar bounce'' (that rich promotional opportunity that even a nomination provides) prompted both moves, but the strategies raise questions. Is postponing ''City of God'' on DVD a good business move since studios make more from a big DVD release than from theaters when a movie is late in its run? How long can ''Translation'' coexist on DVD and in theaters? Does the expanded theater run cut into the film's DVD sales?
In an interview Scott Hettrick, editor of Video Business magazine, said that studios make a 65 to 85 percent profit on DVD's and 50 percent at best in theaters (and that dwindling to as little as 20 to 30 percent late in a movie's run). ''If they're going to capitalize on something, they say, 'Let's go for the DVD because that's where the big money is,' '' he said.
Over the weekend ''City of God'' played on 172 theater screens around the country. ''Miramax has always maximized the theater end,'' Mr. Hettrick said, adding that the studio has delayed the video release of Oscar movies in the past.
Matthew Hiltzig, a Miramax spokesman, said that the film was financed by Miramax and had always been a pet project of Harvey Weinstein, co-chairman of the company. ''Generally we hope that people always see the film in theaters, a far better experience,'' Mr. Hiltzig said. ''We were delaying the DVD for almost a year hoping the movie would receive recognition, and when it did we delayed it some more.''
Expressing a different if not contradictory view, Craig Kornblau, president of Universal Studios Home Video, said that generally with DVD's 60 percent of disc buyers haven't seen the film in theaters. The ''Lost in Translation'' DVD was announced in December, when it was hoped that the film would win some Golden Globe awards on Jan. 25, which it did, and that it would receive some Oscar nominations two days later.
Mr. Kornblau said that as of yesterday the DVD had sold about one million copies, a very strong release. ''Translation'' didn't fall off markedly at the box office during the first two days the DVD was available. ''It looks like they're able to coexist,'' Mr. Kornblau said. How long that lasts remains to be seen. ''We're not sure whether we have a special title under a special circumstance,'' he said, ''or the release model is just being adjusted a bit.''
Mr. Hettrick agreed that ''Lost in Translation'' could be a special case. The film appeals to older people, he said, ''people who want to go to the movie regardless, probably art house appreciators of small indie films who like to see them on movie screens.
''Then at the same time there are enormous numbers of people finding it on home video.''
Others in the business say that ''Translation'' will quickly wither in theaters. Whatever the outcome, convention also holds that if a DVD release is delayed until after the Oscars, it had better not be too long after. Two other films with nominations, ''Something's Gotta Give'' and ''House of Sand and Fog,'' have announced March 30 DVD releases, which seems within the bounce time.
Is a June 8 release for ''City of God'' waiting too long? Mr. Hettrick recalled ''The Pianist,'' a notable Oscar winner last March and released on DVD in May. ''It didn't help two months later when the video came out,'' he said. ''The buzz was gone by then.''
Another Change of Plan
On Friday MGM announced that it was delaying ''The Ingmar Bergman Collection,'' which was to be released tomorrow. The company said the transfers of two of the DVD's, ''Shame'' and ''Hour of the Wolf,'' weren't up to the quality required. They are part of a boxed set that includes ''The Passion of Anna,'' ''Persona'' and ''The Serpent's Egg.'' MGM says that it plans to release the set on April 20.
'Star Wars' Trilogy
Finally acceding to the wishes of millions of ''Star Wars'' fans, Fox is announcing today that the first three films of George Lucas's celebrated series -- ''Star Wars'' (1977), ''The Empire Strikes Back'' (1980) and ''Return of the Jedi'' (1983) -- are to be released on DVD for the first time on Sept. 21. The three films, long among the most requested, are now the last three in a series of six. Two prequels to the original film, ''Star Wars: Episode I -- The Phantom Menace'' and ''Star Wars: Episode II -- Attack of the Clones,'' are already on DVD. A third prequel, ''Star Wars Episode III'' (no further name selected) is to be released in theaters in May 2005. If this is confusing, further realize that the first ''Star Wars,'' now the fourth film of the series, has been renamed ''Star Wars: Episode IV -- A New Hope.''
'Sylvia'
No extras are provided with Christine Jeffs's film about the poet Sylvia Plath (Gwyneth Paltrow), who committed suicide in 1963 at 30. That rules out discussion of why there is so little of Plath's work in the movie or further examination of her stormy marriage to the poet Ted Hughes (Daniel Craig). ''All I want is blackness,'' Plath tells the writer and poet Al Alvarez (Jared Harris). Nevertheless Ms. Paltrow ''has a vivid, passionate presence, even when her lively features have gone slack with depression,'' A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. 2003. Universal. $26.98. 110 minutes. R.
'Intolerable Cruelty'
In a making-of featurette, Brian Grazer, who produced this Coen Brothers' film about the divorce game, says that it reflects exactly what is going on in America. ''But the movie is not shudder-worthy,'' Elvis Mitchell wrote in The Times. ''Instead, it's something not seen in movie theaters in a long time: an intelligent, modern screwball comedy.'' 2003. Universal. $26.98. 100 minutes. PG-13.
'Rain Man'
Barry Morrow, who wrote the screenplay for Barry Levinson's film with Ronald Bass, delivers the best of three commentaries. (Mr. Levinson and Mr. Bass do the other two.) Mr. Morrow also wrote the story about the autistic savant (Dustin Hoffman) on a cross-country drive with his fortune-hunting brother (Tom Cruise) in the 1949 Buick Roadmaster. At one point, he says, studio people thought the film would clash with another movie in development, ''Forest Gump.'' 1988. MGM. $19.98. 134 minutes. R.
NEW DVD'S  Correction:  February 12, 2004, Thursday  The New DVD's column on Tuesday misspelled the surname of a spokesman for Miramax Films who commented on the company's decision to delay the release of the DVD of ''City of God.'' He is Matthew Hiltzik, not Hiltzig.
