President Bush said Monday that a soft economy had caused ''hardship for people in many industries and regions of our nation,'' but he declared that ''America's economy is strong and getting stronger,'' and he predicted the creation of 2.6 million jobs this year.
The prediction provides a benchmark that the president and his critics can use to measure the performance of the election-year economy.
In his annual economic report, Mr. Bush defended his record, which Democrats have harshly criticized.
''Since May 2003,'' Mr. Bush said, ''we have seen the economy grow at its fastest pace in nearly 20 years.''
He predicted that prosperity would soon ''reach every corner of America.''
On a trip to Missouri, a state quite likely to be fiercely contested in the presidential election, Mr. Bush said the economy showed ''good growth, good strong growth.'' He gave much of the credit to three tax cuts that he shepherded through Congress.
But he warned that the recovery could be imperiled if Democrats blocked his call to make permanent the cuts, some of which expire over the next few years. The Democratic presidential hopefuls have all called for rolling back some or all of the cuts.
Republican leaders in Congress plan to push to extend or make permanent at least some elements of the cuts.
Mr. Bush renewed his proposal to overhaul Social Security by encouraging people to set aside some of their payroll taxes in private retirement accounts. He acknowledged that such a change could increase the federal budget deficit in the next 15 years by reducing federal revenues.
He said the proposal would lead to ''smaller deficits in the long term'' by reducing the growth of Social Security benefit payments financed from federal revenues.
The White House thus acknowledged that the government would need to borrow large sums to cover the costs of going to a Social Security system with private accounts.
''Personal retirement accounts widen the deficit by design,'' the report said. ''They refund payroll tax revenues to workers in the near term while lowering benefit payments from the pay-as-you-go system in later years.''
The administration said the reduction in payroll taxes would not harm current workers.
''They save this money in their own accounts, which can give them retirement income just as surely as if the government were promising it to them,'' the report said.
The president's Council of Economic Advisers said the crisis in Social Security and Medicare financing ''results mainly from the fundamental demographic shifts to lower birthrates and longer lives, rather than the impending retirement of the baby boom generation.''
Over all, the report predicts that the economy will create 2.6 million jobs in 2004, increasing nonfarm payroll employment to 132.7 million. Last February, the White House predicted that 1.7 million jobs would be created in 2003. In fact, nonfarm payrolls showed a small decline, government figures show.
If the president's forecast is correct, 2004 will be the first year of Mr. Bush's presidency to see a net increase in payroll jobs. Since he took office, the country has lost 2.2 million payroll jobs, as nonfarm employment dipped to 130.2 million.
On his trip to Springfield, Mo., Mr. Bush highlighted what he said were significant improvements in the economy. He plans to sound the same theme at a meeting with ''economic leaders'' on Tuesday.
In the economic report, Mr. Bush said he inherited a weak economy when he took office on Jan. 20, 2001. He traced many of the nation's economic problems to the ''recession that began in 2000'' and ''the decline of the stock market beginning in early 2000.''
N. Gregory Mankiw, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, said that the administration believed that the last recession began ''sometime in the fourth quarter of 2000.''
Donna L. Zerwitz, a spokeswoman for the National Bureau of Economic Research, a private group that defines turning points in the business cycle, said it had not changed the dates of the recession, from March 2001 to November 2001. But Ms. Zerwitz said economists at the bureau were reviewing the data. Some experts, she said, believe the recession began in November 2000, and others would make the date February 2001.
Democrats mocked Mr. Bush's prediction about jobs. ''I don't think we need a new report about jobs in America,'' said Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the front-runner in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination. ''I think we need a new president who's going to create jobs in America and put America back to work.''
At a rally in Roanoke, Va., Mr. Kerry said, ''I've got a feeling this report was prepared by the same people who brought us the intelligence on Iraq.''
Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the House Democratic whip, said Mr. Bush had ''the worst record of job creation since the Great Depression.''
The economic report acknowledges that ''manufacturing employment fell throughout 2003.'' Figures from the monthly survey of work sites by the Bureau of Labor Statistics show that manufacturing jobs declined by 2.8 million in the last three years.
Mr. Mankiw said a different statistical measure, based on a survey of households, showed ''a lot more rapid job growth.''
