A city correction officer was convicted yesterday of murdering her father and attacking her half-sister in what prosecutors described as a brazen plot to seize her family's assets.
Renee Dasque, 38, an officer who has worked at Rikers Island, was found guilty of murder and second-degree assault in the two attacks, carried out in 2001 in her family's home in Rosedale, Queens. Prosecutors said she hogtied her father and beat him to death with a metal pipe, and used the same pipe to assault her half-sister.
Ms. Dasque was convicted by a jury of six men and six women after a three-week trial in State Supreme Court in Queens before Justice Sheri Roman, who scheduled sentencing for March 10. Ms. Dasque faces a sentence of 25 years to life. Her lawyer, Michael L. Fishman, said late yesterday that he would appeal the conviction on the ground that Justice Roman allowed inadmissible testimony.
The Queens district attorney, Richard A. Brown, said in a statement that Ms. Dasque had pursued a ''carefully planned scheme to become the family's sole survivor because she wanted for herself her father's houses, bank account, insurance policy and stocks valued at over $1 million.''
''The crime was callous and brutal and warrants imposition of a lengthy prison sentence,'' Mr. Brown said.
Prosecutors said Ms. Dasque carried out her attacks about 2:30 a.m. on July 9, 2001, against her father, Jacques Dasque, a retired 63-year-old hospital technician, and her half-sister, Jeanine Dasque, 33, who escaped and was helped by neighbors, who called the police.
Prosecutors initially planned to use Jeanine Dasque as a lead witness in the trial, but in August she hanged herself with an extension cord in a motel room.
Investigators said Renee Dasque had tried pinning her father's death on other people, including Jeanine. Mr. Fishman had hoped that entries in Jeanine's diaries, saying she resented the way her father had favored Renee, would implicate Jeanine, but prosecutors contended that a handwriting expert would easily show that Renee might have written the entries.
Some of the most powerful evidence against her were detailed lists she had made of items to use in carrying out the attacks, including the length of rope to tie her father. The lists also provided an accounting of her father's assets, which included two houses in Queens and a house in Florida.
Mr. Fishman told the jury that Ms. Dasque made out the lists to prepare for routine household chores, and that she wrote down her father's assets during a family meeting in which Mr. Dasque himself had discussed family finances. Mr. Dasque did not have a will.
