Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senator John Edwards campaigned furiously through Virginia and Tennessee on Monday, struggling to block Senator John Kerry from winning two pivotal Southern primaries on Tuesday. A Kerry sweep would put intense pressure on them to quit the race, Democrats said.
In Wisconsin, Howard Dean abruptly said he would stay in the nominating battle even if he lost there next Tuesday, a stance he acknowledged was in ''obvious contradiction'' to a vow he made last week. Dr. Dean said he was responding to pleas from supporters who wanted him to keep running.
Dr. Dean's shift came after a weekend of double-digit percentage point losses to Mr. Kerry in three states where he had once been in dominant positions -- Maine, Michigan and Washington -- and on the eve of two primaries in which he did not compete. [Page A16.]
For all that, the voting here and in Virginia could help to shake out the race, Democrats said. The chairman of the Tennessee Democratic Party, Randall A. Button, said Monday that General Clark, who is from neighboring Arkansas, and Mr. Edwards, who is from neighboring North Carolina, should quit if they could not beat Mr. Kerry on their home turf, an outcome some polls released Monday suggested.
''They are both Southerners that have a message that resonates with Southerners,'' Mr. Button said. If they lose, he said, ''it's gotten down to this: Let's move ahead to our objective, and our objective is unseating George W. Bush.''
A senior national Democratic Party official made the same argument, saying that General Clark and Mr. Edwards would have difficulty raising money to push on should they lose to Mr. Kerry in the South. ''The voters will have spoken: Let's get on with it,'' this official said.
Some of General Clark's supporters said he was likely -- but not certain -- to end his bid for the presidency should he lose Virginia and Tennessee, two states where he has invested a huge amount of time, prestige and money. So far, General Clark has won only one state, Oklahoma, and by a very slim margin.
Several national Democratic leaders said that should he lose again, the general would probably come under pressure from the quarter of the party that encouraged his candidacy -- the Bill Clinton camp -- to clear the field for Mr. Kerry.
By contrast, Mr. Edwards and his aides rejected admonitions from some Democrats that he step aside if he loses. Instead, he said he would push on through Wisconsin on Feb. 17 and on to March 2, when Democrats in 10 states, from New York to California, will choose 1,408 delegates.
Aides to Mr. Edwards said they were hopeful that by a week from Tuesday, General Clark and Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, would either be out of the race or marginalized. After that, they said, Mr. Edwards would enjoy a head-to-head contest with Mr. Kerry for the two weeks leading to March 2.
''We have a long process going on here,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''What we have been preparing for the entire time is a nomination process that's going to go on well into March. We're prepared for that, we have the resources to do that and most importantly we have a message that obviously resonates with voters here.''
Mr. Edwards cited the fast pace of the primary schedule in explaining why he was struggling against a senator from Massachusetts in a part of the country where he should presumably have an advantage.
The problem with Tennessee and Virginia , he said, is ''there is a short period of time between the primaries that come before and the primaries here.''
He added that ''the other states where we've had time to get this message through -- what my campaign is about, who I am as a candidate -- it works. That's the reason this campaign will go into March.''
Mr. Kerry began his day in Virginia and ended it in Memphis, seeking his first victories in the South, which his aides said would establish him as a national candidate.
Dr. Dean's decision to stay in the race reflected a change in strategy that appeared to take place in less than 12 hours. In the morning, he gave a speech in which he implored Wisconsin voters to keep the Democratic nominating contest going, saying that a victory by Mr. Kerry would, for all intents and purposes, end the battle. By the afternoon, Dr. Dean was saying he had decided he would stay in, no matter what happened in that state.
''Over the last three or four days we have had enormous pressure from the people who raised us all the money not to drop out,'' Dr. Dean said. He added, ''It's very clear that a huge number of people around this country, some of you may have seen it, you were in the crowds as I'm walking out, that are saying, you know, don't quit.''
He said that Mr. Kerry had not experienced the kind of examination he had, and that the party might suffer for nominating him.
''As long as I think we have a chance to win the nomination I think comparison is a fair thing,'' he said. ''Frankly, I've said before I don't think Senator Kerry's been vetted in the same way I was vetted when I was the front-runner. I think that's a necessary process because we've got to make sure that our nominee is the strongest possible nominee against George Bush.''
Dr. Dean said he ''was unaware of making this decision'' before announcing it, explaining that he often let choices ''incubate unconsciously for a long time before I actually make a formal decision.''
Some Democrats said that Dr. Dean's decision to stay in past Wisconsin, assuming he goes through with it, could help Mr. Kerry by dividing his opposition.
The Dean news seemed to agitate advisers to Mr. Edwards. As it is, one reason Mr. Kerry could win both Virginia and Tennessee is that Mr. Edwards and General Clark appeared to compete for many of the same voters.
Mr. Kerry, after landing in Memphis, declined to comment on Dr. Dean's decision. ''I've said all along it's not for me to comment on the choices of other candidates in this race,'' he said. ''I'm focused on winning the nomination. I'll do it step by step, one step at a time, and each candidate will have to make up his own mind as to what their choices are in this race.''
Several Democrats said General Clark appeared to be in a more precarious position than Mr. Edwards on Tuesday. Mr. Edwards has scored a decisive victory -- though in South Carolina, the state where he was born -- and a strong second in Iowa.
The chairman of the Virginia Democratic Party, Kerry Donley, said that while Mr. Edwards might survive losses on Tuesday if he came close, General Clark would not.
''Tuesday is a very critical day for Wesley Clark,'' Mr. Donley said. ''He almost really has to come away with a victory in order to remain viable in other states.''
General Clark traveled to three small, economically depressed towns in Western Tennessee on Monday, drawing small crowds for the day before a primary. He called himself a Southerner from a modest background who was ''the underdog.''
''You've got some choice in this race,'' General Clark told a breakfast rally of about 50 people in Union City. ''You've got a great lawyer; he's a wonderful man, he's a great lawyer. You've got a man who spent his life in the Senate; he's a wonderful legislator. Or you got somebody like me, who spent his life rolling up his sleeves, working with people, building teams, being held accountable and making it happen.''
Mr. Edwards continued his pattern since the South Carolina primary last week, avoiding mentioning Mr. Kerry by name. While Mr. Edwards has engaged in exchanges over his voting record with General Clark, he has yet to draw any contrasts with Mr. Kerry, despite vowing to do that.
Mr. Kerry, drawing no fire from his rivals, continued to campaign Monday as if the primaries were behind him. He challenged President Bush for saying that Democrats wanted to raise taxes. Mr. Kerry said that middle-class tax cuts -- in particular, the child tax credit, and the elimination of the so-called marriage penalty -- would not be eliminated should he become president.
''What's on the table is whether people earning $200,000 and up ought to be getting a tax cut at the expense of the average American and the priorities of our country,'' he said. ''If George Bush wants to stand there and defend people who earn more than $200,000 a year getting a tax cut, instead of giving health care to Americans and instead of investing in education and job training, that is the debate I want to have.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
