Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye announced on Monday that she would merge the state criminal courts and supreme courts in the Bronx in a pilot project meant to respond to a steep drop in felonies and a surge in misdemeanors over the past decade.
Judge Kaye, the chief judge of the Court of Appeals, made the announcement during her annual address on the state of the judiciary, at which she once again called for a constitutional amendment to consolidate the state's bewildering system of 11 different courts, some with appointed judges and some with elected jurists.
The chief judge also promised to counter what she called a loss of public confidence in judicial elections and highlighted several proposals that were first put forward by a special commission to look into the matter. She signaled that she would support many of the proposals.
In what seemed like an allusion to the corruption plaguing the Brooklyn court system, as well as to several cases of judicial misconduct upstate, Judge Kaye finished her speech with a plea to the assembled judges to do everything they can to safeguard the integrity of the courts and rid them of patronage. ''When a colleague strays from the oath of office, we are all diminished,'' she said.
Frustrated in her attempts to persuade the Legislature to consolidate the layers of state courts, the chief judge said she would push ahead with an administrative plan to meld the Bronx criminal courts, which handle misdemeanors, with the state supreme courts, which adjudicate felonies.
She said felony arrests have fallen by 50 percent in the last 10 years, while arrests for misdemeanors have risen 60 percent, as the police have begun to focus on arresting people for minor quality-of-life violations, from domestic violence disputes to loitering.
The result is that criminal courts in the Bronx, with 18 judges, are clogged with defendants and have a backlog of 11,000 cases, while the felony courts, with 33 judges, have backlog of 2,800, court officials said.
Judge Kaye said the situation showed why the artificial barriers between the state's courts needed to be torn down to let court administrators better husband resources. ''Common sense alone dictates that we reallocate backlogged cases among available judges to make better use of our resources,'' she said in her speech. ''But once again the antiquated structure of New York's court system -- here the fragmentation of New York City's trial courts between Criminal Court and Supreme Court - turns common sense on its head.''
Judge Kaye said she would act administratively to merge the two courts in the Bronx, elevating all the Criminal Court judges to acting Supreme Court justices and letting both handle misdemeanors.
Supporters of the idea said too many misdemeanor offenders were slipping through the cracks because of the backlogs.
''For years we've said these little acorns grow into great oaks and cast a shadow over our urban centers,'' said Burton B. Roberts, a former Bronx district attorney and retired State Supreme Court justice.
Over the past three years, the chief judge has taken similar steps to consolidate the operations of the Supreme Courts, Family Courts and Criminal Courts for complex matrimonial cases. In 15 counties, a single judge now handles all the criminal charges, custody issues, divorce proceedings and orders of protection connected with one troubled family. In the past, those families had to deal with several courts.
She has failed, however, to get the Legislature to pass an amendment to streamline all the courts. One reason is that many politicians have a vested interest in keeping things as they are, because they can influence who gets judgeships, lawmakers said. ''It does make sense, but it gets bogged down in a lot of different issues,'' said Assemblyman Joseph R. Lentol, a Brooklyn Democrat.
