The reason for the Knicks' five-game winning streak is simple: it's symbiosis. Kurt Thomas sets the pick for Stephon Marbury. He rolls. If Marbury does not take an open shot, Thomas does.
The defense is stuck, because Thomas keeps knocking down his jumpers and Marbury is too quick to stop.
''They have as good a two-man game going in the league as anybody you can name,'' Clippers Coach Mike Dunleavy said after Thomas and Marbury combined to score 70 points in the Knicks' 110-104 victory over Los Angeles on Sunday.
Marbury is a two-time All-Star playing to disprove the coaches and fans who forgot to put him on the team this year. The 31-year-old Thomas has occasionally been mentioned as an All-Star possibility, but perhaps not as many times as he has been mentioned in trade rumors the last few years.
Last night, however, two players the Knicks had wanted at Thomas's spot at power forward, Rasheed Wallace and Shareef Abdur-Rahim, were traded for each other. Atlanta acquired Wallace and Wesley Person from Portland for Abdur-Rahim, Dan Dickau and Theo Ratliff.
For the Knicks to have landed Wallace, they would have probably had to include Thomas in the package. But Thomas seems to be making himself indispensable.
Since jamming the pinkie on his right hand, his shooting hand, in a victory over Phoenix on Jan. 31, he has excelled while playing in pain, averaging 20.3 points and 8.3 rebounds in the last three games.
As the Knicks headed to Thomas's hometown of Dallas for Tuesday's matchup with the 32-19 Mavericks, his recent play has given Isiah Thomas, the team president, an interesting choice: Kurt Thomas, a nine-year veteran, has made himself more invaluable than ever to the Knicks, and perhaps, more valuable on the trade market.
''If they're interested,'' Isiah Thomas said of other teams, ''that means he's a pretty good player, and we should probably try to keep him.''
Thomas, a 6-foot-9 power forward who can pick and pop, play center, snatch rebounds and snarl, also has, in addition to these traits, something else other teams want: his contract.
Thomas has said he will opt out of his deal -- which is paying him a relatively modest $5.39 million this season -- and become a free agent after the season, making him enticing to teams looking for a quality player now and a way to cut salaries later. Thomas is due to make $5.88 million next season, but if he becomes a free agent, that money is wiped off a team's payroll cap.
''All the talk that I heard before I got here, every trade proposal involved Kurt,'' Isiah Thomas said. ''You have not heard one trade proposal come out of here since I've been here involving Kurt. He's a valuable player to us.''
Yet Isiah Thomas would not go so far as to say that it meant his power forward was off the market, and he could still acquire Wallace after the season, when he will be a free agent, especially because Atlanta is looking to cut its payroll.
Officials around the league said that at the end of Scott Layden's tenure, he was shopping Kurt Thomas and, like Isiah Thomas, was exploring ways to acquire Wallace and Marbury. After years of keeping Kurt Thomas off-limits, Layden relented, then he was fired.
Isiah Thomas, who from the start of his tenure with the Knicks liked Kurt Thomas, began negotiations with Thomas's agent, Jerry Hicks, to extend his contract and prevent him from becoming a free agent, but nothing has resulted.
''They're just talking; nothing's happening,'' Kurt Thomas said.
In the meantime, Thomas is tending to his injured finger. A Knicks official said Thomas saw a specialist yesterday, who determined there was no tendon damage or fracture. Thomas will continue to play with his pinkie and ring fingers taped and to wear a splint off the court.
For now, Thomas, who at Texas Christian led the nation in scoring and rebounding in 1995 and was the Miami Heat's first-round pick that year, is perfecting the art of the four-finger release.
''I try not to think about it, but every now and then I know it's going to get banged,'' Thomas said. ''If I catch it clean, I just let it go.''
As if he had listened in on Isiah Thomas's pregame statements about his value, Thomas opened Sunday's game against the Clippers with a dunk. He followed with an 11-foot jumper off the pick and roll. By the end of the first quarter, he had hit all six shots in scoring 12 points.
He sank another jumper in the second quarter, bringing his streak to 14 straight shots without a miss, going back to the second half of Saturday's victory in Miami.
He missed on the 15th attempt, falling short of the Knicks' record of 19 straight baskets, set by Johnny Newman in 1988.
''He is shooting with a great deal of confidence right now,'' Marbury said. ''When he is knocking down that shot, it makes it so much tougher for the defense to rotate.''
Marbury's speed on the pick and roll has clearly helped Thomas over the past 17 games. The Knicks are 11-6 with Marbury and have won 9 out of their last 12 games.
They are only two games below .500 and in seventh place in the Eastern Conference, second behind the Nets in the Atlantic Division.
The Knicks have two games before this weekend's All-Star Game break, with a visit to New Orleans on Wednesday after the Dallas game.
Thomas, in his fourth season with the Knicks, said he was not thinking about the Feb. 19 trading deadline.He said he was thinking only about the next two games.
''It's big -- that's what we've been focusing on -- to get to .500,'' he said.
And if they do get there, Thomas is one of the main reasons why.
REBOUNDS
DERMARR JOHNSON, a 6-foot-9 forward, has played only six minutes in two games in his Knicks career, but the team appears inclined to sign him to another 10-day contract starting Thursday. Johnson is making his way back from breaking his neck in a car accident in 2003.
PRO BASKETBALL
