In the latest show of civic one-upmanship over New Jersey professional sports teams, officials in Newark unveiled a revised plan on Monday for an arena to house the New Jersey Devils and a letter of intent in which the team says it plans to play there beginning with the 2007 hockey season.
The agreement, which comes after the apparent collapse of plans to lure the New Jersey Nets basketball team to Newark, is a product of ferocious politics inside the state and beyond. Within New Jersey, the agreement is an attempt by Sharpe James, the Newark mayor, to force Gov. James E. McGreevey to support an arena in Newark despite strong opposition elsewhere in the state. Beyond that, it also represents the latest gambit in a three-way battle among supporters of an arena in Newark, the Continental Arena in the Meadowlands and a new arena for the Nets expected in Brooklyn.
The proposal unveiled on Monday raised as many questions as it answered and is hardly the last word on the long-debated arena project in the state's largest city. City officials said they would provide more specifics on the project at a news conference on Thursday.
But the proposal also reflects Newark's determination to stay in the game in pursuit of a signature arena that once seemed within its grasp but, with the sale of the Nets, seemed in danger of slipping away.
With the plan disclosed on Monday, the Newark officials sketched out their new vision for the arena project that they say is, at the least, revived. ''We can look forward to thousands of construction and permanent jobs opportunities and new hope,'' Mayor James said in a statement.
City officials released a copy of the letter of intent -- signed by Lou Lamoriello, the Devils' chief executive, president and general manager -- which calls for the Devils to move to Newark by the summer of 2007 and for the team to play in a new 18,000-seat arena.
The deal, which also calls for the construction of an office and entertainment complex, including a hotel, a municipal building and parking garages, is at the heart of a plan to revitalize Newark's downtown. The plan calls for up to four million square feet of office space, half a million square feet of retail, a 300-room hotel, a new building for the board of education and city municipal business, and garages for 3,500 cars within a block of the arena.
City officials also estimated that the plan would bring in $28 million a year for Newark and create more than 13,000 permanent new jobs, and they said the entire development project would cost more than a billion dollars.
The proposed arena, on Lafayette Street between Mulberry and Broad, is slightly west of a site designated for the arena in previous proposals. One Newark official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said the plan was contingent on several factors, chief among them an engineering study into whether the soil in the arena could withstand the weight of such a structure.
The city previously resolved part of one other tricky question: money. Newark already has about $200 million garnered from lease revenue at Newark Liberty International Airport ready to contribute to the cost of the project. Earlier estimates placed the cost of a new arena at $355 million.
One lingering issue is the fate of the Continental Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., 12 miles north of Newark. That Meadowlands arena's future would be uncertain if the new structure were built in Newark. In recent days, George Zoffinger, president of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, which operates the Continental Arena, continued to press a plan to keep that arena open.
Mr. Zoffinger had questioned the viability of a one-team arena in Newark, but he insisted that a Continental Arena without both the Nets and Devils would still be able to schedule events throughout the year and could remain profitable.
Besides finances, questions also remain about the appeal of a hockey team in Newark. In a statement, Gary Bettman, commissioner of the National Hockey League, said that some teams with the highest attendance played in downtown arenas.
''We have seen great success with one-team arenas, as 19 of our teams are the only major league team and primary tenant in their home venues,'' Mr. Bettman said.
One further hurdle may be the public perception of Newark. Even as the sale of the Nets was announced, many fans said that although they were disappointed that the team was poised to move to Brooklyn, a Newark arena had little or no appeal.
''I wouldn't go to Newark,'' said Frank Ranu, 32, a Web site producer from Clifton, who noted the city's reputation for high crime rates. ''Newark is rebuilding, but Newark is still Newark.''
Correction:  February 11, 2004, Wednesday  Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a revised plan to build an arena in Newark misstated the location of the Continental Arena in East Rutherford, which faces an uncertain future. It is 12 miles north of Newark, not south.
