The plot of the Willie Williams recruiting diaries took an unpleasant twist yesterday, when he was charged with misdemeanor battery and violating his probation. The charges jeopardize his chances of playing football anytime soon for the Miami Hurricanes, with whom he signed a letter of intent last Wednesday.
''There's a warrant for his arrest,'' Jim Leljedal, a spokesman for the Broward County, Fla., sheriff's office, said last night. ''He's still not in custody.''
Williams, 19, a highly-recruited linebacker, achieved a measure of fame in recent weeks by chronicling his recruitment by major college football programs for The Miami Herald, and the eye-popping array of steak, police escorts, cheerleaders and private jets he encountered. As the diaries circulated on Internet fan sites, his public profile soared.
It was a series of incidents that Williams left out of the diaries -- from his recruiting trip to the University of Florida in Gainesville in early January -- that have come back to haunt him.
Shortly after his visit to Gainesville, Williams was named in three separate criminal complaints. The Gainesville police investigated and filed the battery charges over the weekend; he is accused of hugging of a woman without her permission. The police are still investigating the other two complaints, one by a man who said Williams punched him in a nightclub and the other involving the discharging of three fire extinguishers in a university dormitory.
The charges in Gainesville prompted the sheriff's office in Broward County, outside Miami, to charge Williams with violating his probation. Williams was put on probation for 18 months in the summer of 2002 after he pleaded no contest to burglary and possession of burglary tools. He was accused of stealing $3,800 worth of stereo equipment from an electronics store in July 2002. That probation was to end tomorrow.
Paul D. Lazarus, Williams's lawyer in Miami, said the recruiting diaries might have actually contributed to his client's current trouble.
''If it were not for the recruiting diaries, nobody would have ever checked on him and his probation would have quietly expired,'' Lazarus said. ''Now he could go to jail for five years and have the rest of his life destroyed.''
Lazarus said the probation charges were particularly serious because judges tend to take a dim view of those who violate probation. He also said the police in Gainesville indicated that they were likely to charge Williams tomorrow in the fire extinguisher incident. Lazarus said he hoped to persuade a Broward County judge to allow Williams to surrender in court and post bail, rather than be arrested.
The charges against Williams represent an unfortunate turn for a young man who less than a week ago was the subject of an intense recruiting battle between Florida State and its coach, Bobby Bowden, and Miami and Coach Larry Coker. Both teams worked hard to impress the 6-foot-2, 230-pound Williams, who in his diaries made no secret of his fondness for surf and turf.
Bowden courted Williams by plying him with steak and lobster tails at one of Tallahassee's best restaurants, the Silver Slipper. Coker offered shrimp and crab claws, and chauffeured Williams around in his new Cadillac Escalade.
Paul Dee, the Miami athletic director, said: ''We are aware of the developments that occurred today. We continue to monitor the situation and gather information so we will be in the best position to make our evaluation of this matter.''
Williams's diaries and news of his arrest have caused a rare bit of off-season excitement in college football. Some columnists have expressed dismay over the lavish treatment heaped on Williams by the teams courting him and questioned whether they were adhering to the spirit of National Collegiate Athletic Association bylaws. N.C.A.A. rules state that colleges must entertain recruits ''at a scale comparable to that of normal student life.''
Rob Wilson, the assistant athletic director at Florida State, said he did not believe his university did anything wrong in recruiting Williams. ''I don't know any school that doesn't have the recruits eat at restaurants,'' he said.
Steve Mallonee, an N.C.A.A. official who deals with Division I colleges, said Friday that the Williams case and others involving recruiting excesses would cause the organization to review its policies on recruiting trips. He conceded that those policies were too vague.
''We're in a culture now where unless it's crystal clear, it gets into that keep-up-with-the-Joneses mentality,'' he said.
News of the criminal complaints against Williams quickly shifted the focus to the University of Miami. Officials there said Thursday that they were unaware of Williams's previous arrests. The Palm Beach Post reported last week that Williams had 10 arrests since age 14. Dee said the university's background-checking process had been insufficient.
Williams led his high school team, Carol City in Miami, to a state championship last year, after knocking the opposing quarterback out of the game. He grew up in modest circumstances and was reared by his mother after his father died. He did well in school, graduating with a 3.0 grade-point average and scored 1070 on the SAT, making him a prize recruit.
Last Wednesday, Williams appeared before the news media at his high school. He tried on a Florida State jersey, then a Miami jersey before settling on the green and orange of the Hurricanes.
Lazarus said, ''We are hopeful that he will get through all of this and be enrolled at the University of Miami, where we hope he will help them win a national championship.''
FOOTBALL
