When it comes to violinists, Pinchas Zukerman is hardly an unknown quantity. But he has been less visible to New York audiences since becoming director of the National Arts Center Orchestra in Ottawa five years ago. He still appears routinely with orchestras, most recently in November with his own, but until Friday night he had not played a New York recital since 1998.
So Mr. Zukerman no doubt drew many listeners to Carnegie Hall who were simply curious to hear what he has been up to. He answered with an intriguing program that included Mozart (K.378) and two big Romantic sonatas, by Franck and Schumann, but also two rarely played Intermezzos by Robert Fuchs and two contemporary works, by Toru Takemitsu and by his own accompanist for the evening, Marc Neikrug.
The most distinctive aspect of Mr. Zukerman's playing, something that struck the ear right away, was his remarkable tone production. He is a tonal hedonist at heart, and without pressing or forcing his instrument he generated a warm, liquid sound that effortlessly filled the hall and even, at a few thrilling moments, blanketed Mr. Neikrug's playing at the grand piano.
Both halves of the program culminated with these peaks of lyricism, but each traced different paths to its Romantic summit. The Mozart and the gracious Fuchs miniatures built up to Schumann's fiery Sonata No. 1. After intermission Mr. Zukerman showed he could also produce a lean and even cutting tone to suit the technical demands of Mr. Neikrug's searching work ''Petrus,'' as well as Takemitsu's short but enthralling piece ''From Far Beyond Chrysanthemums and November Fog.'' The Franck Sonata concluded the program, with Mr. Zukerman singing through its gorgeous long-breathed phrases with his trademark full-throated sound.
For all of the beauty of tone, however, this listener also wished for a bit more of a commitment to exploring the deep recesses behind the notes. Mr. Zukerman's playing brought to mind a principle of his former mentor, Isaac Stern. A performer's task, Stern always said, was to convince a listener not only how this music should be played, but why.
MUSIC REVIEW
