Jürgen Schrempp, the chairman of DaimlerChrysler, testified on Monday that he explored incorporating a combination of Chrysler and Daimler-Benz in the United States but that doing so would have caused political problems with German unions without providing any tax advantage for shareholders.
Mr. Schrempp's testimony came during the resumption of the trial of a fraud lawsuit brought by the billionaire investor Kirk Kerkorian, who contends that the $36 billion transaction that created the company was deceptively described as a merger of equals instead of an acquisition of Chrysler and deprived him of the premium he would have demanded under an outright takeover.
Mr. Schrempp was questioned by Terry Christensen, a lawyer for the Tracinda Corporation, Mr. Kerkorian's investment company, about why DaimlerChrysler was incorporated in Germany, had only one American left on its 11-member management board and had deployed former Daimler-Benz managers to run Chrysler.
''I would love to have a company incorporated in the United States,'' said Mr. Schrempp, who then cited the political problems.
The trial had been suspended in December after DaimlerChrysler's lawyers told Judge Joseph Farnan Jr. of Federal District Court here that they had inadvertently failed to provide Tracinda lawyers with more than 61 pages of notes made during the 1998 negotiations by Chrysler's chief financial officer at the time, Gary Valade. Tracinda has filed court papers to have the omission ruled deliberate.
The notes contained seemingly damaging statements about the deal, including some dictated to Mr. Valade by Chrysler's president, Thomas Stallkamp, in March 1998. Mr. Valade wrote: ''Loss of independence; sell out for profit; why didn't we buy; and senior management sold out.''
Mr. Christensen depicted the notes as evidence that Mr. Kerkorian had been misled by Mr. Schrempp into exchanging his 13.8 percent Chrysler stake for shares in the new company without receiving a takeover premium valued by Tracinda at $1.2 billion.
But Mr. Stallkamp, who was also recalled to testify, said the notes were taken out of context, a claim repeated by Mr. Valade when he testified later that the notes were talking points that Mr. Stallkamp said he would have to answer when asked to explain the merger to shareholders, analysts and the press.
Mr. Stallkamp also said Chrysler's diminished role in the new company was not a result of a takeover but the failure of its own management to take advantage of opportunities for leadership.
Mr. Christensen described ''Getting Bigger by Growing Smaller,'' a book about the merger with Mr. Stallkamp as co-author that was released in November, as a ''complete and total impeachment'' of his previous testimony
''Within a period of 11 months,'' Mr. Stallkamp wrote, ''the Chrysler management team was retired, fired, or otherwise removed from the board. As of 2003, there were only two original Chrysler members remaining on the board and no new individuals were added from the U.S. side. The acquiring company prevailed in the long run and the experiment for a merger did not last a year. In the end, power and authority went to the company who paid for the acquisition.''
The trial is scheduled to end on Tuesday. Lawyers will submit their closing summary arguments by the end of March.
