On Japan's northern edge, the long-running threat from Russia was as real as the debris on the beaches in 1983 from the Korean passenger plane shot down by a Soviet fighter jet from Sakhalin, a dagger-shaped island 26 miles north of here.
In this windblown settlement, people have watched Sakhalin tossed back and forth by tides of war. Japan won the southern half of Sakhalin in the Russo-Japanese War, a grinding conflict that broke out 100 years ago, on Feb. 8, 1904. In the closing days of World War II, it was Russia's turn as Stalin's troops drove the Japanese across the narrow strait, turning this port into a fearful, refugee-clogged city.
''For the Japanese, Wakkanai was their DMZ,'' Lance Gatling, an American aerospace consultant, said in Tokyo, referring to the air and sea listening post here during the cold war. But in a testament to Japan's rapidly warming economic ties with Russia, Wakkanai is evolving quickly into a modern-day commercial bridge. Huge foreign investments are pouring into oil and gas fields 450 miles north of here.
Last summer, ferry cargo from here to Sakhalin tripled from the previous year. This year, the ferry season is being lengthened, and by 2005 the authorities hope to have an ice-worthy year-round ship to make the 100-mile trip to Korsakov, Sakhalin's nearest port.
''Sakhalin is now essential for Wakkanai's survival,'' said Satoru Aiuchi, the Sakhalin project chief for the city government here.
As with most towns on Japan's far edges, Wakkanai's young people have been leaving and its population aging. Since 1975, the population has ebbed by a third, to 43,000 today.
As snow swirled around a cozy crab restaurant here one recent evening, Edward P. Bandlow, who teaches English at Wakkanai Hokusei College here, estimated that only 10 percent of his students stuck around after graduation.
But today, road signs are printed in Japanese, English and Russian, and Russian is a required course at Mr. Bandlow's college. Last year, Wakkanai was Japan's top port for Russian fishing boats, registering 3,300 port calls.
Wakkanai sees its future as a staging ground for Sakhalin, which is visible from here on a clear day. Last year, Japan's largest overseas construction contracts awarded worldwide were for work in Sakhalin, nearly $3 billion for oil and natural gas developments.
Wakkanai hopes to resurrect its old Sakhalin supply role, which nurtured the city before the Iron Curtain dropped.
''More and more construction equipment and materials are being exported from here to Sakhalin,'' said Shigeru Fuse, a city official. Noting that by 2006, some 6,000 workers will build a liquefied natural gas plant across La Perouse Strait -- known in Japan as the Soya Strait -- he predicted that Wakkanai would develop as a source of fresh food for workers.
Travel agents are preparing package tours for oil workers for weekend shopping trips here. Local officials would like Russia to cancel its visa requirement to make travel across the strait easier.
''Wakkanai is very eager to be a leader in closer links with Sakhalin,'' Vasily I. Saplin, Russia's consul in Sapporo, Hokkaido's capital, said by telephone. ''They have good conditions.''
Japanese exports to Russia doubled last year, to $1.9 billion, even though the two countries have no peace treaty from World War II. That is largely because of Japan's objection to Russia's postwar occupation of four islands about 250 miles east of here.
But Japan increasingly sees Russia as a future source of oil and gas and as an ally in dealing with China, Asia's rising power. ''Strategically, if Japan and the U.S. and Japan and Russia have friendly ties, these two ties could deter China,'' said Toshiyuki Shikata, a professor of security studies at Teikyo University in Tokyo.
Japan's view of Russia has changed greatly since 1990, when Mr. Shikata was the commanding general of Japan's Northern Army in Hokkaido.
''The military instructions were to blow up the radar facility and then to retreat,'' Mr. Shikata recalled, describing the standard battle plan for a Soviet invasion.
Stalin told American leaders near the end of World War II that he wanted Hokkaido because Wakkanai's narrow strait kept Soviet warships bottled up in Vladivostok.
But today, Japanese defense plans downgrade the military threat from the north.
''There are no hot lines between Sakhalin and here,'' said Col. Yoshiharu Matsumoto, commander of the air force's electronic listening station, reflecting on the relaxation of cross-border tensions.
Tetsuo Maeda, a national security professor at Tokyo International University, said in an interview, ''The threat to Japan is changing, from Russia to North Korea, and probably later on to China.''
Kiyofuku Chuma, a retired military affairs reporter for the daily Asahi Shimbun, expressed a similar view: ''For Japanese today the feeling of threat is shifting from Russia in the north to China in the south.''
Japan has invited President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia to visit Tokyo. Japanese officials hope that the coming Russian presidential election will give Mr. Putin a strong enough mandate to negotiate a solution to the island issue, finally allowing the two countries to sign a treaty.
In a sign of the changing relationship, the troops that Japan sent to Iraq last month came from the Hokkaido base. The airplanes that flew their armored personnel carriers were Antonov-124 transports, chartered from a Russian company.
At the same time, three Russian navy ships were preparing to leave Vladivostok for joint maritime rescue exercises with South Korean and Japanese navy boats, peaceful maneuvers timed to coincide with the 100th anniversary of Japan's attack on Russia's Pacific fleet.
Wakkanai Journal  Correction:  February 26, 2004, Thursday  An article on Feb. 10 about increasingly friendly relations between Russians and Japanese in Japan's northern port of Wakkanai referred incorrectly to participants in maritime rescue exercises held in the Sea of Japan on Feb. 9, which coincided with the 100th anniversary of Japan's attack on Russia's Pacific fleet. They included only naval vessels from Russia and South Korea, not from Japan.
