Two fifth-grade boys walking home from school yesterday were crushed to death under the rear wheels of a commercial truck as it turned at a busy intersection in Brooklyn. Witnesses said the driver seemed unaware of what happened until it was too late, and the police called it an apparent accident.
The victims, Juan Angel Estrada, 10, of 152 Ninth Street in Gowanus, and Victor Flores, 11, of 161 Ninth Street, were a half-block from their doorways as they stepped off a curb to cross Third Avenue at Ninth Street about 3:30 p.m. and were run over and dragged for about 10 feet as the truck turned onto the avenue, the police said.
Juan was killed instantly, crushed under two sets of double wheels, and Victor was run over by one set of wheels, on the right side of the vehicle away from the driver's view, witnesses told the police.
No charges were filed immediately against the driver, John Olson, 48, of Bellmore on Long Island, a proprietor of Olson's Creative Landscaping, the company name on the side of the 10-wheeled truck.
One witness, Pedro Velez, 44, a construction worker who was crossing the intersection, saw it happen and shouted to the driver to stop. ''A woman screamed, 'Someone stop the truck -- it ran over two kids!''' he said. He said the driver halted immediately and got out, but the children had already been run over and dragged under the wheels.
At the Third Avenue Deli a few feet away, a worker who gave his name only as Victor said he heard the commotion, ran outside and saw the victims under the truck. It was apparent that one boy was dead, he said, but that the other was conscious, bleeding from the nose, mouth and ears. The man said he bent down and tried to suck blood away to clear the breathing passages.
''I was telling him just to keep breathing, stay with me, you're going to be all right,'' the man said. He said that the boy, when finally able to mumble, said only one word, ''Juanito,'' the name of his friend.
Shortly afterward, an ambulance took Victor Flores to Methodist Hospital, where he was pronounced dead at 5:45 p.m., according to Lyn Hill, a hospital spokeswoman.
In the fading light of a winter afternoon, as memorial candles flickered at the accident site, residents gathered to complain about the lack of crossing guards at an intersection where, they said, motorists often ignore the traffic lights and endanger pedestrians in the crosswalks.
Other residents, most of whom asked that their named not be published because they feared problems with immigration authorities, told of frequent accidents at Third and Fourth Avenues at Ninth Street.
''A lot of people complain because a lot of people who live around here have kids,'' one man said. ''They run around the street, and the cars don't pay attention to them.''
In the late afternoon, no one answered calls to P.S. 124, at Fourth Avenue and 14th Street, where the boys were in fifth grade together.
Jesus Bravo, 11, a friend of the victims, said they had been inseparable friends since kindergarten, playing baseball together and, in summer, spending all their time together. Jesus, who is a sixth grader in another school, said he had met Victor and Juan on his way home.
''I just came walking and found them on Ninth Street,'' he said. He said he had stood with them briefly on the northeast corner of Ninth and Third Avenue, but had stepped out ahead of them to cross the avenue from east to west. The boys were sharing a Happy Meal from a McDonald's box, he said.
With the traffic light green and the ''walk'' sign on, the truck and the boys were both permitted to move into the intersection, but pedestrians have the right of way in crosswalks.
The truck, with Mr. Olson alone in the cab, was also moving east to west on Ninth Street, and Jesus Bravo walked in front of it as the truck turned right to head north on the avenue. Victor and Juan, however, apparently stepped off the curb just as the truck rounded the corner, and were caught under the rear wheels.
''When that happened,'' Jesus said, ''I ran home to tell my mom.''
Jose Tapia, 32, Juan's uncle, said that the boy's parents were too distraught to speak. ''He's a good boy,'' Mr. Tapia said. ''''He likes baseball and liked to play baseball.'' He said Juan had three sisters.
A cousin, Jovany Ramos, 9, said simply, ''He was the best cousin'' of many. He said Juan used to play Monopoly and ''make believe,'' in which Juan became Stone Cold Steve Austin, the professional wrestler, and Jovany played the Rock. ''He always won,'' Jovany said. He said Juan also played Pokemon on his Nintendo 64.
Blanca Bautise, 25, an aunt of Victor Flores, said that the boy was born in New York, although his parents came from Atlixco, in the state of Puebla, in Mexico. She said that the boy's mother was pregnant and had recently undergone an eye operation, and that the boy's father, Javier, suffered from diabetes. She said Mr. Flores, a plumber, had returned to work yesterday after taking a month off to care for his wife.
The Flores family had had a reunion on Sunday, and many relatives were still in town yesterday when the family was plunged into mourning. About 40 relatives and friends joined a procession last night to the accident scene, led by the parents. Victoria Hernandez Flores carried a votive candle, rosary beads and a small prayer book. Mr. Flores carried a white candle and gripped his wife's arm.
They walked to the corner of Third Avenue and Ninth Street, knelt near a blood spot that had been sprinkled with sand, and faced a makeshift shrine of candles and flowers set in a cardboard box on the sidewalk. Victor's brother, Ray, 16, did not kneel with the rest. He brooded under the hood of a sweater, but later clasped his mother in an embrace and buried his face in her shoulder.
As the group prayed, an elderly woman with a cane stepped off the curb to cross Third Avenue. Suddenly, the traffic light turned red against her and a big oncoming truck halted dangerously close to her. Its horn began blaring at her to get out of the way. Some in the prayer group looked up, startled by the blast, and shook their heads in dismay.
