By last November, Pittsburgh receiver Larry Fitzgerald and his father -- and perhaps everyone else watching -- suspected it was time to move on. Fitzgerald was near the end of a regular season in which he extended his streak of catching at least one touchdown pass to 18 consecutive games, an N.C.A.A. record.
In a news conference at the University of Pittsburgh yesterday, Fitzgerald made the move official, announcing he would forgo his final two seasons of college football to enter the N.F.L. draft in April.
''I'm very confident in my ability,'' he said. ''I know there's going to be skeptics.''
Fitzgerald was just a sophomore last season, on a team that did not even win its conference championship, but he became one of the most compelling players in college football. N.F.L. talent evaluators, who believed Fitzgerald would not be able to enter the 2004 draft, were impressed from afar. Now they will have the chance to scrutinize him up close.
His announcement came four days after the league found that he complied with its rule that a player must be three years past his high school graduation to be eligible for the draft. Fitzgerald, 20, graduated from Valley Forge Military Academy in May 2002, after attending a fifth year of high school to improve his grades, meaning he is three years past his original graduation year, 2001.
The league's decision came the same day a federal judge declared that the N.F.L.'s age restriction represented a violation of antitrust laws, clearing the way for Ohio State running back Maurice Clarett, also a sophomore, to enter the draft.
The N.F.L. will appeal the decision on Clarett and will seek a stay this week, but even if the league receives a stay, it will not affect Fitzgerald's status.
Fitzgerald and Clarett will inevitably be linked because they are high-profile players entering the draft as sophomores. But there are differences. Clarett has played only one season of college football and has been dogged by off-field controversies. ''The difference is as far as New York is from Honolulu,'' Larry Fitzgerald Sr., Fitzgerald's father, said. ''Maurice and what's happening with him speaks for itself. Larry and the way he's gone about doing things, it speaks for itself.''
Clarett is a gifted running back who helped the Buckeyes win the national title in his freshman season, but his draft position is murky. Fitzgerald's is not. With his quickness, his 6-foot-3, 225-pound frame and his dazzling play, Fitzgerald will most likely be the first receiver chosen in the draft and could go to the Raiders with the second pick over all.
Fitzgerald's athleticism was obvious even in pee-wee football, his father said. But just as Fitzgerald was starting high school, his mother, Carol, was found to have cancer.
Fitzgerald was distracted and his grades suffered. By his senior year, he was in position to graduate, but his grades were not high enough to qualify for a scholarship. So he went to Valley Forge (Pa.) Military Academy. Last April, Fitzgerald's mother died of breast cancer at age 47, providing an emotional impetus for his magnificent sophomore season.
Fighting through double-teams and occasionally triple-teams, he caught 87 passes for 1,595 yards in the regular season, leading all N.C.A.A. receivers. He had 22 touchdown receptions last season, at least one in each of the Panthers' regular-season games. He finished second to Oklahoma quarterback Jason White in the Heisman Trophy voting; no sophomore has won the award.
But Fitzgerald said he was still not sure how N.F.L.-ready his game was.
''I think I have the ability to play in the league,'' he said. ''Everyone needs to work on something, and all of my skills can be refined and made better. That is what I am trying to do.''
By November, Fitzgerald Sr., who is host of a sports program on KMOS-FM in Minneapolis and is the sports editor for The Minnesota Spokesman-Recorder, had begun asking five confidants, some of them connected to the N.F.L., about his son's chances as a professional player. ''All five said, 'He's ready,' '' he said.
Father and son attended the Super Bowl together, an annual celebration Fitzgerald Sr. had shared with his wife. When the league let Fitzgerald into the draft Thursday, both men were relieved. Fitzgerald promised his mother that he would earn his degree, but for now he will stop going to college to focus on training for the draft.
Fitzgerald Sr. said: ''He would not be doing what he's doing, if, No. 1, he didn't in his heart believe he could do it. And, No. 2, if I didn't believe in my heart he could do it.''
FOOTBALL
