But Pavarotti You Can Take Places
There was a party for Gotham and L.A. Confidential magazines on Thursday night. It was held, appropriately enough, at Gotham Hall in Midtown, and it was clear, once you stepped inside, that the publisher JASON BINN is indeed a man who understands glamour.
We speak not of the gold ceilings and grand rotunda of what was once a bank, but of the large canopy bed that had been set up in its center. It had red curtains and red candles and there was an off-red bouquet of flowers nearby.
The plan, from what we could gather by meticulous eavesdropping, was that KIM CATTRALL, Gotham's year-end issue cover girl, would plop down and strike a pose. As she was wearing a black gown that exposed the muscles in her back, she certainly seemed outfitted for it. But Ms. Cattrall, protectively flanked by several short blond p.r. women with headsets and several large black bodyguards plus a few Gotham photographers, seemed to have second thoughts. Arriving early in the evening, she looked at the bed, she looked at what was then a celebrity-thin crowd and a concomitantly desperate photographer corps, and, after answering a few questions, trotted off to the V.I.P. area.
Mr. Binn was not discouraged.
''You know what we'll do?'' he said, turning to one of the public relations blondettes, ''We'll put DARYL up there. It'll be great.''
Gotham and L.A. Confidential magazines consist largely, though not entirely, of party pictures.
(Full disclosure: They interviewed Boldface for their February issue, but, as we hope is obvious, it has not affected our well-known objectivity one bit.)
It is our impression that Mr. Binn and his magazine have taken party photography to heretofore unknown levels of efficiency. There were almost as many photographers as guests and when an important person appeared -- like NICKY HILTON, who arrived late and stayed for a nanosecond -- Mr. Binn would swoop down out of nowhere like a celebrity-savvy American eagle (Life! Liberty! The pursuit of face time!) and escort them to a picture-taking area. Mr. Binn, we have decided, is to party pictures what HENRY FORD was to the automobile: Mr. Binn has invented the paparazzi assembly line.
Among those thus captured, we saw MARIO CANTONE; GINA GERSHON, ANNE HECHE, SEAL, ALEX VON FURSTENBERG, DARIUS RUCKER (more commonly known as HOOTIE), DONALD TRUMP and MELANIA KNAUSS (one swoop around the room and out!), and LIEV SCHREIBER in striped pants and a jaunty cap.
The canopy bed, in which DARYL HANNAH was supposed to have been displayed, remained empty. At 10:10 there was a woman in it, but it wasn't Ms. Hannah and a bodyguard made the woman get out.
When we managed to get Mr. Binn away from the photo production line, we asked him why the bed was empty.
''Look, ETHAN HAWKE is coming in,'' Mr. Binn said.
Mr. Hawke was wearing a brown jacket over an orange zip-up sweater. He was not the picture of health. His face was sallow and emaciated; we felt we could almost see the sinew under the skin.
We hear you're on the cover of the next Details, we told him.
''Yes, I'm friends with DAN'' -- that would be PERES, the editor in chief.
We also hear you looked very muscular in the photo shoot. Have you been pumping up?
''No, I'm having the worst time of my life and that's a good diet,'' Mr. Hawke said. ''Anxiety is good for losing weight.''
Off he went and off we went, this time spotting JEREMY SHOCKEY, tight end for the Giants. What's a guy like you do when you need a bodyguard, we asked him.
Mr. Shockey pointed to two young men who looked as if they might have been lounging on a couch all day, inhaling illegal substances, then threw on their coats and stumbled to the party. (No, no, we're not saying they did. Think of it as a look, a fashion statement.)
The pair, turned out to be EVAN and DAREN METROPOULOS. The names were unfamiliar to us.
''Where you been, man?'' Evan Metropoulos asked our Boldface correspondent. ''I've been on DAVID LETTERMAN and HOWARD STERN.''
Evan Metropoulos, it turns out, is the son of the Pinnacle Foods chairman, C. DEAN METROPOULOS, and is also known as the Bumble Bee tuna heir. He told our correspondent he now runs a fancy hotel in Tarrytown.
''I've been with more chicks than any fat guy you know, except PAVAROTTI,'' Evan Metropoulos said.
As we wrote down what he was wearing -- grunge leather jacket, jeans and sneakers - he offered his own sartorial advice, which, in deference to Fashion Week, we feel compelled to pass along: ''You know you're rich when you can show up to a party like this,'' he told us.
with Steve Kurutz
Boldface Names
