President Pervez Musharraf acknowledged for the first time on Monday that he had suspected for at least three years that Pakistan's top nuclear scientist was sharing nuclear technology with other countries, but argued that the United States had not given him convincing proof.
In an hourlong interview conducted here in English, General Musharraf shared blame for the delay with Washington, saying it was not until October that American officials provided evidence of the activities of the scientist, Abdul Qadeer Khan.
''If they knew it earlier, they should have told us,'' General Musharraf said. ''Maybe a lot of things would not have happened.''
At the same time, General Musharraf said he had seen signs that Dr. Khan was sharing nuclear technology, including ''illegal contacts, maybe suspicions of contacts,'' and ''suspicious movement'' connected to Dr. Khan's laboratory. But he said he was concerned that investigating Dr. Khan, a national hero for his role in developing its nuclear weapons, could provoke a political backlash.
''It was extremely sensitive,'' he said. ''One couldn't outright start investigating as if he's any common criminal.'' [Excerpts, Page A8.]
In Washington on Monday, a senior Bush administration official acknowledged that General Musharraf was not given highly specific information about Dr. Khan's activities until last fall. But the official noted that the United States conveyed more general warnings about Dr. Khan's activities starting in 2001.
On Wednesday, President Bush is expected to give what one senior official at the White House described Monday evening as a ''lengthy, detailed speech on what must change in the area of stopping proliferation.'' He is expected to include new proposals for dealing with rogue scientists and with countries that have not signed the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty -- a delicate subject, because India and Israel, like Pakistan, have rejected it.
General Musharraf said he forced Dr. Khan to retire from his post as head of a nuclear weapons lab in March 2001, to prevent him from transferring any more nuclear secrets. That is the first time the general has cited Dr. Khan's nuclear activities as the reason for his departure. ''We nipped the proliferation in the bud, we stopped the proliferation,'' he said of Dr. Khan's removal. ''That is the important part.''
But the nuclear black market supplied by Dr. Khan continued to operate for two and a half years, until last fall, American officials say. That network is one of the largest and most successful efforts at evading nonproliferation controls, and is suspected of being the source of nuclear weapons developed in Iran, North Korea and Libya, investigators say.
[North Korea was dismissive of reports of Dr. Khan's activities, saying on Tuesday in its first reaction to them that his admission that he sold nuclear weapons technology to the North and other states was ''nothing more than sordid false propaganda'' spread by the United States, Reuters reported, citing a statement by the Foreign Ministry.]
Before the exposure of Dr. Khan's network late last fall, Pakistani officials, including General Musharraf, had long denied that Pakistan was the source of nuclear technology for any other country. In repeated interviews, he never disclosed that he suspected that the nation's top nuclear scientist was spreading technology.
His comments on Monday will only add to the debate over what is a murky episode. Some political and military analysts say Pakistan's earlier refusal to act against Dr. Khan and its effort now to bring the scandal to a hasty conclusion reflect at least tacit approval from the powerful army for his activities. They suggest that Dr. Khan received a full pardon in exchange for publicly stating that he alone was responsible for the proliferation.
The president attributed his protectiveness to Dr. Khan's national stature and to political realities in Pakistan. ''Since he had acquired a larger-than-life figure for himself, one had to pardon him to satisfy the public,'' he said. ''And I think it has gone extremely positively.''
Many argue that what may appear to be evasions or deceptions simply reflect General Musharraf's quandary -- how to appease both international pressure to crack down on a rogue proliferator and domestic pressure to protect Dr. Khan.
General Musharraf said that after he had centralized oversight of the nuclear program in February 2000, he received reports from a scientist who had been ''sidelined'' by Dr. Khan that raised concerns about ''some proliferation activity, some underhand proliferation going on,'' the president said. He also confirmed earlier reports that Pakistani agents had raided a cargo plane used by Dr. Khan in 2000, but had found nothing.
''We got some suspicious reports through the security agencies -- that there are some suspicions of some items to be loaded and taken somewhere in the plane,'' he said.
''We were very sure there was some activity likely,'' said General Musharraf, who added that the scientist may have been tipped off. ''But we didn't catch them red-handed.''
But General Musharraf seemed to have few answers about how Dr. Khan operated freely in a country where the nuclear arsenal is considered its greatest single asset.
He said Monday that the brigadier general in charge of security for Dr. Khan's top-secret laboratory never reported anything. ''He didn't, and frankly, he hasn't even now,'' the president said. ''He in fact has said that yes, he regrets that he was inefficient, he couldn't unearth, he didn't know. He says he didn't know whatever was going on. And he swears by that even now.''
The general emphatically denied reports by American intelligence officials that Dr. Khan had struck a barter agreement with North Korea in which Pakistani nuclear technology was exchanged for North Korean ballistic missile technology. He said Pakistani cargo planes spotted in North Korea in July 2002 were picking up surface-to-air missiles Pakistan had purchased at the height of tensions with India.
While he has previously said the government completed its investigation of the proliferation, he said Monday that the government was ''still looking into the details'' about what, beyond designs, had been transferred to North Korea.
General Musharraf, who had said he would shield Dr. Khan from the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations watchdog group, softened his position slightly on Monday, saying, ''We need to think about it.''
He has indicated that he is not eager for trials of six close aides to Dr. Khan in part because public trials would raise ''the same sensitive issue of Dr. A. Q. Khan coming in again, getting invoked every time.''
He said that despite his suspicions, he had no idea how extensive Dr. Khan's network was, nor how long it had been operating. ''We didn't know that this is so deep that it started somewhere in the late 80's,'' he said.''We didn't know that at all. And frankly again, the sensitivity of the issue -- we tapped it and we just sidelined this one individual.''
Even removing Dr. Khan from his post in 2001, he said, required hours of deliberation over how best to proceed. Dr. Khan was removed as head of the laboratory but was made a special adviser to the government, a post he was stripped of last week.
Even on Monday, General Musharraf seemed ambivalent about whether Dr. Khan was victim or villain, patriot or traitor. ''I don't know whether Dr. A. Q. was using the underworld or the underworld was using A. Q.,'' he said at one point.
