American commanders on Monday outlined their new plans for patrolling the streets of Baghdad and said their No. 1 goal was to be less conspicuous.
The Army is closing down most of its bases in central Baghdad, withdrawing to the outskirts of the city, exchanging Humvees for tanks and using fewer soldiers, said Brig. Gen. Mark Hertling, the First Armored Division's deputy commander. This comes as the First Armored prepares to hand authority for the Iraqi capital to the First Cavalry Division, part of a larger replenishing of occupation troops throughout the country.
''We're going to be less intrusive,'' said Col. Mike Formica, of the First Calvary. ''We won't have 70-ton tanks running through neighborhoods, destroying infrastructure we're trying so hard to rebuild.''
The First Armored's commander, Brig. Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, announced the shift on Feb. 1, during a visit to Iraq by Paul D. Wolfowitz, the deputy defense secretary, saying the American troops would pull back to bases at the edge of the city, leaving its policing largely to local forces.
Along with the different equipment, Colonel Formica said, the incoming troops will have a different attitude. Back at Fort Hood, Tex., where the division is based, commanders down to the sergeant level have been tutored in Arab culture. Rank-and-file soldiers have been reoriented from battlefield missions to urban combat ones. ''All of our armor and artillery guys have been retrained as infantry,'' he said.
When the First Armored Division, based in Germany, arrived in Baghdad in May, 80 American Army posts were scattered throughout the city. Those numbers gradually dropped, and now the tank-heavy division is spread among 26 bases.
Once the First Cavalry takes over -- in April -- the bases will be cut to eight, most outside the city.
Many Baghdad residents feel torn about the new plans for a lower-profile American presence.
''We don't feel safe now,'' said Bilal Orfalle, a money changer. ''How is it going to be any better if there are fewer troops on the streets?'' But his friend, Hussam al-Salemi, said fewer American soldiers could be a good thing. ''Sometimes, they are so rude,'' he said.
The death toll continued to rise Monday. In the Sinjar area of northern Iraq, two American soldiers were killed and six wounded while trying to remove an explosive. In Ramadi, a man blew himself up at the home of two tribal leaders who cooperated with American forces, The Associated Press reported.
Also Monday, military officials said a former Baath party chairman, Muhsin Khadr al-Khafaji -- No. 48 on the American list of most-wanted Iraqis -- had surrendered, Agence France-Presse reported.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE TROOPS
