Consolidated Edison said that it would finish checking for stray voltage at all manhole and service-box covers by the end of yesterday, but that it had inspected about half the city's lamp poles, and had handed over responsibility to the city to check the nearly 200,000 that remain.
The inspections began after the death of Jodie S. Lane, 30, who was electrocuted on Jan. 16 when she stepped on a charged metal plate while walking her dogs in the East Village.
Tom Cocola, a spokesman for the city Department of Transportation, said that the city began picking up the leftover workload on Saturday, but he could not set a date for completion. The city will start by checking the roughly 70,000 lamps in areas with the highest foot traffic, and then inspect the more than 120,000 other locations that pose less risk because their lamps are mounted on wooden poles, high overpasses, or on highways where foot traffic is minimal.
Con Ed and the city share the job of keeping the streets lighted, and of inspecting the lights for stray voltage. While the utility monitors all underground electrical wiring, its responsibility stops at the top of the rectangular box at the base of the poles, said Joe Petta, a Con Ed spokesman. The city's responsibility runs from base to bulb, Mr. Petta said. But since stray voltage often starts underground, sending errant voltage all the way up the side of the light pole,he said it was a problem that ''crosses jurisdiction.''
Con Ed said that as of yesterday, it had inspected 164,000 lamp poles out of the more than 350,000 in the city, finding that 257 had errant voltage. The utility said it also checked almost all of the 250,000 service-box lids and manhole covers, discovering 120 were electrified. The voltage ranged from single digits to 140.
''Really, it's no small accomplishment that we've gotten so much done so fast,'' Mr. Petta said, citing the more than a thousand workers who have remained in the field working to correct problems. The Department of Transportation said that it has put more than 100 inspectors on the streets, hoping to finish checking the highest-risk locations this week.
But for some, inspections are just the first step in dealing with the threat of stray voltage.
City Council members and union representatives have emphasized the need for the utility to find better ways to maintain its wiring.
''Finding these hot spots is only good if you prescribe a lasting solution,'' said Councilman John C. Liu, the chairman of the Transportation Committee, which is holding a public hearing on Thursday to get comments on how Con Ed can improve. Manny Hellen, president of Local 1-2 Utility Workers Union of America, said the best solution was legislation to mandate a tighter timetable for maintenance of its electrical grid. ''Other cities with bad weather deal with corroding wires by having workers do regular overhauls on the electrical infrastructure,'' he said. ''New York City needs to head in that direction if we're going to avoid another fatality,'' he said.
Some residents of the East Village are also mobilizing around the issue.
''Inspections are only useful if they make their findings public,'' said Gunnar Hellekson, 28, a computer technician who helped start the Jodie Lane Project. The group started a Web site last week that will map the locations of electrical hazards.
''They should be ashamed that we are doing their job for them,'' Mr. Hellekson said.
The Web site, firstrunfriends.org/coned, updated several times daily, provides a description and a color-coded alert system indicating the level and type of threat found.
The group will lead a march tomorrow at 4 p.m. in memory of Ms. Lane, beginning at the Tompkins Square Park dog run, proceeding past the site of her accident, on East 11th Street near First Avenue, and ending at Con Ed's headquarters at 14th and Irving Place.
