It was perhaps not the first place one would have expected to find Senator Orrin G. Hatch, and yet there he was, not on Capitol Hill worrying about judicial nominations, but rather glad-handing with the likes of Sting and Geri Halliwell of the Spice Girls at EMI Music Publishing's swanky Grammy after-party in downtown Los Angeles. As waiters wielding trays of tuna tartare, crab rolls and caviar-filled minipotatoes scurried about the sprawling rooftop of the Los Angeles County Museum, Senator Hatch gleefully discussed music -- his music.
''I'm working on a patriotic album with some of Nashville's greatest producers,'' he said, hair combed into perfect submission, tuxedo pressed and gleaming. He has a Christmas album due out later this year and has written everything from country rousers to ballads. Senator Hatch, Republican of Utah, or dare we call him MC Hatch, has even tried his hand at rapping.
''When my son heard my demo, he told me to put in a safe deposit box and never take it out.'' Good idea.
Sharing the roof with him were Yoko Ono, Kelsey Grammer of ''Frasier,'' Steven Tyler of Aerosmith and the entire Osbourne clan. Ozzy, nearly killed in an all-terrain-vehicle accident Dec. 8 in England, gamely hobbled about. In one of several giant tents with banquets and bars along the outer walls of the museum's terrace, last year's Grammy darling, Norah Jones, chatted with the rock duo White Stripes. Paris Hilton, never one to miss a party, was a given a piggyback ride to the bathroom by her boyfriend of the moment, Nick Carter. That bad girl Courtney Love would not be upstaged by any of them, however. In solidarity with her Virgin label mate, Janet Jackson, Ms. Love engineered her own wardrobe malfunction, pulling down the top of her silk slip dress and flashing her right breast. Justin Timberlake was nowhere to be found.
Ms. Jackson's name came up again at the BMG after-party at Avalon, a three-story club in Hollywood. ''I think it was a publicity stunt gone wrong, but people have completely overreacted,'' said Swizz Beatz, a well-known hip-hop producer, who objected that Ms. Jackson's partner in the infamous breast-baring during halftime at the Super Bowl, Justin Timberlake, had performed on the Grammy telecast. ''Other people should be taking the heat, too,'' he said.
Heat. It was all anyone wanted Sunday evening. The weather was more befitting boots and cashmere, but women sauntered (and shivered) in slinky dresses and open-toe stilettos. Jennifer Love Hewitt, in a strapless tangerine number, worked up a sweat on the dance floor with Dan Aykroyd.
''I've known him forever,'' said Ms. Hewitt, the star of ''I Know What You Did Last Summer,'' as Beyoncé's hit ''Crazy in Love'' blared over a faltering sound system. Ms. Hewitt's dance moves impressed several partygoers who gathered around to watch. ''Who knew she had rhythm?'' one woman said as the actress mouthed the words to 50 Cent's ''In Da Club.''
Still, the event of the evening was the Polaroid OutKast party at a mountaintop mansion in the Hollywood Hills. Getting there would not be easy, though. Guests were asked to meet at the Pacific Design Center in Hollywood, where vans were waiting to wisk them to the mansion. The party's address was kept a secret.
''Where is this place?'' one testy passenger asked as the van snaked up a winding road for what seemed like an eternity. Upon arriving, partygoers were treated to a breathtaking view of the city.
Even though the house was packed, Sharon Stone, dressed in a clingy white dress, had no trouble making her way about. ''Congratulations,'' she said to OutKast, the duo that had just won the Grammy for album of the year. André 3000, who makes up the duo along with Big Boi, kissed her hand and gushed, ''I'm a huge fan of your work.'' Ms. Stone smiled, posed for a photo and flitted off.
Moments later a fan slipped André 3000 an unexpected gift: a small bag of marijuana. A vegan and teetotaler, André 3000, dressed in a Kelly green Hermes jacket, swiftly returned the present. ''I don't do that,'' he said graciously.
In the throng were Patti LaBelle, Christina Aguilera, the newlyweds Nick and Jessica Lachey and the rockers Linkin Park. A trio of women dressed in nothing more than skimpy panties and matching bras jiggled about the room.
''We're go-go dancers, but they don't have any boxes for us, so we're mingling and meeting famous people,'' said Sarah, atop perilously high Lucite heels. She had just met the actor Ryan Phillippe. Her eyes were dancing. Other parts of her were moving as well.
''He's hot and he's alone tonight,'' she said, mischief clearly on her mind. ''Reese is not here at all.''
