A group of media and finance executives, who last year made a remarkably public but ultimately losing bid for New York magazine, have not lost their lust for high-profile media properties, three executives involved in the discussions about a possible venture said.
The group, which is led by Mortimer B. Zuckerman, owner of The Daily News, is considering investing up to $11 million in Radar, a magazine focused on celebrities that published two issues last year before running out of money.
It is also interested in investing in -- or even acquiring -- The New York Observer, a weekly paper in Manhattan, and Time Out New York, a weekly listings magazine.
In addition to Mr. Zuckerman, the group has Nelson Peltz, a billionaire investor whose Triarc Companies owns Arby's restaurants; Jeffrey Epstein, a money manager; Donny Deutsch, chief executive of the advertising agency Deutsch Inc.; and Harvey Weinstein, co-chairman of Miramax films.
The possibility that the Zuckerman group was considering investing in Radar was first reported last week in The Daily News.
The group had been the presumptive favorite to buy New York magazine from Primedia. It even speculated in public about its plans for the city magazine.
But on Dec. 16, after the group delivered an offer that Primedia considered low, Primedia accepted a $55 million bid from Bruce Wasserstein, a Wall Street deal maker. Primedia is principally owned by Kohlberg, Kravis &amp; Roberts
''Following the sale of New York magazine, several media entities approached the group offering ideas for investment,'' said Matthew Hiltzik, a spokesman for Mr. Weinstein, who said that he was speaking for others in the group as well. ''Right now, we are just kicking tires, not buying anything.''
Radar, a magazine that both celebrated and made fun of celebrities, garnered a lot of attention from the press when it produced issues in the spring and summer of last year.
But it has been on hiatus as the founders, including Maer Roshan, the former editorial director of Talk, searched for long-term financial backing.
Before it became clear that their bid for New York magazine would be unsuccessful, members of the group had indicated that they wanted to install Mr. Roshan as editor.
One executive who is involved in the current discussions said that the group was looking at a number of possibilities, including a reconfigured Radar magazine that could compete more directly with New York magazine.
New York is primarily a regional magazine, with an emphasis on news and listings about New York City, while Radar had articles and cheeky commentary about national celebrities and national news.
Mr. Roshan declined to comment on the possibility that a deal was in the works, as did a spokesman for Mr. Zuckerman.
Two executives involved in the group said that Time Out New York and The New York Observer had been contacted about a possible sale, but executives at both media properties said that they were unaware of any discussions about a possible sale to the Zuckerman group.
