A day that was expected to produce grand courtroom theatrics in the trial of Martha Stewart instead offered a primer on legal tactics. And while there were tears on the witness stand yesterday, they were not shed by the witness who defense lawyers hoped would break down.
Robert G. Morvillo, Ms. Stewart's often colorful lawyer, questioned Douglas Faneuil, the former broker's assistant who is the government's main witness, for more than three hours yesterday. The session, which was expected to be a climactic showdown, turned out to be a lengthy but largely uneventful tour through Mr. Faneuil's previous testimony.
But Mr. Morvillo did wring an important admission: Mr. Faneuil said that that he never formally conspired with Ms. Stewart or her stockbroker to commit crimes or to conceal them from investigators. Ms. Stewart is charged with conspiracy and obstruction of justice, together with her former stockbroker, Peter E. Bacanovic. Both separately face additional charges as well, all stemming from Ms. Stewart's sale of nearly 4,000 shares of ImClone Systems stock in late December 2001.
The day's most emotional moment came later, after Ms. Stewart's personal assistant, Ann E. Armstrong, took the stand. While describing the telephone messages she took on the morning of Dec. 27. 2001 -- the day Ms. Stewart made her ImClone trade -- Ms. Armstrong broke down in tears, covering her face with her hands on the witness stand. The judge then called a halt to the day's proceedings. It was the first time that intensely personal emotions bubbled to the surface during the trial, with Ms. Stewart also dabbing at her nose with a tissue.
In assessing Mr. Faneuil's four days of testimony, several lawyers said that it hurt Mr. Bacanovic significantly more than it hurt Ms. Stewart. Mr. Bacanovic's lawyer spent more than seven hours last week trying to discredit damning testimony by Mr. Faneuil, only to watch the jury laugh along with some of the witness's statements.
''If believed, he could himself be the nail in Bacanovic's coffin,'' said Jim Walden, a former federal prosecutor who is now a partner at O'Melveny &amp; Myers in New York.
Mr. Morvillo's cross-examination laid the foundation for an argument that Mr. Faneuil simply could not know or did not remember whether Ms. Stewart engaged in any cover-up.
''Morvillo handled the material that he had in a very professional way,'' said Greg Markel, head of the litigation department at Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft in New York, who watched some of the proceedings yesterday. Mr. Morvillo, he said, ''didn't have very strong material to work with.''
Eric R. Havian, a former federal prosecutor who is now a partner at Phillips &amp; Cohen in San Francisco, pointed out that it would be difficult for the defense to argue that no crime took place.
''The problem that Morvillo has with this particular witness is, first, that if Martha Stewart is telling the truth, then Faneuil has lied to admit committing a crime that he never committed. Why would he do it?'' Mr. Havian asked rhetorically. He added later, ''The story that they're trying to spin out, that either his memory is bad or that he didn't like Martha Stewart, isn't enough.''
Mr. Morvillo's cross-examination did cover much familiar ground, including Mr. Faneuil's previous lies, his possible motives for telling other lies, and his cooperation agreement with the government. At various points Mr. Faneuil seemed tired, gazing long and hard at the courtroom ceiling before giving his answer, and several times Mr. Morvillo suggested he had conveniently altered his story or selectively remembered conversations that are central to the case against Ms. Stewart.
More important for his client, however, Mr. Morvillo did elicit the testimony that Ms. Stewart and Mr. Faneuil did not discuss any cover-up.
Mr. Morvillo: Did you ever speak to Martha Stewart about the agreement you made with Peter Bacanovic to commit a crime?
Mr. Faneuil: No.
Mr. Morvillo: You were never asked by Martha Stewart to commit a crime?
Mr. Faneuil: Correct.
By the end of the questioning, Mr. Faneuil had not budged from his claim that he went along with a cover-up of the reasons for Ms. Stewart's stock trade because he felt intimidated by Mr. Bacanovic. Yesterday he added another explanation for his concern.
''I knew the real reason for Ms. Stewart's trade,'' he said. ''The thing I have always been most scared of is being up here on the stand and having to tell the truth when Peter is lying.''
Mr. Morvillo also highlighted inconsistences in Mr. Faneuil's testimony yesterday. He showed Mr. Faneuil an e-mail message that Mr. Faneuil wrote on Oct. 25, 2001, about selling some other shares of ImClone that Ms. Stewart owned. The message read, in part, ''Kelly's got the news -- 61.'' Mr. Faneuil told the court, ''I don't recall who Kelly was.''
Mr. Morvillo also accused him of being carefully coached by the prosecution. Mr. Faneuil responded, ''I didn't have a too clear sense of what was going to be asked.'' Mr. Morvillo asked him to give an example of one thing that was unexpected. ''As I sit here right now,'' Mr. Faneuil said, ''I can't think of one.''
Now that Mr. Faneuil's testimony has concluded, he awaits sentencing on the misdemeanor that he pleaded guilty to in exchange for avoiding more serious charges sometime later this year. As a witness, he is entitled to receive a letter from prosecutors that will be presented to the judge. If prosecutors are pleased with his performance, they may ask for a more lenient sentence, said Michael J. Shepard, a former prosecutor and now a partner at Heller Ehrman White &amp; McAuliffe in San Francisco.
''They go in front of the judge and say, 'Treat him well,' '' Mr. Shepard said.
Ms. Armstrong, Ms. Stewart's assistant, took the stand at about 3:25 P.M. In contrast to Mr. Faneuil, she appeared nervous from the start and uncomfortable being the center of attention in the court.
She testified that she was responsible for taking phone messages and monitoring Ms. Stewart's calendar, among other responsibilities. She took handwritten notes about who called and also kept a telephone log on her computer.
The log is important to the charge of obstruction of justice because the prosecutors say that Ms. Stewart briefly altered it in early 2002, removing part of a message from Mr. Bacanovic about ImClone before restoring it a short time later.
The message was left between 10 a.m. and 11 a.m., Ms. Armstrong told the court. It read: ''Peter Bacanovic thinks ImClone is going to start trading downward.''
As Ms. Armstrong described a phone call that morning from Ms. Stewart she began to cry. ''We talked about the holidays,'' she said. ''I thanked her for the plum pudding she sent.''When Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum asked if she wanted to take a break, she declined. A few moments later, she again began to cry, and Ms. Stewart looked visibly upset as well.
A pall fell over the room. Karen Patton Seymour, sitting at the prosecutors table, urged her colleague, Michael Schachter, who had been questioning Ms. Armstrong, to take a recess. Court adjourned for the day, with jurors looking somber as they filed out of the room.
Ms. Armstrong's testimony is important because prosecutors hope to show that Ms. Stewart was trying to cover up her ImClone trade by altering the telephone log in her assistant's computer. But Mr. Morvillo has said that she immediately realized that it was wrong and restored the parts that she deleted.
Ms. Armstrong testified that a daily stock report, prepared by the chief financial officer for Ms. Stewart's company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, arrived in Ms. Stewart's e-mail. Was one of the stocks listed in the daily stock report ImClone Systems? Mr. Schachter asked. Ms. Armstrong responded: Yes.
She also told the court that Ms. Stewart and Dr. Waksal were good friends, and that Ms. Stewart had shown her a copy of Business Week magazine that prominently featured Dr. Waksal and ImClone. Among the events they attended together were each other's annual company holiday parties, Dr. Waksal's annual Seder, and at least one wedding.
''I think they also saw each other in East Hampton,'' Ms. Armstrong said.
Copies of Ms. Stewart's phone messages introduced as evidence ranged from an editor asking permission to cut one leaf to put hors d'oeuvres on at Ms. Stewart's East Hampton property, to a request from Charlotte and Bill, friends from Maine, to borrow a white Jaguar for a few days.
Mr. Schachter also asked Ms. Armstrong how she got in touch with Ms. Stewart by telephone. That resulted in Ms. Armstrong's reciting various telephone numbers for Ms. Stewart, including her personal cellphone number and the numbers for her home in Westport, Conn.
A spokesman for Ms. Stewart said later that the defendant would have to change all of her telephone numbers as a result.
''It was pure harassment with no motive,'' said the spokesman, George Sard. ''There was no need to introduce all those personal phone numbers.''
