In his first State of the County address, the Suffolk County executive, Steve Levy, warned on Monday night of the worst budget deficit in three decades. He urged spending reductions and said he would deliver a plan to cut costs to legislators this week.
''All of the factors that can break our budget are converging in a single year,'' Mr. Levy said. ''The only reasonable approach is to cut out as many inefficient aspects of government as we can.''
Mr. Levy said state-imposed Medicaid costs and other mandates had strained Suffolk's budget, adding that getting relief from Albany would be his first priority. But to get that relief, Mr. Levy said, the county first has to reform itself and pass a government consolidation plan that he said he would introduce at a special legislative meeting Wednesday.
It may not be easy.
It has been a tumultuous first month for Mr. Levy, a Democrat, who was elected on his promises of clean government and wide-ranging fiscal reforms. The county's projected budget deficit for next year has swelled to $240 million, and Mr. Levy and the Republican-controlled Suffolk County Legislature have butted heads over parliamentary rules, proposed spending cuts and even the location of Monday night's speech.
That friction could become a political liability for Mr. Levy, who will need bipartisan cooperation from legislators to pass many of his proposed reforms.
''It's been one thing after another,'' Mr. Levy said in an interview before his speech. ''They've been sending out a message that they're looking to make it a very, very partisan year.''
In his 40-minute address at Southampton College, Mr. Levy also outlined plans to preserve undeveloped open space and create more moderately priced housing, two issues close to Suffolk voters' hearts. He proposed expanding the county's role in buying property for such housing and recommended creating a department of environment to focus on preservation.
Mr. Levy outlined plans to address an array of other high-profile political and social topics in Suffolk.
He said he would try to ensure federal funding to study beach erosion, and would appoint someone to study breast cancer rates in the county. He also proposed installing more civilians in the Police Department, studying how to buy cheap prescription drugs from Canada and imposing new standards of ethics on county business. .
Despite the partisan acrimony leading up to Monday's speech, many Republican legislators applauded throughout and said they agreed with Mr. Levy on issues like affordable housing.
But Republican legislator Andrew Crecca said after the speech that Mr. Levy had exaggerated the looming deficits by $100 million and failed to take into account an improving national economy. Mr. Crecca called Mr. Levy's grim fiscal forecast a political ploy.
''He wants to paint a picture of doom and gloom,'' Mr. Crecca said. ''If things do turn bad, he can blame it on the circumstances and not on his leadership.''
Mr. Levy was the first Suffolk executive in decades to deliver his State of the County address away from the legislative chambers, an action that angered some legislators, who complained they had not been consulted before Mr. Levy made plans to take his show on the road.
Mr. Levy defended his choice of venue, saying that people on Long Island's East End have long felt neglected by Suffolk government. Still, some criticized Mr. Levy for delivering the speech at Southampton College -- a non-county facility -- and others said he was pandering to Representative Tim Bishop, a Democrat who represents the East End in Congress.
''It's not a small thing,'' said Allan Binder, a Republican legislator. ''It's not schoolyard third-grade anger. He decided to be the imperial executive and told us, 'You be here.' Why is he surprised that we're not running across the street to work with him?''
