Following are excerpts from an hourlong interview on Monday with President Pervez Musharraf in Rawalpindi, transcribed by The New York Times.
Q. You said as far as back as 2000, or even earlier, there were some suspicions about Dr. Abdul Qadeer Khan having possibly inappropriate contacts, separate from the corruption concerns. Can you tell us any more about what you were hearing then?
GENERAL MUSHARRAF -- Well, I wouldn't be able to get into those details. Yes, as I said, there were some suspicious movements, some suspicions, because, as I said again, this is so sensitive.
There were special handling of cargo, special handling of anything that had to do with K.R.L. [Khan Research Laboratories], the organization that he was running. And in that special handling we were getting suspicious -- that in under the garb of the special handling, maybe there is some proliferation activity, some underhand proliferation activity going on.
That is what we suspected because there was a scientist who was sidelined, and that is how we came to know. And therefore I thought -- we thought -- it's better to sideline him, remove him from the place, so that we nip all this.
But as I said, we didn't know that this stretches back to 15 years almost. . . .
Q. If you, as you said, you had suspicions, why not launch a full investigation then?
A. No, It was an extremely sensitive issue and you would have created an uproar again against the father of the nuclear -- I mean, we know that he was a hero. And even removing him from there, we had to deliberate for hours how to handle the situation.
We first removed him, appointed him as adviser, but gave him an office at K.R.L. O.K., you are not there, but you can sit and sort of carry on your lifelong -- because he said that this is my, it's his baby, that K.R.L.
So then gradually, after some time, we also closed that office and totally removed him. But we appointed him as an adviser to give him some comfort. I mean, this had to be done as a gradual process. As I said, it was extremely sensitive. One couldn't outright start investigating as if he's any common criminal. . . .
Excerpts
