Al Gore's loss of his home state in 2000 hangs heavy over Democrats here.
But with Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts poised to make a clean win in Tennessee in Tuesday's Democratic presidential primary against two Southerners, Democrats are allowing themselves to think they might be able to move the state into the win column in November.
Representative Harold E. Ford Jr. of Tennessee is Mr. Kerry's national co-chairman and directs a powerful political machine in Memphis. Mr. Ford said Mr. Kerry's ability to beat two Southerners -- Senator John Edwards of neighboring North Carolina and Gen. Wesley K. Clark of neighboring Arkansas -- in Tennessee would show that voters could support a Northerner and would not automatically vote for President Bush.
''If Kerry wins, it sends a statement to the White House that voters in the South are going to listen to the issues,'' Mr. Ford said. ''They aren't going to be led to believe that if you're from one region, you can't speak to voters here. It means you have to come to the South with more than rhetoric.''
Randall A. Button, the state Democratic chairman, who has remained neutral in the race, agreed.
''Tennessee is a good place to test your message,'' Mr. Button said. ''If Kerry can win Tennessee, that not just solidifies the nomination for him, but it sends a big message for November.''
Polls here all point to a likely Kerry victory on Tuesday. In the face of the Kerry juggernaut, Mr. Edwards and Mr. Clark have tried to lower expectations and minimize the significance of winning the state. The question now seems to be which one of them emerges in second place and who will claim the credibility to stay in the race.
Mr. Kerry's message here has been relatively issue-free as he has sailed through on his momentum from his earlier wins. The state has lost 72,000 jobs in the last three years, and the candidates are blaming Mr. Bush rather than dissecting each other's programs. More to the point, they are talking about their values and culture and faith -- and avoiding any talk of gun control, one of the issues that was deemed crucial to Mr. Gore's loss here against Mr. Bush in 2000.
''Issues pale in comparison to character and so-called electability,'' said Representative Jim Cooper, a Tennessee Democrat who has remained neutral.
With virtually no attacks on him by Mr. Edwards or General Clark, Mr. Kerry appears to be ahead, even though he has put minimal effort into Tennessee. Howard Dean has abandoned the state, despite having the endorsement of Mr. Gore.
''Kerry wasn't even on the radar screen four weeks ago,'' Mr. Button, the state chairman, said. ''But the Iowa bounce was real. It gained velocity in New Hampshire. He hasn't really been here, but he has been getting all this national media exposure and he has this persona as someone who can beat Bush.''
With that momentum, Mr. Kerry won some formidable endorsements here, namely that of former Gov. Ned McWherter, one of the state's most popular politicians, and that of Mr. Ford, who has devoted his family's political machine to energizing African-American voters in Memphis on Mr. Kerry's behalf. Mr. Ford is to campaign with him on Tuesday morning in Memphis before Mr. Kerry leaves to watch the returns in Virginia, which is also voting Tuesday.
Richard Chesteen, a political scientist at the University of Tennessee at Martin, said that Mr. Ford's support in Memphis would more than offset the support in rural west Tennessee for General Clark and Mr. Edwards.
''The Fords are efficient at getting out the vote in Memphis,'' Mr. Chesteen said. ''It's a good machine.''
Both General Clark and Mr. Edwards have spent far more time and money here than Mr. Kerry has, and both have strong organizations.
General Clark has been advertising since Dec. 30, spending more than $1.2 million on Tennessee television, radio and direct mail. His campaign's national vice chairman is Johnny Hayes, the powerhouse Tennessee fund-raiser who was chief fund-raiser for Mr. Gore.
The state's top political consulting firm, Fletcher Rowley Chao, also signed on to his campaign here, and scores of local office-holders have endorsed him. The singer George Jones and Andrew Young, the former mayor of Atlanta, have made commercials for him.
Mr. Edwards has strong ties to Nashville, where he and his wife, Elizabeth, lived from 1978 to 1981, and where their late son, Wade, was born. They both practiced at downtown law firms here and established relationships that have helped them in the campaign.
Mr. Edwards's campaign chairman here is former Representative Bob Clement. Kim Sasser, field director for Gov. Phil Bredesen and a relative of Jim Sasser, the former senator, is Mr. Edwards's political director.
John Winston, Mr. Edwards's state director, said, ''I'll be extremely pleased if we beat out General Clark or if we run very close.''
The state has tended to vote Republican and has two Republican senators. Mr. Gore lost here in 2000 by four percentage points, but some say the issues will be different this time and that Mr. Kerry is a different candidate from Mr. Gore. And last year the state elected Mr. Bredesen, a Democrat, as governor, and he has become enormously popular.
Others said it was much too early to predict whether Mr. Kerry could make a serious showing here against Mr. Bush. For one thing, Nashville remains one of the Republican Party's top fund-raising cities. And the National Rifle Association is sure to get involved here on Mr. Bush's behalf.
''Tennessee is basically a Republican state,'' said John Gear, a political scientist at Vanderbilt University.
Mr. Chesteen predicted that the Republicans would find Tennessee, with its cultural conservatism, a very fertile state to exploit the gay marriage issue against the Democrats.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: TENNESSEE  Correction:  February 18, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Feb. 10 about efforts by Democrats to win Tennessee in the November election after it supported President Bush in 2000 misspelled the surname of a political scientist at Vanderbilt University who commented that ''Tennessee is basically a Republican state.'' He is John Geer, not Gear.
