Just days after reaching a settlement with regulators over improper trading in its funds, Massachusetts Financial Services yesterday named Robert C. Pozen, the former president of the mutual fund unit at Fidelity, as its nonexecutive chairman.
Mr. Pozen's role at MFS has parallels to his experiences at Fidelity, where, analysts said, his actions reassured investors who were pulling billions of dollars from that company's funds after they suffered from poor performance in the mid-1990's. At MFS, Mr. Pozen said he also hopes to restore the confidence of nervous investors.
''This is a company that has made a commitment to the highest standards and risk controls,'' Mr. Pozen said.
Separately, Franklin Resources said in a filing yesterday that the staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission had notified it that it intended to recommend that action be taken against a subsidiary because of improper mutual fund trading.
Mr. Pozen, 57, a professor at Harvard Law School since 2002, joins MFS a week after the company reached a settlement with the S.E.C., the New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, and New Hampshire regulators. The regulators said that MFS, the United States mutual fund unit of Sun Life Financial of Canada, had allowed certain investors to trade rapidly in and out of its funds, even though in public documents it stated that it discouraged the practice. MFS also agreed to cut fees on its mutual funds by 6 percent over the next five years.
As part of the settlement, two top executives at MFS, John W. Ballen, the chief executive, and Kevin R. Parke, the president, agreed to three-year suspensions from serving as investment industry officers.
Mr. Pozen will succeed a third executive, Jeffrey L. Shames, 48, who is retiring. Mr. Pozen said Mr. Shames, until recently a neighbor of his in the Boston suburb of Newton, had recruited him to MFS.
Mr. Pozen will likely be meeting with pension plans that have been monitoring MFS since the investigation became public, a company spokesman said. So far, there have not been large withdrawals from MFS funds.
''They couldn't have picked a better man for the job,'' said James Lowell, editor of The Fidelity Investor, a newsletter, adding that Mr. Pozen ''changed how Fidelity was perceived by investors.''
Mr. Pozen became Fidelity's president in 1997, when investors were pulling billions of dollars out of its funds. The withdrawals followed aggressive bets made by several funds, including Magellan, that were contrary to their stated objectives. Mr. Pozen put changes in place that guaranteed that the funds' returns were less volatile, analysts said.
Mr. Pozen also has a legal background that could come in handy at MFS. Before serving as president of the Fidelity mutual funds division, he was the company's general counsel. He previously served as a lawyer at the S.E.C.
''He brings to MFS a street sense for Pennsylvania Avenue, not just Wall Street,'' Mr. Lowell said.
That could be helpful as MFS, like other fund managers, deals with the fallout from the regulators' continuing investigation into mutual fund trading.
''This industry will go through another year of turmoil,'' Mr. Pozen said. His role will include helping MFS cope with new regulations from the S.E.C. and Congress, as well as expected litigation resulting from last week's settlement. He said he would also upgrade the company's risk controls and compliance procedures.
Another mutual fund company facing legal trouble is Franklin Resources, which said in its filing yesterday that it had been notified by the S.E.C. that its staff intended to ''authorize an action against a subsidiary of the company and two senior officers.''
Last week, the Massachusetts secretary of the commonwealth accused the company, which manages the Franklin Templeton funds, of agreeing to allow an investor, Daniel Calugar, to make $45 million worth of trades in one of its funds in return for investing $10 million in a hedge fund managed by Franklin.
The company is negotiating a settlement with the S.E.C., according to a person close to the investigation. The commission has evidence that other investors besides Mr. Calugar were allowed to trade in Franklin's funds, this person said.
The Massachusetts complaint also named a former Franklin executive, William Post, who has since left the company. The complaint indicated that top Franklin executives, including co-chief executive Gregory E. Johnson, might have been aware of the trading agreement.
A spokeswoman for Franklin declined to comment on the company's filing yesterday. A representative of the S.E.C. also declined comment.
