My parents moved to Brooklyn from Eastern Europe in the 20's. One day my mother, who was a nurse and also the vice president of the New York Vegetarian Society, removed all the meat from the house. A few days later she came home with steamer tickets and said, ''We're moving to Tahiti.'' My father said, ''Where's that?''' And my mom said, ''I don't know, but we leave in 16 days!''
It was 1926 -- I was 4 years old -- and my brother and I were the only white kids besides the governor's family. We became fruitarians and vegetarians, living on breadfruit and nuts.
We came back to the States in 1934, in the San Francisco Bay area, then to Mexico from 1935 to 1936 and then again for a year in 1939. The ranch came about as the result of the second World War. I married Edmund Szekely, a Hungarian immigrant I met in Mexico when I was 17 and he was 28. When the war broke out he was ordered to report for duty back in Hungary. It didn't make much sense for a young Jewish man to fight on the side of Hitler, so we went to Mexico as undocumented aliens.
We found a piece of land in Tecate, Mexico, opened a health and exercise farm and charged people $17.50 a night. Our motto was ''$17.50, bring your own tent.'' That became Rancho la Puerta.
The Golden Door came about from suggestions from ranch guests. I used to get movie stars like Kim Novak who would say: ''I don't want other people to see my rear end when I exercise. I wish you had a place exclusively for us.''
My husband felt it was important to have a business in the States; the only business I knew was taking care of people's needs and linens and so we started a 12-room motel. We charged $250 a week and almost lost our shirt our first year. But we made it, and after 14 years I decided to move and model us after a Japanese inn.
From 1984 to 1990, I ran the Inter-American Foundation, which works with the poor in Latin America and the Caribbean. On one trip to Peru, the Indians, who knew me, held a big fair to celebrate my coming. They gave me a special woven cloth and smeared my face with ashes. The high point came when the village priest presented me with the first artifact they had found on the church grounds in decades: a pin that had been used several thousand years ago to hold their clothes together. He said, ''La Señora te lo mando'' -- meaning, ''The lady Mary sent it for you.'' I turned it into a necklace and I still wear it.
But sometimes the experiences can be a bit more challenging. I was a guest at a celebration in a remote town in Ecuador in the middle of a rainstorm. It was my first exposure to guinea pig. It's a delicacy there; they cut them in half so you see two eyes and two halves of a nose and they roast them. Everywhere you go they wrap them up in newspaper. I was given one along with hot chicken soup. I was famished but the chicken hadn't been thoroughly plucked or cooked so I just drank some of the broth and sort of shoved the guinea pig around.
I've never stopped traveling. Every decade I have a new dream; my latest is to start an immigration museum. When I'm 90, I'll find a new career.
BUSINESS TRAVEL: FREQUENT FLIER  Correction:  February 12, 2004, Thursday  A picture credit with the Frequent Flier column in Business Day on Tuesday misspelled the surname of the photographer. He is Dave Gatley, not Gately.
