Not so long ago the great Russian operas were scarce on American stages, largely because it was difficult to find singers schooled in the language and style.
The fall of the Soviet Union has paid an unexpected but welcome dividend here: as singers and conductors raised on this repertory have fanned out into the world, they have been able to nudge companies devoted to the Italian, French and German classics to make room for Russian works as well.
You still have to wait for the Kirov's regular tours (another dividend) to see the real rarities, like ''The Invisible City of Kitezh'' by Rimsky-Korsakov, but scores that have had at least a toehold, like Tchaikovsky's ''Queen of Spades,'' are getting more stage time.
Elijah Moshinsky's moody staging of ''The Queen of Spades'' was declared an unqualified success when it opened at the Metropolitan Opera in 1995 and an only slightly rusted one when it was revived in 1999. The production returned to the repertory on Saturday evening with a balance of strengths and weaknesses that added another layer of tarnish but not enough to obscure the brilliance of Tchaikovsky's score and the dramatic potential it presents.
Plácido Domingo, who learned the role of Ghermann for the 1999 revival, took it up again on Saturday, but he seemed out of sorts. Granted, Tchaikovsky and his brother, Modest, who wrote the libretto, don't make things easy. They replaced the Pushkin character's single-minded obsession with discovering the old countess's secret for winning at cards with a dual fascination, the other being an equally consuming passion for Lisa, the countess's granddaughter.
Still, Ghermann can be portrayed with greater subtlety than Mr. Domingo brought to the role. He began with an entirely suitable gloominess, but instead of showing the progression of Ghermann's madness, he immediately shifted toward melodrama, making his character overwrought virtually from the start.
Vocally he seemed in decent shape, and Mr. Domingo's decent is better than many singers' best. But there were moments in the first act when he had trouble projecting over Tchaikovsky's lush scoring, and although he produced greater power in the more manic second and third acts, he seemed to be conserving his resources throughout the performance. There was a payoff, however brief and delayed: his phrasing of Ghermann's final aria was the picture of dynamic shapeliness.
In purely vocal terms there was much to admire in Katarina Dalayman's portrayal of Lisa, whose sound was warm and rounded except at the very top, where it became fleetingly strident. Her more pressing problems, though, are dramatic. When the score suggests turmoil or confusion (as when Ghermann climbs in her window), the best she can do is walk aimlessly back and forth across the room. Peter McClintock, the stage director, might consider offering some advice here: whatever one thinks about Lisa's neurotic attachment to Ghermann, there's no reason for her to look silly.
Felicity Palmer was a commanding and unusually three-dimensional countess, and Nikolai Putilin, as Tomsky, deservedly won the loudest ovation of the evening for his ballad of the countess's three cards. Vladimir Chernov as Prince Yeletsky and Elena Zaremba as Pauline also made strong contributions. Vladimir Jurowski, the conductor, drew a sumptuous, beautifully balanced sound from the orchestra, which in this work (as in much Russian opera) is a dramatic presence in its own right.
MET OPERA REVIEW
