''That was a moment in my life, and I hate it,'' Salman Rushdie said at Diane Von Furstenberg's show on Sunday, referring to the extremist fatwa that forced him underground for years. ''This is another moment,'' Mr. Rushdie, the Booker Prize-winning novelist, added, ''and I come because Padma is in this world, and it matters a lot to her.''
Mr. Rushdie was referring to his beautiful companion, a cultural trifecta (model, actress and cooking-show host) named Padma Lakshmi. As Mr. Rushdie endured the paparazzi's attentions, Ms. Lakshmi reveled in them, grinning broadly, pseudo-nonchalantly draping herself across Mr. Rushdie's shoulder in a pose that just happened to display the rock holder on her ring finger, whose platinum prongs clasped a square-cut diamond of Chiclet size.
By segregating the world of fashion from one of serious concerns, Mr. Rushdie was showing how the years in hiding dated him. Fashion, for all its wonky qualities, can sometimes serve as a matrix of politics and power, particularly when a fashion designer happens to be married to Barry Diller and to give cocktail parties for Gen. Wesley Clark and to have the juice to summon to her shows both the Disney chairman, Michael Eisner, and the fashion elite.
''It's about a strong woman,'' said Ms. Von Furstenberg, speaking of the inspiration for her show. That is, it was about three supposed feminine archetypes, namely Diana the huntress, Eleanor of Aquitaine and a beautiful French ethnologist who devoted her life to studying the tribes of the Amazon. In design terms the image produced by conflating these archetypes can be conjured with a single name: Grace Jones.
''Inspiration has to come from somewhere,'' Ms. Von Furstenberg said with the look of someone who has been around the fashion block. Shifting her attention to other concerns, she said she was as concerned about the presidential primary elections as about the runways and added, ''Look, we just have to get this guy out.''
Ms. Von Furstenberg was referring to George W. Bush, and she was not the only person this week wearing her politics on her sleeve. Each show cycle seems to produce at least one garment that telegraphs fashion's ambient political mood. This season's is a tight pink T-shirt with a legend scrawled in vivid orange letters, ''I'm Afraid of Americans.''
Made by an Australian company called Tight Knickers, the shirt is sold at 30 boutiques in Australia and also at Selfridges in London, not without controversy, the company's owner, Jesse Margolis, noted yesterday. ''Our retailers have been egged,'' he said. ''A congresswoman in Australia has written our sales reps letters trying to get them to discontinue the line.''
The shirt, known as the Dear George, was spotted in the dressing area at the Kenneth Cole show on the model Nakiesha Robinson, on other lovelies dashing through Bryant Park and later at Ms. Von Furstenberg's show on the back of Justin Melnick, who described his role vaporously: ''I support the business. I support the girls.'' (He does production work.)
Despite the slogan blazoned across his chest, Mr. Melnick characterized himself as a hawk. ''I'm totally pro-war,'' he said. ''I just don't agree on where and who we wage war with,'' he adding, referring to the war in Iraq. Asked if the shirt had proved controversial on city streets, Mr. Melnick conceded that it had. ''People criticize me for wearing it,'' he said. ''But I'm an American, born and raised, and as far as I know, we still have the right to voice our criticisms publicly.''
It is safe to say that a lot gets voiced during Fashion Week that, under other circumstances, would not be spoken aloud. ''Who is that?'' a fashion editor in the front row of the Luca Luca show hissed at her seatmate on Sunday. She was not referring to the former ice skating prodigy Oksana Baiul, nor to the hip-hop artist Tweet, nor to Kathy or Rick Hilton, who arrived with their less-exposed daughter, Nicky, in tow. ''He looks like someone,'' the editor said, as a man who bore a considerable resemblance to a famous actor walked past, looking as though he had recently benefited from a great deal of rest. ''He looks just like Ray Liotta, but it couldn't be,'' she said. ''Maybe it's his son.''
It was, in fact, Mr. Liotta, the ''Goodfellas'' actor who once made a cinematic work of art out of sauntering into the Copacabana nightclub with Lorraine Bracco on his arm. At the Luca Luca show, his entrance was more subdued. ''My girlfriend's good friends with Luca,'' Mr. Liotta said, referring to Luca Orlandi, a designer beloved by the red carpet set. ''I've never been to one, and I've always been curious,'' Mr. Liotta said of fashion shows. ''It's all kind of bizarre, but I'm a little bit addicted already. When's the next one?''
FASHION DIARY
