NASA officials yesterday defended their decision to end space shuttle missions to service the Hubble Space Telescope, thus dooming it to die within a few years. They said recent criticism of the plan had oversimplified the issue.
In a telephone conversation with reporters, William F. Readdy, the agency's associate administrator for spaceflight, said the agency had prepared a point-by-point rebuttal of a pair of papers distributed last week by an anonymous NASA engineer. The papers challenged NASA's assertion that ending the service missions could be justified on safety grounds.
The rebuttal, Mr. Readdy said, would be presented to the House Science Committee, which is holding hearings on the space program this week.
Sean O'Keefe, NASA's administrator, dismayed astronomers last month by canceling further shuttle missions to the telescope, meaning it will die in orbit in 2007 or so, prematurely ending one of the agency's most successful and popular science missions. Scientists say the telescope could keep working into the next decade if servicing continued. All the remaining shuttle missions are committed to finishing the International Space Station.
Mr. O'Keefe said he based his decision on safety, noting that astronauts needed a ''safe haven'' to inspect and repair the outside of the shuttle or to await rescue, if necessary. The telescope offers no such protection.
The engineer's papers, distributed on Capitol Hill last week and given to The New York Times by a scientist who disagrees with NASA, challenge that reasoning. The documents, online at nytimes.com/science, noted that the board investigating the Columbia space shuttle disaster recommended that the agency develop a way to repair the shuttle's fragile skin, regardless of whether the shuttle is docked. NASA has embraced the board's recommendations.
Moreover, the engineer argued, the requirement of a safe haven during a mission to the telescope could be satisfied by having another shuttle ready to make a rescue.
Mr. Readdy said NASA had already considered those ideas and rejected them. In particular, he said, having a second shuttle standing by would commit the agency to make dangerously fast decisions.
''We would be buying into extreme schedule pressure if we went with this,'' he said. What, he asked, if the rescuers sustained the same damage as the first shuttle? ''Then you would rescue no one,'' he said.
Although Mr. O'Keefe has agreed to have his decision reviewed by Adm. Harold W. Gehman Jr., chairman of the Columbia accident board, NASA officials suggested that for astronomers should accept the inevitable and make the telescope's last years as productive as possible.
