The descriptions of the large and sometimes hulking dogs in the working group at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show yesterday made them sound like the type of super creatures we should all aspire to be: loyal, powerful, good-natured, brave, selfless, fearless, intelligent, rugged and dignified, according to Michael LaFave, the show's public address announcer at Madison Square Garden.
And in the case of the Komondor, which has the appearance of being shrouded in white dreadlocks, he is ''happiest when responsible for others' well-being,'' LaFave said.
A Newfoundland, a breed characterized by its devotion, defeated 21 other dogs, among them a St. Bernard, a mastiff, a Doberman pinscher, an Akita and a Samoyed, to win the group. The winner, Ch. Darbydale's All Rise Pouchcove, or Josh, repeated his feat of a year ago. At nearly 5 years old, he is closing in on retirement.
''We haven't shown him since December, and he's very excited to be back,'' said Michelle Ostermiller, who handles the serene 155-pound black Josh, with his luxuriant coat and huge muzzle. ''He loves to hear the crowds cheering for him.''
He generously licked those who stooped to praise and ogle him. Ostermiller added, ''He loves to hear people tell him how cute he is.''
The working group was the first of four to be judged last night on the first day of the 128th Westminster. Tonight, the winners of the last three groups will be chosen, and the seven group winners will compete for the best in show award.
The day began with 2,624 dogs in 162 breeds and varieties, including three newly recognized ones: the Nova Scotia duck tolling retriever, the German pinscher and the toy fox terrier. It is also the first time that the popular Jack Russell terrier is competing here under the name the Parson Russell terrier, which was adopted last year for the breed in the United States.
Westminster is the antidote to modern sports: short on histrionics and pyrotechnics. There are no ''garment malfunctions,'' drooling mastiffs do not seem to mind being told they have lost and there is not much barking.
''They're always exposed to dogs,'' Thomas H. Bradley 3rd, the chairman of the show, said. ''They're accustomed to doing this.''
Show dogs are often said to love their role and perk up before several thousand people. And if the animal is egotistical, well, it will not be asking for a raise. So one might expect Coco, or Ch. Cracknor Cause Célèbre, an undefeated 5-year-old Norfolk terrier from Kent, England, to be more impressed with herself than usual after winning last night's terrier group competition. She raced along the green carpeting, concluding her showing with a treat, not a rat, which she is bred to catch.
''She's the best I've ever had,'' said Beth K. Sweigart, the handler, who has shown Norfolks for 30 years. Around her neck hung a necklace imprinted with a photograph of a Norfolk. ''She fits the breed standard and she knows she's the standard. She just sparkles with self-importance.''
Les, a Pekingese officially known as Ch. Yakee Leaving Me BreathlessAtFranshaw, was one of 23 dogs in the toy group, unofficially the league of extraordinarily adorable canines. There was a Cavalier King Charles spaniel, a breed with new fame through a recurring role on ''Sex and the City.'' There was a long-coated Chihuahua, a Maltese, a Papillon, a toy poodle, a Shih Tzu and a Yorkshire terrier.
The Pekingese, with its thick, floor-length red-orange coat framing a tiny pushed-in black face, is a slow mover. Les, who is nearly 4, took his time showing, and won his second consecutive toy group championship.
''It's a slow, dignified movement,'' said Hiram Stewart, Les's handler. Les, who has won 118 best-in-shows, close to the breed's record of 126, preserves his self-respect by not being emotional for those who want him to jump for joy. ''He's too dignified to give kisses,'' Stewart said.
Ch. Ale Kai Mikimoto On Fifth, or Miki, a 6-year-old standard poodle, was a repeat winner in the nonsporting group. He exuded the quiet confidence of a veteran with 88 best-in-shows and is accustomed to showing off a delicate Continental trim -- a feat of topiary that turns a white coat into intricately shaped balls of fur on his ankles and at the tip of his tail with a pompadour, and offsets those features with a full shearing in strategic areas.
DOG SHOW
