Mark Korman, a loan officer here, does not know if Gov. John G. Rowland broke the law or violated ethics when he accepted gifts and free work on his lakeside cottage from people doing business with the state. But Mr. Korman said that because Mr. Rowland lied about it, he should be forced out of office.
''The lying bothers me,'' said Mr. Korman, 40, of Cheshire. ''The governor is the face of Connecticut, and you want to be able to believe what he says.''
Mr. Korman is not alone. On Monday, yet another poll was released that found a majority of state residents continue to say Mr. Rowland, a Republican in his third term, should resign. The governor is under federal investigation, and a House committee is deciding whether to recommend his impeachment. On Dec. 12, Mr. Rowland admitted that he had lied when he denied receiving thousands of dollars in gifts and free work on his Litchfield cottage from people who did business with the state.
Fifty-five percent of those questioned recently in the poll, by the Center for Survey Research and Analysis at the University of Connecticut, say the standard to impeach Mr. Rowland must be criminal, not simply an ethics violation.
But exactly what constitutes an impeachable offense? Lunch-hour interviews in downtown Hartford with Mr. Korman and almost two dozen others indicated that people are divided, and in some cases uncertain, on the issue.
''It depends on the amount of the gift,'' said Gary Morrey, an insurance executive who voted for Mr. Rowland three times but now wants him to resign. ''Anything over $100, you're getting into questionable territory.''
The same question confounding the public confronts the 10-member House committee appointed last month. The bipartisan group will examine cases from around the nation and the state's only other impeachment inquiry proceedings: that of a Hartford probate judge in 1983.
But the questions of whether Mr. Rowland's behavior dishonored the office or whether he engaged in conduct that would make it impossible to carry out his duties -- two of the standards used in the 1983 inquiry -- give the committee wide latitude in reaching its decision.
The UConn poll asked 519 state residents about Mr. Rowland and the issue of impeachment. The sampling error for the poll is plus or minus 4.2 percentage points.
Sixty-one percent of respondents said they would vote to impeach Mr. Rowland. Yet only 41 percent say Mr. Rowland should be impeached if he is not convicted of a crime; just 34 percent would impeach him if he is not charged with a crime. Criminality, then, appears to be the public's ''litmus test'' for impeachment, said Ken Dautrich, the poll director.
Sixty-nine percent of people polled said lying about accepting gifts from employees and state contractors is an impeachable offense. For 64 percent of the respondents, Mr. Rowland need not have lied; just accepting the gifts is cause for impeachment. Fifty-five percent said giving state contracts to people who made contributions to his campaign is cause for impeachment.
More than a dozen people interviewed on Monday, including Mr. Korman, said ethical lapses should be enough for the Legislature to force Mr. Rowland to step down.
''There's a cloud over him,'' said Pearl Allen, a real estate investor who works with Mr. Korman. ''He's opened the door to suspicion when he lied.''
For Peter Barr, a bicycle messenger who was resting between deliveries in the lobby of City Place, a Hartford office tower, impeachment cannot come too soon. ''The ethical lapses are enough,'' he said. ''Once you lose that level of trust, how can you do anything else?''
The poll results indicate that although 65 percent of state residents believe Mr. Rowland should resign, they say that if he does not, the impeachment process should be fair.
''This makes us realize the responsibility we have, not only to the governor but to the people of Connecticut,'' said John Wayne Fox, a Stamford Democrat who is co-chairman of the House committee.
Issues of fairness appeared to resonate with more than a half-dozen people interviewed on Monday.
David Mersereau, 44, an investment adviser who was taking a cigarette break outside a Starbucks, said the impeachment committee should withhold its final decision until the federal investigation is complete. A self-described ''ardent Democrat,'' he said Mr. Rowland was entitled ''to a fair shake.'' Like 88 percent of the respondents to the UConn poll, he said Mr. Rowland should testify if the committee calls on him to do so.
''But I think the House is jumping the gun,'' Mr. Mersereau said. ''Let the federal probe wrap up before they do anything.'' Sixty-nine percent of those polled agree.
