For tens of thousands of years, nobody knew how cold it was. They knew about ice and snow and the danger of freezing to death, but no one had thermometers. Instead, they used metaphors, often vulgar, to describe what the cold could do.
In the 16th century, the thermometer was invented. But it wasn't until the 18th century that Fahrenheit and Celsius came up with their numerical scales, making polite conversation about the weather possible for the first time. General satisfaction reigned, if not with the weather itself, at least with how to talk about it, until the 20th century, when the wind chill factor was invented, complicating things. The start of the 21st century has brought even more complicated attempts to describe how hot or cold it is, by academic researchers, government agencies and private companies.
Once again, nobody knows how cold it is.
The thermometer outside the kitchen window may read 20, but then a voice on the radio announces that because of the wind, humidity and a fast-moving nonsense front it feels like 127,000 degrees below zero, that in fact the entire universe has ground to a halt because of the wind chill.
When the authority of the thermometer is undermined, confusion can threaten social bonds. If two people in the same bed can say, at the same time, ''I'm freezing!'' and, ''It's an oven in here,'' without faith in an objective measurement, the whole point of science is called into question.
Meteorologists, aware of the crisis, are searching for a solution. The United States and Canada revised the wind chill chart a couple of years ago when critics pointed out that it had been developed using small plastic bottles of water in Antarctica. New studies used human beings in Toronto, walking on a treadmill in a cold laboratory, wind blowing in their faces.
An Australian scientist, Robert Steadman, has created fiercely complex formulas to measure the apparent temperature. The forecasting giant AccuWeather has developed a proprietary way to determine what it calls the ''RealFeel'' temperature (patent pending).
Commission 6 of the International Society of Biometeorology, a group under the auspices of the United Nations, has a committee working on a temperature measure that will serve in cold, heat, wind, rain and sun.
Robert Henson, a meteorologist who is an editor at the nonprofit University Corporation for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., wrote a history charting the changes in television weather forecasting. In the late 1940's, he said, members of the military did some forecasting. In the 1950's, forecasts turned more toward entertainment, and the tone has gone back and forth.
''It feels to me,'' Mr. Henson said, ''in the last 10 or 15 years, there has been a swing back to harder science.''
That has meant more and more numbers that the public has to interpret. And the desire to announce record highs and lows has led to varied parsings of the data.
''There are so many ways to assess weather records,'' he said. ''There's always a way for a weathercaster to grab a statistic.'' And there's always a number for the public to puzzle over, wind chill being one of the most obvious. But despite the emphasis on the wind chill by forecasters, the index has long been known by scientists to be inadequate to the task of presenting an accurate account to the public of what the temperature feels like.
Dr. Joel N. Myers, founder and president of AccuWeather Inc. in State College, Pa., said that since the wind chill did not take into account sunlight, humidity or other factors, it was obviously flawed. It could, he said, produce the same result for a day at noon in the sun in downtown New Orleans or a night on a beach, as long as temperature and wind were the same.
The RealFeel, Dr. Myers said, takes into account eight parameters -- not only temperature and wind, but also ''precipitation, cloudiness, density of air -- all the factors that affect human comfort.'' His company has applied for a patent on the method used to calculate the RealFeel, which raises the possibility of competing private temperature interpretations -- letting the market decide the temperature. Keeping the method proprietary also leaves other scientists with nothing to say about the method, because they cannot see the calculations.
Dr. Myers said that after the patent was granted he would let scientists, and anyone else who was interested, see how it was done.
In 2001, shortly after the introduction of RealFeel, the United States and Canada introduced a revision of the wind chill equivalent temperature, making the temperatures significantly warmer than they had been in the old calculations, from 1945.
Dr. Maurice Bluestein, a professor of physics in the School of Engineering and Technology at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, and Randall Osczevski, an environmental physicist at Defense Research and Development Canada in Toronto, cooperated in research to develop a new wind chill chart. They conducted a series of experiments with 12 people, male and female, measuring heat loss from the face because of cold and wind. After the researchers plotted the data, they confronted the essential difficulty of all attempts to say just how frightful the weather feels to the average person.
''There's no average person,'' Mr. Osczevski said. ''You have to decide who you're going to represent. We chose to represent the person who would have the most trouble keeping their skin warm in cold wind.''
Because prevailing wind speed is usually measured about 30 feet above ground, they reduced that height for wind chill because the human faces are much closer to the ground. Even so, the old chart turned out to have exaggerated the effects of wind, in some cases by just a few degrees.
In other cases, however, the difference was large. At an air temperature of 5 degrees Fahrenheit and a wind speed of 30 miles an hour, the old chart put the equivalent wind chill at about 40 below zero. The new chart puts the wind chill at 19 below.
There are other problems. One is that although the wind chill really measures heat loss, it is described in the form of an equivalent temperature. At 5 degrees with a 30-mile-an-hour wind, it should feel like 19 below.
''I really don't like equivalent temperature as a way of expressing wind chill,'' Mr. Osczevski said.
The problem is human physiology. A person who has a good ability to send blood to the skin would have warmer skin but greater heat loss than a person whose body did not warm the skin. Skin temperature determines what degree of cold people experience. But a personal wind chill calculation would suggest that the person with warmer skin feels colder than the person with colder skin, exactly the opposite of what occurs.
Catherine O'Brien, a research biologist in the thermal and mountain medicine division at the Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine in Natick, Mass., said that although it flies in the face of common sense people with more insulation -- fat -- whose body core is better protected from the cold, may feel cold more quickly than thinner people with less protection. The reason is that insulation keeps heat in the core, away from the skin, which gets cold. When the skin gets cold, you feel cold.
It is hard to generalize, Ms. O'Brien said, but ''women may feel colder'' than men because the women are better insulated.
And, she said, people vary in many other ways. One study in 1960 showed that Canadian fishermen who had their hands in water all the time had warmer hands in the cold than people who were not used to low temperatures. Other research, she added, has supported the idea that bodies adapt to the cold, although it has not been proved. It is possible that warm hands are a native physiological quirk that makes some people more willing to take jobs like fishing in the cold.
The rule for perception of temperature she said, is, ''It depends.''
But even setting aside unpredictable variations, Dr. Bluestein said, the new chart he helped create is ''still not the definitive answer.'' For instance, ''What's the influence of the sun?'' That is very hard to incorporate, he said, because it depends on the time of day and latitude and longitude. RealFeel is said to incorporate the effects of sunlight, but Dr. Bluestein said without seeing the whole method described he could not comment on its accuracy.
Dr. Bluestein is on Committee 6, the international group, with Dr. Steadman of Australia and a number of other scientists. The group is pursuing a sort of nonprofit ''RealFeel,'' a single number to say what the temperature feels like, summer or winter, but it has not yet come to any agreement.
Dr. Bluestein also said the perception of temperature might not depend on physiology at all. It could be related to other factors like personality, habit and custom. But, he added, the wind chill is unarguably real. One recent weekend, he said, he was visiting Chicago. ''On Friday night we went to a show,'' he said. It was 6 below, supposedly, and then there was a wind. I would not go out in that weather unless I had $70 tickets.''
Dr. Bluestein emphasized that people have one common misconception about the wind chill. No matter what the chart says, neither your body nor the antifreeze in your car can get lower than the temperature when the air is still. Wind makes a body or a beaker lose heat faster than it otherwise would, but if the air temperature is 35 and the wind is 60 miles an hour, creating an equivalent temperature of 18, water will still not freeze, and frostbite is not possible.
There is, of course, a question of how much any of the scientific details matter to the average person listening to a forecast. Asked how he thought that people had responded to the wind-chill changes, Mr. Olczewski said, ''The average person doesn't seem to have noticed.''
