TWO-TON elephants usually don't look good throwing their weight around, but it's time for baseball's two-ton elephant to do just that. If a World Cup of baseball is ever going to leave the planning board, Major League Baseball will most likely have to take action that will not be popular with everyone involved.
It wouldn't be the first time. But this time, M.L.B. would be justified in unilaterally swatting aside impediments to a World Cup.
Roadblocks aside, which of these two tournaments would fans rather see: one with Japan, Taiwan, the Netherlands, Italy, Cuba, Canada, Australia and Greece, or one matching the United States, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, Venezuela, Mexico, Panama, Nicaragua and assorted other Caribbean countries like Curaçao, Colombia and the Virgin Islands?
The answer is easy. Pedro Martínez, Sammy Sosa and Barry Bonds won't be in the first tournament, which is the field for the Olympics in Athens this summer. But they and their fellow major league stars could play in the first World Cup next March if it is put together in time.
''Our objective is to have a World Cup competition in 2005 with somewhere between 8 and 16 teams,'' said Bob DuPuy, the president and chief operating officer of Major League Baseball. ''The commissioner and ownership are very enthusiastic about having such an event and think it would be a terrific promotional vehicle for the game.''
But Major League Baseball has not secured the agreement of the International Baseball Federation, the organization that thinks it runs baseball worldwide. One of the hurdles that has to be cleared is drug testing, which must also be cleared with the Major League Baseball Players Association.
''An appropriate form of drug testing is one of the issues that we're attempting to resolve in the context of moving the World Cup ahead,'' said Rob Manfred, Major League Baseball's executive vice president for labor relations.
Major League Baseball officials are confident they can work out an agreement that would be acceptable to the federation and the union. The union's approval, of course, is more critical to the plan because it has to assure its members that they can play in a World Cup without jeopardizing their major league playing status if they tested positive.
Major League Baseball, on the other hand, is eager for the federation to sanction the World Cup because many countries would not participate without it. M.L.B. doesn't believe that half a World Cup is better than none. If a tournament were to include 8 countries instead of 16, officials believe, it would be telling the world that drug testing was the reason and they would be vilified for it.
That's one way of looking at it. Another would be to ignore the federation, tell its leader, Aldo Notari of Italy, to take his bats and balls and stage his own event in his backyard. The Olympics, for example.
The United States, particularly Donald Fehr, the union leader, has worked hard to have baseball included in the Olympics, but what has that effort wrought? Having lost in a qualifying tournament, the United States won't have a team in the Olympics this year and won't ever have an appropriately competitive team because the Olympics conflict with the major league season.
In any event, baseball would benefit far more from a World Cup than it ever would from the Olympics. A soccer-style baseball tournament would not instantly attract the worldwide attention that soccer commands, but for starters, it would be a huge hit in this hemisphere.
Most, if not all, of the players would be major leaguers. The United States would not necessarily have the strongest team; maybe the deepest, but not the strongest. Consider the Dominican Republic with Martínez and Bartolo Colón pitching and Sammy Sosa, Manny Ramirez, Vladimir Guerrero, Albert Pujols, Miguel Tejada and Alfonso Soriano in the lineup.
But that would be the beauty of a World Cup, All-Star players from Major League Baseball using their talent for their countries, a nationalistic motivation for winning. If the Japans and the Australias and the Cubas declined to participate because the federation didn't like the drug-testing parameters, they would be the losers.
Drug testing, as dictated by the sanctimonious satraps of the sports and drug worlds, is not the ultimate element that rules athletes. Just because it's done for the Olympics doesn't mean it has to be done for everything and everyone else.
As the players union points out, its members have rights, too. If they want to negotiate away their rights, that's their right. They did that to some extent in the 2002 labor negotiations with management.
The self-appointed, self-important observers who have criticized the baseball drug-testing agreement have a right to their opinion, but that's all it is, an opinion. They cannot dictate to baseball or its players the kind of drug testing they should employ.
If the players, on the other hand, want to agree to a stricter testing regimen for a World Cup, that's their right. Players who want to play in a World Cup could accept stricter testing that would not affect their major league status.
That's an idea the union might want to consider in its desire to create the World Cup. The union, after all, has long been out in front of baseball management in the effort to create the World Cup. Union officials are creative enough to come up with a plan that would work.
''We're still very interested in it,'' Fehr said. ''We haven't worked out the details, but we hope it will come off.''
If the plan falls short of Notari's idea, he can go to the Olympics in Athens and watch the Netherlands play Greece.
On Baseball
