Prospective jurors in the aggravated manslaughter trial of Jayson Williams were questioned on Monday about the impact of the prosecution's contention last week that Mr. Williams killed his pet watchdog over a $100 bet in August 2001.
The judge, Edward M. Coleman, and opposing lawyers spent the day questioning 39 prospective jurors in a pool of 64 about what they knew of the allegation that the dog, a Rottweiler named Zeus, had been killed by Mr. Williams with a shotgun.
Most said they had learned about it late last week from friends, co-workers, newspaper headlines or brief radio accounts. While many said they were upset by it, they told Judge Coleman they could disregard information about it and not let the details intrude on their eventual deliberations on state charges that Mr. Williams fatally shot a 55-year-old chauffeur, Costas Christofi, at Mr. Williams's estate in Hunterdon County in February 2002.
However, 6 of the 39 were dismissed because they could not assure Judge Coleman they would remain impartial during the trial.
During his questioning, the judge described the account of the dog's death -- first raised by the prosecution on Wednesday -- as an unproven allegation that has been denied by Mr. Williams's lawyers and will not be admitted as evidence in the trial.
But the six who were dismissed remained troubled. ''It's hard to get the imagery out of my mind,'' one said. Another said the account led her to question Mr. Williams's character.
The prosecution wanted the account of the dog's death admitted into evidence to show that Mr. Williams, a former New Jersey Nets star, had been reckless when handling the guns he owned. But Judge Coleman refused to admit it, saying the details were too prejudicial against Mr. Williams and that the prosecution had sufficient other evidence to prove its charges in the shooting of Mr. Christofi.
The selection of 16 jurors who will hear the case is scheduled for Tuesday, to be followed by opening arguments by the opposing lawyers.
