Peer hard at the widgets, and it appears as if someone has doodled on the surfaces. The Devils' assembly-line, defense-first system does not encourage much artistry, if any, but Patrik Elias is somehow thriving within it.
He has 10 goals in his last 17 games, and the Devils (28-14-10-1) are keeping pace with the first-place Philadelphia Flyers, whom they meet Tuesday in a more-important-than-most Atlantic Division game, their first after the four-day All-Star Game break. ''Keep the pace, you'll be fine,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said Monday.
The Flyers (28-12-11-5), who have 5 more points than the Devils but have played three more games, have been hit hard by injuries. Goaltender Jeff Hackett retired Monday after being sidelined nearly a month with vertigo, and Robert Esche (sprained knee) is also out.
But help is on the way, as Philadelphia acquired goaltender Sean Burke and two forwards from Phoenix on Monday night for center Mike Comrie. Burke, who played with the Devils from 1987 to 1991, is 10-15-5 with a 2.81 goals against average.
It was not known Monday night if Burke would play against the Devils. If he does not, Antero Niittymaki, 23, will start in goal.
It was reported over the weekend that the Flyers might acquire Burke. Not that Elias would have known. He sequestered himself for three days at his cottage.
''It was good to forget about hockey for a couple of days,'' he said.
With 20 goals in 53 games, Elias is on pace to finish with 31 goals, short of his career high of 40 goals, set three seasons ago. But Elias figures 31 goals are better than 29 or 28, his totals of the past two seasons.
''Sometimes they go in, sometimes they don't,'' Elias said.
He is happy, or at least satisfied, with his play. He is one of six Devils to have played in every game, and, along with his six power-play goals, five game-winning goals, four overtime goals and three short-handed goals, he has helped the Devils allow only 100 goals. The St. Louis Blues set a league record four years ago when they allowed 153 goals in 82 games, the fewest allowed in a season of at least 80 games. The Devils are on pace to allow 154.
''The most important part is to feel good about the way we're playing,'' Elias said Monday at South Mountain Arena. ''If you feel good about your game, if you can be consistent, then we feel we'll be right up there.''
As intriguing as a race for the division title with the Flyers might become, the Devils say they are not thinking much about the Flyers at all. They are excited about Tuesday's game, then a home game Wednesday against the Rangers, because they will be tests.
''We're more into how we're playing,'' Devils center Scott Gomez said.
The Devils have had right wing Jamie Langenbrunner back for four games after he missed 28 because of knee surgery. Asked for an evaluation of Langenbrunner's play since his return, Burns replied, ''Fine.''
Langenbrunner said: ''I'm not where I want to be yet. It's tough getting my timing and getting into the flow of the game. But I think the All-Star break is really going to help that.''
Elias said he benefited from the rest, too. He is the Devils' top scorer, with 42 points, and he might have been invited to the All-Star Game had three other Devils -- Martin Brodeur, Scott Niedermayer and Scott Stevens (replaced by Brian Rafalski) -- not been elected to the Eastern Conference starting lineup.
The Devils have 29 regular-season games left, more than any other team in the N.H.L., and Elias says only one thing is urgent for his teammates before the Stanley Cup playoffs begin in two months.
''Start getting that feel again,'' Elias said. ''The season's going to be up before you know it.''
His statistics may not be as impressive as they were three years ago, but his priority within Burns's system is to help the Devils hit their stride when it counts. And, as Elias says, ''it really doesn't make a difference'' who they are playing.
HOCKEY
