Two weeks after the rover Opportunity landed on Mars, NASA finally knows where it is.
Soon after the rover sent back the first photographs from the ground on Jan. 25, mission scientists realized that it had by lucky chance ended up in a small, shallow crater in the middle of a vast flat plain. The crater has exposed bedrock, which will allow them to study the geological history of the site. But they did not know which small crater.
Images taken by the spacecraft as it approached the surface showed one large crater, 500 feet wide, and a smattering of small ones.
At first, NASA engineers and scientists thought the Opportunity, cocooned in air bags, had bounced to the south, and they tentatively narrowed the site to one of two craters. But the Opportunity's radio signals indicated that it was farther north.
''We're definitely in a crater'' was the most definitive statement Dr. Raymond E. Arvidson, deputy principal investigator, could make at a news conference on Jan. 30. ''We don't seem to be in the crater that Tim Parker put us in initially.''
Dr. Timothy Parker, the scientist in charge of mapping the landing site, interjected from the back of the room, ''Sorry.''
A couple of days later, the orbiting Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft spotted exactly where the Opportunity was, about half a mile to the west and slightly to the north of the 500-foot crater. Even more precise photographs taken Friday distinguished the rover from its lander.
Scientists and engineers described their findings at a news conference yesterday at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif.
The Global Surveyor images also spotted other pieces of the spacecraft discarded during landing: the parachute, the upper part of the shroud that housed the rover during its trip to Mars, and the heat shield.
''There is the hardware that we've littered the surface with,'' said Dr. Michael C. Malin, who operates the camera on the Global Surveyor.
The scientists have seen part of the litter from the ground, too.
As the Opportunity drove to the edge of the crater last week to examine bedrock, it peeked above the rim and saw the parachute and shroud on the plain, a quarter-mile away.
