Much has been made of Douglas Faneuil's flair for the dramatic -- so much so that a defense lawyer recently asked him if he had taken acting lessons to prepare for his star turn as a witness at the Martha Stewart criminal trial.
But yesterday, during his third day of cross-examination, Mr. Faneuil sounded like nothing so much as a lawyer.
''In retrospect, I think that is fair to say,'' Mr. Faneuil said at one point.
''It doesn't refresh my recollection,'' he said.
''I think we initiated a meeting the next day,'' he said.
''I believe I referenced this a little bit earlier,'' he said.
And using a favorite phrase of prosecutors everywhere, Mr. Faneuil said, ''There came a point in time.''
None of this would sound odd coming out of the mouth of a lawyer for the prosecution or the defense (though Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Robert G. Morvillo, is also fond of homely phrases like ''as many holes in it as a Swiss cheese'').
But Mr. Faneuil is a 28-year-old former broker's assistant who has testified that he sometimes used the drug Ecstasy at a dance club, and wrote snide e-mail messages to friends. And he is the chief witness against Ms. Stewart, who has been charged with crimes including conspiracy and securities fraud.
In court Mr. Faneuil has been polite, grave and measured, especially yesterday, when he often paused and seemed to be weighing his words.
It would not be surprising if Mr. Faneuil were suffering from a version of the so-called Stockholm syndrome, whose victims come to identify strongly with the people who are holding them captive; after all, he has spent four days on the witness stand. And furthermore, as Mr. Faneuil recounted yesterday, he has had a dozen meetings with prosecutors in the last 90 days -- meetings that were at least in part devoted to helping him prepare for his courtroom testimony.
Then there was the meeting at which Mr. Faneuil was prepared for cross-examination by lawyers for the defense. ''A few people in the office basically pretended to be you,'' he told Mr. Morvillo yesterday.
Spectators laughed, and they giggled more at the response. ''Did they get heavy-set people?'' asked Mr. Morvillo, who is, to be polite, portly.
The courtroom filled up before 8:30 a.m. for Mr. Morvillo's long-awaited cross-examination, long before the trial was to start. And more than 100 reporters and spectators packed the ''overflow room,'' where the proceedings in the courtroom were projected on a big screen.
The cross-examination did not provide any Perry Mason moments. Mr. Faneuil was not as quick and confident as he had been on earlier occasions, perhaps, but he did not obviously falter under questioning.
He did confess to some vagueness about exactly whom he had talked to on the crucial day that Ms. Stewart sold all her shares in ImClone Systems, the day before bad news sent the stock reeling.
Mr. Faneuil has said that he tipped off Ms. Stewart that ImClone's founder, her friend Samuel D. Waksal, was trying to dump all his shares, prompting Ms. Stewart to do the same. And he has recounted in detail conversations he said he had with her and with his former boss, Peter E. Bacanovic, who is also on trial.
The perfection of those recollections, along with Mr. Faneuil's lawyerly demeanor, may create some problems for the prosecution by making him appear overly coached, or at least give the defense an opening.
''On the exact quotes, no one remembers that stuff,'' said Christopher Bruno, a former federal prosecutor now at Bruno &amp; Degenhardt in Fairfax, Va.
The defense, he added, may be able to make Mr. Faneuil appear to be ''nothing more than a puppet for the prosecution.''
For the most part, Mr. Faneuil stayed away yesterday from repeating the dialogue that made his early testimony so riveting. But there was one flash, when he was asked whether he had told Mr. Bacanovic about a time when he said Ms. Stewart complained angrily about the way the phones were answered at Merrill Lynch.
Yes, Mr. Faneuil responded. ''He said, 'See what I have to deal with!'''
