Shanna Hamilton thought she would be playing college basketball in North Carolina this season.
Instead, Hamilton is in the South Bronx playing for Hostos Community College, a bilingual education school that she did not know existed until she was recruited last summer to play on the first women's basketball team in the college's 34-year history.
''I was hesitant,'' she said about her decision to stay closer to home.
At the team's first practice in September, Hamilton, a 5-foot-8 guard and small forward from Far Rockaway, Queens, was sure she had made the wrong decision.
''When we first started playing, I said, 'Oh Lord, here we go again like in high school,' '' Hamilton recalled recently. ''I said, 'We're going to have some problems.' But we had some talent and I thought we could get it together.''
But Hamilton said she never thought the Lady Caimans (17-5) would be this good this soon.
Hostos clinched the City University's junior-college regular-season title and is ranked 10th in the nation among Division III community colleges.
Hamilton, who leads the team in scoring with 16 points a game, said some of her friends still could not properly pronounce the name of Hostos (HOS-tose): ''They either say Hostess or Hostoast. They don't know where it's at, and when you tell them it's in the Bronx, they say, 'Oh, that's too far.' No one ever wants to come to our games.''
On a recent cold winter night, more than 100 students, some with children in tow, cheered on the Lady Caimans during a hard-fought loss at home against Globe Institute of Technology, a Division I community college based in Lower Manhattan.
When Dr. Dolores Fernandez became president of Hostos two years ago, CUNY officials told her that the predominantly female, mostly Hispanic student body, much of which was made up of working-class parents, was too busy dealing with the exigencies of life to engage in such mundane matters as intercollegiate sports.
Despite that, Fernandez started the college's Division III intercollegiate athletic program.
''When I got here, the whole emphasis was on academics, and the line was that with all the things our students have in their private lives, they won't want to play on a team,'' Fernandez said.
It had never been envisioned that a student like Cinteria Webb, who has an apartment and bills to pay, would want to see if there was some basketball left in her 21-year-old body three years after she tore the anterior cruciate ligament in her right knee. And there were doubts that Renee Bostic, who was hired as the Hostos women's coach, could find bona fide student-athletes from New York's summer league playground circuit.
''The climate and student demographic of Hostos has changed,'' Bostic said. ''Hostos was founded for working-class moms and dads, people trying to learn English in order to get a boost in life. Now it's more traditional college-age students. If you're 35, have two kids and a job, playing basketball isn't your main emphasis.''
Bostic found 12 players, ages 18 to 21, who were not married and did not have children. Though they have other responsibilities, they refused to let them get in the way of basketball.
The players, none of whom have scholarships, want to show Fernandez that she made the right decision. They want to show that Hostos has come a long way since 1997, when it was criticized for graduating students who had failed CUNY's writing test.
Bostic tells her players that if they keep up their grades and play well, they could get a scholarship to a four-year college.
That was all Nicola Moore needed to hear. After high school, Moore, a 5-6 point guard from Queens, did not catch the eye of college recruiters. Moore was looking for work when Bostic offered her a chance to play. Now Moore is Hostos's third-leading scorer, she has 3.0 grade point average and she is getting a few calls from recruiters.
Hostos launched its first intercollegiate team, women's volleyball, in spring 2002. Men's soccer and baseball followed.
Men's varsity basketball began in the fall of 2002. In its inaugural season, the men's team played for the CUNY community college championship, losing to Queensborough, 81-64. This season, the men clinched the regular-season championship with a victory over Queensborough. They are currently 18-7.
The success of the men's team has motivated the women's team.
''The ladies saw us do well in our first year, and that made them want to do as well, if not better, than us,'' said Robert Holford, the Hostos athletic director and coach of the men's team.
Holford noted that in the first year, the men's team had victories over some four-year colleges that offer athletic scholarships.
Opponents do not know what to expect of the Lady Caimans, who are named for reptiles that are similar to alligators. The bench is deep. The players are unselfish. ''We have people who can play multiple positions,'' Bostic said.
After the Lady Caimans handed the Borough of Manhattan Community College its first loss in CUNY history last December and defeated Monroe College, which was ranked No. 2 in the nation in preseason polls that same month, opponents began to take notice.
''At the beginning of the season, they weren't scouting us,'' Bostic said. ''Now people are coming to watch us play.''
And, she said, they are gunning for Hostos. ''It's almost an embarrassment to be beaten by us,'' she said. ''It's like, 'You got beat by Hostos!' ''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
