The bongo is not an animal known for going in circles. It surges straight ahead through the thickest of forests, with its reddish hue and striking white stripes confusing predators.
But a herd of 18 bongos now living at the base of Mount Kenya, Africa's second highest peak, has just completed the most circuitous of journeys, one that has taken them back to their ancestral home.
From 1966 to 1975, several dozen bongos were shipped from the wilds of Kenya to the staid confines of various American zoos. They thrived in captivity, breeding with abandon. Eventually, their American population exceeded 400.
Zoogoers loved them, with their cartoon character appearance making them stand out from more garden variety antelopes.
The bongo's hindquarters are outsized. Its coloring and stripes appear painted on by hand. And it towers over the the oryx, the eland and the gazelle. Some males reach 900 pounds.
But while the transplanted bongos thrived in their American enclosures, their brethren left behind experienced the grim realities of the wild. Natural predators like lions and hyenas devoured them. Hunters chased them down as trophies or meat, their bulky bodies proving to be most enticing. The poaching, combined with the steady loss of habitat, whittled down the bongos' numbers to virtually nothing.
Shy by nature, mountain bongos (Boocercus eurycerus isaaci) travel in small family herds dominated by one adult male. Unlike other antelopes that flee pursuers at top speed, bongos sometimes freeze in place, making them easier to catch. Still, they do fight back, using their ample horns as weapons.
Decades back, bongos were found in three separate forests in central Kenya. Today, though, they are gone from the Mau Forest. A tiny population may survive in the forests around Mount Kenya, but no sightings have been reported in 10 years or so. In the Aberdares Conservation Area, the population is estimated at fewer than 100.
In an effort to preserve the species in Mount Kenya, scientists have implanted bongo embryos into female eland, but so far without success.
So conservationists have opted to repatriate some American bongos and hope that their offspring revert to their wild ways. A program, organized by the Rare Species Conservatory Foundation in Florida, has the potential to revive the mountain bongo and give hope to scientists trying to save declining species.
Eighteen robust bongos, 4 males and 14 females, were donated for the effort from Busch Gardens and Disney's Animal Kingdom in Florida, from the Cape May County Zoo in New Jersey and from zoos in Los Angeles, St. Louis and Houston.
All the bongos' ancestors are from Kenya, but biologists sought out as much genetic diversity as they could. They also selected animals from particularly fertile bloodlines.
Before their trip to Kenya, the bongos were quarantined for three months at the White Oak Conservation Center in Yulee, Fla., under the supervision of Dr. Mark Davis, a veterinarian who helped bring some of the bongos to the United States in the 1970's.
In January, they were sedated, blindfolded and loaded aboard a DC-8 cargo plane and flown back to Africa. Arriving in Nairobi on Jan. 29, they were then taken by truck to the Mount Kenya Game Ranch, where a special enclosure had been set up for them, separate from the 18 bongos in captivity there that had never left Africa.
The American-born bongos are not prepared for the mountain's rugged terrain. They are used to eating pellets, not scrounging through the bush for nourishment. They are also far more susceptible to diseases than wild bongos. And they are so accustomed to humans that they may view a poacher as just another admirer.
''They are zoo animals,'' said Dr. Paul Reillo, director of the Rare Species Conservatory Foundation. ''They know how to eat and reproduce. That's it.''
But as the bongos were unloaded from their crates the other day, they moved immediately for the thick vegetation inside their enclosure, an instinct that encouraged the scientists. ''You can take the bongo out of the bush but you can't take the bush out of the bongo,'' said William Woodley, the chief warden of the Mount Kenya National Park, who goes by the nickname Bongo.
His father was a legendary Kenyan game warden, one who fancied the striking antelope. When the elder Mr. Woodley was off trekking through the parks, he would use a park radio to communicate with his wife about their newborn son. Because the radio was for official use only, Mr. Woodley would ask his wife how the baby Bongo was doing. The name stuck.
Bongo Woodley is now in charge of a critical aspect of the bongo revival project, protecting the Mount Kenya ecosystem from the many people who claim the mountain as their own but think little of spoiling it. Illegal logging has proved a major threat, and poaching continues though it is not as common as it was in the 1970's. Further, enterprising criminals sneak deep into the forest to grow and harvest marijuana crops.
''The poverty levels make the whole bongo project quite fraught,'' Mr. Woodley said. ''Even so, that's not a reason not to try.''
Dr. Richard Estes, a wildlife biologist involved in the project, said he was optimistic that bongos would return to Mount Kenya. But the challenge, he said, will be keeping them away from human predators.
''That's a huge bloody mountain, and if the Kenyan Wildlife Service can't protect the bongo, they do not stand a chance,'' Dr. Estes said.
If all goes according to plan, the newly transplanted bongos, and others that will follow them, will give birth to a generation wary of humans and more at home in the wild, scientists say. And though they will be given more room to roam, they will still probably have fences reining them in.
Scientists expect the third generation of bongos, perhaps as much as a decade down the line, to be ready to return to the mountain of their ancestors.
If the project works as planned, Mount Kenya will forever be associated with the bongo, and the revival of the species will make the park more vibrant.
It is the same approach the Rare Species group used several years ago on the Caribbean island of Dominica, where a national park was set up around the rare sisserou parrot.
Project organizers have already begun spreading the word among the local population that the bongo is a special animal. Posters bearing the image of the bongo are going up. Community meetings are being organized. The goal is to persuade locals to think of the bongo as a living asset, not as a piece of meat.
