It hardly seemed a surprise that the panoramic photograph of Gusev Crater, the landing site of NASA's Mars rover Spirit, showed a red landscape. After all, Mars is called the red planet because it looks red, a hue imparted by rust in the planet's ubiquitous dust.
But did NASA fiddle with the image to make it look that red? As Mars buffs have pointed out in recent weeks on Web sites like Slashdot.org, a closer look reveals that parts of the rover itself, in the foreground, are oddly garish. Even the color chips placed on the rover to calibrate the color photographs had shifted. What should be bright blue is instead bright pink; what should be bright green is brown.
A few days later, after the rover Spirit made its first roll onto the surface, it took a picture of the empty lander behind it. Again, the Mars buffs zoomed in on a detail. NASA's navy blue logo, often called the ''meatball'' because of its shape, was now the pinkish hue of rare hamburger. Perhaps more shocking, the spacecraft designers at NASA appeared to have a thing for hot pink: that was the color of the cables strewn around the top of the lander.
What was going on? On Jan. 31, during a lull in the control room at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Jason Soderblom, a graduate student at Cornell who is a member of the science team, gave a talk explaining the odd Martian colors.
The fundamental challenge in creating color photographs of Mars, he said, is that the cameras on the rovers take only black-and-white pictures, and the art of making color out of black and white never exactly reproduces what the eye sees.
To produce a color photograph, the rover's panoramic camera takes three black-and-white images of a scene, once with a red filter, once with a green filter and once with a blue filter. Each is then tinted with the color of the filter, and the three are combined into a color image.
In assembling the Spirit photographs, however, the scientists used an image taken with an infrared filter, not the red filter. Some blue pigments like the cobalt in the rover color chip also emit this longer-wavelength light, which is not visible to the human eye.
''This is actually true for a lot of blue pigments,'' Mr. Soderblom said. The infrared is so bright that it washes out the blue. ''That turns this thing from a dark blue chip to a vibrant pink,'' he said. ''This is an incredibly bright pink. The same thing is happening with our green color chip.''
The infrared-for-red replacement is also ''why the NASA meatball is red instead of blue,'' Mr. Soderblom said. The same is true of the cables. They are actually blue.
For the scientists, there are good reasons to focus on infrared colors rather than the visible red. ''Iron dominates mineral color in the visible, and it causes everything to have shades of red,'' Mr. Soderblom said.
With the infrared filter, the different iron minerals emit different colors, and the camera can better differentiate between them. ''We're trying to identify the minerals in the scene, and the way we're doing this is with subtle differences,'' Mr. Soderblom said.
What the eye sees, even when the colors are right, is not always quite what is happening. Mr. Soderblom showed pictures of the reddish ''lily pads'' around the landing site of the Spirit's twin, Opportunity, where its air bags bounced. The soil in the bounce marks is actually no more red than the darker surrounding soil, but for reasons not yet known, it emits less blue light. ''By being not as bright in the blue, it appears more red to us,'' he said.
Still, there was no reason for the Spirit to see pink on Mars. When producing the panorama, the camera also used the red filter.
''We just made a mistake,'' said Dr. James F. Bell III, the lead scientist for the camera. ''It's really just a mess-up.''
