On Oct. 12, 2002, Brian Nelson and his wife, Susan, pulled into the lot of a park on an unusually sunny day in Seattle. Mr. Nelson unbuckled his seat belt and opened the car door, when all of a sudden he felt faint.
''Wow!'' he managed to say, just before slumping forward. His head fell onto his chest and he began to groan. His wife tried shaking him, but he did not respond.
After about 30 seconds, he fell back in the seat, his eyes rolled up, mouth wide, face almost completely white.
''It was like everything had stopped,'' Mrs. Nelson recalled in a telephone interview. She put her ear to his chest but heard nothing. Panicking, she started beating his chest. It was the only thing she could think of. She thought he was dead.
But after about 30 seconds, Mr. Nelson awoke, flailing his arms wildly. His face and hands turned beet red and the veins swelled in his forehead. After a couple of minutes, his convulsions subsided and a more normal color returned. ''We have to get out of here right now,'' his wife screamed. But feeling nauseated, he got out of the car and stumbled to a restroom, where he vomited. Then he lay on a bench waiting for an ambulance.
When medics arrived, they checked his vital signs and questioned him. (One asked if he had had an ''out of body'' experience.) Apart from a few episodes of lightheadedness over the years, he had been healthy his entire life. He was taking no medications and had no history of seizures.
When he got to the hospital, doctors performed an electrocardiogram. Though it looked unusual, an ultrasound revealed Mr. Nelson's heart to be normal. The cardiologist on call told Mr. Nelson, 49, that there was nothing mechanically wrong with his heart. The problem, he said, was electrical. ''He called it the Brugada syndrome,'' Mr. Nelson recalled. He had never heard of it, and neither had the other doctors in the E.R.
Dr. Ramon Brugada, one of the world's leading authorities on the syndrome and the brother of the man who discovered it, said, ''This is one of the most lethal diseases you can imagine.''
Caused by a genetic defect in heart cells, the syndrome is now believed to be responsible for as many as 12 percent of all sudden deaths and roughly 20 percent of deaths in patients with structurally normal hearts.
Most victims are men who die in their sleep. Once patients develop symptoms -- unexplained fainting is the most common -- there is a 50-50 chance they will die within 10 years if left untreated. Currently, the only effective treatment is an implantable defibrillator.
''The typical patient is 40 years old, in the best moment of his life, very active, very productive, with no previous history of anything, and all of a sudden one night he never wakes up,'' said Dr. Brugada, who is director of molecular genetics at the Masonic Medical Research Laboratory in Utica, N.Y.
The number of diagnosed cases of Brugada syndrome has grown exponentially over the past decade. In Southeast Asia, where the disease is endemic, it is the most common cause of death of men under 40, after motor vehicle accidents. Recent data suggest that it affects 2 percent of the population in some areas.
Although the disease usually strikes in early middle age, cases have been reported in babies only a few days old.
Dr. Charles Antzelevitch, director of the Masonic laboratory, where much of the research on the syndrome has been done, estimated that one American in 5,000 might be at risk for sudden death from the disease.
The disease has a history steeped in mythology. In 1960, Dr. Gonzalo Aponte, a pathologist at the Naval Hospital in Guam, wrote a paper describing 11 cases of young Filipino men who had died in their sleep.
The manner of their deaths was strangely similar. As in the case of Mr. Nelson, the victims moaned, gasped for breath and thrashed about violently. Then they died.
Dr. Aponte performed autopsies but found nothing to explain the deaths: no trauma, no drug overdose, no significant heart or internal-organ abnormalities. He soon learned that sudden death of apparently healthy men was not uncommon in the Philippines.
Villagers called it bangungot, the Tagalog word for nightmares. The syndrome was described in a Philippine medical journal as far back as 1917. ''Such 'deadly dreams' are well known among the lay people, many of whom view them with sullen respect, if not frank terror,'' Dr. Aponte wrote.
Bangungot, though known by different names, is widespread throughout Southeast Asia. In Thailand it is called lai-tai and is estimated to kill one of every 2,500 young men annually in some areas. ''Widow ghosts'' take men away in the dead of night, according to local legends, and the men have been known to disguise themselves as women at bedtime to protect themselves.
In Japan the syndrome is called pok-kuri. In 1982 Japanese doctors wrote in the journal Lancet that every year several hundred men, apparently healthy, had been found dead in bed in Tokyo.
In the late 1970's, the disease first came to the attention of public health authorities in the United States. In December 1981, the Centers for Disease Control reported 38 cases of unexplained sudden death in 11 states among Southeast Asian immigrants, including 25 among the Hmong, from the Laotian highlands.
Thirty-seven victims were men, and all apparently died of cardiac arrest while sleeping. ''The deaths reported here share several features that suggest they may constitute a distinct syndrome,'' the report said. It was named sudden unexplained death syndrome, or SUDS, and was quickly recognized as a leading cause of death among young men from Southeast Asia.
In 1986, Europe's first case -- though not recognized as such then -- was seen by Dr. Pedro Brugada, a cardiologist in the Netherlands who was specializing in arrhythmias. When Dr. Brugada examined his patient's EKG, he saw a pattern that he had never seen before. It was highly unusual, shaped almost like a shark's fin.
Over the next few years, Dr. Brugada searched for this electrical pattern in other victims of cardiac arrest. ''I looked everywhere for this EKG but I found nothing,'' he said in a telephone interview from the Cardiovascular Research and Teaching Institute in Aalst, Belgium, where he now works.
Then he found two, from a 46-year-old Dutch man and a 48-year-old Belgian man who collapsed on the street. In 1992, after collecting eight of these unusual EKG's, Dr. Brugada and a younger brother, Josep, published their results in The Journal of the American College of Cardiology. They called the disorder a new clinical entity. Later, it was named the Brugada syndrome. It and SUDS were soon shown to be the same.
In the late 1990's an international consortium of scientists led by Dr. Antzelevitch and the Brugada brothers set out to discover the genetic basis of the disease. The scientists identified patients in three families and isolated DNA from their white blood cells. Then they sequenced the DNA, focusing on three genes that are known to influence the electrical activity of the heart.
They found a mutation in one of these genes (called SCN5a), which controls the flow of sodium ions into heart cells. When the gene was sequenced in 200 control patients, none had the mutation.
On the basis of these and other observations, the scientists concluded that a ''loss-of-function'' mutation in the SCN5a gene was responsible for the deadly arrhythmias in the Brugada syndrome. SCN5a mutations have now been found in other sudden-death syndromes, including sudden infant death, or SIDS.
Unlike most heart rhythm disorders, those that accompany Brugada are set off by a slow heartbeat, explaining why the deaths usually occur at night. Whether physical activity is beneficial, harmful or neither remains unknown.
protection.
Dr. Antzelevitch called the syndrome the paradigm of the electrical effects that portend the development of many different arrhythmias, including those in coronary artery disease, the leading cause of death in the Western world. ''If we can find a cure for the Brugada syndrome, we may also have a means of dealing with these more common arrhythmias,'' he added.
Now, patients receive implantable defibrillators, the only effective treatment. Sewn under the skin of the upper chest with wires passing through veins directly into the heart, defibrillators monitor the heartbeat and automatically apply an electrical shock if it degenerates into something dangerous.
On the fourth day of his hospitalization, Mr. Nelson received a defibrillator. The next day, he went home.
Mr. Nelson said it was a pure stroke of luck that he survived the whole episode. ''I spend 95 percent of the day by myself. I could have been in the living room watching TV and my wife could have been in the other room, and she would have had no idea.''
Last year, the first randomized clinical trial of implantable defibrillators in Brugada patients was published in Circulation. Sixty-six people who had survived the syndrome's symptoms were recruited in Thailand, randomly assigned to receive defibrillators or drug therapy and then examined by doctors every three months for three years. Almost all the participants were men; their average age was 40.
In the follow-up period, none of the defibrillator patients died, though a third suffered life-threatening arrhythmias. Almost 20 percent of the patients receiving drug therapy died suddenly. Because defibrillators appeared to extend patients' lives, the study was stopped early, and all participants were offered free defibrillators.
Experts say that most cases of Brugada go undiagnosed. ''We're not doing enough to uncover these arrhythmias at an early age,'' Dr. Antzelevitch said. In Japan, he added, children typically have three EKG's by age 18. In Italy EKG screening is mandatory for all newborns and for children playing competitive sports.
In the United States, he said, the screening for the Brugada syndrome and other heart diseases should be performed by the early teenage years. ''The sooner you get it, the more likely you are to catch something before it becomes a problem.''
