BY now, you've probably heard about, if not seen, ''Miracle,'' the sports movie that transcends sports. It's the story of how Herb Brooks's cold-blooded coaching forged the 1980 United States Olympic hockey team that upset the Soviet Union and won the gold medal at Lake Placid during the cold war. With hostages in Iran and the Soviets having invaded Afghanistan, America badly needed a jolt of jingoism.
Nearly a quarter of a century later, coincidentally, with young American soldiers being ambushed in Iraq and with a struggling economy, the movie comes at a time when America needs another lift.
The movie's focus is on Brooks, as it should be. If coaching is making a team better than it really is, Brooks may have done the most remarkable coaching job in the history of any sport. And in a movie that never needs to get corny because honesty is always better than hokum, Brooks, portrayed so well by Kurt Russell, is the sculptor of a shocking upset by mostly college kids.
This was a dream triumph, not a Dream Team, the basketball term that players like Michael Jordan, Larry Bird and Magic Johnson popularized in the 1992 Summer Olympics. In a way, the Soviets, for all practical purposes, were state-sponsored professionals on what was world hockey's Dream Team. Yes, better than any of the best National Hockey League teams of that era.
With N.H.L. players having participated in the last three Winter Olympics and pros participating in most Olympic sports, you will never see another miracle quite like it.
But for anyone who was in Lake Placid, the movie prompted outtakes that, understandably, could not be squeezed into the screenplay. The lasting memory here is a Sunday scene after their 4-2 gold-medal victory over Finland -- their appearance on the auditorium stage of Lake Placid High School, which served as the media center.
Throughout the earlier games, Brooks had seldom permitted his players to talk to the news media. But now, still in their sweaty red-white-and-blue uniforms and with their gold medals hanging from red-white-and-blue ribbons around their necks, here was the team, in shoes instead of skates, flopping into big chairs as Brooks stood at a microphone.
''You're watching a group of people who startled the athletic world,'' Brooks said. ''Not the hockey world, but the athletic world.''
Among all the notebooks and microphones, a reporter asked if any of the players had one word that described what they had accomplished.
''Well,'' said Mike Eruzione, the captain who had scored the winning goal against the Soviets on Friday, ''we're all a bunch of big doolies now.''
To his listeners, doolies was a new word. Realizing an explanation was needed, Eruzione turned to Phil Verchota, a left wing who had coined it.
''I got a gold today, so I'm a big doolie,'' Verchota said. ''It just means big wheel, big gun, big shot.''
''Is there,'' another reporter said, ''any favorite Brooksism to describe what happened here?''
''Well,'' said John Harrington, a right wing who was quietly famous among his teammates for his imitations of Brooks, ''we were damned if we did and damned if we didn't. Fool me once, shame on you; fool me twice, shame on me. We reloaded, we went up to that tiger and spit in his eye. We went to the well again -- the water was colder, the water was deeper.''
His teammates were roaring now and even Brooks was smiling, more or less.
''Would you say,'' Harrington was asked, ''that Herb Brooks is a big doolie?''
''Sometimes he thinks he's a real big doolie,'' Harrington said, smiling while peeking at the coach, ''but yeah, he's a real big doolie tonight.''
Soon another player appeared. Jack O'Callahan, holding a bottle of beer, stumbled up the steps to the stage as his teammates cheered.
''As the only player from Charlestown, Mass.,'' a Boston reporter said to O'Callahan, ''what do you have to say?''
''Well,'' said the husky defenseman, standing up slowly, ''Charlestown is in the shadow of Bunker Hill and the Americans won at Bunker Hill, and the Americans won at Lake Placid.''
When reminded by a reporter that the Americans had not won at Bunker Hill, O'Callahan shook his head.
''I don't want to hear that,'' he said. ''What do you think there's a monument there for? They won. They won.''
But O'Callahan knew what team had won the Olympic gold medal. Only the athletes get medals, coaches don't. But an Olympic official quietly slipped Brooks a gold medal while the Soviets were still wondering why Viktor Tikhonov, the stern Soviet coach, had benched Vladislav Tretiak, considered by many the best goaltender in hockey history, after Mark Johnson's last-second goal in Friday's first period had tied the score at 2-2.
''He is not playing well,'' Vladimir Jursinov, the Soviet assistant coach, said later of Tretiak, ''and my feeling is, he is nervous.''
Years later, Slava Fetisov, by then a Devils defenseman who had been on that Soviet team, acknowledged how he and his teammates had been stunned to see Tretiak benched. But on the way to Lake Placid that winter, below steep forests of white birch, a lone teenager, in long black pants and a gray sweater, was seen skating with a hockey stick along the Ausable River's endless ice.
That lone teenager would retrieve his puck, shoot it and skate after it again, so alone and yet so content. As so many of the American Olympians had as youngsters. Nobody realized it at the time, but that teenager was the omen of the miracle.
Sports of The Times
