The government is very close to deciding whether to grant the first licenses for commercial space flights carrying passengers, the chief commercial space regulator said on Monday.
Three teams have applied for permission to send people on suborbital ships, which would fly to an altitude of about 100 kilometers, or 63 miles, and then return near the point of launching.
Patricia Grace Smith, the associate administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration for commercial space transportation, said, ''We're very close to a license determination.''
A private group is offering a $10 million prize for the first privately financed team to conduct such flights in a reusable vehicle. Diane Murphy, a spokeswoman for the group, called X Prize, said she expected to award the prize this year. Both women spoke on the eve of a two-day conference on the outlook for commercial space launchings.
One applicant, Scaled Composites of Mojave, Calif., recently flew its ship faster than the speed of sound in a test. The group offering the $10 million said this was the first supersonic flight in pursuit of the prize.
Another license applicant, Armadillo Aerospace of Mesquite, Tex., test-fired its engine last month, but a spokesman said he did not expect a license soon. A third applicant, Xcor Aerospace, also of Mojave, said it was planning a suborbital vehicle as a steppingstone to a spaceship that could go into orbit.
Xcor's chief engineer, Daniel L. DeLong, said in a telephone interview that the F.A.A. had told the company that its application was substantially complete in November; the government has until May to decide whether to grant a license. Mr. DeLong said the first flights would not go to orbit, ''but you're definitely in space; the sky turns black and the stars come out, and you can see all the way from Baja, Calif., to the Grand Canyon to San Francisco, looking out one window.''
But the company, which has spent $2 million, needs another $11 million and then 18 months to complete its work, he said. An affiliate of Xcor has taken deposits for the trip, which is to cost $98,000. Xcor is not a contestant in the X Prize competition because it has some government financing, according to Ms. Murphy, the X Prize spokeswoman. Ms. Murphy said that 27 teams from seven countries were in the competition, although some, she predicted, would never go far for lack of resources. The contest was modeled after a $25,000 purse that induced Charles A. Lindbergh to try his solo flight across the Atlantic.
To win, entrants must fly to an altitude of 63 kilometers with at least three people, and repeat the feat with the same vehicle within two weeks.
The entrants have advanced a variety of designs. Some are conventional rockets. Some take off like airplanes. And one pulls a rocket to 80,000 feet using a balloon.
As with the early days of aviation, the commercial space effort is taking place in an atmosphere of some legal uncertainty. The licensing process is supposed to guarantee the safety of the ''noninvolved public,'' meaning people on the ground. But Ms. Smith said that the F.A.A. had concluded that its authority, under a law passed 20 years ago, did not extend to setting safety standards for vehicle occupants.
The House of Representatives may consider a bill later this month that would take that safety into account. Under the bill, the F.A.A. could grant experimental permits, which sponsors said would encourage such flights. The crew and paying passengers would sign forms relieving each other, and the federal government, of liability in case of an accident. And crews would have to meet training and medical requirements.
An agreement is already in place under which the National Transportation Safety Board, which investigates plane crashes, would take charge of spaceship accidents. Ms. Smith said, however, that the Transportation Department had thus far licensed 150 unmanned commercial flights, with no accidents.
The department has licensed four sites for commercial launchings: Kodiak, Alaska; Wallops Island, Va.; Cape Canaveral, Fla.; and Vandenberg, Calif. The Kodiak site is the only one that is not used for government launchings. Applications for several other sites are pending.
Ms. Smith said that commercial space flight would allow the United States to ''retake its role in the space world.''
