The immediate goal for Seton Hall on Monday night was to beat No. 4 Pittsburgh. The long-term goal is to make the N.C.A.A. tournament. By defeating the Panthers in dramatic fashion, the Pirates went a long way toward an N.C.A.A. bid.
In their most significant victory this season, Seton Hall edged Pittsburgh, 68-67, in double overtime at Continental Arena. The Pirates proved they can play with the elite teams in the country and have the will to win. In the Big East, they moved into a third-place tie with No. 23 Providence and pulled a game behind No. 5 Connecticut, which lost to Notre Dame on Monday.
Seton Hall looked beaten when trailing, 55-49, with 1 minute 49 seconds left in regulation, but the Pirates scratched their way back and sent the game into overtime, thanks largely to two 3-pointers from J. R. Morris.
''Right now, we're trying to finish out the regular season as strong as we can,'' Seton Hall Coach Louis Orr said. ''We want to win as many as we can and let the rest take care of itself. Every win is a good win. Beating a team like Pitt is a great win.''
The decisive play in the game came with 9.6 seconds remaining in the second overtime. With the score tied at 67-67, Seton Hall's Andre Barrett drew a foul by Carl Krauser, Pitt's starting point guard. That sent Barrett to the line, and took Krauser out of the game with five fouls.
After Barrett hit the first of two free throws, Krauser's replacement, the little-used freshman Antonio Graves, was left to direct Pittsburgh's final play. Graves missed a running one-hander with time running out, and Marcus Toney-El secured the victory by grabbing the rebound.
The Pirates had a chance to win the game in regulation, but a short jumper by John Allen was ruled no good because it left his hand shortly after the buzzer. Both teams struggled offensively in the first overtime, which ended tied at 61-61.
Barrett's winning free throw capped a masterly game for him. Barrett, a point guard, scored a team-high 20 points and played 49 minutes without a turnover. Krauser, who, like Barrett, is from the Bronx, led Pitt (22-2, 8-2 Big East) with 23 points, but he could not overshadow Barrett's heroics.
''You know how I feel when I step on the court, I think I'm the best guard out there,'' Barrett said. ''But I wasn't hoping to outduel Carl. I was trying to get a win.''
Kelly Whitney and Morris each had 10 points for Seton Hall, which improved to 16-5 and 6-3. Grant Billmeier, rarely a factor this season, had a career-high 8 points, all in the first half.
The Pirates are 11-1 at home and have won five of their last six games over all. Barring a late-season collapse, Seton Hall seems assured of a spot in the N.C.A.A. tournament for the first time since 2000. The Pirates are 3-1 this season against ranked teams, having also beaten Providence, then No. 23 in the nation, and Syracuse, then No. 13.
Coming off Saturday's 85-58 victory over intrastate and Big East rival Rutgers, Seton Hall seemed flat in the opening minutes and fell behind by 14-7. But the Pirates regrouped in time to take a 33-29 lead at halftime.
They led by as many as 8 in the second half before Pitt began to take over. When Krauser made a layup with 1:49 remaining to put Pitt ahead, 55-49, the outlook for Seton Hall was dim.
''We never dropped our heads,'' Toney-El said. ''We always felt we were going to win. When we came to the sidelines, we were all saying, 'We're going to win it.' ''
When it was over, Orr struggled to find the right words. But he seemed most proud of the fight his team showed.
''We have character, and we showed our character tonight,'' Orr said. ''These last two games, we've shown a lot of pride, character and courage. When you win games like this one, it makes you believe that you can win big games. Coming back like we did and giving ourselves a chance to win shows what we are capable of.''
At the very least, the Pirates are capable of beating a very good team. Pittsburgh's only other loss this season was at Connecticut, and the Panthers have been eyeing a No. 1 seeding in the N.C.A.A. tournament.
''Obviously, the effort was tremendous from all our guys,'' Pittsburgh Coach Jamie Dixon said. ''We compliment Seton Hall on how well they played and how well they compete. This was two very good teams competing until the end.''
And when it was over, the Seton Hall fans rushed the court and pounced on the players who had just produced a crucial victory. This was a big one for Seton Hall, but with the N.C.A.A. tournament approaching, there could be more celebrations.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
