The Postal Service's mail-sorting plant here, which was contaminated with anthrax in 2001, is now clear of the poison after being fumigated with chlorine gas last year, the service announced Monday.
Thomas G. Day, the Postal Service's vice president for engineering, said the plant would reopen by the end of the year, after millions of dollars of ruined mail-sorting equipment has been disposed of and replaced. A reopening will also mean that hundreds of mail-sorting personnel, most of whom live in the state capital region here, will no longer have to commute long distances to facilities that took over the plant's responsibilities.
The plant was closed in October 2001 after anthrax-contaminated mail that was delivered to United States Senate offices was traced to the plant here. The tainted mail also passed through a large sorting facility outside Washington, which was also closed and cleaned and is now partially functioning.
The Hamilton plant, just outside Trenton, was fumigated with chlorine gas last fall. The Postal Service said Monday that none of several thousand small test strips placed in the plant before fumigation showed evidence of anthrax.
But the machinery in the plant was ruined by the gas, and Bill Lewis, president of the Trenton Metropolitan Area Local of the American Postal Workers Union, said a tour of the plant Friday evening presented an eerie sight.
''There's a lot of stainless in there, and it's all rusted and pitted,'' Mr. Lewis said. ''Even the phone cords and the tumblers in the locks have to be replaced.''
The Postal Service estimated the cost of cleaning and restoring the plant to be at least $80 million.
''The Postal Service worked diligently to provide the best technologies and processes to decontaminate this facility,'' Mr. Day said Monday. ''The safety of our employees and the public we serve demands no less. I'm pleased with the results."
What will please the 700 employees who worked in the center will be to return. For more than two years, they have commuted to plants in Edison, Monmouth and Lakewood, Mr. Day said, and their unhappiness threatened to became a political headache for local officials. The union is trying to win pay for the added commuting time, Mr. Lewis said.
Fears of contaminated mail spiked during the anthrax attacks, which killed five people and sickened 17 more nationwide. Those fears were briefly revived with the recent discovery of poisonous ricin mailed from a Greenville, S.C., post office, to Bill Frist, the Republican Senate majority leader.
No arrests have been announced in either case.
