THE STRANGER AT THE PALAZZO D'ORO  And Other Stories  By Paul Theroux  296 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $25.
The title story of Paul Theroux's new collection, ''The Stranger at the Palazzo d'Oro,'' aspires to be a Jamesian tale about American naïveté and European sophistication, about innocence and experience and self-knowledge.
It reads, however, more like an embarrassing letter to Penthouse magazine, filled with smarmy descriptions of the sexual acts the narrator has performed on his lover and her noisy, foreign-accented exhortations for more.
The story is labored where it wants to be erotic, preposterous where it wants to be provocative.
Like so many of this author's earlier heroes, the protagonist of ''Palazzo'' is a traveler and a loner with a cold, detached view of the world. Gilford Mariner or Gil, as he is called, is ambitious, envious, secretive and given to telling lies; he wants what he doesn't have.
At the age of 60 Gil has returned to Taormina, the Sicilian town where four decades ago he had the adventure he proceeds to recount. He was 21, virtually penniless and at loose ends. There, at the Palazzo d'Oro, he glimpsed an exotic couple, a mysterious and imperious German countess called the Gräfin, who appeared to be in her mid-30's, and her obsequious Iraqi companion, Haroun. It wasn't long before Haroun made Gil a bizarre proposition: in return for being their guest at this luxurious hotel and some pocket money, he must seduce the Gräfin.
Gil of course proceeds to court the Gräfin, and after a series of put-downs and humiliations, he succeeds. Their affair is an exercise less in passion than in power and manipulation: during the day the Gräfin orders Gil about, treating him like a house pet; at night he tries to devise new ways to dominate and demean her.
These acts are described by Mr. Theroux in the grossest and most clichéd of terms. We are subjected to cloying descriptions of the Gräfin's underwear, the lovers' body parts and their bodily fluids. We also learn that the Gräfin has been keeping a startling secret from Gil.
Although the other stories in this volume eschew the crudely voyeuristic tone of ''Palazzo,'' they, too, are seriously flawed, redeemed only by Mr. Theroux's unerring sense of place and his ability to conjure worlds distant in geography or time. What these stories share with the title story is a fascination with sex as an illicit, shameful or dangerous activity, leading to obsession, self-destruction or peril; and clumsy narratives that lurch from realism to fairy tale weirdness, from memoirlike confessions to hokey B-movie contrivance.
''An African Story'' begins as a finely observed portrait of a wealthy South African writer but soon devolves into a farcical account of his downfall, after he becomes besotted, at the age of 60, with a one-armed black woman who persuades him to divorce his wife, marry her, and then accuses him of rape. ''Disheveled Nymphs'' recounts a similar story about another man in his 60's who falls prey to sexual obsession: in this case he's a wealthy lawyer who lives in Hawaii and develops an unhealthy fascination with the mother and daughter who clean his house.
As for the longest story in this book, a four-part novella called ''A Judas Memoir,'' it's a coming-of-age story, reminiscent in some respects of Stephen King's story ''The Body'' (which became the basis for the 1986 movie ''Stand By Me'').
In the novella's longest sequence the narrator and his friends set off on an expedition to the woods beyond their town in search of a man who molested one of them. Their adventures will initiate them into the hypocrisies and betrayals of the grown-up world, and awaken them to their own potential violence. The other chapters in the story deal primarily with the narrator's creeping awareness of sex: from a series of weird encounters with a neighborhood girl to his glimpse of an adulterous relationship between a friend's mother and her lover.
While there are moments in these stories that possess the intimacy of Mr. Theroux's powerful 1989 novel, ''My Secret History,'' this volume as a whole has a hasty, self-conscious air to it, a tendency to turn subsidiary characters -- particularly the women -- into predictable and unsympathetic stereotypes, and a penchant for substituting cheap, sensationalistic set pieces for purposeful, revelatory storytelling.
In sum it's a book that showcases the author's weaknesses and liking for short cuts, instead of his considerable gifts as a writer.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
