Sitting inside a heavily fortified military compound, President Pervez Musharraf wistfully described the things he used to do: Coffee at the Marriott. Barbecue dinners with friends at the Pearl Continental Hotel. Picking up paan, a South Asian blend of mints and spices, made specially for him by a local shopkeeper.
That was before two assassination attempts in December.
''All that activity unfortunately has been stopped,'' he said in an interview on Monday. ''That hurts me. I am not an introvert. I am not a man sitting at home. I was always more active.''
He said at one point: ''I'm not scared. You might find it very odd, but I am not scared.'' His caution, he said, is for the sake of the country.
Did that mean that he saw himself as uniquely qualified to lead Pakistan at this point in history? ''I would like to believe that,'' he said.
In the past two years, General Musharraf has become, perhaps more than any Muslim leader, a bridge, or a pivot, between Islam and the West. He leads a country that has produced more than its share of Islamic militants, yet is a crucial ally in the American campaign against those militants.
He said that the United States and NATO needed to dispatch more troops to Afghanistan, and that Afghanistan should not ignore the desires of its majority Pashtun population. He said that members and supporters of Al Qaeda remained active in only one area along the border with Afghanistan, and that the Pakistan Army was pursuing them. And he said he had received no recent reports on Osama bin Laden's whereabouts.
''We can't say,'' General Musharraf said, when asked whether capture of Al Qaeda's leader was getting closer. ''Maybe tomorrow we get him, or we may not see him in a year.''
He called for a three-pronged approach to combat fundamentalism.
First, Washington should move aggressively to solve simmering political disputes, he said, particularly the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, to ''kill the perception'' that it favors Israel.
''This is the start point of all the hatred in the Muslim world against the United States and the West,'' he said. ''We are losing. We have to solve it.''
Helping solve Pakistan and India's long dispute over Kashmir would also reduce tensions, he said.
And he called for the adoption of a radical overhaul he proposed for the Organization of the Islamic Conference, an alliance of Muslim countries, and more spending on areas like health and education.
''Fundamentalism is political disputes, lack of education and illiteracy, combined with poverty,'' he said. ''A hungry man, an illiterate man -- anyone who comes and puts a Kalashnikov in his hand, well, he's available.''
''He's going to feed himself, and he doesn't understand what he's doing also,'' General Musharraf added. ''Therefore he's available gun fodder.''
But when he spoke about his own efforts to combat fundamentalism in Pakistan, he conceded that some areas, like reform of hard-line Islamic religious schools, or madrasas, had proceeded slowly. ''You must understand, I don't have a magic wand,'' he said.
He said his biggest problem was getting the lower rungs of Pakistan's government to function.
''There is really a very big gap between policy formulation and policy implementation,'' he said. ''For a developing country, this gap is very large.''
