HIGHLIGHTS
BANNING VIRTUAL MUSIC -- In a joint agreement described as historic, Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians announced yesterday a pact with the Opera Company of Brooklyn to prohibit the use of the virtual orchestra machine in all future productions. ''This is the first agreement that we know of that bans the use of the virtual orchestra machine,'' said David Lennon, the local's president. ''Local 802's main priority is to keep music live, and we will continue to aggressively fight the displacement of live musicians with with the virtual orchestra machine.'' The effort to introduce so-called virtual music led not only to the union's dispute with the Opera Company of Brooklyn, but also to the strike that shut down Broadway musicals briefly last year. Local 802 said the machine involved in its protest of an Opera Company of Brooklyn performance of Mozart's ''Nozze di Figaro'' last Friday was the RealTime Symphonia. The new agreement gives union recognition to its musicians and requires the management to negotiate for a collective bargaining agreement by March 1.
HAVANA: HEMINGWAY ACCORD -- An agreement to exchange information in books and documents left by Ernest Hemingway, below, was reached on Saturday by Cuban officials and Martin Peterson, the co-president of the Hemingway House Foundation in Idaho, Reuters reported. During the meeting at Finca Vigia, the estate on the outskirts of Havana where Hemingway lived from 1940 to 1960, a year before his suicide at his home in Ketchum, Idaho, Mr. Peterson gave the officials a black-and-white photograph of the author on a hunting trip in Idaho on which he shot two antelope. Their heads are mounted in the Finca Vigia sitting room. Last year the Castro government opened the Hemingway house to a restoration project financed by the United States. --
THE CLINTONS, THE GRAMMYS -- The saxophone-playing member of the family won a Grammy, but not for his music making. His wife, also a nominee, was an also-ran. Just in case anyone missed it in all the hoopla over Janet Jackson and all the awards for Beyoncé and Justin Timberlake, Bill Clinton won a Grammy on Sunday night. Mr. Clinton, along with his fellow former president Mikhail Gorbachev, late of the Soviet Union, and the eternal screen star Sophia Loren, were honored in the spoken word for children category for ''Prokofiev: Peter and the Wolf/Beintus: Wolf Tracks,'' with Kent Nagano and the Russian National Orchestra. Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, a nominee in the spoken word album category for the audiobook version of her memoir, ''Living History,'' was a runner-up to Al Franken and his ''Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at the Right.''
INDIA: GRAMMY AFTERMATH -- In the mountain pine forests of the Kangra Valley, 38 miles outside Dharamsala, the Indian hill station that is home to more than 100,000 exiled Tibetans including the Dalai Lama, there was news of an accolade yesterday, and in Dharamsala there was rejoicing, Agence France-Presse reported. The monks of the Sherab Ling monastery had won the Grammy Award for traditional world music album for ''Sacred Tibetan Chant.'' ''It is great news,' said Thupten Samphel, a spokesman for the Tibetan government in exile. ''It is international recognition of the rich spiritual music of Tibet.''
POET'S PROGRESS -- The United States poet laureate Louise Glück, left, is to leave Williams College for a position as writer in residence at Yale University. She will teach poetry writing courses at Yale next fall. The Pulitzer Prize-winning Ms. Glück, 60, of Cambridge, Mass., who has taught at Williams since 1983, usually only in the fall, has a renewable term at Yale, said Dorie Baker, a Yale spokeswoman. James G. Kolesar, a Williams spokesman, noted that Ms. Glück had taken past leaves to teach elsewhere, The Associated Press reported.
HARRY POTTER: IT'S ALL GREEK -- Harry Potter may soon stand alongside Homer's Odysseus in the libraries of classical scholars. After a year of work, Andrew Wilson, a teacher of classics in Bedford, England, has completed what he says is the longest translation of a text into classical Greek in 1,500 years. The work is ''Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone,'' the English title of the first volume of the international best-selling J. K. Rowling novels recounting the adventures of the boy wizard. Mr. Wilson said the project was commissioned by the publishers. ''I think what the official line is,'' he said, ''is that it can be used in schools to encourage people to learn Greek. Having got kids reading English, J. K. Rowling is quite keen to have them reading Latin and reading Greek.'' The BBC reported that the Greek book is to be issued later this year, along with a Gaelic version.
FOOTNOTES
Paris Hilton and Nicole Richie are taking their hit show on the road. Fox Television announced yesterday that the second season of their reality show, ''The Simple Life,'' will uproot them from Arkansas. ''It'll be interesting to see the country through their eyes,'' Mike Darnell, Fox's vice president for special programming told Variety in a report cited by The Associated Press. ''Maybe Paris will visit a Wal-Mart.''
