Having failed to find private equity investors willing to buy the Blockbuster video rental chain, Viacom Inc. may offer to spin off the unit to its shareholders in a stock swap when it posts its 2003 earnings today, executives close to the company said.
Although Viacom, which owns 82 percent of Blockbuster, has declined to comment, several people close to the company say it is close to splitting off the unit, and the most realistic plan would be to let Viacom shareholders swap their Viacom shares for Blockbuster shares in some fixed ratio.
Viacom has tried to sell Blockbuster to a number of private equity firms in recent months, but has been unable to agree on a price. That has left Viacom with the option of either giving its Blockbuster shares to shareholders as an extraordinary dividend or splitting off the chain as a separate company and inviting Viacom shareholders to give up their stock in exchange for equity in Blockbuster. Analysts said they expect the company to choose the latter option.
Simply giving Blockbuster stock to Viacom's shareholders as a dividend would do little for Viacom, which realized 22.5 percent of its $19.1 billion in revenue and 12 percent of its $4.4 billion in cash flow from Blockbuster in the first nine months of 2003. Giving the stock away would also put millions of Blockbuster shares in the hands of investors who might not want to own them.
''I assume they will announce a split-off where investors can exchange a predetermined ratio of Viacom shares for Blockbuster shares,'' said Robert Willens, a managing director at Lehman Brothers and a tax expert. ''It is preferable to a spin-off where you dividend shares of Blockbuster to existing shareholders, without them surrendering any stock in Viacom.
''An exchange offer allows Viacom to retire some of its stock and therefore minimize the dilution to earnings that will happen when Blockbuster's earnings are no longer part of the media company.''
Mr. Willens added that an exchange offer has the advantage of letting Viacom shareholders rearrange their holdings tax-free. That is because Viacom shareholders who want to own Blockbuster stock can acquire it without selling Viacom stock, paying taxes and then buying Blockbuster shares.
Whether or not a split-off would be better than a sale to a private equity firm, which could result in large capital gains taxes for Viacom, would depend on the price the company could fetch. But judging from the months that Viacom's chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, and its president, Mel Karmazin, tried to find a buyer, they believed that a sale was likely to be more lucrative.
Richard Greenfield, who follows entertainment media companies for Fulcrum Global Partners, an independent research firm, said he believed that Viacom was under pressure to get a deal done, which suggests it will happen sooner rather than later.
''The longer they put it off, the more of an overhang it will be on the stock, both psychologically and financially,'' Mr. Greenfield said. ''If they don't do it soon, Blockbuster will turn from a driver of Viacom's growth as it was in 2003 to a drag on its growth in 2004.''
Blockbuster benefited from significant cost-cutting last year. While revenue rose just 7.8 percent, to $4.29 billion, in the first nine months -- largely because of the addition of 537 stores -- cost-cutting let the company increase its operating income by 30.3 percent to $353.6 million.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS
