In a deal reminiscent in some ways of the late 1990's bubble in Silicon Valley, Juniper Networks said Monday that it had agreed to pay a premium price of about $4 billion for NetScreen Technologies, a computer security company.
But analysts said that the proposed acquisition, rather than reflecting the return of a broader technology boom, points more specifically to rising concerns over hackers, computer worms, viruses and other daily threats to the reliability of corporate and home networks. It also underscores the effort by Juniper Networks, which makes routers used to direct data traffic, to expand its reach in markets where it competes with Cisco Systems, the leader in producing the complex digital plumbing that makes the Internet flow.
Under the all-stock deal, Juniper agreed to pay 1.404 shares of its stock for each share of NetScreen, which has about 98 million outstanding shares when all of the company's stock options are taken into account. The two companies are based across the street from each other in Sunnyvale, Calif.
The deal represents a 57 percent premium over the value of NetScreen's stock at the close of trading on Friday. The stock rose 36 percent, to $35.94 on Monday, while Juniper's stock fell sharply, closing down 11 percent at $26.18, suggesting that many investors think Juniper offered to pay too much for NetScreen. As a result, the value of the acquisition fell as well, to about $3.6 billion. Despite the drop, the price attracted plenty of attention.
''The headline number looks like it came from the year 2000,'' Jim Kelleher, an analyst with Argus Research, said of the deal. But if Juniper can expand its role from simply routing data traffic to protecting it from attack, he said, the combination could turn out to be a success.
''Security is as much a part of the network as reliability and performance,'' Mr. Kelleher said. Juniper, he added, ''is trying to offer an integrated product.''
Juniper's stock has been on a tear lately, rising from about $7 a share at the beginning of 2003, giving it enough weight in the market to serve as a valuable currency.
The company has focused on a particular niche of the router market, selling high-end equipment to Internet service providers and telecommunications companies that serve as gatekeepers for Internet traffic. The company has about 21 percent of that market, compared with about 71 percent for Cisco, according to the Dell'Oro Group, a market research firm in Redwood City, Calif.
Juniper's inroads into Cisco's turf, analysts said, are a significant accomplishment. Tal Liani, an analyst at Merrill Lynch, said that when Juniper went public in 1999, Wall Street gave it little chance of breaking Cisco's juggernaut.
For its part, NetScreen sells high-end versions of products that include firewalls, screens and other tools intended to protect networks against viruses, worms and hacker intrusions. The company is one of three market leaders, along with Check Point Software Technologies, an Israeli company, and Cisco, Mr. Liani said.
Mr. Liani predicted that NetScreen and Juniper could be strong partners because both have focused on delivering innovative technology to help them break into arenas dominated by other companies. Juniper has concentrated on supplying service providers, while NetScreen has focused on corporations, often referred to as the enterprise market.
Christine Heckart, vice president of marketing at Juniper, said the deal should indeed help Juniper expand its customer base. ''We don't look at it as 'service provider' and 'enterprise,''' she said. ''These distinctions are blurring, if not outdated.''
That points to a potential advantage of the deal, analysts said. Juniper and NetScreen not only serve different functions, they serve different pieces of a network. Juniper's products route traffic at the center, or core, of a big public data network. As such, they have some basic security, but they cannot do the intensive filtering that is done at the edge of the corporate network, where NetScreen's technology resides.
Mr. Liani, from Merrill Lynch, said Cisco's great strength was that it has offered customers comprehensive packages, enabling them to route traffic both at the core and the edge, and to protect it along the way. But he said Cisco was also vulnerable because it had not always had the best technology at any given point in the network.
Gina Sockolow, an analyst with Buckingham Research, said the acquisition would also put Juniper in a position to create a ''God box,'' a single piece of hardware to process packets of data, deliver them at high speeds and give them high-level security.
''Everybody's trying to get the 'God box' on the edge'' of the network, she said.
TECHNOLOGY
