Highly successful efforts to use combination drug therapy to stop transmission of the AIDS virus from mothers to their babies carry a troubling consequence for the mother: the development of resistance to H.I.V. drugs now recommended to fight their own infections.
The findings, reported here on Monday at the 11th annual Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections, involve studies in Thailand and South Africa about the use of nevirapine with other drugs to try to stop infections of newborns.
The research could have far-reaching implications. Experts knew that H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, could be resistant to nevirapine, but they were surprised by the findings that even a single dose could cause such a reaction. And because nevirapine is one of the three front-line therapies recommended by the World Health Organization to fight the spread of AIDS in developing countries, the results provide a counterweight to its potency in reducing transmission of the virus to infants.
Health officials have recommended since 1999 that an infected mother receive a single nevirapine pill during labor and that her newborn receive nevirapine once within the first three days of life. The therapy can reduce the risk of transmission of H.I.V. to 12 percent from 25 percent or more.
Single-dose nevirapine offered a simpler therapy compared to another drug, AZT, that was shown to reduce the rate of transmission to newborns to about 7 percent in a study reported exactly 10 years ago. AZT had to be given to a pregnant woman in the third trimester of pregnancy and also given to a newborn infant for the first week of life.
In the findings first reported on Monday, the Thailand study shows the combined therapy of single doses of nevirapine for the mother and infant with AZT cut the rate of transmission to about 2 percent, Dr. Marc Lallemant's team found.
The transmission rate is comparable to that when pregnant women received standard combinations of three of more drugs as part of chronic infection treatment.
The treatment's success would ''bring us closer to eradicating pediatric AIDS,'' said Dr. Vallop Thaineua, the permanent secretary of health in Thailand's Department of Health and an author of the study.
The new findings are ''a great victory for reducing mother-to-child transmission'' in poor countries, Dr. John Mellors, an AIDS virologist at the University of Pittsburgh, said at a news conference.
But the other new studies offset the good news. The resistance to nevirapine occurred in about 40 percent of infected women who took just one nevirapine pill during labor. Such resistance can persist for long periods of time, particularly when nevirapine is combined with other drugs for long-term treatment of H.I.V. infection and AIDS.
Speaking at a news conference, Dr. Mary Glenn Fowler, a perinatal AIDS expert at the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said the Thai findings concerning AZT and nevirapine were ''dramatic.'' But, Dr. Fowler said, because the study monitored the women and infants for only six months, and the potentially adverse resistance effects began to be seen only at the six-month period, more studies were needed to determine how important resistance will be in the long term.
Until recently, the prospect of wide-scale distribution of antiretroviral drugs to impoverished countries seemed bleak, and health officials did not consider the implications of H.I.V. resistance to nevirapine and other drugs as important. In the last few years, governments and the World Health Organization have undertaken huge efforts to try to get cheaper drugs to developing nations.
The health agency said on Monday that it had no plans to change its recommendations for therapy regimes, calling the findings on drug-resistance inconclusive. Officials from the agency and the federal government said they were not, as yet, considering substituting other drugs to curb transmission or for long-term treatment.
A committee of experts said AZT treatment for the mother from the 28th week of pregnancy with a single dose of nevirapine at the onset of labor and a single dose of nevirapine plus one week of AZT for her newborn was ''the most efficacious regimen'' for women who do not need chronic antiretroviral therapy.
The Thai study found that women whose virus was drug-resistant and later required long-term, antiretroviral therapy, were less likely to achieve maximal reduction of the amount of H.I.V. in their blood if the drug therapy included nevirapine.
The United Nations AIDS program says that last year 2.5 million children in the world became infected with H.I.V. and that more than 500,000 died. Antiretroviral therapy has lowered the number of infected newborns in the United States to an estimated 300 a year, from a peak of up to 2,000 in 1991, according to the disease control centers.
