A 16-year-old student opened fire at his high school on Monday morning with a pump-action shotgun, shooting a teacher in the leg and spreading fear among thousands of children and parents in this Albany suburb.
The student, Jon W. Romano, 16, fired at least two shells before he was tackled by an assistant principal at Columbia High School, the police said. He was arrested at the school shortly afterward and was charged with one count of attempted murder, said the district attorney of Rensselaer County, Patricia DeAngelis. Mr. Romano, who pleaded not guilty, could face up to 25 years in prison if convicted.
Just a few minutes after the first shot exploded about 10:30 a.m., the school was put into lockdown, its roughly 1,400 students told to get on the floor and not leave their classrooms. Within a half-hour, police SWAT teams were searching the building as helicopters circled overhead. Parents began to receive frantic cellphone calls from their children, but when they rushed to the school they were directed to a nearby middle school, where they waited for the students to be brought over by bus.
''My daughter called and she was really scared,'' said Thea Bove, whose daughter, Miranda, 14, is a freshman. ''Then the phone went dead and I was really scared. You just can't imagine something like this happening here.''
Although no students were injured, many parents said the first thought that went through their minds was the rampage at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo., where 2 students killed 15 people in 1999.
The attack here could have been much worse if not for the intervention of the assistant principal, John Shawchuck, who wrestled Mr. Romano to the ground, and Michael Bennett, a special-education teacher who was coming to help when he was shot, school and law enforcement officials said. One law enforcement official said the police had found a cache of ammunition, roughly 20 shotgun shells containing birdshot, in a boys' restroom.
Though law enforcement officials were still piecing the case together, two of them said Mr. Romano entered school in the morning with a backpack and a long case in which he carried the gun, a Winchester 12-gauge pump-action sporting shotgun. Soon afterward, he went into the a boys' room, the officials said.
Around this time, some students said, their friends began to send each other text messages saying that someone in the building had a gun. It is unclear whether Mr. Romano was showing off the gun or some students had just happened to catch a glimpse of him before he started shooting.
''One of my friends got a text message saying someone has a gun,'' said Alyssa Bouchey, 16. She said that at about that time a shot rang out.
Mr. Romano was firing in the third-floor hallway in the school's south tower when Mr. Shawchuck, the assistant principal, saw him. ''The student had his back to him, but he could clearly see the gun still smoking,'' said a school official who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ''He decided to jump him from behind.''
As Mr. Shawchuck wrestled Mr. Romano to the ground, the gun went off again, wounding Mr. Bennett, who was coming to help. ''The wound was to his leg,'' said Terrance L. Brewer, the superintendent of the East Greenbush Police Department. After being treated at Albany Medical Center Hospital, Mr. Bennett was released.
Mr. Bennett, who has been at the school since 1998, teaches special education and coaches girls' basketball. ''He was my favorite teacher,'' said A.J. Burnetti, a 16-year-old sophomore.
While the police would not speculate on Mr. Romano's motive, both students and law enforcement officials speaking on the condition of anonymity said it was unlikely that Mr. Bennett was the target.
They described Mr. Romano as an emotionally disturbed young man who was being treated for problems ranging from depression to anxiety. ''He had a lot of problems,'' a law enforcement official said. ''He had emotional problems.''
In recent years his behavior has been getting worse, and last spring he was not allowed to attend school, according to a school official. Instead, officials said, home schooling was provided.
School officials said they could not be more specific about the problems because they did not want to violate Mr. Romano's privacy. Whatever his difficulties, he was allowed to start attending classes again in the fall, officials said. Classmates who knew Mr. Romano well only a few years ago said they noticed dramatic changes in him by the time he returned to classes.
''He just became more of a freak,'' Ms. Bouchey said. She said that they had been in a religion class together in freshman year but that she rarely had contact with him anymore.
''He was depressed and he just didn't care because he lost all his friends,'' she said.
While parents were too busy focusing on trying to get to their children to think about the details of what had happened, many asked how a 16-year-old could have gotten hold of a gun and walked into school with it unnoticed.
There are no metal detectors at the school entrances, as there are in many urban high schools, and the principal, Michael Kuzdal, said that in his eight years at the school he was not aware of any incident in which a student had been caught with a gun. Mr. Romano's mother bought the gun less then a week ago at a federally licensed firearm store, according to two law enforcement officials.
''The gun was legal,'' said John Morgan, a field agent in the Albany office of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, which is assisting in the investigation.
Chris Lavin, the chief of the East Greenbush Police Department, said that no charges had been filed against the mother. He also said there was no evidence that Mr. Romano had had any accomplices in the shooting.
Still, the police said they wanted to search the building thoroughly before they allowed students to leave.
While students waited, first in their classrooms and then in the gymnasium, parents began arriving at the Goff Middle School, where dozens of yellow buses delivered their children around 2 p.m.
Pat Kinary said that her son Jeffrey had witnessed the event and that she had been able to speak to him only briefly. ''He said, ''Mom, you need to get here now,''' she said. Later, as she was still waiting for him, she got word from a friend that not only was her son a witness but that he had been in the hallway and was almost hit when Mr. Romano started shooting. ''My God,'' she said quietly.
Correction:  February 16, 2004, Monday  An article on Tuesday about a student who shot and injured a teacher at his high school in East Greenbush, N.Y., misstated the number of people killed by two students in 1991 at Columbine High School near Littleton, Colo. Not counting the killers, who committed suicide, it was 15, not 13.
Correction:  February 17, 2004, Tuesday  An article last Tuesday about a student who shot and injured a teacher at his high school in East Greenbush, N.Y., misstated the number of people killed by two students in the earlier attack at Columbine High School, near Littleton, Colo. A correction in this space yesterday repeated the error and misstated the year of that attack. Not counting the killers, who committed suicide, the victims totaled 13, not 15. The year was 1999, not 1991.
