The Legislature took one more step on Monday toward changing its habit of passing a budget late every year, as the Assembly's Democratic majority aority approved its version of a budget-reform bill and appointed members to a conference committee to resolve differences with the Senate.
The budget reform bill, passed by the Assembly 131 to 13, is significantly different from the one passed by the Senate, and it appears the conference committee has a tough job ahead of it, legislators said.
The only major point of agreement is that both houses want to move the start of the fiscal year to May 1 from April 1.
Beyond that, the two bills diverge. The Assembly bill, for instance, calls for an independent budget office that would provide objective but nonbinding revenue estimates, while the Senate bill would rely on the state comptroller to provide an estimate of revenues that everyone would have to live by.
The Senate bill, which was passed last month, also mandates a default budget that continues the previous year's spending if the two chambers cannot reach an agreement with the governor by May.
Still, lawmakers said Monday that the convening of a conference committee to try to find a compromise on how the state fashions its budget was progress in itself.
The conference committee will begin meeting immediately and is expected to take at least two weeks to finish its work, legislative aides said.
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver predicted that the two chambers would reach an accord.
''The budget process in this state is in dire need of an overhaul,'' Mr. Silver said. ''We can reach agreement on a dramatically improved and timely budget process.''
The state has not met its April 1 deadline for a budget since 1984, largely because the governor and legislative leaders seldom agree on a revenue estimate until after most residents pay income taxes in April.
Under Gov. George E. Pataki, it has also become common practice for legislative leaders or the governor to hold up the budget until deals can be cut on other bills of importance.
Everything in the budget has become a bargaining chip in a larger negotiation over other legislation, and the rule of thumb in Albany has become nothing gets done until everything gets done.
The Assembly's budget-reform bill has several parts that are likely to be hard for the Republican-controlled Senate to approve.
The Assembly bill, for instance, brings under the aegis of the state budget several giant state authorities, like the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the Thruway Authority, that are not currently accounted for in the governor's $99.8 billion spending plan.
Senator Joseph L. Bruno, the leader of the Republican majority, said that many G.O.P. senators saw that provision, among others, as extraneous to the goal of getting an on-time budget. ''The bad news is they seem to be defusing and confusing true budget reform with a lot of other legislation,'' Mr. Bruno said.
Mr. Bruno said he did he not think his caucus would support creating a new bureaucracy to estimate revenues. Neither could he envision passing a bill that did not have a default budget should the Legislature fail to meet its deadline, he said. "You have to have a default budget to have true budget reform,'' he said.
To say the conference committee had a tough job was ''an understatement,'' Mr. Bruno said. ''It truly is a challenge but I'm willing to get engaged in the debate.''
For nine years, Mr. Bruno has made reforming the budget process one of his priorities and has expressed optimism that this may be the year an agreement can be reached; the legislators face elections in November and chronically late budgets have become a club for challengers.
