Even for a choreographer who did more than most to promote the storyless ballet, George Balanchine outdid himself with ''Jewels,'' the spectacular evening-long plotless work he set to the music of Fauré, Stravinsky and Tchaikovsky in 1967.
An instant masterpiece hailed as the world's only three-act pure-dance ballet, ''Jewels'' has always been on New York City Ballet's best-seller list. On Friday night it returned to a sold-out New York State Theater with striking, even startling, new sets by Peter Harvey, which were greeted with shouts (presumably of enthusiasm). There was also a sensational debut by Alexandra Ansanelli in ''Rubies,'' the Stravinsky section of the work.
Ms. Ansanelli's performance, deliriously applauded, beamed a different light on the familiar. Fierce in its speed and technical force, her dancing enhanced the ballerina role's playfulness and sparkle with new dynamism.
Balanchine shrewdly contrasted the flash of ''Rubies,'' the second section, with the first segment, ''Emeralds,'' which translates Fauré's poetic textures into Balanchine's quiet mysteries. By the third act the preceding lyrical and contemporary rhythms are left behind as Balanchine and Tchaikovsky work hand in hand, moving toward a dazzling formal grandeur.
''Jewels'' may have no plot, but there is drama in these contrasts. And there is a unifying thread: the precious stones motif that Balanchine introduced in 1967 through the colors of Karinska's costumes and Mr. Harvey's original décor. That set, with each section's gems seen in relief, was replaced in 1983 by Robin Wagner's décor, with a more encrusted look.
Mr. Harvey's new décor is less insistent on a gem motif than on concept. ''Emeralds'' is now danced against a beautiful lush green abstraction of a forest and flat drapes with trim and strings of green beads. ''Rubies,'' which provoked the shouts, has an electrifying impact just like its choreography. Curves yield to verticals: the black backdrop and severe drapes are studded with red lines although there is also an overhanging circular red design.
If ''Emeralds'' has been called the French section of ''Jewels'' and ''Diamonds,'' the third section, a tribute to 19th-century Russian ballet, ''Rubies,'' with its jazzy impetus, has been linked to Stravinsky's years in America. Yet Mr. Harvey reminds us that both Balanchine and Stravinsky were avant-garde Russian artists before they came to the United States. The red slats recall Russian Suprematist paintings just as the flat acrobatic silhouette for the second ballerina in ''Rubies'' comes from Balanchine's 1920's ballets.
It will take some time to get used to Mr. Harvey's new set for ''Diamonds.'' It misses the palatial splendor of the choreography. The spectacular mass Polonaise by 16 couples near the end needs a ballroom, not the grotto evoked by a blue backdrop and repeated arcades. Even the white beads, cascading overhead, look like pearls instead of diamonds.
As a whole ''Jewels'' is a retrospective of Balanchine's past innovations and achievements. ''Rubies'' has the angular inverted modernisms of many Stravinsky-Balanchine works; ''Diamonds'' is another distilled tribute to the Russian Imperial Ballet although here the homage is more to Lev Ivanov than to his ''Swan Lake'' collaborator, Marius Petipa.
Only ''Emeralds'' has a strange and mesmerizing new luster. Balanchine's neo-Romantic images of nymphs separating a man from his ideal are familiar but they are covered by a Symbolist veneer. Balanchine turned to Fauré's incidental music for plays of the Symbolist period, and there is no more heart-wrenching poetry in ballet than the elegiac final moment: each of three men sink to one knee as the music evokes the heroine's death in the play ''Pelleas and Melisande.''
''Emeralds,'' with its focus on serenity and arm movements, is difficult to dance. Miranda Weese and Stephen Hanna caught its subtle nuances. Jenifer Ringer, too much of a soubrette as the second ballerina, missed the mystery of the walking duet, partnered by an atypically rough James Fayette. It would be grand to cast Pascale van Kipnis in the main ballerina role. She had the right vivacity, as seen in the trio with Arch Higgins and Jennifer Tinsley.
The dancing reached the highest level of the evening in ''Rubies,'' with a brilliant corps setting off Ms. Ansanelli, Damian Woetzel and, in another debut, Teresa Reichlen, who held her acrobatic shapes and long-legged arabesques with steadiness and clarity.
Each segment of ''Jewels'' has a motor motif: walking in ''Emeralds,'' formal dancing in ''Diamonds'' and running in ''Rubies.'' There is even an entertaining chase scene between Mr. Woetzel and four men. Rarely has the momentum of the choreography been as sustained as in Ms. Ansanelli's fast multiple pirouettes, stunningly incorporated into images of seductive allure. Cuteness was replaced by glamour and energy, matched by Mr. Woetzel's fabulous emphatic style. Andrea Quinn, the evening's conductor, was particularly superb in this segment.
The same could not yet be said for Maria Kowroski, who made a cautious if elegant debut as the ballerina in ''Diamonds,'' partnered by a noble Philip Neal. Ms. Kowroski sometimes needs time to work into a role, and here she did not miss the ballet's essence. The final image of her pas de deux summed up Balanchine's ever effective tribute to the ideal ballerina. Mr. Neal dropped to one knee and kissed her hand.
CITY BALLET REVIEW
