Thomas R. Suozzi wore the mantle of reform when he swept into office in 2002 as Nassau's first Democratic county executive in three decades, promising to solve a fiscal crisis and clean up corruption.
But now, after winning praise for Nassau's fiscal turnaround and being noticed on the statewide political scene, he is struggling with a scandal that clouds his reformer image.
''He fell off the white horse he rode in on,'' said Stanley B. Klein, a political science professor at the C.W. Post campus of Long Island University and a Republican committeeman in Suffolk County.
How Mr. Suozzi will fare in the remaining half of his term, the fate of his ambitious county agenda and his own political future all hinge on how the scandal plays out.
''This is a time of testing for this administration,'' Mr. Suozzi acknowledged at a recent news conference here. He was referring to accusations that his former deputy for economic development, Peter Sylver, was guilty of fiscal irregularities and sexual harassment.
No one knows how long the pending investigations will last. The County Legislature, county district attorney, Federal Bureau of Investigation, United States attorney and federal Department of Housing and Urban Development are all scrutinizing the case.
Equally uncertain is how much blame may fall on Mr. Suozzi and whether he will suffer lasting damage to his political clout and popularity. Before the scandal broke, his approval rating in the polls in this traditionally Republican county had soared to 70 percent.
''These problems will be fixed,'' vowed Mr. Suozzi, who has accepted responsibility and announced corrective steps. ''We are better and stronger for it. It is now time to move on and get back to the important work that must be done.''
Critics take a dimmer view. ''The damage is enormous, and he's done it to himself,'' said the County Legislature's Republican minority leader, Peter J. Schmitt. ''The county has screeched to a halt.''
The Republicans say that Mr. Suozzi broke his campaign pledge to make county government a model of efficiency and integrity by eliminating mismanagement, waste, corruption and favoritism. Further, they tie some troubling issues to him.
The first inkling of trouble came last fall, when the civil service director was fired after claiming that some of Mr. Sylver's staff had been paid with diverted federal grants, an accusation the county denied.
Next came disclosures about bills that Mr. Sylver had charged to a county credit card obtained with a falsified application. They included $707 for tinting his county car's windows and $3,400 for a trip to London to give a speech, after which he and his wife stayed three extra days. He later reimbursed the county.
Eventually Mr. Sylver resigned, saying that he was the victim of partisan politics.
But the scandal continued to unfold. Mr. Suozzi's financial deputy and the county comptroller uncovered systemic problems in Mr. Sylver's domain. They found an operation with a lack of procedures in which some workers were paid when absent, contracts were awarded without bidding and accounting was slipshod.
Then a jolting revelation came two weeks ago: Mr. Sylver's former assistant, a 23-year-old woman, had accused him of sexual harassment and attempted assault. She said that when she refused further advances, he had ordered her fired. After relaying a complaint to Mr. Suozzi, she had instead been promoted to a higher-paying job in another agency. She had agreed, in return, to drop her case under a confidential agreement.
''Another cover-up,'' declared Mr. Schmitt, the legislator, who charged that the administration had for months stonewalled his requests for Mr. Sylver's records.
The confidential agreement was released. ''That's a real killer,'' said Professor Klein. ''If you read the document, it's: 'You shut up, we pay you off.'''
Mr. Suozzi insists that the case was thoroughly investigated, but that neither the accusation nor denial was proved. The settlement satisfied the woman, and she requested confidentiality to protect her privacy, he said.
Although Mr. Sylver declined to comment, his lawyer, Stephen Worth, said, ''We deny all the allegations'' of wrongdoing.
Critics say that the choice of Mr. Sylver's lawyer smacks of damage control. Mr. Sylver, who knows lawyers as a former associate dean of Hofstra Law School, is being defended by the county executive's friend and political ally. As mayor of Glen Cove, Mr. Suozzi picked Mr. Worth for appointment to the City Council. Mr. Suozzi said he suggested Mr. Worth to Mr. Sylver, who sought a private lawyer for advice on the allegations of fiscal irregularities.
Republicans also point to a close Suozzi connection in the decision of Mr. Sylver's agencies to hire the Crowe Deegan law firm for $750,000 of work without competitive bidding. When he was mayor of Glen Cove, Mr. Suozzi hired a partner of the firm as the city attorney, and its partners donated $33,000 to his county executive campaign.
The administration defends Crowe Deegan, saying that its work is expert, it charges lower fees than the county's previous lawyers and it was needed quickly to save an endangered project. Bidding was not legally required, though the comptroller recommends it, and the administration says it will be done.
Mr. Suozzi took office vowing to fix a broken county that was dependent on a state bailout and subject to a state-imposed oversight board. Alluding to his success in reviving Glen Cove, his slogan was ''I can do it because I've done it.''
As county executive, he was on a roll. He balanced the budget, replaced deficits with surpluses, cut the work force to its lowest level in 30 years, wrung concessions from the unions, reduced new borrowing and past debt and won Nassau's first credit upgrade in 15 years, then a second.
Harboring ambitions for higher office, Mr. Suozzi reached beyond Nassau. As president-elect of the New York State County Executives Association, he got Albany's attention by demanding that the state stop forcing localities to raise property taxes to help pay for its Medicaid program.
But lately the Sylver matters have preoccupied the administration.
''None of the original accomplishments can be obliterated, but there's no question this has certainly brought the agenda to a halt at the moment,'' said the Legislature's presiding officer, Judith A. Jacobs, a Democrat.
Mr. Sylver is a graduate of Hofstra Law School who earned his way there as a university security guard and eventually became an administrator.
Mr. Suozzi put him in charge of housing, intergovernmental affairs and several economic development agencies. Mr. Sylver became prominent alongside Mr. Suozzi by orchestrating dozens of ''town hall'' forums at which the county executive presided. Lately, however, critics say Mr. Sylver has been in hiding, eluding the Legislature's subpoenas to testify at hearings.
''Suozzi brought in a lot of new people into government, and one of them explodes in front of his face,'' Professor Klein said. A deeper background check would have discovered that Mr. Sylver had filed for personal bankruptcy.
The county operations that Mr. Sylver inherited were disorganized. One agency with a vacant board was little more than a box of assorted files. The comptroller's audit found problems dating to the prior administration, including $119,000 spent on golf, charities and staff parties.
Mr. Suozzi praised Mr. Sylver's achievements. His staff rescued a failing $1.6 million housing program from a federal takeover. The industrial development agency handled more than $1 million in projects, compared with $200,000 in the prior administration. And he saved $250,000 in rent by moving his agencies into empty county offices.
But Mr. Sylver's staff had trouble clearing local grants, said Lisanne Altmann, a Democratic legislator. Last spring he arranged a photo opportunity with giant checks totaling $100,000 for several villages, she said, but the real checks never arrived. ''The problem with the administration is they were in a big hurry to get things done'' and sometimes cut corners procedurally, she said.
Mr. Suozzi's fellow Democrats in the Legislature, who hold a fragile 10-to-9 majority, complain that they were ambushed by the sex harassment case. ''It's like sending in soldiers and not telling them there are land mines,'' said Ms. Altmann.
The administration says it did not alert the legislators because it thought the hearings were limited to fiscal issues.
The Nassau Democratic Party chairman, Jay Jacobs, called the Sylver episode ''a bump in the road'' for Mr. Suozzi. ''We're talking about one member of the administration who made mistakes in judgment that, when all added up, may have used $15,000 out of a $2 billion budget,'' he said. ''They've spent far more than that investigating it.''
But Mr. Schmitt disagrees: ''They're trying to spin it that this is just one guy, just expenses on one credit card,'' he said. ''It's much more -- more than $1 million in questionable spending'' involving salaries, contracts and grants.
