Ernest Hemingway once observed of the English upper classes that they use fewer words in their spoken language than the Eskimo. The English speak with a lot of inflected phrases, so that one phrase -- ''I say,'' ''Awfully nice of you,'' ''What rot!'' -- could mean everything. Hemingway never met a fashionista.
''Don't quite understand the accessories,'' one editor said to another during the Catherine Malandrino show on Sunday afternoon. Some of the models had on big fur hats with flaps over their ears.
''Haven't a clue,'' the other editor said.
''They don't seem to have anything to do with the clothes.''
''No, but then what does these days?''
They watched the show. The models were in cropped trousers with dusty pastel tops and many variations of cobweb sweaters, some of them spilling off the models' shoulders, and they walked with a twisting action in their hips as if to elicit a more heightened sexual response to the clothes. You see a lot of this now on the runways: models walking with an unnatural gait. There was a white trench coat in wide-wale corduroy and several big wool coats in drab porridge colors that appeared to have been knitted by a reposing giant. They were worn with delicate slip skirts, some embroidered with flowers on the scalloped hem.
''The knits are good.''
''Yes, the knits are good.''
The show ended, and the editors moved toward the door. ''Let's get out of here,'' one of them said.
On Avenue of the Americas, the Town Cars of the fashion people were three deep, and a police cruiser tried to chase them off. Gradually, as if guided by a system of hidden pulleys beneath the pavement, the cars glided south through the Sunday twilight, carrying their occupants to the next show, Derek Lam's, at the National Arts Club on Gramercy Park. You could see in his pretty dresses and mosaic-tile prints that Mr. Lam had been influenced by the old marzipan world of Klimt and Mozart. They were not like the overwrought clothes of other young designers. They were thoughtful and quiet, with a sense of rigor in the details, and the pomegranate oranges and washed panne velvets looked fine against the club's Persian carpets and dark paneling.
''Inspiring,'' said a guest as she left the show.
''It has the vibe of a young Oscar,'' said Robert Burke, the fashion director of Bergdorf Goodman.
Mr. Burke was referring, of course, to Oscar de la Renta. He was also making a quite unconscious connection to something Mr. de la Renta had said earlier on Sunday, during a lull in the fall 2004 collections. Mr. de la Renta was in his office on Seventh Avenue, doing fittings for the clothes he would show on Monday afternoon.
''What is the difference between elegant, new, edgy and branché?'' Mr. de la Renta suddenly asked, using the French word for hip.
It was a good question. There is, in fact, no difference today. That the author Salman Rushdie and Michael Eisner, the chairman of Disney, were at Diane Von Furstenberg's show on Sunday night is proof of how much different worlds and tastes overlap. Yet many designers, including Ms. Von Furstenberg, don't seem to know that if you keep mixing and matching endlessly -- piling tweeds on python-print chiffon on leggings -- you don't get more modern clothes. You get the dog's dinner. If you overlooked the hip effects, Ms. Von Furstenberg had good things, like hooded tunics and a black wrap minidress with grommets and chartreuse lacing.
Young designers have their special struggles, perhaps none more than Cat Swanson, a Texan who was in a plane crash in November that killed her father. Her second New York show displayed a flair for mixing textures, like leather and satin, and her ruffled flourishes had a trace of Southern pageantry. Yet the trouble with her clothes, and those of Bryan Bradley of Tuleh, is that despite the branché mix of sophisticated and cheesy, they don't look natural. In Paris last month, Karl Lagerfeld and Hedi Slimane made a case for a more natural look -- Mr. Lagerfeld with his clean black blazers and long slim skirts, which he showed with black stilettos and a minimum of accessories, and Mr. Slimane with his skinny suits, which looked all the more right because most of the models were not professionals. They were skateboarders, art students, American guitar players -- guys, as he said, ''of the moment.''
So to be branché is to be elegant, but to be modern is to be natural.
Just as it demands someone of Tom Ford's vision to know which cheese to serve, and how much to slice off, it takes a designer of Mr. de la Renta's sophistication to know how to strike the balance. He did this best with a denim-blue shearling coat trimmed with guinea hen feathers and worn with a sleek gown of brown chiffon. He also used black and white tweed nicely, in shifts with fringed or feathered hems. There were the usual entrance-makers -- fairy tulle, aubergine satin with back draping -- but it was a severe black jacket over a teacup black taffeta skirt that answered his own question.
In just a few seasons, Carolina Herrera has swept away the stiff satin and set-in sleeves, bringing on a lightness, especially in prints and a more real sense of casual luxury. Though her models yesterday looked hobbled in long cashmere skirts, duffel coats in cobalt blue with chocolate-brown ski pants (it was a chalet-inspired collection) looked lovely, and she did novel things with embroidery and feathered bits of chiffon, particularly matchsticks of jet beading on lilac silk.
A security guard at the Imitation of Christ show at Salon 94 on East 94th Street seemed to be under the delusion that the people waiting in the cold on Sunday morning were there for their health. Bridget Foley, the executive editor of Women's Wear Daily, got so mad that she left and had to be chased to Fifth Avenue by a publicist. Inside, the scene was not much better, as editors beheaded roses scattered on the floor. ''This is a very poor imitation of Christ,'' a photographer said.
There was an ingenuity about Tara Subkoff's all-knit collection, but as Hemingway might have said, it was amusing but not very pleasant.
