In searching for the last piece to the puzzle of bringing the Nets the N.B.A. championship, the team president, Rod Thorn, has sought a big man to compete with the towering front lines of the Western Conference.
Although the additions of Alonzo Mourning and Eddie Griffin backfired this season, the latest move by Thorn, promoting Lawrence Frank from assistant coach to head coach, has coincided with the Nets turning their season around.
The Nets won the final game of Byron Scott's tenure, one in which Frank took over in the second half when Scott was ejected, and they have won all seven games since Frank became the coach. Every victory has been by double digits, and Frank is just two triumphs short of the N.B.A. record for most consecutive victories by a new coach.
What Frank would point out as far more important than his own record is the fact that the Nets have improved to a 29-20 mark after being just one game over .500. They have pulled within two and a half games of the Detroit Pistons for the second-best record in the Eastern Conference and will be host to the Pistons tonight in the toughest challenge of Frank's young career.
''I just think he's done a sensational job,'' Thorn said. ''The things I talked about -- that you could tangibly see -- were his knowledge of the game and his work ethic. He's been training for this coaching position since he was 16 years old. He's been with some of the top coaches in the country, studied them: what worked and didn't work. He was an assistant in college at two different places, an assistant in the N.B.A. in two different places.''
Thorn expressed confidence in Frank the day he named him interim coach, but there were questions that even Thorn could not know the answers to until Frank had taken over as the head coach for the first time in his career.
''He's bright in basketball, smart enough to pick out the good and drop some things that aren't as good,'' Thorn said yesterday. ''His work ethic is right there with anybody's.''
Thorn added that Frank ''can make adjustments while the game is going on, and not many can do that.''
''He's very self-effacing, not afraid to give credit to players, not afraid to ask players, ''Do you feel comfortable doing it this way?' '' Thorn said. ''If the players are comfortable, then you'll get the extra effort. To me, he's in the process of proving to the players that he knows what he's doing, that they can trust him.''
Thorn may have been sold on Frank before he named him to succeed Scott on Jan. 26, calling him an interim coach, but adding that day, ''I expect him to be here longer than that because I think he'll do a very good job.''
Frank has captured the confidence of his players as well as the attention of the league, but Thorn is still not ready to commit on taking the interim out of his title.
''It is early,'' Thorn said yesterday. ''All that will take care of itself. I'd be remiss in saying he came in under less than tough circumstances, seeing what was written and said at the time. You can't expect more than what was done. I expect him to go along that way. He hasn't changed any of what he has to do in order to be ready. He does the same things as when he was an assistant.''
Thorn put this team together, starting with Jason Kidd and continuing with the draft-day dealings that brought Richard Jefferson and Jason Collins to the Nets in 2001. Now, despite the big-man acquisitions that have not worked for Thorn, Frank seems to be working out. ''He's certainly doing his part,'' Thorn said. ''He's put us in a position to win.''
Even with impressive recent victories at Houston and New Orleans, the Pistons game looks to be Frank's most important test so far. Detroit is a team that the Nets might have deemed out of reach just eight games ago.
''This will be our biggest test yet,'' Jefferson said on Sunday. ''This is another chance for us to show that we've gotten better. If we do what we need to do in the regular season, we know we'll be where we need to be in the playoffs. We know we can be very competitive with or without the home court.''
PRO BASKETBALL
