A berth in the 16-nation field at this summer's Athens Games will be decided tonight when the United States men's Olympic team plays Mexico in Guadalajara. The American men have played in every tournament since 1980.
And though 17-year-old Eddie Gaven will most likely be on the bench to start the regional semifinal match, he has seen and heard it all during the United States' three opening-round victories.
''I mean, it's all been kind of rude, booing our national anthem,'' Gaven said in a telephone interview from Mexico. ''It's something we have to deal with.''
He complimented people he had encountered off the field, but he noted, ''Once you get on the field it turns into a war.''
Gaven, who plays in Major League Soccer for the MetroStars, became the youngest player in the history of Olympic qualifying in the Concacaf region -- which includes North and Central America and the Caribbean -- when he entered the match against Canada as a substitute at striker. He started at central midfield and played the entire match in Saturday's 4-3 victory over Honduras.
''It really doesn't matter where I'm playing,'' he said. ''But my favorite spot is center mid.''
Gaven has been on the go since the end of his rookie season in M.L.S., a season that was interrupted when he played for the United States in the under-17 world championships in Finland. After Olympic qualifying, he will take a week off, then join the MetroStars for their trip to Spain for the Manga tournament. A native of Hamilton, N.J., Gaven will again spend the season living at home, about an hour south of Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, where the MetroStars play home matches.
''I'll probably move closer in a year or so,'' Gaven said. ''I do want to be on my own. I don't want to be living at home when I'm 25 or something.''
The United States and Honduras were each assured of advancing to today's semifinals before they stepped on the field on Saturday. United States Coach Glenn Myernick rested six starters: D. J. Countess, Chad Marshall, DaMarcus Beasley, Bobby Convey, Landon Donovan and Brad Davis. In a curious twist, the winner of the match was paired against Mexico, which finished second in its group to Costa Rica.
MAJOR LEAGUE SOCCER  If City Builds It, They Will Come
Officials from M.L.S. were in Cleveland last week to pump up support for an expansion team that was awarded to Bert Wolstein last year. Wolstein's effort to build a soccer stadium with some public financing has run into resistance from officials in Cuyahoga County, which includes metropolitan Cleveland. Wolstein has begun negotiations with Summit County, south of Cleveland.
''If Cleveland builds a stadium, we will be here as soon as we can,'' Don Garber, the league's commissioner, told The Cleveland Plain Dealer during his trip to Ohio. ''If they don't build a stadium, we won't come here.''
METROSTARS -- Steve Reese, a goalie from Oregon who has played in Romania, has joined the MetroStars at training camp in Bradenton, Fla. Zack Wells, the club's second draft pick, from U.C.L.A, is also in camp. The starter, Jonny Walker, is still training with the United States national team, at least until Thursday, when Coach Bruce Arena picks his roster for a friendly match on Feb. 18 against the Netherlands in Amsterdam. Last week, the MetroStars acquired the Bolivian midfielder Joselito Vaca from Dallas.
COLUMBUS -- David Testo, a member of the United States men's Olympic team and the rookie of the year in the A-League in 2003, is set to join the Crew after protracted transfer negotiations with the Richmond Kickers. Testo has signed a four-year contract that will pay him about $30,000 this season.
NEW ENGLAND -- The Revolution has hired Paul Mariner, 50, formerly a striker for England's national team, as assistant coach to Steve Nicol. Mariner had most recently worked as an assistant coach at Harvard.
Corner Kicks
ENGLAND -- Arsenal is five games from tying Liverpool's Premier League record of 29 matches without a defeat. If Arsenal (17-0-7) does not lose any of its next five matches, it could break the record on March 28 at Highbury against . . . Manchester United.
CHAMPIONS LEAGUE -- UEFA, the sport's governing body in Europe, said last week that the final in 2005 would be played in Istanbul. It would be the first European final played in Turkey. This year's final, on May 26, will be played in Gelsenkirchen, Germany.
SCOTLAND -- Glasgow Celtic's Swedish striker, Henrik Larsson, who will leave the club at the end of the season after seven years, said he turned down an offer to join Manchester United in 1998. ''I wasn't tempted at the time,'' Larsson, 32, told Agence France-Presse. Larsson is likely to end up in Spain with Real Mallorca.
THE NETHERLANDS -- Ajax took a 3-point lead in the Dutch Eredivisie after Sunday's 2-1 victory over PSV Eindhoven. It was the club's first victory in a league game over PSV in Amsterdam in nine years. John O'Brien, Ajax's American defender, left the game early in the second half with a minor back injury, according to the Ajax USA Web site.
OCEANIA -- Harry Kewell, a striker from Australia who plays for Liverpool, was named Oceania's player of the year, ahead of Mark Viduka, his former teammate at Leeds, and Ryan Nelsen of New Zealand and D.C. United.
SOCCER REPORT
