Authoritative Sources in a Hyperlinked Environment
Jon M. Kleinberg y
Abstract
The network structure of a hyperlinked environment can be a rich source of in-
formation about the content of the environment, provided we have eective means for
understanding it. We develop a set of algorithmic tools for extracting information from
the link structures of such environments, and report on experiments that demonstrate
their eectiveness in a variety of contexts on the World Wide Web. The central issue
we address within our framework is the distillation of broad search topics, through
the discovery of \authoritative" information sources on such topics. We propose and
test an algorithmic formulation of the notion of authority, based on the relationship
between a set of relevant authoritative pages and the set of \hub pages" that join them
together in the link structure. Our formulation has connections to the eigenvectors
of certain matrices associated with the link graph; these connections in turn motivate
additional heuristics for link-based analysis.
Preliminary versions of this paper appear in the Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
Algorithms, 1998, and as IBM Research Report RJ 10076, May 1997.
yDept. of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca NY 14853. Email: kleinber@cs.cornell.edu.
This work was performed in large part while on leave at the IBM Almaden Research Center, San Jose CA
95120. The author is currently supported by an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship and by NSF Faculty
Early Career Development Award CCR-9701399.
1 Introduction
The network structure of a hyperlinked environment can be a rich source of information
about the content of the environment, provided we have eective means for understanding
it. In this work, we develop a set of algorithmic tools for extracting information from the
link structures of such environments, and report on experiments that demonstrate their
eectiveness in a variety of contexts on the World Wide Web (www) [4]. In particular, we
focus on the use of links for analyzing the collection of pages relevant to a broad search topic,
and for discovering the most \authoritative" pages on such topics.
While our techniques are not specic to the www, we nd the problems of search and
structural analysis particularly compelling in the context of this domain. The www is a
hypertext corpus of enormous complexity, and it continues to expand at a phenomenal rate.
Moreover, it can be viewed as an intricate form of populist hypermedia, in which millions
of on-line participants, with diverse and often conflicting goals, are continuously creating
hyperlinked content. Thus, while individuals can impose order at an extremely local level,
its global organization is utterly unplanned | high-level structure can emerge only through
a posteriori analysis.
Our work originates in the problem of searching on the www, which we could dene
roughly as the process of discovering pages that are relevant to a given query. The quality of
a search method necessarily requires human evaluation, due to the subjectivity inherent in
notions such as relevance. We begin from the observation that improving the quality of search
methods on the www is, at the present time, a rich and interesting problem that is in many
ways orthogonal to concerns of algorithmic eciency and storage. In particular, consider
that current search engines typically index a sizable portion of the www and respond on
the order of seconds. Although there would be considerable utility in a search tool with a
longer response time, provided that the results were of signicantly greater value to a user,
it has typically been very hard to say what such a search tool should be computing with this
extra time. Clearly we are lacking objective functions that are both concretely dened and
correspond to human notions of quality.
Queries and Authoritative Sources. We view searching as beginning from a user-
supplied query. It seems best not to take too unied a view of the notion of a query; there
is more than one type of query, and the handling of each may require dierent techniques.
Consider, for example, the following types of queries.
 Specic queries. E.g., \Does Netscape support the JDK 1.1 code-signing API?"
 Broad-topic queries. E.g., \Find information about the Java programming language."
 Similar-page queries. E.g., \Find pages ÔsimilarÕ to java.sun.com."
Concentrating on just the rst two types of queries for now, we see that they present very
dierent sorts of obstacles. The diculty in handling specic queries is centered, roughly,
around what could be called the Scarcity Problem: there are very few pages that contain the
1
required information, and it is often dicult to determine the identity of these pages.
For broad-topic queries, on the other hand, one expects to nd many thousand relevant
pages on the www; such a set of pages might be generated by variants of term-matching
(e.g. one enters a string such as \Gates," \search engines," or \censorship" into a search
engine such as AltaVista [17]), or by more sophisticated means. Thus, there is not an
issue of scarcity here. Instead, the fundamental diculty lies in what could be called the
Abundance Problem: The number of pages that could reasonably be returned as relevant is
far too large for a human user to digest. To provide eective search methods under these
conditions, one needs a way to lter, from among a huge collection of relevant pages, a small
set of the most \authoritative" or \denitive" ones.
This notion of authority, relative to a broad-topic query, serves as a central focus in our
work. One of the fundamental obstacles we face in addressing this issue is that of accurately
modeling authority in the context of a particular query topic. Given a particular page, how
do we tell whether it is authoritative?
It is useful to discuss some of the complications that arise here. First, consider the natural
goal of reporting www.harvard.edu, the home page of Harvard University, as one of the most
authoritative pages for the query "Harvard". Unfortunately, there are over a million pages
on the www that use the term \Harvard," and www.harvard.edu is not the one that uses
the term most often, or most prominently, or in any other way that would favor it under
a text-based ranking function. Indeed, one suspects that there is no purely endogenous
measure of the page that would allow one to properly assess its authority. Second, consider
the problem of nding the home pages of the main www search engines. One could begin
from the query "search engines", but there is an immediate diculty in the fact that
many of the natural authorities (Yahoo!, Excite, AltaVista) do not use the term on their
pages. This is a fundamental and recurring phenomenon | as another example, there is
no reason to expect the home pages of Honda or Toyota to contain the term \automobile
manufacturers."
Analysis of the Link Structure. Analyzing the hyperlink structure among www pages
gives us a way to address many of the diculties discussed above. Hyperlinks encode a
considerable amount of latent human judgment, and we claim that this type of judgment
is precisely what is needed to formulate a notion of authority. Specically, the creation of
a link on the www represents a concrete indication of the following type of judgment: the
creator of page p, by including a link to page q, has in some measure conferred authority on
q. Moreover, links aord us the opportunity to nd potential authorities purely through the
pages that point to them; this oers a way to circumvent the problem, discussed above, that
many prominent pages are not suciently self-descriptive.
Of course, there are a number of potential pitfalls in the application of links for such
a purpose. First of all, links are created for a wide variety of reasons, many of which
2
have nothing to do with the conferral of authority. For example, a large number of links
are created primarily for navigational purposes (\Click here to return to the main menu");
others represent paid advertisements.
Another issue is the diculty in nding an appropriate balance between the criteria of
relevance and popularity, each of which contributes to our intuitive notion of authority. It
is instructive to consider the serious problems inherent in the following simple heuristic for
locating authoritative pages: Of all pages containing the query string, return those with the
greatest number of in-links. We have already argued that for a great many queries ("search
engines", "automobile manufacturers", . . . ), a number of the most authoritative pages
do not contain the associated query string. Conversely, this heuristic would consider a univer-
sally popular page such as www.yahoo.com or www.netscape.com to be highly authoritative
with respect to any query string that it contained.
In this work, we propose a link-based model for the conferral of authority, and show how
it leads to a method that consistently identies relevant, authoritative www pages for broad
search topics. Our model is based on the relationship that exists between the authorities for
a topic and those pages that link to many related authorities | we refer to pages of this
latter type as hubs. We observe that a certain natural type of equilibrium exists between
hubs and authorities in the graph dened by the link structure, and we exploit this to develop
an algorithm that identies both types of pages simultaneously. The algorithm operates on
focused subgraphs of the www that we construct from the output of a text-based www
search engine; our technique for constructing such subgraphs is designed to produce small
collections of pages likely to contain the most authoritative pages for a given topic.
Overview. Our approach to discovering authoritative www sources is meant to have a
global nature: We wish to identify the most central pages for broad search topics in the
context of the www as a whole. Global approaches involve basic problems of representing
and ltering large volumes of information, since the entire set of pages relevant to a broad-
topic query can have a size in the millions. This is in contrast to local approaches that seek
to understand the interconnections among the set of www pages belonging to a single logical
site or intranet; in such cases the amount of data is much smaller, and often a dierent set
of considerations dominates.
It is also important to note the sense in which our main concerns are fundamentally
dierent from problems of clustering. Clustering addresses the issue of dissecting a hetero-
geneous population into sub-populations that are in some way more cohesive; in the context
of the www, this may involve distinguishing pages related to dierent meanings or senses
of a query term. Thus, clustering is intrinsically dierent from the issue of distilling broad
topics via the discovery of authorities, although a subsequent section will indicate some con-
nections. For even if we were able perfectly to dissect the multiple senses of an ambiguous
query term (e.g. \Windows" or \Gates"), we would still be left with the same underlying
3
problem of representing and ltering the vast number of pages that are relevant to each of
the main senses of the query term.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the method by which we construct
a focused subgraph of the www with respect to a broad search topic, producing a set of
relevant pages rich in candidate authorities. Sections 3 and 4 discuss our main algorithm
for identifying hubs and authorities in such a subgraph, and some of the applications of this
algorithm. Section 5 discusses the connections with related work in the areas of www search,
bibliometrics, and the study of social networks. Section 6 describes how an extension of our
basic algorithm produces multiple collections of hubs and authorities within a common link
structure. Finally, Section 7 investigates the question of how \broad" a topic must be in
order for our techniques to be eective, and Section 8 surveys some work that has been done
on the evaluation of the method presented here.
2 Constructing a Focused Subgraph of the WWW
We can view any collection V of hyperlinked pages as a directed graph G = (V; E): the
nodes correspond to the pages, and a directed edge (p; q) 2 E indicates the presence of a
link from p to q. We say that the out-degree of a node p is the number of nodes it has links
to, and the in-degree of p is is the number of nodes that have links to it. From a graph G,
we can isolate small regions, or subgraphs, in the following way. If W  V is a subset of the
pages, we use G[W ] to denote the graph induced on W : its nodes are the pages in W , and
its edges correspond to all the links between pages in W .
Suppose we are given a broad-topic query, specied by a query string . We wish to de-
termine authoritative pages by an analysis of the link structure; but rst we must determine
the subgraph of the www on which our algorithm will operate. Our goal here is to focus the
computational eort on relevant pages. Thus, for example, we could restrict the analysis to
the set Q of all pages containing the query string; but this has two signicant drawbacks.
First, this set may contain well over a million pages, and hence entail a considerable compu-
tational cost; and second, we have already noted that some or most of the best authorities
may not belong to this set.
Ideally, we would like to focus on a collection S of pages with the following properties.
(i) S is relatively small.
(ii) S is rich in relevant pages.
(iii) S contains most (or many) of the strongest authorities.
By keeping S small, we are able to aord the computational cost of applying non-trivial
algorithms; by ensuring it is rich in relevant pages we make it easier to nd good authorities,
as these are likely to be heavily referenced within S.
How can we nd such a collection of pages? For a parameter t (typically set to about
200), we rst collect the t highest-ranked pages for the query  from a text-based search
4
root
base
Figure 1: Expanding the root set into a base set.
engine such as AltaVista [17] or Hotbot [57]. We will refer to these t pages as the root
set R. This root set satises (i) and (ii) of the desiderata listed above, but it generally is
far from satisfying (iii). To see this, note that the top t pages returned by the text-based
search engines we use will all contain the query string , and hence R is clearly a subset
of the collection Q of all pages containing . Above we argued that even Q will often
not satisfy condition (iii). It is also interesting to observe that there are often extremely
few links between pages in R, rendering it essentially \structureless". For example, in our
experiments, the root set for the query "java" contained 15 links between pages in dierent
domains; the root set for the query "censorship" contained 28 links between pages in
dierent domains. These numbers are typical for a variety of the queries tried; they should
be compared with the 200  199 = 39800 potential links that could exist between pages in
the root set.
We can use the root set R, however, to produce a set of pages S that will satisfy the
conditions weÕre seeking. Consider a strong authority for the query topic | although it may
well not be in the set R, it is quite likely to be pointed to by at least one page in R. Hence,
we can increase the number of strong authorities in our subgraph by expanding R along
the links that enter and leave it. In concrete terms, we dene the following procedure.
Subgraph(,E ,t,d)
: a query string.
E : a text-based search engine.
t, d: natural numbers.
Let R denote the top t results of E on .
5
Set S := R
For each page p 2 R
Let ?+(p) denote the set of all pages p points to.
Let ??(p) denote the set of all pages pointing to p.
Add all pages in ?+(p) to S.
If j??(p)j  d then
Add all pages in ??(p) to S.
Else
Add an arbitrary set of d pages from ??(p) to S.
End
Return S
Thus, we obtain S by growing R to include any page pointed to by a page in R and any
page that points to a page in R | with the restriction that we allow a single page in R
to bring at most d pages pointing to it into S. This latter point is crucial since a number
of www pages are pointed to by several hundred thousand pages, and we canÕt include all
of them in S if we wish to keep it reasonably small.
We refer to S as the base set for ; in our experiments we construct it by invoking
the Subgraph procedure with the search engine AltaVista, t = 200, and d = 50. We nd
that S typically satises points (i), (ii), and (iii) above | its size is generally in the range
1000-5000; and, as we discussed above, a strong authority need only be referenced by any
one of the 200 pages in the root set R in order to be added to S.
In the next section, we describe our algorithm to compute hubs and authorities in the
base set S. Before turning to this, we discuss a heuristic that is very useful for osetting the
eect of links that serve purely a navigational function. First, let G[S] denote, as above, the
subgraph induced on the pages in S. We distinguish between two types of links in G[S].
We say that a link is transverse if it is between pages with dierent domain names, and
intrinsic if it is between pages with the same domain name. By \domain name" here, we
mean here the rst level in the url string associated with a page. Since intrinsic links very
often exist purely to allow for navigation of the infrastructure of a site, they convey much
less information than transverse links about the authority of the pages they point to. Thus,
we delete all intrinsic links from the graph G[S], keeping only the edges corresponding to
transverse links; this results in a graph G.
This is a very simple heuristic, but we nd it eective for avoiding many of the pathologies
caused by treating navigational links in the same way as other links. There are other simple
heuristics that can be valuable for eliminating links that do not seem intuitively to confer
authority. One that is worth mentioning is based on the following observation. Suppose a
large number of pages from a single domain all point to a single page p. Quite often this
corresponds to a mass endorsement, advertisement, or some other type of \collusion" among
the referring pages | e.g. the phrase \This site designed by . . . " and a corresponding link
at the bottom of each page in a given domain. To eliminate this phenomenon, we can x
6
a parameter m (typically m  4-8) and only allow up to m pages from a single domain to
point to any given page p. Again, this can be an eective heuristic in some cases, although
we did not employ it when running the experiments that follow.
3 Computing Hubs and Authorities
The method of the previous section provides a small subgraph G that is relatively focused
on the query topic | it has many relevant pages, and strong authorities. We now turn to the
problem of extracting these authorities from the overall collection of pages, purely through
an analysis of the link structure of G.
The simplest approach, arguably, would be to order pages by their in-degree | the
number of links that point to them | in G. We rejected this idea earlier, when it was
applied to the collection of all pages containing the query term ; but now we have explicitly
constructed a small collection of relevant pages containing most of the authorities we want to
nd. Thus, these authorities both belong to G and are heavily referenced by pages within
G.
Indeed, the approach of ranking purely by in-degree does typically work much better in
the context of G than in the earlier settings we considered; in some cases, it can produce
uniformly high-quality results. However, the approach still retains some signicant prob-
lems. For example, on the query "java", the pages with the largest in-degree consisted
of www.gamelan.com and java.sun.com, together with pages advertising for Caribbean va-
cations, and the home page of Amazon Books. This mixture is representative of the type
of problem that arises with this simple ranking scheme: While the rst two of these pages
should certainly be viewed as \good" answers, the others are not relevant to the query topic;
they have large in-degree but lack any thematic unity. The basic diculty this exposes
is the inherent tension that exists within the subgraph G between strong authorities and
pages that are simply \universally popular"; we expect the latter type of pages to have large
in-degree regardless of the underlying query topic.
One could wonder whether circumventing these problems requires making further use of
the textual content of pages in the base set, rather than just the link structure of G. We now
show that this is not the case | it is in fact possible to extract information more eectively
from the links | and we begin from the following observation. Authoritative pages relevant
to the initial query should not only have large in-degree; since they are all authorities on
a common topic, there should also be considerable overlap in the sets of pages that point
to them. Thus, in addition to highly authoritative pages, we expect to nd what could be
called hub pages: these are pages that have links to multiple relevant authoritative pages.
It is these hub pages that \pull together" authorities on a common topic, and allow us to
throw out unrelated pages of large in-degree. (A skeletal example is depicted in Figure 2; in
reality, of course, the picture is not nearly this clean.)
7
hubs authorities
unrelated page
of large in-degree
Figure 2: A densely linked set of hubs and authorities.
Hubs and authorities exhibit what could be called a mutually reinforcing relationship: a
good hub is a page that points to many good authorities; a good authority is a page that is
pointed to by many good hubs. Clearly, if we wish to identify hubs and authorities within
the subgraph G, we need a method for breaking this circularity.
An Iterative Algorithm. We make use of the relationship between hubs and authorities
via an iterative algorithm that maintains and updates numerical weights for each page. Thus,
with each page p, we associate a non-negative authority weight xhpi and a non-negative hub
weight yhpi. We maintain the invariant that the weights of each type are normalized so their
squares sum to 1:
P
p2S(x
hpi)2 = 1, and
P
p2S(y
hpi)2 = 1: We view the pages with larger x-
and y-values as being \better" authorities and hubs respectively.
Numerically, it is natural to express the mutually reinforcing relationship between hubs
and authorities as follows: If p points to many pages with large x-values, then it should
receive a large y-value; and if p is pointed to by many pages with large y-values, then
it should receive a large x-value. This motivates the denition of two operations on the
weights, which we denote by I and O. Given weights fxhpig, fyhpig, the I operation updates
the x-weights as follows.
xhpi  X
q:(q;p)2E
yhqi:
The O operation updates the y-weights as follows.
yhpi  X
q:(p;q)2E
xhqi:
Thus I and O are the basic means by which hubs and authorities reinforce one another.
(See Figure 3.)
Now, to nd the desired \equilibrium" values for the weights, one can apply the I and
O operations in an alternating fashion, and see whether a xed point is reached. Indeed, we
can now state a version of our basic algorithm. We represent the set of weights fxhpig as a
8
page p
x[p] := sum of y[q], for all q pointing to p
q1
q2
q3
page p
y[p] := sum of x[q],
            for all q pointed 
            to by p
q1
q2
q3
Figure 3: The basic operations.
vector x with a coordinate for each page in G; analogously, we represent the set of weights
fyhpig as a vector y.
Iterate(G,k)
G: a collection of n linked pages
k: a natural number
Let z denote the vector (1; 1; 1; : : : ; 1) 2 Rn.
Set x0 := z:
Set y0 := z:
For i = 1; 2; : : : ; k
Apply the I operation to (xi?1; yi?1), obtaining new x-weights x0i.
Apply the O operation to (x0i; yi?1), obtaining new y-weights y0i.
Normalize x0i, obtaining xi.
Normalize y0i, obtaining yi.
End
Return (xk; yk).
This procedure can be applied to lter out the top c authorities and top c hubs in the
9
following simple way.
Filter(G,k,c)
G: a collection of n linked pages
k,c: natural numbers
(xk; yk) := Iterate(G; k).
Report the pages with the c largest coordinates in xk as authorities.
Report the pages with the c largest coordinates in yk as hubs.
We will apply the Filter procedure with G set equal to G, and typically with c  5-10.
To address the issue of how best to choose k, the number of iterations, we rst show that
as one applies Iterate with arbitrarily large values of k, the sequences of vectors fxkg and
fykg converge to xed points x and y.
We require the following notions from linear algebra, and refer the reader to a text
such as [30] for more comprehensive background. Let M be a symmetric n  n matrix.
An eigenvalue of M is a number  with the property that, for some vector !, we have
M! = !. The set of all such ! is a subspace of Rn, which we refer to as the eigenspace
associated with ; the dimension of this space will be referred to as the multiplicity of
. It is a standard fact that M has at most n distinct eigenvalues, each of them a real
number, and the sum of their multiplicities is exactly n. We will denote these eigenvalues
by 1(M); 2(M); : : : ; n(M), indexed in order of decreasing absolute value, and with each
eigenvalue listed a number of times equal to its multiplicity. For each distinct eigenvalue, we
choose an orthonormal basis of its eigenspace; considering the vectors in all these bases, we
obtain a set of eigenvectors !1(M); !2(M); : : : ; !n(M) that we can index in such a way that
!i(M) belongs to the eigenspace of i(M).
For the sake of simplicity, we will make the following technical assumption about all the
matrices we deal with:
(y) j1(M)j > j2(M)j.
When this assumption holds, we refer to !1(M) as the principal eigenvector, and all other
!i(M) as non-principal eigenvectors. When the assumption does not hold, the analysis
becomes less clean, but it is not aected in any substantial way.
We now prove that the Iterate procedure converges as k increases arbitrarily.
Theorem 3.1 The sequences x1; x2; x3; : : : and y1; y2; y3; : : : converge (to limits x
 and y
respectively).
Proof. Let G = (V; E), with V = fp1; p2; : : : ; png, and let A denote the adjacency matrix of
the graph G; the (i; j)th entry of A is equal to 1 if (pi; pj) is an edge of G, and is equal to
0 otherwise. One easily veries that the I and O operations can be written x  ATy and
y  Ax respectively. Thus xk is the unit vector in the direction of (ATA)k?1ATz, and yk is
the unit vector in the direction of (AAT )kz.
10
Now, a standard result of linear algebra (e.g. [30]) states that if M is a symmetric n n
matrix, and v is a vector not orthogonal to the principal eigenvector !1(M), then the unit
vector in the direction of Mkv converges to !1(M) as k increases without bound. Also (as a
corollary), if M has only non-negative entries, then the principal eigenvector of M has only
non-negative entries.
Consequently, z is not orthogonal to !1(AA
T), and hence the sequence fykg converges
to a limit y. Similarly, one can show that if 1(ATA) 6= 0 (as dictated by Assumption (y)),
then ATz is not orthogonal to !1(A
TA). It follows that the sequence fxkg converges to a
limit x.
The proof of Theorem 3.1 yields the following additional result (in the above notation).
Theorem 3.2 (Subject to Assumption (y).) x is the principal eigenvector of ATA, and y
is the principal eigenvector of AAT .
In our experiments, we nd that the convergence of Iterate is quite rapid; one essentially
always nds that k = 20 is sucient for the c largest coordinates in each vector to become
stable, for values of c in the range that we use. Of course, Theorem 3.2 shows that one can
use any eigenvector algorithm to compute the xed point x and y; we have stuck to the
above exposition in terms of the Iterate procedure for two reasons. First, it emphasizes
the underlying motivation for our approach in terms of the reinforcing I and O operations.
Second, one does not have to run the above process of iterated I=O operations to conver-
gence; one can compute weights fxhpig and fyhpig by starting from any initial vectors x0 and
y0, and performing a xed bounded number of I and O operations.
Basic Results. We now give some sample results obtained via the algorithm, using some
of the queries discussed in the introduction.
(java) Authorities
.328 http://www.gamelan.com/ Gamelan
.251 http://java.sun.com/ JavaSoft Home Page
.190 http://www.digitalfocus.com/digitalfocus/faq/howdoi.html The Java Developer: How Do I...
.190 http://lightyear.ncsa.uiuc.edu/srp/java/javabooks.html The Java Book Pages
.183 http://sunsite.unc.edu/javafaq/javafaq.html comp.lang.java FAQ
(censorship) Authorities
.378 http://www.e.org/ EFFweb - The Electronic Frontier Foundation
.344 http://www.e.org/blueribbon.html The Blue Ribbon Campaign for Online Free Speech
.238 http://www.cdt.org/ The Center for Democracy and Technology
.235 http://www.vtw.org/ Voters Telecommunications Watch
.218 http://www.aclu.org/ ACLU: American Civil Liberties Union
(\search engines") Authorities
.346 http://www.yahoo.com/ Yahoo!
11
.291 http://www.excite.com/ Excite
.239 http://www.mckinley.com/ Welcome to Magellan!
.231 http://www.lycos.com/ Lycos Home Page
.231 http://www.altavista.digital.com/ AltaVista: Main Page
(Gates) Authorities
.643 http://www.roadahead.com/ Bill Gates: The Road Ahead
.458 http://www.microsoft.com/ Welcome to Microsoft
.440 http://www.microsoft.com/corpinfo/bill-g.htm
Among all these pages, the only one which occurred in the corresponding root set R was
www.roadahead.com/, under the query "Gates"; it was ranked 123rd by AltaVista. This is
natural in view of the fact that many of these pages do not contain any occurrences of the
initial query string.
It is worth reflecting on two additional points here. First, our only use of the textual
content of pages was in the initial \black-box" call to a text-based search engine, which
produced the root set R. Following this, the analysis ignored the textual content of pages.
The point we wish to make here is not that text is best ignored in searching for authoritative
pages; there is clearly much that can be accomplished through the integration of textual and
link-based analysis, and we will be commenting on this in a subsequent section. However,
the results above show that a considerable amount can be accomplished through essentially
a \pure" analysis of link structure.
Second, for many broad search topics, our algorithm produces pages that can legitimately
be considered authoritative with respect to the www as a whole, despite the fact that it
operates without direct access to large-scale index of the www. Rather, its only \global"
access to the www is through a text-based search engine such as AltaVista, from which
it is very dicult to directly obtain reasonable candidates for authoritative pages on most
queries. What the results imply is that it is possible to reliably estimate certain types of
global information about the www using only a standard search engine interface; a global
analysis of the full www link structure can be replaced by a much more local method of
analysis on a small focused subgraph.
4 Similar-Page Queries
The algorithm developed in the preceding section can be applied to another type of problem
| that of using link structure to infer a notion of \similarity" among pages. Suppose we
have found a page p that is of interest | perhaps it is an authoritative page on a topic of
interest | and we wish to ask the following type of question: What do users of the www
consider to be related to p, when they create pages and hyperlinks?
12
If p is highly referenced page, we have a version of the Abundance Problem: the sur-
rounding link structure will implicitly represent an enormous number of independent opinions
about the relation of p to other pages. Using our notion of hubs and authorities, we can
provide an approach to the issue of page similarity, asking: In the local region of the link
structure near p, what are the strongest authorities? Such authorities can potentially serve
as a broad-topic summary of the pages related to p.
In fact, the method of Sections 2 and 3 can be adapted to this situation with essentially
no modication. Previously, we initiated our search with a query string ; our request from
the underlying search engine was \Find t pages containing the string ." We now begin with
a page p and pose the following request to the search engine: \Find t pages pointing to p."
Thus, we assemble a root set Rp consisting of t pages that point to p; we grow this into a
base set Sp as before; and the result is a subgraph Gp in which we can search for hubs and
authorities.
Supercially, the set of issues in working with a subgraph Gp are somewhat dierent from
those involved in working with a subgraph dened by a query string; however, we nd that
most of the basic conclusions we drew in the previous two sections continue to apply. First,
we observe that ranking pages of Gp by their in-degrees is still not satisfactory; consider for
example the results of this heuristic when the initial page p was www.honda.com, the home
page of Honda Motor Company.
http://www.honda.com Honda
http://www.ford.com/ Ford Motor Company
http://www.e.org/blueribbon.html The Blue Ribbon Campaign for Online Free Speech
http://www.mckinley.com/ Welcome to Magellan!
http://www.netscape.com Welcome to Netscape
http://www.linkexchange.com/ LinkExchange | Welcome
http://www.toyota.com/ Welcome to @Toyota
http://www.pointcom.com/ PointCom
http://home.netscape.com/ Welcome to Netscape
http://www.yahoo.com Yahoo!
In many cases, the top hubs and authorities computed by our algorithm on a graph of the
form Gp can be quite compelling. We show the top authorities obtained when the initial page
p was www.honda.com and www.nyse.com, the home page of the New York Stock Exchange.
(www.honda.com) Authorities
.202 http://www.toyota.com/ Welcome to @Toyota
.199 http://www.honda.com/ Honda
.192 http://www.ford.com/ Ford Motor Company
.173 http://www.bmwusa.com/ BMW of North America, Inc.
.162 http://www.volvocars.com/ VOLVO
.158 http://www.saturncars.com/ Welcome to the Saturn Web Site
.155 http://www.nissanmotors.com/ NISSAN - ENJOY THE RIDE
.145 http://www.audi.com/ Audi Homepage
13
.139 http://www.4adodge.com/ 1997 Dodge Site
.136 http://www.chryslercars.com/ Welcome to Chrysler
(www.nyse.com) Authorities
.208 http://www.amex.com/ The American Stock Exchange - The Smarter Place to Be
.146 http://www.nyse.com/ New York Stock Exchange Home Page
.134 http://www.lie.com/ Welcome to LIFFE
.129 http://www.cme.com/ Futures and Options at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
.120 http://update.wsj.com/ The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition
.118 http://www.nasdaq.com/ The Nasdaq Stock Market Home Page - Reload Often
.117 http://www.cboe.com/ CBOE - The ChicagoBoard Options Exchange
.116 http://www.quote.com/ 1- Quote.com - Stock Quotes, Business News, Financial Market
.113 http://networth.galt.com/ NETworth
.109 http://www.lombard.com/ Lombard Home Page
Note the diculties inherent in compiling such lists through text-based methods: many
of the above pages consist almost entirely of images, with very little text; and the text that
they do contain has very little overlap. Our approach, on the other hand, is determining,
via the presence of links, what the creators of www pages tend to \classify" together with
the given pages www.honda.com and www.nyse.com.
5 Connections with Related Work
The analysis of link structures with the goal of understanding their social or informational
organization has been an issue in a number of overlapping areas. In this section, we review
some of the approaches that have been proposed, divided into three main areas of focus.
First, and most closely related to our work here, we discuss research on the use of a link
structure for dening notions of standing, impact, and influence | measures with the same
motivation as our notion of authority. We then discuss other ways in which links have been
integrated into hypertext and www search techniques. Finally, we review some work that
has made use of link structures for explicit clustering of data.
Standing, Impact, and Influence
Social Networks. The study of social networks has developed several ways to measure the
relative standing | roughly, \importance" | of individuals in an implicitly dened network.
We can represent the network, as above, by a graph G = (V; E); an edge (i; j) corresponds
roughly to an \endorsement" of j by i. This is in keeping with the intuition we have already
invoked regarding the role of www hyperlinks as conferrors of authority. Links may have
dierent (non-negative) weights, corresponding to the strength of dierent endorsements; let
A denote the matrix whose (i; j)
th
entry represents the strength of the endorsement from a
node i 2 V to a node j 2 V .
14
Katz [35] proposed a measure of standing based on path-counting, a generalization of
ranking based on in-degree. For nodes i and j, let P
hri
ij denote the number of paths of
length exactly r from i to j. Let b < 1 be a constant chosen to be small enough that
Qij =
P1
r=1 b
rP
hri
ij converges for each pair (i; j). Now Katz denes sj, the standing of node j,
to be
P
i Qij | in this model, standing is based on the total number of paths terminating at
node j, weighted by an exponentially decreasing damping factor. It is not dicult to obtain
a direct matrix formulation of this measure: sj is proportional to the j
th column sum of the
matrix (I ? bA)?1 ? I , where I denotes the identity matrix and all entries of A are 0 or 1.
Hubbell [32] proposed a similar model of standing by studying the equilibrium of a certain
weight-propagation scheme on nodes of the network. Recall that Aij, the (i; j)
th
entry of
our matrix A, represents the strength of the endorsement from i to j. Let ej denote an a
priori estimate of the standing of node j. Then Hubbell denes the standings fsjg to be a
set of values so that the process of endorsement maintains a type of equilibrium | the total
\quantity" of endorsement entering a node j, weighted by the standings of the endorsers, is
equal to the standing of j. Thus, the standings are the solutions to the system of equations
sj = ej +
P
i Aijsi, for j = 1; : : : ; n. If e denotes the vector of values fejg, then the vector of
standings in this model can be shown to be (I ?AT )?1e.
Before discussing the relation of these measures to our work, we consider the way in
which they were extended by research in the eld of bibliometrics.
Scientic Citations. Bibliometrics [22] is the study of written documents and their cita-
tion structure. Research in bibliometrics has long been concerned with the use of citations
to produce quantitative estimates of the importance and \impact" of individual scientic
papers and journals, analogues of our notion of authority. In this sense, they are concerned
with evaluating standing in a particular type of social network | that of papers or journals
linked by citations.
The most well-known measure in this eld is GareldÕs impact factor [26], used to provide
a numerical assessment of journals in Journal Citation Reports of the Institute for Scientic
Information. Under the standard denition, the impact factor of a journal j in a given year
is the average number of citations received by papers published in the previous two years
of journal j [22]. Disregarding for now the question of whether two years is the appropriate
period of measurement (see e.g. Egghe [21]), we observe that the impact factor is a ranking
measure based fundamentally on a pure counting of the in-degrees of nodes in the network.
Pinski and Narin [45] proposed a more subtle citation-based measure of standing, stem-
ming from the observation that not all citations are equally important. They argued that
a journal is \influential" if, recursively, it is heavily cited by other influential journals. One
can recognize a natural parallel between this and our self-referential construction of hubs
and authorities; we will discuss the connections below. The concrete construction of Pinski
and Narin, as modied by Geller [27], is the following. The measure of standing of journal
15
j will be called its influence weight and denoted wj. The matrix A of connection strengths
will have entries specied as follows: Aij denotes the fraction of the citations from journal
i that go to journal j. Following the informal denition above, the influence of j should
be equal to the sum of the influences of all journals citing j, with the sum weighted by
the amount that each cites j. Thus, the set of influence weights fwjg is designed to be a
non-zero, non-negative solution to the system of equations wj =
P
i Aijwi; and hence, if w
is the vector of influence weights, one has w  0, w 6= 0, and ATw = w. This implies that w
is a principal eigenvector of AT . Geller [27] observed that the influence weights correspond
to the stationary distribution of the following random process: beginning with an arbitrary
journal j, one chooses a random reference that has appeared in j and moves to the journal
specied in the reference. Doreian [19, 20] showed that one can obtain a measure of standing
that corresponds very closely to influence weights by repeatedly iterating the computation
underlying HubbellÕs measure of standing: In the rst iteration one computes Hubbell stand-
ings fsjg from the a priori weights fejg; the fsjg then become the a priori estimates for
the next iteration. Finally, there was been work aimed at the troublesome issue of how to
handle journal self-citations (the diagonal elements of the matrix A); see e.g. de Solla Price
[15] and Noma [42].
Let us consider the connections between this previous work and our algorithm to com-
pute hubs and authorities. We also begin by observing that pure in-degree counting, as
manifested by the impact factor, is too crude a measure for our purposes, and we seek a
type of link-based equilibrium among relative node rankings. But the World Wide Web and
the scientic literature are governed by very dierent principles, and this contrast is nicely
captured in the distinction between Pinski-Narin influence weights and the hub/authority
weights that we compute. Journals in the scientic literature have, to a rst approximation,
a common purpose, and traditions such as the peer review process typically ensure that
highly authoritative journals on a common topic reference one another extensively. Thus it
makes sense to consider a one-level model in which authorities directly endorse other author-
ities. The www, on the other hand, is much more heterogeneous, with www pages serving
many dierent functions | individual aol subscribers have home pages, and multinational
corporations have home pages. Moreover, for a wide range of topics, the strongest authorities
consciously do not link to one another | consider, for example, the home pages of search
engines and automobile manufacturers listed above. Thus, they can only be connected by
an intermediate layer of relatively anonymous hub pages, which link in a correlated way to
a thematically related set of authorities; and our model for the conferral of authority on the
www takes this into account. This two-level pattern of linkage exposes structure among
both the set of hubs, who may not know of one anotherÕs existence, and the set of authorities,
who may not wish to acknowledge one anotherÕs existence.
16
Hypertext and WWW Rankings. There have been several approaches to ranking pages
in the context of hypertext and the www. In work predating the emergence of the www,
Botafogo, Rivlin, and Shneiderman [7] worked with focused, stand-alone hypertext environ-
ments. They dened the notions of index nodes and reference nodes | an index node is
one whose out-degree is signicantly larger than the average out-degree, and a reference
node is one whose in-degree is signicantly larger than the average in-degree. They also
proposed measures of centrality based on node-to-node distances in the graph dened by the
link structure.
Carriere and Kazman [9] proposed a ranking measure on www pages, for the goal of
re-ordering search results. The rank of a page in their model is equal to the sum of its
in-degree and its out-degree; thus, it makes use of a \directionless" version of the www link
structure.
Both of these approaches are based principally on counting node degrees, parallel to the
structure of GareldÕs impact factor. In contrast, Brin and Page [8] have recently proposed
a ranking measure based on a node-to-node weight-propagation scheme and its analysis via
eigenvectors. Specically, they begin from a model of a user randomly following hyperlinks:
at each page, the user either selects an outgoing link uniformly at random, or (with some
probability p < 1) jumps to a new page selected uniformly at random from the entire www.
The stationary probability of node i in this random process will correspond to the \rank" of
i, referred to as its page-rank.
Alternately, one can view page-ranks as arising from the equilibrium of a process analo-
gous to that used in the denition of the Pinski-Narin influence weights, with the incorpora-
tion of a term that captures the \random jump" to a uniformly selected page. Specically,
assuming the www contains n pages, letting A denote the n  n adjacency matrix of the
www, and letting di denote the out-degree of node i, the probability of a transition from
page i to page j in the Brin-Page model is seen to be equal to A0ij = pn
?1 + (1? p)d?1i Aij.
Let A0 denote the matrix whose entries are A0ij. The vector of ranks is then a non-zero,
non-negative solution to (A0)T r = r, and hence it corresponds to the principal eigenvector
of (A0)T :
One of the main contrasts between our approach and the page-rank methodology is that
| like Pinski and NarinÕs formulation of influence weights | the latter is based on a model in
which authority is passed directly from authorities to other authorities, without interposing
a notion of hub pages. Brin and PageÕs use of random jumps to uniformly selected pages is a
way of dealing with the resulting problem that many authorities are essentially \dead-ends"
in their conferral process.
It is also worth noting a basic contrast in the application of these approaches to www
search. In [8], the page-rank algorithm is applied to compute ranks for all the nodes in a 24
million page index of the www; these ranks are then used to order the results of subsequent
text-based searches. Our use of hubs and authorities, on the other hand, proceeds without
17
direct access to a www index; in response to a query, our algorithm rst invokes a text-
based search and then computes numerical scores for the pages in a relatively small subgraph
constructed from the initial search results.
Other Link-Based Approaches to WWW Search
Frisse [25] considered the problem of document retrieval in singly-authored, stand-alone
works of hypertext. He proposed basic heuristics by which hyperlinks can enhance notions
of relevance and hence the performance of retrieval heuristics. Specically, in his framework,
the relevance of a page in hypertext to a particular query is based in part on the relevance of
the pages it links to. MarchioriÕs HyperSearch algorithm [39] is based on such a methodology
applied to www pages: A relevance score for a page p is computed by a method that
incorporates the relevance of pages reachable from p, diminished by a damping factor that
decays exponentially with distance from p.
In our construction of focused subgraphs from search engine results in Section 2, the
underlying motivation ran also in the opposite direction. In addition to looking at where
a page p pointed to increase our understanding of its contents, we implicitly used the text
on pages that pointed to p. (For if pages in the root set for \search engines" pointed to
www.yahoo.com, then we included www.yahoo.com in our subgraph.) This notion is related
to that of searching based on anchor text, in which one treats the text surrounding a hyperlink
as a descriptor of the page being pointed to when assessing the relevance of that page. The
use of anchor text appeared in one of the oldest www search engines, McBryanÕs World
Wide Web Worm [40]; it is also used in [8, 11, 10].
Another direction of work on the integration of links into www search is the construction
of search formalisms capable of handling queries that involve predicates over both text and
links. Arocena, Mendelzon, and Mihaila [1] have developed a framework supporting www
queries that combines standard keywords with conditions on the surrounding link structure.
Clustering of Link Structures
Link-based clustering in the context of bibliometrics, hypertext, and the www has focused
largely on the problem of decomposing an explicitly represented collection of nodes into
\cohesive" subsets. As such, it has mainly been applied to moderately size sets of objects
| for example, a focused collection of scientic journals, or the set of pages on a single
www site. Earlier we indicated a sense in which the issues we study here are fundamentally
dierent from those encountered in this type of clustering: Our primary concern is that of
representing an enormous collection of pages implicitly, through the construction of hubs
and authorities for this collection. We now discuss some of the prior work on citation-
based and hypertext clustering so as to better elucidate its connections to the techniques we
develop here. In particular, this will also be useful in Section 6 when we discuss methods
18
for computing multiple sets of hubs and authorities within a single link structure; this can
be viewed as a way of representing multiple, potentially very large clusters implicitly.
At a very high level, clustering requires an underlying similarity function among objects,
and a method for producing clusters from this similarity function. Two basic similarity
functions on documents to emerge from the study of bibliometrics are bibliographic coupling
(due to Kessler [36]) and co-citation (due to Small [52]). For a pair of documents p and q, the
former quantity is equal to the number of documents cited by both p and q, and the latter
quantity is the number of documents that cite both p and q. Co-citation has been used as a
measure of the similarity of www pages by Larson [37] and by Pitkow and Pirolli [47]. Weiss
et al. [56] dene linked-based similarity measures for pages in a hypertext environment that
generalize co-citation and bibliographic coupling to allow for arbitrarily long chains of links.
Several methods have been proposed in this context to produce clusters from a set of
nodes annotated with such similarity information. Small and Grith [54] use breadth-rst
search to compute the connected components of the undirected graph in which two nodes
are joined by an edge if and only if they have a positive co-citation value. Pitkow and Pirolli
[47] apply this algorithm to study the link-based relationships among a collection of www
pages.
One can also use principal components analysis [31, 34] and related dimension-reduction
techniques such as multidimensional scaling to cluster a collection of nodes. In this frame-
work, one begins with a matrix M containing the similarity information between pairs of
nodes, and a representation (based on this matrix) of each node i as a high-dimensional
vector fvig. One then uses the rst few non-principal eigenvectors of the similarity ma-
trix M to dene a low-dimensional subspace into which the vectors fvig can be projected;
a variety of geometric or visualization-based techniques can be employed to identify dense
clusters in this low-dimensional space. Standard theorems of linear algebra (e.g. [30]) in
fact provide a precise sense in which projection onto the rst k eigenvectors produces the
minimum distortion over all k-dimensional projections of the data. Small [53], McCain [41],
and others have applied this technique to journal and author co-citation data. The applica-
tion of dimension-reduction techniques to cluster www pages based on co-citation has been
employed by Larson [37] and by Pitkow and Pirolli [47].
The clustering of documents or hyperlinked pages can of course rely on combinations
of textual and link-based information. Combinations of such measures have been studied
by Shaw [50, 51] in the context of bibliometrics. More recently, Pirolli, Pitkow, and Rao
[46] have used a combination of link topology and textual similarity to group together and
categorize pages on the www.
Finally, we discuss two other general eigenvector-based approaches to clustering that
have been applied to link structures. The area of spectral graph partitioning was initiated by
the work of Donath and Homan [18] and Fiedler [23]; see the recent book by Chung [12]
for an overview. Spectral graph partitioning methods relate sparsely connected partitions
19
of an undirected graph G to the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of its adjacency matrix A.
Each eigenvector of A has a single coordinate for each node of G, and thus can be viewed
as an assignment of weights to the nodes of G. Each non-principal eigenvector has both
positive and negative coordinates; one fundamental heuristic to emerge from the study of
these spectral methods is that the nodes corresponding to the large positive coordinates of
a given eigenvector tend to be very sparsely connected to the nodes corresponding to the
large negative coordinates of the same eigenvector.
In a dierent direction, centroid scaling is a clustering method designed for representing
two types of objects in a common space [38]. Consider, for example, a set of people who
have provided answers to the questions of a survey | one may wish to represent both
the people and the possible answers in a common space, in a way so that each person
is \close" to the answers he or she chose; and each answer is \close" to the people that
chose it. Centroid scaling provides an eigenvector-based method for accomplishing this. In
its formulation, it thus resembles our denitions of hubs and authorities, which used an
eigenvector approach to produce related sets of weights for two distinct types of objects. A
fundamental dierence, however, is that centroid scaling methods are typically not concerned
with interpreting only the largest coordinates in the representations they produce; rather, the
goal is to infer a notion of similarity among a set of objects by geometric means. Centroid
scaling has been applied to citation data by Noma [43], for jointly clustering citing and
cited documents. In the context of information retrieval, the Latent Semantic Indexing
methodology of Deerwester et al. [16] applied a centroid scaling approach to a vector-
space model of documents [48, 49]; this allowed them to represent terms and documents
in a common low-dimensional space, in which natural geometrically dened clusters often
separate multiple senses of a query term.
6 Multiple Sets of Hubs and Authorities
The algorithm in Section 3 is, in a sense, nding the most densely linked collection of hubs and
authorities in the subgraph G. dened by a query string . There are a number of settings,
however, in which one may be interested in nding several densely linked collections of hubs
and authorities among the same set S of pages. Each such collection could potentially be
relevant to the query topic, but they could be well-separated from one another in the graph
G for a variety of reasons. For example,
(1) The query string  may have several very dierent meanings. E.g. "jaguar" (a useful
example we learned from Chandra Chekuri [13]).
(2) The string may arise as a term in the context of multiple technical communities.
E.g. "randomized algorithms".
20
(3) The string may refer to a highly polarized issue, involving groups that are not likely
to link to one another. E.g. "abortion".
In each of these examples, the relevant documents can be naturally grouped into several
clusters. The issue in the setting of broad-topic queries, however, is not simply how to
achieve a dissection into reasonable clusters; one must also deal with this in the presence
of the Abundance Problem. Each cluster, in the context of the full www, is enormous,
and so we require a way to distill a small set of hubs and authorities out of each one. We
can thus view such collections of hubs and authorities as implicitly providing broad-topic
summaries of a collection of large clusters that we never explicitly represent. At a very high
level, our motivation in this sense is analogous to that of an information retrieval technique
such as Scatter/Gather [14], which seeks to represent very large document clusters through
text-based methods.
In section 3, we related the hubs and authorities we computed to the principal eigenvectors
of the matrices ATA and AAT , where A is the adjacency matrix of G. The non-principal
eigenvectors of AT A and AAT provide us with a natural way to extract additional densely
linked collections of hubs and authorities from the base set S. We begin by noting the
following basic fact.
Proposition 6.1 AAT and ATA have the same multiset of eigenvalues, and their eigenvec-
tors can be chosen so that !i(AA
T ) = A!i(A
TA).
Thus, each pair of eigenvectors xi = !i(A
TA), yi = !i(AA
T ), related as in Proposi-
tion 6.1, has the following property: applying an I operation to (xi ; yi ) keeps the x-weights
parallel to xi , and applying an O operation to (xi ; yi ) keeps the y-weights parallel to yi .
Hence, each pair of weights (xi ; y

i ) has precisely the mutually reinforcing relationship that
we are seeking in authority/hub pairs. Moreover, applying I  O (resp. O  I) multiplies the
magnitude of xi (resp. y

i ) by a factor of jij; thus jij gives precisely the extent to which
the hub weights yi and authority weights x

i reinforce one another.
Now, unlike the principal eigenvector, the non-principal eigenvectors have both positive
and negative entries. Hence each pair (xi ; y

i ) provides us with two densely connected sets
of hubs and authorities: those pages that correspond to the c coordinates with the most
positive values, and those pages that correspond to the c coordinates with the most negative
values. These sets of hubs and authorities have the same intuitive meaning as those produced
in Section 3, although the algorithm to nd them | based on non-principal eigenvectors
| is less clean conceptually than the method of iterated I and O operations. Note also
that since the extent to which the weights in xi and y

i reinforce each other, the hubs and
authorities associated with eigenvectors of larger absolute value will typically be \denser" as
subgraphs in the link structure, and hence will often have more intuitive meaning.
In Section 5, we observed that spectral heuristics for partitioning undirected graphs
[12, 18, 23] have suggested that nodes assigned large positive coordinates in a non-principal
21
eigenvector are often well-separated from nodes assigned large negative coordinates in the
same eigenvector. Adapted to our context, which deals with directed rather than undirected
graphs, one can ask whether there is a natural \separation" between the two collections of
authoritative sources associated with the same non-principal eigenvector. We will see that in
some cases there is a distinction between these two collections, in a sense that has meaning
for the query topic. It is worth noting here that the signs of the coordinates in any non-
principal eigenvector represents a purely arbitrary resolution of the following symmetry: if
xi and y

i are eigenvectors associated with i, then so are ?xi and ?yi .
Basic Results. We now give some examples of the way in which the application of non-
principal eigenvectors produces multiple collections of hubs and authorities. One interesting
phenomenon that arises is the following. The pages with large coordinates in the rst few
non-principal eigenvectors tend to recur, so that essentially the same collection of hubs and
authorities will often be generated by several of the strongest non-principal eigenvectors.
(Despite being similar in their large coordinates, these eigenvectors remain orthogonal due
to dierences in the coordinates of smaller absolute value.) As a result, one obtains fewer
distinct collections of hubs and authorities than might otherwise be expected from a set
of non-principal eigenvectors. This notion is also reflected in the output below, where we
have selected (by hand) several distinct collections from among the rst few non-principal
eigenvectors.
We issue the rst query as "jaguar*", simply as one way to search for either the word
or its plural. For this query, the strongest collections of authoritative sources concerned the
Atari Jaguar product, the NFL football team from Jacksonville, and the automobile.
(jaguar*) Authorities: principal eigenvector
.370 http://www2.ecst.csuchico.edu/jschlich/Jaguar/jaguar.html
.347 http://www-und.ida.liu.se/t94patsa/jserver.html
.292 http://tangram.informatik.uni-kl.de:8001/rgehm/jaguar.html
.287 http://www.mcc.ac.uk/ dlms/Consoles/jaguar.html Jaguar Page
(jaguar jaguars) Authorities: 2nd non-principal vector, positive end
.255 http://www.jaguarsnfl.com/ Ocial Jacksonville Jaguars NFL Website
.137 http://www.nando.net/SportServer/football/nfl/jax.html Jacksonville Jaguars Home Page
.133 http://www.ao.net/brett/jaguar/index.html Brett's Jaguar Page
.110 http://www.usatoday.com/sports/football/sfn/sfn30.htm Jacksonville Jaguars
(jaguar jaguars) Authorities: 3rd non-principal vector, positive end
.227 http://www.jaguarvehicles.com/ Jaguar Cars Global Home Page
.227 http://www.collection.co.uk/ The Jaguar Collection - Ocial Web site
.211 http://www.moran.com/sterling/sterling.html
.211 http://www.coys.co.uk/
For the query "randomized algorithms", none of the strongest collections of hubs and
22
authorities could be said to be precisely on the query topic, though they all consisted of
thematically related pages on a closely related topic. They included home pages of theoretical
computer scientists, compendia of mathematical software, and pages on wavelets.
(\randomized algorithms") Authorities: 1st non-principal vector, positive end
.125 http://theory.lcs.mit.edu/goemans/ Michel X. Goemans
.122 http://theory.lcs.mit.edu/spielman/ Dan Spielman's Homepage
.122 http://www.nada.kth.se/johanh/ Johan Hastad
.122 http://theory.lcs.mit.edu/rivest/ Ronald L. Rivest : HomePage
(\randomized algorithms") Authorities 1st non-principal vector, negative end
-.00116 http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/ StatLib Index
-.00115 http://www.geo.fmi./prog/tela.html Tela
-.00107 http://gams.nist.gov/ GAMS : Guide to Available Mathematical Software
-.00107 http://www.netlib.org Netlib
(\randomized algorithms") Authorities 4th non-principal vector, negative end
-.176 http://www.amara.com/current/wavelet.html Amara's Wavelet Page
-.172 http://www-ocean.tamu.edu/baum/wavelets.html Wavelet sources
-.161 http://www.mathsoft.com/wavelets.html Wavelet Resources
-.143 http://www.mat.sbg.ac.at/uhl/wav.html Wavelets
We also encounter examples where pages from the positive and negative ends of the same
non-principal eigenvector exhibit a natural separation. One case in which the meaning of
this separation is particularly striking is for the query "abortion". The natural question
is whether one of the non-principal eigenvectors produces a division between pro-choice
and pro-life authorities. The issue is complicated by the existence of hub pages that link
extensively to pages from both sides; but in fact the 2nd non-principal eigenvector produces
a very clear separation:
(abortion) Authorities: 2nd non-principal vector, positive end
.321 http://www.caral.org/abortion.html Abortion and Reproductive Rights Internet Resources
.219 http://www.plannedparenthood.org/ Welcome to Planned Parenthood
.195 http://www.gynpages.com/ Abortion Clinics OnLine
.172 http://www.oneworld.org/ippf/ IPPF Home Page
.162 http://www.prochoice.org/naf/ The National Abortion Federation
.161 http://www.lm.com/lmann/feminist/abortion.html
(abortion) Authorities: 2nd non-principal vector, negative end
-.197 http://www.awinc.com/partners/bc/commpass/lifenet/lifenet.htm LifeWEB
-.169 http://www.worldvillage.com/wv/square/chapel/xwalk/html/peter.htm Healing after Abortion
-.164 http://www.nebula.net/maeve/lifelink.html
-.150 http://members.aol.com/pladvocate/ Pro-Life Advocate
-.144 http://www.clark.net/pub/jed/factbot.html The Right Side of the Web
-.144 http://www.catholic.net/HyperNews/get/abortion.html
23
7 Diusion and Generalization
Let us return to the method of Section 3, in which we identied a single collection of hubs and
authorities in the subgraph G associated with a query string . The algorithm computes
a densely linked collection of pages without regard to their contents; the fact that these
pages are relevant to the query topic in a wide range of cases is based on the way in which
we construct the subgraph G, ensuring that it is rich in relevant pages. We can view the
issue as follows: Many dierent topics are represented in G, and each is centered around
a competing collection of densely linked hubs and authorities. Our method of producing
a focused subgraph G aims at ensuring that the most relevant such collection is also the
\densest" one, and hence will be found by the method of iterated I and O operations.
When the initial query string  species a topic that is not suciently broad, however,
there will often not be enough relevant pages in G from which to extract a suciently dense
subgraph of relevant hubs and authorities. As a result, authoritative pages corresponding to
competing, \broader" topics will win out over the pages relevant to , and be returned by
the algorithm. In such cases, we will say that the process has diused from the initial query.
Although it limits the ability of our algorithm to nd authoritative pages for narrow or
specic query topics, diusion can be an interesting process in its own right. In particular,
the broader topic that supplants the original, too-specic query  very often represents a
natural generalization of . As such, it provides a simple way of abstracting a specic query
topic to a broader, related one.
Consider, for example, the query "WWW conferences". At the time we tried this query,
AltaVista indexed roughly 300 pages containing the string; however, the resulting subgraph
G contained pages concerned with a host of more general www-related topics, and the
main authorities were in fact very general www resources.
(\WWW conferences") Authorities: principal eigenvector
.088 http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/SDG/Software/Mosaic/Docs/whats-new.html The What's New Archive
.088 http://www.w3.org/hypertext/DataSources/WWW/Servers.html World-Wide Web Servers: Summary
.087 http://www.w3.org/hypertext/DataSources/bySubject/Overview.html The World-Wide Web Virtual Library
In the context of similar-page queries, a query that is \too specic" corresponds roughly
to a page p that does not have suciently high in-degree. In such cases, the process of
diusion can also provide a broad-topic summary of more prominent pages related to p.
Consider, for example, the results when p was sigact.acm.org, the home page of the ACM
Special Interest Group on Algorithms and Computation Theory, which focuses on theoretical
computer science.
(sigact.acm.org) Authorities: principal eigenvector
.197 http://www.siam.org/ Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
.166 http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/ Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science
24
.150 http://www.computer.org/ IEEE Computer Society
.148 http://www.yahoo.com/ Yahoo!
.145 http://e-math.ams.org/ e-MATH Home Page
.141 http://www.ieee.org/ IEEE Home Page
.140 http://glimpse.cs.arizona.edu:1994/bib/ Computer Science Bibliography Glimpse Server
.129 http://www.eccc.uni-trier.de/eccc/ ECCC - The Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity
.129 http://www.cs.indiana.edu/cstr/search UCSTRI | Cover Page
.118 http://euclid.math.fsu.edu/Science/math.html The World-Wide Web Virtual Library: Mathematics
The problem of returning more specic answers in the presence of this phenomenon
is the subject of on-going work; in Sections 8 and 9, we briefly discuss current work on
the use of textual content for the purpose of focusing our approach to link-based analysis
[6, 10, 11]. The use of non-principal eigenvectors, combined with basic term-matching, can
be a simple way to extract collections of authoritative pages that are more relevant to a
specic query topic. For example, consider the following fact: Among the sets of hubs and
authorities corresponding to the rst 20 non-principal eigenvectors, the one in which the
pages collectively contained the string "WWW conferences" the most was the following.
(\WWW conferences") Authorities: 11th non-principal vector, negative end
-.097 http://www.igd.fhg.de/www95.html Third International World-Wide Web Conference
-.091 http://www.csu.edu.au/special/conference/WWWWW.html AUUG'95 and Asia-Pacic WWW'95 Conference
-.090 http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/SDG/IT94/IT94Info.html The Second International WWW Conference '94
-.083 http://www.w3.org/hypertext/Conferences/WWW4/ Fourth International World Wide Web Conference
-.079 http://www.igd.fhg.de/www/www95/papers/ WWW'95: Papers
8 Evaluation
The evaluation of the methods presented here is a challenging task. First, of course, we are
attempting to dene and compute a measure, \authority," that is inherently based on human
judgment. Moreover, the nature of the www adds complexity to the problem of evaluation
| it is a new domain, with a shortage of standard benchmarks; the diversity of authoring
styles is much greater than for comparable collections of printed, published documents; and
it is highly dynamic, with new material being created rapidly and no comprehensive index
of its full contents.
In the earlier sections of the paper, we have presented a number of examples of the output
from our algorithm. This was both to show the reader the type of results that are produced,
and because we believe that there is, and probably should be, an inevitable component of
res ipsa loquitur in the overall evaluation | our feeling is that many of the results are quite
striking at an obvious level.
However, there are also more principled ways of evaluating the algorithm. Since the
appearance of the conference version of this paper, three distinct user studies performed by
25
two dierent groups [6, 10, 11] have helped assess the value of our technique in the context
of a tool for locating information on the www. Each of these studies used a system built
primarily on top of the basic algorithm described here, for locating hubs and authorities
in a subgraph G via the methods discussed in Sections 2 and 3. However, each of these
systems also employed additional heuristics to further enhance relevance judgments. Most
signicantly, they incorporated text-based measures such as anchor text scores to weight the
contribution of individual links dierentially. As such, the results of these studies should
not be interpreted as providing a direct evaluation of the pure link-based method described
here; rather, they assess its performance as the core component of a www search tool.
We briefly survey the structure and results of the most recent of these three user studies,
involving the Clever system of Chakrabarti et al. [10], and refer the reader to that work
for more details. The basic task in this study was automatic resource compilation | the
construction of lists of high-quality www pages related to a broad search topic | and
the goal was to see how the output of Clever compared to that of a manually generated
compilation such as the www search service Yahoo! [58] for a set of 26 topics.
Thus, for each topic, the output of the Clever system was a list of ten pages: its ve
top hubs and ve top authorities. Yahoo! was used as the main point of comparison, since
its manually compiled resource lists can be viewed as representing judgments of \authority"
by the human ontologists who compile them. The top ten pages returned by AltaVista were
also selected, so as to provide representative pages produced by a fully automatic text-based
search engine. All these pages were collected into a single topic list for each topic in the
study, without an indication of which method produced which page. A collection of 37 users
was assembled; the users were required to be familiar with the use of a Web browser, but
were not experts in computer science or in the 26 search topics. The users were then asked
to rank the pages they visited from the topic lists as \bad," \fair," \good," or \fantastic," in
terms of their utility in learning about the topic. This yielded 1369 responses in all, which
were then used to assess the relative quality of Clever, Yahoo!, and AltaVista on each
topic. For approximately 31% of the topics, the evaluations of Yahoo! and Clever were
equivalent to within a threshold of statistical signicance; for approximately 50% Clever
was evaluated higher; and for the remaining 19% Yahoo! was evaluated higher.
Of course, it is dicult to draw denitive conclusions from these studies. A service such
as Yahoo! is indeed providing, by its very nature, a type of human judgment as to which
pages are \good" for a particular topic. But even the nature of the quality judgment is not
well-dened, of course. Moreover, many of the entries in Yahoo! are drawn from outside
submissions, and hence represent less directly the \authority" judgments of Yahoo!Õs sta.
Many of the users in these studies reported that they used the lists as starting points from
which to explore, but that they visited many pages not on the original topic lists generated
by the various techniques. This is, of course, a natural process in the exploration of a broad
topic on the www, and the goal of resource lists appears to be generally for the purpose of
26
facilitating this process rather than for replacing it.
9 Conclusion
We have discussed a technique for locating high-quality information related to a broad search
topic on the www, based on a structural analysis of the link topology surrounding \author-
itative" pages on the topic. It is useful to highlight four basic components of our approach.
 For broad topics on the www, the amount of relevant information is growing extremely
rapidly, making it continually more dicult for individual users to lter the available
resources. To deal with this problem, one needs notions beyond those of relevance and
clustering | one needs a way to distill a broad topic, for which there may be millions
of relevant pages, down to a representation of very small size. It is for this purpose
that we dene a notion of \authoritative" sources, based on the link structure of the
www.
 We are interested in producing results that are of as a high a quality as possible in
the context of what is available on the www globally. Our underlying domain is not
restricted to a focused set of pages, or those residing on a single Web site.
 At the same time, we infer global notions of structure without directly maintaining an
index of the www or its link structure. We require only a basic interface to any of a
number of standard www search engines, and use techniques for producing \enriched"
samples of www pages to determine notions of structure and quality that make sense
globally. This helps to deal with problems of scale in handling topics that have an
enormous representation on the www.
 We began with the goal of discovering authoritative pages, but our approach in fact
identies a more complex pattern of social organization on the www, in which hub
pages link densely to a set of thematically related authorities. This equilibrium between
hubs and authorities is a phenomenon that recurs in the context of a wide variety of
topics on the www. Measures of impact and influence in bibliometrics have typically
lacked, and arguably not required, an analogous formulation of the role that hubs
play; the www is very dierent from the scientic literature, and our framework seems
appropriate as a model of the way in which authority is conferred in an environment
such as the Web.
This work has been extended in a number of ways since its initial conference appearance.
In Section 8 we mentioned systems for compiling high-quality www resource lists that have
been built using extensions to the algorithms developed here; see Bharat and Henzinger [6]
and Chakrabarti et al. [10, 11]. The implementation of the Bharat-Henzinger system made
27
use of the recently developed Connectivity Server (Bharat et al. [5]), which provides very
ecient retrieval for linkage information contained in the AltaVista index.
With Gibson and Raghavan, we have used the algorithms described here to explore the
structure of \communities" of hubs and authorities on the www [28]. We nd that the notion
of topic generalization discussed in Section 7 provides one valuable perspective from which
to view the overlapping organization of such communities. In a separate direction, also with
Gibson and Raghavan, we have investigated extensions of the present work to the analysis of
relational data, and considered a natural, non-linear analogue of spectral heuristics in this
setting [29].
There a number of interesting further directions suggested by this research, in addition
to the currently on-going work mentioned above. We will restrict ourselves here to three
such directions.
First, we have used structural information about the graph dened by the links of the
www, but we have not made use of its patterns of trac, and the paths that users implicitly
traverse in this graph as they visit a sequence of pages. There are a number of interesting and
fundamental questions that can be asked about www trac, involving both the modeling
of such trac and the development of algorithms and tools to exploit information gained
from trac patterns (see e.g. [2, 3, 33]). It would be interesting to ask how the approach
developed here might be integrated into a study of user trac patterns on the www.
Second, the power of eigenvector-based heuristics is not something that is fully understood
at an analytical level, and it would be interesting to pursue this question in the context of
the algorithms presented here. One direction would be to consider random graph models
that contain enough structure to capture certain global properties of the www, and yet are
simple enough so that the application of our algorithms to them could be analyzed. More
generally, the development of clean yet reasonably accurate random graph models for the
www could be extremely valuable for the understanding of a range of link-based algorithms.
Some work of this type has been undertaken in the context of the latent semantic indexing
technique in information retrieval [16]: Papadimitriou et al. [44] have provided a theoretical
analysis of latent semantic indexing applied to a basic probabilistic model of term use in
documents. In another direction, motivated in part by our work here, Frieze, Kannan, and
Vempala have analyzed sampling methodologies capable of approximating the singular value
decomposition of a large matrix very eciently [24]; understanding the concrete connections
between their work and our sampling methodology in Section 2 would be very interesting.
Finally, the further development of link-based methods to handle information needs other
than broad-topic queries on the www poses many interesting challenges. As noted above,
work has been done on the incorporation of textual content into our framework as a way of
\focusing" a broad-topic search [6, 10, 11], but one can ask what other basic informational
structures one can identify, beyond hubs and authorities, from the link topology of hyperme-
dia such as the www. The means by which interaction with a link structure can facilitate
28
the discovery of information is a general and far-reaching notion, and we feel that it will
continue to oer a range of fascinating algorithmic possibilities.
Acknowledgements
In the early stages of this work, I beneted enormously from discussions with Prabhakar
Raghavan and with Robert Kleinberg; I thank Soumen Chakrabarti, Byron Dom, David
Gibson, S. Ravi Kumar, Prabhakar Raghavan, Sridhar Rajagopalan, and Andrew Tomkins
for on-going collaboration on extensions and evaluations of this work; and I thank Rakesh
Agrawal, Tryg Ager, Rob Barrett, Marshall Bern, Tim Berners-Lee, Ashok Chandra, Monika
Henzinger, Alan Homan, David Karger, Lillian Lee, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos Papadim-
itriou, Peter Pirolli, Ted Selker, Eli Upfal, and the anonymous referees of this paper, for
their valuable comments and suggestions.
References
[1] G.O. Arocena, A.O. Mendelzon, G.A. Mihaila, \Applications of a Web query language,"
Proc. 6th International World Wide Web Conference, 1997.
[2] R. Barrett, P. Maglio, D. Kellem, \How to personalize the Web," Proc. Conf. on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 1997.
[3] O. Berman, M.J. Hodgson, D. Krass. \Flow-interception problems," in Facility Location:
A Survey of Applications and Methods, Z. Drezner, Ed., Springer 1995.
[4] T. Berners-Lee, R. Ca