 
 
 
Spring 2013 
 
 
Assignment 0: Using VMware Player 
 
Due January 18, 2013 
 
1		Background	
We will be offering a standardized development system for CIS455/555 that is based on a virtual machine 
image. This image contains a small Linux installation, the Eclipse IDE, and all the tools you will need for 
the homework assignments. Having such a standardized system has several advantages: 
 
1. You do not have to worry about incompatibilities between the software we will be using and 
other software that may be installed on your machine; 
2. If something goes wrong, you have a 'safe' configuration to go back to - just reinstall the virtual 
machine image; 
3. The virtual machine image will be the 'gold standard' for grading; thus, if your solution works in 
the VM image, you can be sure that it will also work on the graders' machines. 
 
The virtual machine image works with VMware Player, which has been installed on the Linux machines 
in M100A, M204 (Ketterer Lab), M207, and Towne-M70. If you prefer using your own computer, 
VMware Player is available for free at http://www.vmware.com/products/player/ (Windows and Linux 
versions; non-commercial use only). If you are a Mac user, try VirtualBox (http://www.virtualbox.org/). 
 
Of course, you are free to use a different development system (e.g., a different operating system, your 
favorite editor or IDE, ...). However, we will only grade solutions based on their performance in the 
virtual machine image, and we can only offer limited support if you decide to use your own setup. 
2		Installing	the	VM	image	
Your first task is to install the VM image for this assignment. The following step-by-step guide assumes 
that you are in the Moore M100A lab: 
 
1. Download the VM image from http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~cis455/handouts/vm.zip. If you don't 
have enough space in your SEAS account, use the cis455-vm link in your account (see below) 
2. Unpack the .zip file; this should produce a folder called cis455 
3. Start VMware Player (if you are using the Linux in the lab, press Alt+F2 to open the 'Run' dialog 
and enter vmplayer; you can also open a terminal window and run vmplayer from there) 
4. Click 'Open a Virtual Machine'. In the dialog box that appears, open the cis455 folder, select 
the CIS455 machine image, and click 'Open'. 
5. Click 'Play virtual machine'. If you are asked whether the VM was moved or copied, say 'moved'. 
6. The Linux in the VM image should boot now. Wait until the login dialog appears.  
7. Click on 'CIS455' to log in. The password is vm. 
CIS 455/555: Internet and Web Systems 
You should now have a running VM. A few tips regarding the virtual machine:  
 
? If you run out of storage space while unpacking vm.zip, try downloading vm.zip to a 
temporary directory (e.g., /tmp), and then unpack it to your home directory from there. (Do not 
unpack the VM image to /tmp, since files in this directory are deleted regularly!) 
? If you are using an old version of VMware Player, you may get an error message about an invalid 
configuration file. If you see this message, try upgrading to the newest version. 
? CETS has allocated some extra space for CIS455/555 students; you should have a symbolic link 
called cis455-vm in your home directory that points to this space. If the VM image doesn't fit 
into your normal SEAS account, please store it in this space. 
? Always shut down the VM properly before closing VMware Player (by clicking on the 'CIS455' 
the upper right corner and selecting 'Power Off'). If you do not do this, the VM image can become 
corrupted, just like your operating system can become corrupted if you switch off your computer 
before shutting it down properly. 
? If the screen size of your VM is tiny, try resizing it or putting it into full-screen mode. 
? Note that the mouse pointer has to be over the VM window; otherwise your inputs will not be 
accepted. If at any point your mouse or keyboard are 'captured' by the VM (i.e., you can no longer 
move the mouse outside of the VM window or switch to other applications), press the 'Ctrl' and 
'Alt' keys simultaneously. This should also help you to get out of 'fullscreen mode'. 
? The data you store inside the VM is persistent (i.e., will survive reboots), and we will be using a 
version control system; nevertheless, we strongly recommend that you make occasional backups, 
e.g., by copying your data to eniac.seas.upenn.edu using the scp command. 
? The password for the cis455 user is vm. You shouldn't normally need to become root, but if 
this ever becomes necessary, you can use sudo with the same password. 
? If you would like to use a text editor other than Eclipse, please use apt-get to install it. For 
instance, to install gedit, run sudo apt-get install gedit in a terminal window. 
? If the VM runs slowly on your machine, try increasing its memory size to 1.5GB (under Virtual 
Machine / Virtual Machine Settings..., or under "Edit virtual machine settings"). 
? If the virtual disk (the .vmdk file(s) in the cis455 folder) is getting too big, try deleting some 
files inside the VM and then 'compacting' it (under Virtual Machine Settings... / Hard Disk (SCSI) 
/ Utilities / Compact). This should free up some space on the host machine. 
3		The	HelloWorld	application	[10	points]	
Your third task in this assignment is to write a simple Java program that writes your full name and your 
SEAS login name to System.out when it is invoked (for example, my own solution writes "*** 
Author: Andreas Haeberlen (ahae)"). The class that contains your main method should be 
called HelloWorld, and it should be a member of the package edu.upenn.cis455.hw0.  
 
This is not rocket science. We know. The goal is to familiarize yourself with the VM, and to try out the 
homework submission process, which is described below. In the following, we will assume that you have 
already received an email with your login information for the svn server, and that your VM can 
successfully connect to the network. If you are not sure about the network connection, double-click on the 
"Firefox" icon on the VM's desktop; this should open the CIS455/555 web page. 
 
To get started, open Eclipse, select the "File..." menu, and click on "Import...". Find the "SVN" tab, select 
"Checkout Projects from SVN", and hit "Next >". In the dialog box that opens now, select "Create a new 
repository location" and hit "Next >"; then enter the URL  
 
              svn://ds01.seas.upenn.edu:10455/yourSEASlogin 
 
but replace yourSEASlogin with your actual SEAS login name. Then hit "Next >". 
You should now be prompted for a username and password (if not, check your network connection!). The 
dialog box will suggest cis455 as the username, but you should not accept it; rather, replace it with your 
SEAS login name, and enter the password from your welcome email (check the box to allow the 
password to be saved). You should now see the "Select Folder" dialog, which should show the URL you 
just typed, and below it a folder called "HW0". Select the "HW0" folder and click "Finish". The HW0 
project should now be checked out, and it should appear in Eclipse's Package Explorer.  
 
Find the HelloWorld.java file, and add the necessary code to write your full name and SEAS login. 
Please use the exact format above (Example: "*** Author: Andreas Haeberlen (ahae)"). 
Also, open the README file and complete all the fields. Finally, check all your changes back into the 
repository. To do this, right-click on the "HW0" project in the Package Explorer, select "Team..." and 
then "Commit". You should be prompted for a comment. Enter a short description of your changes  
(Example: "Implemented Hello World") and then hit "OK". Your changes should now be checked in. 
 
For later assignments, we strongly recommend that you regularly check in your changes, at least once a 
day and/or whenevery you've implemented a major new feature. That way, when something suddenly 
stops working, you can use svn's diff feature to find the changes you've made since the last checkin. Also, 
when you create additional files, e.g., for new Java classes, please don't forget to add them to the 
repository