WHO -- Susan Katz, 63, retired bookkeeper, shown with her husband, Sydney, 63, a grocery store executive  WHAT -- 4-bedroom condominium  WHERE -- Manchester Center, Vt.
My husband and I have four children. Twenty-two years ago we set out to find a place they'd enjoy spending time during their vacations. We wanted them to have an alternative to hanging out in town. Southern Vermont offered the best skiing area within three or four hours of our Connecticut home, so we bought this condo, and have been coming ever since.
A condominium is, of course, an ideal choice for a second home. It's pretty much a turn-key operation. One flat fee and the landscaping is done in the summer, the plowing is done in the winter. All you have to do is show up. The thing is, in our case, showing up was no small feat. Shuttling four kids (and usually several of their friends) to and from Vermont was a challenge. Just remembering that many pairs of goggles and neck-warmers was a big deal. I don't recall a single visit that didn't turn into a trip to the local ski shop to buy what we were missing.
Still, it was great for the kids, because they could ski all day. And, it was great for us, because at night, we'd always know exactly where they were: in bed, exhausted from the slopes.
Now, my husband and I have seven grandchildren -- and we're always ready for more. The oldest is 8 years old and already skis the black diamond trails. To accommodate everyone, we've remodeled the house. We have a room with bunks that sleeps six, and the other rooms have trundles. We all gather up here for the holidays. When you look out the window at night, it's beautiful. You can see the Equinox Mountains and lights of Manchester sparkling.
As told to Bethany Lyttle
ON THE MARKET  Information on properties was provided by the listing companies.
WHERE -- Mount Crested Butte, Colo.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom condominium  HOW MUCH -- $975,000
This ski-in, ski-out town-house condominium is in the Crested Butte ski area. It has a double-deep garage on the ground level that is connected by an elevator with the three living levels above. The condominium is 2,200 square feet and is offered fully furnished. There are two decks, one with a six-person hot tub; a security system; a fireplace in the living room; and three and a half bathrooms. Agent: Doreen Letson, United Country Wilson Associates Realty, (970) 641-2169; www.gunnisonco-realestate.com.
WHERE -- Ketchum, Idaho  WHAT -- 4-bedroom condominium  HOW MUCH -- $1,495,000
This 3,706-square-foot ski-in, ski-out condominium is in the Sun Valley ski area. It has three levels; the master suite is on the top floor with an office and a sitting area. There are a fireplace, a deck with Bald Mountain and stream views, an elevator and four and a half bathrooms. It is offered fully furnished. Agent: Terry Palmer, Sun Valley Associates, (208) 622-4100; www.terrypalmer.com.
WHERE -- Incline Village, Nev.  WHAT -- 2-bedroom condominium  HOW MUCH -- $429,900
This multilevel condominium is near Diamond Peak and other ski areas around Lake Tahoe as well as golf courses and lake beaches. It has two bedroom suites with bathrooms on the middle level. The top level has a stone gas fireplace and a living-dining area that opens onto a deck with Lake Tahoe and Diamond Peak views. A one-car garage and a carport are on the ground level. It has never been rented and has had only one owner since it was built in 1991. It is offered furnished. Agent: Alvin Steinberg, Tanager Realty, (800) 666-4718; www.atahoe.com.
WHERE -- Bartlett, N.H.  WHAT -- 2-bedroom condominium  HOW MUCH -- $219,500
Near the Attitash Bear Peak, Bretton Woods and Wildcat ski areas, as well as the Sunday River ski resort in Bethel, Me., this 1,300-square-foot condominium has views of Black Mountain and Kearsarge Mountain from its decks, living area and the upper-level master bedroom. There are two fireplaces, one in the living room and one in the master bedroom, and two bathrooms. The complex has indoor and outdoor pools. Agent: Elizabeth Roy, Prudential Joy Tarbell Realty, (800) 339-9569; www.elizabethroy.com.
WHERE -- Park City, Utah  WHAT -- 2-bedroom condominium  HOW MUCH -- $520,000
Two bedrooms flank a living room with a fireplace in this 1,400-square-foot condominium. It is minutes from the Deer Valley ski area and has a breakfast bar, open dining area, stone and carpeted flooring, three bathrooms and a deck with mountain and ski area views. It is offered fully furnished -- including a Murphy bed in the living room -- and has access to a pool, underground parking and concierge service. Agent: Dennis Hanlon; Lewis, Wolcott, &amp; Dornbush Real Estate, (435) 640-5851; www.dennishanlon.com.
WHERE -- Teton Village, Wyo.  WHAT -- One-room condominium  HOW MUCH -- $365,000
This 500-square-foot studio suite is at the Snake River Lodge &amp; Spa in the Jackson Hole ski area. It has a sitting area, a king-size bed, a small refrigerator, one bathroom and ski-in, ski-out access to the ski lift. There is no kitchen. The condo has access to all of the hotel's amenities and facilities, including an indoor-outdoor pool, a fitness center, restaurants and ski lockers. It is 10 minutes from Grand Teton National Park and 40 minutes from Yellowstone National Park. Agent: Jeanie Staehr, (307) 732-7550; www.rejh.com.
HAVENS: LIVING HERE
