Peter Pan  Jeremy Sumpter, Rachel Hurd-Wood, Jason Isaacs, Lynn Redgrave, Richard Briers, Olivia Williams, Harry Newell, Freddie Popplewell, Ludivine Sagnier  Directed by P. J. Hogan  PG 113 minutes
Mr. Hogan's film, based on J. M. Barrie's books, takes a more literary approach than previous stage and screen versions, which makes it not as shrill and bright as many current entertainments for children. All the familiar elements are in place, with Wendy the storyteller (Rachel Hurd-Wood) feeling growing pains in her staid, prosperous London household and running into trouble at school when she shares a tale of a flying boy who visits her bedroom.
Out the window and off to Neverland with Peter (Jeremy Sumpter), Wendy and her younger brothers land in the running fracas between Peter and Captain Hook (Mr. Isaacs). In a previous encounter, Peter removed a hand from Hook and fed it to a crocodile. And now for the rest of him.
Hook seems deserving enough. A dandified cutthroat, he shoots critics on the spot and has an array of cruel blades to attach to the end of his arm. But he appears flummoxed by Peter, an American adolescent who flits out of reach.
In the forest of Neverland, Wendy tells her adventure stories to Peter's band of Lost Boys and blossoms as a fighter. Captured by Hook, she cleverly becomes a pirate, and her storytelling earns standing ovations from Hook's crew. But this Hook, brimming with neuroses and trickery, is a long way from the croc's belly.
After the battles, Peter considers relinquishing his eternal boyhood to go with Wendy. And at home, a grieving mother waits by an ever-open window for the return of her own lost children.
VIOLENCE -- Swordplay and gunfire, but nothing too intense.  SEX -- Some suggestion transpires between Peter and Wendy, and there is a whiff of sexuality between Hook and Wendy as he growls treacheries in her ear.  PROFANITY -- None.
For Which Children?  AGES 3-6 -- The film is too involved for many, and the threats and violence could be upsetting.  AGES 7-10 -- As in most children's films, going on an adventure involves the pain of separation. That could bother some.  AGES 11 AND UP -- If it's to their taste.
Cheaper by the Dozen  Steve Martin, Bonnie Hunt, Hilary Duff, Tom Welling, Piper Perabo, Kevin G. Schmidt, Alyson Stoner, Jacob Smith, Forrest Landis, Liliana Mumy, Morgan York, Blake Woodruff, Shane Kinsman, Brent Kinsman, Ashton Kutcher  Directed by Shawn Levy  PG 98 minutes
By the time Kate and Tom Baker (Ms. Hunt and Mr. Martin) reached 12 kids, they were having them in pairs. Tom is a football coach at a small Division III college in Midland, Ill., and a moderate income fills a medium-size house with tons of hand-me-down clothes and battered toys and keeps gas in the scarred family van.
Life is a generally happy bedlam, with scheduling crises breaking by the minute and food barely landing on plates at the mob scenes that pass for mealtimes. Kate has been putting the whole thing on paper and is about to ship a manuscript off to a publisher.
Cheery to a fault, Tom nevertheless dreams of coaching at a big Division I college, and when an offer comes from an outfit called the Stallions (at Tom's alma mater), the Bakers have a decision to make. The kids want to stay with their friends in Midland, but Tom prevails and off they go to the big time.
The new house is a mansion with enough bedrooms for almost everybody. Tom wears a suit to work. Instead of watching him sling burgers, the kids see him only on sports shows. And suddenly the family lands another member in the fast lane. Kate's book is about to become a smash best seller, and the publisher wants her for a two-week promotional tour.
Life flies out of control. The kids are taunted at their new schools. With his wife on the road and two squads to manage -- one on the field and one at home -- Tom starts conducting football practice at his house. The university doesn't like this. With chaos at home, Kate walks off the tour. The publisher doesn't like that. Oprah agrees to interview Kate at the Baker house, but backs off after reports of family bickering. Midland never looked better.
VIOLENCE -- Plenty of crashing around, and a Baker kid or two fights tormentors at school.  SEX -- Tom and Kate wiggle their posteriors and talk a lot about the spark left in their 23-year marriage. But in a movie with a 50's feel, they also insist that their 22-year-old daughter and her boyfriend sleep separately when they visit.  PROFANITY -- A couple of naughty words.
For Which Children?  AGES 6-8 -- The sudsy goings-on will appeal, and there's nothing too disturbing or offensive.  AGES 8-11 -- Mr. Martin is fun, but he's no football coach. Most kids realize that if real life takes on similar outlines, it isn't quite this pat and formulaic.  AGES 12 AND UP -- Many (not all) will prefer more cutting-edge material.
Paycheck  Ben Affleck, Aaron Eckhart, Uma Thurman, Paul Giamatti, Colm Feore  Directed by John Woo  PG-13 119 minutes
Michael Jennings (Mr. Affleck) is a whiz of an engineer who does things like invent three-dimensional figures who step free of a computer screen. His assignments pay well, but because his breakthroughs involve corporate secrets, his memory of having accomplished the task is always erased.
His boss, Rethrick (Mr. Eckhart), called Jimmy, smokes cigars the size of baseball bats and has a picture of Einstein in his office. Jimmy proposes a job that would take three years to accomplish, after which Jennings would awake, so to speak, eight figures richer. Reporting to work, Jennings puts all the objects on his person in a large envelope, to be returned three years hence. In a plant-filled lab he encounters Rachel (Ms. Thurman), a biologist he failed to lure into bed some time before. The object he is to work on emits a bright light.
The next thing he knows, he is in Jimmy's office. The job is finished. A preliminary check of his finances shows him to be $92 million richer. On further inquiry, however, he is astounded to learn that he has forfeited the funds. He does have that envelope of personal effects, but now the objects are different.
Though he doesn't remember, Jennings has apparently shipped himself the stuff from work. Now the F.B.I. wants him, and Jimmy is trying to kill him. Rachel proves a good ally in a scrap, and Jennings is one computer geek who can hold his own in a John Woo movie (based on a story by Philip K. Dick). Each object in the envelope can help, but how and when?
VIOLENCE -- Plenty of the usual brawls, shootings and explosions, but nothing too horrendous.  SEX -- Situations occur, but they are subdued.  PROFANITY -- Moderate.
For Which Children?  UNDER AGE 11 -- The film obviously is inappropriate for the youngest, but by 10 or so it becomes a borderline proposition, according to parental guidelines.  AGES 11-13 -- Most parents will have no stern objection.
TAKING THE CHILDREN
