A proposal to expand New York City's fleet of yellow cabs and increase fares by 25 percent received a chilly welcome yesterday from one of the groups it was intended to assist -- taxi drivers.
A study commissioned by the city and released on Wednesday recommended adding 900 yellow cabs to the current fleet of 12,187 -- a move that would allow the city to raise tens of millions of dollars by selling new medallions. The study also suggested increasing fares by about 25 percent, to ease the fears of cab owners concerned that more competition could leave the market oversaturated and drive down the value of the medallions, currently around $225,000 each.
But the proposal -- which has not yet been approved by the city's Taxi and Limousine Commission -- has not eased the worries of cabdrivers, who fear that increased competition and fewer passengers will decrease their earnings.
''If the fares go up, business is going to go down,'' said Maninder Singh, who has driven a taxi for the past seven years. ''And if there's 900 more cabs, business is going to go down. The way things are now, if you work, you can make money. But what will happen when there are fewer riders and more taxis?''
More than 500,000 people take yellow cabs each day in New York, and for years city residents have complained that a shortage of taxis has led to intolerable waits, especially during rush hours and inclement weather.
At taxi stands and on city streets, many cab riders reacted to the proposal yesterday with a predictable mix of emotions: they eagerly awaited the additional cabs but winced at the thought of paying 25 percent more. The base fare for a cab ride is $2, and each additional one-fifth of a mile costs 30 cents. Between 8 p.m. and 6 a.m., a night surcharge of 50 cents is added.
Although the languid pace of New Year's Day made cabs relatively easy to find in Manhattan yesterday, many people said they thought that the expansion of the fleet was long overdue.
Gerald Tam, 24, of Chelsea, said he only traveled by cab at night and often had a difficult time finding one. If the city approves the fare increase, however, Mr. Tam said he would probably walk or take the subway more often.
''The best way to see the city is on foot anyway,'' he said, ''so I guess I'll just walk more.''
Others said they considered the fare increase inevitable and the plan a fair tradeoff.
Christopher Bartle, who lives on the Upper East Side and works in Midtown, said he was willing to pay higher fares if he could be certain that it would shorten his wait for a cab during rush hour.
''You just hope they add enough cabs to make a difference,'' he said. ''People promise you things, but you're never quite sure whether they'll deliver.''
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has indicated his support for increasing the size of the fleet, and both the City Council and the state have given their approval. The study was done by an engineering firm, Urbitran Associates, and determined that the 900 cabs could be added over the next three years without posing major traffic or environmental problems.
But cabdrivers, who have asked for a fare increase of 50 percent, said the study weighed the economic impact on medallion owners without considering how the proposal would affect drivers' wages. New York cab fares are lower than in many other large cities and have not been increased since March 1996.
''The city wants to raise money without raising taxes,'' said Bhairavi Desai, director of the New York Taxi Workers Alliance. ''But the mayor shouldn't balance his budget on the backs of taxi drivers, who work 70 hours a week.''
