If you subscribe to the tempting notion that the movies are fun-house blowups of our national unconscious, this holiday movie season has not brought tidings of comfort and joy. Hollywood has always put on a sober face at the end of year, as the Golden Globes and Academy Awards loom. But this season the mood has been unusually somber. Call it the Season of Tears and Blood.
Yes, there have been hits like the glorified 50's-style sitcom ''Cheaper by the Dozen'' and the frisky comedy ''Elf,'' which peddle stress-free escapist diversion. But along with the fun, a strain of tragedy has darkened the screen in ''Mystic River,'' ''21 Grams,'' ''House of Sand and Fog'' and the documentary ''The Fog of War.'' Each in its way conveys a wary post-9/11 sense of the world and its lurking perils. Each offers a reminder that bad deeds and mistakes in judgment can have lasting and often devastating consequences. If we ignore our anxieties and sweep them under the rug, these films imply, they may fester and eventually explode in our faces.
Along with these gloomy reflections has come a resurgence of war movies with the charge led by ''Cold Mountain,'' ''The Last Samurai,'' ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World'' and ''Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King.'' Although each has a different take on a different war, their arrival reflects a social climate in which war is an ever-present reality, and the unambiguous hero, so long out of fashion in popular culture, has made a spectacular comeback.
This resurgence has brought with it a new explicitness in the depiction of combat. One legacy of Steven Spielberg's ''Saving Private Ryan'' in 1998 was to raise the bar on realism in the screen portrayal of bloodshed. The film's influence is most apparent this season in Anthony Minghella's stately screen version of Charles Frasier's Civil War epic, ''Cold Mountain,'' in which the depiction of mass slaughter is as graphic as Mr. Spielberg's re-creation of the Normandy invasion.
All these anxieties are telegraphed on the screen by images of faces knotted in agony. The tears shed by Sean Penn over the loss of his young daughter in ''Mystic River'' erupt in a stinging cloudburst that, once released, seems unstanchable. Ben Kingsley's howling grief over a son's violent death in ''House of Sand and Fog'' is as heart-rending as any screen depiction of grief ever filmed. In ''Monster'' Charlize Theron, made cosmetically unrecognizable to play the Florida serial killer Aileen Wuornos, gazes at the world with dead, resentful eyes that distill an alienation born from a lifetime of rejection and abuse. These unhappy faces and the stories to which they're attached, remind you just how easily a look of love can freeze into a mask of hate.
Below is a checklist of selected recent films with their strengths and weaknesses noted, with special attention to worthy supporting performances. They're listed in the approximate order of this critic's personal preference. Family films and franchises are omitted.
'Mystic River'
With Dennis Lehane's novel, set in a working-class enclave of Boston, Clint Eastwood finally found a vehicle with which to give his fascination with morality and vigilante justice the dimensions of a Greek tragedy.
PLUSES -- The film has classic screen performances by Mr. Penn and Tim Robbins as childhood friends now grown up, and a solid one by Kevin Bacon in the relatively thankless role of the third member of their youthful triumvirate. Mr. Robbins's shuffling, stammering portrayal of a grown-up victim of child abuse may not be as flashy as Mr. Penn's performance, but you can sense his character's fear and uncertainty in every hesitant gesture and stumbling outburst.
MINUSES -- With an unsatisfying coda pinned on, the movie feels structurally lopsided. A subplot involving phone calls between Mr. Bacon's character and his estranged wife clunks heavily.
'The Fog of War'
In Errol Morris's documentary portrait of Robert S. McNamara, this 85-year-old former secretary of defense delivers an evasive apologia for his mistakes in prosecuting the Vietnam War. Interwoven with his cagey reminiscences are maxims about war and morality that every world leader ought to heed.
PLUSES -- Consisting of one extended interview augmented with vintage film clips and excerpts from White House tapes, the no-frills documentary is a triumphant example of how less can be more when the material is this compelling.
MINUSES -- Some may feel that Mr. Morris's interrogation of Mr. McNamara isn't pointed enough.
'House of Sand and Fog'
It's no coincidence that this film recalls the superior ''In the Bedroom.'' Both movies were adapted from fictional works by Andre Dubus III in which characters find themselves caught in ethical cul-de-sacs that they resolve with desperate life-and-death acts.
PLUSES -- Ben Kingsley gives his greatest screen performance as a proud Iranian immigrant desperately grabbing at a slice of the American dream. Jennifer Connelly as his feisty, tear-stained opponent in a real estate battle is almost as fine. But she is finally outshone by Shohreh Aghdashloo as the Iranian's humane and submissive wife.
MINUSES -- Because Ms. Connelly's character has been softened from the mess she is in the novel, her character has lost some focus. A subplot depicting her relationship with an unhappily married police officer (Ron Eldard) is frustratingly sketchy.
'Lost in Translation'
In Sofia Coppola's exquisitely subtle comedy, a middle-aged American movie star (Bill Murray) and a photographer's neglected young wife (Scarlett Johansson) establish a fragile romantic connection while killing time in a Tokyo hotel.
PLUSES -- Mr. Murray's portrayal of a fading movie star skating on the edge of despair distills a certain middle-aged angst with a wry understanding of life's shrinking possibilities. Ms. Johansson, as an Ivy League graduate, projects a stubborn, critical intelligence. Because the movie doesn't translate its Japanese dialogue, it immerses you in the experience of cultural dislocation. Ultimately the movie makes that discontinuity a metaphor for faltering communication between generations as well as cultures. Anna Faris delivers a sharp satiric cameo as an obnoxiously brazen Cameron Diaz-like movie star.
MINUSES -- Some may dismiss the love story as much ado about nothing. The farcical portraits of Japanese media types have an undercurrent of racial condescension.
'The Barbarian Invasions'
The Canadian film maker Denys Arcand's affectionate group portrait of middle-aged Canadian academics who reunite around the deathbed of an old friend (Rémy Girard) dying of cancer in Montreal is the year's most literate film.
PLUSES -- The wonderfully lived-in performances by the members of the Canadian ensemble sustain a tone of Chekhovian wistfulness as they reminisce about their younger, wilder days. The invasion of the title refers both to the world after 9/11 and to America the Vulgar and the values it exports. The movie openly laments the arrival of an era when money rules and what one character calls intelligence is on the wane.
MINUSES -- Much of the talk, for all its sagacity and wit, skims the surface of the issues being addressed.
'Monster'
The first feature by Patty Jenkins is an unsparingly bleak fictional portrait of the real-life Florida serial killer Aileen Wuornos (Charlize Theron). The story focuses on her co-dependent relationship with her lover (Christina Ricci), who ended up testifying against her in court.
PLUSES -- Ms. Theron, like Hilary Swank in ''Boys Don't Cry,'' all but disappears into the body and mind of her character, and she succeeds in eliciting as much compassion as revulsion for her character, a low-rent prostitute who starts murdering her clients.
MINUSES -- Ms. Ricci appears intimidated by her character. She communicates her selfishness but not her humanity.
'In America'
In Jim Sheridan's semiautobiographical ode to America as the Promised Land, an aspiring Irish actor (Paddy Considine) moves to the United States with his wife (Samantha Morton) and two daughters and settles in Hell's Kitchen. The episodic movie is sweetly narrated by the older girl (Sarah Bolger).
PLUSES -- The film has winning, warm-blooded performances by Mr. Considine and Ms. Morton playing parents whose mutual devotion is shadowed by the recent death of a young son. The movie's unabashed hokiness can be attributed in part to being narrated by a child.
MINUSES -- The movie is burdened with a mawkish, unconvincing subplot about a saintly downstairs neighbor (Djimon Hounsou) who is dying of AIDS.
'Cold Mountain'
This Civil War drama adapted by Anthony Minghella from Charles Frasier's best-selling novel aspires to the epic grandeur of movies like ''Reds,'' ''Doctor Zhivago'' and even ''Gone With the Wind,'' and in some respects it succeeds. But Jude Law and Nicole Kidman, as sweethearts who have barely met when the war carries him off, come only half alive as characters.
PLUSES -- Renée Zellweger's portrayal of a raucous backwoods tomboy who teaches Ms. Kidman survival skills may verge on caricature, but it is still a welcome antidote to a tone of high-minded British reserve that colors the rest of a movie that feels distinctly un-Southern.
MINUSES -- Ms. Kidman is radiant and Mr. Law handsome, but both are too cool for any sparks to ignite. The movie drags in places, and the climactic love scene is as chilly and calculated as a perfume ad on television.
'21 Grams'
The Mexican director Alejandro González Iñárritu's metaphysical drama is a wildly ambitious follow-up to his ''Amores Perros,'' which explored human fate, chance and coincidence with a remarkably visceral sense of the physical world. The new movie, which brings together a dying mathematician (Sean Penn), a grieving mother (Naomi Watts) and an ex-convict and born-again Christian (Benicio Del Toro), explores the relationship between the living and the dying and the possibility of revenge and forgiveness in a more abstract way.
PLUSES -- Mr. Penn (in a professorial turnabout from the roughneck of ''Mystic River''), Ms. Watts (even more arresting here than in ''Mulholland Drive'') and Mr. Del Toro (chewing the scenery) are superb.
MINUSES -- Like ''Amores Perros,'' ''21 Grams'' is constructed like a jigsaw puzzle. But the forward and backward structure is at once more complicated and arbitrary and seems intended partly to camouflage an ultimate lack of narrative credibility.
'Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World'
Set during the Napoleonic Wars, the freewheeling adaptation of a Patrick O'Brian novel has more seafaring smarts than the waterlogged ''Perfect Storm.'' Directed by Peter Weir, this movie stars Russell Crowe as the captain of a British frigate that clashes with a larger French warship.
PLUSES -- Mr. Crowe's charismatic captain exudes the oratorical confidence of Richard Burton in his prime. The hierarchy and rituals of British naval life are scrupulously observed. And Paul Bettany brings a fine sense of balance to the role of ship's surgeon, whose scientific curiosity conflicts with his naval duties.
MINUSES -- The minutiae of 19th-century British naval life is certainly not everybody's cup of tea, and the cooped-up all-male environment becomes claustrophobic.
'The Triplets of Belleville'
In Sylvain Chomet's eccentric animated film, a bicycle racer is kidnapped by French Mafiosi during the Tour de France and taken to Belleville, an imaginary North American city. His clubfooted grandmother and her dog team up with three ancient music hall stars, the Belleville Sisters, to rescue him.
PLUSES -- The movie, which features hand-drawn animation, is a total original full of surreal pranks, including a concert played on tuned bicycle spokes, and stylistically antithetical to the Disney-Pixar school of machine-tooled animation. Underneath its zany whimsicality, its view of life is anything but sugar-coated,
MINUSES -- The minimal French dialogue is not subtitled.
'Something's Gotta Give'
In Nancy Meyers's fluffy screwball comedy, set in New York and in the Hamptons, a successful playwright (Diane Keaton) who has given up sex succumbs to her daughter's boyfriend (Jack Nicholson), a wealthy lothario who is recovering from a heart attack in her beach house. Keanu Reeves is a handsome cardiologist who also falls for her.
PLUSES -- The repartee has a classic screwball snap, and Ms. Keaton and Mr. Nicholson chew their roles with relish. Ms. Keaton's humanity is so palpable she actually succeeds in warming up that automaton, Mr. Reeves. Frances McDormand, as Ms. Keaton's spunky wised-up sister, injects a healthy note of skepticism.
MINUSES -- Despite its Viagra references, the movie isn't any more grounded in reality than its 1930's prototypes. Like most romantic comedies nowadays, it is a Cinderella for soon-to-be seniors that shamelessly panders to its designated audience.
'Pieces of April'
In this caustic little comedy, a suburban family dutifully but reluctantly visits a rebellious daughter (Katie Holmes) for Thanksgiving in her grungy tenement on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
PLUSES -- Patricia Clarkson, as the mother being treated for cancer and subject to mood swings, is bracingly spiky and unpredictable.
MINUSES -- The dialogue, which teeters precariously between laughter and suds, sometimes feels forced, and the movie turns into mush.
'Bad Santa'
Despite its nonstop profanity, the season's anti-Christmas offering, which stars Billy Bob Thornton as a foul-mouthed professional Santa who robs the stores in which he insults the children on his lap, isn't as Scrooge-like as it pretends to be. His encounter with a chubby, lonely 8-year-old teaches him the true meaning of Christmas.
PLUSES -- For its first half, this sour little comedy is a welcome antidote to ''Jingle Bells'' and all it stands for.
MINUSES -- The one-note joke palls well before the movie lets down its defenses and goes soft.
'The Company'
Robert Altman's ensemble piece mixes actors (Neve Campbell as a dancer and Malcolm McDowell as an impresario) with the actual members of the Joffrey Ballet of Chicago to evoke an insider's vision of the ballet world.
PLUSES -- The behind-the-scenes view of the rigors of ballet feels authentic, and the ballet excerpts are beautifully photographed.
MINUSES -- There's no story unless you count a flimsy romance between Ms. Campbell and James Franco. All the ambience in the world can't compensate for the lack of developed characters.
'Girl With a Pearl Earring'
Scarlett Johansson is a maid who serves in the household of the great Dutch painter Vermeer. When she becomes the model for one his greatest works, jealousies and rivalries simmer around her.
PLUSES -- The visually ravishing film, based on Tracy Chevalier's novel, unfolds like a Vermeer canvas being slowly turned into the light. Ms. Johansson registers the tiniest calibrations of anxiety and erotic awareness as the model who has no idea she will be immortalized.
MINUSES -- The surrounding intrigue is jumbled and barely comprehensible. The movie is best appreciated as a cinematic painting.
'Mona Lisa Smile'
The easy target in this comedy, which preaches an ambiguous, warmed-over feminism, is its caricature of Wellesley College in 1953 as a deluxe finishing school peopled with prudes and brides-to-be. Julia Roberts is the art history teacher who shakes up her students by suggesting that they consider choosing a career over marriage.
PLUSES -- The formulaic movie is more entertaining than it deserves to be.
MINUSES -- Ms. Roberts is seriously miscast as an intellectual West Coast rebel. Kirsten Dunst, Julia Stiles and Maggie Gyllenhaal have flashy turns as students, but only Ms. Gyllenhaal, as the class bohemian, transcends her appointed stereotype.
'The Cooler'
William H. Macy is a so-called cooler, someone whose luck is so bad it rubs off on others. A Las Vegas casino owner (Alec Baldwin) to whom he owes money hires him to end gamblers' winning streaks by simply showing up. He loses his gift when a prostitute with a heart of gold falls in love with him.
PLUSES -- Although Mr. Macy is as solid as ever in another of his nervous, milquetoast roles, Mr. Baldwin, who is emerging as one of the greatest screen villains ever, steals the movie as the menacing casino owner.
MINUSES -- The premise is silly and the relationship between Mr. Macy and Maria Bello far-fetched, despite its graphic depiction.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK  Correction:  January 3, 2004, Saturday  A Critic's Notebook article in Weekend yesterday about holiday film releases misspelled the surname of the author of the novel on which the film ''Cold Mountain'' is based. He is Charles Frazier, not Frasier.
The article also gave a credit erroneously to Andre Dubus III, author of the novel that was the basis of the current film ''House of Sand and Fog.''  ''In the Bedroom,'' (2001), to which the new film was likened, was based on a story by Andre Dubus, the father of Andre III.
