INDUSTRIAL commodity prices are surging, lifted by the rebound of the global economy. Gold is also a highflier, helped some by stronger economies but more by the fall in the value of the dollar.
Industrial commodity prices, which rose 22.1 percent last year, are within striking distance of their post-World War II high reached in 1995. Gold, up 19.5 percent, to $416.10 an ounce, went over $400 in December for the first time in more than seven and a half years.
Industrial commodities -- which are as varied as copper, tin, steel, crude oil, rubber and plywood -- had their fifth-biggest annual gain as measured by the Journal of Commerce-Economic Cycle Research Institute index, which began in 1949. This index, which includes 18 industrial commodities, began its current rally with a 15.9 percent increase in 2002, after falling in 15 of the previous 21 years.
Gold had its third consecutive annual gain in 2003, the first such broad rally since the late 1980's. Since the end of 2000, the price of an ounce of gold has climbed 52.1 percent.
Global economic growth is forecast to pick up this year and the dollar to head even lower; consequently, industrial prices are expected to hit a new peak, while $400 could become a floor for gold rather than a tough-to-maintain high.
China could play a pivotal role in each of these forecasts. Analysts say that China was the biggest customer for industrial commodities as its economy grew at an expected annual rate of 7 percent to 8 percent last year. The key to demand is whether that pace continues.
The gold price could move higher if China decides to loosen its currency peg to the dollar, because that could allow the value of the dollar to fall still lower. In addition, China appears to be moving toward allowing individuals to own and trade gold, a change that could easily increase demand and lift the price.
But the gain in commodity prices does not mean the industrial economy in the United States is booming. Nor does the higher cost of nickel, aluminum and gold mean that inflation is threatening.
Instead, analysts say, the industrial price rise results more from lost capacity for mining, refining and transporting many commodities. That occurred because investment was curtailed after the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and then again during the eight-month recession that ended in November 2001. So there is not enough supply to meet the rising demand as the United States and Asian economies, led by China, continue to grow.
CAPACITY for industrial commodity production and transportation ''is well below trend on where it would be in a normal cycle,'' said Steve Strongin, director for commodities research at Goldman Sachs, so it took ''much less added global demand to tighten these markets.''
Even if China's growth slows this year, Mr. Strongin said, commodity prices will not be undermined because supplies and transportation capacity will remain tight.
The American manufacturing sector, meanwhile, is rebounding but not quickly. This sector grew for the five months through November, according to the Institute for Supply Management. But there has been no job recovery; through November the monthly string of consecutive layoffs stood at 40.
Anirvan Banerji, director for research at the Economic Cycle Research Institute in New York, said that the surge in commodity prices resulted mainly from growth in manufacturing abroad, especially in China. He pointed to one obscure piece of data in the most recent United States manufacturing report as evidence: The price of corrugated boxes has fallen for nine consecutive months, showing that there is not a strong American demand for cartons for shipping newly made goods.
As for gold, last year's rally followed the course of the falling dollar, rather than reflecting rising expectations for inflation. As the dollar fell over the year -- 16.5 percent against the euro and 9.6 percent against the yen -- the price of gold rose.
While the rallies in industrial commodities and gold are expected to continue this year, they may not be so strong. And although a falling dollar and rising industrial commodity prices can increase inflationary pressures, many economists, both private and at the Federal Reserve, do not see a surge in inflation on the horizon. Mr. Strongin warned that in the next 12 to 18 months, there should be a pause in the industrial commodity rally as buyers readjust to higher prices, but the move higher should resume. And, he added, ''the second leg of a commodity rally is better than the first.''
Gold is likely to continue to follow the dollar. This means it could rise all year. But some forecasters predict that the dollar will rebound later this year, which could rein in gold prices for a while.
