The Islanders' six-game winning streak ground to a halt Thursday night in a draining 1-0 loss to the Ottawa Senators.
But several Islanders players still found a silver lining. Bounced from the playoffs last season by Ottawa, the Islanders indicated that their recent success had not been a fluke.
Even without some of their top shooters, the Islanders peppered Senators goaltender Patrick Lalime with 32 shots in front of 18,500 fans at the Corel Center. But Lalime recorded Ottawa's second straight shutout and was the beneficiary of Peter Schaefer's ninth goal of the season at 14 minutes 5 seconds of the third period.
Schaefer received a pass from defenseman Karel Rachunek, who was skating behind the Islanders' net, and beat Islanders goalie Garth Snow on the glove side.
''It was a simple pass-out,'' said Snow, who made 22 saves. ''Our defense played well.''
It was the fourth game in a row in which Snow has allowed one goal and only the third time in 14 games that the Islanders did not record a point.
Snow's solid performance came a day before goalie Rick DiPietro was scheduled to rejoin the Islanders after a minor league conditioning assignment. Snow has played well enough to cement his role as the starter. Since taking the starting role from DiPietro, Snow has posted a 9-4 record.
The Islanders (19-16-2-1) were playing the second game in a three-game trip that concludes Saturday in Boston. It was the first of three matchups this month against the Senators.
''We keep playing like that and we'll be fine,'' Islanders Coach Steve Stirling said. ''We deserved better.''
Ottawa (19-10-5-3) entered the game with a hot streak of its own, and it is undefeated in eight straight contests. Ottawa's captain, Daniel Alfredsson, recently guaranteed that the Senators would win the Stanley Cup.
The Islanders were dealt a blow three minutes into the game when right wing Mark Parrish hobbled to the dressing room after being checked into the boards by defenseman Chris Phillips. Parrish, who scored six goals in the previous six games and whose 13 goals are tied for second on the Islanders, sprained his left ankle on the play and did not return, forcing Stirling to once more juggle the team's patchwork lineup.
Already out was Michael Peca, who was scratched with a mild groin muscle strain that he sustained Wednesday in a 6-1 blowout over Pittsburgh. Aleksei Yashin is expected to miss at least another month recovering from a lacerated left wrist.
Midway through the second period, Snow made one of the game's best saves. Controlling play behind the goal, Senators wing Martin Havlat tried a wraparound on Snow's stick side. Snow deflected the puck, but it caromed to wing Antoine Vermette, who snapped an off-balance shot from 15 feet toward the far corner of the net. Snow stretched to make a kick save.
As Snow and Lalime traded difficult stops, both teams committed a rash of unforced turnovers, often trying to make an extra pass when presented with a scoring chance.
HOCKEY
