American folk art portraits can be primitive or accomplished, but style mattered little to the 18th- and 19th-century families who inherited these prized possessions.
''Before the daguerreotype, the best way for people to pass down likenesses was by commissioning portraits,'' said Arthur Liverant of Nathan Liverant &amp; Son, a Connecticut dealer in American antiques since 1920. ''J. A. Davis -- no one knows his first name -- was one of many itinerant artists who traveled around America by horseback, carriage or train to paint portraits. He would go to a town, open a storefront and advertise that he was doing likenesses. He stayed there as long as local people employed his services.''
Mr. Liverant will show a Davis watercolor of Lucy Barns dated Oct. 9, 1844, at the American Antiques Fair, which this year runs from Jan. 14 through 18 at the Metropolitan Pavilion in Manhattan. The opening night party benefits the American Folk Art Museum.
''Davis was a folk artist who did very flat portraits of common folk in southern New Hampshire, Massachusetts and Rhode Island,'' Mr. Liverant said. ''There are about 40 known portraits by him. He began painting about 1837 and continued into the 1850's. He was one of three New England watercolorists featured in a 1974 show at the Art Institute of Chicago, which listed but did not illustrate my painting.''
Miss Barns wears a black dress and two necklaces. She holds a red book. ''It's very Yankee and stark,'' Mr. Liverant said. ''She has black, ink-spot eyes. The book reflected the fact she was going to school.''
The Davis work is one of several folk-art portraits for sale this month. On Jan. 16 Sotheby's is auctioning the collection of Raymond and Susan Egan, longtime New Jersey collectors of folk art, in a single-owner sale. Christie's has portraits in its Americana sales on Jan. 15 and 16. (Viewings for both sales begin Jan. 10.) At least three dealers will have portraits in the American Antiques Fair.
The Egans have folk portraits by some of the best-known names in the field: Ammi Phillips, M. W. Hopkins, William Kennedy and Sturtevant J. Hamblin. ''Mr. Egan is the most meticulous, fastidious collector I've ever experienced,'' said Nancy Druckman, the director of Sotheby's folk art department. Mr. Egan's favorite in the sale is the circa 1840 Hamblin portrait of a baby boy in a blue dress. The baby has white lace pantaloons, red socks and black shoes. He carries red flowers and cherries. Behind him, through the window, is a seaside scene, with sailboats gliding across a pink sunset. Its estimate is $60,000 to $80,000.
Hamblin was born into a family of painters in Portland, Maine. He worked with his father and brothers until 1839, when he moved in with his sister Rosamund and brother-in-law William Matthew Prior, a fellow painter. He followed the Priors to Boston and lived with them from 1841 to 1856. Hamblin's stylistic affinities with Prior have led scholars to call them the Prior-Hamblin School.
Ammi Phillips (1788-1865) is probably the best-known American folk artist. He painted more than 600 portraits in his 60-year career and is in several museum collections. Born in Connecticut, he began doing portraits about 1811, when he moved to Western Massachusetts.
The Egans are selling ''A Portrait of a Young Woman in a White Eyelet Bonnet,'' a Phillips oil done around 1836. The elegant, pretty woman has black hair, white skin and blue eyes. She wears a black dress with a lace collar that reveals her shoulders. Her bonnet is tied with a large blue bow that reflects its satin sheen. In her left hand she holds a book with a gilded leather binding. Her right elbow rests on a table where another book is placed. ''Portraits began at about $10 apiece,'' Ms. Druckman said. ''The more you paid, the more you got. This was probably a marriage portrait.'' It is expected to sell for $40,000 to $60,000.
The most arresting Egan portrait is of a little girl seated with a black cat, circa 1840. She has dark brown hair and enormous brown eyes. She wears a gray silk dress edged with lace and a bright coral necklace. William Kennedy (1818-circa 1870), a native of New Hampshire, painted it when he was still in New England. In 1849 he moved to Baltimore. He is associated with the Prior-Hamblin School and was a neighbor of the Priors in Baltimore in the late 1850's.
This portrait has real personality: the naughty girl, lips tightly drawn, gives the viewer (or the painter) a malevolent stare that is echoed by the look in her cat's eyes. She looks capable of causing a lot of trouble. Its estimate is $30,000 to $50,000.
Christie's has two baby portraits attributed to Prior and a marriage portrait (circa 1725) of Elizabeth Van Dyke Vosburgh, great-granddaughter of a Dutchman who immigrated to Manhattan in 1645. Wearing a fancy red dress with lace cuffs and collar, Mrs. Vosburgh holds a flower in one hand (probably a symbol of fertility) and a silver patch box with her and her husband's initials (a symbol of her wealth) in the other. It was done by the Gansevoort Limner, one of the best-known Patroon Painters, an anonymous group who painted prominent Dutch settlers in the Hudson River Valley from 1690 to 1745. Its estimate is $100,000 to $150,000.
''Few of his works survive,'' said Margot Rosenberg, the head of the American folk art department at Christie's. ''This one is very rare because it was never relined. On the reverse side of the painting, one can see a shadowy outline of the woman, a bit like the Shroud of Turin.''
At the American Antiques Fair, the Connecticut dealer Jeffrey Tillou is showing a pair of Prior oil portraits of a man and his wife from the late 1830's. ''A family in West Hartford bought them in 1966,'' said Jeffrey Savage, an associate at the Tillou gallery. ''In 1977, they had them relined with wax, a common means of relining at the time. We bought them this year and took them to Tom Yost, a paintings conservator, who removed the relining and discovered inscriptions on the back.''
The inscriptions read: ''Mr. Otis Kimball, a 30, painted from nature by W. M. Prior, 1836'' and ''Mrs. Margarett Kimball, aged 26 years, painted by W. M. Prior in Bath, Maine, Feb. 28, 1838.''
''In nature means he sat for the portrait,'' Mr. Savage said. ''He was a merchant in Bath; his wife died exactly three months after this painting was finished. They are the best pair of Prior portraits I've ever seen.''
David Wheatcroft, an Americana dealer in Westborough, Mass., has a three-quarters-length oil portrait of a 9-year-old girl in a coral dress, circa 1840, that he attributes to Sturtevant Hamblin. ''She's one of the Darling sisters from Maine,'' he said. He has another Hamblin oil portrait of a 10-year-old girl in a blue dress, also circa 1840.
ANTIQUES  Correction:  January 6, 2004, Tuesday  The Antiques column in Weekend on Friday about folk-art portraits misstated the name of a show that will include some of them at the American Folk Art Museum from Jan. 14 to 18. It is the American Antiques Show, not the American Antiques Fair.
