An 82-year-old woman and her bedridden son, whom she tried to save, died on Thursday morning in a fire that swept through the family's home in this Nassau County hamlet, the authorities said.
The authorities reported that the woman's husband was rescued and three firefighters and a police officer were slightly injured.
Around 11:20 a.m., a 911 caller reported that the family's split-level house on Rosemont Street was on fire. The police arrived first and found the woman's husband, Max Matsil, 82, in the living room, said Detective Raymond Kurz of the Nassau County Arson Squad. Mr. Matsil, who suffered burns to his face and hands and singed his hair, was in good condition at Nassau University Medical Center, Detective Kurz said.
The detective said the police were unable to reach Mr. Matsil's wife, Christine, and their son David, who were trapped on the second floor. A short time later, he said, Mrs. Matsil's body was found on the floor in front of David's bed in a second-story bedroom and David, 54, who has Down syndrome, was found in the bed. Both victims were pronounced dead at the scene.
For about an hour, nearly 90 firefighters from local fire departments battled to control the blaze, which destroyed the house. Three firefighters and a police officer were treated and released at the medical center, the authorities said.
Detective Kurz said the fire began after a lighted fireplace sparked, igniting a rug in front of it and then spreading. Mr. Matsil had lighted the fireplace, located in a basement den, then gone to the first-floor living room to join his wife, who was reading a newspaper, the detective said. A smoke detector sounded, and Mr. Matsil went to investigate. When he opened a door leading to the basement, the blaze lashed out, burning him. As the fire spread, the couple went to save their son.
Detective Kurz said it was unclear how the flames had escaped the fireplace, since the flue appeared to be working properly and a fireplace screen was in place.
Two of the Matsils' neighbors, Jane Cooper and Robyn Martin, cried and hugged each other while looking at the house's charred exterior. Ms. Martin, who lives next door, described the couple as devoted parents and kind neighbors. Ms. Martin said the couple had other children and grandchildren, all of them living out of state.
The family had lived on the block for at least 45 years, the neighbors said. For the last few years, they said, Mrs. Matsil, a retired nurse, and her husband, a retired jeweler, had spent their time caring for David.
David Matsil had worked as a clerk at a local supermarket at one time, Ms. Martin said, but his health had deteriorated and he needed constant care and was not able to leave his bed.
In spite of that, she said, Mrs. Matsil always found the time to send birthday cards to Ms. Martin's two teenage sons. Much like a grandmother, she would include gifts of money in the cards.
