A developer who says he is converting an 18-acre property into a family farm has so drastically altered the landscape that some residents of the affluent Greenfield Hill neighborhood here are questioning his motives.
The would-be farmer, Salvatore DiNardo, who develops and leases commercial and industrial properties in the Bridgeport area, was ordered to halt all work on the site in August after the town's Conservation Commission concluded that he had illegally filled and drained wetlands and installed more than 500 feet of underground pipes as a storm sewer system.
Although Mr. DiNardo maintains that the work was necessary to prepare the site for farming, the extensive alterations have created ''a lot of public suspicion,'' said Milan Bull, a member of the Conservation Commission and senior staff member at the Connecticut Audubon Society's Fairfield office.
''I've been in Fairfield 35 years, and I've never seen anything quite as dramatic as this,'' Mr. Bull said, ''where somebody went in and ripped out huge, truckloads-full of wetlands without a permit.''
Mr. DiNardo appealed the commission's order and won another chance to make his case. A State Superior Court judge in Bridgeport ruled on Dec. 15 that the commission must revisit its decision after holding a hearing to allow Mr. DiNardo to rebut the claims of critics who had previously testified before the commission. That hearing is scheduled for Feb. 5.
Still at issue is the larger question of whether farming activities are exempt from state wetlands regulations. Mr. DiNardo contends that they are; the commission says they are not.
When lawmakers wrote the wetlands statute in 1973, they deliberately made allowances for farming interests, said David B. Losee, a Hartford lawyer who is representing Mr. DiNardo and worked for the legislative committee that drafted the law. Farmers who testified before the committee argued that the ability to drain meadows in certain areas was essential to their livelihoods, Mr. Losee said.
The original farming exemption has since been revised, and one court ruling involving a farmer gave the upper hand to regulators. A Superior Court judge ruled in July 2000 that a Guilford farmer who wanted to move his farm stand and create a parking area in wetlands was not exempt from regulation even though the construction was related to farming activity.
Mr. DiNardo's son, Peter, who works in the family business, defends his father's farm development on Redding Road as an attempt to make a long-held dream come true. Standing beside a 1920's house that is currently the only residence on the property, he described lavish plans for a cranberry bog, a grazing area for llamas or alpacas, a vegetable garden and fruit trees.
Perhaps bakers' ovens will be built in the old barn, he said, and a large wine cellar added to the basement of the former caretakers' cottage, now being converted to a guesthouse. A 1.5-acre pond surrounded by decorative boulders and sculpture has already been created.
''My father doesn't have a hobby; he doesn't play golf. This was going to be his hobby,'' Peter DiNardo said. ''We're not residential developers. We did not purchase the land to build houses.''
Over the two years that the DiNardos have been clearing the property of trees and surrounding it with high stone walls, neighbors have become increasingly concerned. Reports by the commission's staff say that sediment and mud from the site clogged nearby brooks and ponds on Redding Road. A September inspection report notes several manholes on the property leading to the pipes.
''Our concern from the outset was that he was setting up the property for a later development,'' said Albert Meric, president of the Greenfield Hill Village Improvement Society. ''The drainage going underground would certainly indicate that.''
The society tried to persuade Mr. DiNardo to transfer further development rights to its nonprofit foundation, a move that would have yielded him a tax benefit based on the potential value of the property. He was not interested, Mr. Meric said.
In November 2000, the parcel's previous owner, Parr Development of Shelton, Conn., obtained approvals to build three houses on the site. According to town records, Parr originally proposed five houses, but the Conservation Commission would not approve that many because much of the heavily wooded site was a red maple swamp. Mr. DiNardo bought the property in May 2001 for $2.55 million; the commission approved his plan for a farm in October of that year, but members now say that they did not grant specific permission to alter wetlands.
''Basically, the town has to take Mr. DiNardo at his word about what he wants to do,'' said Noel Newman, the assistant town attorney. ''But we have a difference of opinion as to what a farming exemption allows you to do.''
Residential Real Estate
