New-York Historical Society  2 West 77th Street, Manhattan  Through April 18
Now a hip hobby, but a household necessity before the arrival of factory-made clothes, home sewing is brilliantly saluted in this elaborate show. Devoted to the social and cultural history of sewing, it goes back to the 18th century when every woman, regardless of class, knew how to wield a needle. And it runs to the 21st, reporting on a resurgence in long neglected skills that enable home stitchers today to make personal fashion statements.
Quilts, samplers, gowns, graduation dresses, aprons, potholders and such, along with garments for dolls, babies, children and mothers-to-be, are among the prizes of home-sewn work shown here.
A dazzling ''Mariner's Compass Quilt'' with a stylized overall motif of nautical compasses, stitched by a New York woman around 1830-40, greets viewers at the show's entrance. Nearby is a complex biblical sampler depicting Adam and Eve and the Tree of Knowledge, made by Christina Arcularius, age 15, in 1792. (A portrait of her, circa 1820-30, arrived at respectable matronhood as the wife of a prominent grocer, appears with her sampler.)
From our own time are two snazzily embroidered denim jackets from the 1960's and 70's made, respectively, by David Cohen and Nancy Groce, and a memorial quilt in honor of the victims of the World Trade Center attacks by an artist, Lisa Purdon. A personal heraldic banner stitched by Richard Boylan for a course in medieval heraldry at the Fieldston School in 1964-65 shows that until recently, sewing had a place in curriculum enhancement, at least in private schools.
But stitched products are only part of this rich display. There are patterns, sewing baskets, sewing machines, sewing boxes and tools: thimbles, pincushions, sample stitch books, work tables and embroidery frames. Photographs and paintings of the stitchers' activities, like sewing circles, add interest. So does a 1950's sewing parlor installation, replete with a machine, a work table with patterns laid out and comfortable stuffed chairs sporting crocheted antimacassars. It's a show so well and appealingly done that even nonsewers could love it.
GRACE GLUECK
ART IN REVIEW
