PHIL AMICONE did not play the saxophone at his swearing-in Thursday as the 41st mayor of Yonkers. He had to suspend his lessons during the hectic run-up to the November election, and in any case he does not consider himself ready to blow his horn in public.
But you can hear sweet, sweet music any time in his office, where soothing jazz perpetually issues from the stereo.
''I love to have music on, all day,'' he said over tinkling tunes and takeout chicken soup on Tuesday afternoon. ''Even if I'm having a meeting, I'll leave it low as background music.''
Bearded, 54 years old, a civil engineer by trade (specialty: waste-water treatment), Mr. Amicone, the deputy mayor since 1996 to the departing mayor, John D. Spencer, comes off as a relatively laid-back guy. This is a helpful quality to have in a city known mainly for its municipal controversies -- a school system that seems to teeter ever on the brink of insolvency, and a divisive lawsuit challenging segregation in housing and education.
The Smooth Jazz Mayor, however, who says he stood for election ''not necessarily by choice,'' has vowed to keep as firm a hand on the ship of state as his famously scrappy, sharp-tongued friend and predecessor, Mr. Spencer.
''We share a passion,'' he said. ''We just exhibit it differently. Try to hurt the city of Yonkers, John will take you on in the street, while I'll try to negotiate it. But if the city is not being respected, then I'll fight as hard as anyone.''
Civic respect is a chronic issue in Yonkers, the fourth-largest city in the state, with almost 200,000 residents, fated to sit next door to the biggest, brashest city in the country.
''Take Yonkers, move it 50 miles north, we're the big guy,'' Mr. Amicone said. ''Stay here, people still think we're a borough of the city. People think Yonkers is part of the Bronx.''
Mr. Amicone (pronounced am-uh-COH-nee), a conservative Republican, takes the helm at a typically contentious time. In the closing weeks of 2003, Yonkers threatened to lay off 500 teachers and abolish sports and music programs in the schools until a $21 million rescue plan was put together. The money problem, Mr. Amicone says, will recur this year because the revenues won't, guaranteeing Yonkers its annual moment in the spotlight.
Mr. Amicone's promotion to mayor almost came with a substantial pay cut, but on Tuesday the City Council agreed to raise the salary of the mayor by 17 percent (he will be paid $156,100 a year); other officials will receive comparable increases. This too, created considerable controversy, given the schools' dire financing.
All this squabbling, Mr. Amicone said, can make it hard for him to concentrate on his main mission aside from ensuring that the children of Yonkers get a decent education -- to continue to rebuild the city.
Yonkers, a Hudson River town of steep hills and valleys once known as the City of Gracious Living (an appellation that Mr. Amicone said lost its currency ''probably when the desegregation case kicked in'') has been enjoying a revival of sorts under Messrs. Spencer and Amicone. The city has undergone $800 million in redevelopment, including a sprucing up of the long-decaying waterfront. A restored park takes full advantage of a view across the Hudson at the sheer majesty of the Palisades, a scene pretty much unchanged from the day in 1639 when the Dutch bought Yonkers from the Indians.
THERE are plans to build a minor-league baseball stadium. The crime rate is the fourth lowest in the country among cities of 150,000 to 250,000 people. And if that's not enough, Mr. Amicone said, Yonkers was the birthplace of the elevator and the FM radio station.
Mr. Amicone's father, a bus maintenance worker, moved the family to Yonkers from the Bronx when Mr. Amicone was 2. (His mother, 81, still works in the Bronx, as a secretary in a plastics factory.) The mayor's affection for his adopted hometown was cemented in 1981 after a fire just before Christmas forced him, his wife and their three sons out of their house, a brown Victorian on North Broadway that he has since rebuilt.
''People were so incredibly generous,'' he said. ''They brought us clothes, toys, everything. It was then that we realized we were in a really special place. You could buy a more expensive house, but you couldn't find better neighbors.''
Still, he never hankered to run the whole city. After Mr. Spencer, a longtime friend, was elected mayor in 1995, Mr. Amicone agreed to leave his job as buildings commissioner in White Plains and become Mr. Spencer's deputy. He finds himself in his current position because of term limits.
''I would have been happy if John was able to run for a third term,'' he said. ''Once it was obvious that he couldn't, at that point I started to think about running for office only because I want to finish what we started.''
In the November election, Mr. Amicone handily defeated the Democratic candidate, a former schools superintendent, even though registered Democrats outnumber Republicans by about two to one in Yonkers. And Mr. Amicone is not a Republican in name only, like the recent mayors of Yonkers's overwhelmingly Democratic neighbor to the south. He is a family-values guy, staunchly anti-abortion.
As he settles into his job, Mr. Amicone said, he hopes to have time to resume his tenor saxophone lessons. And he looks forward to resuming his regular-guy kind of life in Yonkers. To that end, a secretary leaned in and delivered a message to him as he ushered a visiting reporter out the door on Tuesday.
''Phil,'' she said, ''call your mom.''
PUBLIC LIVES
