The challenge was familiar enough to anyone who has ever planned a holiday party: how to conjure that special festive feeling. In this case the New York Philharmonic played host on New Year's Eve at its rather drab home in Avery Fisher Hall. And there was more at stake than usual, since the the whole country was invited to attend via telecast, as part of the ''Live From Lincoln Center'' series.
The orchestra began, as any good host would, by gussying up the place. The stage was lined with flowers, three chandeliers were hung over the musicians, and giant velvety red ribbons were festooned across the rafters.
But of course the guest list is always vital, and the Philharmonic all but ensured a successful party by booking the soprano Renée Fleming, perhaps the most instantly recognizable singer performing before the public today. Andrew Davis, music director of the Lyric Opera of Chicago, conducted.
The program hewed mostly to familiar works, but to its credit, the night was not excessively pops-oriented. The evening opened with a fine reading of Debussy's well-loved, ''Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun.'' Sir Andrew fashioned the composer's lush impressionistic sound world out of supple diaphanous playing in the strings and delicately tinctured solos among the woodwinds.
In Ravel's ''Shéhérazade,'' which came next, Debussy's sound world did not rupture so much as shift toward the East, or more accurately, toward Ravel's highly exotified idea of the East, ''where imagination sleeps like an empress in her forest filled with mystery.'' Those words come from a poem by Tristan Klingsor, one of the three that Ravel used for this luxuriously textured song cycle.
Ms. Fleming, looking radiant in a maroon dress, plied her trademark lustrous soprano to the music, and yet there was also a slight tentativeness to her performance, as if she could not quite find her way inside its characters and their fantasies of the Orient that seem embarrassingly clichéd by today's standards.
There was a world of difference when Ms. Fleming returned in the second half of the program with her hair let down, literally. She was on more familiar operatic ground offering three selections from Massenet's ''Hérodiade,'' ''Thaïs'' and ''Manon,'' each one delicately phrased and attractively rendered with her beautiful liquid tone. A well-known recitative and gavotte from Act III of ''Manon'' proved a highlight of the evening, and Ms. Fleming was rewarded with eager interruptions of applause as well as a warm ovation.
Sir Andrew rounded out the program with two orchestral greatest hits. The first was the ''Carmen'' Suite, an instrumental medley of the most popular tunes from Bizet's opera. The playing was rhythmically tight even if the dozen-plus violinists couldn't render the famous habanera with the hip-swagger of a real Carmen, the audience clearly appreciated the chance to hear music that so many must have known by heart.
In the same spirit the formal program ended with Offenbach's overture to ''Orpheus in the Underworld,'' led by Sir Andrew with precision and no small amount of telegenic charisma. Before leaving, though, the rest of the guests got their turn as the conductor spun around to lead the audience in another New Year's musical tradition, the singing of ''Auld Lang Syne.''
PHILHARMONIC REVIEW
