British and Mexican airlines canceled two flights to the United States, one on New Year's Day and another on New Year's Eve, after American and British authorities warned of possible terrorist threats to the flights, government and airline officials said Thursday.
Those actions came on top of concerns raised by American officials about two other flights this week, leading to the temporary diversion of one flight from Mexico on Sunday and the interviews of passengers on a flight from Britain after it landed at Dulles International Airport outside of Washington on Wednesday evening.
None of the passengers on any of the flights were arrested, officials said, but the incidents reflect the government's increasingly aggressive efforts to police American airspace in the face of renewed terrorist threats. The Bush administration remains concerned that terrorists may seek to hijack an international flight. In recent days, officials said, American fighter jets have accompanied some flights as they landed in the United States and officials have begun requiring foreign airlines to put armed marshals on some flights over the United States.
Brian Roehrkasse, a spokesman for the Department of Homeland Security, declined Thursday to comment on the specific threats that led to the flight cancellations this week, but he said the government believed the threats were serious.
''We have received credible threat information about particular flight routes throughout the past couple of weeks and have worked with our international partners to ensure that security measures are put in place,'' Mr. Roehrkasse said.
''Based upon the current assessment of threats, we will have heightened security in place until U.S. intelligence officials assess that the threat has lessened,'' he said.
British Airways Flight 223 from London to Dulles airport, which was scheduled to carry 180 passengers, was canceled on New Year's Day after British government officials warned the airline of their security concerns, a spokesman for the airline said. Some passengers were rerouted to Washington on a later flight, while others were scheduled to arrive on Friday.
Flight 223 was the subject of concern a day earlier. Fighter jets accompanied the plane, and officials interviewed its passengers and searched its cargo after the flight landed at Dulles on Wednesday. British Airways officials said they hoped the flight would fly as scheduled on Friday, but were awaiting word from government officials.
''I'm sure there are a lot of disappointed and frustrated people, but it's a security issue and that has to be our No. 1 concern,'' Leo Seaton, a spokesman for British Airways, said in a telephone interview from London.
Aeroméxico Flight 490 from Mexico City to Los Angeles was canceled on New Year's Eve after American officials advised the airline that it might be the target of attack. The passengers ultimately flew to the United States on different flights. Mireya Magaña, a spokeswoman for the Mexican Embassy in Washington, said Mexican officials did not know what prompted the warning.
The decision to cancel the British Airways and Aeroméxico flights left scores of passengers scrambling for flights to Washington and Los Angeles. Passengers aboard the British Airways flight that was stopped at Dulles airport on New Year's Eve waited for nearly three hours before they were allowed to leave the plane.
Catherine Bolton, an American translator who lives in Italy, said she and other passengers on that British Airways flight were ordered to remain in their seats without standing, passports in hand. She said the passengers worried at first that a bomb was on the plane.
''It was kind of eerie,'' said Ms. Bolton, 46, who was flying to Washington to visit relatives. ''Normally you land and everyone gets up. But this time nobody moved.''
The flight cancellations came one week after the Bush administration raised the national terrorism alert level to orange. Tom Ridge, the secretary of homeland security, warned on Dec. 21 that the danger of an attack on the United States was ''perhaps greater now than at any point since Sept. 11, 2001.''
On Dec. 24, Air France canceled six flights between Paris and Los Angeles at the urging of American officials, who said they suspected that as many as a half-dozen passengers had ''links to terrorism.'' French officials said last week that they had found no terrorist links to the people booked on those flights, but American officials said the United States was still investigating people who had reserved seats but did not show up for the flights.
Increasingly worried about the threat of terrorists hijacking an international flight, the Bush administration issued an emergency order Monday demanding that foreign airlines place armed air marshals on flights that travel into, out of or over the United States if American officials determine there is a threat.
In an incident over the Pacific on Thursday night, a passenger on a Northwest Airlines flight from Detroit to Honolulu had to be restrained after he approached the cockpit, airline officials said. The man was escorted to the back of the plane by two off-duty pilots who happened to be on board and was arrested when the plane landed. Thomas Becher, a spokesman for Northwest, said he could not say whether the incident was related to terrorism.
--------------------
Oil Terminal Shut Down
WASHINGTON, Jan. 1 (AP) -- The threat of terrorism prompted the closing of the oil tanker terminal in Valdez, Alaska, on Tuesday. Tankers resumed loading late Thursday.
Security was strengthened last week in Valdez, on Prince William Sound, after federal officials said al Qaeda could target remote sites like oil facilities in Alaska. Officials also said then that they could not corroborate a report about a Qaeda threat against the Valdez oil terminal.
Tankers load Prudhoe Bay oil at Valdez, the end of the 800-mile pipeline, which carries 17 percent of the nation's domestic oil supply.
