Pace/MacGill Gallery  32 East 57th Street, Manhattan  Through Jan. 24
With their enticing displays, reflective surfaces and buy-now exhortations, shop windows can be irresistibly photogenic. This display of work by five well-known names during the last century -- Eugène Atget, Harry Callahan, William Christenberry, Lee Friedlander and Andy Warhol -- interprets the theme broadly, from following the decline and fall of an abandoned rural place to fixing in memory the drab fronts of small bars and groceries in the Midwest.
The most nostalgically appealing works are Atget's sepia-toned shots of small shops in Paris. In ''Brocanteur'' (1912), dusty used furniture sits outside an antique facade on the improbably named Rue du Cherche-Midi; in ''Boutique Fromage'' (1911), a dimly glimpsed proprietor hovers in the doorway of a serious cheese shop. These steady-on scenes belong to a bygone Paris, but Atget's lens has kept them very much alive.
In sharp contrast is the very modern sense of the world as collage and montage projected by Mr. Friedlander's views of shop window exteriors from the 1960's. They present surreal minglings of events outside with displays within -- for instance, one of a man walking past an airline office that makes a lamp, a giant airplane poster and a tiger skin rug seem like sidewalk furniture he's passing through.
''Sale'' signs -- and a window taped after a break-in -- prevail in Warhol's quick shots, including a warning to potential customers that reads ''No Cute Dogs, No Ugly Dogs, No Big Dogs, No Small Dogs, No Gay Dogs, 'No' Dogs!'' Mr. Christenberry focuses on an abandoned palm reader's shop in his native Alabama, chronicling its gradual deterioration each summer for 16 years until it became a vacant lot.
The best of Callahan's work here are color still lifes of small working-class store fronts of the 1940's and 50's from Chicago and Detroit, ranging from a mom-and-pop-type grocery to the facade of a tiny hotel that advertises ''kitchenet'' apartments. They stand for the thousands of unsung, unglamorous places that serve ungentrified neighborhoods everywhere.
GRACE GLUECK
ART IN REVIEW
