The National Collegiate Athletic Association frowns on unscheduled challenge matches after the football season. So it is unlikely that Southern California will offer to take on the winner of Sunday night's Sugar Bowl game between Louisiana State and Oklahoma -- anytime, anywhere -- to decide one true national champion.
But the Trojans, who will have to settle for half a national championship, could argue that they are the best team in the country. They rolled to a 28-14 victory over Michigan in the Rose Bowl on Thursday in a balanced display of offense and defense that included four touchdown passes.
Three were thrown by quarterback Matt Leinart, and one was caught by him.
If only they could settle all the arguments with one final game.
''Those guys would love to play again,'' Coach Pete Carroll said of his players. ''We don't get to. It would be a nice thing to do.''
Keary Colbert, who caught two touchdown passes, was asked if he felt like a champion. ''Oh, definitely,'' he said. ''You can't tell me I'm not.''
Aside from the touchdown passes, the Trojans (12-1) beat the Wolverines (10-3) while sacking Michigan quarterback John Navarre nine times.
After leading by 21-7 after three quarters, they choked off a rally by the Wolverines as the sun set and the stadium lights ignited the night.
Navarre looked stunned afterward when discussing U.S.C.'s speedy, tricky, shifty defense, which attacked him from all angles.
''I knew they had the ability to pressure, but not that much,'' he said.
Tony Pape, one of his blocking tackles, said the Wolverines take pride in how well they protect their quarterback. ''There is a tremendous bad feeling about what happened today,'' he said.
In its 12 regular-season games, Michigan had given up only 15 sacks. Navarre also fumbled three times, but recovered all of them.
Leinart, a left-handed sophomore who replaced last season's Heisman Trophy winner, Carson Palmer, completed 23 of 34 passes for 327 yards. Until a late fumble, he played nimbly, confusing the Michigan defense with pump fakes and rollouts to his left.
His touchdown catch came after two teammates -- Hershel Dennis and Mike Williams -- took pitchouts on what looked like a reverse sweep. The score gave the Trojans a 28-7 lead with 3 minutes 44 seconds remaining in the third quarter.
''I got lost on the play,'' Leinart said, referring to the way he sifted through Michigan's suddenly vulnerable secondary. ''They play a lot of man-to-man. They probably didn't expect it.''
Colbert said he watched his quarterback catch the ball and head for the end zone.
''I was really thinking, 'Don't fall!' '' Colbert said. ''Sometimes, quarterbacks get tripped up in their own feet.''
Another memorable play was an interception by Lofa Tatupu, a Trojans linebacker, late in the second quarter. It helped set up U.S.C.'s second touchdown and 14-0 halftime lead.
Navarre, under pressure, threw the ball in the direction of Braylon Edwards, who earlier in the game had dropped a pass in stride on the sideline that might have gone for a touchdown.
This time, Edwards's eyes were still turned upfield. The ball hit him in the heel, caromed upward and landed in the hands of Tatupu, who ran it back from the 29 to the 3. That set up a 6-yard touchdown pass from Leinart to LenDale White with 52 seconds left in the second quarter.
Was Tatupu surprised that Edwards was not looking? ''Yeah, I was,'' Tatupu said. ''For whatever reason, he didn't look back. Good thing I did. I said: 'Oh! That ball's in the air.' I just took it.''
Lloyd Carr, the Michigan coach, called it the pivotal moment of the game. ''It's something you hate to happen to you,'' Carr said.
Another striking moment came on U.S.C.'s first drive of the second half. The Trojans extended their lead to 21-0 when Leinart connected again with Colbert, this time on a 47-yard play.
Covered closely by Jeremy LeSueur, Colbert snared the ball with his right arm at the 20, shrugged off LeSueur and sprinted into the end zone.
Colbert finished with 6 catches for 149 yards. Williams had 8 for 88. Edwards had 10 for 107.
Chris Perry, Michigan's tailback and a Heisman Trophy finalist, carried 23 times for 85 yards, including a touchdown run of 2 yards to cut the U.S.C. lead to 28-14 early in the fourth quarter.
The Trojans came into the game ranked first in the Associated Press poll of news media and first in the USA Today/ESPN poll of coaches. The Wolverines were fourth in both polls. But U.S.C. was excluded from the B.C.S. title game in the Sugar Bowl because the combination of polls and computer rankings put the Trojans in third place in the B.C.S. table, behind L.S.U. and Oklahoma.
But the Trojans most likely will win at least the A.P. half of the championship, which would be their first in a quarter-century, since 1978, when they finished a 12-1 season by beating Michigan, 17-10, in the 1979 Rose Bowl.
Carr, when asked how he would vote, said he was committed to the winner of the Sugar Bowl because that is the deal the coaches have with the B.C.S. ''If I were a member of the media, I think Southern Cal is very deserving,'' Carr said.
Carroll, in his third year here, said: ''I don't have a vote. I didn't sign up for that.'' Regarding his rebuilding of the program, Carroll said, ''We're just getting started.''
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
