A FEW years ago, few Americans had probably ever heard of curling, that curiously hypnotic sport that resembles a game of shuffleboard played on ice. Sure, it is practically a national obsession up in Canada, but you would have been hard-pressed to find anyone south of the Canadian border who could tell you the difference between a spinner and the spare.
But then the 2002 Olympics in Salt Lake City came along, and all of a sudden people across the United States were standing around the office water cooler comparing notes on the game they had stayed up until 3 a.m. to watch.
Since then, curling clubs in this country have shown double-digit growth in unlikely places like Phoenix, Dallas and Ellenton, Fla., near Sarasota. Rick Patzke, communications director for USA Curling, the governing body for the sport in this country, said there are now approximately 130 recognized clubs in the United States, with nearly 13,000 members among them.
One of the oldest established clubs is the Potomac Curling Club, in Potomac, Md., near Washington, which has been around for 40 years. For much of that time, it rented ice at a local hockey arena and its membership held steady at about 50 die-hards. Tired of the inferior ice, $300 an hour rental fees, and the second-class citizenship afforded curlers at most public rinks, the club got a loan from the World Curling Federation and a state grant, and decided to build its own curling facility.
The new facility -- the first built in this country since 1974 -- opened in February 2002, with four ''sheets'' or playing surfaces. Since then, membership in the club has tripled, to 180, said its president, Derek M. Surka, a 32-year-old aerospace engineer from Welland, Ontario. And the majority of the new members are young Americans, like Nicole D'Isa, a 24-year-old legal secretary who came to a Potomac open house and was instantly hooked. ''It was very different from what I had imagined,'' Ms. D'Isa said.
The basics of curling are easy to master: teams are made up of four players who slide ''stones'' down the ice, trying to get them closest to the bull's-eye target at the other end.
Sweepers rub the ice vigorously around the stone in an attempt to control its path. Only one team can score per turn, or end. So what is it that attracts 20-year-olds to shell out $450 a year to curl as many as three nights a week? ''It's easy to get good, but then you have to work hard at getting really good,'' Ms. D'Isa said.
For Abby Sanford, a 27-year-old Labor Department consultant and new member of the Potomac Curling Club, curling represents another kind of competitive challenge. ''I'm somewhat of an athlete.'' said Ms. Sanford, who runs, plays ultimate Frisbee and has rowed competitively. ''In a mixed league, I get to play against people who I would never get to compete against in any other sport.''
''Most people look at curlers as these old fat guys,'' said Kathy Riikonen, 33, an Ontario native who didn't take up curling until she moved to the United States in 1998 and now curls at the Potomac club three nights a week from September to April. ''In reality, a lot of curlers are competitive and athletic.''
For clubs without their own ice, curling can still be a hard sell. The fledgling Coyotes Curling Club in Scottsdale, Ariz., just started this year and has one league that plays on Saturdays on the Phoenix Coyotes' hockey practice rink. The curling club currently has about 35 members, with an average age of about 40, said Karen Tait, 55, the club president. About a quarter of the members are Canadian ex-pats, the rest are Americans who have moved down from Wisconsin or Minnesota. Despite its less-than-ideal conditions, the club vows to persevere.
''The ice is not the quality we'd like for curling, but we had nothing here before, so we're happy with it,'' Mrs. Tait said. No such problems are plaguing the Potomac club. In March, it will be the host of the Kayser, a prestigious annual tournament for curlers with less than five years' experience sponsored by the Grand National Curling Club, the regional organization for East Coast clubs. At least 24 teams from New England to Florida are expected to participate in the ''mixed'' event, which means teams are made up of two men and two women.
''It's very popular with new curlers because of both the competitive and social aspects,'' said Mr. Surka of the Potomac club.
While the Olympics certainly helped recruit new curlers, credit for sustaining the drive has to go to club members, who risk ridicule in trying to recruit friends and co-workers. Ms. D'Isa, the legal secretary, said she has had a few successes, and one big failure. ''She has never come back,'' Ms. D'Isa said of a woman she recruited, ''because she fell and broke her wrist.''
Correction:  January 9, 2004, Friday  An article last Friday about the growing popularity of curling misstated the number of curling clubs that have built new facilities in the United States since 1974. In addition to the club in Potomac, Md., new facilities include clubs in Utica, N.Y.; Eveleth, Minn.; and Centerville, Eau Claire, Madison, Rice Lake and Superior, all in Wisconsin.
