When the word arrived here at Farm Sanctuary that the government had banned the butchering of cows too sick or injured to walk, there was no time for a victory party.
''Most of the people here have animals, and they had to get home and feed them,'' explained Gene Bauston, a co-founder of the sanctuary and its president.
As if to make the point, the four dogs that he and his wife and co-founder, Lorri, take to work each day charged through the reception area. They looked as if they might be celebrating something -- but then, four dogs headed home for food usually are.
Mr. Bauston headed out for a quiet dinner at House of Hong, this town's lone Chinese restaurant. The owner handed him the vegetarian menu without being asked.
Farm Sanctuary, which runs Web sites like SentientBeings.org, NoDowners.org, NoVeal.org, BanCruelFarms.org and AdoptATurkey.org, has been pressuring the government since 1998 to halt the use of sick and injured cows as food, arguing that they are ''adulterated'' and therefore illegal in interstate commerce under the federal Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act.
Until Tuesday, the Department of Agriculture had disagreed, arguing that not all meat from a sick cow is adulterated and that approving such cattle was long-established practice. It denied Farm Sanctuary's petition in 1999 and fought its subsequent lawsuit.
Just two weeks ago, Mr. Bauston said, a federal appellate court upheld the sanctuary's right to sue.
Through the Freedom of Information Act, he said, he has amassed thousands of ''suspect cards'' from slaughterhouses -- records that inspectors are required to fill out when assessing an animal unable to walk.
The records show that inspectors approved animals with malignant lymphoma, hepatitis, pneumonia and gangrene. Federal regulations allow inspectors discretion to decide which animals are fit to eat. Mr. Bauston reached into a batch of 18,000 more cards he just received and showed one on which an inspector had written ''tox,'' and then crossed it out and put in ''broken leg.'' Toxic shock can kill dairy cows, often when mastitis, an udder infection, spreads unchecked.
On another, an inspector seeing a sick animal noted that it was ''sluggish, dull, not responsive'' -- possible signs of disease, Mr. Bauston said, perhaps brain disease. The diagnosis made after the kill was ''broken leg.''
Mr. Bauston said that he was ''very happy, and a little bit stunned'' by Tuesday's decision to ban the slaughter of sick or injured cows for human food in the wake of finding such a cow with bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or mad cow disease, on Dec. 23. He is still waiting to see how the government will determine which cows are classified ''downers,'' and hopes the ban will improve veterinary care of older cows since the incentive to sell them for meat will be gone.
He finds slaughterhouse practices cruel, complaining that ''in the agribusiness industry, suffering doesn't matter.'' He once asked a slaughterhouse manager why he accepted sick animals, and why farmers sold them instead of calling a veterinarian. The joking reply, he said, suggested the manager had lost some perspective: ''He told me, 'Look, if your wife was really sick, and you could get $500 for her, would you bring her here, or would you kill her at home?' My jaw dropped.''
Meat industry spokesmen have said their practices are legal, killing is done quickly and the beef supply is safe.
Mr. Bauston, who grew up in Hollywood Hills as the son of a hotelier, looks more like someone who might play beach volleyball with Tom Cruise than like someone who financed his early career in animal rescue by selling vegetarian hot dogs at Grateful Dead concerts.
He wears mud-covered boots and a gray sweatshirt that imitates an Army one, but says ''FARMY.'' In the farm office, his wife wore her purple velvet ''glamour overalls,'' but quickly changed to rough ones for a tour of this 175-acre farm where about 600 animals, from turkeys to steers, live comfortably, mostly after being rescued by police or animal control officers.
In the 1980's, the Baustons, who met at a Greenpeace event, traveled the country -- in, yes, a VW van -- clandestinely videotaping operations, sometimes with a buttonhole camera. They found cows unable to walk rolled into slaughterhouses by forklifts and hatcheries where unwanted male chicks were tossed alive onto a tractor auger that dismembered them as it carried them outdoors to their fate -- a manure spreader.
Mr. Bauston described hiding behind the rendering truck at a California slaughterhouse with the nonchalance some veterans use about battles. ''That wasn't pleasant,'' he said. ''But they were new guts -- they hadn't been in the sun very long. Wasn't as bad as some. ...''
He has been threatened and shoved, he said, but never hit. His tapes, handed to television stations and shown to legislators at about the same time as an outbreak of E. coli bacteria at a Jack in the Box restaurant, helped lead to California's outlawing the slaughter of the sick and injured cattle in 1995, he said.
His films of sows spending their lives caged in rows so they could be fed at one end and hosed off at the other without ever seeing the piglets they gave birth to led to Florida banning such ''gestation crates,'' he said.
His volunteers are pushing for similar laws in other states. They also call prominent restaurants and ask them to remove veal from their menus if it is raised the usual way: with the calves penned in crates and fed a diet that produces anemia to keep their flesh white.
About 350 restaurants, including Tavern on the Green, Lutèce, Montrachet and the Hard Rock Cafe chain, are listed on their Web site as having agreed.
What first strikes a visitor to Farm Sanctuary is how enormous the animals are.
Farmers usually kill pigs at 250 pounds, Mr. Bauston explained. The sanctuary's can weigh up to 800, and are the size of pygmy hippos. Their tusks must be sawed off each month.
Alby is a former calf who, Mr. Bauston said, was rescued about 13 years ago from an angry farm worker who had let 51 other calves starve to death. He weighed less than 100 pounds; he now weighs about 2,800 and is six feet at the shoulder.
Queenie, a cow who escaped from a slaughterhouse in Queens in 2000, is here. So is Simon, a goat who was abandoned after growing up in a Brooklyn apartment.
Veterinarians, Mr. Bauston said, have visited to see how animals bred for the industry can age when allowed to.
At the center of the farm is the grave of Hilda, the first animal the Baustons rescued. The ewe has a granite tombstone: ''Rescued from Stockyard Aug. 3, 1986. Died of Old Age, Sept. 25, 1997.'' Mr. Bauston showed a picture of the ''dead pile'' at a Pennsylvania slaughterhouse where they found her.
''You can see a piece of another sheep's skeleton,'' he said. ''The maggots were literally inches deep. Then this one animal lifted her head a little. She was still alive! We put her in the van and took her to a vet -- we thought to be euthanized. But in 20 minutes, she was walking. She had just suffered heat exhaustion in the truck.''
At the gravesite, Mrs. Bauston credited Hilda for Tuesday's ban. ''You did it, girl,'' she said. ''She was the idea for this campaign. She's the founder. We're just the muckers.''
They moved here in 1989 because land was cheap. The Schuyler County hills look like a frostbitten Appalachia, a rolling sea of staved-in barns and rusting tractors, and they got 175 acres with barn and equipment for $100,000. They have another sanctuary in Orland, Calif.
Now they have an annual budget of $3 million, which comes from 100,000 members who pay $20 each and donors like Mary Tyler Moore.
In summers, young volunteers live in guest houses. Though he cannot sneak them into slaughterhouses, Mr. Bauston takes them to livestock auctions to radicalize them. ''They look in the animals' eyes and see the fear,'' he said. ''Then they watch the buyers, who see them as pieces of meat.''
He wants a change in law to get rid of the food industry's exemption from all animal cruelty laws.
Although he does not eat meat, eggs or milk, he does not like being lumped with groups the meat industry dismisses as fanatics, ''seeking a vegetarian society.''
''We encourage a vegetarian lifestyle, but we don't demand it,'' he said. ''But when it comes to cruelty, we go to the wall.''
