When Don Chaney considers the factors in the Knicks' recent turn of fortunes, he points to the increased emphasis on defense and the play of Keith Van Horn and Frank Williams. But he also attributes it to having a healthy roster and a team growing together.
So how do the Knicks keep their four-game winning streak going and the suddenly potent production rising when the team is blanketed by volatility and insecurity?
Chaney said it was difficult when players were moving on and off the roster, something that has occurred with frequency in the week and a half since Isiah Thomas became president of basketball operations.
''It's a distraction,'' Chaney said. ''My big thing is a hundred percent concentration on the game.''
Because of the roster moves of the past week, Chaney likened the Knicks' situation to training camp.
''It's hard to maintain stability under these circumstances, but it's a necessity,'' he said. ''I mean, we're trying to improve the team. So it's almost a Catch-22.''
Chaney is trying to run his team through drills when a trip across a tightrope might be more apt. The Knicks play the Chicago Bulls on Friday night at Madison Square Garden, trying to forge their first five-game winning streak since March 2001. But Chaney must also soothe egos and calm nerves for his players wondering who will be the next one overboard.
Since Thomas took over Dec. 22, the Knicks have waived Slavko Vranes; activated Mike Sweetney from the injured list; traded Clarence Weatherspoon to Houston for Moochie Norris and John Amaechi; and put Sweetney back on the injured list along with Michael Doleac. Amaechi will be waived once the paperwork is done.
But the players know the activity is probably not over. The Knicks have four point guards, leaving Charlie Ward and Howard Eisley warily waiting for word that at least one of them has been traded. The players realize that almost no one is secure.
''Things are in disarray right now,'' said Eisley, who was on the bench for all of the Knicks' 102-73 victory over Miami on Tuesday night. ''We have a lot of point guards still on this team right now. I think eventually things will iron themselves out.''
Eisley said he could not worry about things he could not control.
''You have to just be ready to play; that's part of our business,'' he said, adding, ''If deals get done and you're involved, you have to be man enough -- maybe it's not personal but the best for the team, and you just have to go wherever it is.''
Ward, who has a desirable contract, is the most likely player to go. Williams is now starting, Norris seems to fit Chaney's up-tempo style and Eisley has a long and expensive contract. But no one is sure what Thomas will do. After all, he found a taker for Weatherspoon and his lucrative contract.
BASKETBALL
