A Staten Island firefighter was in critical condition yesterday with a head injury and facial fractures and another firefighter was charged with assault after what the authorities called ''horseplay'' went calamitously wrong as the two were on duty in their firehouse on Wednesday night.
''What we heard is that it was some kind of horseplay. They were fooling around and then it got serious,'' Jack Thompson, a Fire Department spokesman, said yesterday. ''As for the rest of it, that's a continuing investigation.''
Relatives of the firefighter said another firefighter had struck him in the face with a chair.
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said that there was ''an altercation in a firehouse'' and that one firefighter was on a ventilator. ''It's serious, but we don't think life-threatening at the moment.''
The mayor added: ''We're not going to put up with any behavior like that. But until you know the facts, it's just too early to judge.''
The injured firefighter, Robert Walsh, 40, was in critical but stable condition at Staten Island University Hospital's north campus. He has been with the Fire Department since 1995.
Firefighter Walsh was hit by a chair while the two firefighters were in the kitchen of the firehouse, his father, Jack Walsh, of Hazlett, N.J., said at the hospital.
He said his son was heavily sedated but conscious, and could communicate with hand gestures while a breathing tube blocked his mouth. The forehead above his right eye was broken, both eyes were swollen shut and part of the firefighter's nose had to be surgically reattached, his father said.
''It's no accident when a guy hits you with a chair,'' the father said.
Firefighter Michael Silvestri, 41, assigned to the same firehouse as the injured firefighter, was charged with assault and criminal possession of a weapon, the police said. Firefighter Walsh's brother, Jim, also from Hazlett, said he was told by a Fire Department official that his brother had been hit without warning amid joshing during a shift change. ''But my brother said something that hit a nerve,'' he said, and the other man ''picked up a chair, and no one thought he would use it, and he just swung for the fences.''
Firefighter Walsh, who is 6-foot-8 and weighs 340 pounds, ''didn't even raise his arms,'' his brother said.
Neither the police nor the Fire Department would confirm that the weapon mentioned in the assault charges was a chair.
Firefighter Silvestri, who was appointed to the department in 1988, has been suspended without pay, Mr. Thompson said.
Neither firefighter has faced departmental charges, he said. Both men have addresses listed in Staten Island.
The incident started at 6:45 p.m. Wednesday at Engine Company 151 in the Tottenville section of Staten Island, the police said.
Firefighters at the small brick firehouse, where Christmas wreaths hung over the red garage door, would say little about the incident yesterday.
One firefighter said, ''It's too hot. We're not going to talk about it right now.''
