Hoping to revive the stalled Middle East peace effort, an Egyptian government envoy met the embattled Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, here on Thursday and urged him to work with rival Palestinian factions to end attacks against Israel.
''It is the duty of the people of the region and first of all us and you and the Arab people to take the decisions and measures from our side that will pave the road toward a better future,'' said the envoy, Osama el-Baz, speaking briefly to reporters outside the sandbagged entrance to Mr. Arafat's blasted West Bank headquarters. ''We hope that Israel will do the same because the issue depends on the will of both sides.''
Mr. Baz, who carried a letter to Mr. Arafat from the Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak, is trying to arrange a new meeting of Palestinian faction leaders in hopes of getting them to agree to stop attacks against Israelis. An Egyptian-sponsored meeting of about a dozen Palestinian leaders in Cairo early last month ended in a stalemate.
Mr. Baz said that Mr. Arafat's response made him ''feel more confident'' about the future.
But the Palestinian leader, standing at Mr. Baz's side, said little to reporters that would indicate any new initiative is under way. ''A mountain can't be shaken by the wind,'' Mr. Arafat replied cheerfully when asked if he saw any softening in Israel's attitude toward him.
Under the American-backed ''road map'' agreed to last year, the Palestinians are supposed to disarm the militant groups while Israel freezes the expansion of settlements in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Neither side has made much progress, and attacks on both sides continue.
With Egyptian help, Mr. Arafat's prime minister, Ahmed Qurei, has been trying for months to persuade various armed Palestinian groups to stop attacks on Israel.
Mr. Qurei would like to obtain cease-fire commitments from the various factions so that he has something to take to the table in a meeting he is seeking with the Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon.
Mr. Arafat's Fatah organization, the largest Palestinian faction, which celebrated its 39th anniversary on Thursday, is in favor of stopping militant action if Israel shows restraint. But the more radical Hamas and Islamic Jihad groups have only offered to halt attacks against civilians in Israel while maintaining their right to strike the Israeli military and Jewish settlers in the West Bank and Gaza.
Israeli officials complain that Mr. Arafat has refused to exert the necessary pressure on the more radical factions to stop the violence and that Mr. Qurei lacks the political muscle to get the job done.
The need for action has grown more urgent since Mr. Sharon said last month that Israel may temporarily disengage from the peace effort unless there is progress in the months ahead.
He warned that the country is considering sealing itself off from the West Bank behind the controversial barrier that it is building. The unilateral move would divide many Palestinian families, cost thousands of Palestinians their jobs and leave the Palestinian people cut off from large chunks of the territory they hope to incorporate into a Palestinian state.
Saeb Erekat, the Palestinians' chief negotiator, said Thursday that he is hopeful that the factions will reach a consensus the next time they meet. But riding in his heavily armored Mercedes sedan after the meeting with Mr. Baz, he complained that Israel's expanding settlements, its barrier, its killing of Palestinian civilians and its continued efforts to assassinate senior Hamas and Islamic Jihad members makes an agreement increasingly difficult.
''The growing settlements and building the wall are two things that are burying the road map to peace,'' he said.
The anticipated journey plotted by the road map is already far behind schedule. Phase II should have ended in December with the creation of a provisional Palestinian state. That remains a distant prospect.
On Thursday there was a glimmer of progress toward peace when Israel announced that it would lift the blockade of the West Bank town of Jenin, the home of many of the suicide bombers who have attacked Israel in the past three years.
But there was more violence elsewhere in the area. Newspapers reported that a 16-year-old Palestinian, Muhammed Jaber Said, died early Thursday after being shot by Israeli soldiers in the West Bank. And in the West Bank city of Nablus, where the Israeli military has been carrying out raids, two Israeli soldiers were wounded by a bomb, the army said.
And in Budrus, close to Ramallah, about 400 people demonstrating against construction of the West Bank barrier clashed on Thursday with Israeli soldiers who fired tear gas and rubber bullets. About 45 people were reported injured.
