THE price of oil this year will turn on several developments around the world, among them the rise of China's economy, whether the United States dollar continues falling as many in the industry expect and political uncertainty in nations with substantial oil reserves: Iraq, Russia, Venezuela and Saudi Arabia.
Major developments in any of these areas could cause the price of oil to rise from its current $32.52 a barrel for light crude on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Barring any unexpected or calamitous events, many analysts say it is even possible that the price will slip slightly, possibly to $27 to $30. But the price is expected to remain relatively high.
Fast-industrializing China has emerged as a crucial source of increasing demand for oil, already eclipsing Japan by some measures as the world's second-largest oil market, after the United States. This trend, creating upward pressure on the price of oil, is expected to continue in 2004 as the Chinese economy continues to grow. An annual growth rate of 7 percent is forecast.
China's demand for oil grew 10 percent in 2003, and it is expected to increase 6 percent this year, or the equivalent of an additional 320,000 barrels a day, according to the International Energy Agency. While the strain of coping with the growing thirst for oil may become evident in China's energy infrastructure this year, oil exporters are toasting the emergence of an important market.
Stronger demand in China, and, to a lesser extent in other Asian economies, was a main reason that the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries decided not to cut production at its last meeting in Vienna in December, leaving in place its production limit of 24.5 million barrels a day. None of OPEC's 11 members showed displeasure with leaving the price of oil hovering around $30 a barrel, or $2 more than the top of the group's self-proposed trading range of $22 to $28 a barrel, which is often flouted.
But this year, many analysts say, prices could slip to the middle to upper level of OPEC's price range because of a combination of factors, including expectations for increased production in non-OPEC nations like Russia, Angola and Equatorial Guinea and the removal of one of 2003's major uncertainties, the concern over the short-term effects of the war in Iraq. OPEC prices, based on a combined measure for prices of seven grades of oil, tend to be about $2 a barrel lower than the Nymex price for light crude oil.
The near-term contract for crude oil has generally been rising on the Nymex over most of the last two months, closing the year at $32.52 a barrel. That is down from a 12-year high of $37.83 for the benchmark contract reached on March 12 just after the United States Energy Department announced a decline in inventories and a week before the war in Iraq; the last time the benchmark closed higher was in October 1990 during the Persian Gulf war when Iraq's occupation of Kuwait cut off exports from both countries.
Oil futures hit their year's low only six weeks after the high, with the benchmark crude closing on the Nymex at $25.24 on April 29. That was after United States-led forces took control of Iraq and oil supplies had increased from Venezuela, where a national strike was settled, and Nigeria, where wells reopened after civil strife. But then, by July, with global inventories tight largely as a result of a slower-than-expected recovery in production from Iraq, oil once again breached $30 a barrel.
''Iraq still remains the wild card,'' said Amy Myers Jaffe, senior energy adviser at the James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy at Rice University here.
EVEN after the capture of Saddam Hussein in December, Iraq remains mired in a guerrilla war and facing a formidable process to repair and secure its oil infrastructure, leaving its role ahead unclear. The ambitions for Iraq to re-emerge as an important oil exporter depend largely on efforts to combat attacks and sabotage on a crucial pipeline running from northern Iraq to Turkey.
OPEC, meanwhile, which accounts for about a third of the world's oil exports, remains vigilant about its option of cutting production to maintain high prices once warmer spring weather starts to sap demand, but its members have been unusually vocal about another theme, the value of the dollar.
Several OPEC representatives, including Saudi Arabia's oil minister, Ali al-Naimi, have indicated that today's relatively high oil prices are related to the weakness of the dollar against other major currencies, like the euro. Because oil is priced in dollars, OPEC members have not received an equivalent price rise once sales are translated into their own currencies. The declining dollar has also meant that Europeans, converting euros to dollars to pay for oil, in effect saw oil prices drop 13 percent last year. What is more, with the euro's 19.8 percent climb against the dollar, Persian Gulf nations have found imports from Europe more expensive.
A weak dollar could extend beyond an aggressive OPEC stance on prices, though, with the currency's volatility spilling into the trading of crude oil contracts this year, said Michael Lewis, chief commodities strategist at Deutsche Bank in London. Mr. Lewis said he expected a ''surge in speculative activity'' in crude oil trading, which could lead ultimately to wider swings in oil prices.
Further uncertainty comes from the political situation in Russia, the second-largest oil exporter, after Saudi Arabia, and a non-OPEC member. Russian production is still expected to rise this year, but analysts remain jittery as President Vladimir V. Putin seeks to exert greater governmental control over the nation's oil industry. Until the October arrest of Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, the former chief executive of Yukos, the nation's largest oil company, the industry had appeared to be ready for huge infusions of Western investment.
''Russian oil is now in a different period,'' said Daniel Yergin, chairman of Cambridge Energy Research Associates. Mr. Yergin said it remained unclear how the prospect of Mr. Putin's growing influence and higher taxes on Russia's oil industry might affect production. He said there would be little clarity on the outlook for the nation's energy industry at least until after presidential elections in March.
Other doubts relate to Venezuela, where President Hugo Chávez is facing another effort to recall him from office, and Nigeria, where the recent replacement of the oil minister led to speculation as to whether Nigeria would remain a faithful member of OPEC. Finally, there is Saudi Arabia, which has by far the world's largest oil reserves.
Several analysts pointed to concerns over the Saudi government's efforts to prevent a recent upswing in terror attacks in the country from developing into a greater threat to economic stability and the oil infrastructure. Such concerns are not yet calculated into oil prices, these analysts said.
Other issues with Saudi oil are also generating talk in Houston's executive suites, among them a technical critique of Saudi Arabia's ability to produce abundant oil cheaply. The critique, by Matthew R. Simmons, chairman of Simmons &amp; Company International, a prominent investment bank that specializes in energy, is based on his own analysis of Saudi geological data. Mr. Simmons warns that Saudi Arabia's famously prolific wells might be less fecund than once thought.
Saudi Arabia's importance to the global energy industry was driven home at a lunch in Houston in December for Prince Bandar bin Sultan bin Abdul Aziz, the Saudi ambassador to the United States, attended by 600 people who hung on his every word. In a rare public speech, Prince Bandar characterized Saudi Arabia's struggle with terrorism as a ''fight to the death.''
