New York City ended the year with a few more homicides than in 2002 -- but with fewer than 600, a number seen by police and city officials as a benchmark of a less violent era. The last time a year's total dropped below that number was 1963.
The final tally for 2003 was 596 homicides, up from 587 in 2002, according to official statistics released yesterday. But police officials pointed out that those numbers could change as pending investigations were closed.
In the decades since 1963, the murder rate in New York City climbed dramatically and steadily, driven in the end by the crack cocaine epidemic and hitting more than 2,000 in the early 1990's. The 600 figure is therefore viewed as psychologically and symbolically important.
Even after huge drops in the mid- and late 1990's, the overall crime rate has continued to drop under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and his police commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, who was also commissioner as crime began to slide off its highs in 1992.
The figure seemed in peril early in the week, with seven homicides occurring on Monday and Tuesday. But on Wednesday, New Year's Eve, the only reported homicide was a statistical addition to police numbers from a shooting that took place in 1991, the police said.
There were also remarkably few incidents during the celebration in Times Square on Wednesday night and yesterday morning. The police said that they made no arrests, and that almost all of the 105 summonses issued around Times Square went to people with open containers of alcohol. No summonses were issued for disorderly conduct, the police said.
Officially, the last homicide of 2003 was the death of Jose Rivera, who was shot when he was 16, in 1991, and remained in a coma until he died last July, police officials said. The medical examiner's office classified the death this week as a homicide, which the Police Department did not enter into its records until Wednesday. Two men were arrested soon after the crime, the police said yesterday.
Record-keeping aside, the actual last homicide of the year occurred on Tuesday, when Ricardo Chavis, 21, who lived in the Edenwald housing project in the Bronx, was murdered, the police said. Mr. Chavis was shot after an argument with a man who fled the scene, the police said.
As New York officials announced the city's final number, their counterparts around the nation engaged in the same grim New Year's Day tradition. Chicago, with 599 killings, registered its fewest murders in 36 years -- and 49 fewer than in 2002. But that still left the nation's third-largest city with the largest number of killings in 2003.
Los Angeles, which had the most murders in 2002 -- 658 -- ended up with a total estimated at lower than 500, according to The Associated Press. The Los Angeles police commissioner, William J. Bratton, was New York City's commissioner in the mid-1990's.
Washington registered a small drop in the number of killings -- 247 from 262 in 2002 -- while Baltimore saw its first increase since 1998, to 271 from 253, according to The Associated Press.
With the slate wiped clean by the dropping of the ball, New York City recorded its first killing of 2004 less than an hour into the new year. Two more quickly followed.
While sitting on the stoop with friends outside his family's house in Canarsie, Brooklyn, Tralane Walker, 25, was shot in the head by a man who neighbors said began firing indiscriminately from across the street. Police officials said that they were looking into questioning a suspect from the neighborhood, but that it was not clear whether the attacker knew his victim.
Mr. Walker, a nurse's aide in an Endicott, N.Y., home for the aged, had arrived in the city on Wednesday afternoon to spend New Year's Eve with his family, said his mother, Geraldine Taylor, 51. As was his tradition, Mr. Walker joined other relatives at an evening service in the First Baptist Church of Crown Heights.
After returning to the family's home on East 96th Street just before 1 a.m., Mr. Walker walked across the street to exchange New Year's greetings with a friend, witnesses said. Several minutes later, a man who showed up in the block to settle what Mr. Walkers' relatives' called a feud with another man started firing a gun.
''Tralane never knew what hit him,'' Ms. Taylor said, ''He died with his hands still in his pockets.''
The family had been planning a birthday party on Sunday for Mr. Walker's daughter, Kiarra, who will turn 4. ''Now we have to also arrange a funeral instead,'' Ms. Taylor said.
Several hours later, the police discovered the body of Elliott Velasquez, 20, in his apartment on Ryer Avenue in the Bronx. He had been shot to death, the police said. They added that they had no suspects in the case but that the shooting seemed to have been the result of an argument over a girlfriend.
At 8 a.m., the body of George Rigos, 70, who had been fatally stabbed, was found by his son in his Queens Village apartment. Police officials said that there were no suspects as yet in the case.
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg seemed relieved that the city had fewer than 600 killings last year. But he was also quick to lament the incidents that occurred just after midnight. ''New Year's Eve is unfortunately one of those evenings where, for some reason or another, some people get a little bit crazy,'' he said. ''Two is two too many, but it's a lot less than it used to be on New Year's Eve.''
