A gift under our Christmas tree was a two-DVD album of David Bowie's collected videos. Mr. Bowie has been a composer of songs and their video visualization for 32 years, since his earliest efforts for the BBC, and video vignette after video vignette was both musically appealing and visually engaging.
Yet after a dozen of them my interest waned. Too many discrete songs, one after the other, is like reading a joke book or eating candies. They don't make an album, or a novel, or a meal.
Which got me to thinking about popular music and its decades-long, stumbling quest for a successful extended form. When I retired myself as chief rock critic of this newspaper in 1980, one reason was the tiresome predictability of the same short song structures, the same idioms, the same mannerisms. The bedrock of tradition is one thing; the deep rut of routine quite another.
Not that pop composers haven't tried to stretch out. We've had rock operas, like the Who's ''Tommy'' or Neil Young's recent ''Greendale,'' which were really successions of songs, even if they told a story.
In that sense they were like the concept albums, first LP's and later CD's, in which musicians tried to set a mood (Frank Sinatra's premiere collection of lost-love ballads, ''Only the Lonely''), create a world (the Beatles' ''Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Heart's Club Band'') or make a statement (Pink Floyd's ''Wall'').
But there seems now to be a widespread fear, in this era of the downloading of singles on the Internet, that the album as a marketable package and artistic statement is slipping away. The whole music business is in trouble, but album sales declined 20 percent over the last three years, reports Nielsen SoundScan. People want to grab the songs they particularly like, free or for 99 cents, burn them onto their own CD's in their own order and ignore the rest. ''I see the demise as inevitable,'' David Bowie himself said, as quoted in The Dallas Morning News.
For some rock 'n' roll purists this is merely a restoration of the true and natural order of the universe. Rock was originally about singles, and a lot of albums consisted, or consist, of padding around a couple of hits. The padding became all the more patent when albums expanded from the LP's 40-minute length to the CD's 70 minutes. If the album goes away, so, some might hope, will pop padding, pretension and pomposity.
Take that, all you hopeless English art-rock bands of the 70's, like Emerson, Lake and Palmer, and all the way up to Paul McCartney's clueless ''Requiem.'' When technically limited pop artists try to emulate orchestral classics -- as David Byrne did in his music to Robert Wilson's ''Forest'' or as Stewart Copeland did in his dreadful opera ''Holy Blood and Crescent Moon'' -- they either turn their skeletal song inspirations over to hack classical arrangers or they ape the surface characteristics of classical music with none of its muscle and heart.
Yet artists and the public have shown a perennial need for music that transcends a three- or four-minute limit. In instrumental music, that's not so hard, as any number of jazz or disco and techno numbers or bleary-eared jams (the Grateful Dead) attest through sheer, dogged repetition of their basic elements. On a more artistically elevated level, the folk guitarist John Fahey showed and the jazz pianist Keith Jarrett shows a wonderful skill in knitting together fragments of music into album-length improvisations (Mr. Jarrett's ''Köln Concert'').
But songs with lyrics are harder to expand, unless instrumentally fleshed out (Led Zeppelin's ''Stairway to Heaven''). Songs knit together sequentially are a revue, or a musical. Songs more seamlessly knit become modern-day opera.
That was why I found Jeanine Tesori's score for her collaboration with Tony Kushner, ''Caroline, or Change,'' so promising. This has been billed as a musical, and may well move as such to Broadway from the Public Theater. But lovers of older-fashioned musicals remain puzzled by it. They lament the score's lack of hummable tunes, even if they profess respect for Ms. Tesori's work. They fret that it's chilly and emotionally distant, even confusing, as pop idioms are juggled from (embedded) song to fragment to snippet.
What Ms. Tesori has done is to create a successful pop long-form composition: an opera if you will. There are plenty of moments when her singers can rear back and belt, even if not all the singers at the Public have the vocal chops to do so. But what's ingenious is the continuity of the text and music, the way everything flows together at no cost (to my ears) to the vitality of the moment. It's exciting to read that Ms. Tesori and Mr. Kushner have planned more projects together.
On one hand this kind of work -- I'm also thinking of fellow new-musicals composers like Michael John LaChiusa, Stephen Flaherty, Jason Robert Brown, Adam Guettel and most recently Stephin Merritt, although some of these are so far sticking with linked songs -- represents a new fusion of the musical and opera. This is a subject already much written about, going all the way back to Virgil Thomson and George Gershwin to Kurt Weill and Gian Carlo Menotti in the 50's through Leonard Bernstein and on to Stephen Sondheim.
But maybe the lines of influence can flow the other way, whereby composers of musicals can help invigorate pop music. There would be a certain symmetry in this. Rock 'n' roll arose in the 50's as a challenge to pop standards, which were (in often debased form) the songs from the golden age of the American musical.
If composers like Ms. Tesori can circle around and inspire a pop composer like, say, Alicia Keys to stretch herself beyond the singles format, everyone might profit. These new long-form composers will need to keep themselves communicative, connected to some kind of real and viable audience. Sheer performing or composing virtuosity can please musicians but alienate audiences.
A pop composer of extended forms needs to know not just the vast range of musical idioms now suitable for transformation, but also the harmonic and theoretical underpinnings needed to effect such transformations. Yet all that knowledge can't usurp the need to thrill people or move them or fascinate them; learning must be worn lightly.
In this time of crisis for pop music and the pop-music business, it's time for a rethinking of basic assumptions, even at the price of a little pomposity. The album as a set of loosely linked songs may be moribund. But long live the album, or the stage, as a home for a new kind of popular music, one that appeals equally to head and heart.
REVERBERATIONS
