Marian Goodman Gallery  24 West 57th Street, Manhattan  Through Jan. 17
Starting out as a technician in a biochemical laboratory, the English-born sculptor Tony Cragg was early seduced by art, and particularly the transformation of found substances into sculpture. From the beginning, his emphasis has been on the process of working with man-made or natural materials to invoke the familar world of bodies, objects and the detritus of urban landscapes.
This show displays sculptures from the last five years along the lines of the ''Early Forms'' and ''Rational Beings'' series that he developed over that period. In ''Early Forms'' he uses compressed, blown-up versions of cans, detergent bottles and other household containers to make works of formal elegance with an Arte Moderne look to them. One is ''Declinations,'' a bronze patinated in high-gloss yellow, that echoes the sleek curves and undulations of that era, while at the same time not concealing its humble household origins.
In ''Rational Beings'' and a number of similar works, he stacks and distorts elliptical flats into weird twisted piles that carry within them the semblance of human profiles. At times they evoke the dynamics of Futurist sculpture, in particular that of Boccioni. One example is the two-part bronze ''Out of Sight, Out of Mind,'' comprising a small, fattish column of dinner plate discs stacked teeteringly atop one another and a taller, thinner column of rubbery-looking forms that could derive from a tower of cans or bowls each collapsed into the one before it. The eye can tease out a number of profiles in both columns.
A star among these works is ''Pulse,'' a sinuously twisting horizontal organism composed of heavy plywood discs or ellipses whose highly polished graining is stained in red. It resembles an elegantly camouflaged natural growth, like a formation of fungi or ginger root, but one you want to stroke.
A couple of recent works take an even more biomorphic approach, like ''Species,'' a large piece surfaced with greenish Kevlar (a strong reticulated material made of carbon and silicone) and sprayed with a shiny plastic finish. A large leaf form and a disc splay out from a budlike center to come off as a symbol of earthly growth.
Because Mr. Cragg explores every possible development in each of the sculptural series he undertakes before exhausting the theme, the work sometimes seems unduly repetitious. Yet that aspect is transcended by his superlative sense of form and ingenious ways with materials.
GRACE GLUECK
ART IN REVIEW
