Devils center Scott Gomez raised his arm as if he was going to plead his case, but he quickly realized it would be better to just head to the penalty box. Earlier, he was clobbered in the nose with a stick. Now this.
Gomez knew he had been pushed into Washington goaltender Olie Kolzig, but he drew a goaltender-interference penalty anyway. The lowly Capitals then scored a third-period power-play goal Thursday to earn a 2-2 tie with the Devils.
''The ref was going to call it,'' Gomez said. ''There was nothing I could do about it.''
Gomez left MCI Arena with stitches holding together the bridge of his nose.
He had a chance to put away the game for the Devils, but Kolzig stopped his shot, and Gomez tumbled over him, earning a penalty.
Joel Kwiatkowski muscled in the rebound of a shot by defenseman Sergei Gonchar at 4 minutes 1 second, and the Devils (19-7-9-1) scrambled for a tie against a team that had been pummeled, 7-1, by Buffalo less than 24 hours earlier.
''Any team with heart and character is going to come back hard after getting humiliated like that,'' defenseman Scott Stevens, the Devils' captain, said.
The presence of the 6-foot-3, 225-pound Kolzig, who stopped 34 of 36 shots, also seemed to help the Capitals (11-23-4-1), who entered Thursday tied with Pittsburgh for the fewest points in the Eastern Conference.
Washington also scratched two of its top five scorers because of injuries: right wing Peter Bondra and right wing Dainius Zubrus. Grant Marshall and Sergei Brylin scored power-play goals for the Devils, but they failed to score on a pair of two-man advantages.
''It makes a difference in the game when you can't capitalize,'' Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur said.
With Capitals defenseman Brendan Witt in the penalty box in the first period, defenseman Rick Berry picked up a high-sticking penalty to give the Devils a two-man advantage for 41 seconds.
The Devils took seven shots in the two minutes that Berry was in the penalty box but did not score. The Capitals then turned a neutral-ice turnover into a goal at 13:02.
Devils defenseman David Hale lost the puck, and the Capitals had a two-on-one rush the other way. Bates Battaglia flipped a pass to Mike Grier, who shoved the puck between Brodeur's pads for his first goal since the first game of the season.
Washington handed the Devils another two-man advantage in the second period, when defenseman Jason Doig tripped Gomez 61 seconds into a cross-checking penalty on Gonchar.
Three minutes later, Washington center Brian Sutherby clubbed Gomez in the bridge of his nose with his stick. Gomez, blood trickling down his nose, went to the bench to have the cut patched.
The Devils scored with 88 seconds left in the four-minute power play. Defenseman Scott Niedermayer took a big slap shot from the point that never made it to Kolzig. But it deflected to Marshall in the slot, and he scored his third goal at 15:08.
''We got guys in perfect places,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said.
Thirteen seconds after Stevens and Doig received roughing penalties, Devils defenseman Paul Martin tried to shoot through a gap but was tackled by Washington center Jeff Halpern. The Devils needed six seconds to score.
Brylin won a face-off with center Trent Whitfield in the Washington zone and headed for the slot. Devils defenseman Brian Rafalski let a shot fly from the face-off circle, and Brylin tipped it in at 19:49 for his sixth goal.
''It was a tough game,'' Brylin said. ''It was kind of weird. We had so many power-play chances, and we got two goals. But it wasn't enough.''
Later, Brodeur stopped Gonchar's shot with his left pad -- exactly what he wanted to do. He also got in front of Kwiatkowski's rebound, but the puck dribbled past him, and Kwiatkowski pumped his fists.
HOCKEY
