Libya's prime minister said Thursday that the United States should act quickly to reward his country for abandoning its secret weapons programs. He warned that unless the United States lifted sanctions by May 12, Libya would not be bound to pay the remaining $6 million promised to each family of victims killed on Pan Am Flight 103.
The prime minister, Shukri Ghanim, in an interview, said that any decision by the Bush administration was strictly an ''internal matter'' for the United States, but that the deadlines and their consequences, made clear in the settlement with the Lockerbie families, were well known to all parties, including senior administration officials.
A quick lifting of American sanctions would allow American oil companies to return here this spring and pave the way for unfreezing $1 billion in assets that Libyan officials say are languishing in American banks.
Mr. Ghanim said his country would like to ''accelerate to the maximum'' the dismantling of its nuclear, chemical and biological weapons programs so that President Bush would be able to tell Congress in the next few months that the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, had fully and transparently destroyed or surrendered all his illicit weapons.
In Washington, a State Department spokesman said he could not comment on the Libyan prime minister's comments, but quoting Mr. Bush in December, he said that Libya's recent agreement to dismantle its banned weapons and compensate Lockerbie bombing victims opened the door to the possibility of improving relations, including the lifting of sanctions.
''We have indicated to the Libyans that we are prepared to talk about the remaining bilateral sanctions that apply,'' he said.
Last month, when Libya agreed to dismantle its weapons program, administration officials said American sanctions would not be lifted until Libya began to implement its pledge and took further unspecified actions leading to its no longer being identified as a state that sponsors terrorism.
The families of the 270 people killed when Libyan terrorists blew up the jet over Lockerbie, Scotland, have been paid $4 million each under the agreement signed last September that led the United Nations to lift its sanctions. In the settlement, Libya insisted on a stipulation that the families would not receive the full $10 million pledged unless the United States lifted sanctions and removed Libya from the list of states supporting terrorism within eight months. After May 12, the funds in escrow would be returned to the Libyan government, Libyan and Western officials said.
''The agreement says that eight months after the signing, if American sanctions are not removed, then the additional $6 million for each family of victims will not be paid,'' Mr. Ghanim said. ''So of course,'' he said, referring to a lifting of sanctions, ''this would be for the good of the families of the victims, but we will leave this to the decision of the Americans.''
By raising the prospect of a deadline that, if broken, would deprive Lockerbie families of more than half the compensation they were promised, Mr. Ghanim injected a note of both urgency and political pressure into the immediate steps ahead.
He said publicly for the first time on Thursday that Libya would like to be paid for turning over certain nuclear materials, just as he understands some former Soviet states have been compensated for cooperating with such removals.
The prime minister, a leading reformer among Colonel Qaddafi's advisers, spoke in his large new office near the palm-studded waterfront of Tripoli's ancient harbor. A large portrait of Colonel Qaddafi looks out over the carpeted expanse of his work area. Mr. Ghanim, 61, spoke in the English that he perfected in the Boston area while he completed doctoral studies at The Fletcher School at Tufts University.
The prime minister's emphasis on the timing for an American response to Colonel Qaddafi's proclamation on Dec. 10 is the first indication that a deadline for an American response is hanging over the complicated process of dismantling the Libyan arsenal. It comes at a time when some senior Bush administration officials have questioned the ability of the International Atomic Energy Agency led by Mohamed ElBaradei to supervise the removal or destruction of Libyan weapons.
The prime minister said that as far as Libya was concerned, Dr. ElBaradei was in charge of the disarmament process, along with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. A senior Bush administration official, however, said that American and British intelligence officials, plus nuclear experts from the Pentagon, the Department of Energy and American nuclear laboratories, would arrive here this month to effectively take charge of the disarmament.
The senior official characterized Dr. ElBaradei's visit here this week as a ''badly advised'' public relations exercise at a time when the United States Central Intelligence Agency and Britain's MI6 spy agency were developing strong bonds with Libya's military and intelligence chiefs.
''We want to have more conversations in private with the Libyans before doing anything in public,'' the senior official said this week.
''Libya itself is looking for help from the United States to make its declaration'' to the chemical weapons agency, ''and our teams of people from the Defense Threat Reduction Agency, the Department of Energy and the national labs are going to help the Libyans do the bulk of the work,'' the official added.
''ElBaradei has got a minuscule percentage of the knowledge'' about the full assortment of Libya's illicit weapons programs, the official said, and, therefore, ''he has a role, but only with the technical aspects'' of verifying the dismantling of the Libyan nuclear program.
A six-member team of nuclear inspectors Dr. ElBaradei left behind declined to comment on their role. They left the country Thursday.
One Western ambassador here called the dispute over who is in charge ''unhelpful,'' but it remains unclear how the disarmament will proceed, officials said.
One Western official pointed out that while Dr. ElBaradei's group was responsible for nuclear weapons-related material, chemical weapons removal falls under a different treaty organization, and no international body has clearcut jurisdiction over Libya's long-range missiles and biological weapons.
A large amount of chemical precursors and lethal chemical agents will have to be destroyed, officials said, but it was not immediately clear where they would be shipped for destruction.
Western diplomats here confirmed that the May 12 deadline was a prominent feature of the negotiations along with a Libyan expectation that Washington would be honor bound to reward Colonel Qaddafi not only for his declaration, but also for the steps he is taking to allow American, British and United Nations inspectors to effectively assume authority over his secret weapons programs.
''As the Libyan government takes these essential steps and demonstrates its seriousness, its good faith will be returned,'' Mr. Bush said on Dec. 19. ''Libya can regain a secure and respected place among the nations, and over time achieve far better relations with the United States.''
Libya's expectation for quick action could complicate the Bush administration's plans, Western officials here said. On the one hand, Washington is seeking to reward Colonel Qaddafi for surrendering his programs to develop illegal weapons, but on the other hand the administration must verify that all the weapons are accounted for under a monitoring program that will allow continuous access to any suspect site.
