AFTER a rollicking year for the American stock market in 2003, prudent investors are asking: Was it too much, too soon?
The Wall Street consensus is bullish, as it often is. But some market-watchers are worried that investors, hungry to gain back what they lost in the three previous years, will start reaching for the dessert cart before the second course of economic recovery is served. After a year in which the blue-chip indexes rose at least 25 percent and small-cap indexes surged more than 45 percent, it may be time for investors to sit back and pace themselves, they say.
Thomas M. McManus, chief investment strategist for Banc of America Securities, is generally bullish on stocks for the coming year, but he frets about the possibility that ''we begin to get some of that dessert course where investors start just throwing money at the market and start pushing up valuations ahead of earnings improvements.''
Since early last year, investor sentiment has swung sharply back toward an emotion that was common in the boom years of the late 1990's, Mr. McManus said. ''People are more worried about missing the upside opportunity than they are about losing money,'' he said.
A significant number of his counterparts, however, expect a robust market next year, based largely on expectations for solid corporate earnings and a burgeoning economic recovery. ''This is a market showing a tremendous amount of resilience,'' said Laszlo Birinyi, founder of Birinyi Associates, Westport, Conn.
Michael Moe, with ThinkEquity Partners in San Francisco, sees room for small-cap growth stocks to grow, and Abby Joseph Cohen, chief investment strategist for the Goldman Sachs Group, predicts more gains for technology issues. Of course, not all of their peers agree. Tobias M. Levkovich, United States equity strategist for the Smith Barney unit of Citigroup, expects the market's rise to end by summer. Then, stock prices could fall 10 percent or more by year-end, and they may not be much higher in four years than they are now, he said.
''We don't believe we're in a new bull market but in a trading-oriented market,'' Mr. Levkovich said, adding that the current environment was reminiscent of the up-and-down market seen from 1974 to 1982.
But he remains far from the consensus. Mr. McManus expects a modestly good year, while Ms. Cohen, Mr. Moe and Mr. Birinyi all expect a very good year.
THOMAS M. McMANUS, chief investment strategist, Banc of America Securities.
After advising investors to take advantage of any weakness in the stock market in 2003 by ''buying the dips,'' Thomas M. McManus has been lowering expectations for this year, especially in the second half.
''We expect only modest appreciation for the major averages in 2004 with most of the gains coming in the first half,'' he said. ''We expect that the large-cap stocks in the Dow average and the S.&amp;P. 500 will outperform the small-caps in the Russell 2000 index.''
That would mark a reversal from last year, when the indexes representing smaller stocks and technology companies easily outpaced the Dow Jones industrial average and the S.&amp;P. 500. But the shift is already under way: In December, the Dow average rose almost 7 percent, while the Nasdaq composite index was up just 2 percent.
''The Dow is playing catch-up,'' he said. ''If people start loading up on small caps at the beginning of 2004, we think they'll be disappointed.''
Indeed, if 2004 starts off with an exuberant buying spree over all, he said, he probably would recommend that investors reduce their exposure to the stock market. Since February, Mr. McManus had been advising institutional clients to hold 75 percent of their assets in stocks, but he cut that allocation back to 70 percent last month. He would cut it again, probably to 65 percent, he said, if he thought prices were rising too quickly at the start of this year.
But Mr. McManus, like many other Wall Street forecasters, believes an economic recovery is under way and that, coupled with an election campaign by a popular incumbent president, should buoy stocks.
Mr. McManus predicts that the major averages will rise about 5 percent, while broader indexes will be nearly flat. His forecast calls for the Dow average to be at 10,600 at mid-year and 11,000 at year-end, up from 10,454 at the end of 2003. He sees the S.&amp;P. 500, which closed the year at 1,112, climbing to 1,140 at mid-year and 1,160 at year-end, and the Nasdaq Composite, which ended the year at 1,950, rising to 2,050 at mid-year and 2,100 at year-end. In contrast, he forecasts that the Russell 2000 index of smaller companies will rise to just 575 by mid-year, up from 557 at year-end, then fall back to about 550 over the next six months.
Investors who study valuation are inclined to see the stocks that rose the fastest in 2003 as overpriced, but that analysis may be too simplistic, Mr. McManus said. He advised investors to look for ways to ride the momentum of the market by searching for stocks and sectors with earnings that are likely to increase to justify their high prices.
''At certain times in valuation cycles, you have to go with momentum,'' he said. ''When earnings are getting better, the stock market's not generous enough to hang around and let you buy a company cheap. It's going to charge you more than you think it's worth.''
He cited a portfolio manager he admires who told him: ''You'll never be really successful unless there are some stocks in your portfolio that make you uncomfortable.''
Generally, Mr. McManus said, he thinks investors should stop chasing stocks of cyclical companies that benefit early in economic recovery, like makers of industrial equipment, and become more defensive.
Banc of America Securities' list of 10 stocks to buy now is filled with makers of consumer products and service providers, including Clorox, Colgate-Palmolive, Comcast and American International Group, an insurer.
What are the biggest threats to Mr. McManus's forecast?
He said there were significant risks on either side. Stocks are priced for a continued expansion, so the market might react badly to an unexpected pause in the economic recovery or a tapering of earnings growth, he said.
Conversely, if the economy heats up beyond expectations, the bond market may anticipate a response by the Federal Reserve and push up interest rates faster than expected and bring the stock market skidding to a halt. ''Sometimes the Fed's bark is worse than its bite,'' Mr. McManus said.
ABBY JOSEPH COHEN, chair of the investment policy committee, Goldman Sachs Group.
Stocks seem to be entering a less frenetic but more confident phase of the bull market that began with a ''sigh of relief'' in the spring, Abby Joseph Cohen said. The rate of growth of corporate operating profits is likely to moderate to about 8 percent, from her estimate of 27 percent in 2003, but returns on stocks should continue to be above historical norms, she said.
Ms. Cohen, who was one of the more bullish forecasters on Wall Street during the punishing bear market that began in 2000, is still more optimistic than most. But she made a prescient call in April when she recommended buying the more volatile stocks of smaller and economically sensitive companies.
At that time, Ms. Cohen had recommended a heavy weighting in shares of information technology companies: 18 percent, compared with the S.&amp;P. 500's 12 percent in technology stocks at the time. Since then, she said, the rally in tech-stock prices has narrowed the gap, pushing the S.&amp;P. 500's share of tech stocks to about 17.5 percent. Still, she said, she thinks there are more gains to come in technology.
Likewise, she still favors companies that draw discretionary spending by consumers. But she thinks consumers will shift from buying things to doing things, so she prefers providers of consumer services, like travel and entertainment, to producers of cars and housing.
She is advising managers of pension funds to keep about 75 percent of their assets in stocks, 20 percent in bonds and the rest in cash and commodities. She expects the S.&amp;P. 500 index to reach 1,250 by the end of 2004, a rise of 12 percent.
Stocks will be carried higher by continued, though slower, consumer spending and increasing patience and optimism among investors, she said. As concerns about a slide back into recession have abated, she said, investors have begun to look further down the road.
''What we know from previous cycles is when inflation and interest rates are under control, investors are willing to pay more for a given level of earnings,'' she said. ''As we go through 2004, increasingly what people will be thinking about is 12 to 18 months beyond wherever we are.''
She said that she and her colleagues on Goldman's investment policy committee did not expect the Fed to raise interest rates soon. But, she added, if the Fed did raise rates from their unusually low levels, investors would see that move as a reaction to economic growth, and it ''would not have a particularly deleterious impact'' on stocks.
''We're not expecting the Fed to turn ugly this year, but we think we have reached, or will soon reach, the end of the long bull market in bonds,'' she said.
Ms. Cohen said she was as likely to be underestimating as overestimating the market's fortunes. If foreign economies perform better than expected, she said, earnings and stocks could surprise on the high side.
Then again, she added, the market could receive some unpleasant surprises from the presidential race, like proposals for tariffs or other forms of protectionism. ''Politicians sometimes say the darnedest things,'' she said.
TOBIAS M. LEVKOVICH, United States equity strategist for the Smith Barney unit of Citigroup.
After a year of being more bullish than most market forecasters, Tobias M. Levkovich has turned decidedly less optimistic. He expects the S.&amp;P. 500 to end the year around 1,025, down about 8 percent, although he said stocks might continue their recent rise in the first quarter.
''We're fairly sanguine about the market prospects in the very near term,'' he said. ''Investors are feeling better about life, the economy's better, jobs seem to be coming back -- albeit slowly. We're hearing companies talking about capital spending initiatives. We're getting all this good news, which is encouraging.''
Indeed, Citigroup's economists are projecting a 5 percent increase in the gross domestic product this year. But economic growth and rising corporate profits do not always add up to higher stock prices, Mr. Levkovich said, citing 1984 and 1994 as two exceptions to what some investors consider a rule.
If the economy is able to sustain its strong recovery, interest rates are likely to rise during the year, he said. As bonds become more attractive, investors would be willing to pay less for every dollar of corporate earnings, he said, so the stock market could decline as earnings improved.
''I'm talking about something that's a modest correction, not something draconian,'' he said.
He has been advising clients to hold onto stocks of cyclical companies in advertising-sensitive media and the capital goods and building-materials sectors. Among Smith Barney's favorite stocks in those areas are the Belo Corporation, Viacom, Alcoa, Caterpillar and Louisiana-Pacific.
But Mr. Levkovich has also been warning clients to be prepared to act defensively and shift their money into companies that sell staples, such as drugs and consumer goods. In those areas, Smith Barney is recommending Coca-Cola Enterprises, Wendy's International and CVS.
But he forecasts disappointment for those who think a major bull market has begun. ''I suspect in 1974 people felt entitled to a new bull market, kind of the way they do today,'' he said. ''But markets don't work that way.''
MICHAEL MOE, chairman and chief executive, ThinkEquity Partners.
The sun is starting to shine again in Silicon Valley after a long, dark period, said Michael Moe, who works from San Francisco running a research-oriented investment bank.
A former growth-stock strategist at Merrill Lynch, Mr. Moe forecasts that consensus estimates for corporate earnings over all ''will turn out to be conservative,'' and that investors will pay even more for each dollar of those earnings this year than they did in 2003. That combination will drive blue-chip stocks to a gain of as much as 20 percent.
But Mr. Moe said that the small-cap growth companies that were the lifeblood of Silicon Valley should fare even better. They were ''so left behind'' in the last few years that they ''have a lot of catching up to do,'' he said.
Demand for stocks has been strong, with an average of $2.5 billion flowing into mutual funds each week since March, he said. With the market for initial public offerings nearly dormant until late last year, the supply of new shares has not kept up with demand, he said.
''To sustain the bull market, we need a pickup of I.P.O.'s, because new issues are effectively the fresh blood of the market,'' Mr. Moe said.
The sectors that should lead the market higher in 2004, he said, include biotechnology and communications companies that can capitalize on the convergence of voice and data. This may be the year, he said that the regional telephone companies ''throw in the towel'' on Internet telephony.
''Anything mobile is hot,'' Mr. Moe added, citing companies that provide handsets, software or computer chips for wireless communication. Qualcomm, which provides the inner workings of many of those handsets, is to the wireless world what Microsoft was to the personal-computer revolution, he said.
Sounding more like a true believer than a survivor, Mr. Moe said, ''The people who thought the Internet was going to change everything might have the last laugh.''
LASZLO BIRINYI, president, Birinyi Associates.
Stocks cannot help but shoot higher amid the fertile combination of economic growth and low inflation, said Laszlo Birinyi, who runs a financial consulting firm in Westport, Conn., that he founded in 1989.
Mr. Birinyi, an avid student of market history, said he saw parallels between the current environment for stocks and the one in 1962, the beginning of a four-year bull market. Back then, he said, companies were holding back on capital spending, unemployment was not declining and stocks looked expensive.
''It's not unusual, at the beginning of an upward move, to have overvaluation,'' Mr. Birinyi said. ''At the beginning of a bull market, the traditional parameters and historical measures are somewhat discarded. My concern is that we get too carried away.''
Mr. Birinyi, who had expected stocks to gain only about 10 percent in 2003, said he would not be surprised by a rise of 20 percent or more this year. He said he was hard-pressed to imagine anything that might turn the market back down.
''For right now, there are no storm clouds in my scenario,'' he said, adding that even a raising of interest rates might be good for stocks. ''This is a market showing a tremendous amount of resilience.''
He is most troubled, he said, by the big gains some smaller technology companies have made while mainstays of the Nasdaq stock market, like Microsoft and Oracle, have lagged.
Investors in technology will need to be astute stock pickers this year, looking for proven companies that have not run up, rather than loading up on the most beaten-down companies, he said.
''Now, you want to buy stocks which really do reflect the economic recovery instead of the hoped-for recovery,'' he said.
Among his favorites, he said, are Dow Chemical, United Technologies, I.B.M. and companies that should benefit from a continued housing boom, like Countrywide Financial, Centex Homes and Pulte.
He said that he did not favor financial stocks in general, but liked some that offered attractive dividends, including Citigroup and American Express.
