With $20 and a dream of legalizing their lives in New York City, a surge of mostly Irish immigrants trooped to the Emerald Isle Immigration Center this week for last-minute help in entering the new computerized green card lottery.
But for many of the immigrants, and thousands more would-be applicants around the world, luck ran out well before the deadline, Tuesday night at midnight.
The State Department's electronic lottery on its Web site was overwhelmed by the surge in online applications, and government officials and immigrant advocates agree that many applicants were shut out in the last 12 hours.
''The servers were working as hard as they could,'' said Stuart Patt, a State Department spokesman, adding that they never failed entirely. ''This is unfortunately a consequence of waiting until the last minute.''
The perils of procrastination should have been obvious, Mr. Patt added. Last year, when applications were still done only by mail, 2.9 million of the 10 million that arrived were disqualified for being late.
This year the lottery accepted only online applications, and a total of 5.9 million were submitted, Mr. Patt said. That is well below last year's total and the 13 million mailed in 2000 but almost 900,000 more than officials had projected a week ago based on the rate of submissions since the lottery opened on Nov. 1.
Mr. Patt attributed the unexpected last-minute rush of applicants to an article on Saturday in The New York Times about the lottery, officially known as the Diversity Visa Lottery. He said the article, which was also published on Monday on the front page of The International Herald Tribune, attracted attention in the foreign press and might have drawn applicants who thought the chances to win were better than usual.
Officials attribute the drop in applications from last year to a reduction in duplications and fraud. Immigrant advocates, however, say the numbers were down because potential applicants often lack access to computers and often fear that online information could be shared with the Department of Homeland Security.
Siobhan Dennehy, director of the Emerald Isle Immigration Center, in Queens, said many last-minute applicants were worried that an online application could make them targets of deportation.
''There are people who have children who were born in this country and have never seen their grandparents,'' Ms. Dennehy said yesterday. She mentioned one man with a 6- or 7-year-old daughter whose grandparents are too old to travel. He told Ms. Dennehy he was afraid to risk traveling back to Ireland until he could adjust his illegal status.
''There isn't a lot of hope today to change your status,'' Ms. Dennehy added. ''People felt, 'This is my last shot for now.' ''
After the center closed for the day Tuesday evening, she said, staff members split up the last applications, including digital photographs, and kept trying to enter them from home or office computers until the midnight deadline. From 6:30 p.m. to midnight, she said, she submitted only three more applications herself.
Forty forms could not be submitted by the center's two offices. The 40 applicants will be notified next week, and their $20 fees returned.
''The last one happened to be a woman with the same day and month of my daughter's birthday,'' Ms. Dennehy added. ''I was determined to get this woman in, and alas, it didn't work.''
At the State Department, Mr. Patt said nearly 300,000 applicants did make it through that last day. Estimates of the number of immigrants living illegally in the United States range from 8 million to 10 million.
The countries with the most applicants were Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Nepal and Morocco, Mr. Patt said. Each country is capped at 3,500 green cards, however, so the more applications, the longer the odds. Over all, 110,000 are randomly selected, but about half drop out or fail to meet minimal qualifications for a diversity visa, like a high school education or a trade.
