REJOICING over stock market rallies around the world, big global investors are nonetheless entering the new year cautiously, expecting more gains but much less spectacular ones than in 2003.
When translated into dollars for American investors, stocks in some emerging markets more than doubled in 2003 -- among them Thailand, up 134.3 percent, Turkey, 122.4 percent and Brazil, up 102.9 percent.
Even some developed markets posted dollar gains that exceeded the American markets' 26.8 percent gain, as measured by Morgan Stanley Capital International's country stock indexes. Germany was up 60.1 percent; Canada, 52.1 percent; and Japan, 34.6 percent.
Over all, the Morgan Stanley Capital International index of world stock markets, excluding the United States, rose 37.5 percent last year.
Many large institutional investors, however, are treating the extraordinary returns as, well, extraordinary. Instead of piling more money into global markets in search of once-in-a-decade gains, they are taking a more restrained approach as they brace for more modest, single-digit increases that are expected this year. While companies in Asia, in particular, will continue to benefit from strong growth in the United States and China, investors are becoming more selective about picking winners and losers, rather than simply betting that broader economic rebounds will lift all boats.
Market analysts and big investors generally contend that share prices globally will continue to rise through the first half of 2004 as profits meet expectations and interest rates remain low. While some worry about the impact of the presidential election in the United States in November on markets around the world, most expect gains for the full year.
''We expect a more muted reaction'' in 2004, said Alan Brown, chief investment officer at State Street Global Advisors in London. ''Highish single-digit returns. The main worry is I don't know what to worry about, but I know there's something out there.''
Such caution toward the market is grounded in two concerns. First, the global recovery now under way faces several formidable hurdles, chief among them a weak dollar, which may reduce the United States's current account deficit but hurt its trading partners; rising interest rates; violence in the Middle East; and the United States presidential election. To lesser degrees, Japan's shaky banks and continued slow growth in Europe present obstacles.
The second concern is connected to the first. After years of selling their shares of companies based outside the United States, large investors in many cases in the last year increased their holdings to bring them in line with global model portfolios. Now that their portfolios are ''neutral,'' they want to see additional good news before they pour more money into markets outside the United States. This kind of pause after last year's gains is consistent with past rallies.
''Equities rarely move from a bull market to a bear market smoothly to a bull market,'' said Matthew Merritt, the head of Global Equity Strategy at Citigroup Global Markets in London. ''The question is: have equities gone too far or not far enough in pricing in the global economy?''
The answer, he and others say, depends on which market you highlight. Some of the most eye-popping returns in dollar terms last year were in Argentina, up 98.5 percent and Russia, up 70.3 percent, both thinly traded markets where a little money can double an index. While economic conditions in both countries have stabilized, prompting rallies, few market watchers expect these big increases to be repeated.
In Europe, German stocks still have room to grow, despite last year's 60.1 percent increase, because the shares in manufacturers like Volkswagen AG and SAP AG are rising with the upturn in demand for cars, technology and other goods, and because companies have been cutting costs to compensate for the stronger euro, which gained 19.8 percent against the dollar last year.
''The only interesting market in Europe is Germany,'' said Abhijit Chakrabortti, global equity strategist at J.P. Morgan Securities in London. It is the only European market, he said, where companies have ''taken the needed steps'' to restructure by cutting costs, laying off workers and reducing debt.
Big companies in France and Italy, on the other hand, are struggling to reduce high labor costs and debts. Manufacturers in these countries also lag their German rivals in moving production to China and other booming, low-cost markets.
Like manufacturers in Europe, Japanese exporters are wrestling with a strong currency that makes their products more expensive to foreign buyers, but Canon Inc., the Honda Motor Company and others have learned how to trim their production costs to compensate for a robust yen and have also moved sizable portions of their manufacturing overseas.
More broadly, Japan seems finally to be dealing with its festering banks. The government has set deadlines for the banks to reduce their non-performing loans and stockholdings. Though much work remains, the worst days seem to be past, a big reason Japanese bank stocks, which make up 8.8 percent of the market, jumped 48.9 percent in 2003, as measured by the yen-denominated Topix Bank Index.
''There is now growing evidence to suggest that Japan's major structural problems are slowly, but surely, being resolved much faster than the consensus believes,'' Kathy Matsui, chief equity strategist at Goldman Sachs Japan in Tokyo, wrote to investors last month.
Ms. Matsui expects Japan's Topix index, which charts about 1,500 of the country's largest companies, to rise 40 percent, calculated in yen, in the next 12 months, a forecast that is higher than that of most analysts and well ahead of last year's 24 percent advance.
Ultimately, Japanese stocks, like most around the globe, rely heavily on growth in the United States and China. Both countries are not only big buyers of such finished products as cars, machinery and electronics, but also of commodities like steel, chemicals, coal and oil. China's appetite for these raw materials is expected to prop up Australian stocks again this year. South African shares, which gained 39.9 percent last year, should benefit similarly.
''There's very little pricing freedom in any manufacturing anywhere in the world,'' Mr. Brown said. ''But at least commodities prices are getting better.''
Britain, on the other hand, is expected to suffer because its stock market, which was among the slowest growing in 2003, up 14.4 percent -- but 27.2 percent in dollar terms -- is more reliant on financial stocks that are dealing with mounting consumer debt and rising interest rates.
Mr. Brown, like many market watchers, added that part of the gains in stock prices last year could be attributed to the absence of bad news after the abatement of economic fears related to the war in Iraq, worries about deflation and concern about SARS, and to companies' efforts to adjust to tough times.
''When markets are up 60 to 70 percent, it's hard to believe it will be repeated,'' said John Feng, a consultant at Greenwich Associates in Connecticut who polled financial institutions in Asia on their investment plans for 2004. ''But people on the buy and sell side are their most optimistic in three or four years. There's a lot of talk about domestic consumption picking up'' for Asia.
Mr. Feng, who surveyed dozens of mutual fund and pension fund managers from August through October, said the portfolio managers expected stock markets in Hong Kong, China, Taiwan, South Korea and Singapore to grow 11 to 14 percent in 2004. These investors are shifting more money toward North Asia, particularly Taiwan and South Korea, which are seen as favorably positioned to benefit from the global boom in technology investment and from Chinese growth. That comes at the expense of Southeast Asian markets like Thailand and the Philippines, which are expected to lag this year and be less likely to benefit from those trends.
While analysts tend to expect market gains in the first half of the year, some worry that the United States presidential election in November could nudge investors to the sidelines until the outcome is clear. If the United States economy grows at an annual rate of about 4 percent through June, as expected, the Federal Reserve will also face pressure to raise interest rates, which could dampen corporate profits, consumer spending and, ultimately, the world's biggest economy.
