In the span of a few days, Jim Fassel has gone from lamenting his departure from the Giants to fielding a swarm of interest from other teams looking for a head coach.
Fassel spent part of New Year's Day talking to the Redskins owner Daniel Snyder, who flew to San Francisco where Fassel was spending the holiday with his family. His son Mike had played for Boston College in the San Francisco Bowl on Wednesday.
Because of that trip, Fassel had put off an interview with Arizona until Saturday, but Snyder was unwilling to wait. He flew in his private jet to California for the meeting. Fassel's agent, Steve Rosner, said Snyder and Fassel met yesterday afternoon, had dinner together and would also have breakfast today.
Rosner said Snyder had called him only hours after announcing that Steve Spurrier had resigned as coach.
''I'm never surprised about Dan Snyder's aggressiveness,'' said Rosner, who also said Fassel had been flattered by Snyder's interest and not bothered by his meddlesome reputation. Snyder has been through four coaches in his five years as Redskins owner.
''I think if Jim had any major concerns about Dan Snyder, he would not have interviewed for the position,'' Rosner said.
Rosner said, however, that Fassel would meet with any team that requested an interview before entertaining any offers. Fassel is scheduled to talk to the Bears on Monday or Tuesday and still expects to hear from Buffalo. Snyder is also expected to use his California swing to interview the former Vikings coach Dennis Green, who lives near San Diego.
He has also requested permission to talk to the Seattle defensive coordinator Ray Rhodes, but cannot interview him as long as the Seahawks remain in the playoffs. They play at Green Bay on Sunday.
Giants officials spent yesterday talking to two of Fassel's prospective replacements -- the defensive coordinator Romeo Crennel and the offensive coordinator Charlie Weis, both with New England. The Giants have no further interviews scheduled, although they could still approach Louisiana State Coach Nick Saban after the Tigers play in the Sugar Bowl on Sunday.
Saban's wife, Terry, told The Times-Picayune of New Orleans that Saban was not leaving the team.
''I'm not saying never, but we're not going anywhere this year,'' Terry Saban told the newspaper. ''The administration has shown they are committed to him. But the biggest reason, besides the whole family thing, is that his staff has worked so hard to recruit for four years, the top recruiting class year after year, that you look at the bench and the young talented players. And in an exciting conference, I don't want anybody else to coach these guys. I don't think Nick wants to let anyone else coach these guys.''
Giants General Manager Ernie Accorsi said he and the executive vice president John Mara would meet with the co-owners Wellington Mara and Robert Tisch after yesterday's interviews to determine their next step. Accorsi and John Mara have already interviewed the St. Louis defensive coordinator Lovie Smith and the former Jaguars coach Tom Coughlin.
Vermeil to Coach Chiefs Another Season
Dick Vermeil, the N.F.L.'s oldest coach, will be back for a fourth season with the Kansas City Chiefs, a decision he made after thinking how much he regretted leaving St. Louis shortly after the Rams won the 2000 Super Bowl.
''I was thinking of how I would feel about four months down the road,'' said Vermeil, who is 67. ''I decided I would be more apt to regret having left than to regret having stayed.''
Chiefs General Manager Carl Peterson, one of Vermeil's closest friends, talked him out of retirement in 2001 and gave him a three-year, $10 million contract. ''I don't even know if it will be a one-year contract or not,'' Vermeil said. ''I just told Carl that I wanted to stay.''
The Chiefs, 13-3 in the regular season and seeded second in the A.F.C. playoffs, will play host to a second-round playoff game on Jan. 11.
Vermeil took the Philadelphia Eagles to the Super Bowl after the 1980 season and guided the Rams to the N.F.L. championship following the 1999 season; he could be the first coach to take three different teams to the Super Bowl. (AP)
PRO FOOTBALL
