THE American mutual fund industry will have its 80th birthday in a few months, but no one is much inclined to celebrate. And no wonder: the $7 trillion business, born with the formation of the Massachusetts Investment Trust in Boston in March 1924, is slogging through the worst scandal in its long history.
So far, some of the biggest, oldest and proudest names in the industry -- MFS, founder of that first fund; Putnam Investments; and the Janus Capital Group, among them -- are facing lawsuits or investigations, and no one is sure when the last muddy shoe will drop.
The technical details may seem a bit arcane to modern investors who can conjure up stock quotes at 2 a.m. on their BlackBerries. Under laws adopted in an era of slower paperwork and more primitive technology, funds are priced once a day, typically at 4 p.m., and all orders received before the deadline are filled at that price. Now, with funds investing globally and market-moving news breaking on a 24-hour cycle, this quaint practice can leave funds with prices that are out-of-date by the legal cutoff.
Exploiting those stale prices by quickly buying shares and cashing out when prices adjust is called market timing. While not illegal, it diverts profits that fairly belong to long-term investors, and it violates the bylaws of many of the funds accused of allowing big hedge fund customers, or their own executives, to do it. Submitting orders after the deadline but getting them filled at the deadline price is called late trading, and it is illegal -- although several big hedge funds have been allowed to place late trades as part of their profitable forays into public mutual funds.
To those steeped in the fund industry's traditions, saying the scandal is about late trading and market timing is like saying the scandal at Enron is about how the books were kept. In each case, they say, the larger sin was that trusted, powerful people betrayed those who trusted them in exchange for more money or more power. And it is the betrayal of the trusting middle-class American investors that seemed to weigh most heavily on the minds of the seven industry leaders and former industry regulators who were asked for advice on how regulators, the industry and fund customers should best navigate through this quagmire.
''I was outraged,'' said Charles R. Schwab, one giant of the business. ''I just couldn't quite believe that a fund company would be in cahoots with hedge funds to allow them to use portfolio information to game their funds.'' Schwab has dropped many funds involved in the scandal from its ''Mutual Fund Select'' list of recommended funds, company executives say.
To Michael F. Price, who attained near-legend status through his management of the Mutual Shares funds, the industry's culture has been hijacked by ''the marketing types,'' outsiders who lack the genetic code required to manage money for other people.
Or as Kathryn B. McGrath, a lawyer and former fund regulator, put it: ''In the scramble to survive and make money, some people in the industry forgot about that fundamental principle: It's the shareholders' money, stupid.''
In a series of interviews, they and others offered seasoned advice about the practical ways that regulators, industry executives and investors could address the scandal, which has already led to the suspension of several fund company employees, including three at Franklin Resources, the current owner of the funds that were once run by Mr. Price and another interview participant, Sir John Templeton.
But several said the only real cure would be a profound change in the industry's culture. ''When you're managing money for your mother, you don't go around looking for opinions from lawyers on legal ways to skim,'' said David Silver, a former regulator who was president of the industry's trade group, the Investment Company Institute, from 1977 until 1991. ''That's what it means to be a fiduciary.''
The comments that follow are excerpted from the conversations, which took place in the last half of December.
CHARLES R. SCHWAB founded the financial services firm that bears his name in 1971, and his reaction to the scandal, he said, was outrage.
''These were infractions that really went over the line. I just couldn't quite believe that a fund company would be in cahoots with hedge funds to allow them to use portfolio information to game their funds. Why? I guess the answer is, there was money to be made, and there were no controls. But I just said, 'Oh my goodness -- in a $7 trillion industry.' The good news is: this is not as big or as bad as, say, the savings and loan debacle was. But it goes to the heart of the reputation and integrity of the industry, and we've got to bring those back into line.
''I think there ought to be the Modernization Act of 2004 with respect to mutual funds. We're operating under the Investment Company Act of 1940, and that was some 64 years ago. There are lots of piecemeal things going on, putting a finger into the dike here and there. But we've just got to clean up the complete legislative act. It's been piecemealed along for 60 years now, and it's time to take a step forward and move into the new century.
''Also, under the auspices of the I.C.I., the industry should have some sort of conference where they would get together and come up with a working paper that the industry could buy into.''
Mr. Schwab also questioned the role of hedge funds. ''They have induced mutual funds and brokers to do certain things here that were really outrageous,'' he said. ''Where did they lose their moral compass on this thing? It just was, for me, so unseemly. I think they definitely need to be a part of the modernization I'm thinking about.''
Finally, Mr. Schwab advised investors to diversify. And if they are in a tainted fund? ''I would definitely take the opportunity to redeem those shares and find a mutual fund group that I have some trust in. In fact, I have done that with some mutual funds in some of my I.R.A. accounts.'' ''Every company's going to have an occasional issue or a problem, but where they had a continuous issue of somebody taking advantage of their own fund, that really crosses way over the line.''
MICHAEL F. PRICE, now a private investor, ran the Mutual Shares fund group from 1988 until 1998, two years after he sold it to Franklin Resources.
''When I got into the business in the mid-1970's, you couldn't give mutual funds away. But as the market got better after a terrible bear market, funds did better. Small boutiques sold out to the big distribution companies. Soon the professional managers, the marketing types, were running the show, guys who succeed based on the amount of assets under management and the growth in those assets, rather than from the performance of the money -- which is backward. With the huge bucks at stake, you had the professional marketers taking over.
''Most funds are very mediocre. They're lousy stock pickers who tend to run in a herd and who really got caught with their pants down in 2001 and 2002. But the public has kind of been educated by these marketing and distribution guys in the wrong way. The regulators can help on the advertising side, big time.''
He urged regulators to eliminate hidden marketing fees, but cautioned against cutting fees so deeply that funds cannot reward good stock pickers. ''The operative theme should be: 'If our funds grow because of good performance, our money managers get paid' -- not: 'if our funds grow because of good distribution, our distributors get paid.' The industry will go broke if they don't deliver good performance over long periods of time. And they better start turning that around, soon.
''I personally think the number of mutual funds in the country should shrink by at least a third or a half. Funds under $100 million should be merged together to cut overhead. Those with bad performance? Close 'em up! Nobody should own that stuff -- they should vanish. There should be Darwinism, survival of the fittest.
''Investors have to be re-educated. These are your life savings. Pick up the newspaper, the financial magazines, go to the library, do some homework and figure out -- on the no-load or the very low-load side -- which had the best performance in bear markets and the lowest fees, and which have the boards that look like they represent your interests.
''Directors need to have independence, they need to have backbones. You know what the shocking thing to me is? That nobody has had a contract canceled by a board of directors. Even where a chairman was messing around with the fund, the board didn't cancel the contract. What does it take to get fired in this business?''
SIR JOHN TEMPLETON, the 91-year-old retired founder of the Templeton Funds, now owned by Franklin Resources, has lived a lot of the mutual fund industry's history firsthand. While he confesses that he has not followed the current scandal closely, he has strong views on the need to preserve the credibility of mutual funds for the next generation.
''I feel so strongly about the benefits of mutual funds. The whole world, throughout hundreds of years, has suffered from the fact that only a few people were owners. Mutual funds provide the most practical way for over half of all the families on earth to become participants in the ownership of businesses.
''I think the damage done by this scandal will be temporary. It is very unlikely that people will turn away from the industry because of this. I can't think of an alternative that is anywhere near as open and honest. The biggest alternative for centuries has been real estate. But the amount of secrecy and the amount of uncertainty and the amount of doubt about values is many times more in real estate than it is in stocks and bonds, in mutual funds.
''So there are no alternatives that come anywhere near what mutual funds are providing. If you can think of one, let me know -- I'm always searching for new investments.''
DAVID SILVER, as a young regulator, helped negotiate the rule that sets the 4 p.m. deadline for fund pricing -- a rule he now agrees is obsolete. Having served as president of the Investment Company Institute during the fund industry's most robust period, he is disturbed by the changes in the industry culture that he says the scandal has brought to light.
''The companies affected so far roughly fall into two groups: One is relatively new entrants into the business who simply just never had, or never developed, a fiduciary culture. The second group is old-line fund groups that were acquired by other organizations that were not primarily in the American mutual fund business. As a result, there clearly has been a breakdown in the fiduciary culture traditionally associated with money management. If you're managing money for your mother, you don't go around looking for opinions from lawyers about legal ways to skim. That's what it means to be a fiduciary.
''We need much more significant standards for people who run mutual funds. You and I can form a mutual fund tomorrow as long as we have $100,000. And when a mutual fund company is acquired by an entity that is not regulated by the S.E.C., the commission ought to contact the acquiring organization and as politely as possible inform the senior management that they've acquired an institution with fiduciary responsibility, just to put them on notice.
''You also have to look back at the S.E.C. to wonder why the market-timing problem hasn't been addressed. The funds were trying to deal with the problem by adding various restrictions, and they were sued numerous times over those steps. In none of those cases, so far as I know, did the S.E.C. intervene with an amicus brief. When you have an area of ambiguity, and people not thinking in terms of their fiduciary responsibility, you get a recipe for trouble. And there is a serious problem of internal regulation at the S.E.C. It's so chopped up that nobody takes an integrated look at risks across industry borders.
''For the industry, my message would be transparency, transparency, transparency. There is nothing to lose from even more disclosure on the impact of fees and charges on investors. To the extent that the industry doesn't live in a goldfish bowl already, it should voluntarily climb into the goldfish bowl.
''For investors, my advice would be to start reading those annual reports you're getting, but don't race for the door. This scandal should make investors very angry -- if you go to a dinner party with some of your best friends and you get home and find your pocket has been picked of $25, you're going to be angry. But maybe you don't break off a good relationship with a friend you've had since high school on the basis of that one incident.''
DAVID S. RUDER, who teaches law at Northwestern University, was chairman of the S.E.C. during the 1987 market crash. He is also a founder of the nonprofit Mutual Fund Directors Forum, which is reviewing fund industry practices at the request of the S.E.C. chairman, William H. Donaldson. One of Mr. Ruder's targets for change is the industry's ''soft-dollar'' practices, by which a fund's portfolio trades are steered to brokers who provide research or other helpful services to the fund's manager.
''It is one of the areas in which the industry may seem to be grasping. The public wants to have a sense that the industry has not tried to siphon off dollars from the funds on the side, and soft-dollar practices sort of make you feel queasy when you look at what's going on. Both the S.E.C. and the Investment Company Institute are recognizing that these practices probably ought to stop.
''The S.E.C. has also indicated its willingness to look at proposals requiring that three-fourths of the fund directors and the chairman of each board be independent. I actually favor each of those steps. By having three-quarters of the board be independent and by having an independent chairman of the fund, you will provide better avenues for the directors to assert their monitoring responsibilities over the fund advisers.
''But I would vigorously resist any suggestion that the government should put limits on fees or attempt to somehow set them. The far better approach would be to insist that the directors exercise their fiduciary obligations, and that there be full disclosure by the advisers to the fund directors about factors that might enter into the fees. And I do not believe that state regulators ought to be constructing rules for the future -- that is the proper realm of the S.E.C., which has much greater expertise in the area.
''The industry needs to emphasize honesty and integrity as a part of its fundamental obligations, to say 'We recognize our obligations to shareholders, and those include an obligation to be honest and act with integrity in all of our ways.' And that, in individual cases, would result in very strong compliance programs and efforts to advertise them.
''I think the stale-pricing phenomenon is going to disappear as the funds become more able to deal with market timing and valuation problems.
''But I would hesitate to advise an investor in a fund that has been involved in the scandal to pull out of that fund. There may be substantial costs which an investor might face, penalties in terms of early redemption fees or sales charges when buying new shares.''
RICHARD C. BREEDEN, who was chairman of the S.E.C. from 1989 to 1993 and is now overseeing the reorganization of WorldCom, which expects to come out of bankruptcy protection early next year as MCI, deplores the breakdown in executive-suite morality.
''The most tragic cases among the fund scandals were the ones that had the involvement of senior officials of the funds,'' he said. ''It's not a low-level clerk somewhere, a bad apple that can happen to anyone. Violations seem to have been committed or tolerated by people at the very highest level. And that suggests that the fund industry has lost its way. If someone comes to you and asks for the right to engage in trading that is blatantly illegal, it should not take more than a nanosecond to say no.
''When you're running a business whose sole product is serving as a trusted fiduciary for other people's money, using honesty and integrity in how you deal with the money should be rule No.1. Each fund complex should use this as the opportunity to re-examine their practices, their codes of conduct, their ethical standards, the training of their employees and the sensitivity of their boards to the issue of maintaining faith with their investors.
''But we should be very cautious before setting out to legislate. This [the Investment Company Act of 1940] is an act that has worked remarkably well for more than a half century. I'm not saying that modernization of the act isn't appropriate -- I think it is. But we need to take time to study those issues carefully and not run out and pass a law that will make us feel that we've done something, but that doesn't address some of the bigger issues. My recommendation is not a red light, it's just a big yellow light -- let's aim before we shoot.
''We also need better disclosure in the whole area. I think mutual fund prospectuses, for the most part, read like gobbledygook. It takes someone between Sherlock Holmes and the National Security Agency to figure out what the fees that are being charged actually are. And that should be a big, graphically highlighted number right in the middle of the cover page. I mean, for goodness sakes, when a car dealer wants to sell you a car, they have to put the price on the window of the car so the customer strolling around the lot is able to see it.
''As for investors, where particular fund complexes had repeated regulatory problems and the senior leadership of the fund is involved -- a minority of the cases so far -- investors should think about moving their money. You're not a serf on the plantation. Get up and leave.''
KATHRYN B. McGRATH, now a partner with Crowell &amp; Moring in Washington, is also convinced that the scandal is rooted in a serious shift in the industry's culture and must be repaired.
''In the boom, when a lot of sins were hidden by share prices going up, and then when the market fell, in the scramble to continue to survive and make money, some people in the fund industry forgot about that fundamental principle: 'It's the shareholders' money, stupid. It's not your money.' Many people were sort of new to the business and were not accustomed to the tradition of having funds run by people who woke up in the morning and thought of themselves, first and foremost, as money managers. Sales came much more to the forefront. There were more people at the forefront of the business who came from cultures that were very different.
''Also, during the boom, some of the portfolio managers got antsy and said, 'We don't make enough money doing this. We can't try all these marvy, peachy-keen techniques that we think up, so we want to be able to manage hedge funds, and not just these old, staid, isn't-this-boring mutual funds.' And out of fear of losing their more talented managers -- and because they wanted to make money -- the fund advisers started introducing hedge funds. They did that in a big fat hurry; they didn't sit down and think through the conflicts of interest this was going to present and put things in place to make sure that the conflicts of interest didn't run amok. And that led them all into trouble.
''One of the problems is that more rules don't necessarily make for better results. Each new rule proposal, each legislative proposal standing alone, seems to have a good idea behind it. But I worry that the cumulative effect is going to be awfully expensive, and most of that will be passed on to the individual shareholders. And I worry that it's going to impair the ability of people in the business to sit back and think about whether what they're doing is right.
''I think the fund companies that are going to be the most successful going forward are the ones that work from the very top to hammer it into every employee's head that 'Our duty is looking out for our shareholders. Their interests come first, and if you have to ask about some ethical issue, the answer is no.'''
