A huge throng marched through this city's avenues on Thursday to demand free elections.
It was the largest demonstration here since a big protest in July forced the government to postpone and later withdraw a proposal for stringent internal security laws.
While the crowd on Thursday did not match the half-million people who swamped the streets on July 1, a two-mile-long procession of protesters of all ages did make the walk from a large city park dotted with palm trees to the main government offices.
Demonstrators called for the government to allow the public to elect the next chief executive and the entire Legislature in this autonomous Chinese territory.
Tung Chee-hwa, the current chief executive, was re-elected without opposition in 2002 by an 800-member Election Committee loyal to Beijing. Various business and professional groups, along with the Election Committee, also select 36 of the 60 members of the Legislature, while the public elects the rest.
Richard Tsoi, the spokesman for the coalition of labor unions and nonprofit groups that organized the protest, said 100,000 people had taken part. A police spokeswoman said Thursday night that the number of people waiting in the park to begin marching had peaked at 37,000.
Mr. Tung's administration issued a statement Thursday evening saying ''many citizens'' had taken part in the procession.
''We will listen carefully to their aspirations,'' the statement said.
The statement said that the government had an obligation to pursue democratic development under the Basic Law, the constitution for Hong Kong that Britain and China negotiated before Britain handed over the territory to China in 1997. But the government also noted that, ''Hong Kong is a pluralistic society, and there are differing views on the pace of constitutional development.''
Many business leaders oppose further democracy, contending that the public does not understand the importance and complexity of creating an environment conducive to investment. Mr. Tung has said he will begin studying constitutional reforms this year.
The demonstrators called for universal suffrage in elections for Mr. Tung's successor in 2007 and for the elections for the Legislature in 2008.
Through state-run newspapers, Beijing has signaled its uneasiness with allowing greater democracy, particularly as long as candidates hostile to the Communist Party continue to do well in elections here.
Pro-democracy candidates mostly routed pro-Beijing candidates in elections on Nov. 23 for 400 seats on various local councils here. That led many here to call for Mr. Tung not to exercise his right, granted by Beijing six years ago, to appoint up to 102 more people to the councils.
But Mr. Tung went ahead on Saturday and appointed 102 council members, mostly business executives not active in democratic causes.
Organizers of the march on Thursday had predicted that this decision would draw more people to the event, and some marchers said in interviews that the appointments had indeed made a difference in their decision to take part.
''If we are a democracy then why are there appointments?'' asked Christine Chung, a 49-year-old nurse who said she had waited for more than three hours in the park for her turn to march. ''They're not elected by the people.''
Hong Kong's economy has rebounded from a deep recession last spring, during an outbreak of SARS, to rapid growth this winter. But unemployment remains high, at 7.5 percent, and Hong Kong still has a minimal social safety net for those who lose their jobs.
