Getting The Picture
Great artworks are often moving. And tomorrow several students will show how painting and sculpture have moved them to, well, move.
Their creations are part of ''Dances by Very Young Choreographers,'' an annual program at Dance Theater Workshop for budding visionaries, ages 8 to 16.
Birdy Sahagian, 14, worked with Rodin's sculpture ''The Thinker.'' Appropriately, the dance features her own thoughts. ''She took a tape recorder and recorded a narrative about making a dance,'' said Ellen Robbins, a choreographer and teacher who directs the program. Another teenager, Ming Lin, centers her choreography on Giuseppe Arcimboldo's ''Summer,'' a 16th-century painting of a man whose face is made up of vegetables. The results are as minimalist as the art is not.
''Procession,'' by Ariane Rockoff-Kirk, 14, is inspired by a collage by William Kentridge, who works with silhouette forms. ''She has made a parade of people all in black and puffed out with pillows,'' Ms. Robbins said, ''so they're misshapen like shadows.''
The other girls have themes ranging from spiders (Livia Whitermore's ''8 Legs'') to martial arts (Maia Sage Ermansons's ''Sword and the Chrysanthemum'') to classroom misbehavior (Fiona Flynn Evans's ''School Girl'').
The young choreographers, who also include Annarose Lipkin, Hannah Burnette and Charlotte Richman, have contributed to Ms. Robbins's own art-inspired dance, ''Walkaround Vermeer,'' which she developed with George Deem, an artist. While the dance, which portrays a day in Vermeer's studio, includes a re-enactment of ''Girl With a Pearl Earring,'' it was conceived years before Peter Webber's current film. Apparently Vermeer, who had many muses, is a powerful muse himself.
''Dances by Very Young Choreographers,'' tomorrow at 2 and 7 p.m. at the Bessie Schönberg Theater, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, (212) 924-0077. Tickets: $20; 19 and under, $10.
Follow That Star
Christmas may be over in ordinary households, but historically three gifts -- symbolic ones, that is -- remain to be opened. Those are the ones delivered by the Three Wise Men, whose journey to Bethlehem is celebrated by Christians on Epiphany, Jan. 6. Tomorrow the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine will honor the coming holiday with a gift of its own: ''Los Tres Reyes'' (''The Three Kings''), a bilingual pageant.
''All of the Christian Church celebrates Epiphany, but it's the Spanish tradition that's really focused on the three kings,'' explained Bishop Catherine S. Roskam, the Episcopal Suffragan of New York and the show's director. ''It's a great gift to us because it really brings us back to the 12 Days of Christmas.''
The pageant, also sponsored by the Episcopal Diocese of New York and the National Episcopal Church Center, combines the talents of Jeannine Otis, Elizabeth Swados and Lois Bohevesky (music and text) with those of the choreographers Edward Winslow and Jack Landrone. Two narrators, one speaking English and the other Spanish, will tell the story, which also includes high-energy action -- the Kidsensemble of New York and the children's company of the Dance Theater of Harlem are both involved -- and humor.
''The three kings have amusing obstacles that are expressed in dance and song on their way to the stable,'' Bishop Roskam said.
The star, the camels and the kings are the handiwork of the Hudson Vagabond Puppets. Each camel requires three children inside it, Bishop Roskam added, ''so we have the only six-legged camels in creation.''
The show is followed by a reception. No frankincense and myrhh, though -- just cookies and cider.
''Los Tres Reyes'' (''The Three Kings''), tomorrow at 1 p.m. at the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Morningside Heights. Free (seating is first come first served). Information: (914) 693-3848.
100 Years Young
How do you celebrate the birthday of someone who's ageless? The answer is, as often as possible. That's the approach of Random House Children's Books, which this year honors the centennial of an author who never seems to grow old: Dr. Seuss.
This weekend the publisher will begin the birthday bash at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, the first stop on its Seussentennial Imagination Tour. The festivities, led by the Irondale Ensemble Project, a New York City troupe, include an interactive play, workshops, goody bags and character appearances.
The show begins with a song written to the music of the ''William Tell'' Overture. ''It's the titles of the Seuss books, all 44, and no other lyrics,'' said Judith Haut, vice president and director of publicity at Random House Children's Books.
After that sizzling start, the show offers music, story vignettes and biographical glimpses of Theodor Seuss Geisel (a k a Dr. Seuss). ''He said it was as if he was always looking at the world through the wrong end of a telescope,'' Ms. Haut said.
The imagination workshops will encourage children to adopt a similarly creative perspective. ''The program ends with a Dr. Seuss challenge,'' Ms. Haut added. '' 'You name any Dr. Seuss book, and we'll perform it for you right now.' ''
The Seussentennial Imagination Tour, tomorrow and Sunday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m. at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, the Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, (212) 721-1223. Free with admission ($7; members, free), but tickets are required.
Family Fare
