HAVING survived a year of scandal in 2003, the New York Stock Exchange enters this year confronting significant challenges that could undermine its dominant market position.
Under the guidance of its interim chairman, John S. Reed, the exchange has managed in just over three months to move constructively beyond the turmoil that enveloped it over the huge compensation package of its former chairman, Richard A. Grasso. Mr. Reed, the retired co-chairman of Citigroup, has worked to restore the aura of trust that the exchange has historically enjoyed as the leading institution in the nation's financial markets.
The exchange now has a chief executive in place, John A. Thain, the former president of Goldman Sachs. His relative youth -- he is 48 -- and technological skills bring a new vigor to the institution as it addresses a variety of regulatory and structural hurdles. But, at the insistence of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the jobs of chairman and chief executive were separated, and a permanent chairman has not yet been named.
The exchange also has a revamped board, with a fresh slate of independent directors who have virtually no ties to the securities industry. The board will oversee the stock exchange's regulatory division.
While questions remain as to whether Mr. Reed and the exchange may file any legal claims against Mr. Grasso and the old board, the public outcry over Mr. Grasso's $139.5 million compensation package has largely died down.
Regulators, for the time being, at least, seem reassured by the progress. The S.E.C. has signed off on Mr. Reed's new structure, endorsing his stated intent to keep the Big Board's self-regulatory function intact.
Still, this year, the commission will contemplate potential changes in market structure that could hurt the Big Board's dominant market position. And some market experts wonder if the deep wounds suffered by the exchange in the Grasso affair will weaken the institution, making it more susceptible to competitive challenges.
''I think the exchange is a lot more vulnerable, and its credibility has been challenged,'' said Arthur Levitt, the former chairman of the S.E.C.
''The N.Y.S.E. has long been thought of as an icon of capitalism,'' he continued. ''A great deal has been lost through the Grasso matter and the floor trading scandals.''
Mr. Reed came in with a specific mandate: to overhaul the exchange's creaky governance structure and to sever the web of insider relationships that led to Mr. Grasso's princely pay.
At the same time, Mr. Reed was charged with burnishing the exchange's image, which had already been tarnished by specialists who came under regulatory scrutiny after accusations that they had abused their trading privileges.
MANY on Wall Street applaud Mr. Reed's recent changes, but a number of critics say that by not appointing any investor representatives to the board -- although they are represented on the exchange's executive panel -- Mr. Reed has not gone as far as he might to restore investor confidence.
''Structurally, he has come a long way,'' said Charles M. Elson, director of the University of Delaware business college's Weinberg Center for Corporate Governance. ''But he needs to have institutional investor representatives on the primary board because they were the most harmed by the exchange violations. Public confidence is critical for the exchange, because if investors believe the exchange is rigged, they will view the market as rigged as well.''
In addition to polishing the exchange's public image, Mr. Reed must persuade federal regulators that the Big Board's 211-year-old model based on the twin pillars of self-regulation and its open-outcry trading system is still appropriate in today's market environment, with its increased emphasis on electronic trading and heightened regulation.
For almost 10 years, the exchange, which controls 80 percent of trading in its listed stocks, has faced a wave of electronic competitors called electronic communication networks, or E.C.N.'s.
These exchanges, led by Archipelago, the largest, use computers to facilitate all trades, and they assert that their system is faster and superior to that of the Big Board, which relies on its network of specialist traders to conduct mini-auctions between buyers and sellers to get the best possible price for investors.
As the furor built over Mr. Grasso's pay and the regulators' accusations that some exchange specialists traded ahead of customers, executives from the electronic networks have argued that the Big Board's dominant market share was artificially high because of restrictions preventing electronic networks from attracting the liquidity needed to compete with the exchange.
''We have a competitive alternative,'' said Gerald D. Putnam, the chief executive of Archipelago. ''The fact that the N.Y.S.E. dominates 85 percent of I.B.M. trading is not healthy.''
The electronic networks say that the only way they could attract that kind of market share would be for the S.E.C. to amend the trade-through rule, which requires that a market order be executed on the exchange that offers the best possible price, regardless of how long that process may take.
Without that requirement, exchanges like Archipelago say, their model, based as it is on a speedy electronic process, would allow trading to become more efficient, and thus they could chip away at the Big Board's market position.
The exchange's defenders argue that liquidity begets liquidity: investors choose to trade on the Big Board because that is where it is easiest to execute large trades at the best possible prices.
It is also questionable whether the S.E.C. will be eager to tinker with a rule intended to protect the small investor.
''The trade-through rule protects investors, so I don't think that the S.E.C. will jettison 'best-execution' altogether,'' said William C. Freund, a former economist at the exchange and a securities professor at Pace University.
''People forget, too, that the N.Y.S.E. has been investing $200 million a year in technology for years now,'' he said. The aim of these investments has been to enhance the exchange's own electronic trading capabilities.
Still, the electronic networks claim that their model results in faster trades, which are more beneficial to the investors who say they prefer speed over the best possible price.
And, while Mr. Thain presided over many of Goldman's investments in the electronic marketplaces that are now emphasizing speedy executions, as incoming chief executive of the exchange he said, ''We have to be careful about moving from anything that does not guarantee best price.''
Other issues remain for the exchange to address. Mr. Reed and the board must still appoint a nonexecutive chairman, who will assume the lead director position on the board and be responsible for all regulatory and compensation matters. Mr. Reed says that he and Mr. Thain are considering four candidates.
And they must decide on a legal strategy with regard to Mr. Grasso.
But, as Mr. Reed looks at what he has accomplished since returning from retirement on an island off the coast of France three months ago, he seems content.
''I'm happy I came,'' he said in an interview in mid-December. ''And I hope that when I look in a mirror, I can say that I did a good job.''
