Read the dictionary definition of ''camp,'' and you might think it is something that can be easily manufactured. ''Banality, mediocrity, artifice, ostentation, etc. so extreme as to have a perversely sophisticated appeal,'' says Webster's New World. Take something highbrow, stir in something lowbrow, have hit.
But ''Tales From the Manhattan Woods,'' a collision of great voices and lame jokes now at the Wings Theater in Greenwich Village, shows that creating campy theater, the kind that succeeds by virtue of its artful trashiness, is not so easy after all. This production meets the dictionary definition: the music of ''Die Fledermaus,'' the Johann Strauss Jr. opera, provides the sophistication, and Frederick Stroppel's book and lyrics are aggressively banal. But the undefinable spark needed to fuse the two into something transcendently gauche isn't there.
Mr. Stroppel has taken the ''Fledermaus'' characters and basic story and transplanted them to modern-day New York. Eisenstein, the philandering, jail-bound husband of the tale, is here a real-estate tycoon who is headed to the pokey for slugging a photographer. Rosalinda, his wife, is, as in the original, still tempted to dally with her old flame, Alfredo, but the crucial party invitation that sets events in motion arrives by fax. Adele, the Eisensteins' maid, thinks at one point that she is auditioning for a film. And so on.
It's a heavy-handed approach to modernizing an already frivolous plot, made even heavier by the ladling on of pop-culture references by the dozen. Dr. Phil, Johnnie Cochran, Sean Penn, Al Sharpton, Hooters and pretty much anything or anyone else you can think of get mentioned, as do assorted bits of New York geography.
This might all still work if delivered with the kind of shameless gusto seen in a good ''Rocky Horror'' production, but instead self-consciousness seemed to reign, at least with Cast No. 2. (The show is triple cast.) Only Stephen Phebus, providing the piano accompaniment, looked truly comfortable; everyone else had the ''This is us letting our hair down'' stiffness of a Kennedy Center Gala.
All that said, there is fine singing to be heard in this show, and at close quarters: the theater seats about 60. The principal performers all have legitimate opera voices and extensive credentials. Sarah Miller as Rosalinda and Shawna Stone as Adele were especially fine.
It's too bad the script didn't let them have more fun by making fun of themselves. The vast majority of the humor in ''Tales From the Manhattan Woods'' is of the let's-mock-yokels variety: ''Wouldn't it be hilarious if we took that Strauss music and stuck a lyric to it that referred to Target stores?'' Only occasionally does the show stop laughing at people who don't go to opera and engage in the far more sophisticated science of self-deprecation.
Mr. Phebus provides a moment of this right at the start with his disrespectful treatment of the overture, and there are a few funny knowing winks later. (A prison guard, overhearing Alfredo singing his head off, mutters, ''These people come to this country -- you'd think they'd learn to sing in English.'') Mostly, though, there is a sense that modernizing this comic opera somehow made it less comical.
TALES FROM THE MANHATTAN WOODS
Book and lyrics by Frederick Stroppel; music by Johann Strauss Jr.; an adaptaion of ''Die Fledermaus;'' directed by Judith Fredricks; musical director, Stephen Phebus; assistant director, Lorene Phillips; production manager, James Murphy; set and property design, Tom Claypool; costume concept, Brad Scoggins and Michele Cuccia; lighting design, Cindy Shumsey; hair and makeup, Amethyst Garden; assistant lighting design, Supreet Kesar. Presented by Writer's Stage, Opera New York and William Holt. At the Wings Theater, 154 Christopher Street. West Village.
WITH: Sarah Miller (Rosalinda), Jeffrey Reynolds (Eisenstein), Shawna Stone (Adele), David Jasper (Alfredo), Gideon Dabi (Falk), Judith Fredricks (Orlofsky), Jay Gaussoin (Falk), Lorene Phillips (Blintz), Jacqueline Carnahan (Sally), Karl Kahofer (Stosh) and Donal Cooke (Ivan).
THEATER REVIEW
