Since, quite literally, the moment he took office, City Comptroller William C. Thompson Jr. has been touted as a possible candidate for mayor. Of course it was his father, who swore him in, who did the touting.
''So Billy,'' his father, William C. Thompson, a retired judge, told him during his swearing-in on Jan. 1, 2002, ''if you do your usual good job, if you listen to your father and if God spares my life, eight years from now, I want to be back up here.''
Now the question in political circles is whether Mr. Thompson will wait that long, when term limits will force him to step down as comptroller. Mr. Thompson, a Democrat, said in a recent interview that Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's low poll numbers and the overwhelming defeat of the mayor's proposal to ban party primaries might induce him to challenge Mr. Bloomberg after serving only one term as comptroller.
''I'm looking at 2005,'' Mr. Thompson said, adding that he will make up his mind in the fall based in large part on how Mr. Bloomberg, a Republican, is viewed. ''Right now what people are saying is they are not connecting with the mayor.''
Whether Mr. Thompson decides to run for mayor, instead of facing what analysts say would likely be an easy campaign to be re-elected comptroller, depends largely on three factors: whether Mr. Bloomberg's popularity rebounds, the strength of the other Democrats who enter the race and his own performance as comptroller.
The comptroller is the city's chief fiscal officer -- a low-on-glamour, green-eyeshade post whose power is usually exercised behind the scenes. But as Mr. Thompson reaches the middle of his term, there are signs that he is raising his political profile.
Mr. Thompson had a largely low-key first year in office, punctuated by a few big moments, such as when he exposed last-minute changes that Rudolph W. Giuliani's mayoral administration made to the leases of Yankee and Shea Stadiums, giving the teams more favorable terms. In another early report, his office argued that the terrorist attack of Sept. 11, 2001, cost the city up to $95 billion.
But last year he took more aggressive stands on several fronts. He joined State Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi in accusing the Metropolitan Transportation Authority of using misleading data to justify its bus and subway fare increases. Then he accused Mayor Bloomberg of engaging in ''borough warfare'' by proposing a budget that would have cut garbage collection outside of Manhattan. And most recently, he criticized one of Mayor Bloomberg's signature deals, the one making Snapple the official drink of New York City schools and other city buildings. He said the selection process was tainted by potential conflicts of interest.
Throughout it all, Mr. Thompson and Mr. Bloomberg have taken pains to appear civil, if not friendly, in public. The mayor calls the comptroller Billy, and the comptroller calls the mayor Mike. The two men sometimes appear together, as they did last fall to announce changes in the Department of Homeless Services' housing policies that resulted in part from an audit by the comptroller's office. And in October, Mr. Bloomberg took Mr. Thompson to Miami to watch the Yankees play in the World Series.
''I think there's always going to be some tension between City Hall and the comptroller's office,'' Mr. Thompson said in an interview in his office on the fifth floor of the Municipal Building. ''At the very least, we've tried not to cheap-shot people.''
In some respects Mr. Thompson, 50, is the un-Bloomberg -- in ways that could both help and hurt his candidacy should he decide to take on the mayor.
While Mr. Bloomberg, a liberal Republican, tried to neuter the city's political parties with his call for nonpartisan elections, Mr. Thompson is a son of the Brooklyn Democratic Party (his father was an influential party leader).
Mr. Bloomberg started his life in politics at the top, winning the mayoralty after campaigning as a business executive and political outsider not beholden to anybody. Mr. Thompson, by contrast, has long toiled in the vineyards of New York City politics. At 25 he was chief of staff to Frederick W. Richmond, a Brooklyn congressman; he went on to become a deputy to Howard Golden, the Brooklyn borough president, and later became president of the old Board of Education.
Those long years of paying political dues give Mr. Thompson a natural base of support, but also leave him vulnerable to charges that he is too close to the political clubhouse at a moment when the Brooklyn Democratic machine is facing corruption allegations and the indictment of its leader, Assemblyman Clarence Norman Jr.
Several newspapers have run articles pointing out that Mr. Thompson has hired the spouses of Representatives Jerrold Nadler and Nydia M. Velázquez, among other politically connected appointees. Mr. Thompson bristles at suggestions that they were patronage hires, saying they all earned their positions.
''People like to focus on a few people and say, 'Oh, political person!' ''he said. ''This is a talented group of people.''
Mr. Thompson is generally well liked by fellow government officials, and he has won praise from many quarters. John J. Hallacy, the managing director in charge of municipal research at Merrill Lynch, said, ''He clearly has a good grasp on the issues, and is a good keeper of the city's funds and accounts.''
Elizabeth Holtzman, a former comptroller, praised Mr. Thompson for raising questions about the Snapple deal and the mayor's plan, which was canceled, to scale back trash collection in some neighborhoods. ''I think he's picked his areas, and they are all very, in my opinion, legitimate, sensible areas for him to have raised issues about,'' she said.
Others, though, have questioned whether Mr. Thompson has been aggressive enough. ''I think he got off to a slow start,'' said Prof. Raymond D. Horton, the chairman of the management division at Columbia Business School. ''There are some huge operating agencies in this city that operate with less than complete efficiency. You should have a public voice talking about their productivity.''
While the comptroller's interactions with the mayor often reap the most attention, it is his less visible work that has a greater impact on the lives of New Yorkers.
As the investment adviser to the city's five pension funds, Mr. Thompson must try to steer them out of a period of heavy losses caused by a combination of recent stock market declines and the burden of having to pay more generous benefits to retirees, thanks to a law passed in Albany. With the combined value of the funds down to $74 billion in June from $105.6 billion in 2000, Mr. Thompson said that he is moving to diversify investments so they will be a little less susceptible to the violent swings of the market.
Even more arcane decisions he makes can save or cost the city millions. Mr. Thompson relaxed several policies of his predecessor, Mr. Hevesi, to give the city more flexibility in closing its budget deficits. Mr. Thompson ruled that public debt can be refinanced even if it does not show savings in every future year, as long as it saves money over all. And he decided to allow the city to refinance its debt as long as doing so saves the city at least 3 percent of the overall cost, down from Mr. Hevesi's rule that it save at least 5 percent. ''It's more the norm,'' Mr. Thompson said.
Mr. Thompson, whose budget has been reduced by roughly $6 million since he took office, to $52.8 million, has had to cut personnel and rearrange the office. His total headcount has fallen to 724 from 788.
The comptroller's audit division took a big hit, dropping to 170 people from 193. His external relations department, meanwhile, which includes people who deal with the news media and do community outreach, grew to 26 from 24.
With fewer people in the audit department, the number of completed audits dropped to 109 last year, down from 126 the previous year and 157 the year before that. But Mr. Thompson said that his audits have identified more savings than those of prior years.
Unlike Mr. Bloomberg, who uses his personal fortune to bankroll his political campaigns, Mr. Thompson must raise money for his races. As of the last filing, in July, he had just over a million dollars in the bank for a campaign for an undeclared office in 2005. That money includes more than $15,000 in contributions from members of companies that are paid by the city to advise the pension funds on their investments.
Mr. Thompson said the contributions had nothing to do with the choice of investment firms to advise the pension funds. ''The people on our pension side have no clue as to who contributes,'' he said.
It has not been easy in recent years for city comptrollers to make the transition to Gracie Mansion. The last comptroller to do so, Abraham D. Beame, had a tough time of it, taking office for one troubled term just as the city slid to near-bankruptcy. Since then two other city comptrollers, Harrison J. Goldin and Mr. Hevesi, have run for mayor: both wound up finishing fourth in their Democratic primaries.
Quite a few Democrats are already mulling mayoral runs in 2005. Fernando Ferrer, the former Bronx borough president who has run unsuccessfully twice, recently formed an exploratory committee. Gifford Miller, the City Council speaker, may be officially undecided, but an aide seemed to let the cat out of the bag recently in a leaked e-mail message saying that ''the speaker is preparing to make a run for mayor in 2005.'' Others, including Assemblyman Brian M. McLaughlin of Queens and Representative Anthony D. Weiner of Queens and Brooklyn, are testing the waters. All come from different streams off a mainstream Democratic base but would be competing for virtually the same contributors and voters.
So giving up a safe shot at re-election could be risky. Then again, given that Mr. Thompson would be forced out of the comptroller's office after a second term because of term limits, he would risk missing his chance to run as an elected official should a challenger beat Mayor Bloomberg in 2005.
Mr. Thompson is beginning to sound like a candidate when he talks about the mayor.
''The mayor is not just the job of being the C.E.O. of the city,'' he said. ''It's the job of being the leader of the city. It is on an emotional level at times. At times it's, 'I understand your problems.' It's kind of being the spokesperson for the city. But it is moving the people to a vision: what are we going to be? And I think, in the end, he needs to do that. If he doesn't, then I think that in 2005 someone will.''
