The Bush administration has proposed to Iran that it may be willing to send a high-level delegation for earthquake relief, even while President Bush cautioned that Tehran must take several major steps before he is ready to improve relations.
Speaking in Falfurrias, Tex., at the end of a hunting outing, Mr. Bush said that while he welcomed signs of warmer dealings with Iran in recent weeks, the country must still rid itself of terrorists and nuclear weapons programs and open its political system before he will be ready to improve relations with Tehran.
An administration official in Washington said that the idea of sending a relief delegation -- possibly headed by Senator Elizabeth Dole, Republican of North Carolina -- had been discussed within the administration in recent days but that no final conclusion had been reached as to whether it was practical or even advisable. He said Iran had not responded to the suggestion.
''This is all at a very preliminary stage,'' the official added. ''It's been discussed and looked at, but it is a complicated undertaking. Nobody has said yes to this. There has not been a green light from either side.''
Sending a high-level delegation to Iran would be seen as another in a series of conciliatory gestures by the United States toward Iran in the last couple months. These have included statements by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and others, starting in October, that the administration was open to the possibility of resuming a direct dialogue with Iranian officials.
Direct talks with Iran were suspended in May after a series of bombings in Saudi Arabia were traced by American intelligence officials to groups operating in Iran.
Mr. Bush's comments on Iran to reporters, at the end of a holiday trip to Falfurrias, where he shot five quail while hunting with his father, were the first about Iran since the earthquake that Tehran says killed about 40,000 people. American relief workers were among the first to reach the stricken city of Bam, and the welcome they received from both victims and the government has raised the possibility of an end to a freeze that has lasted since the Iranian hostage crisis nearly a quarter century ago.
''What we're doing in Iran is we're showing the Iranian people the American people care, that we've got great compassion for human suffering,'' Mr. Bush said at a small airstrip near the private land where he hunted. He noted that on Wednesday he ordered a temporary easing of restrictions on trade with Iran to speed the flow of relief aid.
But that easing will last only 90 days, and Mr. Bush was careful on Thursday to restate the conditions Iran must meet before sanctions are permanently lifted. ''The Iranian government must listen to the voices of those who long for freedom, must turn over Al Qaeda that are in their custody and must abandon their nuclear weapons program,'' he said. ''In the meantime, we appreciate the fact the Iranian government is willing to allow our humanitarian aid flights into their country. And it's a good thing to do. It's right to take care of people when they hurt, and we're doing that.''
He also addressed for the first time, though only briefly, his administration's growing worries about the stability of the government of President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan, after two successive assassination attempts against him.
''Obviously terrorists are after him,'' Mr. Bush said, though he did not give voice to the suspicions of American intelligence agencies that Al Qaeda was behind the attacks. He said that in a telephone conversation with General Musharraf before Christmas, after the first assassination attempt but before the second, ''he sounded very confident that his security forces would be able to deal with the threat.''
Pressed on the question of whether Pakistan's nuclear arsenal was secure and would remain so no matter what became of General Musharraf, Mr. Bush clearly did not want to dwell on the issue.
''Yes, they are secure,'' he said, sounding more definitive than many of his national security aides.
Correction:  January 3, 2004, Saturday  Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Bush administration's suggestion that it might send a special delegation to help with Iran's earthquake relief omitted credit for the publication that first reported the development. It was The Washington Post. (Later developments are reported today on Page A1.)
