They can hear his voice through the walls sometimes. Other days, just footsteps.
When Ray Lewis is around the corner, they snap to attention like children hearing the rattle of their father's keys at the front door.
But it is in a huddle, with room for 11 men, that the Baltimore Ravens know they must squeeze Lewis's hand and run through mortar and brick with him.
''You don't want to fail,'' Gary Baxter, a third-year Ravens cornerback, said here Wednesday, ''and then have to come back to the huddle and look at your leader.''
No other player in the National Football League is talked about in this way, because no other player is like Lewis, who at 28 has become the soul of a defense, a franchise and a city.
In eight seasons in Baltimore, Lewis has emerged as one of the greatest players in the history of the N.F.L., a ferocious linebacker who was named this week as the league's defensive player of the year for the second time. (Only Lawrence Taylor, a three-time player of the year, has received the honor more.)
The roots of the Ravens' foray into the postseason -- they will be host to the Tennessee Titans on Saturday in an American Football Conference wild-card game -- can be traced directly to Lewis's broad shoulders.
Inside his 245-pound frame resides a man of electricity and emotion; a player who will yell himself hoarse before a game and gyrate all over the field without losing energy; a man who faced murder charges earlier in his career, and after the charges were dropped used the episode to further fuel his combustible play.
Lewis -- on the youngest team of the 12 in this postseason -- has reached such an iconic status that older players, coaches and executives listen intently when he speaks.
''I know when somebody is just running off at the mouth,'' Ozzie Newsome, the Ravens' vice president and general manager, said in his office here. ''When Ray speaks, it's genuine.''
Mike Singletary, the Hall of Fame linebacker and first-year Ravens linebackers coach, said: ''If you didn't know him, you'd look at him and go, 'Oh, give me a break.' He's doing this and he's doing that and you're thinking, 'Who has that much energy?' But that's him. His whole game is passion.''
Lewis's bounce leads to production. This season, according to the team's statistics, he amassed a career-high 225 total tackles -- 160 solo and 65 assists -- and a career-high 6 interceptions, a year after missing 11 games because of a shoulder injury.
His intensity has kept the Ravens defense afloat despite roster turnover and an influx of youth.
If opponents do not fear him, they still want to know his whereabouts on the field. Other players, before and since, have been faster or just as strong. But when Lewis hits an opponent, it sounds like a car backfiring. Over, around or through, he is going to find you.
''Can you imagine being a coordinator trying to draw up an offense against him?'' George Atkinson, the former Oakland Raiders defensive back, said in a telephone interview Wednesday. ''If you can intimidate your opponent, it slows them down. They think twice. He does a great job of that, and teams are intimidated off the bat because they see it on film and then they feel his energy on the field.''
Although the Titans have lost five straight games to the Ravens, no Tennessee player this week would admit to being intimidated by Lewis or Baltimore.
In fact, Eddie George, the Titans running back and friendly rival of Lewis's, noted that both he and the Ravens linebacker represent equally the heart and soul of their respective teams.
Lewis, however, pointed out some slippage in George's confrontational running style.
''By looking on film, he's not the same pounding Eddie George that he once was,'' Lewis said. ''Eddie George used to just pound people and make them not want to play football again.''
There is more than a touch of braggadocio in Lewis. In two news conferences since Baltimore clinched its first division title last Sunday, Lewis said he did not mean to brag. Still, his words crackled with cockiness.
He knows he is great and understands that his teammates gain confidence from him. Lewis is also beloved in this suburb and in nearby Baltimore, itself a town of underdogs overshadowed by the larger metropolitan points along the East Coast.
For Lewis, who can be seen on commercials for Reebok and EA Sports, his station as a pitchman is a turnaround for someone who, in January 2000, was charged with murder after a fight broke out at an Atlanta nightclub and two people were killed in the hours after Super Bowl XXXIV. The charges against Lewis were eventually dropped, and he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor count of obstruction of justice.
''I think the people of Baltimore believe he didn't have anything to do with that,'' Brian Canfield, 40, a consultant, said yesterday while standing in the lobby of the ESPN Zone in Baltimore with his 9-year-old son, Dane. ''People see Ray around town. He's involved with a lot of public-relations events. He lives nearby and people see his passion for this team and this city. There is nothing like being in the stadium when Ray comes out of that tunnel. The place goes psycho.''
Lewis, when asked if he wondered if his unrivaled talent would ever lead to commercial endorsements, responded, ''If people ever found out about my heart.''
The dark days for Lewis continue to motivate him and his teammates, according to the Ravens players and Newsome, who drafted Lewis with the 26th overall pick almost eight years ago.
In 2000, the season after the Atlanta incident, Lewis earned his first defensive player of the year award and was named the most valuable player of Super Bowl XXXV against the Giants.
''He used it as a motivator, but I think he's also used it to bring some substance to his life,'' Newsome said. ''I think his religious perspective has changed, and the way he carries himself out in public. His whole social life has changed from that incident.''
Corey Fuller, a Ravens defensive back, said Lewis has found peace despite the tumult.
''Sometimes, being an athlete, when you come from our situation, people forget we have feelings and emotions,'' Fuller, a native Floridian like Lewis, said. ''People think we're just barbarians or we're just ghetto kids, and it's not like that. We feel just like other people.''
For a high-profile player, any jealousy of Lewis seems muted or nonexistent. There are no secrets on the Ravens, a number of Lewis's teammates said. He shares everything, from workout routines to film-watching sessions at his home.
On game day, when Lewis is bouncing around the field, his yelling is not for show.
''Go be a star,'' he will say to young players like Baxter. ''Go get that pick.''
And for three hours, Lewis's play will be blinding and his voice will rise, colliding with the shouting of Ravens fans who embrace him in the way any underdog town would.
''He's reaching a Cal Ripken level,'' Newsome said. ''He's not there, but he's getting there. He's starting to ascend to that level because of his talent and his play. He's Baltimore's.''
PRO FOOTBALL
