Jose Morales knows about hardship.
Eight years ago, he left a small family farm in Ecuador to escape impoverishment that left him feeling like a burden to his five grown children after he and his wife became estranged.
He came to the United States with a commercial visa and a desire to make a living by selling wares created by artisans in his hometown, Otavalo. The town is a major marketplace for handmade, indigenous crafts.
Mr. Morales, 67, has been able to make some money here. But mostly, he says, he left behind one set of struggles only to find another. Since coming to New York City, he has overcome many problems, like being arrested and having his wares confiscated because he was unable to procure a vendor's permit to sell crafts.
He sleeps on a flattened box in a corner of an apartment in East Harlem that he shares with five other people.
A Quechua Indian who speaks only Quechua and Spanish, Mr. Morales is still able to convey the bleakness of his living arrangement with the aid of a translator, Regina Kirk, director of St. Cecilia's Parish Services in East Harlem. He says there is so little room in the apartment that even if someone were to offer him a bed, he would probably have to refuse it.
Compounding his burdens is a hearing problem that has been worsening over the last 15 years.
But Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York and The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund found a way to help.
Mr. Morales regularly eats breakfast and lunch for a minimal price at the Corsi Senior Center in East Harlem.
''He just sits and eats very quietly and he leaves just like that -- very quietly,'' said Eridania Silverio, a caseworker there. It was at the center that Mr. Morales met someone who referred him to St. Cecilia's, an archdiocesan site, after he asked about getting help for his hearing loss.
''It was difficult for him to ask for help because, as an indigenous man, he was without an education and embarrassed,'' Ms. Kirk said. ''He thought he would be rejected.'' In fact, she said, he waited two weeks before following up on the referral.
After going to St. Cecilia's, Mr. Morales met Ms. Kirk, who walked with him to the Metropolitan Hospital Center. Mr. Morales had given her a chart showing that he had gone there a month earlier to have his hearing tested.
Dr. Frida Malpica, Metropolitan's chief of audiology, met with the pair and used the chart to make a diagnosis of moderate sensory-neural hearing loss.
According to Dr. Malpica, patients who have the disorder often try to determine what is being said by focusing on a speaker's face.
''You have to elevate your voice for them to hear you,'' she said. ''They hear part of the word but not all of the word. They begin to look for visual cues to put into context what they're missing auditorily because they are not getting all of the consonant sounds.''
Dr. Malpica referred Mr. Morales to the Scientific Hearing Center to get a digital hearing aid. But the $1,200 price was well beyond his modest means.
That is where the Neediest Cases Fund came to his aid. The fund provided $200 toward the hearing aid, and Catholic Charities at St. Cecilia's Parish paid the rest. Soon, Mr. Morales reaped the benefit of having gathered his courage to ask for assistance.
One month after visiting the parish center (where he also now receives groceries from a food pantry), Mr. Morales received a new digital hearing device and a year's worth of free batteries.
''He feels rejuvenated, more content,'' said Ms. Kirk, as Mr. Morales told how the hearing aid has changed his life.
She said he can now hear the laughter and conversations of his roommates, without feeling that he is being ridiculed or excluded.
He can hear his children in Ecuador better, too, when he speaks to them by telephone twice a week. Four times a year, they send him goods that he sells in front of Our Lady of Pompeii Church in the West Village, and in a parking lot each weekend. He applies part of his profit toward a vendor's fee for each site.
Mr. Morales sells a variety of goods -- woven scarves, wool jackets, colorful bracelets, finger puppets, wooden flutes. And he makes many of the products himself.
''He's very proud of the work that he does and the people from his village do,'' Ms. Kirk said. ''He just brings his 'artesanía' with him and people are really impressed with the work.'' Artesanía is a Spanish word for crafts.
''Every time I've seen him,'' she said, ''he has his bag of goods.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $5,315,572.71  Recorded Tuesday: 106,777.50
Total: $5,422,350.21
Last year to date: $5,985,811.29
