Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun first barked out Ben Gordon's nickname in a practice two years ago: Gentle Ben.
He came up with it after seeing Gordon coasting, failing to play with the urgency Calhoun demands. Though the name did not stick much past Gordon's freshman year, the message still resonates.
With his pure jump shot, 39-inch vertical leap and 21-point scoring average, Gordon is one of the most talented guards in college basketball. But for top-ranked UConn (10-1) to contend for the national title, Calhoun needs Gordon, a 6-foot-2 junior, to step out of character and play assertively.
''It's a little different to find this in 2003, but he's got to learn to be a little more basketball arrogant,'' Calhoun said. ''He needs to say, 'You can't stop me, and I know that.' That's the last step.''
Gordon is unassuming. He wears a white T-shirt under his uniform that hides his chiseled body. He happily drives around campus in a clunky 1988 Lincoln Mercury that his teammates call the hearse. He prefers the solitude of a quiet gym so much that the police have shown up at 1 a.m. and kicked him out of his high school gym in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
Throughout his career, Gordon has teased Calhoun, showing tantalizing glimpses of transforming Gentle Ben to Assertive Ben.
That last happened against Nevada on Nov. 19. Gordon scored 37 points, exchanged some trash talk with a Wolf Pack player and nodded confidently to the crowd after tough baskets. Gordon lamented that foul trouble prevented him from scoring 50.
''Seeing him like that made my night,'' Calhoun said.
And Gordon knew it. ''That's exactly what Coach and the coaching staff have been waiting for me to do,'' he said.
Gordon has always shied away from being the center of attention.
Born in London to a mother of Jamaican descent, Gordon came to the United States before his first birthday.
Reared in Mount Vernon by his mother, Yvonne, and his grandmother, Avis, Gordon did not take an interest in basketball early on. Instead of dreaming of the N.B.A., Gordon says he told his mother he wanted to be an ecologist.
The solitude he relishes now in the gym came from wandering around his family's backyard as a child, digging for worms and searching for bugs among the tomatoes and cucumbers in his grandmother's garden.
When he finished, he would dissect his findings.
''It was a surprise that Ben decided to play basketball,'' Yvonne Gordon said.
It does not surprise her that Calhoun's biggest gripe about her son is his passive personality.
''Under much pressure and strain, he'll do what he needs to do,'' Yvonne Gordon said. ''He doesn't have an aggressive nature. He's just a very gentle person.''
By no stretch, though, can Gordon be considered lazy.
Connecticut's strength coach, Andrea Hudy, said she spotted Gordon running the bleachers of the football stadium at 6 a.m. one day this fall, wearing a weighted vest.
When Gordon arrived at UConn, Hudy said, she could tell that he was physically gifted. But even better, she said, he developed a competitive spirit in the weight room.
When the players do weight and strength tests, Hudy said, Gordon and the junior center Emeka Okafor fight over who goes first. Each wants to break the standard the other sets.
Even the 6-9 Okafor has a difficult time matching Gordon's weight- room efforts. Gordon bench-presses 280 pounds, squats 500 pounds and maintains 6 percent body fat.
''If he wasn't a basketball player, he'd be an Olympic athlete,'' the assistant George Blaney said. ''He's a triple jumper, he's a running back, he's a decathlete. Name your sport.''
Exploiting that talent, though, has been the biggest challenge for the coaching staff.
His freshman season, Gordon deferred to veterans like Caron Butler. Still, he showed glimpses when he scored 23 points in an overtime upset at Arizona and later made a 3-pointer to beat Villanova in the Big East tournament. His sophomore year, Gordon led the Huskies in scoring (19.5) and assists (4.7), but still had nights like a 4-point game at Vanderbilt, where he appeared too hesitant to blend in.
This season, during Connecticut's loss to Georgia Tech on Nov. 26, the ghost of Gentle Ben reappeared. With Okafor hobbled by back problems, Gordon managed only 13 points on 9 shots.
''The struggles are less,'' Calhoun said. ''The struggles for entire games are nonexistent. The minutes have turned to moments. Now we need there to be fewer moments.''
Gordon and Calhoun would like to forget about Gordon's arrest last February on charges of assault and disorderly conduct after slapping a female student.
Gordon describes the incident as horseplay that got overheated. (The other student was also charged with disorderly conduct, though the charge was dropped.)
''He never ever backed away from that it was a stupid act by him,'' Calhoun said. ''He did something stupid and he admitted it.''
Gordon was given probation and had to perform 30 hours of community service. He spoke to middle school and high school students about everything from goal setting to bullying.
''That was actually a real good experience,'' Gordon said. ''If I would have known it was like that, I would have done it regardless. The kids really appreciated it.''
The arrest did not change Calhoun's view of Gordon -- he played him three days after the arrest -- and Calhoun said he would vehemently defend Gordon's character to N.B.A. teams.
Around the team these days, Calhoun doesn't chide Gordon in practice by calling him Gentle Ben. Instead, knowing Gordon's personality, Calhoun said his assistants complained that he was too easy on Gordon.
Calhoun has resigned himself to the fact that Gordon and Okafor are projected as high first-round picks in the N.B.A. draft next summer and may leave after this season.
But before then, the Huskies have a realistic shot at the national title, and Calhoun will be hoping Gentle Ben does not make a return appearance at pivotal moments.
''Big games come down to someone who can make their own play,'' Calhoun said.
''Obviously, he's the guy most likely to do that. He may end up being, at critical times, our most important player.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
