For a month and a half, LeBron James had the world of basketball wide-eyed and open-mouthed like no one before him. He was 18 years old, fresh out of high school and averaging 17 points, 6 rebounds and 6 assists a game in the National Basketball Association.
Magic Johnson had put up similar numbers at that age, but that was at Michigan State. Michael Jordan had averaged a mere 13 points and 4 rebounds as an 18-year-old at North Carolina, and Kevin Garnett and Kobe Bryant were N.B.A. reserves for most of their rookie season.
Conventional wisdom said that it would not last, that there was a rookie wall in James's future that would keep him from staying at such a level.
In mid-December, James hit that wall running, scaled it with ease and used it to propel himself into another dimension.
As if it were not enough to enter the N.B.A. playing like an All-Star, James has spent the past two weeks playing like a superstar.
Over the Cleveland Cavaliers' last 10 games, James, a 6-foot-8, 240-pound guard, has averaged 27.7 points a game, scoring more than 30 points five times.
''You'd think he's 25 or 26 years old,'' said Rod Thorn, the president of the Nets, who will play James Friday night at Continental Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., in what will be James's first visit as a professional to the New York metropolitan area. ''It's incredible. You look at Kobe and Garnett and those guys -- when they were his age, they weren't as good as he is. Will he get up to their level? I'm not saying he will or won't, but there's never been an 18-year-old guy as good as he is.''
One could argue that James, who on Tuesday celebrated his 19th birthday by recording 22 points and 10 rebounds in a loss to Indiana, has already reached their level. Already one of the N.B.A.'s most versatile athletes, he and Paul Pierce are the only players in the league averaging at least 20 points, 6 rebounds and 6 assists a game.
Some would dispute the notion that James has arrived because of Cleveland's 10-22 record, but Tracy McGrady, a bona fide superstar who engaged in a memorable Christmas Day shootout with James, has led Orlando to just 8 victories in 32 games. Despite Bryant's brilliance, the Los Angeles Lakers seldom win without Shaquille O'Neal on the floor. Last season, when O'Neal missed the first 12 games because of an injury, Bryant averaged 29 points a game, yet the Lakers went 3-9.
Is it fair to rob James of superstar status just because his starting lineup includes Kedrick Brown and Ira Newble?
''I knew he was good, but I didn't know he was this good,'' Cleveland Coach Paul Silas said. ''I've often said it takes most players two or three years to really acclimate themselves to this league. And he's done so already. That's not to say he doesn't have a lot of things to improve on -- he does. But he's so smart that he just figures it out. Couple that with his athleticism, and he's way, way ahead of schedule.''
James could become the youngest player to compete in the All-Star Game. He is fourth among Eastern Conference guards in the voting, but he may be selected as a reserve by the coaches.
''I know I've got a lot of fans out there, so the All-Star Game is really all about the fans,'' said James, who is averaging 20.2 points, 6.1 rebounds and 6.0 assists. ''The All-Star Game really doesn't mean that much to me.''
In Cleveland, local basketball observers have already broken the LeBron era into two stages: before the Ricky Davis trade, and after it.
Davis is the high-flying, high-scoring swingman who led the Cavaliers with 20.6 points a game last season. Cognizant of team chemistry, James tried to defer to Davis for the first month of the season, saying the Cavaliers were still Davis's team. On the court, this caused confusion because it was not clear who the club's go-to guy was.
Beyond that, the 24-year-old Davis was clearly not happy playing in the shadow of a teenager, and while he seldom voiced his displeasure, he exuded the stench of resentment. Though James actually began his recent surge the game before Davis was traded, posting 37 points against Boston, he and the Cavaliers have taken off since Davis was moved to Boston on Dec. 15 for two role players, Eric Williams and Tony Battie.
With James firmly entrenched as the go-to guy, the Cavaliers have won four of nine games without Davis, including victories over Portland, New Orleans and Philadelphia.
''People have brought a lot of confidence to me,'' James said. ''They look at me as a leader, and when I'm on the court, that's how I feel. I feel like I'm comfortable with these guys, a lot more comfortable than before the trade.''
Silas said: ''He's the focal point of the team now and we rely on him down the stretch of games to get it done. He's our go-to guy right now. He realizes that, he does not shy away from it, and he's coming through. I think the chemistry is one thing that helped, where he knows that the guys are for him. They just want him to do well.''
The absence of Davis's bitterness is not the only thing that has changed. James has become more aggressive on the court, attacking the basket regularly instead of relying on his outside shot. That has enabled him to take more free throws, increase his field-goal percentage to .472 over the last 10 games, and boost his scoring. After averaging only 4.2 free-throw attempts and shooting 72 percent from the line in his first 22 games, James has averaged 6.8 free throws and hit 84 percent of his attempts since Dec. 13.
''You get easy points,'' James said in explaining his more aggressive approach to driving with the ball. ''Free throws are easy points. I never listen to anybody that tells me I need to go to the basket more. I've been playing this game long enough to know what I need to do.''
Besides James's ability, his demeanor on the court also amazes onlookers. He is so nonchalant that he sometimes appears to be loafing. ''The game is very easy for him,'' Thorn said. ''It appears to me as if he doesn't break a sweat.''
James has been so impressive that those around the game don't shy away from comparing him to Jordan. Though not as graceful as Jordan, James, who starts at point guard, has court vision and passing ability similar to that of Magic Johnson. One Eastern Conference scout who attended a recent Cavaliers game said, ''He's Jason Kidd and Michael Jordan rolled into one.''
James does not play defense nearly as well as Kidd does or as Jordan did, and that is the area he needs to work on most. He is still learning technique and positioning, and he often runs into screens. He also needs to cut down on his turnovers (3.9 a game). Otherwise, the comparisons to Jordan are likely to continue.
''This kid probably handles the ball better than Michael did at his age,'' said Thorn, who as Chicago's general manager drafted Jordan in 1984. ''Michael just came out and scored every night when he was a rookie. He was relentless and went to the basket better than this kid. Neither one was a great shooter, but this kid is getting better and better, just as Michael did.''
Asked if the thought of James's continued improvement was a scary one, Silas said, ''Not for me, not as long as I'm around him for the next 10 years.''
REBOUNDS
The Nets, in their first 16 home games of the season, have failed to sell out Continental Arena even once. Now comes Game No. 17, on a Friday night, in a holiday week, with LeBRON JAMES making his first visit to the New York metropolitan area as a professional. While that would seem to supply all the ingredients for a sellout -- the capacity at Continental Arena is 19,968 -- a number of tickets were still unsold Wednesday. The Nets said the only thing they were sure of was that there would be a big crowd for the game.
BASKETBALL
