Michael Bloomberg will enter the second half of his term as New York City's mayor with anemic popularity ratings despite his substantial achievements. Under Mr. Bloomberg, New York has been shepherded through desperate budget straits without significant losses in service. Crime has continued to drop in almost all categories. He has shown singular initiative in seeking out challenges, including taking control of the city's schools, and staunchly insists that he be held accountable for the results.
The mayor stubbornly believes that performance -- and only performance -- matters. His conviction that the public has no right to know where he goes during his private time is well known and wrongheaded. But he shows up when his presence is important. In 2003 the public gave him points for swiftly cleaning the streets after snowstorms and for leadership after the blackout and the shooting of a city councilman, James Davis. He did the right thing when he visited a neighborhood where a black city worker had died after police officers, acting on a bad tip, had forcibly entered her home. In one of his most popular initiatives, he set up a phone number, 311, for residents to report nonemergency problems.
Mr. Bloomberg made the right bet during last year's budget crisis when he chose higher taxes over drastic reductions in city services. But many voters still resent him for the tax increases and fail to give him credit for the clean and safe city streets. Some also resent his antismoking crusade -- the positive effect on the health of city bartenders tends to be forgotten by patrons forced to smoke outside.
So far Mr. Bloomberg has been flailing over a crisis he inherited from Rudolph Giuliani: the huge trash problem created by closing the Staten Island landfill. Mayor Bloomberg's plan to build transfer stations and send the garbage to out-of-state landfills seemed like a good interim answer, but it turns out to be far more costly and difficult than he expected. The city is waiting for a revised plan.
Mr. Bloomberg has always said that his administration will be judged by its success in improving schools, and the jury is still out on that. His early achievement in restructuring the system has been succeeded by a period of open bickering, most loudly between Schools Chancellor Joel Klein and the unions. Both Mr. Bloomberg and Mr. Klein made their names in the high-powered world of American business and legal life, and at this point it's not at all certain that their talents have transferred into the far different world of education.
Mr. Bloomberg -- private, disciplined and usually governed by rules of civility -- is mercifully a far cry from the operatic Mr. Giuliani. But he does not always pick his fights wisely. He placed a big bet on his ill-conceived battle to eliminate party primaries in local elections and overwhelmingly lost. More recently, he unleashed scorn on the city's Campaign Finance Board because it proposed increased public financing for candidates running against self-financed opponents, a likely situation for the billionaire mayor in 2005. The city could have used that mayoral anger better when Gov. George Pataki failed last year, again and again, to help the city out of its budget hole.
The mayor prefers working behind closed doors and settling differences quietly. But with an additional $2 billion budget gap looming, Mr. Bloomberg may need to let constituents see him fighting for them. All in all, the city has been lucky to have him in City Hall, but it would be good for New Yorkers to feel more like part of his team.
