As Chinese and World Health Organization scientists seek to determine if a 32-year-old man with pneumonia in Guangdong has SARS, they are wrestling with tantalizing but inconclusive test findings that have created a medical mystery and raised a number of diagnostic questions. Among them are these:
Is the man's pneumonia from the SARS coronavirus or from some other infectious agent?
Was the respiratory illness that he suffered last winter an undetected case of SARS? If so, are persistent immune responses to that old infection interfering with the current laboratory tests and confusing interpretation of the results?
If the man has SARS now and had it before, his would be the first known case of reactivated SARS, adding a new problem for doctors and health officials in diagnosing and controlling SARS.
Reactivated or recurrent SARS ''is among the theories we are considering'' in the case of the man, who is recuperating well in a hospital in Guangdong, said Dr. Julie L. Hall, the SARS team leader in Beijing for the World Health Organization.
Because so many infectious agents can cause pneumonia, the list of possibilities is long. In this case it includes infection with other animal and human viruses in the SARS coronavirus family. Even with the best of tests, definitive diagnoses can be elusive.
Still, Dr. Hall said in a telephone interview, ''Everyone is desperate to get a diagnosis.''
If confirmed, the patient would be the first outside a laboratory setting to become infected with the SARS coronavirus since the health organization said its transmission stopped last summer. The only two cases since then have been in scientists who acquired the infection in laboratories in Singapore and Taiwan. The Guangdong patient is a television producer who says he has not been in contact with health workers or a laboratory.
The man's illness last winter, when SARS was spreading, and the results of current tests have raised the theory of reactivated SARS. At China's invitation, the World Health Organization has sent three experts to Guangdong to find more details about his case and to search for other cases. One aim is to determine what medical care the man sought last winter and whether blood or other specimens taken then remain for tests that may yield clues now.
The only way to distinguish SARS from numerous other respiratory illnesses is through different types of laboratory tests of blood, sputum and feces. The findings depend in large part on the stage of the illness when samples are taken.
Tests of the Guangdong man offer ''a mixed bag of results,'' Dr. Hall said.
Doctors often use the polymerase chain reaction test to detect fragments of a virus gene in specimens from patients. When successful, the test offers a quicker diagnosis than growing the virus in cells in the laboratory. But contamination often invalidates the findings of the tests.
The tests performed in three laboratories in China on one specimen have been positive, Dr. Hall said. But because the specimen came from one source, the results are ''terribly difficult to interpret,'' Dr. Hall said. ''We cannot exclude contamination,'' she added.
Health officials are also testing for antibodies, the blood proteins that the immune system makes to ward off viruses and infections. The amount and type of antibody usually rise with time as a patient recovers, so comparisons are made of blood collected weeks apart in the acute and convalescent stages of infection.
In the Guangdong case, Dr. Hall said, ''there are antibodies that do react to the SARS virus, but that could be a cross-reaction to infection with any other coronavirus.'' So, she added, ''it is very difficult to know which virus those antibodies are reacting to and also whether this is an acute or a chronic type reaction.''
''There is some evidence that he may have SARS, but not enough to say he is positive, and not enough to say he is negative,'' Dr. Hall said.
Consistency in laboratory findings is needed to verify a diagnosis. To help in the suspected case, the World Health Organization is sending to the relevant Chinese laboratories blood from a variety of known infections to aid in making an accurate diagnosis. The agency has sent Dr. Tuckweng Kok, the head of a virology laboratory in Adelaide, Australia, to help interpret the findings.
If further tests confirm that the man suffered his first and only attack of SARS, and none of his contacts are infected, a crucial question will remain: how was he infected?
His isolated case would make it even more imperative to determine where the SARS virus hides in nature, said Dr. Klaus Stöhr, who helped lead the W.H.O. investigation of SARS last year. Scientists suspect that certain animals harbor the virus, but are not certain which ones.
