If Mike Dunham is auditioning to keep his job as the Rangers' No. 1 goaltender during the team's four-game trip, he earned a failing grade here Thursday night.
The 31-year-old Dunham was removed just 5 minutes 2 seconds into the second period after allowing 4 goals on 12 shots and the St. Louis Blues held off a late charge by the Rangers, 5-4.
The Blues (22-9-4-1) had four power-play goals and Doug Weight, a former Ranger, assisted on three of them. The Rangers (15-14-5-3) outshot the Blues, 43-22.
''I didn't forget how to play overnight,'' Dunham said. ''There's been some inconsistency on my part. It's one big save. If I can make that big save, that might be the difference. That's what I was doing last year. And that's what I need to get back to.''
Goaltending was not the Rangers' only problem. Lack of discipline was a factor; the Rangers gave the Blues eight power plays. A number of Rangers said that before the game they talked about not allowing the Blues to have any power plays at all.
''We took too many bad penalties,'' Coach Glen Sather said.
And it was not the first time.
When asked what he could do to get his message across, Sather said he could either ''end up benching three or four guys'' that he would not be able to replace, ''or we can keep talking about it.''
Bobby Holik said: ''You have to send a message across, no matter who it is.''
Holik was reminded of a situation he was in with the Devils a few seasons ago. Larry Robinson, the Devils' coach at the time, started benching players after they made a mistake. Holik was among those benched. When asked if that was what he would urge Sather to do, Holik said: ''That's not my advice. That's what happened to me, and it worked. I'll leave it at that.''
Along with their four power-play goals, the Blues scored a stunning short-handed goal when the former Devil Mike Danton beat Dunham with a 40-foot slap shot. It skipped off Dunham and into the net just half a second before the first period ended.
Dunham was not wholly at fault on Danton's goal. With the Rangers on the power play and the score tied at 1-1, Aleksei Kovalev tried to thread a pass to defenseman Vladimir Malakhov. Malakhov had jumped into the play and skated down the slot from the Rangers' blue line, where he had been their last line of defense.
''They were trying to make an impossible play in an impossible situation,'' Sather said.
The Blues' Ryan Johnson intercepted the puck and pushed it to Danton, who skated over the Rangers' blue line before firing the long shot at Dunham from above the top of the slot. To try to cut down the angle, Dunham skated nearly 10 feet out of the crease, but it did not help. The Blues took a 2-1 lead into the first intermission despite being outshot by 16-5.
The Blues scored twice in a 1:34 span early in the second period to take a 4-1 lead. Kovalev was in the penalty box, serving four minutes for high-sticking Mark Rycroft.
That was the end for Dunham. Jussi Markkanen replaced him and allowed one goal on 10 shots.
Eric Lindros, Petr Nedved, Martin Rucinsky and Brian Leetch scored for the Rangers.
Since Nov. 2, Dunham is 5-10-2 and has allowed 56 goals in 19 appearances for a high 3.19 goals-against average. He has two no-decisions in that span, including Thursday's game; he was pulled in both games.
For the season, Dunham is 9-12-4 with a 2.72 goals against average and .906 save percentage in 27 games. Markkanen is 6-4-1 for the season, and has recorded five victories and one no-decision in his last six starts.
Speculation is growing that Dunham is in danger of losing his job. Because Markkanen seems better suited to the backup role, Sather is looking for another goaltender.
SLAP SHOTS
Rangers defenseman BRIAN LEETCH played his 1,100th career game. . . . Rangers right wing ANSON CARTER was back in the lineup after missing three games with a rib-cage strain; JAN HLAVAC was benched to make room for Carter.
HOCKEY
