NEW YORK CITY'S great subway system has many benefits. While getting millions of people where they need to go each day with a minimum of logistical fuss and environmental muss, it also serves as a great humanizing, socializing force. After all, spending time in the company of strangers is one of the earth's oldest, most direct and stimulating forms of education. Travel is broadening, as they say, and New Yorkers can learn a good bit about the world simply by exercising their right to a $2 ride. The experience, formative to natives, transformative to later arrivals, encourages tolerance, curiosity and creativity, basic ingredients of cosmopolitanism.
Over the last two decades New York's subway system, one of the largest and most heavily used in the world, has expanded its benefits, subjecting its vast apparatus, and its riders, to an extreme makeover costing about $31 billion. It has entailed rehabilitation, replacements and additions on all fronts: tracks, cars, mechanical systems and stations, both inside and out. In tandem with this, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's Arts for Transit division has created, literally, its own artistic underground. Since its founding in 1985, Arts for Transit has installed nearly 140 works (and counting) of public art in stations throughout its labyrinthine 722-mile system.
It's hard to grasp the enormousness of this project without going out and trying to see quite a bit of it. (I managed somewhat more than half.) It is the Works Progress Administration all over again, or the exact opposite of André Malraux's ''museum without walls.'' That is, a museum with miles of them, as well as -- for the most part -- harsh lighting and no closing hours.
Venturing into the subways in search of new art is like eavesdropping on a classic New York argument that has no resolution but plenty of ammunition and passion on both sides. Such a tour provides a panoramic view of the course of public art since an outcry caused the removal of Richard Serra's ''Tilted Arc'' sculpture from Federal Plaza, and the culture wars raged. Paradoxically Mr. Serra has become something of a Pied Piper of Modernist sculpture, making works that attract crowds; and diversity, accessibility and accountability have now become catchwords.
Sometimes large, sometimes small, the art in the subway system includes murals of glass, ceramic or stone mosaic; windows and walls of stained glass; sculpture; and forays into Conceptual art and installation art, all permanent. They have been made by artists known and unknown from all corners of the New York art world and beyond. For better and sometimes for worse, this underground reflects the subway's vibrant social reality: it is a fascinating exercise in artistic democracy.
I grew up in Kansas and fell in love with the subways on the first day of my adult life in New York. After years of untold subway time -- spent watching, listening, reading -- I would say that large, active systems of mass transit are the main difference between the red and the blue states of the 2000 electoral map (California excepted). People who travel only by private car -- most of America -- can too easily stick to their own kind and cling to their prejudices and misconceptions without the threat of contradictory experiences.
The artworks sponsored by Arts for Transit are not without contradictions of their own. So far they include modest additions, like Susan Tunick's discreet glazed terra cotta murals at the PROSPECT PARK -- and PARKSIDE AVENUE -- stations on the Q train in Brooklyn. But there are also dynamic large-scale works, among them a stunning bit of modern-day Byzantium by Elizabeth Murray: ''Blooming,'' a bright mosaic paean to the workaday world that includes pink and green trees, a pair of enormous high heels and a colossal yellow cup of coffee. It covers every square inch of a large transfer area at 59TH STREET AND LEXINGTON AVENUE --, where the 4, 5 and 6 lines and the N and the R cross. (There is a second Murray mural, ''Stream,'' as good as this one if spread a bit thin, in an enormous passageway at 23RD STREET-ELY AVENUE -- in Queens.)
From Beavers to Stars
The subway system has never been an art-free zone, as demonstrated by the many neo-Classical-style mosaics and plaques that remain from the original Heins &amp; LaFarge designs of the first IRT stations, which began opening in 1904. Site-specificity was always cultivated, too. The evidence includes the glazed terra cotta reliefs, descended from the della Robbia of Florence, of beavers at ASTOR PLACE -- . (The Astor family fortune was derived from beaver pelts.)
Other examples are tile reliefs that repeat along the track walls at UNION SQUARE -- (a bucolic village relief), GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL -- (a steaming locomotive) and 125TH STREET -- (a steel-girder bridge) on the 4, 5 and 6 lines.
As the lines expanded and styles changed, a measure of continuity was always pursued, and still is. The mosaics and plaques took on an Arts and Crafts simplicity in the 1918 BMT stations and were further streamlined for the IND in 1930.
Arts for Transit has overseen extensive restorations and replications of original mosaic borders and allowed some tweaking by individual artists. But in its commissioned artworks it appears to have strived for diversity more than continuity. The organization's director, Sandra Bloodworth, says it has done so by varying its selection process, alternating between open calls and inviting specific artists to submit proposals to professional panels. Community planning boards are almost always involved in the decisions.
The results are a mixture of grassroots and establishment, professional and amateur. Invited artists have included Roy Lichtenstein and Jacob Lawrence at TIMES SQUARE --, Romare Bearden at WESTCHESTER SQUARE-EAST TREMONT AVENUE -- in the Bronx and Eric Fischl at 34th STREET-PENN. STATION --. At the same time Keith Goddard, a designer selected in an open call, is responsible for the charming mosaics of historically correct hats recently completed at 23RD STREET -- on the N and R lines.
In the M.T.A.'s long tradition of in-house design, the Arts for Transit division, which is mostly artists, has also participated directly by designing the artworks for the station at 81ST STREET AND CENTRAL PARK WEST --. This multimedia portrayal of constellations, dinosaur skeletons and the ocean floor heralds your arrival at the doorstep of the American Museum of Natural History, but it is also cluttered. Too many cooks.
A partial tour of subway art will articulate a host of issues, not only old versus new, but also art versus design, public use versus personal expression, and local versus general. You may also learn that mosaic is as fabulously supple and responsive to touch and personality as oil paint, and as humbling. Not every painter's style, no matter how celebrated, benefits from translation.
So far the stained-glass works have not demonstrated a similar variety. They are especially monotonous in the stations and platforms on the elevated tracks, although Yumi Heo's urban scenes in the 33RD, 40TH AND 46TH STREET -- stations of the 7 line along Queens Boulevard and Verna Hart's jazz musicians at the Myrtle Avenue station on the J, M and Z lines reward attention.
Bigger Is Better
The art that best holds its own against the power and bustle of the subway is for the most part big and colorful, architecturally protected and encountered as you change lines or enter and leave stations. Some pieces, like the Murray mural at Lexington Avenue, literally have rooms of their own.
Others are overhead: Lichtenstein's muscular Art Deco send-up at Times Square and Lawrence's glass mosaic nearby. ''Under Bryant Park,'' Samm Kunce's somewhat hammy tour de force, turns a long passageway in the 42ND STREET-FIFTH AVENUE -- station into a journey through the earth's strata.
Frank Leslie Hampton's ''Uptown New York'' treats commuters to a sweeping view of classic New York rooftops on the mezzanine at the TREMONT AVENUE -- station at the Grand Concourse in the Bronx. The mosaics' glass and stone elements are scaled and arranged to denote the brick facades of buildings.
On a mezzanine at the TIMES SQUARE -- entrance at Seventh Avenue and 41st Street, Jack Beal's ''Coming of Spring'' can stop you in your tracks. The exaggerated light and heightened color of Mr. Beal's Neo-Mannerist realism may actually work better in mosaic than in oil paint.
On the Platforms
The most successful pieces largely steer clear of the platforms, where shallow space, linear design and relentless repetition of tiling, columns, tracks and the trains themselves create a true tunnel vision that quashes most deviations.
Too often the platform walls have simply been treated as a white ground on which anything of any image or shape can be added -- pictorial equivalent of plop-art public sculpture. Many of these works look cute for about a New York minute, but they are as essential to the subway system as tattoos are to the body.
On the platforms proper nothing beats the old mosaic borders and signs, except for the brighter new versions. Take the sparkling fields of light green and yellow green mosaic, edged in deep red, that repeatedly set off the white letters of Brooklyn BOTANIC GARDEN -- at its station on the S line. At the CANAL STREET -- station on the N, R, Q and W lines, the artist Bing Lee has designed dazzling new borders that acknowledge the neighborhood's population with Chinese characters and a palette of deep red, Persian blue and celadon.
At 42ND STREET -- the IND streamlining continues on the walls beside the tracks. Big white-tile 42's repeat along a broad band of blue tiles, changing elevations like notes on a musical score. Parts of the numbers are white-on-white but still legible, creating the optical thrill that is basic to effective graphic design.
Borders aside, a few platform murals do succeed. Flanking the station's central stairs and facing one another across the platform, the four large glass-mosaic murals of Louis Delsarte's ''Transitions'' look stunning against the new white tile of the renovated CHURCH AVENUE -- station on the 2 and 5 lines in Brooklyn. Like many of the new subway murals, their depictions of people strolling along sidewalks and the costumed figures of the Caribbean Day Parade hark back to American Scene painting. But these don't feel dated, and their subtly tilted perspective -- as if seen from a second-story window -- gives them added thrust.
Where Subtlety Prevails
Some art on the platforms succeeds by exercising discretion. At the 66TH STREET -- stop of the 1 and 9 lines, Nancy Spero's ''Artemis, Acrobats, Divas and Dancers'' isolates attenuated figures along the walls, engaging expanses of white tile and using to good advantage the wainscoting and repeating pilasters that break up the whiteness. The platform appears to be lined with sparsely composed wall paintings; the theatrical theme is tied to Lincoln Center.
At 125TH STREET AND LENOX AVENUE -- on the 2 and 3 lines, Faith Ringgold makes great use of white by corralling it into brightly patterned frames and dotting it with the isolated forms of Harlem's architectural landmarks and portrayals of the area's most famous residents, who fly overhead like guardian angels. Ms. Ringgold's piece pays tribute to the history of Harlem, as do works at adjacent stations by Maren Hassinger (110TH STREET --), Vincent Smith (116TH STREET --) and Willie Birch (135TH STREET --).
But visually Ms. Ringgold's mosaic reflects a widespread weakness in the system. It looks good up close but contributes little to the general effect; it might almost be a portable painting. Tim Snell's mosaics at EIGHTH STREET -- (and Broadway), which isolate neighborhood scenes in portholelike circles are more assertive but also more arbitrary.
The most engaging historical homage I encountered was the small but surprisingly powerful ceramic mosaics created by Lee Brozgold, working with an after-school group of elementary school art students, at SHERIDAN SQUARE -- and Christopher Street. Depicting all kinds of significant people -- including Henry James, Mabel Dodge and John Brown Russwurm, founder of the first black newspaper in the United States -- these images gain force by marrying colorful mosaic with incised black-and-white drawing on larger pieces of glazed ceramic.
Other works created with students or children include Jimmy James Greene's anarchic murals at UTICA AVENUE -- in Brooklyn and Nitza Tufino's small ceramic plaques at 86TH STREET AND BROADWAY --, although in this case the result is diminished by the gradual realization that most of the images are based on photos.
Having It Both Ways
Letting design prevail is also effective. James Garvey's ''Lariat Seat Loops'' at the 33RD STREET -- station on the No. 6 line are like mischievous bronze firehouse poles; they extend from the ceiling to the floor, looping around several large columns at hip height as they go. At once decorative and functional, industrial and frivolous, they presage the poles and handholds of the subway cars while also providing temporary seating and a bit of sly Art Deco-ish whimsy, which befits the neighborhood of the Empire State Building.
Michele Oka Doner's long, quietly shimmering wall of handmade, bronze-glazed bricks toward the south end of the HERALD SQUARE -- (34th Street) multiline station is another case in point. This gorgeously subtle surface is unlike any other brick wall in the M.T.A. system.
Another kind of peaceful coexistence is at the 72ND STREET -- and Broadway IRT station, where the new addition is ''Verdi's Rigoletto,'' Robert Hickman's barrel-vault skylight of laminated glass. Downstairs the station's walls are punctuated by ornate carpet-pattern decorations by Heins &amp; LaFarge: big rectangles of Persian-inspired motifs that suggest ceilings as fancy and ornate as Mr. Hickman's is plain.
Nothing I saw managed to be as simultaneously ambitious and self-effacing as the Conceptual installation that the sculptor Mary Miss, working with the architect Lee Harris Pomeroy, has dispersed through the large multiline UNION SQUARE -- station. ''Framing Union Square'' exposes the archaeological layers of the subway system's perpetual renovations.
The complex is ripe for a little deconstruction, having originated as three separate stations built by three competing subway companies. Ms. Miss's work leaves portions of old mosaics exposed and and allows old piers to jut through a floor like bits of the Roman Forum. A long stretch of mosaic border, tilting steeply toward a level floor, shows where a ramp used to exist.
Ms. Miss's interventions, which continue throughout the station, have eye-catching fire-engine-red frames, whose inside edges contain phrases and quotes reflected in mirrors, a slightly irritating but unobtrusive strategy. In one instance Squire J. Vickers, the designer of the BMT station, expresses his conviction that a plaque of color should blaze with the brightness of a jewel.
Liking subways, art and democracy, I want the three to collaborate brilliantly. This doesn't always happen, but it may happen often enough. Not all the new art in our dramatically renewed subway system will stand the test of time, but every last bit of it will become part of a living museum and never-to-be-finished creation that, despite its many imperfections, is more perfect than not.
New York's subway system expresses an urban body electric that Whitman only glimpsed, and connects each of us to the more personal one that he eloquently envisioned. It enables us to encounter in awe-inspiring physical form and complexity the energy of the past mingling with the present and evolving into the future, all in the process of getting to work on time.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK  Correction:  January 3, 2004, Saturday  A Critic's Notebook article in Weekend yesterday about art in the New York City subway system misspelled the surname of the artist who created ''Memories of Twenty-Third Street,'' a glass mosaic mural. He is Keith Godard, not Goddard.
