A GIGANTIC cardinal-and-gold elephant has hunkered down in the musty laboratory of the Bowl Championship Series. The pachyderm has claimed squatter's rights and bragging rights, all kinds of rights, and is not going away any time soon.
The University of Southern California did the worst thing possible for the intricate but rather imperfect formula for producing a national football champion. It walloped a very good Michigan team, 28-14, yesterday in the Rose Bowl to cast a huge shadow, a veritable eclipse, on the festivities in New Orleans on Sunday.
The B.C.S. is based on the premise that only two teams, Oklahoma and Louisiana State University, are worthy of being champion. But the pesky football writers, who vote in the Associated Press poll, had been picking U.S.C. as the best team in the land going into the bowl games, and nothing that happened yesterday is likely to change their quirky little minds.
The coaches who vote in the USA Today/ESPN poll are supposed to go along with the program and vote for the winner of the B.C.S. title game as the top team. Being law-abiding types, they tend to do just that, but maybe this is the year the coaches show some spunk.
Lloyd Carr, the grizzled coach of Michigan, does not look like a campus radical, but after yesterday's thumping he was asked who he would vote for.
''I'm committed, as a member of the coaches' poll, and I will do that,'' Carr said, meaning he will vote for the winner in New Orleans.
But Carr added, ''If I was a member of the media, the A.P. poll, I'm sure Southern Cal is very deserving.''
He paused and said, ''You could make me an honorary member.''
Pete Carroll, the U.S.C. coach, did not push the issue, saying of his colleagues like Carr: ''Guys have to do what they think is right. I respect that.''
Carroll could remain on the high road, what with U.S.C. having been more aggressive, more confident, more mobile than Michigan. The crusher was a nifty 15-yard touchdown pass from Mike Williams, the slippery receiver, to Matt Leinart, the quarterback, late in the third quarter.
With hipper-dipper stuff like that, the Trojans might have looked like champions even to the Dr. Frankenstein computer that shunned U.S.C. from the Final Two in New Orleans.
Now the architects of the B.C.S. are going to have to deal with it. They created a rigid system of picking two teams for one designated championship bowl each year. That works fine if two undefeated teams can be matched in an ultimate game. But L.S.U., Oklahoma and U.S.C. all came into these bowl frolics with one loss apiece, which created immense mischief.
Oklahoma won all 12 of its regular-season games but then was slaughtered by Kansas State, 35-7, in the Big 12 Conference championship game on Dec. 6.
This raises a rather obvious question: why hold conference championship games if losing does not hurt a team's chances of being selected for the B.C.S. championship game?
This is not like the national basketball tournament, which encompasses 65 teams. Everybody knows those conference finals are bogus. The real action is the quarterfinals, where underachievers and overachievers scramble to get into the semifinals just to earn a place in the first round of the national betting brackets.
The high motivation of U.S.C. raised the level of this classic meeting between two grand old conferences that used to meet here every Jan. 1 until the Rose Bowl officials joined the pot-luck roving supper of the B.C.S.
The two old opponents met here in the cozy sunken oval, in the shadow of purple mountains. The temperature at game time was 59 degrees, 7 below the average for the last 23 Rose Bowls, but the air was dry. It almost always is.
Once again, the Rose Bowl had the feel of the center of the football universe. Michigan, which had lost twice this season, wanted to prove ''we're back,'' in the words of Coach Carr. They did not exactly do that against U.S.C., which lost only once, 34-31, to California in triple overtime on Sept. 27.
The two teams in the Sugar Bowl have also lost once, Oklahoma most recently. ''With the B.C.S., it doesn't matter when you lose, and that's a good thing,'' said Coach Bob Stoops of Oklahoma.
In other ways, late-season developments definitely count. Both Hawaii and Notre Dame came up with stinkers in their last games, long after they played U.S.C., but their losses hurt U.S.C.'s status in the computer rankings. There's something wrong with that reasoning.
L.S.U. got its losing out of the way early, to Florida, and then finished 12-1, including a 34-13 victory over Georgia in the Southeastern Conference title game.
One of the two teams in New Orleans will lose again, forcing the coaches in the USA Today/ESPN poll to show some of the character they are always talking about.
''The system is the system,'' Carroll said, adding hopefully, ''Some coaches are willing to go against it.''
The two teams in the Sugar Bowl and the voters in the coaches' poll now go about their business with the formidable silhouette of U.S.C. looming large over everybody's shoulders.
Sports of The Times
