WITH a downtown that is just one block long but home to three fishing supply stores, you could get the idea that Roscoe is all about fishing. Until you talk to Donald Fleck, a Brooklyn psychotherapist who has owned a second home in Roscoe since 1978: a 1,200-square-foot renovated farmhouse from the 1920's a half-mile out of town. He'll tell you about his pond, his 106 acres and how the same money would have gotten him and his family a ''home the size of a postage stamp in New Hope,'' the Pennsylvania town where they first looked. But when you ask him about fly-fishing, he's quick to say he would rather swim or hike.
There are weekenders who fly-fish and those who don't -- even in a community that calls itself Trout Town U.S.A. -- but homeowners' common bond is an appreciation for a place that is rural, affordable and a two-hour drive from New York City. The absence of anything resembling night life hardly seems a drawback. Residents speak of its small-town airs as a main attraction.
That's how it is for James and JoJo Mulholland, a nightclub manager and a model from Manhattan. They bought a three-bedroom log cabin on five and a half acres and are now purchasing 10 more acres. ''When we first bought in 1997,'' Ms. Mulholland said, ''our friends who go to the Hamptons said to us, 'What will you do there? Where will you eat?' First of all, we love the Roscoe Diner. Second of all, we barbecue.''
Weekend barbecues, neighbors who chop wood for one another and a brook outside their door that provided the stones for their fireplace are a few of the pleasures that have the Mulhollands raving about their $75,000 investment. They estimate that the property has tripled in value since they bought it.
Land is a major attraction in Roscoe, one of three hamlets in the Township of Rockland. (Livingston Manor and Lew Beach are the others.) Roscoe, in the western foothills of the Catskills, has about 20,000 acres of state forest preserve. ''A lot of people like to buy property bordering that land,'' said Pat Pomeroy, the town supervisor and the owner of Elliott &amp; Pomeroy, a real estate company. ''Then they have 20,000 acres in their backyard. That's what makes Roscoe popular.''
A fourth to a third of the homeowners are fishers, Ms. Pomeroy estimated. There are those like Brian and Karen Flahive from Edgewater, N.J., graphic designers and avid fly-fishers who came for the fishing and stayed for everything else. Then there are nonfishermen like Herbert Walker, a Manhattan lawyer who first looked for a home in Dutchess and Columbia Counties and in parts of Connecticut, New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
''In the Hamptons I always had a place on the water,'' Mr. Walker said. ''But it was becoming too citified with dress codes in restaurants, and the traffic was unbearable.'' After friends encouraged him to look in the area, he rented a house on Tennanah Lake as a trial run. He liked it so much that in 1996 he bought a home on Lake Muskoday.
The Scene
Those who view fishing as a way of life talk as if they're on a spiritual retreat. There is the concentration aspect: ''You can't think about the office or home when you fly-fish,'' said Michele Tutalo, a former weekender turned full-timer. There's the tranquillity of spending hours on the Beaverkill and Willowemoc Rivers, the trout-filled waters running through Roscoe and coming together at Junction Pool.
One oft-told story is that a trout going upstream swam into Junction Pool and tried growing two heads to swim up both rivers. So was born the two-headed trout dinner, which kicks off trout season (April 1 to Oct. 15). The dinners have been held annually at the Rockland House for the last decade, but they began at the Antrim Lodge, which has been closed for years and under renovation since 2002. It is expected to reopen by April 2005.
The town is still home to noted fly makers. Among them are Mary Dette, the daughter of two respected anglers, Walt and Winnie Dette, who sells original Catskill flies from her home, and Poul Jorgensen, ''the most innovative fly tyer in the history of the sport,'' according to Art Lee, editor at large of Fly Fisherman Magazine.
You could say Stewart Avenue, the main drag, has two scenes. On a recent Saturday morning, Floyd Franke, author of ''Fish On!'' (Derrydale Press, 2003), head instructor at the Wulff School of Fly Fishing and licensed guide, chatted with a small crowd in front of the Beaverkill Angler, which sells Orvis products. ''This is a contact point for fly-fishers and networking,'' Mr. Franke said. ''If you don't check in every day, someone will ask where you are.''
Across the street, Annie's Place, a country home and gift shop, had a decidedly urban feel. Shoppers talked about the previous night's ''Dateline NBC'' and about the latest celebrity brouhahas.
Stewart Avenue is home to two good Italian restaurants, Raimondo's Restaurant and Pizzeria and Bel Villagio, as well as Catskill Grocers. Ms. Tutalo recommends Plain &amp; Fancy for specialty coffee and sandwiches, and Ms. Mulholland is a fan of the ''amazing'' French toast at the Roscoe Diner on Old Route 17. And while in town, you can get a hair appointment -- most Sundays and some Saturdays -- with Jeffrey Swander, a hairstylist for ''Late Night With Conan O'Brien'' and ''Saturday Night Live.''
Pros
''We don't think we'll ever be in danger of having the Home Depots here because we don't have the population for it,'' said Ms. Pomeroy. Roscoe does have land though, and people are still buying and building. Values went up 24 percent over the last two years, Ms. Pomeroy said, adding that there has been strong demand for weekend homes.
Besides fishing, bow-and-arrow and rifle hunting, which run from September through the beginning of December, are popular, as are snow sports like snowshoeing and cross-country skiing. (Downhill skiing is 45 minutes away in Belleayre.) Hikers and bikers enjoy hundreds of marked trails in the state parks. There are public golf courses, basketball and tennis courts, a community swimming pool and several campgrounds. The Catskill Fly Fishing Center and Museum in Livingston Manor, six miles away, displays flies from famous anglers and offers educational programs.
Livingston Manor is being revitalized, and Main Street there is home to new businesses like Peez Leweez, a comfy coffeehouse with folk-rock music on Friday nights; Twin Brooks Gallery, which carries contemporary Japanese art; and WeGe &amp; Company, which sells ''unpredictably modern home furnishings.''
Cons
There is no taxi service in town, and the closest train is in Middletown, an hour away. A few stores sell anything from collectibles to hardware, but most shoppers have to go elsewhere for their major needs. Shopping malls are in Middletown and Binghamton, also an hour away. There is no bookstore in town, but Hamish &amp; Henry Booksellers is expected to open soon in Livingston Manor.
The nearest movie theater is a triplex 15 minutes away in Liberty. Full-service drugstores are in Liberty and Livingston Manor. ''If you're looking for a New York City cultural life, it isn't here,'' Mr. Walker said, ''although every year there's the Roscoe Arts Festival, when local artists display their work.'' There is also summer stock a half-hour away in Forestburgh, a hamlet outside of Monticello.
Nearby Route 17, already a popular thoroughfare for trucks traveling between New York and upstate cities like Binghamton and Syracuse, might soon be even more busy. ''Route 17 eventually will be designated as Interstate 86 but that hasn't happened yet,'' said Bob Lambrigger of Bob Lambrigger Realty.
The Real Estate Market
Prices range from $50,000 for a small cottage to $600,000, said Elwin Wood, the owner of Bob Lambrigger Realty, with a few properties going as high as nearly $850,000. Mr. Wood said that 75 percent to 85 percent of the weekend homes he sells are used year-round. Houses for sale tend to be old farmhouses; there are some log cabins and the occasional Victorian. Lake-front property, available five miles out of town, is hot and getting harder to find. Turnover is low; Lambrigger estimates it sold 40 homes last year, priced all over the range, and gets one to two listings weekly. School and land taxes, depending on fluctuations, are $2,000 to $2,200 a year. This month, Elliott &amp; Pomeroy Real Estate was listing a log cabin on five acres 10 miles out of town with one bedroom and a loft for $150,000. It has been on the market for five months.
Stone Realty has listed a four-bedroom, three-and-a-half-bath contemporary home on two acres on the edge of town for $485,000. It has a three-car garage, a swimming pool and a hot tub. It has been on the market for four months. Bob Lambrigger Realty is listing a five-year-old, 2,000-square-foot Beaver Mountain log house on 150 acres for $849,000.
LAY OF THE LAND  It's Your Choice: Fish or Don't
POPULATION -- 1,200, 2,400 in summer.  SIZE -- 26 square miles.  MEDIAN HOUSE PRICE -- $115,000.  RECENT SALES -- Elliott &amp; Pomeroy Real Estate sold a two-story contemporary with a cathedral ceiling, five bedrooms, three and a half baths, a fireplace, a wraparound deck, a gazebo and a full basement on 1.4 acres with a view of the woods, four miles out of town, for $169,000. It was on the market for five months. (The seller paid $146,000 in 1999.) Bob Lambrigger Realty sold a ranch house with three bedrooms, two baths, a wraparound porch and a stone fireplace on 95 acres for $430,000 after seven days on the market. (The seller paid $265,000 seven years ago.)  DISTANCE FROM NEW YORK -- 120 miles.  TRAVEL TIME -- By car, two hours from the George Washington Bridge; ShortLine Coach USA takes three hours from the Port Authority Bus Terminal; round-trip fare is $62.55 (212-736-4700).  GETTING THERE -- From New York, take the George Washington Bridge to the Palisades Parkway to Route 6 to Route 17 west to Exit 94.  WHILE YOU'RE LOOKING -- Baxter House Bed &amp; Breakfast (2012 Old Route 17, 607-498-5811) is an 1800's farmhouse on Old Route 17. Its six rooms are decorated in colonial style and are $45 to $125, including breakfast. The Roscoe Motel (2054 Old Route 17, 607-498-5220), on the Beaverkill River, has 18 rooms for $45 to $70, including Continental breakfast. Fishing on premises; fishing license required.
HAVENS
