There has been a headlong rush to open restaurants in an area formerly better known for its motorcycle gangs. Once everyone wanted to escape Alphabet City, but now it has attracted refugees from one of the snootiest parts of town. Three former employees of Scalinatella, the quintessential Upper East Side Italian restaurant, have opened Cantinella on Avenue A.
The interior looks like that of an uptown restaurant that has been lifted lock, stock and barrel from its 60-something-street moorings. In the East Village, classy might be a good description. It has tablecloths, and the chairs match. Quiet in the early evening -- no retired citizens coming for 6 o'clock dinner -- it is raucous by 7:30 p.m.
In the Upper East Side Italian restaurant mold, the menu is quite short, the list of specials that trip off the owner's tongue so long that patrons can remember only a fraction of what's available. But you have the distinct impression that you'll be missing something if you stick to the menu.
''We can make the veal any way you want: francese, marsala marinara, scallopini, Milanese, with tomatoes and arugula, with shiitake, '' said Ramon Pallone, one of the owners. Prices for the specials are not mentioned, which might lead you to think that they are as reasonable as the printed menu, on which the top main course is grilled steak at $20. They are not. The Dover sole meunière special was $34.
Seasonal cooking means nothing at restaurants like this, something that's evident when the gift to go with our drinks is out-of-season tomatoes on top of crostini.
At a time when retro food is popular, Cantinella, which means wine cellar, offers it all: spaghetti with tomato sauce, linguine with clams, chicken with sausages, and tiramisu. The ingredients that were hot and new to Americans in the late 1970's and early 80's -- arugula, radicchio, mascarpone and portobello mushrooms -- are generously distributed throughout the old comfort food.
But the vegetables that accompany each main dish are from a cafeteria steam table: carrots and broccoli adorn every plate.
Cantinella, 23 Avenue A, between Houston Street and Second Street, East Village; (212) 505-2550. Dinner entrees, $14.50 to $60.
Diner's Journal
