IT will be a long time before bond traders forget last year's sudden bond market rout. And there could be an encore this year.
From mid-June to the end of July, the yield on the Treasury's benchmark 10-year note surged 1.30 percentage points, to 4.41 percent from a 45-year low of 3.11 percent. Investors sold in anticipation of rising interest rates as the economy rebounded and the stock market rallied.
That violent sell-off made July the worst month for the Treasury market since February 1980. The 4.2 percent loss in Treasuries alone was worse than any entire year for the whole investment-grade fixed-income market in at least 30 years.
Even high-yield junk bonds, which finished 2003 with their second-best year ever, after 1991, had a miserable July, as the total return for the sector fell 1.4 percent.
Surprisingly, the investment-grade fixed-income market still managed to post a total return of 4.1 percent last year, despite July, as repeated promises by Federal Reserve policy makers to keep their benchmark short-term interest rate low for ''a considerable period'' helped pull down rates. The 10-year yield ended the year at 4.25 percent, well below the 2003 high of 4.60 percent at the beginning of September.
But the return for junk bonds was stunning, and lower-rated investment-grade bonds did not do badly at all, showing that taking on some added risk was the way to survive in the bond market last year.
The 28.1 percent total return for junk bonds was only surpassed by the 39.2 percent of 1991, while lower-rated investment-grade corporate bonds returned 11.5 percent. The gain in total return came mostly from increases in the prices of these bonds as the rebound of the economy improved the credit outlook for the companies issuing them.
The small overall gain, however, was well below bonds' performance of the previous three years when the market outperformed stocks and posted an average annual total return of just over 10 percent.
And with the Federal Reserve expected by many to begin raising rates this year, 2004 could be even tougher than 2003 for bonds, especially for Treasuries, strategists and money managers say.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury could increase more than a full percentage point, which would be its biggest annual rise since 1999, the last negative year for the bond market over all. The market lost 1 percent that year, with the Treasury market losing 2.4 percent while investment-grade corporate bonds lost 1.9 percent, according to Merrill Lynch bond indexes.
But the loss this year could be even larger because interest rates earned on Treasuries and other investment-grade bonds are much lower than they were in 1999. So any losses from price declines will be eating into a much smaller yield.
This year ''could look like 1994 in the bond market,'' said Thomas H. Atteberry, assistant portfolio manager of the FPA New Income fund. That was the last year the Federal Reserve was raising interest rates, and the overall market's loss, excluding junk bonds, was 2.8 percent.
David J. Greenlaw, chief United States fixed-income economist at Morgan Stanley, said, ''The risk is that you could have another sharp correction in interest rates -- like last year -- the way the market is behaving.''
THIS is the darker of forecasts, and the returns are based on indexes for the overall market that cannot be adjusted the way an individual investor or a money manager can alter his or her portfolio to reduce losses. But it shows how painful 2004 could be.
Joseph P. Deane, a bond portfolio manager at Citigroup Asset Management, said, ''We are playing defense.'' He added that he had a lot of cash on the sidelines and had been hedging with bond futures to provide some ''downside protection.''
Bond prices, especially those of Treasuries, will be driven lower, analysts say, as interest rates rise, first in response to growth and then as traders react to the growing federal budget deficit, which some analysts now predict will reach $500 billion this year.
Then the Federal Reserve is expected to begin raising its short-term interest rate benchmark. Exactly when is being hotly debated. Some forecasters expect a move by midyear, while others do not see it until near the end of the year, and a few forecasters see no rate increase until 2005. In the end, the timing will depend on how fast the economy grows, how fast new jobs are created and when inflationary pressures rise -- all in a presidential election year.
By the end of the year, in some forecasts, the yield on the Treasury's 10-year note could be up to 5.6 percent. The fed funds rate in some forecasts will climb by one percentage point, to 2 percent.
So investors will have to be picky and will have to take on risk to have a chance for returns better than those of the overall market.
The places to be, many analysts say, are high-yield junk bonds and lower-rated investment-grade corporate bonds -- just like last year. The returns will not be as good as last year, they say, but the prices of these bonds are likely to decline less than those of higher-quality bonds because, as interest rates rise, a growing economy would improve the issuers' credit quality. In addition, the higher yields on these bonds, some in double digits, would be a nice cushion for any price decline.
Kingman D. Penniman, president of KDP Investment Advisors, predicted that junk bond returns would be relatively attractive but less than a third of what they were last year, averaging about 8 percent to 9 percent for the entire market. ''I don't think a 9 percent return is bad,'' he said, ''especially if the return for the whole market could be negative.''
Mr. Atteberry's approach is to keep the maturities of all his investments as short as possible, thereby making them less vulnerable to a rise in interest rates. The average maturity for his $1.1 billion portfolio is down to two years. About 30 percent of the portfolio is in cash, ready to invest to earn the new higher yields once bond prices have dropped and interest rates have moved up.
Mary J. Miller, an assistant director of T. Rowe Price's fixed-income group, said the best she could predict for the bond market this year was ''modestly positive returns, but lower than 2003.'' She added, ''I wouldn't recommend jumping into the market right now.''
