DURING his lecture tours in the early 20th century, Wilson Bentley was fond of saying that each of his ice-crystal photographs was unique. He had never found two identical snowflakes. Anyone who has caught a flake on a mitten or the tip of a tongue is probably familiar with the phrase he popularized: no two snowflakes are alike.
He would know. Between 1885 and 1931, Bentley, a farmer who became known as the Snowflake Man, photographed 5,381 snow crystals, most of them caught on his family's farm in Jericho, Vt. Using a bellows camera rigged to a Bausch &amp; Lomb microscope, he was the first to capture individual snowflakes on film.
Today, at the back of the photogenic Old Red Mill in Jericho -- past the working loom and the village office where residents pay their taxes and water bills -- you can see his equipment and selected prints in the Snowflake Bentley Room. The mill, perched above Browns River, is about 12 miles northeast of Burlington on Route 15. In anticipation of the winter season, my wife, Laura Farrell, and I recently took a trip to the museum. (Its hours through March are Wednesday and Saturday, 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; Sunday, 1 to 4:30. It is open daily April through December. Admission is free. More information is at 802-899-3225 or at www.snowflakebentley.com.)
Next to the oversize camera, which is three feet long when fully extended, is Bentley's black collecting tray, used to sort specimens. Snowflakes can shatter in blizzards, and even with no wind at all many crystals break their arms in their descent from the clouds. A perfectly symmetrical flake is rare, ''one in a million,'' according to Kenneth Libbrecht, a physics professor at Caltech, whose www.snowcrystals.com Web site reveals his own obsession with snow. When Bentley captured a perfect specimen, he lifted it with a broom splint, then flattened it with a wing feather. With no electricity at his farm, he illuminated the crystals with the cloud-muted sunlight that came through the barn window, giving the images a silvery, highly polished shine.
In a letter to Charlotte Bean, a woman who had requested some photographs, he hinted at his consuming passion: ''As usual, when good snowflakes are falling, I did not stop for dinner, or anything else, tho I had callers and became ravenously hungry.'' Bentley often referred to his fleeting crystals as gems: ''I wouldn't change places with Henry Ford or John D. Rockefeller for all their millions. I have my snowflakes!''
He was obsessed, which is not to say that he was limited. Bentley was a connoisseur of fog frost, window frost, frost heaves, ice flowers, raindrops, dew and the aurora borealis, which he recorded having seen 634 times from his farm over the course of 49 years.
But it was the snowflake that brought Bentley fame. Each crystal begins its journey as a microscopic speck of dust in the middle or upper atmosphere. Water vapor crystallizes around this nucleus, typically clay, and temperature and humidity determine growth. (On ski slopes, freeze-dried Pseudomonas syringae, a commercially produced bacterium isolated from corn, is used as the nucleating agent for artificial snow.)
The flake's journey is recorded in its arms. Stellar dendrites, the familiar snow crystals with six intricate branches like trees, are common in temperatures between 10 and 30 degrees. Below zero, hexagons are formed, and by minus 30, there's no innovation: the ''little artists of the snow,'' as Bentley called the forces in the clouds, restrict themselves to simple columns and pyramids.
Given that there have been millions of years of snow and millions of flakes in each storm, can each flake truly be unique, as Bentley proposed? Dr. Libbrecht insists that it is true, at least for the large crystals: ''When you have a complex shape, it's like a fingerprint. The odds of all the features falling in the same place becomes astronomically small.'' For smaller crystals, Bentley gets off on a technicality. Although the typical water molecule is composed of two hydrogen molecules and an oxygen, one out of every 5,000 water molecules has deuterium (a heavier, stable isotope of hydrogen) instead of ordinary hydrogen, and one of every 500 water molecules will have a rare isotope of oxygen. The difference is not visible to the naked eye -- or even in Bentley's pictures -- but, like human DNA, it helps determine the individuality of a flake.
''Snow Crystals,'' a book featuring 2,453 of Bentley's photomicrographs, was published a month just before his death at 66 in December 1931, of pneumonia, possibly contracted during a long walk home through melting snow. Reissued by Dover, the book is like a well-organized snowstorm. In contrast, the exhibition is almost breezy, with a hundred or so contact prints, lantern slides, stereographs and montages.
While we were visiting the mill, snow began to fall, and joyful screams descended from the sledding hill behind the museum. Later, stepping into the night, I watched stellar dendrites float out of the dark, each on its own trajectory to the same place -- a snowpack, measuring 18.8 inches by the storm's end. Even Bentley would have been impressed. It was the eighth-largest snowfall in the area since records began, and only one storm during Bentley's lifetime was known to have dropped more snow.
My wife and I abandoned our plans to drive home. We were snowed in.
DAY TRIPS
