Traditionally when the Metropolitan Opera presents Lehar's popular operetta ''The Merry Widow'' on New Year's Eve, it introduces an element of surprise into the festivities by having special guests stroll in to perform during the party scene in the last act. There was not much surprise, though, that the special visitor on Wednesday night was the ageless and amazing singer Barbara Cook, whose appearance was announced with fanfare more than two weeks ago.
But there was one genuine surprise this night, something so unexpected it startled the entire audience, all but a few complicit members of the cast, the Met's press spokesman on duty and, most important, Stephanie Ann Sheppard, a young Met soprano portraying one of the six grisettes (dancing girls) at the party.
During the festivities the soprano Emily Pulley, who was playing the role of Valencienne and serving as the hostess at the impromptu party, said that Tony Stevenson, a tenor with the company who had just sung a duet, Leonard Bernstein's ''Tonight,'' with the soprano Veronica Villarroel, had something special to share with the audience but needed the help of Ms. Sheppard, who, looking completely confused, was ushered center stage by her colleagues.
Mr. Stevenson explained to the audience that he and Ms. Sheppard met onstage when this production of ''The Merry Widow'' was introduced in the winter of 2000. They got to know each other better when the production was revived two years ago, then fell in love, he said. By this point Ms. Sheppard, looking adorably embarrassed, seemed to have guessed where Mr. Stevenson was headed.
Here they were together again on the Met stage in ''The Merry Widow,'' Mr. Stevenson said. What better time and place to pop the question? He got on his knee, brought out a ring and asked Ms. Sheppard if she would be his lifelong companion, his friend, his lover, his wife. The audience erupted with applause and shouts of, ''Say yes!'' Talk about pressure.
Blushing and overcome, after a tension-inducing pause, Ms. Sheppard did just that, loud enough for all to hear. Champagne glasses were brought out for the couple, who kissed and toasted each other, then slipped offstage for a few moments of well-deserved privacy, though they both returned for the final scene of ''The Merry Widow,'' with the vivacious and creamy-voiced mezzo-soprano Susan Graham in the title role, conducted by Kirill Petrenko.
There were, actually, a couple of other musical surprises. Ms. Villarroel also gave an ardent performance of a Neapolitan song, ''Non ti scordar.'' The dashing tenor Juan Diego Flórez, the new king of the Bel Canto repertory, sang a brilliant account of ''Ah! mes amis,'' the buoyant aria from Donizetti's ''Fille du Regiment,'' complete with all nine high C's tossed off with confidence.
Then came Ms. Cook, who seemed visibly moved to be making her Met debut at 76. She is an ardent opera fan who can be seen in the house often, not just for the crowd pleasers but for formidable evenings like ''Parsifal.'' As is her practice in her cabaret and concert work, she sang through a hand-held microphone. The Met had not quite worked out matters of amplification and balance, and Ms. Cook at times seemed to have trouble hearing the orchestra, even though the presence on the podium (and also at the piano during one song) of her longtime accompanist, Wally Harper, surely gave her confidence.
Still, at an age when most divas have been long retired, Ms. Cook is singing splendidly. She came onstage already in the midst of a heavenly rendition of Alan Jay Lerner and Burton Lane's ''On a Clear Day You Can See Forever,'' then sang ''A Wonderful Guy'' with an earnestness that made this Rodgers and Hammerstein favorite seem completely fresh. A medley followed with Rodgers and Hart's melancholic ''He Was Too Good To Me,'' and Stephen Sondheim's ''Losing My Mind,'' both performed with movingly subdued intensity.
To conclude Ms. Cook put down the microphone, walked to the rim of the stage and sang a wistfully beautiful performance of Carl Fischer and Frankie Laine's ''We'll Be Together Again.'' That her soft voice carried so truly was a testimony to her incomparable vocal technique and clear diction. It was also a meaningful nod from a great artist to the heritage of opera as a medium for natural singing.
But surely this evening will be remembered as the Met's entry into reality opera with an onstage marriage proposal.
MET OPERA REVIEW  Correction:  January 5, 2004, Monday  A Metropolitan Opera review and a picture caption on Friday about ''The Merry Widow'' referred incorrectly to the singing voice of Stephanie Ann Sheppard, the cast member who received a marriage proposal onstage on New Year's Eve. She is a mezzo-soprano, not a soprano.
