A skid mark on the road, some divots in the grass and scrape marks on a tree a few feet from the front porch of a house told nothing of the tragedy that happened here Wednesday.
''It looked like a war zone,'' Chief Rusty Alexander of the Locke Fire Department said Thursday afternoon of the scene 24 hours before, when a van carrying members of the Our Savior New American School boys' basketball team from Centereach, N.Y., on Long Island, flipped on North Carolina Highway 150, leaving one student dead and eight injured.
Kevin Mormin, 18, a 7-foot-3 junior center from Paris, who was being recruited by Division I programs, including Pittsburgh and Louisville, was killed in the accident. The assistant coach Bob Bass said school officials were working with the French consulate to have Mormin's body transported back to France.
Three players were in critical condition at Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center in Winston-Salem: the junior forward James Tchana, 17, of Cameroon; the senior guard Gary Konati, 18, of Paris; and the freshman Peter Stelzer, 14, of Seldea, N.Y., the son of the Rev. Ron Stelzer, the headmaster, pastor and coach of Our Savior.
Tchana sustained a collapsed lung, cracked sternum and broken ribs, Bass said. He was in a medically induced coma, said John Reade, a church elder who spoke at a news conference at the school in Centereach on Thursday night.
Konati had leg and hip injuries and will have surgery Friday for a fracture in his pelvis. Peter Stelzer sustained a head injury and had his spleen removed, Bass said. Tchana, Konati and Stelzer were all stable, Reade said.
Also injured were the sophomore guard Sheckem Lafayette, 16, of Brentwood, N.Y., with two fractured legs; the junior forward Benoit Bekono, 17, of Cameroon, who had a separated shoulder; the junior Hanna Stelzer, 16, who had a fractured leg; and Sara Stelzer, 12, who had a broken clavicle. Both are daughters of the coach.
Bekono, Lafayette and Hanna Stelzer were at Rowan Regional Medical Center in Salisbury.
''Our hearts are broken,'' Reade said, adding of Mormin, ''For the few months that he was here, he just captured us with his spirit and his love for other people.''
The van's driver, Emily Stelzer, 22, an English teacher at Our Savior and a daughter of the coach, was charged with misdemeanor death by vehicle and driving to the left of center. She posted a $1,000 unsecured bond and is scheduled to appear in Salisbury District Court on Feb. 24.
This was not an unusual trip for the Our Savior team, which is viewed as one of the best basketball programs in the Northeast and attracts players worldwide, with scouts from the N.B.A. and colleges often attending its games. The program, at a school of about 400 students in prekindergarten through 12th grade, was begun by Stelzer in 1992 and has competed against top teams in the country in recent years and travels to tournaments throughout the United States.
Ten to 12 of the school's students are from outside the United States, and most ''are drawn because of our basketball program,'' Reade said.
For this trip, the school used two vans to transport students from Centereach to Delaware for the Slam Dunk at the Beach tournament, Dec. 26 to 29. They then headed to Charlotte, N.C., to play in the Dell Curry High School Shootout, which began Thursday.
Ron Stelzer was driving the lead van on the trip. Emily Stelzer, who Bass said had driven the van many times before, followed her father in the second van, carrying a total of nine people.
When Ron Stelzer encountered traffic on Interstate 85 in a construction zone in Salisbury, a small town 45 miles northeast of Charlotte, he decided to take a two-lane road, Highway 150 West, Bass said. Stelzer was familiar with the back roads of North Carolina; he attended Davidson College just north of Charlotte.
The speed limit on Highway 150 at that stretch is 55 miles an hour, and the road has subtle bends, including one near the home in front of which the accident occurred.
According to a North Carolina Highway Patrol statement, Emily Stelzer's van hit the right shoulder and she overcorrected, crossing the center line and hitting a ditch bank on the left side of the road. That caused the van to flip several times. Five players were ejected, some as far as 50 to 75 feet, according to Alexander, the fire chief. Clothing and papers from the van were strewn over the front yard.
Mary Cauble, 80, of Salisbury, lives across the road and witnessed the accident.
''I just saw it as it hit that bank,'' said Cauble, who called 911. ''I thought it was going to hit the house. There are a lot of accidents here. It doesn't look like it's dangerous, but it must be. Our mailboxes have been torn down three times in the last couple of years.''
Players and students on the trip received counseling from local and school pastors in the hours after the accident. Players and family who arrived after the accident were housed at Sacred Heart Catholic Church in Salisbury on Wednesday and Thursday nights.
Bass said the team planned to travel back to Centereach on Friday by chartered bus, and a community church service is planned for Friday night. As for the rest of the basketball season, that remains undetermined.
''We're going to speak to our church board,'' Bass said. ''We're going to look at this and do what's best for the school and the youngsters involved.''
BASKETBALL
