''I DON'T want my ballets laughed at 50 years from now.'' So said George Balanchine when I asked him if he wanted his works to survive him.
What did he mean? That over time ballets are distorted or modified by dancers and choreographers when their creators are gone? Yes, but more certainly he meant that tastes change, that dancing changes and that since he choreographed for his time, even if his ballets were preserved in amber, they would not speak to another age.
Very likely Balanchine will be proved wrong. It has been 20 years since he died, and his ballets are performed more widely than ever. This month, the international ballet world mobilizes to honor the 100th anniversary of his birth in St. Petersburg, Russia, on Jan. 22, 1904.
The mobilization shifts into high gear on Tuesday when New York City Ballet begins in earnest its two-season tribute, ''Balanchine 100: The Centennial Celebration,'' at the New York State Theater. Augmented by exhibitions, panels and films in New York and performances of Balanchine ballets and related events in other American cities and abroad, this homage may seem like one more familiar act of piety.
Balanchine was one of the greatest choreographers in the history of ballet and one of the 20th century's most innovative artists. Yet after City Ballet's mammoth 1993 ''Balanchine Celebration,'' the company's 40th- and 50th-anniversary seasons in 1988 and 1998 and decades of exposure to Balanchine's choreography, what is there to learn?
Perhaps letters in exhibitions (one currently at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center and one due at the Harvard Theater Collection in April) will reveal more information about Balanchine, the man whose ancestors hailed from the former Georgian kingdom of Imeretia. Even those who knew him for years often regarded him as an enigma.
To know Balanchine in depth is to know him through his work. If there is one thing the centennial can teach us, it is that Balanchine's monumental achievement remains relevant for all time.
True, there may be surprises. Even Shakespeare slipped in popularity for a century or two. Then there are those who still do not recognize Balanchine as a radical innovator who taught audiences to look at dance in a new way. Just 10 years ago the cultural journalist Richard Kostelanetz included Stravinsky but not Balanchine in his Dictionary of the Avant-Gardes.
Stravinsky without Balanchine? Balanchine without Stravinsky? Here were two titans of modern art who shared the same objectivist sensibility. For Stravinsky music was organized sound, and for Balanchine dance was pure movement. Audiences for both were repeatedly warned not to read stories into compositions that had no narrative pretext.
It is no accident that Balanchine and Stravinsky were associated for 45 years: in direct collaboration through the four scores that Stravinsky wrote for Balanchine and more loosely through the existing Stravinsky scores that Balanchine used for many ballets. In the process, Stravinsky said, the choreographer illuminated the music to the composer himself.
Perhaps Balanchine had no equivalent of Stravinsky's ''Rite of Spring.'' He neither suffered nor enjoyed any scandal surrounding the contribution that defined him as a modernist. Moving past Serge Diaghilev's definition of ballet as a synthesis of painting, music and dance, Balanchine insisted that dance was primary. Like an abstract painter concerned with paint, he created nonillusionist art. It was art focused on its own essence. In a typical Balanchine ballet, the material of dance is dance.
To anyone familiar with Balanchine, such concepts are basic truths. More than anyone, he raised choreography in ballet to an independent art. He introduced speed, energy, attack and startling compositional patterns that pushed dance into the space age.
When ''Agon,'' the milestone Balanchine-Stravinsky collaboration, had its premiere in 1957, the choreographer and Lincoln Kirstein, City Ballet's founders, compared the work in a program note to an I.B.M. computer. How many people in 1957 knew what a computer was? At the 1958 Brussels World's Fair a guide's explanation of what the I.B.M. computer could do was greeted with general amusement, if not disbelief.
Yet in the seminal ''Agon'' Balanchine also remained loyal to the 350-year-old idiom of classical ballet. He transformed it and extended it into a contemporary language but respected it as a grammar of movement. It is this transcendent vocabulary, no doubt, that accounts for Balanchine's omission from Dictionary of the Avant-Gardes. Unlike the included -- Isadora Duncan, Martha Graham and Merce Cunningham -- he rejected the idea of a personalized dance idiom.
In his preface Mr. Kostelanetz cites his main criterion: ''My basic measures of avant-garde work are aesthetic innovation and initial unacceptability.'' If that is the basis, Balanchine more than qualifies through the 40 years it took to educate a public in his formalist aesthetic.
Tradition was the springboard for his innovation. That he used toe shoes and a centuries-old vocabulary did not make him old fashioned. Even today his focus on pure dance, steps and structure, is too rigorous for those who demand dance-drama or movement that expresses specific emotion.
But Balanchine is more than sufficient for those who appreciate the steps of the classical dance idiom that served his mentor, Marius Petipa, choreographer of ''The Sleeping Beauty'' in the 19th century. Once again it is worth repeating the significant statement Balanchine made upon his arrival in New York in 1933. ''Classicism is enduring because it is impersonal,'' he told the British critic Arnold Haskell. The dance idiom he chose was classical (codified) and impersonal (unmannered). If Balanchine will indeed remain relevant in other times, it is precisely because he uses this classical vocabulary as both form and content. It is, in fact, enduring.
Can anyone date two of his signature works by looking at them? ''Concerto Barocco,'' created in 1941 to Bach's Double Violin Concerto, has undergone a series of costume changes. Now stripped of its overdone designs and danced in white tunics for the women and black tights for its sole male dancer, it is arguably Balanchine's greatest and most spiritual work. Streamlined in its clear design but complex in its interplay between music and dance, between soloists and ensemble, it looks freshly choreographed.
By contrast ''Symphony in C'' is a grand tutu ballet. But its partnering and technique are contemporary. It is not, as might seem, one of Balanchine's tributes to the Russian Imperial Ballet. It is inspired by Balanchine's own prototypes, the neo-Classical plotless works by Léo Staats at the Paris Opera Ballet in the 1920's. Staats, he told me, was the only choreographer he admired besides Petipa.
It was for the Paris company that Balanchine first choreographed ''Symphony in C'' as ''Palais de Cristal'' in 1947. He used Bizet's youthful symphony (rediscovered in the 1930's) and filled it with evergreen youthful energy.
Balanchine became Balanchine as we know him today in the 1940's. That is, he arrived at his signature style after initial, more rebellious experiments.
Tradition, however, was in his training. His family encouraged him to study both music and dance in the Russian academies.
Meliton Balanchivadze, his father, was a composer from Kutais, the capital of Imeretia, which became the western part of Georgia after it was incorporated into the Russian Empire in 1804.
''Of his mother's origins, Balanchine knew very little in detail and of his father's not much more,'' Bernard Taper writes in his biography ''Balanchine.'' Yet once when I visited Balanchine in his office, I saw him looking at a sumptuous French book, ''The Peoples of the Russian Empire Under Alexander III,'' and he pointed to a color plate of a man and woman in national costume. ''That's my tribe,'' he said, explaining that his father's family came from Imeretia. When Balanchine joined Diaghilev's Ballets Russes, after he left Russia in 1924, his name was changed from Balanchivadze.
His mother, Maria, was Russian. Four years ago a Georgian critic from Tbilisi told me that relatives of Andrei Balanchivadze, Balanchine's composer brother, had told him that she was half Jewish, and that the family had long concealed this fact.
In any event Balanchine's family life was relatively brief. After entering the school of the Maryinsky Ballet in St. Petersburg as a day student in 1913 and becoming a boarder in 1914, he was virtually abandoned, when his parents, brother and sister, Tamara, moved to Tbilisi in 1918. Meliton became part of the Menshevik, or Socialist, government that ruled a short-lived independent Georgian Republic for three years after the Russian Revolution.
The myth is that Balanchine, as a Maryinsky student, was part of the czar's household. The reality is that his formative years were spent in the maelstrom following the czar's overthrow in 1917. Life was hard but exciting: one has only to read ''Split Seconds,'' the memoir of Tamara Geva, whom Balanchine married when he was 18. (She was 16.)
As a budding choreographer he was then more interested in barefoot acrobatics than in Petipa. The image of Geva slung over his shoulder in one of his early ballets in 1923 (''Enigma,'' but originally identified as ''Étude'') tells the story.
Geva moved to New York in 1927, when she performed ''Sarcasm,'' the first Balanchine choreography (uncredited) seen in the United States. Later he married Vera Zorina, Maria Tallchief and Tanaquil LeClercq.
The impression is that Balanchine revealed only aspects of himself to individuals and very few saw the complete picture. He wore his persona as a mask. Outwardly he displayed little emotion and more than one critic accused him of creating ballets with no heart. When I quoted him as saying, ''I have never cried at the ballet -- I never cry anytime,'' Geva told me this was not true.
Russians knew him best. Once we spent two hours speaking Russian, and his mask dropped. From then on, his personality was completely different, more revealing. Still, Mr. Taper wrote, ''he guarded well his mystery.''
Perhaps he was merely tired of explaining the Russian émigré experience and the cultural baggage that made him different from Americans. He had lived through the artistic ferment of Russia in the 1920's, had choreographed ballets for Diaghilev, for the Royal Danish Ballet and for English music halls. He had been asked to be ballet master at the Paris Opera Ballet. But in New York he was initially treated as a talented unknown by all but his patron, Lincoln Kirstein. When Balanchine said, ''Classicism is enduring,'' most in the dance audience didn't know what he was talking about in 1933. Now they do.
Centenary Events
The 100th anniversary of the birth of George Balanchine is being celebrated with a number of special events, including exhibitions, television screenings and dance performances. Beginning Tuesday the New York City Ballet is featuring 54 Balanchine works during two seasons that will end in June at the New York State Theater, Lincoln Center; tickets range from $20 to $80; information: (212) 870-5570. A schedule of events, including the January performance schedule for the New York City Ballet, follows.
New York City Ballet
''A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.'' Tuesday night at 9:30; Jan. 10, at 2 and 8 p.m.; Jan. 15, at 8 p.m.; Jan. 16, at 8 p.m.; Jan. 18, at 3 p.m.
ALL BALANCHINE PROGRAMS. ''Apollo,'' ''Scotch Symphony'' and ''Tchaikovsky Piano Concerto No. 2,'' Wednesday at 8 p.m.; ''Tchaikovsky Piano Concerto No. 2,'' ''Concerto Barocco'' and ''Slaughter on 10th Avenue,'' Thursday at 8 p.m.; ''Serenade,'' ''Scotch Symphony'' and ''Prodigal Son,'' Jan. 9, at 8 p.m.; ''Apollo,'' Donizetti Variations'' and ''Slaughter on 10th Avenue,'' Jan. 13, at 7:30 p.m.; ''Serenade'' and ''Harlequinade,'' Jan. 17, at 2 p.m.; ''Apollo'' and ''Harlequinade,'' Jan. 17, at 8 p.m.; ''Tchaikovsky Piano Concerto No. 2'' and ''Harlequinade,'' Jan. 20, at 7:30 p.m.; ''Apollo,'' ''Serenade'' and ''Prodigal Son,'' Jan. 22, at 8 p.m.; ''Donizetti Variations,'' ''Apollo'' and ''Serenade,'' Jan. 30, at 8 p.m.; ''Donizetti Variations,'' ''Scotch Symphony'' and ''Tchaikovsky Piano Concerto No. 2,'' Jan. 31, at 8 p.m.
PARTIAL BALANCHINE PROGRAMS. ''Concerto Barocco,'' ''Prodigal Son'' and ''Slaughter on 10th Avenue,'' Jan. 11, at 3 p.m.; ''Concerto Barocco,'' ''Apollo'' and ''Slaughter on 10th Avenue,'' Jan. 14, at 8 p.m.; ''Harlequinade,'' Jan. 21, at 8 p.m.; ''Prodigal Son'' and ''Tchaikovsky Piano Concerto No. 2,'' Jan. 27, at 7:30 p.m.
Exhibition
''THE ENDURING LEGACY OF GEORGE BALANCHINE,'' New York Library for the Performing Arts, 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, Lincoln Center. A multimedia exhibition with photographs, designs, costumes, set models, videotapes and recordings on view through April 24. Also, four lectures in conjunction with the exhibition: ''Cabin in the Sky: The Collaboration Among Boris Aronson, George Balanchine and Vernon Duke,'' Jan. 24, at 3 p.m.; ''Balanchine in Paris,'' Feb. 21, at 3 p.m.; ''Before New York City Ballet: George Balanchine in the 1940's,'' Feb. 26, at 6 p.m.; and ''Poetry in Motion: Stravinsky and Balanchine's Musical Bond,'' March 4, at 6 p.m. Hours: Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, noon to 6 p.m.; Thursdays, noon to 8 p.m.; closed Sundays, Mondays and holidays. Free. Information: (212) 870-1630.
Television
MUSEUM OF TELEVISION AND RADIO, 25 West 52nd Street, Manhattan. ''A Celebration of George Balanchine: Selected Television Work,'' featuring programs from the ''Dance in America'' series of the late 1970's. Tuesdays through Sundays at 12:30 p.m., Thursdays at 6 p.m. Through March 7. Admission: $10; students and 62+, $8; children 13 and younger, $5. Information: (212) 621-6800.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
