A woman picked through the wreckage of her home for her husband's wedding ring, shopkeepers swept broken glass from their floors and American soldiers stepped over human remains scattered across a narrow street.
That was how New Year's Day began Thursday in the upscale Arasat neighborhood, as people started the grim task of sifting through the debris of their lives after a car bomb tore through Nabil Restaurant here on New Year's Eve.
American and Iraqi officials said 8 people were killed in the explosion and 35 wounded, including 3 American journalists. American officials said someone had parked a car loaded with 400 pounds of explosives on a side street next to the restaurant, which was destroyed in the blast.
Also on Thursday, military officials said an American soldier was killed and six others injured when their truck overturned on the way to Baghdad International Airport.
On New Year's Eve, Nabil Restaurant was packed with revelers when the explosion ripped through the building around 9:30 p.m.
Next door was a half-destroyed two-story home belonging to a Christian woman, Feryal Kazanci. She also leased out the land on which Nabil Restaurant sat. Ms. Kazanci had to climb through a window on Thursday to get into her home, as rubble had covered the front door.
''Who's going to pay for this?'' she said as she fought back tears in her debris-strewn living room. ''My home's destroyed, my two cars are destroyed, my husband's in the hospital. What am I supposed to do?''
Her husband was wounded in the blast, she said, and she was here to look for his wedding band.
The attack on Nabil prompted many owners and managers of upscale restaurants to reflect on their security measures, but few said they would do anything differently.
''We decided to continue our work because our restaurant was open throughout the war,'' said Jinan Raful, the manager of Al Lathakia, a Syrian-owned restaurant 650 feet from Nabil that is also popular with foreigners. ''We can't do anything to protect ourselves because if we put up concrete walls and hire a lot of guards, then nobody will visit us anymore.''
About 10 Iraqi diners were sitting in the restaurant in the early afternoon. Waiters whisked plates of kebab and pita bread to their tables.
At Al Ghota, a restaurant serving Iraqi and Western food in the nearby Karada neighborhood, the owner, Ahmed Ooda Abdullah, reflected on the work of the insurgents.
''Muslims and Christians denounce that,'' he said. ''But if I hire more armed guards, then that won't do anything. When terrorists try to destroy something, they'll destroy it. There's nothing you can do.''
