The new year was precisely seven minutes old, with Times Square still rumbling with fireworks, when another rumble came from uptown: a convoy of city cleanup vehicles moving eastward on West 57th Street.
''Let's go, let's go,'' shouted an officer from the City Department of Sanitation, even as revelers continued to scream ''Happy New Year'' and sing ''Auld Lang Syne.''
The officer directed the fleet of vehicles -- dump trucks, street sweepers, a tow truck and a bus full of sanitation workers -- onto Broadway toward Times Square. Meanwhile, on 34th Street, another fleet started working its way up Broadway and Seventh Avenue.
The big cleanup had begun. To watch it -- minute by minute, block by block, broom stroke by broom stroke -- was to witness the unfolding of a sprawling operation of almost military planning and precision that transformed the center of the city, an operation that continued right up until 2 p.m. yesterday.
While the extensive preparation mounted by the city to pull off the New Year's Eve celebration is recognized worldwide, this second performance is virtually unseen -- by the millions who tuned in on television and by the throngs who had already turned their backs as they sought their first entertainments of 2004. But in many ways it is just as carefully organized, and just as old as the celebration itself.
''We're not patting ourselves on the back, but we do an excellent job,'' said Keith W. Mellis, a spokesman for the Sanitation Department, who added that the operation is refined and tweaked each year. ''Everyone thinks it ends with the ball dropping, but behind the scenes, our guys are busy cleaning so that in morning, things can get back to normal.''
It was early afternoon Wednesday when many of the hundreds of thousands of visitors began arriving; by evening they stood cordoned into groups by metal barricades. Terrorism fears prompted the city to remove all sidewalk trash cans for the evening, said Michael R. Murphy, a deputy chief for the city's Sanitation Department, who directed the cleanup. This meant that as visitors ate, drank and discarded, the streets became their repositories.
For the cleanup, the area from 34th to 57th Streets between Sixth and Eighth Avenues was divided into six zones. Starting at midnight -- remember the fireworks' lingering rumble -- crews began working their way toward 42nd Street. After an initial pass by street-sweeping vehicles, workers using brooms and blowers moved the trash from sidewalks into the street. Then the sweepers rolled by a second time and picked up piles of litter by slowly encircling them in a tightening spiral.
''Look how nice this is,'' Mr. Murphy said, walking up to a section of Broadway, at 48th Street, that had just been swept for the second time.
A block south, the sweepers were circling. Mr. Murphy pointed to one and said, ''I think she's getting ready to dump.''
With that, the street sweeper used a hydraulic lift to tilt its hopper full of trash into a dump truck. Mr. Murphy pointed to the sweeper's rotating brushes and explained that they whisk the trash onto a conveyer belt that then moves it into the sweeper's hopper.
The monster cleanup was handled by 66 city workers, 54 of whom worked from 11 p.m. Wednesday night until 7 a.m. yesterday and another dozen of whom worked from 6 a.m. to 2 p.m.
Of that, 24 workers swept up with hand brooms (manual litter patrol) and two others used backpack-style leaf blowers. There were also 14 workers driving street sweepers (mechanical broom operators). There were four dump trucks and two pickup trucks. By 10:30 a.m. yesterday, workers had removed 28 truckloads of debris and 11 loads of the sweepings of mechanical brooms.
In addition, 50 workers employed by the Times Square Alliance (formerly known as the Times Square Business Improvement District) joined the cleanup, said Tim Tompkins, president of the alliance.
At one point, a worker using a blower at Broadway and 46th Street, pointed out the difficulty of cleaning confetti while trying to direct it into piles.
''It's kind of fun doing this, but the wind takes it up and it comes back,'' the worker said.
The swirls of confetti created an opportunity for some lingering revelers to revive the celebration. They grabbed handfuls of confetti from the pile and danced in the swirling bits of colored paper.
One worker, Eddie Markovich, 42, celebrated while he swept.
Mr. Markovich, who wears a funky blond hairstyle, chatted with revelers and briefly joined the dancing in the confetti swirl, bouncing joyfully while holding his broom. Then he allowed several revelers the privilege of sweeping up Times Square.
He called New Year's Eve trash mostly party refuse -- cleaner than your average garbage. ''This is what I call civilized trash,'' he said.
Some was not trash, but treasure. Sweeping vehicles heading south on Broadway came upon a dozen unopened bottles of liquor left neatly in the middle of the street. A police officers pointed out the cache of booze to some pedestrians, who then gleefully ran over and snatched up the bottles.
''Well, free drinks,'' said Katy Allgood, 22, a student from Astoria, Queens. ''I didn't get to drink before.''
Some was most definitely not treasure. Workers said that this year -- as in other years -- they found numerous bottles of urine, apparently created in desperation by revelers penned in for the dropping of the ball and unable to get to bathrooms.
By 2:30 a.m., most of the streets and sidewalks had been cleared and Mr. Markovich and other sweepers concentrated on their final block, Broadway between 45th 46th Streets, which had a particularly large accumulation of debris.
Not all the confetti was destined for the dump. At Broadway and 46th Street, Tony Everett, 32, and Caroline Monck, 18, both visiting from London, scooped up handfuls of confetti and stuffed it into Ms. Monck's black leather handbag.
''My mother would love to have been here,'' Ms. Monck said. ''When we get back home, we're going to re-create the event for her.''
City sanitation officials say they expect about 25 tons of celebratory refuse. This year it was 26 tons, a mix of confetti, party hats, noisemakers, streamers and smuggled-in beer cans. (The largest cleanup came after the 2001 party left 35 tons.)
By noon yesterday, all that remained of the 26 tons were the few stubborn bits of colorful confetti clinging to moist patches of asphalt. Trash was scarce and there was little evidence at all of the huge party hours earlier.
''You come to work tomorrow morning, it's like there was no party,'' said Mr. Murphy, the cleanup director.
