As federal investigators search for cows that were imported from Canada with the cow that was found to have the nation's first known case of mad cow disease, Washington State officials have begun a process that will kill the offspring of the sick cow.
The cow, which was sent from a dairy farm in Mabton, Wash., and slaughtered on Dec. 9, gave birth to a bull calf shortly before slaughter. That calf was sent to a feedlot in Sunnyside, about 10 miles north of the Mabton ranch, but because officials cannot pinpoint the calf, they plan to kill all bull calves in the feedlot herd of 464 that are under 30 days old, the same age as the sick cow's offspring, said Linda Waring, a spokeswoman for the state's Department of Agriculture.
It is still unclear how many calves will have to die, Ms. Waring said Thursday.
Experts say the risk of cows passing on mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy, to their offspring is extremely low. But officials decided it was prudent to destroy the young bull calves, Ms. Waring said.
''Basically, it would be all bull calves under 30 days of age,'' she said. ''They are identifying them now.''
Officials have not disclosed the name of the Sunnyside feedlot.
Officials from the United States Department of Agriculture made the decision to kill the bull calves at the Sunnyside ranch, Ms. Waring said. They are leading the investigation, she said, and have not yet decided whether to kill a separate herd of about 4,000 cows at the Mabton ranch, which is under quarantine. Another calf born to the sick cow is still at the Mabton ranch, the Sunny Dene Ranch, where federal officials said they had identified nine other live animals that came from the same herd as the sick cow.
The difficulty in pinpointing the offspring of the diseased cow comes amid other difficulties in identifying the location and fate of 81 cows thought to have been shipped to the United States from Alberta, Canada, in August 2001.
Both the Canadian and United States government have called it ''premature'' to assume any link between two cases of mad cow disease and a single rendering plant in Alberta, where both animals may have been born or raised.
The Edmonton Journal reported on Wednesday that Canadian agricultural officials had asked for the records of West Coast Reduction, a plant in that city that boils animal carcasses down into oils, fat and protein powder.
Dr. Ron DeHaven, chief veterinarian for the United States Department of Agriculture, said Wednesday that the plant was being investigated but that it was ''premature to drawn any conclusions.'' In any case, Dr. DeHaven added, the plant would have bought animals to render from many ranches.
Correction:  January 3, 2004, Saturday  An article yesterday about plans to kill the offspring of a cow that was found to have mad cow disease misstated the role of Washington State agriculture officials. They are helping to identify a group of bull calves that include one born to the infected cow, but it is the United States Department of Agriculture that will kill the animals.
