THERE are only three rooms in the Babits-Feinerman apartment on 100th Street and West End Avenue, and Lucas, 14, has the bedroom.
His parents, Marty Babits, 55, a psychotherapist, and Shelley Feinerman, an artist and teacher, sleep on an old Murphy bed (with new hydraulics) in a room divided by a paper screen, behind which are stored Ms. Feinerman's paintings, a computer desk, a folded, gateleg dining room table and two bookshelves crammed with titles.
There are only three chairs here, too: a black canvas folding lounge chair that belongs to Mr. Babits, a maroon floor cushion that Lucas, a gregarious host, pulls out when guests stop by, and a handsome bentwood glider-rocker that Ms. Feinerman found for $40 in a thrift shop. ''I thought, 'I don't know where I'm going to put this, but I'm bringing it home,' '' she said.
The constraints -- or opportunities, depending on your perspective -- of this 700-square-foot one-bedroom, which rents for $700 a month, have shaped this family since 1984, when Mr. Babits and his sister Linda swapped apartments.
''The small space teaches you that you can't be too fixed in your thinking, meaning in thinking about what's possible in a room, or what a room is for, and it has presented choices,'' said Mr. Babits, explaining one of them. Fifteen years ago, Mr. Babits said, he was a songwriter in graduate school for social work. He had to make a choice between a keyboard, and a desk: there was not room for both. ''So I had to think quite seriously about what it meant to be a therapist,'' he said.
BUT in 1984, he was making music exclusively, and his sister Linda was a classical pianist with a 14-year old son. Linda taught the Alexander technique, a system of body movement and alignment, to other pianists in the room where Ms. Feinerman and Mr. Babits now sleep; her Steinway grand is gone, but the mirror she installed on a wall remains. Marty had a large two-bedroom across the street; he had broken up with a girlfriend and wanted a fresh start.
This apartment was a family heirloom, having been passed down from one Babits sister to another since 1969 -- there were three, Olivia, Jane and Linda -- and never losing its rent-stabilized qualification.
The Babits grew up on Cherry Street on the Lower East Side, in the same building as Ethel and Julius Rosenberg. Their mother was a political activist, their father a publicist.
Ms. Feinerman had grown up in Queens, in a series of one-bedroom apartments with her sister, Carole, and their mother, a dress-designer-turned-secretary, who slept on a pullout couch in the living rooms. Saturday nights her Aunt Sylvia would arrive, and the two women would re-arrange all the furniture for fun. Since she moved in with Mr. Babits in 1984, Ms. Feinerman and her husband have been moving furniture here, too, refining the space to fit the different roles they found themselves in.
In the beginning, they slept in the bedroom. Mr. Babits wrote songs in the middle room, which boasts a bathroom and tiny kitchenette, and Ms. Feinerman painted in the back. When Lucas arrived in 1989, the year Mr. Babits graduated from Fordham, Lucas won the bedroom and his parents hung a Murphy bed from a middle-room wall.
''It's always been about choices in this apartment,'' said Ms. Feinerman who, with her fiery, corkscrew-curly hair and blue jeans, looks decades younger than her 57 years. Ms. Feinerman, who works as a special education teacher in the city's public schools, took six years off when Lucas was born.
''That was a choice, too: to stay home with Lucas, or move to a bigger apartment,'' she said. ''With one income, and the cost of my painting, and Marty's student loans, we chose to stay here. Soon, it became, 'Do we move to another borough?' but Marty was growing his practice in Manhattan, so we stayed on. Now, Lucas is a real city kid, and while I'm ready to move, he wants to stay.''
As Lucas grew, the middle room began to feel like nothing so much as a hallway to the one bathroom, and Mr. Babits and Ms. Feinerman moved the Murphy bed to the back room. ''Marty was very generous, and let me have the middle room to paint,'' said Ms. Feinerman, who paints naturalist-fantasy still lifes all winter and, when she can, landscapes from nature.
Her lush and romantic canvases now fill this room, along with her still-life props -- a creamy eggplant colored vase, a clutch of lavender flowers -- so that the room itself is as vividly colored, as whimsical and naturalistic, as one of her paintings.
Not having space can alter a career, as in Mr. Babits's case, and change habits. How you eat, for example. With no table (that gateleg, buried under Ms. Feinerman's canvases, is for parties only) and no dining chairs, no counters, and no kitchen cabinets, cooking is ''a real production,'' Ms. Feinerman said.
So the three eat takeout, separately, during the week; Ms. Feinerman pulls the Murphy bed down and sits on it like a couch, Lucas retreats to his room, and Mr. Babits, who works quite late, mostly eats in his office in Lincoln Towers. Sunday nights they eat as a family, picnic style on the floor in front of the Murphy bed.
Cooking, like painting outside, is saved up for August, which the family spends in Vermont. September can be hard, Ms. Feinerman said, ''when we have to fit everything back in here like the clown car in the circus. Some years I make peace with it, and some years I don't. ''
At night, Mr. Babits likes to sit among the paintings and read, in that glider-rocker, as it happens; if Ms. Feinerman wants to paint, she has to -- gently -- ask him to leave.
''You have to say, 'I want to be in here now,' '' she explained, ''so the other person doesn't feel thrown out.'' For a marriage, this presents certain difficulties. ''It's less natural, you can't just meander from one room to the other,'' she said. ''If you fight, you have leave the apartment.''
MR. BABITS is working on a book about couples, the idea for which sprung, in part, from life in this apartment. Titled ''The Middle Ground,'' it explores his notion that couples need to conceive a mental area that is something between his position and hers.
''When you're sharing in an atmosphere of scarcity,'' he said in a peculiarly apt definition of marriage, though he was referring to their home, ''sometimes you may want more than there is, for instance, space for yourself. You have to learn to accommodate the fact that you may be getting less than you want, but it isn't the other person's fault. It's a way of reinterpreting the feeling of not having something.''
Habitats | 100th Street and West End Avenue
