The 100-mile-an-hour man gave Scott Kazmir the most ironic piece of advice: slow down.
Billy Wagner, whose fastball can top out at triple digits, sat down with Kazmir, the Mets' most precocious prospect, two years ago in the dugout at Minute Maid Park, when it was still called Enron Field and Wagner was still closing games for the Houston Astros. Kazmir was only a senior at Cypress Falls High School in northwest Houston, but he was being hailed as the latest in a long line of Texas fireballers and compared to Kerry Wood, Roger Clemens and Nolan Ryan.
When a television reporter asked Kazmir about succeeding those Lone Star legends, he looked into the camera and said he had patterned himself mostly after Wagner. They are both left-handed, both less than 6 feet tall and both throw fastballs that reach the high 90's. Sensing an ideal photo opportunity, the television station arranged for Kazmir to interview Wagner in the Astros' dugout for a sports highlight show. Only after the segment, when Wagner waved away the producers and cameramen, did the real interview begin.
''We talked for almost an hour,'' Kazmir said. ''He told me about the minor leagues, what to expect, and he told me to be patient. It's hard right now, because I want everything to come right away. But I think about how he told me to wait for my time.''
Wagner's message may also resonate with the entire Mets organization. The club is being prodded to answer the Yankees, especially since their acquisition of Alex Rodriguez, and there is an obvious temptation for the Mets to showcase the brightest face of the franchise as soon as possible.
But that face -- more like a baby face -- belongs to a 20-year-old who still calls his parents every day, hikes his stirrups to his knees and looks awe-struck at Mike Piazza's locker, whispering, ''It's unreal.''
While Kazuo Matsui garners most of the attention at spring training, the other Kaz is wearing No. 74, a sign he will probably end up at Class AA Binghamton or perhaps Class A Port St. Lucie, where he pitched the Mets to a victory over Dunedin last season to clinch the Florida State League championship. In that outing, Kazmir worked his way in and out of jams, showing he is a plausible candidate to eventually help the Mets out of the woods.
''I remember that game well because I saw him being very composed, never flustered,'' said Ken Oberkfell, who managed Kazmir at Port St. Lucie and could manage him at Binghamton this season. ''There's no question he's a major league pitcher in the future. I'm not saying he's Sandy Koufax, but he has electric stuff.''
The Mets are careful not to bill Kazmir as the next Dwight Gooden, the ultimate example of a 20-year-old who did not need any more minor league seasoning, but Kazmir has similar credentials. He led the minor leagues in strikeouts per nine innings last season and was named the Mets' top prospect by Baseball America. With the Brooklyn Cyclones in 2002, he pitched 18 innings, struck out 34 and allowed one run.
Kazmir worked out this winter with Florida's Josh Beckett and, upon arriving at spring training, the Mets pitcher and Houston native Scott Strickland said, ''That kid has an arm like a thunderbolt.'' So few batters have reached base against Kazmir that he has not learned how to hold runners on. His fastball has also been so overwhelming that he has not had to locate it.
With their new pitching coach, Rick Peterson, the Mets believe Kazmir and those like him will reach Shea Stadium in due time. Dominant pitching has marked the finest periods in the club's history, and over the past five years, the Mets have emphasized the development of young pitchers.
''There is a significant difference from five years ago, and I can say that because of the players we're being asked for in trades,'' said Gary LaRocque, the Mets' director of baseball operations, who oversees the farm system. ''We're constantly being asked for pitchers.''
The most popular are Matt Peterson, Bob Keppel and Royce Ring, all of whom are in spring training. Further away are Jeremy Hill, Kole Strayhorn and José Diaz, who could reach spring training next season. The final phase of pitching prospects includes Shane Hawk, Brian Bannister and Matt Lindstrom, recent acquisitions who could progress quickly but are most likely a few years off.
Distant promise is of little consolation to fans in New York, the quick-fix capital of the sports world, where Rodriguez makes more headlines than a crop of young pitchers. But part of the reason the Mets finished in last place in the National League East the past two seasons was their farm system, which was ranked 27th by Baseball Weekly five years ago. Now it is ranked third.
At the head of the class is a pitcher the Mets should probably not have been in position to draft. Kazmir pitched four consecutive no-hitters as a junior at Cypress Falls, was named Baseball America's high school player of the year as a senior and finished his career averaging two strikeouts an inning. The Cincinnati Reds seemed all set to take him with the third overall pick in 2002.
But right before the draft, the Reds became nervous about Kazmir's potential contract demands. He tumbled down the board, falling below a pitcher from his own high school, Chris Everts. The Mets, who had a scout in attendance every time Kazmir pitched his senior year, picked him 15th, then signed him to a relatively reasonable contract worth $2.15 million.
''I remember those teams that passed on me,'' Kazmir said. ''It's always in the back of my head. It's something that pushes me when I go out there.''
The future of the Mets has a past. Moments before his first major league spring training workout Friday, Kazmir thought back to the day when he was 9 and his mother, Deborah, told him she had breast cancer. Although Kazmir did not understand what it meant, he remembers the fear that coursed through him.
''I didn't know what was going on, but I knew it was very scary,'' Kazmir said. ''I think that took a lot to overcome.''
Deborah Kazmir has been cancer-free for the past six years, but Scott has a long memory. Whether a draft-day slight or a family illness, he seems to bring every motivating factor to each pitch.
Perhaps that is how he gets that extra mile an hour or two. Like Wagner, Kazmir has a powerful lower body, but his small stature and relatively mild manner belie the force with which he can deliver a baseball. When he winds up and reaches back, he seems to find something extra.
In many ways, he tries to mimic Wagner's mentality and his mechanics, but there is one apparent difference between Kazmir and Wagner, his boyhood idol.
Kazmir insists he will never be a closer. He is too intent on starting something.
INSIDE PITCH
The Mets hired LEON LEE to be the manager of their short-season Class A team, the Brooklyn Cyclones. Lee, the father of Chicago Cubs first baseman DERREK LEE, is most recognized in Japan. He managed the Orix Blue Wave of the Japanese league last season, was the Cubs' Pacific Rim scout and is still regarded as one of the best hitters in Japanese league history. . . . Reliever SCOTT STRICKLAND, who had elbow surgery in June, completed a workout Saturday and said he expected to be pitching for the Mets in May. Strickland plans to spend April working out in Port St. Lucie, then begin a rehabilitation assignment.
BASEBALL
