''ARE these the new city cabs?'' a hopeful passer-by asked on St. Marks Place in the East Village, where the distinctive upright shape of a London taxi was stopping pedestrians in their tracks.
If London cabs can make it here, they can make it anywhere, so New Yorkers' positive reactions thrilled the cab's driver, Jeff Nieves, vice president of a Massachusetts company that hopes the English imports can gain a foothold in the United States.
His cab drew admirers in front of the New York Public Library, and an inquiry from a BBC employee, Naomi Bradford, who was interested in taking clients for rides to give them a taste of old England. Several admirers said they had been in the taxis during visits to Britain and were impressed by the legroom and luggage space.
Two young tourists on St. Marks Place were actual Londoners, Hannah McCall and Roisin Wilson. ''In London it would be dirtier, have adverts on the side, no-smoking signs and a notice that if you get sick inside it's a £10 fine,'' Ms. Wilson said after trying out the back seat.
The London taxi is steeped in tradition, regulated by the Conditions of Fitness dating to 1679, which applied then to horse-drawn carriages. One of the seemingly quaint conditions -- a requirement that gentlemen passengers be able to keep their top hats on -- dictates the cab's distinctive tall windows and high stance. The 25-foot turning radius required by the Public Carriage Office of London since 1907 (and reaffirmed last year) ensures that the cab is highly maneuverable. The rules are strict for cab drivers, too: they must acquire ''the Knowledge'' of some 320 city routes.
The latest design of the London cab, built by LTI Ltd. in Coventry, England, dates to 1997. The rear compartment offers limousine-size accommodations for three passengers, plus two jump seats, one of which swivels out to the curb. In the wood-paneled Executive Sedan driven by Mr. Nieves, passengers recline on leather seats with their own controls for air-conditioning, interior lights and a built-in intercom.
The only hint of the taxi's plebeian roots is its extra-firm ride, which jars passengers into taking notice of Manhattan potholes. Mr. Nieves attributes this characteristic to the cab's structural rigidity, a factor in its estimated life span of 500,000 miles.
Larry Smith started London Taxis North America of Sudbury, Mass., in 2001 after seeing the latest edition of the London classic, the TXII, while on vacation in England. He quickly concluded that it was more accommodating than the American limousine his family had taken to the airport.
''I told them I wanted to market the taxis in the U.S., and they told me they'd heard that before,'' said Mr. Smith, a mechanical engineer who also started the Finagle a Bagel chain in Boston.
But Mr. Smith persevered where others had failed, ushering the car through the laborious process for American certification, including emissions approval and crash testing. Two versions are offered: the basic taxi and the London Executive Sedan, designed for livery services.
Others have tried to introduce London taxis in the United States. Austin FX3's were briefly on the road in New York in the early 1950's, and FX4's were tested in Philadelphia later in that decade. In the mid-1980's, the London Coach Company of Mount Clemens, Mich., imported FX4's without engines, fitting them with Ford Pinto motors. This attempt to market the taxis also failed. Some FX4's ended up in private hands, like one with 250,000 miles on the odometer that belongs to Murray Jackson, a Canadian taxi enthusiast in Ottawa.
To pass muster in America, the latest taxi leaves the factory with left-hand drive, a redesigned fuel system and side marker lights. A driver air bag and extra insulation are added in the United States. Three years since the company was founded, London Taxis has put more than 100 vehicles on American roads. It hopes to sell 600 in the next year.
The basic taxi costs $49,000, and the executive version is in the mid-$50,000 range -- steep in comparison with a $24,000 Ford Crown Victoria cab. So what is the appeal to taxi operators? Mr. Smith said the TXII was the only vehicle in the world currently purpose-built as a taxi, without the need to also serve as ''transportation for soccer moms.''
Mr. Smith added that the cab catered to passenger comfort with easy access through big doors that open at a 90-degree angle and more legroom than a first-class airplane seat. With its built-in ramp, the taxi is also wheelchair accessible and has features for the sight- and hearing-impaired, like yellow grab handles and an intercom tuned for hearing aids.
Its 2.4-liter turbo-diesel engine, built by Ford, is used in European transit vans. The company promises fuel economy of 24 miles per gallon in the city, 28 on the highway.
The London taxi benefits from a reservoir of good will generated by frequent visitors to Britain. Elaine Showalter, the feminist author and professor of English at Princeton, has described the London taxi as one of the four best ideas in transportation. In an e-mail message, she called the car a ''luxury liner'' compared with ''the dirty, beat-up New York yellow cab with its two inches of precarious passenger legroom.'' And London cab drivers, she added, ''will discuss politics and sports with you, help you with your luggage, welcome you to the city and call you 'luv.'''
The beachhead for today's newly immigrated London taxi was Detroit, where a taxi company, Checker Cab, bought three. These were put into service for weddings, airport duty and special events.
''There are a lot of double takes and stares from people when they ride around Detroit,'' said Timothy J. McCarthy, president of Checker Cab. ''People here see it as a unique, novel way to travel, and they like the roominess and special amenities.''
A dozen London taxis are in use in Ottawa, the Canadian capital. There is a small fleet in Chicago, where they are used in advertising promotions; three in Bronxville, N.Y.; and a handful in the Boston area. London taxis began cruising the steep streets of San Francisco this month. While London Taxis does not now plan to market the taxis in New York City, that remains a possibility.
One happy operator is Barry Lynch of Leesburg, Va., a native of England who arrived in the United States when he was 10. Mr. Lynch says his 8-year-old daughter persuaded him to go into the taxi business after he was laid off from a high-tech job. She saw one on a trip to London and proclaimed it the ''coolest car in the world.''
Mr. Lynch looked into buying a vintage car, then discovered London Taxis. ''The next thing you know, we have one of the first cars coming off the boat,'' he said.
The cab is in use from 4 to midnight daily, taking passengers to the airport and transporting couples to dinner parties and weddings. ''People smile at you all the time,'' Mr. Lynch said. His repeat business is more than 70 percent, and he now awaits delivery of his second London taxi.
