When the manufacturer of the drug OxyContin -- a top-selling prescription painkiller that was proving lethal in a ballooning black market -- needed to tackle its growing legal and public relations problems, it hired a former mayor of New York best known for his formidable public safety credentials, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Only months later, the Department of Justice, the cabinet agency charged with combating drug crimes and abuse, including traffic in OxyContin, also turned to Mr. Giuliani, a former federal prosecutor, and the consulting firm he had set up with a dozen of his aides.
The dual contracts only hint at Mr. Giuliani's remarkable success in building a business empire since leaving City Hall in December 2001.
In its two years of existence, his firm, Giuliani Partners, has earned tens of millions of dollars by assembling an extremely broad range of clients, jumping almost immediately into the ranks of the nation's most prestigious consulting firms, according to two industry guides.
A detailed examination of its business practices shows that the firm's work for its base of 20 or so clients -- with at least two on different sides of the same issue -- stretches well beyond providing advice on policing and domestic security, the type of job that has produced the most publicity for Giuliani Partners.
The firm has been hired to improve public confidence in a horse-racing gambling operation. It has advised New York hospitals on buying bulk supplies, helped expand a California-based business that sells inexpensive wills, and set up an alliance with a large accounting firm to fight computer hackers.
More recently the partnership moved into the world of venture capital, working with Bear Stearns &amp; Company to invest $300 million in security-related businesses, with Giuliani Partners to eventually share in the profits of businesses that succeed.
Taken together, the firm's deals, carried out chiefly by a handful of former civil servants, have made the partnership one of the most novel and lucrative ventures ever begun by an out-of-office American politician, avoiding the familiar path of many ex-officials who join law firms or become lobbyists.
The firm, which opened in January 2002 in affiliation with Ernst &amp; Young, the global accounting firm, is clearly and without apology driven by the stature Mr. Giuliani gained in commanding the New York City Police Department and in guiding the city after the World Trade Center attack. It is sustained by the advice Mr. Giuliani and his partners offer in appearances they make around the nation and the world, warning audiences that more attacks are almost certainly on the way. Such predictions, of course, benefit both the former mayor's firm and the clients he has retained, many of them involved in selling terrorism preparedness products.
''I'm not a piano player,'' Mr. Giuliani said, discussing his firm's security work. ''That isn't what I learned how to do. What I learned how to do is law enforcement, security, reduction of crime, running organizations.''
Every step Mr. Giuliani takes, including appearances in California, Florida, Pennsylvania and five other states over the past month, elevates his profile as a businessman in advance of the return to politics that he acknowledges is all but inevitable.
Through it all, Mr. Giuliani has moderated the stridency and confrontational tactics he often employed as mayor, avoiding issues that caused controversy in City Hall and staying with the building blocks of his improved reputation.
Former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, an occasional political ally of Mr. Giuliani, said he was impressed by the former mayor's successful marriage of big business with high-profile politics. ''He is a better politician out of office, than in it,'' Mr. Cuomo said.
Most of the firm's clients benefit from the Mr. Giuliani's reputation and advice to sell their products in a straightforward way. But the firm's broad range of interests, like that of many enterprises headed by once-powerful politicians, has at times produced some awkward appearances.
Bear Stearns, for instance, benefited from tens of millions of dollars in tax breaks offered by Mr. Giuliani when he was mayor and it was threatening to leave the city. And Nextel Communications, the wireless phone carrier based in Reston, Va., has offered the partnership compensation worth at least $15 million, in part to help its pursuit of an important reshuffling of the radio spectrum from the Federal Communications Commission. At the same time, Mr. Giuliani and his staff have also served as unpaid advisers to the F.C.C., spending more than a year helping prepare a report about how local governments can best communicate with the public during catastrophic events, an assignment that was brokered by Nextel's chief regulatory counsel.
Nothing the former mayor has done appears to violate any formal conflict-of-interest rules. Mr. Giuliani said he scrupulously avoids any conflict in his sometimes overlapping roles, adding that he is not a registered lobbyist.
''Everybody knows what we're doing, so there's nothing hidden,'' said Mr. Giuliani, whose firm now has 58 employees. ''We have nothing to do with decision-making in either area.''
The First Customer  A Drug Company Comes Under Federal Scrutiny
In January of 2002, less than a month after Mr. Giuliani left office, Purdue Pharma found itself facing a host of legal, financial and public relations problems over the manufacture of OxyContin. The drug, a time-released painkiller, was introduced in 1996, and sales grew from $125 million in 1997 to $1.35 billion in 2001. OxyContin was an enormous profit center for Purdue. But with its success came crime waves in certain parts of the country, including pharmacy break-ins and robberies: word had spread that the time-release features could be wiped out simply by crushing the tablet, turning it into a superpotent narcotic. Misuse of the drug had been cited by government authorities in more than 400 deaths.
The federal government was becoming concerned. Asa Hutchinson, then the administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration, told Congress that Purdue's aggressive marketing and promotion had helped cause the widespread abuse of OxyContin. By 2001, the drug agency advocated allowing only specialized pain management doctors, instead of all general practitioners, to prescribe the drug, and requiring that it be distributed only through special centralized pharmacies, moves that would have cut Purdue's sales. It was also investigating security and management problems at Purdue's main manufacturing plant.
The company needed the political cover of an alliance with someone considered an unimpeachable American hero, and Purdue officials later made it clear why they became the first client of Mr. Giuliani's firm weeks after he left City Hall.
''We had to switch over to using more political consultants,'' explained Robin Hogen, a Purdue spokesman, in a speech he made to public relations executives in March 2002, three months after Mr. Giuliani was hired, but before the hiring was publicly disclosed. ''We're about to announce next week bringing on a sort of rock star in that area.''
The goal, Purdue officials said later, was to limit new federal enforcement or regulatory actions. ''We believe that government officials are more comfortable knowing that Giuliani is advising Purdue Pharma,'' said Purdue's chief lawyer, Howard R. Udell, in a statement advertising Mr. Giuliani's services to other possible clients.
To Mr. Giuliani and his associates, the contract seemed a perfect assignment.
''Purdue Pharma has hired some of the most experienced experts on drug enforcement and drug monitoring in the country,'' Mr. Giuliani said, referring to his own law enforcement experience, and that of his partner Bernard B. Kerik, the former police commissioner, who once specialized in drug enforcement at the Police Department.
Mr. Kerik was dispatched with other former police aides to evaluate security practices at Purdue's OxyContin manufacturing plant in Totowa, N.J., where two Purdue employees were arrested in 2001 and accused of trying to steal thousands of pills. Mr. Giuliani, meanwhile, began organizing doctors, pharmacies, pharmaceutical companies and other health care professionals into a group that his company called the Rx Action Alliance, which would try to build a strategy to limit prescription drug abuse.
The efforts of the former mayor and prosecutor on behalf of a manufacturer that D.E.A. officials said had contributed to the spread of OxyContin abuse help illustrate the unusual range of Giuliani Partners' client base. Few outside the company are aware of the variety of clients that Giuliani Partners has advised.
There is, for example, Leeds Weld Equity Partners, a investment firm based in Manhattan specializing in companies that sell education equipment and services, which Giuliani Partners is being paid to advise. The former mayor also teamed up with We the People Forms and Service Centers USA, a company based in California that is opening stores across the country selling low-priced wills or divorce papers. And late last year, Mr. Giuliani also announced a deal in which his firm would advise nearly 100 hospitals in the New York region that want to save money by buying surgical equipment and drugs in bulk. Compensation has not been disclosed in any of these arrangements, and Mr. Giuliani would not talk about his income or his firm's earnings.
For the most part, an examination of the firm's work shows that the mission of Giuliani Partners is not to make calls to drum up government business for a client, in the timeworn fashion of many former city and national officials. ''We are religious about not doing that,'' said Michael D. Hess, who was the city government's top lawyer while Mr. Giuliani was mayor and is now senior managing partner at the firm. ''That is something we turn down.''
But in his various roles, Mr. Giuliani does not hesitate to work closely with government officials abroad and at home. As a consultant, he attended two meetings in 2002 to discuss OxyContin with Purdue executives and Mr. Hutchinson, the D.E.A. administrator at the time. As a law enforcement icon who once was one of the top three officials in the Department of Justice, he also stood next to Mr. Hutchinson that same year in Washington at a ribbon-cutting for a new Drug Enforcement Museum exhibit, an event that included a luncheon where the former mayor helped the agency's museum raise $25,000.
About 10 months after Mr. Giuliani's firm began its work for Purdue, it also won a $1.1 million contract from the Department of Justice to look for ways to improve the effectiveness of the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force. The force's duties included helping investigate OxyContin abuse, and Purdue officials had appealed to its director, Karen Tandy, for help, a Justice Department official said.
The outcome so far for Purdue has been positive. In September 2003, it won its bid to hold off restrictions on the sale of OxyContin. No government action has yet been taken against the company for lapses at its New Jersey plant, which the company says is more secure because of Giuliani Partners' involvement.
Purdue officials would not disclose how much Mr. Giuliani had been paid, but said they were pleased with his firm's work.
''Rudy Giuliani is a man of action,'' Mr. Hogen, the Purdue spokesman, said in a recent interview. ''He does not do things to take a picture and move on. He wants substance. He wants change. He wants to see impact. And that is what he has done for us.''
But critics contend that the firm's work for parties on opposite sides of a drug inquiry seems to raise a conflict-of-interest question. ''On the one hand he is representing a client with a problem before the D.E.A., and on the other hand he has a contract with the Justice Department that has him talking to agents at the D.E.A.,'' said Bill Allison, a spokesman for the Center for Public Integrity, a nonprofit group in Washington that monitors government ethics issues. ''That sure seems to be a conflict to me.''
Mr. Giuliani said he sees no chance for a conflict in the multiple ways he is involved in the matter, since his company was not involved in making decisions on law enforcement matters. ''It was all disclosed,'' he said, sitting in his wood-paneled offices 24 floors above Times Square. ''It's two different areas of expertise.''
The Pitchman  Message on Security Has Corporate Sponsors
He was introduced as the man who ''guided America through the emotional shock of Sept. 11 and in the difficult days that followed.'' When the ovation died down that day in 2002, Mr. Giuliani moved on to the central premise of his appearance at a public-safety communications convention in Nashville.
''We are never, ever, ever going to be able to figure out every possible way in which we can be attacked,'' he said, according to a recording of his remarks. He went on to urge support for better terrorism preparedness and for a major change in the radio spectrum that Nextel Communications had requested of the Federal Communications Commission. ''I want to thank you and Nextel and the private operators who all agreed on that,'' he said, referring to a few other cellular carriers. ''I think that can be a very positive improvement for the future.''
Mr. Giuliani's remarks that day were similar to those he had made in scores of visits around the nation, in more than 30 states since he left office, where he has given lectures on leadership, earning up to $100,000 a speech; promoted the campaigns of fellow Republicans; and reflected on his experiences on Sept. 11, 2001. He sometimes speaks at events that are like auto shows for antiterrorism products.
But his audiences, including the crowd in Nashville, are not always told that he is being paid by companies that sell just the kind of security products or services he is in effect urging his audiences to consider buying. Nextel has sent him or members of his staff to St. Louis, Washington, Austin, Sacramento and Anaheim, Calif., to promote its products, introducing him as a public safety leader who can ''address critical homeland security communications needs.''
In many ways, the firm's work for Nextel embodies Mr. Giuliani's ability to combine his new financial life with his political past and future. The Nextel phone that he carried on Sept. 11 is now in the Smithsonian, and his call for better communications during disasters, part of his stock speech demanding better preparation for the next attack, is virtually identical to the thrust of Nextel's marketing campaign for its wireless service. At the same time, his appearances burnish his public profile and allow him to resume his best-received role providing reassurance to worried audiences.
Nextel has hardly been the only one of his clients that has benefited from repeated warnings about the need for greater domestic security. Aon Corporation, the insurance giant that lost 175 of its World Trade Center employees and associates on Sept. 11, has joined with the partnership to create what it calls the Aon Giuliani Protocol, a crisis management service sold to corporations worldwide. Strohl Systems of King of Prussia, Pa., is jointly marketing with Giuliani Partners special computer software that helps companies after operations are disrupted by a disaster.
CB Richard Ellis, the global real estate firm, has signed a partnership with Mr. Giuliani under which his firm evaluates office buildings to identify vulnerabilities they may have to possible terrorist attacks or weaknesses in fire and safety equipment. Entergy Nuclear Northeast, which owns five nuclear power plants, including Indian Point Energy Center in Buchanan, N.Y., about 35 miles north of Manhattan, hired Giuliani Partners to evaluate its emergency planning and security systems, and in particular its ability to defend the plants.
Nextel, however, may have the most at stake from the work it hired Giuliani Partners to perform: a contract that went far beyond Nextel's message that government agencies should upgrade communications equipment so employees can talk to one another during an emergency.
The company's combination cellular and two-way-radio phones, it turns out, have caused radio interference around the country. To preserve its franchise in the face of complaints about the interference, Nextel has billions of dollars riding on a petition before the F.C.C. to rearrange part of the radio spectrum, and helping to achieve that goal is one of the principal reasons Nextel hired Giuliani Partners. At appearances around the country, including the one in Nashville, Mr. Giuliani has told audiences about the need to deal with the interference problem, even specifically supporting Nextel's proposed solution on occasion.
Verizon, a competitor of Nextel in this arena, says this method, if approved by the F.C.C., would be worth $6 billion to Nextel. But Nextel officials vigorously dispute any suggestion that they will profit from the reassignment of the wireless spectrum, saying the effort is purely intended to eliminate interference.
Mr. Giuliani's staff members acknowledge that he and members of his team have worked in a orchestrated way with Nextel to help persuade public safety officials to back the Nextel petition and to encourage governments to upgrade their equipment. ''That's not lobbying,'' said Mr. Hess, the senior managing partner at Mr. Giuliani's consulting firm. ''That's the First Amendment.''
Mr. Giuliani has stayed away from directly urging the F.C.C. to approve Nextel's petition. But his status and appeal were so great that the F.C.C. wanted his help on a broadcast industry project, and an agency official asked Nextel to see if he might be interested. Giuliani Partners was eager to comply, sending three representatives to an F.C.C. meeting in Washington and then assigning a member of the firm to spend months working with the industry committee on its report. The advice was offered free to the F.C.C., but Mr. Giuliani and his team have had a direct financial interest in the success of Nextel's ventures. At least part of his compensation package, according to a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, consisted of stock options that Giuliani Partners exercised. If the firm has already sold the Nextel stock it bought at a special price set by the company, it has earned at least $15 million. If it still holds that stock, it has realized a $28 million profit from the Nextel contract.
After two years in the business world, Mr. Giuliani said he was enjoying this experiment in public speaking, management advice and capitalism. The firm, he said, has grown faster than he expected it would. He does not deny, however, that a return to politics is probably inevitable.
''I know at some point in the future I'm going to want to be probably involved in public office again,'' he said in the interview. ''If you ask me when, which one, my ideas haven't been formulated.''
As to what will happen to Giuliani Partners if the large chunk of his staff that went from the mayor's office to his firm follows him back into politics, Mr. Giuliani, who is also helping President Bush's re-election bid, said he cannot say for sure. ''Who knows the answer to that. It really depends on a prediction of what our business is going to be like at least a couple of years from now.''
Rudy Inc.
