Home Front
The scenery was beautiful, but Leon Matthews could not enjoy it back in 1942 when he was working the midnight shift building Fire Control Tower No.23 at Cape May Point. The 71-foot concrete tower was one of 15 built by the Army to help in defending the coast in the event of an attack during World War II. Mr. Matthews, who lives in Whitesboro and is 84, remembers that he was paid 75 cents an hour to feed sand and rocks into a concrete mixer. ''It was hard work,'' he said.
If people at the Mid-Atlantic Center for the Arts have their way, Mr. Matthews's story and those of other people who built the tower, will be part of a museum at the structure, which sits on state land off Sunset Boulevard in Lower Township.
In November, the tower was named to the National Register of Historic Places, and in December, the center, which restored and administers the Cape May Lighthouse, signed a 20-year lease with the state allowing it to restore the tower and set up a museum to interpret its history.
Michael Zuckerman, the center's director, said he hoped to raise $2 million for the restoration and open the tower to visitors by 2007.
Back to New Brunswick
The blues singer Guy Davis is no stranger to New Brunswick, where he is performing on Saturday at the Crossroads Theater, in a concert presented by the State Theater.
Ten years ago, Mr. Davis performed at the Crossroads Theater with his parents, Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee. In 2001, he was an artist-in-residence at the State Theater, performing and traveling to schools teaching children about the blues. ''When I was their age, I was the kid with the big eyes sitting down in the front row,'' Mr. Davis said.
But he added that while growing up, he did not know much about the blues. His parents were more likely to listen to Harry Belafonte or Pete Seeger records, and the first people he heard playing the blues were white college students. ''That's who I thought invented it,'' he said.
''Over the years, I began to discover a lot of this music that I loved was invented and performed by black artists and in the old days, performed to black audiences, and it was usually about black people,'' he added. ''Nowadays, I perform 98 percent in front of white audiences. It's a very different world.''
Information on the concert: (732)246-7469.
Avoiding the Evil Eye
Karen Guancione of Belleville creates art installations inspired by the lives of Italian-American immigrants, among them, her family. Her recent work centers on the effort to ward off ''the evil eye,'' and includes her 20-foot assemblage, ''Contro Il Malocchio'' (Against the Evil Eye), on display in ''Immigration and Expectations,'' an exhibition at the Paul Robeson Gallery on the Newark campus of Rutgers University. The show also includes the work of nine other artists, exploring how their ethnic backgrounds intersect with American society.
Ms. Guancione, 46, confided that she has faith in good luck charms. Whenever she gets a grant, she said, she hangs little Italian sausages around her house. ''It's a protection against envy,'' she said.
The show runs through March 5. Information: (973)353-1610.
Taking the Kids
The New Jersey Theater Alliance is preparing for its seventh AT&amp;T Family Week at the Theater. This year's version, from March 6 through March 14, features 125 events at 52 venues in every county of the state with plays, workshops, theater games and crafts, storytelling, backstage tours, discussions and events in Spanish. All events are free for children, ages 3 to 18, with many free for adults as well.
Among the week's highlights are the Shakespeare Theater of New Jersey's touring productions of ''Hamlet'' and ''A Midsummer Night's Dream,'' adapted for young audiences; a backstage tour of Paper Mill in Millburn; and a Pushcart Players production based on Spanish folk tales.
Information: www.familyweek.com or (800)843-2787.
Meanwhile, the alliance recently released the newest edition of ''Class Act: Learning Through the Arts.'' The free 72-page guide, available in printed form, on CD-ROM or on the internet, offers information on educational resources available through theaters and other arts organization in New Jersey. These include in-school residencies, touring theater companies, summer programs and teacher training, as well as programs for adults like playwriting workshops and acting and dance classes. Information: www.njtheatrealliance.org or (973)593-0189.
Margo Nash with Michelle Falkenstein
