IN November, Miramax Books dispatched interns with stacks of postcards to deposit in Brooklyn bars and post on bulletin boards across Manhattan that left behind a cryptic question: ''Are you a love monkey or a booty nomad?'' In smaller type, they teased: ''Find out in February 2004.''
It may be a reach to say men have discovered their feelings, but publishers seem to have done it for them, churning out at least a dozen books in a 12-month period in which male navel gazing is the celebrated raison d'être, and doing everything they can to make it a full-on trend. This month, Miramax pushed up the publication of ''Booty Nomad,'' by a 29-year-old first-time author named Scott Mebus, from March to Feb. 13 in order for it to come out at the same time as William Morrow's ''Love Monkey,'' by a 37-year-old first-time author named Kyle Smith. At least seven more books in the genre will be out by this summer.
The hope, publishers say, is to turn the vulnerabilities and anxieties of young men into a commercial tsunami equal to that created by books like ''Bridget Jones's Diary'' by Helen Fielding, which has sold more than two million copies, and ''The Girls' Guide to Hunting and Fishing'' by Melissa Bank, which has sold about one million.
So far, however, booksellers say, none of these books have lived up to their industry buzz, and some publishers and book industry watchers question whether ''lad lit,'' as the genre has come to be called, will ever have a natural readership.
Do men, who make up a relatively small share of the book-buying public, want to read about themselves the way women do? And do women, who have fueled the chick-lit genre, want to read about men who obsess about their waistlines and drool over 22-year-old interns, as Mr. Smith's protagonist does in ''Love Monkey''?
Mr. Smith, who in ''Love Monkey'' adopts both the meddlesome mother and diary format of the Bridget Jones books, said he wrote the book to give a peek inside what he calls ''the black box of guys' minds,'' but also, he said, because he wanted to be funny. He said he thinks his book can appeal to men as well as women -- anyone who likes Ben Stiller or Jack Black movies. A description that apparently does not apply to all of his reviewers. ''As a man who sees serious parallels between his own life and Bugs Bunny cartoons, Tom will appeal to a relatively narrow readership,'' Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times. The Sun-Sentinel in Florida wrote that while he sometimes seems to understand women so well he might be gay, ''some readers might find Tom an unappetizing piece of work, a snit.  . . .''
At a reading at a Manhattan Barnes &amp; Noble last Thursday evening, a woman in the audience asked ''under what circumstances'' might Tom ''lose his little-boy facade.'' Mr. Smith replied that all the women Tom dated improved him, so it would take dating more women. ''Then there's hope?'' the questioner asked dubiously.
Mr. Smith defended Tom. ''He's a jerk, but I like him. Jerks are more interesting. I didn't want there to be a lot of hugging and learning.''
Hugging and learning many women can probably live without; it's the jerk part that gets in the way. ''If you make him too appealing, he's not real, or if you make him too good,'' said Audrey LaFehr, editorial director at Kensington Books, which publishes an imprint called Strapless aimed at young women. ''If you make him too real, he might not be appealing. They sort of have to be all things to all women. It's going to be a balancing act between that guy who can be a jerk but is still lovable.''
When Hyperion Books published ''Men and Other Mammals,'' a first novel by a British author, Jim Keeble, it edited the protagonist to be more likable to women than in the British version, said Leslie Wells, the house's executive editor. (It also changed the title; the book was published as ''My Fat Brother'' in Britain.)
Almost everyone agrees that the key is to crack the code mastered by the British author Nick Hornby, who in both ''About a Boy'' and ''High Fidelity'' managed to make male commitment anxiety quixotically appealing, both to men who identified with his characters, and to women who found them endearing. Both writers and publishers have rushed to share in Mr. Hornby's popularity.
Mr. Smith in ''Love Monkey'' punctuates his novel with various top-five playlists -- an unacknowledged but unmistakable homage to ''High Fidelity,'' and press materials push Mr. Smith as the American Nick Hornby. Similarly, the agent for Nick Earls, the Australian author of ''Two to Go,'' a comedic novel about dating and a dead end job that was released last September, calls him ''the Australian Nick Hornby.'' So far, however, booksellers say no one has been able to replicate Mr. Hornby's success.
''The standard is maybe higher,'' said Ms. LaFehr of Kensington, comparing this new genre of books by and about men to those by and about women. ''There's this uncertainty higher up in the publishing chain about whether the market is really there.''
Time magazine wrote that ''one feels not so much entertained by 'Booty Nomad' as hit on.'' Still, Mr. Mebus said he firmly believes his readership is female. He wrote his novel as a catharsis after a break-up with a woman he promises shared all the good qualities and none of the bad of the woman described in his pages as ''the Eater of Souls.'' On a friend's suggestion, he sent the manuscript to an agent, with ''Booty Nomad'' as a temporary and somewhat tongue-in-cheek title. It stuck. ''People said, 'The only reason they're reading it is because it's called 'Booty Nomad,' '' he said. (The cover shows a man dressed like an upscale 20-something New Yorker, leading a camel and searching the horizon over subway stops named for different women.)
''None of my male friends like the plot of my book,'' he said. ''They like the jokes, they like the ending, but the whole relationship thing, they're just not into it. They want to know 'Is there any kicking in it?' '' He admits that he prefers books by Terry Pratchett, Stephen King or John Steinbeck.
''Historically, women have been a stronger and more reliable readership,'' said Carole DeSanti, who edited Melissa Bank's ''Girls' Guide'' for Viking, the house that brought Helen Fielding's Bridget Jones to this country. ''Men's readership is more pieced together -- Father's Day, men's adventure, particular authors who catch on. If there's a way of galvanizing or making the audience of male readers as interested as women readers have been in terms of reading about their experiences, that'd be great. The question is, will they? Will they come to the book?''
Still, applying the rules of Bridget Jones to Archie Andrews just might not work. ''It's hard to do certain things realistically, like male friendship,'' said Ms. LaFehr. ''In chick lit a lot of it is the heroine who goes out and has experiences and talks to her friends about it. I don't know that it's quite the same for guys. Women can naturally dissect a five-minute conversation for five hours. I don't know how much material would be there for guys.''
Bruce Tracy, the editorial director of Villard, agreed. ''It may be, because men in general don't have the communication and impulse to quote-unquote 'share,' as we say, that to be guy-to-guy open and engaging on the page about matters of the heart and about matters of what I'm doing with my life doesn't come as easily to guys,'' he said.
Mr. Tracy, although he acknowledges that several of his books are lumped together as lad lit, cautioned against trying to manufacture a new trend. ''I do sign up books because they fit in with other books we've done,'' he said, ''but for me, personally, it's been on a book-by-book basis. I think they all have things to say to a readership that hasn't been spoken to enough.''
At a panel held by the Women's National Book Association in New York last month called ''Is Chick Lit Chic?'' the discussion turned to its male counterpart, and why it had not caught on as quickly. Panelists suggested that perhaps the real lad lit -- if the parallel goal is books about men's lives written by men and read by men -- consists of books like ''A Million Little Pieces,'' an addiction memoir by James Frey in what publishers call a Dave Eggers-like voice.
Nevertheless, there are some publishers who think lad lit might breathe new life into its female counterpart. ''The criticism that everyone has with chick lit is that they're all the same,'' said Louise Burke, the executive vice president and publisher of Pocket Books, which is marketing three coming titles as ''the boys of summer'': ''Dinner for Two'' by Mike Gayle, ''The Dead Father's Guide to Sex &amp; Marriage,'' by John Scott Shepherd, and ''Upgrading'' by Simon Brooke. ''So we felt in order to keep bringing books to this audience we needed to evolve with the category. Women are saying, 'Enough about me, what do you think about me?' They want the male perspective.''
Ms. Burke is not expecting her lad lit titles to sell as well as chick lit -- not yet. Still, she said, look what can happen with a change in perspective.
''You take 'The Bridges of Madison County'; that book written by a woman would not have been successful,'' she said. ''We had seen books like that written by women, and you said, 'I've read it before.' As soon as a man wrote it, we thought it was something new. It stayed in hardcover forever.''
