Elizabeth Berkley  Actress  ''Sly Fox''
WHEREVER the actress Elizabeth Berkley goes in public, she says, strangers come up to her and repeat lines from the various roles she has had: ''I'm so excited, I'm so excited, I'm so scared'' -- her lines at the end of what seems to be everybody's favorite episode of ''Saved by the Bell,'' where, as the bookish Jessie Spano, Ms. Berkley pops pills in order to study for the SAT's.
''And you can be my Mom'' -- what she says to Goldie Hawn as the very young new girlfriend of Ms. Hawn's first husband in ''The First Wives Club.''
''Let me do your nails sometime, darling'' -- a catty line by Nomi, the stripper turned dancer in ''Showgirls.''
Ms. Berkley would surely be even better known if the 1995 ''Showgirls,'' her first starring role in a film, had lived up to its hype; it was, after all, a big-budget Hollywood movie by big-time Hollywood filmmakers. Instead, it turned out to be a notorious bomb, ''winning'' for her a Golden Raspberry for ''worst new star'' and cropping up again and again in the nine years since it was released, most recently with the publication last month of ''Hollywood Animal,'' a memoir by the film's screenwriter, Joe Eszterhas, who calls ''Showgirls'' part of ''an unparalleled disaster in the history of Hollywood'' and says a few unkind things about Ms. Berkley.
''The aftermath of that movie could have killed somebody's career,'' Ms. Berkley acknowledged. ''But it made me want to work harder, and better.''
In reality, the ambition began earlier. As a child taking ballet in Detroit, she wore a T-shirt that the mother of a classmate had embroidered with a star and the words ''Broadway Bound.'' Some two decades later she's making good on that claim, with a New York stage debut as the deeply religious and much-desired Mrs. Truckle in a revival of Larry Gelbart's comedy ''Sly Fox.'' Directed by Arthur Penn and starring Richard Dreyfuss, the play opens April 1 at the Barrymore Theater. It may have taken a while for her to get there, but, Ms. Berkley says, ''I still have that little T-shirt.''
Though it will be her first Broadway appearance, Ms. Berkeley is no newcomer. She says she is 28 years old (and calls incorrect the sources that record the year of her birth as 1972 or 1974), but one could date her professional career way back to the moment when she wrote a letter to the television producer Norman Lear: ''I told him I thought he should create a sitcom for me to star in,'' she said. She was 10 years old at the time. At 11, she had her Equity card. At age 13, she said, she was an Elite model in New York, and by 15 a regular in the television series ''Saved by the Bell.''
In ''Sly Fox,'' she is playing what she sees as a very different part from that of Nomi, in a tale based on Ben Jonson's ''Volpone,'' transposed to the California gold rush. ''I love that in this world, where everybody's trying to put something over on everybody else, she's the embodiment of innocence,'' Ms. Berkley said. ''Her earnestness and purity are so steadfast and her commitment to God so strong, she doesn't notice what goes on. Therein lies the comedy.''
JONATHAN MANDELL
SPRING THEATER
