THE photographs that line the walls here at Stratton Mountain School speak volumes: there is one of the fourth-place Olympic downhill skier Heidi Preuss, a student in the 1970's, and one of the cross-country Olympian Joe Galanes, a student in the 80's. There is also a picture of Ross Powers, who won an Olympic gold medal in 2002 in snowboarding's half-pipe, after his 1998 bronze medal.
This cozy, 114-student school, one of seven New England ski academies, was on the map long before Mr. Powers arrived in the 90's, but his performance helped solidify its reputation as being the place to go for those interested in Alpine, Nordic and snowboarding glory.
The 7th- through 12th-grade school, which, in 31 years of operation, has had 26 Olympians (8 from 2002), has attracted students from as far away as New Zealand and Japan. But many come from Westchester. Six current and two former county residents and one Putnam resident now attend.
Seventy to 90 students apply yearly, of whom 30 to 40 are accepted, according to Kate Nolan, the school's registrar and admissions assistant.
''Everyone here is really good at their sport,'' said a freshman skier, Mike Orme, 14, of South Salem. ''I can't think of a better place to be if you want to pursue Alpine ski racing.'' Mike, a full-time student, last year divided his time between John Jay Middle School and Stratton Mountain School and won the school's most- improved skier award. The school, though, doesn't automatically accept the athletically skilled, but looks at academics, drive and potential, Miss Nolan said.
Admissions officials prize those qualities, said a ski coach, Jack Bailey. ''It takes a large amount of commitment, focus and independent work'' to succeed at the school, he said.
Boarders pay $28,800 for a fall to spring school year. It costs $19,500 to attend from December through March, an option for 7th to 10th graders.
During the winter, the pace is hectic. The schedule includes three hours of outdoor weekday-morning training at the nearby Stratton Mountain Resort, followed by five hours of academics and an hour of dry-land conditioning. Weekends generally mean competitions. Off-season, students spend four hours a day on athletics.
''We live a completely different life from normal public school kids,'' said Hannah Tsai, 17, a senior from Yorktown. ''Skiing is a really, really tough sport -- one of the toughest out there. We're always on a pretty crazy schedule.''
Ben Smiles, a 17-year-old senior, formerly of Bedford, who now lives in Vermont, said: ''Our whole lives revolve around skiing'' and the physical conditioning it requires. ''It never gets old. It's never the same thing. You don't look at it like, 'I have to go lift again.' It's more like, 'I'm going to get stronger and ski better.' You're working out and doing something you really love and knowing you're getting better.''
Yet, for all the work, goals vary.
''I'm trying to pursue my goal and get on the U.S. ski team and make the Olympics,'' said a first-year student, Matt Corvo, 14, a ninth grader from Mount Vernon. ''I found this to be the best school to help me with that. Besides, skiing, it gives you an education. They work on your confidence and almost work with you individually.''
Matt is at the top in overall standings for his age group in the southern Vermont ski council. Although much remains to be determined, his coach, Dave Ferraro, said he is on track to someday make the United States team.
Jim Andersen, 16, a junior from Putnam Valley, who is in his fourth year at the school, has also been successful. After graduation, he plans to do a year of postgraduate skiing, hoping to make a United States team.
''I wanted to improve and have improved,'' said Jim, who as a seventh grader was on the Carmel High School ski team. ''I have to wait and see how far I can take skiing.''
Jim, who two years ago won his age group's Junior Olympics Super G Alpine race, is among the East's top four 15- to 16-year-old skiers, Mr. Bailey said.
Coaches say they don't make promises that success is guaranteed, but, ''We like to think anything is possible,'' Mr. Bailey said.
Sverre Caldwell, the Nordic coach, said: ''We try to be upfront. A lot of kids make the national team, but many more do not. I counsel them to study really well, so they get into the college of their choice. All that said, as a coach, I want them to reach their skiing dream.''
Many have. Nearly 90 students over the life of the school have made a United States national team.
''When you're here, you realize a lot of people have gotten to that level. It makes the goal seem within your reach,'' said Ben, who attended Byram Hills Middle School.
But Ben, whose family moved to Vermont last year, said he did not think he could make the national team. He may do a postgraduate year to improve his chances of making a Division I college squad instead, a move that his coach, Brian Blank, endorses. Ben's brother, Tim, 15, a sophomore, regards college skiing as his goal.
Paul Weber, 17, a junior from South Salem, who finished first in his age group at the Vermont Cup slalom this year, is also training for college skiing.
Of his three years at Stratton Mountain School, Paul said: ''It has helped me improve vastly. I really felt I needed help to push myself.''
Mr. Bailey estimated that about 75 percent of the students go on to Division I programs, which Mr. Blank characterized as one step below national teams.
Next fall, Hannah Tsai is likely to attend Dartmouth, although she could opt for a postgraduate year at Stratton Mountain, with an eye toward some day making the United States team.
Hannah, who spent two winters at Stratton while attending Yorktown High, made the nationals last year and ended up fifth in the nation in the giant slalom.
While one of her brothers skied for Yorktown and another still does, she said, ''There's not a way to be in a public school and get the flexibility to race.''
Often students miss a day or more of classes for meets. Ben Smiles recently spent eight days in Colorado.
But the school sends along assignments. It is even flexible with its faculty. Recently, Mr. Caldwell, the Nordic coach, who holds a math degree, taught geometry for 10 days, allowing the math teacher to compete for the United States in the under-23 world Nordic championships.
''We're all in it together, said Andrea Lennox, 13, of Yorktown. ''We have a love for the sport,'' .
Christine Schozer, 13, an eighth grader from Scarsdale who is in her first year at the school, said no one at Scarsdale Middle School understood Alpine skiing's demands.
''It's a lot better here,'' said Christine, whom Mr. Ferraro feels is a potential national team member. ''It's easy to relate to people. It's a lot more welcoming and friendly.''
Academics are such a priority that study hall is mandated for students with any course average below 74.
Electives are few and advanced-placement courses nonexistent. But classes average only eight to 10 students, Miss Nolan estimated.
Christine's mother, Adria, described the school's education as comparable to Scarsdale's.
''The big difference is they don't have the diversity of the classes, but they don't have a lot of wasted time,'' Mrs. Schozer said, adding her daughter was one of only three students in her fall English and science classes.
''You can make the most of what we have here if you're motivated and want to learn,'' said Hannah, who scored a perfect 800 on the SAT verbal section and more than 700 on the SAT math section.
''Academically and physically, I've improved.'' Andrea Lennox added, explaining she now favored skiing over ballet.
After the winter term, she will l return to Mildred E. Strang Middle School in Yorktown, where a brother and sister ski for the high school. But she plans to return full time next fall.
''It's just one step at a time,'' Christine explained of her approach.
EDUCATION
