Bowne House, long a symbol of religious freedom for the city, has a slavery problem.
It is no revelation that John Bowne, a prosperous English farmer and merchant who in 1661 built a house that bears his name and still stands in Flushing, owned at least two slaves and an indentured servant. That was not unusual for a man of his time, class and place. But recent excavations at the house, combined with new historical scholarship, are making more clear how much the Bowne family and other businessmen in the region exploited slave labor for their profits.
''There were lots of slaves in Flushing early on,'' said James Moore, a professor of anthropology at Queens College who has led his students on six archaeological digs at the house. ''They're not kitchen help. They're out there in the fields, planting, harvesting and creating wealth.''
Professor Moore said the artifacts, which are on display through next Sunday at the Flushing Library, at Main Street and Kissena Boulevard, did not specifically relate to the household's slaves. But he suggested that the slaves' importance to the Bownes could be inferred by something as simple as a fine porcelain Chinese cup found on the site.
Only a wealthy family could afford such an item, he explained, and that kind of wealth could be accumulated only by using slaves. His conclusion echoes historians' growing belief that slavery was more prevalent in the region than formerly thought.
That is a problem for Bowne House, which has been closed for renovations since 2000 and is in the process of being transferred to the nonprofit Historic House Trust, which helps the city Parks Department manage 22 historic houses.
John Bowne, a Quaker, was jailed for holding Quaker meetings in his house, but later traveled to the Netherlands and persuaded officials to overrule Peter Stuyvesant and allow religious freedom in the Dutch colony.
His story fits an uplifting narrative of Flushing as a birthplace of early American freedom. The area was home to Elias Hicks, a Quaker leader and a critic of slavery, and to the authors of the Flushing Remonstrance, a 1657 defense of religious freedom. Later, Flushing is believed to have operated several stops on the Underground Railroad.
But in light of the recent archaeological discoveries, Bowne House must square this heritage with the family's larger involvement with slavery. And historians like Professor Moore, who is a member of the house's board of trustees, must also try to place that fact in nuanced historical context.
The last thing he wants, he said, is a simplistic rewriting of John Bowne's legacy from hero to hypocrite. ''From 1690 to 1790, about a third of the households in Flushing had enslaved Africans,'' he said. ''But it's fair and important to add that in the 1820's and 30's, the Bownes and the Parsonses'' -- another prominent local family -- ''were involved in the abolitionist movement,'' which worked to free slaves.
Bowne House officials have until 2006, when the house is expected to reopen, to figure out how to incorporate this knowledge into the story of one of the city's most important Colonial dwellings.
''It upsets everyone,'' Professor Moore said of the new conclusions. ''It's not something European-Americans want to hear about, and it's very upsetting to African-Americans to hear this history. But it's important that the story be known about slavery in this region.''
JIM O'GRADY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: FLUSHING
