DOWN AND DIRTY PICTURES
Miramax, Sundance, and
the Rise of Independent Film.
By Peter Biskind.
Illustrated. 544 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $26.95.
IF Hollywood books were better, we might be harsher in our judgment of Peter Biskind's new one, ''Down and Dirty Pictures: Miramax, Sundance, and the Rise of Independent Film.'' But the truth is most Hollywood books are unrepentantly lame, a few racy anecdotes strung together about strategically mentioned movie stars, along with an explanation of how-I-ended-up-here-from-my-humble-beginnings. Thus Biskind's book, however flawed, must be welcomed for attempting to interpret the entertainment industry with at least some seriousness of purpose. Not to mention full sentences (Bernie Brillstein, Mike Medavoy, Lynda Obst, please take note). In ''Down and Dirty Pictures'' Biskind takes a stab at explaining one of the seismic changes to the filmmaking business through the 1990's: the advent of a viable independent movie industry. Starting with the success of Steven Soderbergh's ''Sex, Lies and Videotape'' in 1989, Hollywood -- still caught up in the franchise-obsessed, star-driven 1980's -- was forced to take note of the business potential of small movies made outside the studio system. The studios then proceeded to co-opt the independent movement and make it their own, with mixed results both for the business and for the creative aspects of the industry.
Biskind rightly chooses to focus on two pillars of the independent edifice, Miramax Films and the Sundance Film Festival, both of which launched Soderbergh's first film (the festival showed it, Miramax bought it), and both of which continue to play central roles today. But Miramax takes up the bulk of the book, and therein lies a problem. There is apparently little that is not already known about the volcanic Harvey Weinstein, co-chairman of Miramax, or his quieter though equally scary brother, Bob. It's certainly titillating to read the litany of bullying episodes -- those we haven't read and reread already -- like Harvey slamming Nathan Lane up against a wall, or calling the filmmaker Alexandre Rockwell while he sat in the dentist's chair. He reportedly told the dentist: ''Knock all his teeth out, I don't give a good goddamn how much it is, I'll buy him a whole new set of teeth if he makes the changes'' to a film. But after a half-dozen chapters of these episodes, they become repetitive and unenlightening. Same goes for the continual cycle of criticism of Weinstein's conduct, followed by grudging praise of his genius. By Page 267 we're reading it for the umpteenth time, this time from the agent Cassian Elwes: ''I have to give it to Harvey, for as crazy as he is, and unpleasant as he can be, he really is masterful when he wants to be.'' The quote could be cut and pasted into practically every chapter of the book.
Part of the problem is that Biskind goes into detail on many films we couldn't care less about. Do we really want to know about the production battles on #Cop Land''? And as in his last book, ''Easy Riders, Raging Bulls,'' about the 70's (although, thankfully, less egregiously so), Biskind at times gets caught up in the arcana of his world, leaving the reader breathless and confused, like a stranger lost at a hip cocktail party in full swing. A random example from ''Down and Dirty'': ''Likewise, the remarkable 'L.I.E.' was shunned for its sympathetic treatment of your friendly neighborhood pederast. Despite an unsatisfactory ending, 'L.I.E.' was in fact a dazzling debut film by Michael Cuesta, which featured an array of extraordinary performances, led by Brian Cox as the pederast. It was finally picked up some months afterward by Jeff Lipsky's new company, Lot 47, which didn't have enough money to give it the push it needed and deserved. . . . Where was Harvey's acquisitions team when these films -- which the old Miramax would have scooped up -- went begging? Buying Todd Field's '#In the Bedroom,' for $1.5 million. Recalls John Penotti, whose company, GreeneStreet Films, cashflowed the film, along with 'Good Machine': 'It was really hard to get people up for a Sissy Spacek movie, let alone the concept, but the minute the screening ended, Mark Gill and Agnes Mentre from Miramax said, ''#This is an extraordinary movie, we want it.'' ' ''
Huh? The sheer number of names is eye-glazing. The obscure John Penotti reappears in a new chapter, 13 pages later, then drops from sight.
Biskind also charges Robert Redford with betraying independent film. He accuses the star of being remote and meddling at the same time, comparing him to a child unaware of the havoc he leaves in his wake. One would hardly expect less of a movie star of Redford's stature, though it is interesting to learn how Redford uses his star power to dazzle his Sundance staff, then abandons them when his attention wanders elsewhere. He frequently announces ambitious indie projects that for one reason or other fizzle out, like the Sundance Cinemas initiative. The book recounts in detail filmmakers' stories of how Redford has shoved aside those he is supposedly devoted to when they are involved with projects that interest him. Soderbergh was one, and Redford snatched ''Quiz Show'' from him; Dick Pearce, who was attached to ''A River Runs Through It,'' was another. As for the movies themselves, Biskind calls Redford's work as a director ''lifeless as insects preserved in amber.'' Ouch. Redford does not give his side of the story, choosing not to cooperate with the author.
Within the industry there have been complaints about Biskind's approach. He virtually ignores the significant (though failed) independent movement in the 1980's, a decade he pithily refers to as ''the bland leading the bland,'' movie-wise. Then there are the simple factual errors, such as Biskind's contention that Weinstein, ''Harvey Scissorhands,'' slashed ''Cinema Paradiso'' down from two and a half hours to two. Mark Urman, the publicist for the film at Cannes in 1989, is among those who insist it was the movie's Italian producer who cut the film, not Weinstein. Biskind is also inexplicably harsh toward several medium-size figures in the independent world, most notably Amir Malin, then of October Films and most recently departed from Artisan Entertainment after its purchase by Lions Gate. (The permutations of the independent movement are even more mind-numbing than those at the major studios.) The other ogre in the narrative is Scott Greenstein, formerly of Miramax and later of USA Films, in Biskind's view a younger version of Harvey Weinstein without the charm. Both Malin and Greenstein may be deserving of all this criticism -- it's Hollywood after all -- but there are almost no responses from them, and no explanation as to why they don't choose, or aren't allowed, to tell their sides of the story. Instead, the indie veteran Bingham Ray and others get to slash and burn Malin's character -- at one point he is referred to as ''cancer,'' at another as ''Satan.'' Greenstein may well be a troll, but he did produce more than one superior film, including Soderbergh's ''Traffic.'' The accusations feel lopsided and unfair.
About halfway through the narrative Biskind concludes that by the mid-1990's, sometime after ''Pulp Fiction,'' the independent movement sold out. Sundance became a hive of cellphones and corporate sponsors, and Miramax gave its indie soul to Disney in a deal worth some $100 million (Harvey Weinstein told me in a recent interview it was $80 million, but never mind). Biskind's analysis is factually correct, and yet it is a story killer in terms of maintaining the reader's interest. If the soul of the renascent indie movement died in 1994, why keep reading through the year 2000? Biskind correctly points out that the indie spirit moved into the Hollywood system, as filmmakers like Soderbergh, David O. Russell and Alexander Payne made movies at the major studios, but he continues to chronicle the byzantine ways of Miramax and minor intrigues at Sundance. Despite feeling every bit as cynical as Biskind about Hollywood, I cannot agree that Sundance has become a content-free corporate event whose indie spirit has been sucked dry. Whatever Redford's flaws, the annual festival still attracts the young and yearning; undiscovered talent can be found there, and is. The independent movement has changed irrevocably, but it is not dead in spirit or in fact. The postscript of the book, unfortunately, is a half-baked compilation of newspaper clippings from the last three months of 2003, as if Biskind decided it was necessary to show that the book is current, up to the minute. It's enough to know the origins of the modern independent film movement, and to observe, as Harvey Weinstein does about himself, that ''if I didn't exist, they'd have to invent me -- I'm the only interesting thing around.''
Sharon Waxman reports on Hollywood for The Times.
