I'm from Buffalo Bills country, but I was always a Patriots fan, because my mom's family is from New England. And now I go to school in Boston. The Super Bowl was such a close game; we were all tense until that final kick. We were shouting at the TV. The five girls I was watching the game with are all athletes, so we can relate. I'm on the women's crew team at Northeastern. Everyone was stomping and getting riled up because we had just won.
I walked home with two of my roommates. That's when we first saw people hanging by their arms from trees and being really rowdy. A car had already been flipped, so we started running because I have a car on our street, and we wanted to protect it. It was my grandfather's car, a Toyota Camry. It wasn't a new car to say the least -- it's a '91 -- but my grandfather loved it and wanted to give me something.
Two years ago, when the Patriots won the Super Bowl, there was such mayhem in Boston. Cars were flipped over; people were cheering. It was after 9/11, and there were people chanting: ''U.S.A. U.S.A.'' That didn't really make sense. This year, there was an E.M.S. truck on hand, and firefighters were already on the scene when we walked through. If anything I thought it would be more controlled. It turned out to be even worse.
When your team wins, you would think that people would come together and be a little bit happier, rather than demolish everything in their way. I guess it happened in the Fenway because there's such a large number of college kids around the same age here. It was a way for them to get away with breaking the law and not getting in trouble for it. The police can handle only so much when thousands of kids are causing destruction. Fans, dedicated fans, get so involved when they watch sports. They want to put themselves in it. This was their way of expelling the energy that they got from watching the Super Bowl. It's just not safe.
We stood outside for a while watching my car. Things seemed to be under control. It was getting cold, so we went upstairs to the apartment. I was sitting, talking to friends on my computer, and one of my roommates came in and said, ''It sounds like it's getting louder outside, maybe we should go and check on your car.'' We went to our window that overlooks the street. The police had started to break things up. The next thing I knew I saw this kid who appeared to be my age walk right up to my car and kick the mirror off on the driver's side. I just started freaking. Another kid walked up to my car, pointed at it and shouted to his friends, ''Let's flip it.'' Then his friends were like ''No, man, let's just keep going.''
Then a gray S.U.V. came out of nowhere. I saw it sideswipe some cars near mine. I saw sparks. He just went back into the middle of the road and reversed as far down the street as he could. He was going pretty fast. And then he switched gears and just floored it. It wasn't very long before he hit someone. The guy had put his hands up before he was hit as if to tell the driver to slow down. This poor kid just stood there, kind of wide-eyed, not knowing what to do. He was thrown into the parked cars and slid down. People ran over to him and crowded around. Everyone else cleared the street, screaming. I didn't see the driver hit any other people from our window, but a couple of minutes later a kid ran back to where the first kid was hit and screamed, ''Four others are dead.'' We all started to cry. Then my roommate's boyfriend came up to our apartment and told us that there was blood everywhere. In fact one person had died, one was critically injured and two others were released from the hospital. Finally, more police officers came, and a whole SWAT team with helmets and bats and cleared out the street.
That night I went from being hysterical to being shocked to being angry then to crying again. I didn't go to sleep till 3 or 4. It was a dreamless sleep. What happened just didn't make any sense. If I was excited, I would be hugging my friends, jumping around. To see a team work so well together and be so united and then see what their fans could do -- that's what made it unreal. To go from watching a game with friends to seeing everything fall apart around you. Who knows what might happen if the Red Sox win the World Series? People shouldn't have this fear: the Red Sox are going to be playing, it's a huge game, run for cover.
A few days after they won, a parade celebrated the Patriots; I wasn't excited. There was a commercial with the mayor inviting everyone to Boston to celebrate. After being so overwhelmed after they won and so nervous throughout the game, I felt like saying, Please don't.
LIVES
