In 1987, Bette Davis appeared on the David Letterman show wearing a skintight dress with buttons sewn into a heart-shaped bodice. She demanded a close-up of the dress, designed by her friend Patrick Kelly -- an American in Paris who referred to himself as a ''black Lucille Ball'' and charmed his adopted city with his witty Southern-fried take on Continental glamour.
Davis then gave Letterman a present from the designer -- one of the little black doll brooches he bought by the hundreds to give away as a token of his friendship -- and pointed out that Kelly was in New York looking for a financial backer. The next day, Kelly heard from the redoubtable Linda Wachner, president of the fashion conglomerate Warnaco. Wachner had been in discussions with Kelly for weeks, but her interest was waning before Davis's on-air plug. No longer -- Kelly had his backer.
Incredibly hardworking and determined, Kelly, who died at 35 in 1990, had a will to power that would have made Nietzsche look like a slacker -- at Kelly's memorial, the Rev. Eugene Callender called the designer's achievements ''a dramatic demonstration of the can-do consciousness.'' But Kelly's enchanted ascent, from selling his designs on the street to appearing in the world's leading department stores, was also made possible by fairy godmothers like Davis. His considerable charm certainly didn't hurt. One critic gushed that Kelly's ''infectious joie de vivre could power a Mississippi River steamboat.'' Even the French fell under his spell: in 1988, they invited the outsider in the oversize dungarees and atomic-colored high tops to become the first American member of the Chambre Syndicale, the august governing body of French fashion.
''Everyone loved Patrick,'' says the designer Sonia Rykiel, who lobbied for Kelly's induction. ''He was charming, intelligent, funny and so talented. The way he played with buttons is still being copied around the world.''
As much as he liked to design with buttons -- a stylistic allusion to the colorful constellations that his grandmother would sew on his shirts to disguise the fact that the buttons did not match -- Kelly also liked to push them. His grinning golliwog logo, watermelon prints and decision to pose as a Southern caricature flanked by two models in blackface for Annie Leibovitz in Vanity Fair upset those who didn't share his sense of irony. (He referred to the Ku Klux Klan, which occasionally sent him hate mail, as ''the Cha Cha Cha,'' and told one journalist, ''Honey, what do they know about fashion except for a white robe?'')
From April 17 through Sept. 5, the Brooklyn Museum of Art is staging the first exhibition of Kelly's designs and his personal collection of black memorabilia, surveying his legacy as a fashion force, media provocateur and cultural producer. ''Patrick was a great designer and an even more important cultural figure,'' says Thelma Golden of the Studio Museum in Harlem and the exhibition's guest curator. ''He was a child of the South, and his success was such a Jackie Robinson moment for the black community.''
His designs spoke in a thick Southern accent and referred to the flamboyant Sunday-best styles of the black women he grew up around. (''From one dress in my Baptist church,'' he was fond of saying, ''you could do a whole collection.'') But in a country still riven by race, Kelly's collection of black memorabilia -- from Aunt Jemimas to black Barbies -- is likely to inflame opinion as much as it did when he was alive. Golden, however, sees Kelly as a precedent for contemporary black artists like Kara Walker, who plays with racial stereotypes in imagemaking. ''After I started work on this exhibition, I stopped thinking about Patrick as a designer and started thinking of him as an artist,'' she says. ''And whether you call his collection Negrophilia or black memorabilia, these are objects that always provoke a conversation, and Patrick understood that sometimes the only way that you can have this dialogue is by taking a route that isn't so clearly understood as good or bad. They are as critical to thinking about his work as his beloved bows and buttons.''
Kelly's love of adornment sometimes extended to his embellishment of the truth. ''Patrick was the master blurrer of his own myth,'' says Bjorn Amelan, the designer's former business partner and lover, at his home in upstate New York. ''Christmas and birthdays were very important to him, but he had me believe that he was older than he was because he didn't like people to know his age for fear that they would pigeonhole him.''
He was born, in fact, on Sept. 24, 1954, in Vicksburg, Miss., and was raised by his grandmother Ethel Rainey, a maid and caterer, and his mother, Letha Kelly, a home-economics teacher. Little is known about his father, Danie, who was, at different times, a fisherman, cabdriver and insurance agent. ''Patrick didn't talk about him much,'' Amelan says, ''but he told me once that his dad had left abruptly and showed up again at the dinner table one night, without a word of explanation, and asked for the Thousand Island dressing. Whether apocryphal or real, there was some real trauma there that was painful for him to talk about, so I didn't push.''
He learned to sew from his Aunt Bertha, the family seamstress, and became aware of fashion from the magazines his grandmother would bring home from the houses of the rich people she worked for. ''I knew what a Sears catalog was,'' Kelly once said, recalling the first time he saw a copy of Vogue, ''but this was something different.''
After graduating from high school -- his yearbook lists him as Friendliest Boy and Best Boy Dancer -- Kelly briefly studied art at Jackson State University before moving to Atlanta, where he decorated the windows at the Yves Saint Laurent boutique for no pay, sorted vintage clothing at Amvets and made extra cash by selling recycled versions of the discarded clothes in a local beauty salon.
At a 1979 Ebony Fashion Fair in Jackson, Miss., Kelly met the model Pat Cleveland, who encouraged him to move to New York. He studied fashion design at Parsons for a semester -- according to Kelly mythology, a friend from Atlanta whom Kelly bumped into on the street paid the tuition -- and held odd jobs, like scooping ice cream at Baskin-Robbins.
A year later, Kelly again ran into Cleveland, who had by then become a friend and suggested that he relocate to Paris to pursue his dream, just as his idol Josephine Baker did in the 1920's. Cleveland agreed to meet Kelly later that afternoon at a hair salon but never showed for their rendezvous. However, mysteriously waiting for Kelly was an airline ticket to Paris. ''I never told him it was me, but I think he knew,'' Cleveland says.
Kelly arrived in Paris speaking fractured French and not having the proper papers to work legally. He met the designer Paco Rabanne, who gave him freelance work and signed a lease for him on an apartment along the Rue des Sts.-Pere. Kelly also landed a cash job creating costumes for a nightclub called Le Palace. ''He worked on an old Singer that a friend gave him, but it kept blowing the fuses in the building,'' recalls Liz Goodrum, another transplanted American who helped him with the costumes and became his longstanding friend and assistant. ''We'd work late at night so the neighbors wouldn't find out it was us.''
Around this time, Kelly was hospitalized with Crohn's disease, an infection of the intestines, and he lost his job with Rabanne. A lifelong fan of fried chicken -- ''One of his favorite sayings was, 'Girl, we gotta get a bird in here,' '' Goodrum says -- Kelly made money as a caterer. Meanwhile, his fashion clientele, mostly black models who occasionally paraded his clothes in guerrilla shows that Kelly organized on the street, continued to grow. He had no phone, so clients would slip their orders under the door, leaving an advance for Kelly to buy fabric.
Then in February 1983 he bumped into Amelan, a well-connected agent for photographers like William Klein and Horst. Organized and level-headed, Amelan was Kelly's binary complement. ''We were both coming out of a relationship,'' Amelan says, ''but before long we became lovers, and we moved in together.''
One afternoon, while scouring the fabric district, Kelly stumbled upon rolls of colorful jersey. Convinced that he could make money customizing the fabric with buttons and bows, just as the women in his family adorned their inexpensive store-bought creations, he persuaded Amelan to buy the lot. ''Soon after we bought the fabric,'' Amelan recalls, ''things really turned around. We met a woman called Françoise Chassagnac, a former model who introduced us to the owners of a chic Parisian boutique called Victoire. They agreed to produce Patrick's collection and gave us showroom space above the boutique. They also introduced us to a friend of theirs at Elle magazine.''
Nicole Crassat had recently been fired as the editor-in-chief of French Elle and was in the last few days of her tenure at the magazine. Her last hurrah, in the February 1985 issue, was to feature Kelly, an unknown, and his jersey dresses, in an unprecedented six-page layout. Amazingly, the clothes that Kelly had sewn on his battered Singer wound up at tony department stores like I. Magnin and Bergdorf Goodman, which also featured them in their windows. ''From then on,'' Amelan says, ''Patrick's career became a juggernaut zooming at high speed. We moved into bigger premises, we began to hold proper fashion shows and our lives became incredibly exhausting.''
A shrewd marketer of himself -- ''a black American in Paris sells,'' he once said -- Kelly began wearing his signature sharecropper overalls and distributing his little black doll brooches. ''I don't know if the N.A.A.C.P. would like my dolls''- the organization didn't, and took objection to the golliwog logo on his label and shopping bags -- ''but they give me pleasure,'' he said.
The French press, however, ate it up and called him le mignon petit noir Americain (the cute little black American). Soon, the King of Cling, as he also came to be known, outgrew the Victoire boutique and entered into a short-lived agreement with the Italian manufacturer Ghinea. He was making enough money to hire a small staff, which was augmented by a troupe of unpaid assistants. In December 1986, one assistant, an American named Katherine Schumer, took to Christmas dinner her former employer, the actress Bette Davis. The pair got on like a house on Fire Island, bonding over the peach cobbler that Kelly made for the occasion.
After Davis and Warnaco came to the rescue, Kelly was able to afford major advertising campaigns, always featuring him, and the spectacular runway presentations that became the toast of Paris for their color and movement at a time when humorless Japanese designers were overrunning the fashion shows. ''Paris fashion was very boring,'' says Audrey Smaltz, who produced all of Kelly's runway shows, ''but Patrick's shows had the most energy and always ended with gospel music -- the audience was so up by the time they walked out.''
Celebrities like Paloma Picasso, Grace Jones and Madonna began treading a path to his showroom in the Marais, and Kelly himself was becoming a star after appearances on shows like ''Bob Hope's 80th Birthday'' and ''Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous.'' A bespoke collection and eyewear range were started, and discussions were under way for a diffusion line and a perfume. But with the increased attention came new pressures.
Amelan recalls a dinner they had with Paloma Picasso. ''She told him that he was riding a wave and to be very careful that it didn't leave him behind,'' he says. ''That made a very strong impression on Patrick. He loved a party, good food and to smoke pot, but he became very conscious of not goofing around. He worked harder than ever, and I think that ultimately, the pace his life took aggravated his sickness.''
On Aug. 23, 1989, the designer checked into the Hotel Dieu hospital. He and Amelan kept the reason for his hospitalization from even their closest friends, many of whom presumed that Kelly had Crohn's disease.
''Patrick absolutely had AIDS, and it's important to set the record straight,'' Amelan says. ''We didn't want people to know at the time because there was obviously a stigma attached to the disease that would have spelled the end of his professional future, and we could not risk that.''
The spring show in October was canceled because of Kelly's health, and when Wachner checked in on her charge, the ruse was exposed. ''She took one look and said, 'Patrick has AIDS,' '' Amelan says. ''I said he didn't, and she didn't argue with me, but next thing I know we had a letter from her lawyer. She was rightfully of the opinion that Patrick was either going to die or not be able to keep designing collections, and that the business had to come to an end.''
Kelly, who was so enamored of birthdays and holidays, died on Jan. 1, 1990. At Kelly's memorial in New York, Gloria Steinem, who met the designer in 1987 when she interviewed him for the ''Today'' show, eulogized her friend, who managed to bring a little of the Mississippi to the Seine and in the process fulfilled his dream: to become a famous designer in Paris by creating clothes that made people smile. ''He was an outsider who brought the outside with him,'' Steinem read in a shaky voice, ''and then eliminated the outside-inside division for everyone. Instead of dividing us with gold and jewels, he unified us with buttons and bows.''
Horacio Silva is the executive editor of www.hintmag.com.
