There is rarely a good time to drive down 181st Street, the narrow but teeming commercial strip that crosses Washington Heights and leads to the Bronx. If it isn't a Domino's Pizza tractor-trailer inching around sanitation trucks collecting trash from a snowbank, it's a herd of city buses maneuvering with the dexterity of hippopotamuses as some livery cabs ''block the box.''
A result: frustration, aggression, tardiness -- and injuries. According to the police, Amsterdam Avenue and 181st Street is the most accident-prone intersection in the 34th Precinct, which covers the neighborhood.
But now Community Board 12 is focusing on the problem, and a report on possible solutions, commissioned by C. Virginia Fields, the Manhattan borough president, was presented Jan. 20 at Gregorio Luperon High School on 181st Street. The recommendations, by the consulting firm of Konheim &amp; Ketcham, include eliminating on-street parking to create a bus lane, relocating bus stops, lengthening walk signals for pedestrians, enforcing block-the-box rules and removing illegally placed street vendors.
The most controversial proposal was widening the sidewalks. The consultants say wide sidewalks would ease pedestrian congestion and make the street narrower and thus less dangerous to cross. But many people worried about the effects of the curb.
''How does that help traffic?'' said Zead Ramadan, the chairman of Community Board 12, which is planning three meetings on the 181st Street problem. ''That's silly.''
Some participants at the meeting at Luperon High School were disappointed that the proposal did not include a shuttle bus that would consolidate the riders of five Bronx bus lines before they entered Manhattan on 181st Street. But Carolyn Konheim, one of the consultants, said the buses were often too crowded to make that a real possibility during rush times.
City officials were reluctant to make any promises. ''We would have a lot of work to do if we were to act on any of these recommendations,'' said Maurice Bruet, a deputy transportation commissioner.
SETH KUGEL
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: WASHINGTON HEIGHTS
