A STATE car is a rare privilege in Connecticut government and a chauffeur is even rarer. For the few public servants who get both, is a car and driver a perk or an efficient way to conduct the state's business?
Arthur Spada, the state's public safety commissioner, took heat earlier this month after The Hartford Courant reported about the thousands of dollars in overtime pay his driver, a state trooper, had been paid while driving him to various events. Those events included a football game and the weddings of state troopers.
While many officials get a car provided by the state, only a few also get a driver. And only three get a driver who is also a state trooper. They are the governor, the lieutenant governor, and the public safety commissioner. Other officials use employees in their office to drive them. Unlike the state troopers, the civilian drivers are non-union employees who aren't paid overtime, but instead receive compensatory time off.
Still, why would anyone need a driver? Why wouldn't state officials simply take the wheel themselves?
For the three officials riding in cars piloted by troopers, safety is one of the reasons, said Sgt. J. Paul Vance, spokesman for the State Police. High-profile state officials need protection as they travel to events and once they arrive. In addition, Gov. John G. Rowland, Lt. Gov. M. Jodi Rell and Mr. Spada are on call 24 hours a day, Sgt. Vance said. On Sept. 11, 2001, Mr. Spada was en route to federal court in Bridgeport when the governor called him to inform him about the terrorist attacks. From his Crown Victoria, Mr. Spada began coordinating Connecticut's response.
''He needs to be able to respond at a moment's notice to any event,'' Sgt. Vance said. ''When you're driving and communicating and talking on the phone, you can't do those things all at once.''
Mr. Spada works in the back of the car while he is on his way to events, Sgt. Vance added.
Mr. Rowland uses his car and state police driver for personal and political events, as well as his duties as governor. That is part of the job, said Dean Pagani, the governor's chief of staff and spokesman.
''The governor is entitled to 24-hour-a-day, seven-days-a-week security,'' he said. ''His car is considered part of the security detail.''
The state's ''constitutional officers,'' elected officials whose positions are described in the state's constitution, generally enlist staffers to drive them to and from work and events. Generally, those employees have other responsibilities, acting as executive assistants or working with constituents. But, when the boss needs to get to a meeting or a ribbon-cutting, driving becomes that employee's first priority. Among the officials who use drivers are Richard Blumenthal, the attorney general; Susan Bysiewicz, the secretary of state; Nancy Wyman, the comptroller, and Denise Nappier, the treasurer.
All of these constitutional officers get Crown Victorias when they start office. The governor has a Lincoln Town Car. Other commissioners can apply for cars, but rarely, if ever, have drivers.
Mr. Blumenthal, who lives in Greenwich, is picked up at home by a driver from his office every morning between 7 and 7:30 a.m. On the road, he is not looking at the scenery, he said in an interview last week. His workday has already begun.
''My time in the car is often my most productive hours of the day,'' he said.
Four or five staff members take turns driving the attorney general around. Often, they would have gone to the event anyway as a staff representative.
Mr. Blumenthal also uses the car on weekends, generally with a driver. Last weekend, for example, he attended a graduation ceremony for cadets with the Marines Corps in New Haven and then a funeral for a police officer in East Haven. When election years roll around, Mr. Blumenthal said he tries to avoid going to political events in his state car. But sometimes he can't avoid it. If he is scheduled to go to an event after work in Hartford or in the northern half of the state, it would be impractical to go home first and get his car, Mr. Blumenthal said. He reimburses the state for the mileage to and from political events, he added.
Similarly, Ms. Bysiewicz, who lives in Middletown, sometimes uses her state car to attend political events, but always reimburses the state, said Larry Perosino, her spokesman. She also taps non-union employees in her office to take the wheel.
To Rachel L. Ranis, a sociology professor at Quinnipiac University, having a driver may seem ostentatious, but it can actually save taxpayers' money.
''Sometimes something looks extravagant, but it's not,'' she said. ''You do notice these days that people really are doing work in the back of a limousine.''
When former President Bill Clinton entered office, he got rid of some of the government's chauffeurs, she said, but the change didn't work well. Later, she said, the president reinstituted the drivers.
''Most of it could be just the symbolism of being cost-efficient, but it isn't,'' she said.
Nonetheless, Dr. Ranis said, symbolism matters when the state is facing hard times.
''On the other hand, symbols can be more important than dollars and cents,'' she said. ''People don't want to see someone in a limousine. They want them to drive.''
Actually, there are no limousines in the state fleet. There are 40 different models, including Crown Victorias and Dodge Neons. Those cars are controlled by the Department of Administrative Services, which decides which employees drive what.
Those decisions aren't political, but practical, Alan J. Mazzola, deputy commissioner at the department, said. The Neons go to departments that need to make short quick trips. Commissioners who want a car fill out forms to determine which car they will get. Will they be carrying visitors and constituents? Do they need a car with a hitch?
Last year, facing a massive deficit, the governor's office asked state officials, with a few exceptions to turn in their cars to save money. By the end of March 2003, 642 state vehicles had been turned in, with 56 commissioners and deputy commissioners relinquishing their keys. In 2003, the state sold 982 vehicles, bringing in more than $2 million. According to the Department of Administrative Services, the reduction in the state's vehicle fleet will save about $20 million over then next five years, though that figure does not include mileage reimbursement the state has to pay employees who drive their own cars on business. For employees who drive more than 1,000 miles a month, using a state car is actually cheaper than spending money on mileage, Mr. Mazzola said.
About 25 state commissioners still have state cars that they drive home at night. Most of them, including wardens at prisons, are on call 24 hours a day, Mr. Mazzola said. Others drive more than 1,000 miles per month.
Some commissioners, though, said they had thought the governor's directive was aimed at everyone.
''I thought it was every agency, but apparently some officials are different or have different responsibilities,'' said Mary J. Healey, the state's consumer counsel, who drove a state-issued Ford Taurus until she got the governor's memo. Like anything, the car can help employees do their jobs, but it can also be abused, she said.
''Perks are there to do your job more efficiently and not to be abused,'' she said. ''If you view it that way and don't abuse it, it can be nice.''
For Ms. Healey, who lives five minutes from work, losing the automobile hasn't been much of an inconvenience. ''It was more of an expense for me to have that car,'' she said. ''I can ride my bike to work.''
