WHAT makes me curious and hopeful about theater this season? Experienced artists who try something new or keep raising the bar for themselves and others. Fresh talent, of course, and -- since New York isn't our only theater center now -- talent that has received more attention outside the city than inside.
Short runs and scant funds handicap far too many new plays off Broadway. Promising works deserve better. Visits from abroad are also usually too short. But at least they still happen. Some of the greatest thrills of my theatergoing life have come from Ingmar Bergman and the Royal Dramatic Theater of Sweden and the National Theater of Greece. Something to worry about: will actors and writers from countries deemed politically suspect be denied visas, as the Cuban musicians nominated for Grammys this year were?
The young writer Betty Shamieh has the playwright's most essential gift: the passion for talk. Some playwrights have a gift for language, but not really for speech. When their characters start talking, you start to wish their words were in a book framed by lots of description. Ms. Shamieh's rich, urgent prose will catch you up, then fling you into a character's life as though it were your own. In her family drama, ''Roar,'' we meet two generations of Palestinian-Americans living in Detroit during the first gulf war. Don't expect the grim worthiness of a ''problem play''; expect unpredictable events, relationships and humor. ''Roar'' opens in April on Theater Row in a production by the New Group.
Kelly Stuart's plays have been done more on the West Coast than on the East. Now, ''The Life of Spiders'' comes to the Culture Project on Bleecker Street next month, produced by the Holderness Theater Company in New York. Her writing is pungent and unsettles. An earlier play, ''Mayhem,'' was a screwball satire. Its targets were marriage, friendship and politics in the year 2000. ''The Life of Spiders'' is set in 19th-century Paris. An ambitious young provincial hopes to make his fortune by selling silk from spiders. Sexual intrigues, betrayal and Faustian temptations await him.
Deb Margolin is a terrific performer and writer. She gets heartbreak, raucous humor and the contradictions and hypocrisies of public and private life into her pieces. In her hilarious ''Bill Me Later,'' she imagined herself as a Monica Lewinsky aspirant: ''I'm a political science major with a minor in women's studies. Very minor.'' Seeing a ''whole constellation of scam and idealism'' in Mr. Clinton's eyes, her ersatz Monica complains: ''This is a classic case of not being in the right place at the right time. Here's a man who'll do it with anybody and I can't get invited to the right parties.''
Ms. Margolin's ''Three Seconds in the Key,'' a New Georges production opening at the Baruch Performing Arts Center in April, is a revival. It concerns illness and virility, basketball, sons and mothers, blacks and Jews.
How long has it been since we trusted playwrights to turn news into probing drama? Television usually gets there first now. (If you're a ''Law and Order'' fan, you know that those series are a primer of current events and issues.) Tracey Scott Wilson's play ''The Story'' examined a journalism scandal with roots in the Jayson Blair, Janet Cooke and Stephen Glass incidents. It had a very short run at the Public Theater this winter. It deserved a longer one. Now, revised and recast, it has reopened at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven.
I'm a sucker for ''life is theater and theater is life'' tales of any kind. Give me ''The Royal Family,''  ''Six Characters in Search of an Author'' or ''42nd Street'' (the movie): I never tire of watching actors act out between scenes. In Craig Lucas's new play, ''Small Tragedy,'' which opens next month at Playwrights Horizons, we get to watch the backstage psychological machinations of a troupe performing that Freudian classic ''Oedipus Rex.''
I've never seen the Comédie-Française and I've never heard Molière performed in French. (In English verse yes, thanks to Richard Wilbur's delicious translations.) The time has come. The Brooklyn Academy of Music will bring the troupe and its ''Imaginary Invalid'' to New York in May. I anticipate merciless wit, flawless timing, elegant staging and perfectly pitched voices.
Some of the smaller spaces on the Off Off Broadway circuit are still arranging their spring lineup. I'll look for surprising text-video experiments and lively matings among dance, music and theater. Talented young performers and writers will get to do new works on small budgets. One of the outstanding young actresses I saw last year was Zabryna Guevara, who had the title role in Eduardo Machado's play ''The Cook,'' a rich, generous tale of life in Cuba for three classes over three generations. In May, Ms. Guevara will appear at the Lark Theater in ''Jazz'' by Koffi Kwahule, an exciting young African playwright.
SPRING THEATER
