When I heard that Isabella Blow, the famous fashion stylist and muse -- you might think of her as the one who wears the hats -- was having her house redecorated and closets custom-built ($40,000 worth of California Closets, I'd heard), I went directly to her London office to see whether it was true. I had never met Blow before, but because she is the fashion director of Tatler magazine, and I work two floors above her in the features department at British Vogue, I thought it worth seeing if she was still working, even at 7:30 in the evening. She was indeed in her office. Naked, in fact.
''Oh, hello,'' she says, unfazed, as she finishes climbing into a gold-and-silver Alexander McQueen dress with a bodice shaped like a swimsuit. Blow has an old-fashioned, young boy's face, a sleek black cap of hair, a brightly painted red mouth, shining white skin and a startlingly beautiful body -- narrow and tiny, and round in all the right places. All in all, she is a pretty splendid sight. ''I'm getting ready to go out to dinner with my husband, Detmar,'' she explains. ''We're celebrating our wedding anniversary, though in fact we are going through a divorce.'' She does a little snort at this. ''We're going round the corner for some Lebanese. A meal that will cost £4, I should think.'' Here she hoots with laughter.
Blow hoots with laughter all the time, I discover, even when she is feeling dismal and talking about depression and her recent nervous collapse, the pressures of fashion and her broken heart, which she also does a lot. But as this is the first time Blow and I have met, and to explain my visit, I am businesslike and so ask her about her closet plans.
''Ah, closets,'' she says. ''I'm not going with California Closets anymore. I'm going to make the house erotic and sexy instead.'' She's having a Venetian cabinetmaker named Michele Gervasuti do them. ''I'm going to see him in Venice tomorrow to discuss the plans.'' Besides getting dressed, Blow is packing for her five-day trip. In her office, which she shares with the entire Tatler fashion department, is an enormous rack of her own clothes, which she is rummaging through. ''We are going to have glass sculptures made especially for the hats,'' she tells me, ''and the furniture is coming from a countess's palazzo in Venice. I'm going to have a bath shaped like a gondola that will be filled with Egyptian chocolate. It's very good for the skin. I hated Egypt when I went there. Too many people. But that's where you get the best chocolate for bathing in, which reminds me. I've got a corset made in the shape of a gondola,'' she says. ''Where is it?'' She casts a beady eye over the rack. ''I wear it all the time. It's made by the new boy at Worth: Giovanni.
''He's a genius,'' she adds, referring to Giovanni Bedin. ''I wore his corset underneath a McQueen black tailcoat lined with cockerel feathers. Black cock feathers.'' As she talks, she pulls out clothes, and because I am present, she tells me about them.
''Oh, this,'' she says, holding up a long see-through pink nylon thing. ''This is my burka.'' It's by a Japanese label called Undercover. ''I wore it at the Dior couture show a year ago, as an antiwar protest. I was saying, 'It's O.K., Muslims, don't be frightened.' Put it on, Jess,'' Blow continues, handing the garment to her beautiful and endlessly patient 21-year-old assistant, Jessica Andrews, who puts the burka on over her clothes.
''When I wore it, this French woman from Le Monde came storming over to me full of outrage and asked me how many times I'd been to Tajikistan. I've never been, but I said to her: 'Many times. Do you mind moving, please?' But at Jean Paul Gaultier everyone was burka-ed up, and they all wanted me and David LaChapelle to sign their burkas.'' Blow pauses for a second, seizing on another find.
''Now this, Jess,'' she says, hauling out an uncompromising McQueen dress made of calf and white tulle. ''I think my bull dress has to come to Venice. People drew blood making this. It's made from pieces of bull stitched together. Can you believe it? Look, this is the hole where the dagger went in and killed it. And this tulle at the bust! So McQueen. Everything with him is hard and soft. I describe what he does as like a mountain sitting in a soft sky. Plus, of course, it is sex. The hard thing going into the soft thing. And if you can mix that, then. . . .'' Blow pauses, barely, for a breath. ''What happens is that people go too soft. Like me. I've got to harden up.''
I had heard that Blow was exhilarating company, that she makes a habit of having a wild and amusing time. What I didn't know was how welcoming and inclusive she is, how self-deprecating and bawdy and sexy. I ask her again about the house. Can we photograph her in it? Will Michele Gervasuti be building closets? If so, how?
''Gervasuti is a carpenter,'' Blow tells me, by way of reply. ''He's been carving wood since he was 5. He carves like a god. He's going to use rabbit droppings on all the furniture to give it the greeny gilt color of a river. And the sitting room will be lit with pink light, the light of St. Mark's Square. I adore that light. Oh, Jess -- this.'' She pauses and more closely examines the garment she has found. ''No,'' she says more thoughtfully, ''this stays behind. It's goat. It stinks.''
Blow is holding an empire-line skirt that fastens underneath the bust, made from pale cream baby goatskin. ''I love this,'' she says. ''McQueen gave it to me, but I have to wear it in the country because of the smell. Though nothing will ever be as bad as when we did the Yorkshire pictures for Tatler. I did this Yorkshire story after my nervous breakdown, about missing the countryside.'' (Before their separation, Blow spent weekends with Detmar, a lawyer turned art dealer and gallery owner, at Hilles, his family's Gloucestershire Arts and Crafts house.) ''It was a 'Wuthering Heights' shoot, because I had a longing for the country, and we used all these hounds in one of the photographs.'' Unfortunately, the 40 hounds relieved themselves on the couture dress she had borrowed.
''I wrote to John and said, 'Sorry about the urine, John.' He said, 'Don't worry at all.' ''
Galliano? I ask.
''Yep. Dior, couture. Beautiful. There's the coat he just gave me. Look at these big stalks and leaves. Isn't it the most beautiful thing you ever saw? I want to use it for curtains because it makes me feel so good just to hang that coat up.'' She pauses and thinks for a second. ''But it's so hard doing shoots these days. Everyone uses the same clothes now.''
If Blow is inclined to go overboard talking about clothes, that is not her intent when putting them on. ''People think I like things that are strange and over-the-top,'' she says. ''Vogue once called it junk-box clothing, but it isn't that at all. Actually, what I like is classic, elegant tailoring with an anarchic twist. I like a very good cut. My favorite designer is Mainbocher. He dressed the duchess of Windsor. But to be like her, you have to have clothes cut onto your silhouette to make you look perfect. It's a lot of work,'' she says and sighs. ''And it's the most expensive thing in the world.''
The second time I meet Blow, we are at her house early on a Saturday morning, after she has returned from Venice and a Tatler fashion shoot, featuring nipples, in Naples. We are to have breakfast together, tour her house and talk about her clothes. The Gervasuti closets have not been built yet, and the chocolate bath will no doubt never quite materialize, but there is, to Blow's delight, a whole family of waist-high glass heads in situ, waiting to be dressed with their hats. Blow is dressed in a tight white satin skirt with a fur-trimmed, tightly waisted white leather jacket covered in red embroidery, all by McQueen. Her legs are bare and she is wearing -- remember, this is a December morning, and she is at home -- silver Manolo Blahnik sandals with six-inch heels. On her head, of course, is a hat -- a red chicken-feather with a veil by Philip Treacy. Blow wears hats, I realize, the way other people wear spectacles. She gets up in the morning, and she puts one on as a matter of course.
''The spirit in which she wears a hat is one of the things that inspires me most about her,'' says Treacy, the milliner she discovered when he was still a student at the Royal College of Art. Their relationship -- milliner and muse -- began when she commissioned him to make a gold lace headdress over a chiffon wimple for her wedding to Detmar in 1989. She wore it with a medieval purple velvet dress hand-embroidered with trompe l'oeil necklaces. She and Treacy also collaborated on a book called ''Philip Treacy.'' Blow says the original title was ''When Philip Met Isabella.''
I compliment Blow on her outfit. She looks like an Eskimo Christmas fairy by way of a Paris atelier. ''Isn't this jacket beautiful?'' she says. ''It's one of three in the world. This was the sample. Another went to Milan, and the third was bought by an Indian doctor for £10,200. It makes you think to yourself, If I've got things like this, my love life will be all right.'' She pauses. ''It doesn't work like that, though,'' she adds ruefully. A few minutes later, when we are upstairs and I am admiring more hats and a corseted McQueen white-and-black checkerboard suit that has become one of her staples, she sighs, and then says wistfully: ''All this fuss for clothes. Clothes that I live for. Instead of having children.''
However sad or wistful Blow may sometimes seem to be -- and there is good reason for melancholia: her brother drowned in front of her when she was a small child; her father disinherited her and left the family house, Doddington Park, to her stepmother; her grandfather Jock Delves Broughton killed himself shortly after he was acquitted for the murder of his wife's lover, Lord Erroll, in Kenya in the early 1940's; and, of course, her separation from Detmar and the loss of Hilles is not to be underestimated -- she cheers up and becomes animated when you ask her about her clothes and the people who make them. She will not ever discuss them with anything less than all of her considerable enthusiasm.
''McQueen actually gilded this dress,'' she says, showing me a narrow shift in green and gold lace. ''And where is my McQueen military coat?'' she wonders. ''It's dark blue and gold with a collar up to here. I wore it to my cousin's maiden speech in the House of Lords. It was slashed in the back, so it looked like a dagger. It would have been perfect in the Tower of London.'' And so she goes on. For each piece of clothing, each hat, there is a story, which is lucky, because many of them have not survived except as part of an anecdote.
I thought that going through Blow's wardrobe would be like rifling through the last 15 years of fashion history. (Blow first saw Treacy's work in 1989; McQueen's at his graduation show from Saint Martins College in 1994. She also discovered, among others, the designers Hussein Chalayan and Julien Macdonald; the photographers Jürgen Teller and Sean Ellis; and the models Stella Tennant and Sophie Dahl.) But her closet -- which for the moment doesn't exist; clothes are hung over banisters, draped over chairs and hung on a rack next to her television in her basement -- is anything but archival. Where, for example, is McQueen's graduation project, which she bought in its entirety? Where are the Galliano clothes she used to wear in the late 80's before she discovered McQueen? Where are the sweat pants for when she's at home, watching movies?
''I don't store my clothes very well,'' she admits. ''I don't put mothballs on them. I don't put linen rags between them. I don't fold them up, really. I'm afraid I just wear them to death.'' This is true. Several of her Treacy hats have caught fire -- Blow is a smoker and is always leaning over candles to reach something, say, plum sauce at dinner with Lord Snowdon. Then too, there have been one too many McQueen coats caught in a car door or left on a train. As for the casual stuff, it simply doesn't exist. When I ask Blow what she wears to relax in, she looks panic-stricken. ''Oh, I long for the country,'' she says. I press her again. ''Umm,'' she says, as if searching for the answer to a quiz. Then she alights on something. ''I wore a white feathered cape the other night to watch a David Attenborough program about birds.'' Blow does not own a single pair of flat shoes. She thinks she has one pair of McQueen jeans, but she can't recall ever wearing them. She doesn't wear pajamas, and instead of a dressing gown, she uses a diaphanous black chiffon number by McQueen.
''No,'' Treacy says, when I check with him. ''There is no off-duty look. Sportswear is not in her vocabulary. She is a fashion animal.''
Blow offers: ''I do want to get my things in order. Gervasuti has this idea that in the mornings I can lie on the sofa and look around me and see all the clothes. It's meant to be very well ordered, like a shop. I haven't actually seen the designs, but the theory is that somehow the clothes will appear while I'm lying down. No one else will see them. They'll be like a mystery.'' It does sound mysterious; too fantastical for words, perhaps. Except that this is Isabella Blow, and the fantastical is part of her every day.
The third time I meet Blow, it is for the shoot for this story. She is wearing a dizzyingly fabulous pale pink strapless tutu gone mad by Hussein Chalayan that she wants to be photographed in next to one of the new glass hat stands that was hand-blown in Murano, Italy. On her head, and almost entirely covering her face, is a huge pink acrylic disk hat by Treacy. ''Hussein told me this dress is worth £25,000,'' she says, tweaking one of its many pleats of tulle. I ask her if it is hers. ''It was supposed to be,'' she says. ''It was made for me. A sculptress fitted it to my body. But somehow Hussein has never managed to complete the last stage -- the handing over stage. So I'm borrowing it. I insisted. You have to insist. McQueen says that if I ever die, he'll see my face everywhere he looks, with my lips going, 'Where are my clothes?' '' She laughs. Once Blow has the dress on -- ''How many yards of tulle do you think there are here? Hussein told me, but I forget. Forty-eight?'' -- she gets on all fours to see if that is the right pose to strike for the photograph. Someone remarks that when positioned like this, the ruffles in the back of the dress look like a chicken's plumage. Blow begins to cluck like a chicken. ''Well, I am an old turkey,'' she says.
''Oh, this poor hat,'' she remarks a minute later. ''Battered and destroyed. Like me.'' She laughs. Blow laughs at herself a lot. However she is feeling, she knows that being maudlin is not entertaining, and though she is not a manic entertainer -- despite how she looks, Blow is a conversationalist rather than a performer -- she cares passionately, perhaps to a fault, about other people in her company having a good time.
''She is a rare bird in the fashion world,'' Treacy acknowledges. ''And the clothes are the least of it. Obviously she's an inspiration, but she's much, much more, because she has a heart and she wears it on her sleeve, for better or worse.''
And Blow does, literally, wear it -- hanging off a little ankle bracelet. ''It's a broken heart,'' she says, taking stock before adding quietly and with proper philosophical intent, ''People think that an ankle bracelet is something tacky, but in fact it is elegant because it draws attention to the ankle.'' She then draws in her breath and whispers, as if it might be the answer to everything: ''It's very sexy, a delicate ankle. Don't you think?''
Daisy Garnett is a writer in New York and London.
