Q: What was the high point of the Dean campaign for you?
It would have to be the Sleepless Summer Tour that happened back in August, September, where you just had a real outpouring of support. Even we were shocked by it. These were people who organized these rallies themselves. We just showed up. I mean, just thousands and thousands of people who came out.
If you were to give one reason for the campaign's collapse, what would it be?
You have a party that's tried to make every rule that it can to stop an insurgent. But at the same time -- it's not Al Gore's endorsement -- what I'm saying is, him endorsing us was a good thing. But at the same time, the unintended consequence of it was that the second Al Gore endorsed Howard Dean, alarms went off in newsrooms and at every other campaign headquarters. At the campaign headquarters, they all had meetings and said, ''We've got to stop Howard Dean right this second.'' That's what the Al Gore endorsement meant. It meant, We've got to kill this guy or he's going to be the nominee.
When you left the campaign, was it an emotional scene? Was there shouting or crying?
No. It was serene. Look, I'm proud of the job that I did for the Dean campaign. The governor wanted to run the campaign he wanted to run. He wanted Roy Neel.
I've heard the campaign described as the dot-com candidacy, boom and bust. You were involved in dot-coms. Do you think that's a fair analogy?
No, I think it's ridiculous. The Dean campaign was a dot-com miracle, not a dot-com crash. The Dean campaign raised more money than any Democratic campaign in history.
Speaking of money, there have been a lot of questions about the Dean campaign's spending. People say you blew through nearly $40 million.
There's all this ranting: Geez, we spent $100,000 in Austin, Tex., on TV. Well, we did spend $100,000 on TV in Austin. And what it was designed to do was make a statement and raise money off that statement. So we put up $100,000 in Austin, saying we're going to stand up to George Bush, and it generated about $1 million in internet contributions. Well, no one had ever done it that way before. So it seemed to the punditocracy that it was wasteful. Wasteful is doing it the way they do it. Hey, let's go spend $350,000 on a big ballroom with chicken dinners and fine china and entertainment, and if we raise $1 million at that dinner and we make $650,000, that's called smart politics.
And you've said you worked in the campaign for free. But your firm did get a commission on all those TV ads. You must get some part of that.
Well, the first thing is, there was never a conflict of interest with me because I never had check-writing authority in that campaign. I wanted that authority, but I never had it. The major media decisions were all made by a group of senior staff. There are three partners in our firm, and the $155,000 that I was paid I would have gotten whether I was golfing or I went sleepless for the entire year or working till 4 in the morning, busting my rear because I believe in Howard Dean.
Did you encourage Dean to make a third-party run or go all the way to the convention?
No. No. This year's too important. I really believe that this is the most pivotal political moment in my lifetime. I think Bush needs to be defeated.
Kerry's now the likely nominee. How good a candidate would he be for the party?
I believe that the party would be stronger with a nominee who wasn't from Washington. But I think any of these guys has a chance. It's actually a really strong field.
Do you think that when it's all over and some time has passed, you'll go back up to Burlington and have dinner with Governor Dean and talk about the campaign that was?
I'd like to think so. But I don't know.
Matt Bai
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-22-04: QUESTIONS FOR JOE TRIPPI
