THE painter and printmaker Chuck Close and his wife, Leslie, started coming to the Hamptons in 1974, renting a beach cabin that summer. For the next 10 years, they spent their summers in East Hampton. In 1985, they bought the Bridgehampton property where they live, and where Mr. Close works, for half the year.
Mr. Close was originally drawn to the area because of its reputation as an art colony and as the home of the first abstract expressionists, who began to cluster around East Hampton in the 1940's.
''I went out to see where de Kooning and Pollock lived,'' Mr. Close said in a recent conversation in his Manhattan studio, ''and to go to the cemetery where they're all planted,'' a reference to Green River, the Springs graveyard where more than 30 artists rest side by side with the ancestors of local families.
But the appeal of his Bridgehampton home is the ocean. ''It's where I'm the most happy and the most relaxed,'' said Mr. Close, 63, who spends the rest of the year in Manhattan. ''I need the rhythmic pounding of the surf. Maybe it's like the fetal heartbeat.''
Mr. Close, whose graphic work is the subject of a survey at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in Manhattan through April 18, is one of many artists who have been drawn to the East End, and who continue to give it its vitality as a center of artistic creation. Like many other painters working there, he is captivated by the special quality of the light. As he pointed out, ''Everybody talks about the light, but it is phenomenal.''
''When I start a painting in the country and then bring it in to the city, I'm so shocked at how it looks,'' he explained. ''I'm constantly telling people, you should have seen it in the country, where you can really see the color.
''I have daylight in my studio here as well,'' he continued, gesturing toward a large painting in progress on his motorized easel, ''but it's just not the same.''
Looking at Mr. Close's work, however, one would be hard pressed to connect it with the light in the Hamptons. His imagery has nothing to do with his immediate surroundings, nor is there any indication of an environmental context. His primary subject since the late 1960's has been the isolated human face, which he first photographs and then translates into paintings, drawings, prints or other media, often enlarging it to monumental proportions.
Yet even his earliest monochrome works, which were often dismissed as slick photorealism, are really not about depicting an accurate likeness. ''Likeness is an important byproduct of what I do,'' he told the critic Gerrit Henry, as quoted in an article in Art in America in 1975, ''but only to the extent that if the photograph I paint from looks like the person, the painting will look like the photograph.''
Mr. Close's paintings of photographed faces are not the same as portraits painted from life, nor are they ''realistic'' when they are purged of color, as many are, and shown in a shallow depth of field, where foreground and background details are lost. Instead, they address the question of how visual information is communicated by confronting the viewer with a wealth of detail that must be perceived, recognized and processed. At this point in his career, it is as if he wants to make the image as abstract as possible but still recognizable.
A native of Washington State, Mr. Close graduated from the University of Washington in 1962, and then studied at Yale University's School of Art and Architecture. There, he emulated Willem de Kooning and seemed destined to become a third-generation abstract expressionist, although with a dash of Pop iconoclasm.
But soon after his graduation in 1964 with an M.F.A., he adopted the style that has become his signature. Still, he never lost his admiration for his New York School forebears. He just did not want to imitate them.
Mr. Close came to New York City in 1967 and established himself in SoHo, when young artists were illegally converting raw loft spaces into live-in studios, and avant-garde galleries were opening in shabby storefronts. He appreciated the camaraderie and mutual support such a community can generate. ''It's important for me to have kindred spirits,'' he said.
Among Mr. Close's classmates at Yale were Brice Marden, Janet Fish, Richard Serra, Nancy Graves, Jennifer Bartlett and others who would make names for themselves in contemporary art. Several of these friends, as well as relatives and other artists, would become Mr. Close's subjects.
''I try to work with people I have a significant relationship with, either personally or through their work,'' he said. He also requires them to pose with no restrictions on how he might use their image.
One of his earliest subjects was Philip Glass, whose full frontal face first appeared in Mr. Close's repertory of subjects in 1969, when he was a virtually unknown composer working as an assistant to Mr. Serra. Beyond his availability and willingness, Mr. Glass was a kindred spirit.
''We were both dealing with issues around process and production, minimalism, and self-imposed limitations,'' Mr. Close said. ''I'm painting just black and white, he's making music with just seven notes. And we had a belief in following process wherever it goes.''
''Phil,'' with his slightly expectant expression and unruly mop of hair, is Mr. Close's most frequently recycled image. It has gone through numerous transformations, from the original meticulous rendering of a photo booth-style black-and-white head shot, blown up to 9 x 7 feet, to a 1995 etching in which the features are abstracted as a tonal grid of pixel-like dots.
''Philip calls himself my 'Haystacks,''' Mr. Close said, referring to the many variations on that motif by Monet.
Unlike conventional portraits, which are usually painted on commission and tend to flatter the sitter, Mr. Close's paintings are what he calls ''heads.'' He set out to make them as neutral as the haystacks, although some of his subjects, like Mr. Glass, Mr. Serra, Ms. Graves and himself (he has done many self-portraits), have since become well-known figures in the arts.
There are obvious affinities between Mr. Close's tightly cropped head shots and those done around the same time by Alex Katz and Philip Pearlstein. Although Mr. Close steers clear of celebrity subjects, a comparison can also be made to Andy Warhol's photo-derived portraits of film stars like Elizabeth Taylor and Marilyn Monroe. (Mr. Close did accept an assignment to photograph President Clinton in 1996.)
A nearer parallel may be Warhol's ''Thirteen Most Wanted Men,'' a 1964 black-and-white series based on police mug shots of criminals, with their stock poses and deadpan expressions.
But Warhol adapted the photographs directly by screen-printing them, often somewhat carelessly, on canvas. Mr. Close rejects mechanical processing and slapdash finish in favor of painstaking, seamless hand rendering, even though the result shows no trace of the painterly touch that serves as an artist's signature.
Mr. Close said that by giving himself limitations of subject matter, style, format and technique, he avoided what he had found difficult as a would-be abstract expressionist -- the necessity to face the blank canvas each day and make it up as he went along.
But as Kirk Varnedoe, the late Museum of Modern Art curator, observed, in a 1998 monograph on the artist, ''He could, in some quite literal sense, both lose himself and find himself, by focusing so totally on the moment-by-moment process of making.''
As Mr. Close's art has evolved, he has continued to use the face as a vehicle to explore the limits of visual recognition. The features of the faces in his works are readily perceived, even when fractured, simplified, stylized and almost completely dissolved.
When he began using color in his work in the early 1970's, he handled it the way a commercial printer does, applying each color successively, as if run through a press. Then the grid used to enlarge the image from the original small photograph was allowed to remain visible, affirming the importance of the process itself, as well as the incremental nature of the image.
Gradually he eliminated more and more detail from the image, and devised codes -- crosshatching, dots, fingerprints -- to communicate the necessary information about the picture. The results of his choice to fragment the image this way have often been compared to mosaics, with their discrete blocks of color combining to make recognizable forms, and to Georges Seurat's pointillism, which relies on the viewer's eye to make sense of the scene.
But Mr. Close feels that a more direct influence was his grandmother's needlework. She ''made big, complicated things out of small pieces,'' as he put it.
Not only was she always busy knitting or crocheting the components for bedspreads and afghans, but she could lay the work aside and pick it up again without losing continuity, he said. In retrospect, this seems to Mr. Close like a clear precedent for what he does now. As someone who describes himself as chronically indecisive, he had to find a way to break his work of painting down into bite-size pieces, and fit them together methodically, which was also his grandmother's strategy.
Mr. Close's life took a radical turn in 1988, when the sudden rupture of a spinal artery left him almost entirely paralyzed from the neck down. After intensive therapy he was able to regain partial use of his limbs, but was forced to develop new techniques so that he could continue working.
For someone as process-oriented as he is, turning over a design for execution by an assistant was not an option. As far as his paintings are concerned, he said, ''Nobody's ever made a stroke except me.''
While he collaborates with master printers and technicians on his graphics -- which, as the exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum illustrates, often require a separate block, plate or screen for each of many colors -- he is nevertheless directly involved in all aspects of their production.
Remarkably, after Mr. Close lost much of his manual function and came to rely on an arm brace to work, his painting technique began to show greater evidence of a distinctive touch. Again, it seemed as if he were striving to overcome a limitation, only this time it was not an arbitrary one he had set.
In his later work, each square of the grid has become a unique mini-abstraction subtly related to its neighbors, all interacting to define the fundamental image.
Notwithstanding the discipline of his format and his desire to allow the viewer to recognize the image, Mr. Close believes he has considerable freedom to experiment.
''I make the rules, so I can break them and play around with it,'' he said, adding that this is the most misunderstood aspect of his work. ''In fact, it's extremely intuitive. The more things seem to limit you, the more things open up. It can be very liberating.''
Second article in a periodic series profiling East End artists. The first was about the sculptor Ibram Lassaw.
