Everything is not as it seems. These days, the truth is just another opinion. Live long enough, and you will come to see that even reality is a veil.
Consider fashion photography. In particular, the glamorous images created by Cecil Beaton, the British photographer, writer, illustrator and set designer. His grand and theatrical portraits of Britain's royal family, writers, politicians and Hollywood's elite are a veritable who's who of 20th-century celebrity. One of the most alluring elements of Beaton's work is the elegance into which the subjects are delivered by not just a master photographer, but also, by all accounts -- well, by all accounts until now -- a most amusing and doting man. A real ''girlfriend,'' as some might say. How he must have worshiped at the shrines of the people he photographed.
Ha!
A handsome new book, ''Beaton: Portraits'' (Yale University Press), has just arrived on my desk. With 150 duotones and 80 color plates, it includes an essay by Terence Pepper, the photography curator at the National Portrait Gallery in London, where an exhibition celebrating what would have been Beaton's 100th birthday is up till May 31.
Staring from its cover is an enigmatic black-and-white portrait he took of Audrey Hepburn in 1954. So beautiful, so graceful are her pose and her expression, Hepburn looks not unlike the girl with a pearl earring in the portrait by Vermeer. Then I recall something, an entry from Venice in ''The Unexpurgated Beaton'' diaries from 1970 to 1980, recently published as he wrote them, not the earlier sanitized version. (A second volume of unexpurgated diaries, ''Beaton in the Sixties,'' was published in Britain and is expected here this year.) To wit: ''Audrey Hepburn . . . wore pink Givenchy ruffles, her hair in curls. Great animation, but my eagle eye spotted a certain amount of grimacing, which is fast making her into a caricature. She will not be a beautiful old woman, but through her photogenic qualities, a rich one, for she has accumulated a fortune from films.''
From Goya to Currin, the history of art is filled with the aversion artists have felt toward their subjects. Sometimes only the subject's piercing vanity takes away the artist's sting. Even in the pre-Botox freeze-smiles of many Warhol portraits, you get the message that the artist did not love all subjects equally. ''The Argentine lady came and wrote out a big fat check,'' he said in a 1983 diary entry, ''which was great, it pays a month's mortgage on the new building. And last month, Pia Zadora's check did that, so that was a lift.''
Beaton's feelings were not so benign, we discover. He expressed regret at Audrey Hepburn's ''homely approachability,'' referring to the relative naturalness and democracy of her beauty, a quality not appreciated by the artifice-loving Beaton, an elitist whose Hollywood ideal was Greta Garbo. Today's generation may see Hepburn as the height of glamour, but to him she was pre-Kmart, ''a troubled sprite in blue dungarees, a citizen Puck.'' After photographing Elizabeth Taylor at a costume party, he wrote: ''I felt I must be professional to the last ounce of energy and continued, but not with anything but disgust and loathing at this monster. Her breasts, hanging and huge, were like those of a peasant woman suckling her young in Peru. They were seen in their full shape, blotched and mauve, plum.''
He once described Princess Grace, who had gained a few pounds after her marriage, as ''a big bull puppy now.'' Ouch. Of Katharine Hepburn, he said: ''That beautiful bone structure of cheekbone, nose and chin goes for nothing in the surrounding flesh of the New England shopkeeper. Her skin is revolting . . . her appearance is appalling, a raddled, rash-ridden, freckled, burnt, mottled, bleached and wizened piece of decaying matter. It is unbelievable, incredible that she can still be exhibited in public.''
Said Truman Capote of his good chum Beaton: ''The camera will never be invented that could capture or encompass all that he actually sees.'' Beaton's beautiful photographs, we learn, are not the documents they appear to be.
Who was it who said the unexamined life is not worth living? I think he meant travel, not fashion. With fashion, it is best not to look too closely at the seams. People who studied Beaton knew of his perfectionism (in his role as a costume and set designer, he once charged backstage, opening night, at the Metropolitan opera to rip the skirt off a chorus member; the union allowed the opera to continue only after he practically bloodied himself bowing and scraping his apologies), but most people overlooked the miseries of the man to exalt the art. However, after you've read the diaries, it is hard to enjoy the work. Should it be?
Everyone knows, or should know, that after the age of 20, beauty is a performance on the red carpet of life. Beaton's subjects did their star turns and look fantastic. That has not changed -- the stars got their money's worth, or at least the publications that commissioned the photographs did -- and we can still applaud them. But poor Beaton. He missed his own story. He was a magician, with the power to turn frogs into princesses. But to really enjoy having that gift, the alchemy of technique and instinct that you see now in the work of his heirs -- for instance, Mario Testino -- you have to love frogs even more compassionately than you revere princesses.
Beaton could not love imperfection because he hated one of life's most fundamental humanizers: the fact that we grow old. He hated age. He hated himself for aging, and every friend and swell whose looks ripened with the years. Of course, his was of an age that still believed in progress: great expectations equal great disappointments. It is probably much easier to live nowadays in an era that puts its trust only in acquisitions.
''The inroads into the flesh do not tell one the full story,'' he wrote after seeing his infirm friend Sir Michael Duff. ''One just sees a sort of shadow.''
''I was very sad and considered myself fairly lucky! I have only half an atom left, but I continue on that. I have enough to live on -- until I am taken off! But I suddenly feel it is a long journey away. On what am I to build my life? The answer is very vague!''
Sir Michael Duff outlived Cecil Beaton, if only by a few weeks, but still. The photographer died in 1980, a week or so after making the decision to put his cat Timothy to sleep. ''Timothy who had been 17 years my friend was no longer,'' Beaton wrote in his last diary entry.
Exhausted, Beaton took to his bed and did not rise the next morning.
William Norwich is the editor of Style &amp; Entertaining.
