I'M a great one for wonder, the way other people are good at racquetball or checkers. I'm the guy who goes outside at night to stare up at the stars, trying to wrap my mind around their immensity. Visiting a historic site or battlefield, I try very hard to picture what happened there and how the participants felt. Famous synagogues, mosques and cathedrals make me feel reverent and solemn; art galleries set my imagination on fire; I can stare at waterfalls or scenic vistas for long, contemplative minutes in transcendent satisfaction.
Or at least I used to be good at these things. With each birthday I have found my capacity for wonder starting to show signs of atrophying, in the same way my reflexes are beginning to slow. Somewhere in the course of daily living, somewhere beneath the heavy encrustation of responsibility and routine, my ability to just sit and watch and wonder has begun to disappear.
Been there, done that, seen those -- these are the jaded excuses that can sink a person if he's not careful. And so, faced with the big 55 this past autumn, I decided to spend my birthday alone in what is still this country's purest wonderland, Yellowstone National Park.
I traveled out there with two resolutions. The first was not to fly-fish myself into my usual state of exhaustion (this would be tough to adhere to, with the brown trout spawning, the rivers full of fish), but to put some energy instead into taking in all the famous Yellowstone marvels that lie close to the road. If I needed to test anything during my two weeks in the park, it was not my hardness or my fitness, but my softness -- the ability to open myself up to beauty and splendor and all those things that the worrisome buzz of middle age can rush you past.
My second resolution was more specific. This was my sixth visit to the park, and never once had I seen Old Faithful. I had always been too busy fishing. My favorite corner of the park was way over to the northeast along the Lamar River; Old Faithful seemed the icon of the overcrowded, cliché Yellowstone I was determined to avoid. In other words, I had my excuses.
The first week went past in a blur of too much fishing, too much hiking, too much rushing about. Enjoyable, intoxicating even, but if I did not slow things down in a hurry, my resolutions were dust.
On the afternoon of my birthday I drove west from Yellowstone Lake to the Upper Geyser Basin. The enormous parking lot only held a few cars this late in autumn (the park was so quiet that trotting along the middle of the pavement, wearing a look of requited curiosity, was a wolf), and if not for three yellow buses full of Idaho Falls schoolchildren, I would have had the geysers largely to myself.
According to the clock in the visitor center it was 30 minutes before Old Faithful's next eruption. I stretched out in the shade of some lodgepole pine, in a spot where I could not only get a good view of the geyser cone but also could study the people sitting on the horseshoe of benches waiting patiently to be amazed.
A small enough group -- I counted 61, mostly kids, but with a good sprinkling of seniors, many of whom held hands. About 10 minutes before the eruption, dogs began getting restless; they looked up at their masters and made urgent little tugs on their leashes back toward the parking lot. At the same time, steam the color of leaf smoke began gurgling up from the bone-white cone, surges that slightly exceeded each other in what the rangers coyly call the ''preplay period.''
The actual eruption, when it came, was both beautiful and anticlimactic. Beautiful in that the strong northwest wind flattened out the spray into rippling sheets of sideways moving rainbows; disappointing in that, because of the wind, the water did not form that classic, fountain-like column seen in so many photographs, calendars and postcards.
I did better the next morning. (As with many Yellowstone wonders, the trick is waking up early so that you can have them to yourself.) I hadn't bothered looking at the clock this time, so the eruption took me by surprise. I had crossed the little bridge over the Firehole River, and was climbing the boardwalk toward the Beehive and the other famous geysers, when I heard a whoosh and looked around -- and there it was, Old Faithful blossoming into Old Faithful, high and fresh and sparkling, and no one there to see it but a soaring raven and me.
I had big fishing plans for the day, but I stayed around for four more eruptions. I was mesmerized, enthralled, converted. I wanted to laugh, to shout, to point -- at no other time in my trip did the young man in me so playfully poke the aging man in the ribs.
In what surely was among the most inspired moments of place-naming in American history, Gen. Henry D. Washburn and his exploring party of 1870 had named this great geyser while camped near its base. The words ''old'' and ''faithful'' had spontaneously come to their minds, when almost everything else they named within Yellowstone tended to be ''Hell's'' this or ''Devil's'' that. To these frontiersmen, it must have seemed the highest virtue -- fidelity, steadfastness, dependability -- and I thought how far we had gone in the opposite direction in the years since, to the point where almost the only time you hear the word ''faithful'' now is in is sexual and entirely negative sense, ''unfaithful.''
BUT maybe, my middle-aged sensibility decided, as I studied each new eruption with its subtly different variation, it is time to get back to restoring ''faithful'' to its place on our short list of virtues, especially in the sense I was watching here: of something that manages not only to be young, fresh and inspiring but also to enchant right on cue. It's absurdly bizarre for superheated water to suddenly pop its cork, but if it does this faithfully (every 65 minutes if its last eruption lasted less that 2.5 seconds; every 92 minutes if the last eruption lasted longer than 2.5 seconds) then you have something that serves, even in our sardonic age, as a tonic to our souls.
Right up until my last moments in the park I was locked inside a smaller enchantment set within a larger one. The Upper Geyser Basin, Midway, the Lower Geyser Basin, the huge, boiling Excelsior pool, the Grand Prismatic Spring. I shuttled among all of these, found it all but impossible to leave their radius. Even later, when I arrived home, those were the wonders I ended up talking about most, not about the trout I had caught, or the bears I had seen. ''Dad,'' my son Matthew said, with the expression a 13-year-old gets when he is leveling with you, ''You've got geysers on the brain.''
On my first trip to Yellowstone in 1988, the plane ride home had taken me right over the park, which was invisible except for one monstrously large cloud of red-veined blackness, a cloud that seemed to be erasing the beauty of Yellowstone for an entire generation. It did not, of course. The great fires of '88 renewed the park's beauty and I saw it now, as my flight out took the same shortcut it had 15 years before, slanting high above Yellowstone Lake. That early in the morning the cold tightened and showcased all the hot springs and geysers within the park's enormous caldera, so it seemed the base for a thousand columns of the lightest, most ethereal gray imaginable, holding up the sky.
I watched them as long as I could, twisting around to look out the window behind me, then turned with the greatest reluctance away. With the memory of Old Faithful, I was taking the elixir of wonder back home.
Essay W. D. WETHERELL'S novel, ''A Century of November,'' will be published this year by the University of Michigan Press.
