ON a recent Saturday morning, David Bach ate what he considers a debtor's breakfast, and it gnawed at him all day. This was the problem: the Ritz-Carlton had charged him $6 for a muffin. ''Six dollars!'' Mr. Bach said, in a tone that was equal parts bemusement and outrage. ''It tasted perfectly fine, but what muffin is worth that?''
Mr. Bach, who has had as many as four books simultaneously on business best-seller lists -- including ''The Automatic Millionaire'' at No. 1 -- can afford to pay a lot more for his muffin. But the consumption of petty luxuries is a habit he is trying to help his readers break, and he intends to lead by example.
The tenets of his philosophy are not new. In an updated variant of ''a penny saved is a penny earned,'' he advises people to be cautious about their finances. Everybody should divert at least 10 percent of income to retirement accounts, and it should be deducted directly from paychecks -- hence the term ''automatic.'' Everybody should buy a house and pay off the mortgage ahead of schedule. Everybody should cut back on mindless, chronic purchases -- he has coined the term ''latte factor'' -- sock the money away and take advantage of the ''miracle'' of compounded interest.
There have been many, many books on this general theme over the years, and Mr. Bach does not offer any market-roiling innovations. But armed with a clear message, he has mastered the mechanics of popularity. He trains and oversees a huge network of seminar-givers, who spread his ideas and sell his books. He offers an array of products, including tapes, CD's, workbooks and reference guides. He is constantly on television, including an appearance last month on the ''The Oprah Winfrey Show,'' the purest gold in the publishing business.
His success also speaks volumes about the changing market for business books. Best-selling celebrity chief executives have become few and far between, and books about the latest corporate scandal or botched megamerger have flopped. But simple instructional books like the ones Mr. Bach churns out are flying off the shelves, a trend that has accelerated in recent years.
Not everybody is impressed. ''The stuff is so obvious -- anybody could say it,'' said Austan Goolsbee, an economics professor at the University of Chicago. ''They all pretend there's a secret, but the secret is that there's no secret.''
Even so, Mr. Bach and his ilk have tapped into a basic need that seems to run deep in the culture: the need for reassurance. The problem is not you, he counsels. The problem is a system that preys on your worst instincts, and he is here to help you defend yourself.
Mr. Bach is 37, and he credits his grandmother, who sold wigs for the Gimbel's department store in Milwaukee, with teaching him how to invest. With her guidance, he made his first stock purchase at the age of 7. It was McDonald's. Two years later, he bought Disney, and by the age of 12, he was offering his friends' parents unsolicited advice about the attractiveness of triple-A municipal bonds. ''I was a geek,'' he said.
HIS father and sister are also financial planners, and the three of them eventually set up their own unit inside Morgan Stanley, near San Francisco. Among the things Mr. Bach learned about his clients was that couples often did not communicate about their finances, and that after the husbands died, their widows did not know even the most basic things about managing money. So after conducting many seminars especially for women, he published a book in 1999 called ''Smart Women Finish Rich.'' Two years later, he followed up with ''Smart Couples Finish Rich.''
These books sold briskly, and Mr. Bach found himself flying regularly to New York to make five-minute television appearances on programs like ''The View'' on ABC. It was an inconvenient way to live, but he found the work edifying to a degree that his day job was not. He believed that he was helping ordinary people take control of their lives, he said.
Finally, Mr. Bach had an epiphany of sorts. ''I was sitting in a room with a client who had $6 million, and we were trying to figure out how they could get their dividend checks in Europe,'' he said. ''And it hit me: Was God going to be proud of me when I reached the Pearly Gates if I spent the rest of my life helping a smaller and smaller group of richer and richer people?''
With his wife, who is also a financial planner, Mr. Bach moved to New York City in 2001 to become a full-time writer and to be near all the television studios. They bought an apartment in TriBeCa, and Mr. Bach opened an office at the TriBeCa Film Center. ''In this country, you have to buy your freedom, and that's what I've been able to do,'' he said.
Living and working in a neighborhood where a $6 muffin might be considered a bargain, he set about writing ''The Automatic Millionaire.'' As he did so, the market for business books was shifting in his favor. Ever since Andrew Tobias published ''The Only Investment Guide You'll Ever Need,'' in 1978, financial self-help books have been near the top of many best-seller lists. But over the years, there has often been strong competition from other types of business books, like biographies and management guides.
More recently, however, self-help has emerged as one of the only consistently vital genres on the business best-seller list. ''When we buy business books over here, we look for prescriptive advice,'' said Rick Wolff, an executive editor at Warner Books, which has recently published titles like ''The Lazy Person's Guide to Investing.'' ''It's what you can count on, as much as you can count on anything.''
Publishers are particularly interested in books intended for people who know almost nothing about money. Even a word like ''investing'' in a title can scare away potential readers. Adrian Zackheim, the publisher of the Portfolio and Sentinel imprints at the Penguin Group, said that ''a lot of the more traditional business books, like about management, offer a more complicated promise that isn't going to immediately appeal to a huge number of people the way these self-help books do.''
Indeed, John F. Welch Jr., the former General Electric chairman who received a $7.1 million advance for his 2001 autobiography, is moving into the realm of practical advice with his next book, ''Winning,'' to be written with his fiancée, Suzy Wetlaufer. But passing Mr. Bach on the best-seller list may be tough even for the iconic Mr. Welch.
The prevailing notion of ''The Automatic Millionaire'' is that you cannot even trust yourself. Putting yourself on a budget, Mr. Bach states emphatically at every opportunity, doesn't work, in the same way that diets don't work -- because people are forever tempted to cheat. That is why you need to have the money deducted automatically from your salary, the way the federal government started requiring employers to withhold taxes from paychecks in the 1940's.
Mr. Bach also advocates buying a house, and he does not fear a real estate bubble. ''There has never been a national housing bubble,'' he said. ''You cannot become rich as a renter. It's that simple.''
But what defines rich? On ''Oprah,'' Mr. Bach performed a series of financial makeovers. After reviewing the spending of several people who lived paycheck to paycheck and were slipping into debt, he showed them how trimming as little as $10 a day from their expenses could result in retirement accounts worth hundreds of thousands of dollars. All one woman had to do was cut her trips to the masseuse and the manicurist in half, and she would have $282,000 when she retired.
To ensure that the enormousness of that sum was fully appreciated by the audience, Ms. Winfrey walked over to a table and pulled a sheet off it, revealing the full amount in cash.
''That's real money,'' Mr. Bach said, as the crowd oohed and aahed.
A few moments later, shown with a couple who had enormous debts, Mr. Bach supervised one of the most familiar financial self-help rituals -- the cutting up of credit cards. If the enthusiasm of Ms. Winfrey's studio audience is any guide, these hoary tactics still get people's attention.
It was after Mr. Bach's appearance on ''Oprah'' that ''The Automatic Millionaire'' jumped to No.1 on The New York Times business best-seller list. ''Smart Women Finish Rich'' and ''Smart Couples Finish Rich'' also returned to best-seller status, as did ''The Finish Rich Workbook.'' According to his publisher, Broadway Books, there are 1.5 million copies of these four books in print. According to Nielsen BookScan, ''The Automatic Millionaire'' has sold 151,000 copies. By comparison, David Denby's well-regarded memoir of his stock market travails, ''American Sucker,'' has sold just 5,600 copies in about the same time period.
The challenge for Mr. Bach, editors at major business publishers say, will be maintaining his post-''Oprah'' momentum. Among the ways he is trying to do this is with a three-hour weekly radio show, broadcast by Sirius Satellite Radio and syndicated in five markets.
The personal rigor needed to build an audience was clear at a recent broadcast. The format is call-in, and because the show has been on the air only since last October, callers are sometimes scarce and Mr. Bach is forced to improvise. ''The first hour is the longest one,'' he said, as the program was about to begin. ''By the third hour, we're doing O.K.''
Highly caffeinated, Mr. Bach stood behind a microphone in a studio and announced that the phone lines were open. The switchboard did not light up. In the earnest, exhortative style of a Little League coach, he riffed about the Martha Stewart trial and the Janet Jackson halftime incident, and repeated the phone number many times. Still nothing. Not a peep from the public. Was anyone out there listening? This was pressure that required the uncrushable spirit of a stand-up comic.
Mr. Bach did not wilt, and 20 minutes into the program, he got his first caller, a retired widow who wanted to make sure that the small pension her husband had left her would not be cut off. Mr. Bach asked a few questions and then was able to assure her that there was little danger that the checks would stop coming. It was a magic moment. The woman sounded relieved and grateful, Mr. Bach was giddy to have made himself useful, and the calls began to trickle in.
