FOR those nostalgic for the first wave of exclusive lounges in the mid-1990's like Spy and Wax, where art dealers, scruffy rock stars and high-powered literary agents mingled with the latest models, Hiro, the new Japanese-themed lounge at the Maritime Hotel in Chelsea, will try to channel that feeling.
''We won't use promoters or e-mail out mass invitations,'' said Nur Khan, who was an owner of Wax and the bar Sway, and who says he is friends with the likes of Kate Moss, Mick Jagger and Primal Scream. ''Everyone in here has to be a power broker or creative.''
To help spread the word to the right people, Mr. Khan and the singer Michael Stipe of R.E.M. were hosts of Hiro's first event, during Fashion Week, a private party for the British magazine Dazed and Confused, attended by a who's who of waifish models and the young actresses Kirsten Dunst and Maggie Gyllenhaal, which Mr. Khan said was a good sampling of his crowd. ''It's meant to feel like a secret late-night hideaway,'' said Eric Goode, who owns and designed the Maritime Hotel with Sean MacPherson. Mr. Khan worked with them on the design of Hiro and runs it.
At Hiro's opening on Feb. 13, the formula seemed to gel. There was no sign outside, no velvet rope and no guest list. Instead, patrons were greeted by a woman peering through a window who cracked the door so they could plead their case for entry. At about midnight, people began to trickle into the club, a dimly lit room with low, undulating wooden ceilings, Japanese lanterns and a backlighted shoji screen concealing a sunken ballroom that will be used for special events and concerts.
Malcolm Crews, 32, a fashion art director, sat sipping a vodka tonic in a red banquette obscured by a rope curtain. ''Friday nights are usually really scary,'' said Mr. Crews, noting with approval as a group of women walked past that there wasn't a bare midriff or Ugg boot among them. ''I usually just stay home,'' he said, ''but here it seems like there's a better chance of meeting cool people.''
Over by the long wooden bar stood Benji Baker, 32, a former model who had come to Hiro to meet up with friends from the Wilhelmina modeling agency. Ms. Baker had dined next door at Matsuri, the Japanese restaurant, and then wandered upstairs to the hotel bar, she said, for yet another round of sake.
''Everyone we want to see is coming here tonight,'' said Ms. Baker, who said she met Mr. Khan during too many late nights years ago at Wax. ''I only hope I don't pass out before they get here.''
Hiro  366 West 17th Street; (212) 242-4300.
GETTING IN -- It helps to be a model, a rock star or friends with the management.  D.J. PICKS -- ''Loaded'' by Primal Scream; ''Fools Gold'' by Stone Roses; ''Don't Believe the Hype'' by Public Enemy.  DRESS CODE -- For men, layered T-shirts, vintage Levi's; for women, tapered jeans, candy-colored pumps.  SIGHTINGS -- Kirsten Dunst, David Blaine, Daryl Hannah.  SIGNATURE COCKTAIL -- Three Monks: three sakes, Amaretto and orange juice, $13.
BOÎTE
