THIS should be a great time to be a Yankee fan. The Yanks have signed A-Rod and the Boss has reduced the Red Sox' chief owner into a blithering fit -- Elmer Fudd vowing wevenge on that Wascally Wabbit.
However, now is basically a great time not to be a Yankee fan. It is delightful to sit back and listen to Yankee fans come off the laughing gas and resume their normal anxiety that they will not tromp all over baseball the way they are supposed to do.
Already, there are Yankee fans out there obsessing about the flaws in the team that could make this the fourth consecutive season in which the Yankees do not win the World Series.
It is the sacred duty of all who are not Yankee fans to nod morbidly and agree with every brooding scenario. This only makes it worse for them.
This is what I hear from friends of mine who are of the Yankee persuasion. They are good people, politically and morally and socially. They love the Yankees with all their hearts. And this is what they currently fear, in descending order.
*The Yankees will miss Andy Pettitte every fifth day.
*Whether he tries to or not, A-Rod will bring attention to Derek Jeter's remaining at shortstop.
*Omigosh, what if Mariano Rivera can no longer blow everybody away?
*If there is pressure on Joe Torre to play Kenny Lofton in the field, he will be the worst Yankee center fielder in decades.
*Torre's lame-duck status, even if by his own volition, will have an impact if the Yankees start slowly.
*Who's going to play second base and bat ninth? Could this be the Achilles' heel of the 2004 Yankees?
*Jason Giambi and Gary Sheffield will be distracted by the Balco investigation.
These are modest things to worry about when the payroll is soaring toward $200 million, and many of the best players in the world are earning their paychecks in the Bronx.
It could be worse. Every day, Yankee fans wake up and say a prayer of thanksgiving that they are not Mets fans.
Mets fans bumble along, making self-deprecating jokes about right field being the Bermuda Triangle, and whether Steve Trachsel is going to win 9 games or 10. They know that sometime later in the decade there might be a one-year goofy little miracle in Queens. This is far different from being a Yankee fan, with such miserably high expectations.
Much Yankee angst is based on the purchase of Alex Rodriguez. Having written a month ago that the Boss should do his thing and pay for A-Rod, who would surely be thrilled to move to third base, I view the last week as psychic déjà vu.
New Yorkers have been laboring under the belief that A-Rod was a 24-and-1 player, as somebody within the Mets' organization implied after the 2000 season, when the Mets did their dead-level best to avoid signing him. There is no doubt he takes care of himself, but in a world of tramp athletes he appears to be a class act.
Rodriguez has been that way all along. A decade ago, my son had a summer job as a clubhouse attendant for the Class A team in Peoria, Ill. One day the Mariners' Appleton (Wis.) team bus chugged in, a few hours before game time. The order went out for a bunch of pizzas to give the boys enough energy to play a night game. Who was buying? Appleton's bonus baby, Alex Rodriguez, was taking care of his buds.
As a rookie, A-Rod became friendly with Derek Jeter. They knew they could both make a lot of money and have a lot of fun without letting the game make them sour, as they saw happening around them. Their respective teams failed to reach the World Series in 1995 because neither management had enough instinct to stick them at shortstop in October. A-Rod has never made it to the World Series, but this could be his year.
A-Rod will be the lightning rod in the clubhouse. The first time Jeter misplays something at short, a posse of news media will go running to A-Rod, trying to get him to say he would have had it. The problem is not going to be A-Rod or Jeter or Torre or maybe even Steinbrenner. The problem is going to be us. It is what we do.
Despite the usual Yankee-fan paranoia, the odds are extremely in favor of A-Rod and Jeter winning a World Series together. Torre will have to resist using Rivera for more than an inning at a time. He will have to fight off the factions in his organization that think Lofton can play center field. He may even have to pinch-hit for his second baseman sometimes. He will have to get over Steinbrenner's discarding Pettitte. Some Yankee fans discredit Torre, who has merely won four World Series in eight years.
The Red Sox, of course, have not even played in a World Series since 1986. As a stockholder in The New York Times Company, which owns a piece of the Red Sox, I applaud their financial prudence in not matching A-Rod's ludicrous salary. However, as a sports fan, I guffaw at the turnaround. The Yankees are not only on a roll but their owner has also demolished the petulant Red Sox owner.
It should be sheer, exhilarating joy to be a Yankee fan. Of course, it is not.
Sports of The Times
