AS a travel industry executive, Barbara Cacoulidis spends her days helping people arrange vacations. But when the tourism business shrank after the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, she could not manage much time for herself.
In 2002, she took just a week and a half of vacation.
But last year, she gave herself nearly three weeks, including her first-ever Christmas vacation, in the Bahamas. Ms. Cacoulidis and her extended family swam with dolphins and dined at an underwater restaurant. The men played blackjack and roulette, the women got facials and the children made piñatas at camp.
''As the economy has gotten better, that eases everyone's minds,'' said Ms. Cacoulidis, now the national director for sales at Rosewood Hotels and Resorts. ''You need to take some R.&amp;R.''
The ups and downs of her vacation schedule could serve in one way as an economic indicator. In recent years, many executives have been reluctant to take long or expensive vacations, largely because of the lagging economy. Some did not have the cash for exotic travel; others feared that if they were not at their desks every day, there would be no desk waiting for them when they returned.
But as the economy has improved, more executives are stepping out of the office for real breaks.
''People do feel a little more comfortable in terms of both time and money,'' said David Buda, executive vice president of the Tzell Travel Group in Manhattan, whose clients are mainly high-level managers. ''I guess they figure: 'I really deserve a vacation. I want to get back to a more normal life.'''
Mr. Buda says his leisure business has regained most of the ground it lost after 9/11. And in a measure of overall interest in leisure travel, the American Express Company, which polled 1,350 people in September, found that respondents planned to spend at least a third more on travel in 2004 than in 2003.
When Management Recruiters International, an international executive search firm based in Cleveland, surveyed 730 executives last February, 47 percent said they would not use all their vacation time in 2003, largely because of job pressures. Many said they previously took more time off. But the company president, Allen Salikof, said he expected different results in the survey this year.
''I think you'll see executives really start to utilize their vacations more than in previous years,'' he said. ''We're projecting increased hiring that's going to take some of the pressure off some of the executives.''
Owners of the largest companies in the Women Presidents' Organization, a national association of 625 women entrepreneurs, hold a networking session every November on a Thursday night and Friday. When 16 members gathered in New York City in 2002, only three extended their meeting into a vacation weekend. A year later, in Miami, 13 out of 16 stayed. ''It was the cash; they were doing better,'' said the group's president, Marsha Firestone.
Some executives feel that they have gone too long without slowing down. Carolanne Gardner, the associate general counsel at the Financial Guaranty Insurance Company, a bond insurer in New York, decided last fall that two years without a break was too much. ''I felt like I hadn't seen my family in months,'' she said. She had gone to Hilton Head, S.C., for a week in 2001 and again in 2002 with her husband, Adrian Del Valle, and their two children.
But, she said, ''I was inside at the computer almost the whole time.'' She was so busy because the bond insurance business tends to boom when the rest of the economy is weak.
At the end of last year, Ms. Gardner pulled herself away from the office for three weeks. But no exotic travel was involved. Except for a short trip to visit friends in Baltimore, the family stayed in New York City. ''I'm cooking, we're going to the park,'' she said, ''I'm doing the things we never do.''
Executives may be willing to take more time off, but many are still cautious about where they go and how long they stay. Many are sticking to North American destinations like Mexico, Canada, Las Vegas, Orlando or Alaska. Instead of taking two weeks at a time, they often book shorter trips of three or four days each. That preference mirrors the overall trend found by the American Society of Travel Agents in a survey of 400 agents last June.
MS. FIRESTONE of the Women Presidents' Organization is typical. Usually, she and her husband, Monroe, take one trip overseas a year. But in 2003, they stayed on this side of the Atlantic: one week golfing in Colorado, one week at a resort in Mexico and one week at the Grand Canyon, Bryce Canyon and Zion National Park.
''The economy put a lot of pressure on us,'' Ms. Firestone said, ''and the Iraq war made us want to stick closer to home.''
Because the economic picture remains fuzzy, many executives are deciding only at the last minute to take time off. Elaine Goldhill, the president of her own travel consulting firm in Manhattan, started noticing the trend just before Thanksgiving. ''People realize, 'Oh my God, it's the holidays and I don't have plans,''' she said. ''And I think because business has picked up, they could focus more on things they enjoyed doing.''
Mr. Buda of Tzell Travel said that 90 percent of his clients used to make their holiday plans nearly a year in advance, but that fewer than two-thirds booked well in advance in 2003.
Having tasted the pleasures of leisure again, many executives may not easily give up their vacations the next time the economy sags, travel experts said.
Terry Espy, owner of her own construction project management company in Raleigh, N.C., revamped the business several years ago and took no big trips during that time. But last fall, as business became strong, she and her husband spent a week sailing around the British Virgin Islands with a general contractor she knows and other business associates.
''We made a commitment,'' she said, ''that we're going to do this once a year or twice a year.''
Executive Life
