THE LAST CROSSING
By Guy Vanderhaeghe.
393 pp. New York:
Atlantic Monthly Press. $24.
GUY VANDERHAEGHE'S latest novel, ''The Last Crossing,'' revisits territory he explored in his previous one, ''The Englishman's Boy'': the late-19th-century wilds of northern Montana and Canada's Northwest Territories. The recurrence of not only places but a plotline suggests the operation of a cookie cutter. In both books, a ragged crew of ill-tempered misfits heads north from Fort Benton on the Missouri River, across the so-called Medicine Line (the United States-Canadian border), for what promises to be a converging-destiny blowout. Both novels contrast a wilderness saga with connected stories from different times and places -- 1920's Hollywood in ''The Englishman's Boy'' and 1890's England in ''The Last Crossing'' -- and both were prizewinners and best sellers in Canada. ''The Last Crossing'' is by far the richer novel, though its richness is nothing if not studied and deliberate.
In 1870, the saintly Simon Gaunt crosses the ocean from England with his zealous mentor, the Rev. Obadiah Witherspoon, on a mission to convert the Western Indians of the New World, whom they believe to be descended from the Lost Tribes of Israel. A year later, his twin, Charles, and older brother, Addington, arrive in Fort Benton to search for the lost Simon. Charles, who has alternately loved and betrayed Simon, as we learn from flashbacks, fears his martinet father, who sent him on this mission. He also envies and despises Addington, his preening companion.
A budding artist whose work scratches ''no deeper than the surface of things,'' Charles is a man in whom excessive emotion always causes ''disquiet.'' And, naturally, disquiet seeks him out -- great heaping, dripping hogsheads of disquiet, dumped on his head in a wilderness baptism. Much of it is provided by his arrogant older brother. Beneath his civilized exterior, Addington was already a savage before coming on this mission, and since extreme places breed extreme forms of behavior, the West unhinges him completely. He takes firm military command of the search, yet shows little enthusiasm for finding Simon. Instead, his expedition becomes the Western grand tour of an English adventurer, to be written up by a sleazy journalist brought along for that purpose.
Of the other characters -- a strong and varied cast -- the most interesting is perhaps the love-smitten Custis Straw, a Fort Benton horse trader hooked on laudanum and whiskey, who follows the expedition in pursuit of Lucy Stoveall, its cook. The presence of Lucy, the lone woman traveling with an entourage of hot-blooded men, occasions mischief, violence and jealousy within the group, as well as lifelong disquiet for poor Charles, who also falls in love with her. She has come along to take revenge on the men she believes killed her sister, now whiskey traders in Canada, though she announces that her goal is to find her missing husband. ''Everybody chasing after everybody else,'' then -- as Custis's friend Aloysius tells him. ''Those Englishmen chasing their brother. Lucy Stoveall chasing her husband. You after Lucy Stoveall. A game of fox and hounds.''
All this is told from multiple first- and third-person perspectives, with frequent shifts of time and place, using present-tense immediacy and past-tense formality, in a narrative as carefully constructed and laboriously pieced together as a Lego Taj Mahal. Vanderhaeghe's writing is hardly effortless and never soft-focused; like the Western shadows Charles describes, it is ''cut from black tin, sharply defined, stark.'' His descriptive powers can be both fresh and strained, as in this account of the expedition's departure:
''The little town of Fort Benton grows smaller below as the procession makes a long, clamorous climb out of the river valley of the Missouri, wagons juddering along the potholed freight trail. Axles shrieking, the chirp and squeal of wagon boards sawing against one another, the tintinnabulation of enamelware clanking in the back, drivers shouting, 'Hyup! Hyup!' slapping reins to teams surging in their collars up the arid, canvas-colored hill, the blue sky lurching above them, flapping like a matador's cape, teasing them to charge forward.''
The musical ''juddering'' sounds earthy and antique, though it postdates this novel's historical period. The ''chirp and squeal of wagon boards'' is perfect, though, as is the ''canvas-colored hill,'' but the Poe-ish ''tintinnabulation'' verges on High Art, and the lurching, flapping, teasing sky is forced and overdone. Nor does the sky's color (blue) suggest a matador's cape. I'm afraid that Vanderhaeghe's too-fond preference for simile will make some readers reach for their Colt .45's.
At his best, he is something of a Dickensian sensationalist. His flair for the lurid can be exquisite, as in the nearly campy scene in which Addington, during a ball at Fort Edmonton, taunts Charles by kissing Lucy on the mouth, then retreats to his room to smear his body with mercury -- his syphilis regimen. Indeed, if it weren't well grounded in character, much of this novel would be Grand Guignol. Its gritty realism has an odd effect: it makes the book seem less real, a stiff yet vivid and extravagant spectacle.
A curious thing happens halfway through. As the search for Simon becomes more desultory because of Addington's quest for exotic places, so the novel too begins to revel in its aimlessness, its goal the same as Addington's: to accumulate adventures and anecdotes. Vanderhaeghe was clearly taken with his research -- one pictures the index cards stacked on his desk -- and the north-country West was obviously a rich mine.
The stories, for example, of John Rowand of the Hudson's Bay Company and ''Rowand's Folly'' (his three-story log house, with a gallery and an immense ballroom), of Rowand's bizarre funeral procession back and forth across the Atlantic, his corpse pickled in rum, and of the voyageurs who drank the rum along the way, have little to do with the novel's careful interlocking of narrative pieces but everything to do with a baroque love of history and its freakish incongruities. So we get both a tour guide and a parody of tour guides in the padded-with-arcana middle portion of the book. Epic novels can be loose, baggy monsters, but this one is stuffed with enough goodies to keep us entertained for days.
The best thing, though, is that it's all a cunning trap. The search fizzles out, and the belated climax and denouement have their own entirely unexpected rewards that nonetheless -- and with vigilant precision -- were very much prepared for.
John Vernon's most recent novel is ''The Last Canyon.''
