THE letters that Gerald W. Duquette sent home to his wife, Lillian, during World War II took a little longer than usual to reach home in Westport.
''The post office would get the letters, and they'd pass them around, and by the time it would get passed around the post office the delivery would be a few days late,'' Mr. Duquette said. ''Everybody got a big kick out of seeing them.''
Obviously, these weren't ordinary letters. Actually, the letters were probably not especially noteworthy except to Mrs. Duquette, but what made them worthy enough to pass around were the envelopes they came in. They were works of art by another soldier, Samuel L. Boylston, that were so extraordinary they have survived years in a dresser drawer in Westport and now sit in the Library of Congress.
''All the collections on our Web site are unique and insightful in their own right, and I think particularly the illustrations by Sam Boylston, what they tell me, is this is one way a person understood and processed what they were going through,'' said Anneliesa Clump Behrend, a spokeswoman for the Veterans History Project at the Library of Congress. ''It was their record of their experience.''
Mr. Duquette was stationed with the 13th Army Air Force in the New Hebrides (now independent and renamed Vanuatu) and had the good fortune to serve with a sergeant from South Carolina who was a bit of an artist. The sergeant, Mr. Boylston, volunteered to paint on each envelope a cartoon of off-duty life in the South Pacific: a soldier fishing on the beach; another taking a shower, and a Hollywood director discovering what the South Pacific was really like.
Frequently witty and rarely depicting combat, the envelopes gave Mrs. Duquette a colorful glimpse into her husband's life during the 28 months they spent apart.
''I saw this G.I. with a pencil and some paper and he was scratching away, making all kinds of scratches and cartoons and everything,'' said Mr. Duquette, now 83, of Mr. Boylston. ''We were just attracted to each other.''
At some point, Mr. Duquette said, Mr. Boylston handed him a six-cent envelope with a cartoon of two soldiers and a clothesline.
''He had a great imagination,'' Mr. Duquette said. ''He was able to whip it up just like nothing.''
On the orange bed sheet in the middle, Mr. Boylston had written Mrs. Duquette's name and address. In the lower left corner, he had drawn a soldier holding up a purple bra and asking ''Where did this come from?''
Mr. Duquette mailed it home on Feb. 26, 1944. Mrs. Duquette liked it so much she asked for a similar one a year later.
"The first few, I was flabbergasted,'' she said. ''I didn't even know that his buddy knew anything about artwork or anything. And then as they kept coming, I sort of looked forward to them."
Mr. Boylston made cards for the Duquettes' anniversary, Mrs. Duquette's birthday, even for Mr. Duquette's sister-in-law when she gave birth to twins. Each one passed the Army's censors. He decorated cards and envelopes for plenty of soldiers in the unit, but did the most for Mr. Duquette.
After they returned home from the war, Mr. Duquette worked for Railway Express; his wife ran the newsstand at the Saugatuck train station. Mr. Boylston returned to South Carolina, where he eventually gave up his artistic aspirations and instead went to law school, served as a state representative in South Carolina for six years and as executive vice president of the South Carolina Trucking Association for 25 years.
They stayed in touch, and Mr. Boylston continued painting for the Duquettes.
When the Duquettes visited Mr. Boylston on their way to Florida, they saw his work in his basement and at a nearby gas station, which used to exhibit and sell it. His cartoons were occasionally published in local newspapers in South Carolina.
Mr. Boylston visited the Duquettes in Westport whenever his trucking conventions were held in New York or Boston. They took him to the Southport Savings Bank, now People's Bank, where they had an account.
Mr. Boylston's painting of Southport Bank still hangs in the stairwell of the Duquettes' house. Two more of his paintings are in the living room: a watercolor of a New England barn in autumn and an oil painting of a Southern tobacco farm.
Mr. Boylston continued to send them handmade cards for birthdays, anniversaries, and Christmas long after the war was over. Mrs. Duquette kept everything.
In 2002, the year after Mr. Boylston died, Mr. Duquette read an article in VFW Magazine about the Veterans History Project. Worried that his letters would get damaged if he kept them much longer, Mr. Duquette wrote the Veterans History Project to see if he could donate his collection there.
The call from Washington came right away. The Duquettes shipped off all 60 of the envelopes Mr. Boylston decorated -- 58 to Mrs. Duquette and two to Mr. Duquette the year after they returned from the war.
''I was happy to send them there because I know that they'll be preserved forever there,'' Mr. Duquette said.
The letters are one item among the 28,000 in the Veterans History Project, which was commissioned by Congress in 2000 and is part of the American Folklife Center of the Library of Congress. About 50 of the items, including Mr. Boylston's envelopes, are online at http://www.loc.gov/folklife/vets/stories.
But there are some real-life details the Web site doesn't capture: Mrs. Duquette marked on the backs of most of the envelopes sent during the war the dates she received and responded to her husband. She even used a few to make grocery lists.
Mr. Boylston's envelopes will likely be part of a display in honor of the dedication of the national World War II memorial in May, said Mrs. Behrend of the Veterans History Project.
''He didn't create these illustrations in a way that he thought they would be saved at the Library of Congress,'' she said. ''It was just an everyday act of an everyday assignment, which is quite extraordinary when you look back.''
Ellen McCulloch-Lovell, the director of the Veterans History Project, said the envelopes belong in the exhibition.
''When I think about those envelopes,'' she said, ''they are wonderful and they're so vivid and they are unique.''
