THE stately Decatur House sits in plain view in the heart of downtown Washington, just across the street from the Chamber of Commerce. But few passers-by realize that the red brick building, completed in 1818, houses one of the city's last preserved slave quarters.
Inside, visitors can see the original brick fireplace in the slaves' sleeping quarters and read copies of handwritten documents from the 1800's that list the names of the men, women and children who once lived there in bondage. The house, at 748 Jackson Place NW, is one of 98 historical sites in ''African American Heritage Trail, Washington, DC,'' a new guide published by city officials who are hoping to encourage visitors to glimpse a crucial -- and often overlooked -- slice of history in the nation's capital.
In 2002, Washington drew 18.6 million travelers, and more than a third visited museums and historic sites, recent statistics from the Washington DC Convention and Tourism Corporation show. But these visitors rarely explored the city's African-American historical landmarks. Tourism officials are hoping to change that by promoting the guide, which contains 15 self-guided walking and driving tours.
The sites include the African American Civil War Memorial and Museum, 1200 U Street NW, where visitors can view exhibits dedicated to black soldiers who fought in the Civil War. Another is the Metropolitan A.M.E. Church, 1518 M Street NW, where thousands attended the funeral of the abolitionist Frederick Douglass in 1895. The homes of prominent black Washingtonians, including the philosopher Alain Locke and the bandleader Duke Ellington, are also on the tours.
Detailed historical information about the places listed in the guide and more than 100 additional landmarks will be available online at www.culturaltourismdc.org on Feb. 29 to coincide with the end of Black History Month.
''We're creating new ways for visitors to discover the history beyond the monuments,'' said Kathryn S. Smith, a historian and executive director of Cultural Tourism DC, the nonprofit group that published the guide with city and federal funds and is creating the online database. ''The city of Washington is a unique, urban place, and its identity is defined by the people who have lived here and the buildings and streetscapes they have left behind. African-Americans have been central to this city since Day 1.''
In 1800, blacks were 25 percent of the city's population; they now make up about 60 percent. The 52-page guide chronicles their stories with descriptions of a range of historically significant places, some open to the public and other sites that are not. In certain locales, the original structures no longer exist or are in disrepair -- like the dilapidated former residence of Carter G. Woodson, the historian who, in 1926, started Black History Week, the inspiration for Black History Month.
Tourism officials believe the guide will have special resonance for black travelers. The Convention and Tourism Corporation, the official marketing arm of the city, expects to spend $125,000 this year on a print and online advertising campaign directed toward black travelers.
But Jane Freundel Levey, who edited the guide and works as a historian at Cultural Tourism DC, said of the city: ''You don't have to be African-American to identify with the story and the triumphs and the creativity. It's a human story. It's an American story.''
About 50,000 of the guides were printed in December, which officials believed would cover demand for about three years. But more than 30,000 are already gone. They can be ordered at www.culturaltourismdc.org for a shipping and handling fee of $4.75, or by calling (202) 661-7581.
Frank Smith, the founding director of the African American Civil War Memorial, met a British tourist this month who decided to visit his museum after discovering the guide while visiting the city's major monuments. ''It was precisely what we want to see happen,'' Mr. Smith said.
And Carol Gelderman, an English professor at the University of New Orleans who is a frequent visitor to Washington, saw a mention of the guide online. Ms. Gelderman promptly ordered a copy.
''I've been going to Washington for years,'' she said, ''but there's still a lot I have to learn.''
TRAVEL ADIVSORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT
