THE heath family is among the most beloved in the garden. It includes rhododendrons, azaleas, pieris, lingonberries, heather, blueberries and, of course, heath itself. All are relatively trouble-free if you accept their one foible: They are finicky about soil.
In their native habitats, these plants grow in soils that are at once very acidic and rich in humus, yet infertile. Water often lies a foot or so below the surface and is wicked up to roots, most of which sit in the well-aerated top few inches of soil. Approximate these soil conditions in the garden, and heath family plants will be happy.
Ideally, I like to get the soil ready well before the actual planting because it gives me a head start in the spring and gives the materials I mix time to meld through the winter.
More than 20 years ago, I became enticed with the ornamental and gustatory qualities of blueberry bushes. I began preparing the soil in autumn for the 14 bushes I had planned to plant in the spring. I chose a site where the soil was well-aerated, but if it had not been, I would have planted those blueberries atop a wide mound of soil. Other alternatives would be to install drainage pipe to carry away subsurface water or to choose a new site.
Acidic soil is especially important in the nourishment of heath family plants because it puts iron and nitrogen into forms that they can absorb. You can test the pH yourself or send samples to a soil-testing laboratory (the county agricultural extension office may be helpful); acidity should be 4.0 to 5.2.
If the soil is not sufficiently acidic, add sulfur, a naturally mined mineral. To raise the acidity (i.e., lower the pH) of sandy soils by one point, add a pound of sulfur for every 100 square feet; other soils need about twice that amount.
I also mix a bucketful of peat moss into the soil at each planting hole. Peat moss not only further acidifies the soil, but it also provides humus, which helps keep the soil moist and aerated. Peat moss is particularly suitable for heath and its kin because these plants dislike lots of nutrients.
If you have heavy clay, it's wise to create wide mounds of aerated soil on top. Or if you prefer, install a drainage pipe to carry away subsurface water.
After planting my blueberries, I added a three-inch blanket of sawdust around them. Any fluffy organic mulch -- leaves, pine needles or wood chips -- will do. Mulch shields the shallow roots of these plants from winter cold and summer heat. It also suppresses weeds and eliminates the need for hoeing, which would damage those shallow roots.
Water is crucial for the first few years, especially for woodland natives like rhododendrons and blueberries, which thrive in sunlight only if they have enough to drink. Estimate the spread of the branches and every week apply a half-gallon of water per square foot, watering slowly to prevent runoff. That amount is equivalent to an inch of rain, so adjust your watering according to the weather.
Rather than trudge from the house to my blueberry bushes with a watering can, I installed a drip irrigation system. Applying water slowly and over long periods, drip irrigation more closely approximates actual plant water use, so it is more efficient and promotes better growth than sprinkler or hand watering.
Plants in the heath family thrive in barren soil because their tender hair roots are easily burned by fertilizer salts. These plants do need food, in minimal amounts. As with most plants, nitrogen is the nutrient needed in greatest amounts. But heath family plants are choosy about how it is served. Read the fine print to make sure that the fertilizer contains ammonium nitrogen, the kind preferred by acid-loving plants.
I FERTILIZE my blueberries with soybean meal. Like other natural fertilizers, it contains nitrogen that is locked up at first but converted to ammonium by one set of soil micro-organisms and then by another to nitrate, another form of nitrogen used by plants. Very acidic soil does not harbor the nitrate-forming micro-organisms, so by fertilizing the soil I can make sure blueberry plants get just what they want.
You may need to add sulfur yearly or every few years, depending on the natural acidity of the soil. In areas like the West, where the soil is so alkaline that making it acidic is unfeasible, the best solution is to dig a hole a few feet wide and a couple of feet deep and fill it with equal parts acidic peat moss and sand. Periodically fertilize this virtually nutrient-free mix with other nutrients in addition to nitrogen.
Heath family plants grown strictly as ornamentals require less food than those that are grown for fruit. Every fall or winter, I spread two pounds of soybean meal per 100 square feet beneath my very blueberry bushes to get the couple of feet of annual growth needed for good crops.
I also replenish the mulch from time to time. As organic mulches decompose, they enrich the soil with humus. After 10 years of spreading three inches of sawdust beneath my blueberries each fall, I find that the soil is so soft and absorbent that the plants produce bumper crops, even without irrigation.
CUTTINGS
