BUYING fine art can be intimidating. Not without reason, buyers expect to encounter arrogant dealers and lofty gallery prices.
That has not been a problem, however, at Costco, the warehouse club store better known for appliances, clothing and grocery sections that sell staples like cereal by the case. Since last spring, the company has been selling fine art, including limited-edition lithographs by Pablo Picasso, Marc Chagall and Joan Miró.
Greg Moors, an art dealer in San Francisco, began selling art at some of the company's stores in brief experiments last spring, and for the last two months has been selling on the company's Web site, Costco.com. The artwork is museum quality, matted and framed.
''There were so many double takes at the stores,'' Mr. Moors said. ''People stopped in front of these lithographs and said: 'Wow! What is this?'''
Mr. Moors sold 43 pieces of art during appearances at Costco stores -- in the La Jolla area of San Diego, as well as Concord and Mountain View, Calif., and Issaquah, Wash. ''I consistently did fairly well,'' he said, ''considering that people are coming in to buy hamburger and walking out with a $1,200 work of art.''
Because of that success, Costco began giving Mr. Moors space on its Web site last month to display six pieces of art a week, on a trial basis. The program has been so successful that the company is planning to expand it and give art a larger presence on the site. (To find out what is for sale, type ''fine art'' into the search box on the top of the home page.)
''When I first heard about it, I wasn't sure it would work,'' said Liz Elsner, an assistant vice president at Costco.com. ''Buying art is such a personal thing. But every time we've thrown them up there, they're gone within a week. We just loaded six more on the Web site, and we're down to two already.'' Previously, the company tried offering lower-priced art reproductions generated by computer, she said, but it took them off the Web site because they did not sell. The art being sold through Mr. Moors is priced from $450 to $15,000, and averages $1,500.
Mr. Moors, 49, formerly worked for the fine-art chains Martin Lawrence Galleries and Circle Fine Art and briefly operated his own San Francisco gallery, which he said he had closed because of high overhead. He acquires the art he sells through Costco one piece at a time from dealers, collectors and other sources. ''I'm trying to find wonderful works of art that are of a high quality that you don't have to refinance your home to buy,'' he said.
Before Costco allowed him to sell in its stores, the company checked his credentials and background and brought in outside appraisers to inspect the art.
Ms. Elsner said Costco applied the same pricing system to the art that it did to other goods, marking them up no more than 14 percent above what it pays Mr. Moors. He said his markup was ''way below what retail galleries charge'' but declined to be specific.
Tony Pernicone, an art appraiser who owns Avanti Fine Arts, a gallery in Larkspur, Calif., north of San Francisco, and previously directed the San Francisco Art Exchange and other art galleries, said: ''At a legitimate gallery, generally the markup is 100 to 150 percent, depending on their overhead and the cost of the art. Obviously, you get galleries that try to go higher.'' Costco's price of $1,550 for a Chagall Bible Series lithograph was $500 to $1,000 less than a gallery would have charged, Mr. Pernicone said.
Several art dealers said galleries in a fashionable area like Union Square in San Francisco, where rents can exceed $20,000 a month, charge higher prices for art because of their towering overhead.
So far, Mr. Pernicone said, he does not see Costco's art sales as a problem. ''I haven't lost any deals because of people buying at Costco,'' he said. ''But if I did, I guess I would start to be concerned about it.'' He added that over the long haul, the Costco sales might be good for galleries.
''If it's the first time someone is buying fine art, and it's going to open the door to them walking into a gallery later, I think it's O.K.,'' he said. ''I think that the more people buy art, the better a gallery is going to do in the long run.''
In addition to the Picassos, Chagalls and Mirós, Costco has sold limestone lithographs by Henri Matisse, Max Ernst, Jacques Villon and other artists, and an original etching by Pierre Bonnard. Mr. Moors now plans to sell original oil paintings by lesser-known modern artists, like Pascal Cucaro and Geneve Sargent, on the Web site.
MR. MOORS'S telephone number is listed as the one to call for information about the artwork on the Web -- and customers often call it. Most customers have been very happy with their Costco art purchases, he said. He recalls one man who bought an etching from a 1908 Mary Cassatt series for $2,500 from the Web site.
''He's thrilled,'' Mr. Moors said. ''It was a dry-point etching where there were only about 40 of them done. In a gallery it would have probably gone for $7,000 or $8,000.''
Nancy Larsen, who with her husband edits a newsletter called the Greater Sacramento Arts Reporter and maintains an arts Web site, recently bought lithographs by Picasso and Marcel Vertes from Costco.com.
''Because I'm in the arts, I didn't want to own ordinary prints,'' she said. ''We spent a couple of thousand dollars, and I knew I wasn't getting ripped off because of the fact that they were things that Costco guaranteed.''
Costco guarantees the authenticity and perfect condition of the art and, unlike many galleries, will accept returns. ''If you're dissatisfied with your purchase, we'll take it back, no questions asked,'' Ms. Elsner said.
Selling fine art at a club store may be a novel idea, but the concept of mass marketing the works of major artists is not. From 1962 to 1971, Sears hired Vincent Price, the actor and noted collector, to sell lithographs, etchings, paintings and other artwork by Picasso, Francisco Goya, Albrecht Dürer and many other artists through its stores, and even through the Sears catalog. Some high-end retailers like Marshall Field's have sold fine art in their stores for years.
Costco does place one restriction on the art sales: there can be no nudity in any of the works. That has prevented Mr. Moors from selling several pieces through the company, including some from Picasso and Chagall.
As enthusiastic as Mr. Moors is about the Costco art sales, he objects to having the term ''discount'' applied to the pieces. ''It's disrespectful to the art,'' he said. ''Dishwashing soap is discounted. A couch is discounted. Fine art is sold at a wonderful price.''
