PLAYING for the Yankees this year, Alex Rodriguez will make about 9 percent of the team's gaudy payroll. With the Texas Rangers last season, Rodriguez's salary ate up more than a quarter of the team's payroll. The difference is huge.
''If you get one player making much over 10 percent of your payroll, you're asking for trouble,'' said a general manager who has made a study of the effect of unusually large salaries on club payrolls. ''When payrolls get high, 90 or 100 million dollars, it compounds that. A guy making 20 or 30 percent of it makes it worse.''
Among other reasons, the Rangers desperately wanted to trade Rodriguez to purge their payroll of his huge salary: $21 million this year, going up to $25 million each of the next two years and $27 million each of the four years after that.
The Rangers learned in the first three years of the historic $252 million contract that unless they wanted to have the Yankees' type of payroll, the Rodriguez salary did not allow them to have the players they needed to bolster their roster to be competitive.
That realization came belatedly to the Rangers' owner, Tom Hicks, who created the monster three years ago. He never expected to finish last for three successive seasons with Rodriguez in his lineup, but that's what he got despite a top-notch performance from his high-priced star, including a most valuable player effort last season.
Hicks set out to slash his payroll while having the Rodriguez contract sitting on his throat. The salary was a constant that got in the way of improvement.
''It doesn't guarantee you anything if you don't have enough left to put a solid supporting cast around him,'' said the general manager who did the study. ''You might as well cut him loose. The name of the game is winning.''
Rodriguez contributed to a prodigious offense, but in his three seasons with them, the Rangers were never able to build a decent pitching staff. Last season, the staff had a 5.67 earned run average, worst in the major leagues.
The Seattle Mariners learned about winning a few years ago. In succession, they shed, willingly or unwillingly, Randy Johnson, Ken Griffey Jr. and Rodriguez, three perennial All-Stars, and remained a winning team. In 2001, after the last of those stars had departed, they won a franchise-record 116 games and the division championship.
Of course, with the kind of payroll the Yankees have, a Rodriguez type of salary wouldn't make as large a dent as it did on the Rangers, whether it's $16 million, which is what the Yankees will pay him, or $21 million, which is what his contract calls for. (The Rangers will pay the rest.)
Derek Jeter's 2003 salary, $15.6 million, was the largest salary the Yankees paid; that amount represented 11.1 percent of the payroll, the second smallest percentage among the highest-paid players on each team. Only Bret Boone's 8.5 percent of the Seattle payroll was lower. The Yankees, of course, cannot only afford Jeter's salary, but they can also afford to fill their other positions, including third base.
Bonuses for Rodriguez, Too
Giving Alex Rodriguez the largest contract in history wasn't enough for Tom Hicks. Why stop at $252 million when he could include bonuses in the deal?
Last season, for example, beyond his $21 million salary and $1 million prorated share of his signing bonus, Rodriguez earned $900,000 in bonuses -- $500,000 for the American League Most Valuable Player award and $100,000 each for winning a Gold Glove as the best-fielding shortstop, a Silver Slugger as the best-hitting shortstop, making the A.L. All-Star team and being named to a postseason all-star team.
Rodriguez's contract has other bonus clauses, including payments for being the M.V.P. of the division series (although the award does not yet exist), the league championship series and the World Series. Now that he has fled the last-place Rangers for the Yankees, he has a chance to earn those bonuses, too.
And should he win the league M.V.P. award again this year, he will receive a $1 million bonus. Even if he doesn't win the award but finishes in the top 10 in voting, he will get $200,000 (2nd to 5th) or $100,000 (6th to 10th).
The Yankees don't include award bonuses in their contracts. George Steinbrenner, the principal owner, figures he pays his players enough that they should win awards without additional incentives. Poor Derek Jeter. He will have a $17 million salary this year but not a penny in award bonuses.
The Mets' Story
Alex Rodriguez was in play for the second time in three years, and again the Mets did not pursue him. This time, though, they might have been on more solid ground.
''We were told he only granted permission to two teams,'' the Yankees and the Red Sox,'' Fred Wilpon, the Mets' owner, said. ''I think that's what Boras told our people.''
Scott Boras, Rodriguez's agent, said he didn't recall specifically telling that to the Mets, but he said he had a conversation with General Manager Jim Duquette in which he might have said it.
''Anyone who asked I told, the only two teams he was interested in going to were the Yankees or the Red Sox,'' Boras said.
All right, so the Mets have a reason for not trying to get Rodriguez now. What was their excuse three years ago when he was a free agent? They never have explained their behavior then.
''I don't want to go back to what happened three years ago,'' Wilpon said. ''I want to go forward.''
When Rodriguez was a free agent, the Mets announced they would not pursue him because he wanted to be treated differently from the other players and he would create a ''24-and-1'' environment in the clubhouse. To the Mets' shame, they have never apologized to Rodriguez for unfairly maligning him. People who were involved at the time said the Mets decided they didn't want to spend the money it would have taken to sign Rodriguez, and Steve Phillips, then the general manager, was instructed to use the ''24-and-1'' excuse.
Previously, Phillips told Boras that the Mets had the highest interest in Rodriguez and even returned to Boras's hotel room at the general managers' meeting to get a second copy of a thick notebook the agent had prepared on his client. Phillips wanted one copy for each of the Mets' co-owners, Wilpon and Nelson Doubleday.
But in a subsequent conversation, the Mets learned it would take a contract of 10 to 12 years in length and a value of more than $200 million. Phillips didn't blink at those numbers, but the next words heard from the Mets were ''24-and-1.''
End of pursuit.
ON BASEBALL
