BEFORE I became president of Playboy in 1982, I wanted to go to Harvard Business School's Advanced Management Program. They wouldn't take me. They said that I was too young, but I suspect that it didn't help that I was a woman.
I was in my late 20's at the time, and I told the head of admissions, ''I'm very confident I would be able to hold my own, and it would be good for the program if you had a more diverse student body.''
I even said that ''there's a strong likelihood I'll be running this company.''
My arguments didn't work. I didn't get in. Since then, I have been back on more than one occasion to lecture at Harvard.
I was raised principally by my mother. My dad's influence came later in life. I didn't grow up with him. He's very competitive and I'm really competitive. We both love games -- pinball, backgammon -- and we both love to win. There are situations where a parent would let a child win, but my father didn't do that. When I beat him, I knew I really won.
One thing that stands out is when my dad and I started working together in the 70's, before I started running the company.
The 70's were the time when Penthouse came into the United States and started to gain circulation. A lot of articles said that Penthouse's circulation was going to surpass Playboy's and that the only hope for Playboy was to become much sexier and more explicit.
I saw my father, with his strong view of Playboy, determined to stay true to what Playboy was, even if it had to get smaller. At the time people were afraid the magazine would be put out of business. And the editorial staff and the marketing people were saying to Hef, ''Don't you think we should go in this direction?'' He told them one of his favorite sayings: ''To thine own self be true.''
When I took over, it was much easier for me to understand that while it was important to have a finger on the pulse of the marketplace, I needed to understand what the brand stood for.
I went through a period in the early 1980's when I was interested in the Civil War. I read a lot about Lincoln, who goes through a frustrating period when he gives direction to his generals but doesn't think they're listening.
In leadership, it isn't about what you say; it's about what the other person hears. If you articulate well, like Lincoln, you have a tendency to think: ''I've made it clear. I've expressed myself in whole sentences that were artfully framed.'' But the point is, Lincoln realizes, what did the other person hear?
The second thing I took away from reading about Lincoln had to do with a particular person in government who everyone else in his cabinet felt needed to be replaced. Lincoln was not making the change. The cabinet sent a delegation and essentially told him: ''Maybe you don't see it. This person is ineffective. He needs to be replaced.'' Lincoln said: ''I do see it. Who should I replace him with?'' They said, ''We don't know.''
That was the point right there. To Lincoln it was about: ''Where am I moving to?'' It's not enough just to analyze this person's weaknesses.
The question is what are my alternatives and what is the plan.
EXECUTIVE LIFE: THE BOSS
