JOE DELUCCY keeps himself busy in the usual way in winter: watching the water while waiting for spring to come to the Hudson River, which has drawn him since he was a boy. A retired welder for the city of Yonkers and a lifelong river fisherman, Mr. Deluccy is a member of the Yonkers Yacht Club, where he keeps his boat, CZ, named after Chester Zigmunt, an old fishing buddy.
Recently, on one of the first weekend days this year to offer even a hint of warmth, Mr. Deluccy, 56, sat inside the main room of the Yonkers Yacht Club, alternately poking at the fire then turning to watch the flow of the river, the next best thing to being out on it. He went for a walk on the dock, leaning out over the water, thinking, he said, of St. Patrick's Day, when he will start cleaning his boat and sometime in early April, launch his boat. Soon, he said, but not soon enough.
''Look at it,'' Mr. Deluccy said, nodding toward the river. ''That's all I can say.''
Yonkers Yacht Club is an unlikely yacht club in that there appear to be no yachts. Most of the several dozen boats are like Mr. Deluccy's, an 18-foot motorboat.
And most boats will be used not for cruising to the Caribbean for a vacation, but for local fishing. Mr. Deluccy mostly fishes in the Hudson as far up as Newburgh, with occasional trips to Long Island Sound and off the coast of Sandy Hook, N.J.
Access to the club can be gained only by two sets of wood stairs connected by a bridge over railroad tracks. All of the woodwork seems to tilt down toward the river. It looks as if one gust of wind could send it crumbling into the water, taking with it the modest clubhouse, which sits in the shadow of the Warburton Avenue apartment buildings.
A tiki bar at the club is an innovation, a brainstorm by a member who then went ahead and built what has been a very popular addition.
Unlikelier even than the survival of the club is the revival of the river itself. That those who love the river can now look forward to its rebirth as a place to sail and fish and kayak each spring is a statement of how far it has come.
Mr. Deluccy is quick to add he happily fished for decades -- and in his youth did a little skinny-dipping too -- when the river was all but glowing with pollutants. But recent years, he said, have been different. The fish have been bigger and more plentiful, he said.
New fishermen, his favorite sort to take out on the water, are more willing and even eager to try to catch something out of the Hudson.
''I took a 41-year-old friend who had never been on the river out,'' Mr. Deluccy said. ''and he caught an 18 pound striper. We took a picture of him and I didn't notice until I saw the picture but his face was lit up. What a precious picture.''
As for the river's future, Mr. Deluccy shrugged. The cleanliness will bring all sorts of development and from what he has seen, some of the development can be as bad as some of that old industry. When the Yonkers Yacht Club members have tiki bar parties that get a little loud and rowdy, Mr. Deluccy said, residents in the apartments above them have been known to throw things down.
But that problem, like all others, will be put to rest in a few short weeks when his boat gets dropped in the water. And what will it feel like when actually out in the water and not now as he's doing, just looking at it, wishing?
Mr. Deluccy said: ''You see those pictures on television of the astronauts floating around space without gravity? It's like another world out there, floating around. That's just how I feel.''
FOR THE RECORD E-mail: Fuchs@nytimes.com
