THE STRANGE HOURS TRAVELERS KEEP
By August Kleinzahler.
98 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
THE poet and critic Charles Bernstein has argued that poetry should be at least as interesting as, and a whole lot more unexpected than, television. August Kleinzahler's poetry has long met this refreshingly perverse standard. If it sometimes seems that American poets are a humorless lot, lacking a certain sprezzatura, Kleinzahler gives the lie to all that. He has labored in the vineyards of verse for many years, and more strikingly, he has played.
Currently of San Francisco, Kleinzahler hails from ''Jersey,'' the imaginary region more commonly associated with that tireless bard of the popular, the Boss, a k a Bruce Springsteen. From his several books, one gathers that Kleinzahler prefers the music of Miles Davis, Bartok and Monteverdi -- although like Springsteen, Kleinzahler has ''been thinking constantly of America,'' as he writes in ''Christmastime in Coronado.'' In ''The Strange Hours Travelers Keep,'' we accompany the poet en route, a flâneur in the Baudelairean line who writes splenetic, loving, reflective odes to, epistles on and ditties out of modern life. His scope is large, his diction wildly exact, his line inventive, his means varied, and he never condescends.
Kleinzahler once suggested that he was less an ''Ex-is-ten-tial-ist'' than ''a Collision-Ecstasist.'' In this volume you will find more collision than ecstasy. Swooping from the cosmic (the ''nebulae'' of the title poem) to the world-historical (the marauding hordes in ''The Tartar Swept''), Kleinzahler pauses to attend to the comical minutiae of habit in ''The Single Gentleman's Chow Mein.'' For all his vast, sometimes obscure horizon of reference, he offers a renewed commitment to attentive, eccentric care -- represented, for example, by the heroine of his title poem, a ''reticent epistemologist'' who ''parks / Gets out, checks the curb, reparks'' under the ''Thunder of jets / Peristalsis of great capitals.''
Kleinzahler might be considered a postmodern metaphysical poet. He makes a complex cognitive music, his poems often sprung from a conceit deftly played out: ''A Beautiful Mind'' undoes the feel-good inanity of the movie, enacting instead a vivid brain-surgery fantasia (''You can imagine the mess / and attendant motor disturbance''). In ''The Hereafter'' the newly dead poet gets a private screening of his life: ''A 20-million-dollar home movie it is. . . . What a lot of erections, voidings, pretzels, / bouncing the ball against the stoop. / She really did love you, all along.'' Hell is not, it would seem, other people.
For all their dazzle, these poems do not ask you to like them. They are a free -- albeit occasionally dyspeptic -- offering, arising from a commitment to track ''How thus the Streaming Familiar / Is made to transfigure / Magick'd in the Candle's Glow.'' The poet's humor is sometimes whimsical, often elegiac and intermittently quite savage, particularly in his epistle-poems, modeled ingeniously after Horace. How stylishly Kleinzahler does them in! -- the literary functionaries thriving in what Bernstein calls ''official verse culture''; the haplessly aspiring poet ''lunging and casting about like a spaniel''; the officially traumatized versifier who prostitutes her past into poetry in ''Lavinia, Si Placet.'' One begins even to pity Kleinzahler's targets, so devastatingly does he nail them. But a guilty pleasure is still, after all, a pleasure.
As to less guilty pleasures: they are also to be found here, although a few poems do register as minor notational exercises, ''found poems'' that do not transcend their origins in the detritus of late capital. In subject matter Kleinzahler aspires to the encompassing range of a Whitman -- nothing contemporary is alien to him -- yet his prosody is reminiscent less of Whitman's psalmic, incantatory sprawl than of William Carlos Williams's artfully casual lines (from which Kleinzahler takes his title), or Basil Bunting's lively, insistent music. Kleinzahler's gift for dramatic monologue and character study finds full realization here, in such poems as ''An Englishman Abroad'' (''What a hateful dismal . . . little village / London really is'') and the various epistles. Several poems titled ''A History of Western Music'' punctuate the book, as if chapters from a notional opus. Strange, beguiling excursions, they allow Kleinzahler to spin out, among other things, a prose poem on the 18th-century ''ocular harpsichord'' invented by a Jesuit, whose instrument -- coordinating tones with colors -- ''succeeded in doubling music, so that the deaf may see and the blind may hear, and those with their sensibilities entire may enjoy music in its fullest measure.''
Such synesthetic contraptions and witty inventions offer a counterpoint to Kleinzahler's own poetics. His work often seizes upon art's techne, its means of production, and the soulful aspirations conveyed in them: he takes for granted our 21st-century cyber-situation, and his poems invoke the impact of dreams, computers, movies, jazz, detective novels, pop songs, ads, headlines, billboards -- the enormous exfoliating media apparatus humans have built to convey their manifold messages, in all their grandeur and banality.
Yet Kleinzahler's sensitivity does not produce a poetry of media glut or serial factoid. His poems are not parasitic on other arts or inventions; they have metabolized these phenomena as thoroughly as Whitman absorbed opera and the locomotive, Thomas Hardy the ballad or Frank O'Hara the tabloid. Our media are our air, Kleinzahler suggests: ''Imagine in all the debris of space / The countless trade names,'' he invites us. ''Can you make it out / Almost a hiss / An old shellac LP of white noise.''
Thus Kleinzahler's preoccupation with music and other sonic textures, including noise. If ''music is fugitive, living a moment and leaving nothing behind,'' this poet aspires to something more permanent than fleeting tones but less marmoreal than self-monumentalizing poetry. His poems ring many changes, delicate and precise, on what is ''fugitive'' (a recurring word here), even as his ears remain preternaturally open to the America of attack jets, talk radio and holiday gatherings ''with the TV going all the while.''
If poets still have a claim to be ''the antennae of the race,'' as Ezra Pound declared, Kleinzahler stands as one of our most singular poet-transmitters. His poems are little machines of inspired attention.
Maureen N. McLane, a junior fellow at Harvard's Society of Fellows, is a visiting scholar in comparative media studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
