''CAROLINE, OR CHANGE'' doesn't exactly fit into any of the usual categories for the Big Broadway Show.
It's an operatic musical dealing with race and civil rights, not a splashy love story. It doesn't have big production numbers or dazzling sets, nor is it based on a popular movie (like ''The Producers'') or the song catalog of a famous band (like ''Mamma Mia!''). It does not have a big theatrical star, nor any recognizable names from television or film. And its story -- about a Jewish schoolboy in the South in the 1960's who befriends, then alienates his family's black maid -- would not seem likely to appeal to masses of tourists, Broadway's lifeblood. (The title doesn't exactly roll off the tongue, either, referring as it does to the child's habit of leaving coins in his pockets that come out in the wash.)
Perhaps most curiously, the show did not even get unanimously favorable reviews at the Public Theater, where it recently sold out a 14-week run. Ben Brantley's review in The New York Times was indicative of the opinion of many of the city's theater critics, who complimented individual elements of the show and its high-minded themes, but found it lacking in a certain dramatic oomph. ''In truth,'' Mr. Brantley wrote, ''it is almost too good to be good.''
So how is it that the production is to open on Broadway at the Eugene O'Neill Theater on May 2, at a cost of $5 million and with 20 -- count 'em, 20 -- producers above the title?
Tony Kushner's graceful book and lyrics, George C. Wolfe's taut direction, Jeanine Tesori's eclectic score and Tonya Pinkins's widely praised leading performance don't hurt. But most of all, what ''Caroline'' had in its favor is Mr. Kushner, who took an unusually active role in making sure his first musical would be seen by a broad -- and Broadway -- audience.
''When a play or, more so, a musical gets to Broadway, it is looked at and discussed in an important way,'' Mr. Kushner said in a recent interview. ''I think we all felt that 'Caroline' needed to be seen in that way.''
That's easier said than done, however, especially during a tough Broadway season. And Mr. Kushner didn't just need $5 million -- he needed it fast, in order for the show to make it to Broadway in time to be eligible for the Tonys. So, shortly after ''Caroline'' opened at the Public on Nov. 30, he took the highly unusual step of picking up the phone, calling potential investors and pitching them. ''The reviews were kind of all over the place, some raves and some not,'' he said. ''So I felt that the fantasy version of it, with people beating down the door, was not going to be the case. So I was on the phone a lot.''
Mr. Kushner is known for his outspokenness on subjects from gay rights to the Moral Majority and in his calls to producers, say those who received them, his manner was gentle, but impassioned.
''I said, 'You're an activist, let's activate for this piece,' '' said Ms. Tesori. ''The calls weren't to convince, but to stand up.''
Mr. Kushner says he stuck to a series of deeply felt, and unshifting, talking points: that the musical deserved to be seen by more people than the Public run allowed, that he believed in the show and the audiences' response to it, that that response was uncommon in the theater, and most important, that, as he put it, ''it is a really good musical that would have an appeal to a large number of people.''
''I felt,'' he said, ''that this was something to fight for.''
He also turned on the charm, of which he has plenty to spare. (Ms. Tesori refers to him as ''the Hugh Jackman of arts and letters.'') And if that didn't work, he wasn't afraid to turn on the humor, too. ''It was three words,'' he recalled with a laugh. '' 'Get rich quick.' ''
That was the pitch, anyway. But even those closest to Mr. Kushner say the show's chances of making back its $5 million on Broadway are, well, a little, well . . . ''I would characterize its odds as long,'' said Rocco Landesman, the president of Jujamcyn Theaters, which owns the O'Neill. ''And everybody knows that.''
The first group he approached were the so-called '' 'Angels' angels,'' producers who had been involved in Mr. Kushner's only other Broadway production, ''Angels in America,'' the two-part AIDS epic that ran on Broadway in 1993 and 1994 and had recently been given a celebrated film treatment by HBO.
''I called my friends from the days of doing 'Angels,' '' he said, ''and said, 'If you're thinking about doing it, do it.' ''
Margo Lion, the lead producer of ''Hairspray'' (another musical that tackles 60's race issues, albeit in a far campier way), was one of those friends. She had seen ''Caroline'' in previews and attended the opening night party, where she told Mr. Kushner how much she liked it. The next day, she recalled, ''Tony called and said, 'I know you said you liked the show.' And he said, 'I don't want to put the arm on you, but can you help make this happen?' ''
She said yes, as did Daryl Roth, who has produced five Pulitzer winners, and Frederick M. Zollo, who has produced extensively on Broadway and in Hollywood.
That core joined forces with Carole Shorenstein Hays and Frederick De Mann, who had begun putting money into the development of ''Caroline'' as far back as August 2001. (Ms. Hayes and Mr. De Mann had been producers on two other recent Public Theater transfers, ''Topdog/Underdog'' in 2002 and ''Take Me Out'' last year.)
Slowly, that group began to be joined by some of the best-known backers on Broadway (Roger Berlind, for example) and some lesser-known ones (Kristin Caskey, an associate producer of ''Thoroughly Modern Millie''), by big-time Tony Award winners (including Mr. Berlind, whose shows have won 62) and newcomers (Elizabeth Morten, making her Broadway producing debut), as well as by major media outfits (Clear Channel Communications and HBO).
That would be an impressive coalition for any theater insider to have put together. But it becomes downright astonishing in light of one simple fact: of all the business people who said yes, none of them say they did it for the money -- which Mr. Kushner, when he isn't joking around, admits is fortunate.
''It's not about making an immense amount of money,'' he concedes. ''It's about not losing an immense amount of money.''
Mr. Kushner did what he could, of course, to make the long-term prospects financially viable. For one thing, he and Ms. Tesori agreed to accept smaller-than-average royalties. ''We all made concessions,'' Ms. Lion said. ''The show is being done on minimum scale. They took the leadership position, Tony and Jeanine.''
The business model Mr. Kushner pursued was based on the slow-building success of ''Angels in America'' -- which recouped only about 75 percent of its $3 million cost during its Broadway run, but eventually earned the rest through book sales, regional theater rights, a successful national tour and the HBO movie. That's one of the reasons, he says, that he approached HBO about ''Caroline.''  ''Having HBO attached to the project would make it less scary,'' he said -- and it would make a future movie that much more likely.
Still, those prospects are a long way off. And at least one investor, who put money into ''Angels'' but declined to invest in ''Caroline,'' said the ''Angels'' model wouldn't work this time around.
'' 'Caroline' is not even in the sphere of interest'' for a national tour, said the producer, who spoke on the condition on anonymity.
Nor is it a slam dunk for best musical at the Tony Awards (''Wicked'' should offer stiff competition), which would ordinarily be a draw for what Mr. Landesman calls ''a high-prestige endeavor'' like this.
Mr. Zollo put that fact in perspective. ''You think Roger Berlind needs another Tony?'' he asked, rhetorically. ''We all like awards, we all want awards, but the fact is that there are easier ways to win awards.'' (Mr. Zollo didn't say how.)
More than anything, producers said they got involved not for a Tony, but Tony.
''I always salute writers who understand the business they are in,'' Ms. Lion said, ''and are very determined to see their work done.''
Mr. De Mann, a well-known talent manager who has worked with Madonna and Michael Jackson, said the playwright is both the show's star and its principal marketing tool. ''If one is a theatergoer, one has to see a Tony Kushner play,'' he said. ''There's brilliant performances, great music, but I think he's what would draw people from the Midwest. I think 'Angels in America' made him a household name. I think he is the answer.''
Whether that proves true, Mr. Kushner says he is touched that so many producers have decided the show is worth the risk. ''I knew it wasn't going to be easy because it's a new kind of thing,'' he said, referring to the musical's sung-through text as well as its subject matter. ''I'm happy that it connected with enough people who believe in it as much as I do.''
At least one of them is still holding out hope that the show might be a Broadway smash. ''How many shows in New York are selling out?'' Mr. Zollo said. ''Doesn't that qualify it as a smash hit? I mean, people were lining up for tickets at the Public, people being turned away. We know there were 300-some people willing to stand in line for tickets in this weather. So I'm wondering, why else shouldn't it come to Broadway?''
Mr. Landesman said that he owed a debt to Mr. Kushner for choosing one of his theaters for the run of the acclaimed ''Angels,'' and that ''Caroline'' offered him an opportunity to return the favor. As for profits, he said: ''Remember, this is a business where only 15 to 20 percent of shows make money. The reason people go into shows is because they love the show.''
SPRING THEATER
