MOST states now have automated pay systems of the E-ZPass variety, but how many can boast a quick history lesson from an unlikely place, the highway rest stops?
Each of the 12 rest areas on the New Jersey Turnpike is named for a deceased famous person who is a favorite son or daughter of the surrounding area. Travelers who notice this bit of local color may have fun figuring out who the honorees are and their New Jersey connection. Until recently, they got no assistance from the Turnpike Authority beyond the names, but as part of the latest rest-stop renovations, a brass plaque is now displayed in each area, explaining the honoree's contributions to history and the Garden State.
Included in the distinguished dozen are two women (Clara Barton and Molly Pitcher); two presidents (Woodrow Wilson and Grover Cleveland); two poets (Walt Whitman and Joyce Kilmer); one writer (James Fenimore Cooper); one sports legend (Vince Lombardi); one inventor (Thomas Edison); and three other historical figures (Alexander Hamilton, Richard Stockton and John Fenwick).
Though it may seem a dubious distinction to have a snack bar, a gas station and bathrooms named for you, some have clamored unsuccessfully for the honor.
The actress Susan Sarandon, who grew up in Edison, commented when accepting the Governor's Award for Outstanding Contribution to Jersey Arts a few years ago: ''I'm going for a rest stop. I have all my other awards, but I want a rest stop named for me.'' Sorry, Susan, you may be famous, but you're not dead yet. Besides, all the rest stops are taken. The first one was dedicated in 1951 and the last in 1972, for the legendary football coach Vince Lombardi, who began his career as a high school teacher and coach in Englewood.
It is curious to imagine what some of the honorees might say if they knew of their turnpike celebrity. Would Clara Barton feel vindicated, since she started a successful, free public school in Bordentown, only to be passed over by the school board who hired a man as headmaster? Her loss was the world's gain, as she moved to Washington and later founded the American Red Cross.
James Fenimore Cooper, author of ''The Last of the Mohicans,'' might be surprised, since he left his birthplace, Burlington, at an early age and is closely associated with upstate New York, writing and living in the family homestead, Cooperstown.
Of the famous 12, some are native New Jerseyans, like Grover Cleveland, who was born in West Caldwell, and the ''Trees'' poet Joyce Kilmer, born in New Brunswick. Some died or are buried here, like Alexander Hamilton, who was killed by Aaron Burr on the Palisades, when dueling for honor was still fashionable. Walt Whitman spent his later years in Camden and is buried in Harleigh Cemetery.
Some are well known, like Thomas Edison, the wizard of Menlo Park, or Woodrow Wilson, the 28th president, a former state governor and former president of Princeton. For others, their stories may be familiar only to students whose schools are named for them. John Fenwick, a Quaker settler, founded the town of Salem in the 1600's, and Richard Stockton was the first of the New Jersey delegation to sign the Declaration of Independence. Molly Pitcher, nee Mary Ludwig Hays, was an American Revolutionary heroine who earned her nickname taking water to soldiers in the Battle of Monmouth.
All are interesting contributors to the cultural and historical fabric of New Jersey. And let's face it. You don't read something positive about the New Jersey Turnpike every day. Kudos to the Turnpike Authority for a successful rest-area renovation plan that wisely includes a tip of the hat to our past.
SOAPBOX Ginny Knackmuhs is a computer consultant who lives in Wyckoff.
