FOR travel-research snobs, tourism bureau brochures are the poor man's planning tool -- too often packed with stale photos and swooning profiles of the region's attractions, and too rarely filled with the sort of practical tips that can make a trip.
On the Web, though, tourism bureaus can be considerably more useful. Freed from the constraints of 64-page booklets, many national tourism organizations have built comprehensive Web sites in recent years, with helpful information and narratives that, while not exactly hard-hitting, can be worth listening to.
Not surprisingly, most of these sites are available in English; many have sections devoted to American travelers in particular.
Of the 128 million or so Internet users in the United States, Barry Southers, 34, is probably one of the more well versed in the ways of foreign tourism Web sites. Mr. Southers, an M.R.I. technologist at the University of Cincinnati and avid international traveler, has leaned on these sites for suggestions for seven years.
A Worldwide Directory
In the process, Mr. Southers says he has mostly shunned United States-based publishers of travel guides, both online and off. ''I've just enjoyed the sites better from the countries themselves,'' Mr. Southers said. ''They seem easier to navigate, they have more information, more pictures. You can read about the Loire Valley all day long, but if you see pictures, that gets you.''
Rather than head for search engines to find a particular national or regional Web site, Mr. Southers says he first checks www.towd.com, the Tourism Offices Worldwide Directory. The directory, which is edited and published by Brian Lucas, a Winnipeg-based Web site developer, lists more than 1,300 ''official tourism offices,'' including those of national and local governments, convention and visitors bureaus, chambers of commerce and other organizations.
The site offers pull-down menus for searching nations and regions, and while fast and easy to use, it is not without flaws. For instance, using my Mac, I selected Bhutan from the menu of nations and was given a page describing the directory's mission. (No big surprise: many Web sites treat Macs like second-class citizens.) On a Windows-based machine, though, the site listed Bhutan's Tourism Department site, www.tourism.gov.bt, with its address, phone numbers and e-mail address.
More impressive were the listings for popular destinations like Germany, which included its official tourism Web site, with more links and contact information for Germany's local tourism offices in various cities within and outside the United States.
Geared to Americans
Like a growing number of nations, Germany has built a site for American travelers, among others. Near the top left-hand side of its main tourism site, Germany-tourism.de, is a link yielding 26 sites tailored to specific countries and constituencies.
The American site is much like the main English-language version of the site, in that it features vacation ideas, 600 panoramic photos and links to cities and towns. Those links provide decent overviews, but they are so breathless at times that they lose credibility. (A description of the old mining town of Freiburg gushes: ''Where else can you find so many superlatives?'') Elsewhere, as on the site's Munich page, important information is sometimes missing. The Munich page brims with detailed information on the city's attractions, but it placed a key destination -- the memorial at the Dachau concentration camp -- at the bottom of the page. It was listed merely as ''Dachau,'' with no description or links for more information. And in a later visit to the site, it wasn't there at all.
The site's American version (also at www.visits-to-germany.com) improves on the English version in that it provides travel bargain information. From the home page, click on the ''special deals'' tab. For instance, last month the site promoted a two-for-one airline ticket deal from Lufthansa and United to German and other European cities, as well as vacation packages from PrideWorldTravel.com, a travel company for gays and lesbians.
Bargain packages are available on other national tourism sites as well. While preparing for a trip last summer to Japan, Jennifer Pedersen, a teacher at the Crestridge School of International/Global Studies in Omaha, found such a package on the Japan National Tourist Organization Web site, www.japantravelinfo.com.
Ms. Pedersen, who teaches Japanese and lived in Japan in the late 80's, looked in the Hot News section and found an offer to visit about 30 attractions in Tokyo for $18 (the Grutt Pass), with instructions on where to buy it in Japan. Once armed with that pass, she toured the Asakura Choso Museum, the home of the sculptor Fumio Asakura, who died in 1964. Asakura had built, she recalled, ''an incredible garden in the center of the house, with bridges and water, and with walls and windows that opened onto the garden.''
A Few Caveats
Sometimes the tourism bureau sites aren't run by tourism bureaus themselves. Take Russia-travel.com, Russia's official tourism site for Americans. It is actually maintained by the Russian National Group, a New York-based travel wholesaler.
According to Dina Kevra, the Russian National Group's executive manager, the site regularly updates currency exchange rates and travel deals, among other elements.
While the site can inform, it occasionally disregards the needs and tastes of mainstream travelers, as evidenced by an ad this month on the home page for an international dating service called A Foreign Affair, for men seeking women overseas.
Some sites still have glitches; www.visitmexico.com, more artfully crafted than many other tourism-bureau sites, was from time to time unavailable in January. (A Web site representative in Mexico said they were working on it.)
If you browse
China Tourism, www.cnta.com/lyen: A vast site, at times cutting-edge, at times trailing-edge. The interactive map shuttles you quickly to a selected region, but photos in those sections are sometimes in short supply. Occasional translation slips.
Mexico Tourism Board, www.visitmexico.com: Polished and high tech with interactive maps, a comprehensive listing of destinations and activities and a currency converter. Intermittent glitches.
Turkish Ministry of Culture and Tourism, www.tourismturkey.org: Good for broad travel ideas, less helpful with specifics. Divided into regional sections, with a handful of photos in each.
Egyptian Tourist Authority, www.egypttourism.org: Listings broken down by travel interests (culture, religion, diving, etc.), with destination options within those categories. Informative; short on photos.
Japan National Tourist Organization, www.japantravelinfo.com: Designed for North Americans, easily navigable. Good deals sometimes found in Hot News section.
PRACTICAL TRAVELER E-mail: tedeschi@nytimes.com
