Scott Phillips doesn't really write crime stories. He writes about criminal behaviors -- how they originate, how they transform character, how they become part of the cultural norm and, most incisively, how they flourish in certain environments. If you want to look at it historically, as he does with wit and gusto in COTTONWOOD (Ballantine, $23.95), ''crime'' is just a name for behaviors that fall out of social fashion.
In the wild and woolly days of the 1870's, when the Great Plains outpost of Cottonwood, Kan., is hungrily waiting for the railroad to come through and turn it into a boomtown, most people don't even blink when their neighbors are beaten to death in a bar brawl or lynched in full view of the mayor. Bill Ogden, the cagey narrator, who is by no means ''most people,'' can go one of two ways in this wide-open town. Given his intelligence, but also his loose morals and lax ethics, this saloonkeeper-cum-photographer could either throw in his lot with a con man whose get-rich schemes have the town dazzled -- or he could go after a notorious family of thieving killers and get elected sheriff. That Ogden stays unpredictable to the end is a tribute to Phillips's refusal to rewrite history and whitewash the hellions who built this nation.
Whenever Michael Dibdin dispatches his seasoned Italian detective, Aurelio Zen, to solve a regional crime, the investigation invariably expands into a penetrating analysis of the region itself. In MEDUSA (Pantheon, $23), Dibdin extends his scrutiny to the mountainous district along the Swiss border by sending Zen into the remote northern Dolomites, where Austrian cavers have stumbled upon a desiccated corpse. Through painfully gathered interviews that lead him from major cities like Milan and Verona into isolated rural hamlets where the natives speak an archaic Latin dialect, he determines that the dead man was an army officer who in the 1970's belonged to a right-wing political cell bent on bringing down the government. With that conspiracy facing exposure, the aging survivors of the old cell now stand in mortal fear of their lives.
Although Dibdin's superb Venetian mystery ''Dead Lagoon'' is still the finest book in this series, ''Medusa'' comes close in the remarkable depth and breadth of its on-the-ground detail. As Zen travels the region on solitary rail journeys, he immerses himself in the history, the customs and, above all, the political secrets of the country contained in the ''cliques, cabals, corruption'' we come to know as ''the endless misteri d'Italia.''
It's no secret that Anna Pigeon, the national park ranger who polices the trails in Nevada Barr's rigorous environmental mysteries, prefers the ''open empty spaces'' of far wilderness outposts to those manicured theme parks that cater to soft-bellied tourists. So we feel her pain in HIGH COUNTRY (Putnam, $24.95) when she shows up in the regal setting of Yosemite National Park working as a hotel waitress. It's an undercover assignment, of course, just a blind so she can circulate among the park's personnel and get a lead on the disappearance of four young workers. Despite her advanced age (she's ''coming up on 50''), Anna wins the trust of a few youngsters who finger the camp's dope suppliers and alert her to midnight ''mining'' runs in the High Sierra.
Picking up the pace as a storm breaks through a glowering winter sky, Barr maneuvers all the principals into the upper reaches of the snowbound mountains, where Anna is tracked like a wounded animal across a frozen lake and into the deep woods. The bone-chilling human hunt is a solid piece of adventure writing; but Barr loses her grip with the stereotypical villains, who, besides giving away the show by smoking and drinking and using foul language, also stick out like belly dancers because they haven't a clue how to dress for Barr's stern moral climate.
After the hatchet job he did on Australian sensibilities in his first mystery, ''Death of an Old Goat,'' Robert Barnard swore he would never go back to the scene of his crime. That he still has strong feelings about the country after 30 years seems clear from A CRY FROM THE DARK (Scribner, $24), an introspective whodunit in which two crimes, a rape and a murder, committed some 60 years apart, both shape and redefine the life of a respected novelist. Bettina Whitelaw is 80 years old and living in London when she begins an autobiographical novel about growing up in the ''little, parched, remote town'' of Bundaroo in the Australian outback. Scenes of that insular world are written with unforgiving clarity, sharpening the timeworn edges of Bettina's memories of being ostracized by her narrow-minded neighbors for befriending a forlorn English boy despised for his sensitivity. The resolution of the crimes may come as no surprise, but there is great subtlety to Barnard's character studies of people who came of age in the challenging climate of ''open landscapes and closed minds.''
Here's a good one for the Don't-Bother-Me-I'm-Reading-for-Fun Department: THE CUTTING ROOM (Ballantine, $23.95), in which Laurence Klavan gleefully slices and dices every known specimen of the Hollywood film trade, from knuckleheaded action stars with political pretensions to hollow-eyed cinéastes who lull themselves to sleep by reciting supporting actor nominations. Like every other character in this witty spoof, Roy Milano, a New York film buff who airs his arcane knowledge via a self-published newsletter called Trivial Man, is a beloved movie cliché. Cast as the Hitchcockian hero who embarks on a quest for knowledge and becomes a pawn in a deadly game of intrigue, Roy plays his role with disarming guilelessness. Learning of the existence of Orson Welles's original, uncut footage of ''The Magnificent Ambersons'' (''the Holy Grail of the trivial community''), he blunders from coast to coast in pursuit of the celluloid treasure. Greedy men, duplicitous women and dead bodies appear on cue to bedevil his progress and dare the reader to identify their movieland models. Although the plot eventually implodes from its pileup of improbabilities, the farcical spirit of the adventure makes it worth its weight in popcorn.
Crime
