GRACELAND
By Chris Abani.
321 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $24.
Sixteen-year-old Elvis Oke lives with his alcoholic father, Sunday, and Sunday's crotchety girlfriend, Comfort, ''at the left edge'' of Maroko, a slum near Lagos, Nigeria. When we first meet Elvis he's scratching out a living by going down to the city beach, patting on a thick layer of talcum powder and a wig and performing impersonations of his famous namesake. The notion is almost too weird to swallow, but then Chris Abani's Lagos is such an extraordinary place that he somehow gets away with it.
This book works brilliantly in two ways. As a convincing and unpatronizing record of life in a poor Nigerian slum, and as a frighteningly honest insight into a world skewed by casual violence, it's wonderful. What it isn't, quite, is a successful novel. The horrors are never really assimilated into the book's imaginative structure, and the author's interest in showing us his little-written-about world pulls ''GraceLand'' persistently in the direction of nonfiction.
Perhaps in an effort to keep his material novel-shaped, Abani has recruited a number of other literary sources. There's all kinds of extraneous material hanging round at the top of each chapter: recipes (some of which, it must be said, sound delicious); orphaned pieces of anthropological data about the Igbo; instructive asides about the uses and mythology of the kola nut. Abani is far from being the only contemporary author to use the pages of his story as a scrapbook. The novel unadorned is no longer enough -- like a boring old vanilla cone it has to be speckled with chewy tidbits of history and proverb until it starts to resemble nothing so much as a highbrow McFlurry. Before we can join Elvis in remembering how he used to rub ''mentholated spirit'' into his chin in a vain attempt to make his beard grow, we must be told that ''just like the kola nut, people have distinct lobes of energy.''
How much more fun to skip the cultural information pack and go straight to Cousin Obed, who, ''not realizing exactly how pubic hair grew,'' had ''taken the skin from a squirrel's tail and stuck it, fur side out, along the length of his penis.'' The insertions grow more annoying as the action becomes more serious. As Elvis slides into criminality and despair, and a series of intercut flashbacks reveals a past of truly wicked tribulation, the last thing I wanted was another extract from R. C. Agoha's book ''Medicinal Plants of Nigeria.'' ''The four-lobed kola nut is the King nut,'' announces the top of Chapter 11. Terrific! But who cares, when it's Lagos in 1983 and Elvis and his friend Redemption are about to spend the night wrapping cocaine so it can be swallowed by human mules. ''You take dis small spoon,'' Redemption explains, ''and you measure one -- not full, O.K.? Den you empty it into de fingers of dis glove . . . one spoonful per finger.''
The logic for giving a recipe for oil bean seed salad and telling us about the Ukpo plant is that all this stuff is supposed to come from Elvis's mother's commonplace book. Since her death from breast cancer when Elvis was 8, he's carried her cracked leather notebook around like a comforter. But as slum life turns into something worse, it's as though Abani himself loses patience with such tweeness: at any rate he effectively explodes his own conceit. ''All these recipes, and yet nobody he knew cooked from recipes,'' Elvis realizes suddenly, laying the book aside. ''That was something actors did on television and in the movies: white women with stiff clothes and crisp-looking aprons and perfect hair who never sweated as they ran around doing housework for the husbands they called 'hon.' ''
Nobody calls her husband ''hon'' in Maroko, and not much housework gets done either. Everything is about power, which in underclass terms means the very poor picking on the extremely poor. An innocent man is stoned and burned alive in a scene of quite stunning nastiness: ''I beg, Peter. You know I no be tief. I beg.'' Children are raped almost incidentally. A boy waiting for his bucket to fill starts drumming on the water tap with a bicycle spoke and is electrocuted by 4,000 volts from the overhead power line. The roads are littered with bodies that are never retrieved because the relatives can't afford the fines they now owe the police for these careless deaths. Elvis slips through all the disease and disorder with a dancer's lucky grace, until one day he is caught up in a public demonstration and arrested.
Chris Abani was himself arrested in 1985. He was 18 years old at the time. The Nigerian government suggested that the plot of his first novel, published when he was only 16, had laid the blueprint for a political coup. He was held for six months, during which time he was beaten daily. In 1987 he was arrested again. This time he was sent to Kiri-Kiri, a maximum security prison in Lagos, where he was held for a year. During his incarceration he was tortured. It's impossible to read the prison scenes in ''GraceLand'' without remembering these facts. Hung by his wrists from the metal bars of his cell window, his feet six inches from the floor, at first Elvis's body feels like ''one mass of pleasant sweet aches.'' Then his fingers ''began to swell like loaves of bread.'' The incident develops into an account of torture so precise and excruciating that the novel effectively collapses with the strain of trying to accommodate such horrors. There's not enough room left afterward for the shock waves to dissipate -- it's hard to believe in Elvis's recovery, or the subsequent events, which feel rushed and skimpy -- but this error in fictional design does increase the sensation that this is unmediated truth, with all the urgency of news.
And for all the horrors, there are sweet scenes in ''GraceLand'' too, and they're a thousand times better for being entirely unsentimental. There's one lovely moment set at a dance class (the novel is good on dancing altogether). The lesson is full of civil servants who are hoping their grasp of the cha-cha-cha will smooth the path to promotion. But they cannot move stiffly enough for Western ballroom, despite the tutor's remonstrations: ''Mrs. Ebele, dis is not Salome's Dance of de Seven Veils. If you keep grinding your waist like dat, your partner will have an embarrassment on de dance floor.'' So finally the master ties his students to wooden crosses, this being the only way he can get them to waltz like stodgy Europeans. As teaching strategies go, this is awkward and original but ultimately worthwhile. ''GraceLand'' is too.
Sophie Harrison is a freelance writer in London.
