John Michael Higgins  Actor  ''Big Bill''
WHEN John Michael Higgins was asked to play the title role in ''Big Bill,'' A. R. Gurney's play about the tennis great Bill Tilden, which opens today at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center, he knew exactly where to turn for inspiration. ''My biggest influences,'' he said, ''are Edward Albee and Daffy Duck.''
It's not that the celebrated career and troubled life of Bill Tilden have any particular connection to absurdist drama or Warner Brothers cartoons. Mr. Higgins finds lessons from Albee and Daffy for all his varied roles.
And if it is hard to tell when he is kidding, Mr. Higgins, who turned 41 this month and has been a professional actor since the age of 10, says he never is.
''A performance is an odd marriage of science and emotion,'' he explained the other day in his dressing room, ''and Chuck Jones'' -- one of the duck's directors -- ''was a master at it. He had 24 frames per second. He knew that if he has Daffy raise his eyebrow for exactly eight frames, it's funny. If it's nine frames, it's not funny.''
As for Mr. Albee, both ''The Zoo Story'' and ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?'' happen in real time. ''Like an Albee play,'' Mr. Higgins said, ''I have to give the impression that a performance is one sustained event, even though it actually has many parts.''
When he is performing, Mr. Higgins said, he is serious even in the comic roles for which he is best known, like those in two mockumentaries by the director Christopher Guest -- Scott Donlon, the flamboyantly gay dog handler in ''Best in Show,'' and Terry Bohner, the leader of the New Main Street Singers in ''A Mighty Wind,'' last year's spoof of folk singers. ''I play it the same whether it's comedy or drama,'' he said. ''It's all in the context.''
Bill Tilden, who died in 1953 at the age of 60, is considered the father of modern tennis but is little remembered today. Secretly gay, he was eventually imprisoned after court appearances involving his behavior with teenage boys.
''He's charismatic, he's charming, he can talk a big game,'' Mr. Higgins said about the character he portrays. ''But he is also defeated, juvenile and inept. This play works best when you see the cracks in the edifice.''
Mr. Higgins has had several high-profile roles as gay characters. He had the title role in Paul Rudnick's 1993 play ''Jeffrey.'' He also played a priest dying of AIDS in an unaired episode of the television series ''Nothing Sacred.''
''These characters are all very different,'' he said. ''I can't play 'gay.' I've got to play action. I can't play attitude or opinion or a preference. That Bill Tilden was a tennis player, a celebrity and gay are all frankly not as interesting as that he was a man struggling against himself to stay happy.''
What makes John Michael Higgins happy is when he is home in Los Angeles with his wife, the actress Margaret Welsh (a frequent collaborator who plays all the female characters in ''Big Bill''), watching reruns of ''The Lawrence Welk Show.'' ''We watch it religiously every week,'' he said. ''It has everything. We're not trying to be perverse; it's just that when that show goes on, we can't tear ourselves away.''
JONATHAN MANDELL
SPRING THEATER
