SHARMBA MITCHELL strutted into the ring in the ballroom of Bally's Park Place Hotel Casino. His trunks were sliced all around in five-inch-wide strips, flapped up like a Polynesian dancer's, the front printed in red, white and blue stars and stripes. Underneath were short shorts of the variety perhaps no longer acceptable in Super Bowl halftime shows.
His opponent, with the mellifluous name Lovemore N'dou, walked more solemnly through the ropes. While followers from Mr. Mitchell's home in suburban Washington cheered him on, Mr. N'dou, who was born in South Africa, got only a wisp of acknowledgment from the crowd. His trunks were a more sedate white with blue pinstripes and advertising patches for two sponsors, a plumber and a dental clinic, their phone numbers prominent. His high, white boxing shoes had blue fringes much like a high-school majorette's.
Theirs was the headline match in a night of boxing earlier this month sponsored by Showtime, the pay-cable network, and Budweiser, the beer. The estimated 1,400 onlookers at the 12-round bout were a mixed Atlantic City crowd. At least two men wandering the back wore full-length black fur coats despite the heat generated by the TV lights and scrunched-in bodies. A few tailored suits were in evidence and a man on press row actually wore a straw fedora with a ticket slid through the headband.
But most spectators were clad in sweatshirts and jeans, and most whistled more for the bethonged, buxom woman showing the round-numbers during breaks than for the fighters themselves. A few aficionados screamed hopeful instructions for their favorites, and most fled to the gaming tables when the ring announcer proclaimed the unanimous decision for Mr. Mitchell.
Boxing is hanging on in Atlantic City, drawing crowds even as the notorious promoter Don King draws attention of another type by applying for and then withdrawing applications for a license at the casinos.
While boxing and casinos have long been a mutual draw in Nevada, boxing has been only a moderate lure in Atlantic City since casino gambling came to town 25 years ago.
Elsewhere in the state, boxing has never been much of a money-making enterprise.
''There were a lot of boxers from New Jersey, and some were quite colorful,'' Bert Sugar, an author and boxing historian, said in a recent interview.
''There was Two-Ton Tony Galento from Newark -- or 'Nerk,' as he used to pronounce it,'' Mr. Sugar recalled. ''There was Charlie Fuseri, a welterweight from Irvington whom they used to call the Irvington Milkman. They were both from the 1940's. Then there was the heavyweight champ Jersey Joe Wolcott from Camden, whose name was really Arnold Cream, but his father liked an old fighter named Joe Wolcott, so he called him that, with the Jersey in front.''
But most New Jersey fighters, from the 1940's until now, have had to look elsewhere for their paydays, Mr. Sugar said.
''In the 1930's and 1940's, there was a weekly show out of Newark, but that's because the New York promoters were doing five or six a week and wanted extra venues,'' he said.
Jack Dempsey defended his heavyweight title against Georges Carpentier at Boyle's Thirty Acres in Jersey City in 1921. And there was a little bit out of Atlantic City before casinos, Mr. Sugar said, pointing in particular to the middleweight championship fight between Joey Giardello and Dick Tiger in 1963.
So, even with only seven or eight fight cards a year in Atlantic City, these may well be among the best of times for boxing in the state.
As Ken Condon, the president of Bally's operations in Atlantic City, which sponsor more fights here than anyone else, put it: ''I'd say things aren't good, things aren't bad. They are about medium. The heavyweight division is down, and in boxing, they say, as goes the heavyweights, so goes boxing. But we've had some success with other weights, so things are decent.''
The King Relationship
Atlantic City's relationship with Mr. King, however, is even less certain.
Though Mr. King has promoted many fights here over the years and even promoted a boxing card on Dec. 13 at Boardwalk Hall with eight championship fights, he does not now have a license to put on fights in the casinos. In fact, he has withdrawn his latest application for a casino service industry license.
Because of a quirk in the gaming laws, Mr. King was allowed to promote three fight cards while his latest promotion license application, filed in 2002, was pending. But his applications and licenses in Atlantic City have more ups and downs than a Boardwalk roller coaster.
He first applied in 1982, then withdrew the application the next year. He was licensed in 1989, after promoting several fights while the application was pending. That license was renewed in 1992 and then was suspended in 1994 at the start of a federal investigation for wire fraud. He was acquitted of those charges at a trial in Manhattan and applied again in 1998. Then he withdrew the application in 2001 and reapplied the next year. And now he has pulled out again, citing the advice of lawyers.
If he continued to pursue the application, Mr. King would have to face being questioned by the state Division of Gaming Enforcement about allegations that he conspired with the founder and former president of the International Boxing Federation, Robert Lee Sr., to take bribes from promoters and managers to manipulate fighters' rankings to make their bouts seem more prestigious. Two prominent promoters, Cedric Kushner and Robert Arum, admitted in federal court in Newark in 2000 that they had bribed Mr. Lee. They were not charged, but Mr. Lee was sentenced to 22 months in prison for corruption and was banned from boxing for life.
Mr. King, who was listed among 14 unindicted co-conspirators in the Lee case, is still licensed by the State Athletic Control Board and could technically promote fights elsewhere in New Jersey. But that is not where the big money is.
''I suppose you could do a really big fight in the Meadowlands, but that is about it,'' said Lou DiBella, a New York-based boxing promoter who used to run the boxing division of HBO Sports. ''There are some minor club shows in Newark and Jersey City from time to time, but it is too expensive to run a show here without TV and casino backing.''
An Image Problem
Lacking a license for Atlantic City, Mr. King is expected to leave the state, perhaps for good. Other promoters are of mixed opinion about that possibility, since Mr. King controls a lot of good boxers and can bring attention to the state, as with the December card.
''But then Don King also brings the worst kind of publicity to the sport,'' said Kathy Duva, whose company, Main Events, in Bloomfield, is the state's largest fight-promotion business. ''Our problem is an image problem.''
She referred to the reputations of some infamous boxers and Mr. King, who once served four years in prison on a manslaughter conviction.
''Our sport is filled with fabulous guys who don't go out and commit felonies, like him and his client Mike Tyson,'' Ms. Duva said. ''Our company is looking hard to bring sponsors into the fold, and that is the reason they don't want to be there. Tyson, for instance, had a spectacular deal with Pepsi and by the time he got finished raping a teenager, Pepsi got rid of him and set us back 25 years.''
Mr. King aside, though, there are some bright spots for boxing in Atlantic City.
Last month, Boardwalk Hall sold out for a card headed by one of Mrs. Duva's fighters, Arturo Gatti, who defended his world junior welterweight crown against Gianluca Branco. More than 11,000 people paid as much as $300 a seat to see Mr. Gatti, 31, who was born in Montreal but now lives in Jersey City, retain his title by a unanimous decision. Hundreds of thousands more watched the fight live on HBO.
''From a TV point of view, it doesn't matter where a fight is, but whether it can be an electric crowd and a sellout, which is what the Gatti fight was,'' said Ross Greenburg, the president of HBO Sports. ''So that was good for us.''
After particularly good flurries of punches ending the third and 10th rounds of the fight, sonorous repetitious yells of ''Gat-ti! Gat-ti! Gat-ti!'' reverberated through the massive Boardwalk Hall. ''That kind of thing is good for boxing as well,'' Mr. Greenburg said.
Mr. DiBella, who is a competitor of Mrs. Duva, nevertheless said that her promotion of Mr. Gatti was probably the shining light of Atlantic City boxing these days.
''To tell you the truth, the grass roots of boxing are in a downturn now,'' he said. Referring to Lennox Lewis, he added: ''You have a heavyweight champ from England, and he is going to retire. And basic cable, like ESPN, is cutting back on the smaller fights you need to build up a feeding ground.''
''But Arturo Gatti is the Oscar De La Hoya of New Jersey,'' Mr. DiBella continued, referring to the Los Angeles-based world super-welterweight champ, whose inspired crowds cheer start-to-finish at all his fights.
Mr. Gatti, Mr. DiBella said, ''has been one of the most exciting fighters in a long time, and Bally's has found a way to capitalize on that.''
Mr. Gatti's last three fights -- the two before the Branco bout were rollicking non-title fights with Micky Ward -- have sold out Boardwalk Hall, bringing hundreds of thousands of dollars in tax money to the state. The fights have also helped Bally's bottom line.
''It's like bringing a major concert in,'' said Mr. Condon, the Bally's executive. ''You can't do it every day, but if I can do a Gatti fight, or something like it, three or four times a year, that is great business for us. You don't want to over-saturate it, though. I like doing maybe six or eight ballroom fights to supplement that.''
Bally's is now the primary promoter of fights in Atlantic City, though the Trump properties still have some bouts.
The Borgata, the new big hotel-casino in town, has no plans for boxing, but Larry Hazard Sr., the commissioner of the State Athletic Control Board, thinks that is a mistake.
''You have that beautiful new facility and you would think they would want a big new crowd,'' Mr. Hazard said. ''The total picture, with Don King out of the mix, seems that you have Mr. Gatti, but that is a one-shot deal. You have to have the Tropicana and Harrah's and Resorts and the Borgata all doing boxing. Then you will get an infrastructure and get more and more Gattis in the future.''
Mrs. Duva's company, Main Events, which was founded by her husband, Dan, in 1978, also does pay-per-view events like the ''Miss Howard Stern New Year's Eve.'' But its heart, Mrs. Duva said, is in boxing. Her vice president for boxing, Carl Moretti, is always on the lookout for that next Mr. Gatti, the local guy who can bring a spark to Atlantic City boxing. He thinks he may have found one in Kermit Cintron, a welterweight from Reading, Pa., who fought on the Gatti-Branco undercard.
''Cintron is exciting like Gatti and can bring in a local crowd as he gets better and better,'' Mr. Moretti said. ''The more exposure they get, especially on places like HBO, the better it will be. He will be back in Atlantic City on May 1 and this last fight should help that one. But there are not as many kids doing boxing as there used to be. Soccer, football, whatever, is easier than doing this with dedication for years.''
Comparisons With Las Vegas
Mr. Greenburg of HBO, who sees boxing all around the world, said the Atlantic City boxing crowd was rarely glitzy but often knowledgeable.
''In Las Vegas, you get the Hollywood community flying in from Los Angeles for even a not-so-big fight,'' Mr. Greenburg said. ''In A.C., you get a Philly or a New York crowd coming in for the night. And with Gatti, you get what I'd call an arena crowd. They are really excited. It's like rooting for a hometown team. That is something you wouldn't get in Las Vegas.''
Mr. Condon of Bally's says the casinos in Las Vegas make more of boxing than those in Atlantic City. Since the fights are televised nationally, the headline fight is on much later in Atlantic City -- as late as 11 p.m. in some cases. In Las Vegas, the crowd is back out on the casino floor by 9 or 10 o'clock. But in Atlantic City, they might bet for only an hour or two after a late fight. That, Mr. Condon said, is primarily why other Atlantic City casinos have been only lukewarm on boxing.
Still, he is happy to have boxing at his casino.
''It creates an image and an identity for us,'' he said. ''We're the place you want to go to if you want this kind of event. It's almost like an amenity for us, and we intend on keeping on doing it.''
But you are unlikely to see even so much as a minor professional card anywhere else in New Jersey.
Main Events promoted fights at the Totowa Ice Rink in the early 1980's, with the bouts on ESPN, but the ice rink is gone and TV networks are now more likely to hook up with casinos for bigger bouts rather than have a series from a smaller place.
Though gyms in Camden, like the O.R. &amp; Sons Boxing Club in the Whitman Park section, or the Red Brick Gym in Newark still might have an occasional amateur night, promoters say it is impossible to make money unless television and casinos help underwrite fights.
''We did a couple of shows at the Rexplex in Elizabeth and did some in the Park Theater in Union City and lost tens of thousands of dollars,'' said Mr. Moretti of Main Events. ''We wanted to build up a good Latino base, one that would become a following. But this is a business, and if you are going to lose $30,000 in a night, it isn't going to be worth it.''
Looking Elsewhere
Mr. Moretti and Mr. DiBella say they look for smaller casinos in Connecticut or in the South and the Midwest, or some nonunion sites in Texas, to place their fights.
''In other states, maybe the medical and insurance costs aren't as great, or the building rentals aren't as high,'' Mr. Moretti said. ''At the Rexplex, for instance, we had to compensate them for the basketball and other activities they were losing on a particular night.''
He added: ''On the other hand, it may cost us $2,000 to transport a couple of fighters to Texas and then put them up and have them eat and whatever, so it would be nice to have places to fight here. But the venues are filled with other things or won't split parking and concessions, or whatever, so I think Atlantic City is it for now.''
Mrs. Duva said Mr. Gatti's next fight might be in Montreal. If Mr. King is out of the picture here, that means there may be only small fights, like the Mitchell-N'dou bout -- which was for something called the IBF Interim Junior Welterweight Title -- in Atlantic City for a while.
''But we still have several fighters, even some from Texas, who we think could become stars some day, so I don't think we're abandoning Atlantic City,'' Mrs. Duva said. ''We all hope boxing survives, and we certainly hope Atlantic City will be a part of it.''
