An animated image of a buxom, scantily clad Asian woman who speaks broken English has turned a popular SoHo boutique into a free-speech battleground.
The store is Saigoniste, which sells high-end housewares from Vietnam. Some Vietnamese-Americans are protesting its marketing campaign, whose centerpiece is a creation called Ho Chi Mama promoting lacquer platters and bowls with broken-English slogans. In response, the store's owners defend Ms. Mama as a hip voice of contemporary Vietnam who has helped make their business a success.
Ms. Mama was introduced in an animated video on Saigoniste's Web site when the store opened in November 2002; she is shown chauffeuring famous New Yorkers to Saigoniste on her Vespa. Cynthia Ashworth, who owns the store with Hugh Duthie, removed the video from the Web site last month after learning that The New York Times planned an article about it.
Broken English can also be found on some of the handwritten price tags; a recent tag read: ''Ho Chi Mama say . . . Soft glow of tea light turns every dinner into hot date.''
One person who objected to the fractured aphorisms was Linh Thuy Song, a Vietnamese-American from Ann Arbor, Mich., who visited New York last summer. In the Saigon shopping district where such goods are sold, Ms. Song said, women who work in boutiques ''are very educated and speak five languages.''
''I don't mind that she's a modern, sexy woman,'' Ms. Song said of Ho Chi Mama. ''I mind that she doesn't speak proper English.''
Ms. Song also objected to the fact that the character's name echoed that of Ho Chi Minh, the president of the former North Vietnam, whom many former South Vietnamese consider a tyrant. And she objected to the fact that the name played on the degrading terms ''ho'' and ''hoochie mama.''
Ms. Song e-mailed a complaint to the store, and when the marketing approach did not change, she started an online petition, which has more than 900 signatures.
In response, the store's owners wrote a statement maintaining that Ms. Mama is a modern fashionista who has support from Asians and non-Asians, and they promised to remove the broken English. While some copy on the Web site and on price tags was rewritten, Saigoniste's marketing tactics, including tags with poor grammar, remain. ''Our intention is not to offend, but to turn a stereotype on its side,'' Ms. Ashworth said. ''Ho Chi Mama is very empowered, very cool.''
EMMA JOHNSON
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: SOHO
