SKI FOR LESS -- Two Northeastern ski resorts have deals on lift tickets during this snowy winter. Jack Frost-Big Boulder Mountain in the Poconos has a Web-only offer of four lift tickets (all good on the same day) for a total of $99, through March 7. Visit www.jfbb.com. And Waterville Valley Resort in New Hampshire will add the third night of accommodations and third day's skiing free when guests book two nights at the Valley Inn. You must stay Sunday to Thursday night, on a nonholiday week, and the price starts at $118 a person a night, based on double occupancy. Breakfast and access to the White Mountain Athletic Club are also included. This offer is good as long as the snow holds out; (800) 468-2553 or at www.waterville.com.
HILTON HEAD -- Through June 4, the Sea Pines Resort on Hilton Head Island has rates starting at $158 a night for a two-bedroom villa on the resort's Ocean golf course that sleeps up to four. In addition, a six-night reservation brings a seventh night at no extra charge. The Sea Pines section of the island features three golf courses. Ask for the Lowcountry Loafing rate. Availability is limited and reservations are required. Information: (843) 785-3333 or www.seapines.com.
A GUIDE IN EUROPE -- Global Positioning Systems for navigation, which provide turn-by-turn real-time directions for drivers, are now available in selected models through the Renault Eurodrive program. For a minimum 17-day lease price, Renault provides a new car with all taxes, insurance and mileage costs covered. The deal is available to those who reside outside Europe. The minimum 17-day price for G.P.S.-equipped cars starts at $1,699 for a Laguna sedan with automatic transmission. Reserve by March 31 for a $100 discount. Additional days are $25 to $30 each. The G.P.S. program provides the most detailed street coverage in France; in other countries, only major highways and major cities are mapped in detail; (800) 221-1052 or at www.renaultusa.com.
YOSEMITE SAVINGS -- Booking ahead can result in reduced rates at accommodations in Yosemite West, which is midway between Yosemite Valley and Wawona. Reservations for April and May must be confirmed (and partly prepaid) by March 15 for the savings; June, July and August reservations must be confirmed by April 30, and autumn reservations by May 31. The discounts are 10 percent for stays of four or five nights, 15 percent for six to eight nights, 20 percent for 9 to 13 nights and 25 percent for two weeks or longer. Rates without discounts start at $115 a night for a double room, $185 a night for a two-bedroom unit that sleeps four, and $280 a night for a cottage accommodating eight; taxes are extra. For these Early Bird Specials, you must book at (559) 642-2211. For information, visit the Web site www.yosemitewestreservations.com.
JOSEPH SIANO
TRAVEL ADVISORY
