The three children two rows ahead of me on a Florida flight over a recent holiday weekend were going wild, yelling across other passengers, whining and screaming like colicky infants (though they were far from it). Their indulgent, clueless parents were doing very little to control them.
I had earplugs. Still, I could hear them clearly. Should I say something?
My instinct was to lay low, but after witnessing the obvious distress of the crew and other passengers for two hours, I became emboldened. ''Will you please shut those kids up?'' I yelled at the top of my lungs.
There was a moment of silence while the father looked around for the source of the complaint. I stayed seated, anonymous behind him. But then the man next to me (who runs a martial arts school for children in New Jersey, he later said) took up the cause. ''And if they won't shut up,'' he yelled, ''get some duct tape for their mouths!''
The other passengers nodded in support. Some were even smiling. Perhaps I had been uncivil, but it was clearly in the name of the greater good. I guess I had given voice to the collective superego, the one that yells out what everybody else is thinking of the ill-mannered -- Emily Post with a bullhorn.
It's the slam of the hand of a pedestrian on a cab blocking a crosswalk. It's the brave soul on the subway who tells disruptive teenagers to sit down and chill out.
Often it is a voice in the wilderness. Because even in this most flagrantly self-expressive of cultures, it takes a lot of guts to want to wag a finger at a stranger.
Mary Hilliard, a photographer, was on a group tour of Bhutan when, after much thought, she asked a very loud woman to please keep it down. Others on the tour were thankful. But Ms. Hilliard agonized the whole trip. ''I was trying to improve conditions for all of us, but I shouldn't have criticized her in front of other people,'' she said.
I don't know about that. If people are so clueless, living as we are with so many etiquette books but no real etiquette, is anything less than a public chiding effective?
''Sometimes you have to bring on the public shame,'' said Elizabeth Goren, a Manhattan psychologist. ''That's what's needed.''
Not that it's easy. After all, this is a ''looking out for No. 1'' society that's pretty cynical about the moral lessons that used to keep citizens in line. It is also an increasingly disenfranchised, ''on the move while on the phone'' population threatened by terrorism, random shootings and road and air rage. Who would want to rock the boat?
Perhaps it's better to sit there smoldering in silence or distracting yourself trying to decide what to say or whether you're going to say anything at all. And yet according to Freud, anger can be as much an inner signal as anxiety. ''Sometimes you need to listen to it,'' said Dr. Goren, ''and speak your mind.''
That's what Helen Lee Schifter, a young mom about town, did on a frigid day earlier this winter when she and other pedestrians were watching a nanny ignoring an obviously underdressed, wailing child on East 57th Street. ''Excuse me, but isn't that Johnny Jones?'' she asked, inventing a name.
When told it wasn't by the nanny, she cheerfully went on, ''Oh, but I definitely know him and his mother from somewhere.'' Soon, some other pedestrians were at her side to support her, along with a policeman. Was she being a buttinsky or a good citizen? In a world in which the erosion of public civility is an overdocumented fact, and we hardly know our neighbors anymore, maybe you have to be a bit of both. The bold nag with the red flag.
''Someone has to be the ethical fascist,'' said Amy Alkon, a syndicated advice columnist who hands out cards in Los Angeles teasing S.U.V. drivers as road-hogging, gas-guzzling vulgarians.'' Sally Beatty, a Wall Street Journal reporter who chastised a rude receptionist in a doctor's office the other day, said, ''You just see something that needs to be done and you do it.''
Me? I was mortified for my eruption on that plane, but eventually pleased as well. Because to everyone's relief, those children were quiet for the rest of our flight.
Sometimes you just have to demand good manners in the rudest possible way.
THE AGE OF DISSONANCE
