I am a medical student on a pediatrics rotation. Recently we diagnosed an 11-year-old boy with leukemia. He was treated and will continue as an outpatient. Throughout his stay, his parents refused to divulge his diagnosis to him. He is a bright boy, interested in science and curious about his treatment. Does he have a right to know his diagnosis?
E.L.
Physicians have an ethical obligation to inform patients of their conditions and treatments, but parents have the legal authority to make medical decisions for their minor children and, by implication, to decide what information those children receive. How to resolve these two duties can be controversial among medical ethicists (in questions of reproductive rights, for example). In this case, I believe that this young patient has the right to know what he's being treated for.
Ignorance breeds fear, an emotional state deleterious to your health. A knowledgeable patient can more fully participate in his own care and thereby improve its quality. Thus, to act in the best interests of this patient, the physician must respond to the boy's curiosity.
The patient's age is a factor, certainly. Legally, there is a clear distinction between minor and adult, but for actual children, attaining maturity is a gradual process. The older a child gets, the more entitled he is to be treated like an adult.
A bright and inquisitive 11-year-old can grasp much about his sad circumstances.
This child's physician should begin by talking to the parents. He or she might persuade them that, ethics aside, deception is a doomed strategy. Smart kids figure things out eventually. When the boy learns he was lied to, at least by omission, he is apt to feel hurt and anxious, undermining his trust in his parents and his doctors and making his treatment more difficult.
The physician is not alone here. Help is available from the hospital's ethics committee (and lawyers) and perhaps from a children's advocate, and together they may bring the parents around. But if the parents remain obdurate, the doctor should do what's best for the patient.
Our son wants to sell his 1975 Cadillac and buy a truck for work. He has been doing construction in a rough part of town and has had numerous offers from obvious drug dealers. Guys run up to him offering cash on the spot. This will likely get him the best price, but is it ethical to sell the car to drug dealers?
Bob Johnson, Hendersonville, N.C.
He may sell his barge-on-wheels with a clear conscience. Marketplace ethics do not enjoin us to sell only to those we esteem. Neither Saks nor Sears requires proof of virtue from its customers.
If you aspire beyond shopping-mall morals, you should not sell someone the instrument with which he means to do harm -- a gun to a deranged man with murderous intentions, for example. By this standard, some criticized I.B.M. for selling South Africa computers that might be used to administer apartheid. But this taboo cannot be infinitely extended to more casual connections. Duane Reade may sell shampoo to Andrew Fastow, although it could be argued that without good grooming, he would have been unable to appear in Enron's executive suite and engage in financial shenanigans.
Your son's situation is akin to this latter example. He is not certain that these fellows are drug dealers, and even if he were, their illicit activities are not directly connected to motoring in style. Thus he is free to make the sale, as is the local Exxon dealer to gas up the Caddie.
One caution. Your son may be in legal jeopardy if he accepts ill-gotten gains. He should consult a lawyer before closing the deal.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-22-04: THE ETHICIST
