The ecology of parking in Bay Terrace, a neighborhood of condos and Colonial homes in Queens, rests on a pair of tectonic plates that have lately started grinding against each other: an established residential area and an expanding commercial zone. The most recent tremor occurred on the cold afternoon of Jan. 24, when 15 homeowners picketed outside a row of doctors' offices on Bell Boulevard chanting, ''Hey, hey; ho, ho; they want meters; we say no.''
The pickets were responding to the efforts of Dr. Jordan Zuckerman, a dermatologist with an office on the street, who had begun a petition and persuaded the city Department of Transportation to install 20 two-hour parking meters on the boulevard.
The meters were necessary, Dr. Zuckerman contended, so more people could find spots during the day. New turning lanes for the recently expanded Bay Terrace Shopping Center across the street had eliminated a number of on-street parking spots, and as a result the center was now towing the cars of patients it had once allowed to use its lot.
''Many of the patients who come to this area are elderly, handicapped, children and pregnant women,'' Dr. Zuckerman said. ''There's a parking dilemma, and we're losing some of them.''
In December, the city installed two poles along the boulevard between 23rd and 26th Avenues for the row of meters, poles that did not go unnoticed by Phil Konigsberg, president of the Bay Terrace Community Alliance, a local civic group.
''There are still some private residences on that part of Bell Boulevard and people who park their cars on the street,'' Mr. Konigsberg said.
After he led two protests, the city backed off. Tom Cocola, a spokesman for the Transportation Department, said no meters would be installed for now. ''At the request of the community,'' he said, ''we've decided to reconsider.'' The poles that had gone up in December were removed.
Many of the 30 doctors in the area, who have formed the Bay Terrace Professional Community Coalition, tried but failed to agree on parking with the Cord Meyer Development Company, which owns the shopping center and an accompanying garage. Another option, recommended in a recent study by the Department of City Planning, is to install muni meters that would allow drivers to pay for short or long-term parking.
But Mr. Konigsberg dislikes that idea, and a meeting on the parking issue March 11 will bring together the doctors, residents, and officials from the city and Cord Meyer. Dr. Joan Ferrara, a spokeswoman for the doctors, plans to be there to propose other solutions, like reducing the no-parking hours in a nearby loading zone. ''We're trying to cooperate,'' she said.
JIM O'GRADY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: BAY TERRACE
