The winter sun in Kabul streams through the large classroom windows, lighting the girls' veils and their faces as they look up spellbound at their employer, Sarah Takesh, who is outlining their next task.
''Don't do it like this, but like this,'' Takesh tells them, quickly drawing a wavy stem with flowers and leaves branching off. She gives out pieces of hand-woven silk in smooth plastic bags to each of the women and teenage girls.
An American designer who lives out of a suitcase in the United States, India and Afghanistan, Takesh has embarked on one of the boldest fashion enterprises this side of Timbuktu: Tarsian &amp; Blinkley, a ''Made in Afghanistan'' label, which sells in boutiques like Butter in Brooklyn and through her Web site, www.tarsian.com.
The beauty of Afghan women and their handicrafts are little known outside Afghanistan and may be a tough sell, but Takesh is harnessing the women's exquisite embroidery skills and their eagerness to work.
The result is a collection of silk blouses and sleeveless tops decorated with snatches of silk embroidery, beading or crochet, and slim pants and wrap skirts flaunting asymmetrical embroidery. She describes the designs as a mix of casual and feminine, ''East meets West,'' ''girliness in a war zone.''
''The worldview of Afghan women is the burka, and it's depressing,'' Takesh says over a lunch of kebabs, flat naan bread and pomegranates in Kabul.
''But I love the old art of this region, and there is something so powerful about Islamic countries. There is a certain beauty and forbiddenness about them.''
Iranian-born -- her grandfather was a feudal lord -- Takesh, 30, speaks the language and is very much at home in Kabul. She has lived in the United States since she was 5, but was drawn back to the region through a combination of her mother's stories of life in the gardens and feudal fortresses of Iran, and her own sense of adventure. She traveled to Pakistan's northwest frontier, and toured the silk-road cities of Kabul; Peshawar, in Pakistan; and the fabled Kashgar, in western China.
Tarsian &amp; Blinkley, conceived while she was at business school in Berkeley two years ago, is born out of her wild imaginings about a beautiful, fictional Scythian horsewoman who meets the quintessential, impeccably tailored English gentleman in the Pamir mountains.
''I want to be focused on one thing, Central Asia, and slowly over time evoke an atmosphere,'' she explains.
She talks of one day helping to revive the ancient silk weaving famous in northern Afghanistan and the Uzbekistan cities of Bokhara and Samarkand to the north. (Her Web site boasts the bold, rich-colored silk ikat design.) More immediately, her company allows her to mix her deep love of fashion with a genuine desire to help Afghan women emerge from the grim darkness of their lives after years of war and the repressive Taliban rule.
''Unspeakable terrors have fallen on every family here,'' Takesh says, adding that each of the women working for her is dealing with mental anguish and personal loss. ''Marzia is one of the best workers. Her eldest brother got blown up by a mortar shell in their own backyard, and her eyes always reveal a sharp sadness.''
Afghan women -- forbidden to work and restricted to their homes for five years under the fundamentalist regime, many of them also traumatized by the war -- are desperate for work and for some economic independence. Despite the enormous changes in the last two years since the American war against the Taliban, women in Afghanistan remain trapped by their lack of education and job opportunities, and a very strict traditional culture that keeps them at home raising children.
Embroidery is one thing they all know, for every Afghan girl learns the skill from her mother and still prepares for her marriage a trousseau of embroidered cloths, hangings and shawls -- and it is something the girls can work on at home.
''Everyone tried to put me off the idea of working in Afghanistan, saying that quality control would be so difficult,'' she says. ''But I kept complaining, nagging and controlling, and it has not been so bad.''
She has in fact found willing partners every step of the way. ''It's good for us, we are unemployed and we can do this work at home,'' says Anise, 55, who arrives with her daughter to collect work. There is pride, too. ''All the time they are sending us charity clothes from abroad,'' Anise continues, ''and we are proud that this time we are making things for American women.'' The women are paid from about $2.50 to $4 a day -- above-average wages -- and they all say they need it badly.
Takesh says she can already see changes in the women. A year ago they were silent and tense, and clung to the all-enveloping burka out of fear and insecurity. ''This year is very different,'' she says. ''They look better.''
She teamed up with Nasirullah, a master tailor and instructor in Kabul. Nasirullah runs sewing and tailoring training courses for Afghan women, and over the years he has trained 5,000 women through his organization, the Afghan Women's Vocational Skills Learning Center. Working out of offices belonging to him and an American nonprofit organization, Morning Star Development, Takesh has tapped into a pool of local female embroiderers and male tailors who quickly assemble when word gets out that work is available. ''Here you just yell out the window when you need them,'' she says.
For all the romance of the region and the compassion she feels for Afghan women, Takesh displays a fierce practicality and knowledge of the fashion business from her years living and working in New York. (At one point, when one of the women lining up for work snatches at the fabric, Takesh chides her: ''You made the material very dirty. I will never give work to you again.'')
She studied architecture at Columbia University and took several courses at Parsons, before doing different jobs ''running around the garment district.'' In 2001, she went to business school at Berkeley, where she won two prizes for her Tarsian &amp; Blinkley business plan.
''Fashion is brutal; no one is going to care about Afghans,'' she says. ''The difficulty will be the marketing.'' Which is why her latest collection is intentionally ''hip and young and sexy.''
''It has little surprises,'' she says, ''a thin crocheted line of midnight blue, two fingers of sequins, and richer, stronger colors. I don't think my mother will be wearing it.''
As she sits on the floor pinning labels to finished garments before packing them up for shipping, she talks of the next part of the job, and for the first time displays some anxiety. She will be spending time in the United States, concentrating on the stressful job of selling her clothes, touring boutiques and finding a showroom for her collection.
''In March I'll come back to Kabul, get a house, settle down, open a shop,'' she says. She has already found an enthusiastic clientele among shop-starved United Nations staff members in Kabul and plans to have a factory of her own within a year to raise production to more than 1,000 pieces a month and employ more women full time. She says confidently, ''I'm in the right place.''
Carlotta Gall reports for The New York Times from Kabul.
