From the Ivory Tower To the Silver Screen
Who says a former star on one stage can't be happy playing supporting parts in other productions?
Certainly not L. Jay Oliva.
In 2002, Dr. Oliva stepped down after 11 years as president of New York University. His top-of-the-cast run had capped a 42-year N.Y.U. career that involved teaching Russian history and serving in ever-higher administrative posts.
During his presidency, the university completed a transformation, begun a decade before he became chief, from a second-tier commuter school to a top-ranked research university.
Dr. Oliva took on the usual challenges of a university president, like fund-raising and guiding growth. The second task was especially touchy, as N.Y.U.'s expansion angered many of its Greenwich Village neighbors.
He also undertook another challenge, more unusual for a campus chief: acting in musical theater. It began in 1999, with a supporting role in a student production of ''Brigadoon.'' It continued with supporting roles in other student shows, among them ''West Side Story'' and ''Guys and Dolls.''
The president-in-greasepaint got some newspaper ink, as did his occasional singing and tap dancing at university functions. He pointed out that as a young man, he had led a trio that sang in Irish bars.
These days, Dr. Oliva, 70, spends more of his time in the performance world. He is executive producer for a new N.Y.U. theater, the Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, seeking bookings to fill it and money to support it. And he still steps into other characters.
After leaving the presidency in June 2002, ''I spent the summer with the Mount Washington Valley Players,'' a regional theater company in North Conway, N.H., he said last week. ''I played Colonel Pickering in 'My Fair Lady.'''
Recently, he took a step into film. ''A walk-on, no dialogue,'' he said, as a United States senator in a scene shot for ''She Hate Me,'' directed by Spike Lee, an alumnus of N.Y.U.'s Tisch School of the Arts.
Dr. Oliva said he hoped for more acting action. ''I have an agent,'' he said. He also has the requisite photo (that's it above) for casting directors. There are older-man parts, he said, and ''my ankles still work.''
For City and 3 Nations, A Tax Claim Stalemate
Last April, New York City sued four foreign governments for a total of $106 million that it said they owed in long-unpaid property taxes and accrued interest on buildings they own in Manhattan.
It said the buildings, though used for tax-exempt purposes like housing the countries' United Nations missions or consulates or both, had also been used for commercial or residential purposes that were not tax-exempt, making the properties partly taxable.
It said Turkey owed $70 million on 821 United Nations Plaza, the Philippines $17.7 million on 556 Fifth Avenue (above), India $16.4 million on 235 East 43rd Street, and Mongolia $2 million on 6 East 77th Street.
In September, the city settled with Turkey for $5 million. City officials said Turkey's documentation of how much of its building had been used for diplomatic functions warranted the steep reduction from the $70 million claim.
Last week, a deputy chief in the city's Law Department, Vincent D'Orazio, said no negotiations were under way with the other three governments, and the suits against them continue.
The lawyer for the three governments, Robert Kandel, declined to comment.
Following Up
