When World Series games came on television during Joe Torre's playing days, that was his cue to leave the house and go shopping. If Torre, now the Yankees' manager, could not play in the postseason, he did not want to watch.
Alex Rodriguez is different. After playing out last season with the hapless Texas Rangers, Rodriguez eagerly watched the epic American League Championship Series between the Yankees and the Red Sox last fall.
''I can remember jumping out of my couch three or four times in that series,'' Rodriguez said Saturday at Legends Field, after reporting to spring training for the Yankees. ''Game 4, Game 5, Game 6 and 7; it was just awesome to watch. As a baseball fan first, it wasn't one bit frustrating. I wished and dreamed about someday being able to play in games that meant so much. That dream is here a lot sooner than I thought.''
Rodriguez demurred when asked which team he had rooted for, but there is no doubting his allegiance now. The Red Sox failed in their effort to trade for him, Aaron Boone wrecked his knee, and Rodriguez wound up here, as the splashiest addition to a team full of marquee stars.
To do it, Rodriguez agreed to play third base, and he showed up ready. After landing at Tampa International Airport, Rodriguez left a private plane carrying a bat and a glove, and he took grounders and batting practice at the Yankees' minor league complex.
''I'm still not aware of where I am right now,'' he said after working out for 70 minutes in warm-up pants and a Yankees T-shirt. ''I'm trying to take it all in. I look around and I see the Yankee uniform. It's awesome.''
Rodriguez took seven rounds of batting practice, swatting 10 homers in 65 swings, including one blast that dented a parked truck. He also broke the bat of third baseman Eric Duncan, the Yanks' top draft pick last season, whose future is probably elsewhere now.
''Eric, there's your wood,'' Rodriguez said after breaking the bat. ''There's that minor league wood.''
Duncan, who was in high school a year ago, saved the bat fragment for Rodriguez to autograph.
''That was the best experience of my baseball career,'' Duncan said.
Rodriguez's first formal workout will come on Tuesday with the rest of the position players. The Yankees have scheduled another news conference with him after that; it will be his third in eight days since the trade for Alfonso Soriano became official.
''He's not going to have a problem dealing with whatever pressure there is, because he's an intelligent young guy,'' Torre said of Rodriguez. ''I think he knows what values are.''
Rodriguez expects to have a close relationship with Torre, who plans to make him one of the players he seeks out to gauge the mood of the locker room. Rodriguez clashed with his previous manager, Buck Showalter, who never played in the majors and seemingly never had Rodriguez's trust. In praising Torre, Rodriguez compared him to Lou Piniella, who managed him for seven years with the Seattle Mariners.
''Joe played the game,'' Rodriguez said. ''He reminds me a lot of Lou Piniella, in different ways, obviously. But both are people you can trust, people who played the game, people who kind of know what you go through. That part of it is fun for a major league player. To have a manager you can trust is cool.''
Rodriguez has played on four All-Star teams under Torre, and he was teammates on the Mariners with Luis Sojo, now the Yankees' third-base coach. Rodriguez's eyes sparkled as he met Sojo at the door to the locker room, hugging Sojo and joking in Spanish. The two talked for several minutes and will be working closely this spring.
Sojo, the bench coach Willie Randolph and the spring instructor Graig Nettles will help Rodriguez learn a new position. Since the trade, Rodriguez has taken grounders at third base at the University of Miami and has an idea of how to position himself.
''I like to play deep, because I feel like I have a strong arm,'' Rodriguez said. ''That's one of the benefits as a shortstop. Hopefully, I can take it over to third base.''
Torre, who started out as a catcher and converted to third, said the biggest adjustment for him was reading the way the ball hooks down the line. Rodriguez said he must get used to fielding slow rollers and bunts. He will call on shortstop Derek Jeter to take anything in the air.
''I already told Jeter that he's getting every fly ball,'' Rodriguez said.
With the rebuilding Rangers, Rodriguez has said, he spent much of his time off the field mentoring young players. With the Yankees, Rodriguez will be the youngest one in the starting lineup. He said again Saturday that he simply wants to be one of the guys, and catcher Jorge Posada said he would.
''Everybody's got their job,'' Posada said. ''Derek's got his job, he's got his own job. Everybody's a leader in this clubhouse. I think that helps.''
Like Jason Giambi before him, Rodriguez spoke about his eagerness to jump into the East Coast baseball fray. He grew up in Miami rooting for the Mets, but spent his first 10 seasons in the American League West. Now Rodriguez is off the couch and in the thick of the hottest rivalry in sports.
''I'm a fan first -- I love baseball, and I love watching baseball,'' he said. ''Just catching some of the fever. You get energized. You feed off the energy of East Coast baseball.''
Since Rodriguez became a part of it, John Henry, the Red Sox' principal owner, and his Yankees counterpart, George Steinbrenner, have bashed each other with harsh public statements. In the rivalry, A-Rod is Lighting Rod, and he is ready to move on to the really fun part.
''We've all done a lot of talking,'' Rodriguez said. ''Now it's time to go play.''
INSIDE PITCH
Starter KEVIN BROWN took a ball off his right ankle in practice on Saturday, but trainers did not notify Manager JOE TORRE, who did not sound concerned. . . . Torre plans to use ENRIQUE WILSON as the primary second baseman and played down the need for a better hitter there. ''I don't think we need more offense, let's put it that way,'' he said.
BASEBALL
