North Fork Bank Acquires GreenPoint
The North Fork Bank, owned by the North Fork Bancorporation (NYSE: NFD) of Melville, has agreed to acquire the GreenPoint Financial Corporation, the parent of the GreenPoint Bank, for $6.3 billion in stock. GreenPoint is based in Manhattan.
The expanded North Fork will have more than $50 billion in assets, $30 billion in deposits and more than 340 branches in three states, making it one of the largest consumer banks in New York City area. The deal continues North Fork's expansion efforts, following a December announcement of plans to acquire the Trust Company of New Jersey.
John A. Kanas, the chairman and chief executive of North Fork, will retain both positions in the merged institution. Thomas S. Johnson, GreenPoint's chairman and chief executive, will become a North Fork director, and Bharat B. Bhatt, GreenPoint's president, will become a senior executive vice president.
''The economics of this transaction are compelling,'' Mr. Kanas said in a statement. ''We are bringing together two very simple and profitable banking strategies under one management team.''
Arrow's Profit Rises Sharply
Arrow Electronics (NYSE: ARW) of Melville tripled its fourth-quarter profit on rising sales in North America and Asia, the company said on Tuesday.
Fourth-quarter net income rose to $26 million, or 26 cents a share, up from $7.6 million, or 8 cents a share, for the same quarter last year. Quarterly sales rose to $2.48 billion from $1.89 billion.
The company, a global distributor of electronic components, attributed its performance to recovering global components market and to its own cost-saving efforts.
The company also announced organizational changes, among them the appointment of Jan Salsgiver as the vice president for global strategy and operations, a new position.
Acclaim's Loss Narrows
Acclaim Entertainment (Nasdaq: AKLM), a video game maker in Glen Cove, said Tuesday that it had narrowed its net loss to $9 million for the fiscal third quarter, which ended Dec. 28. It recorded a net loss of $13.9 million for the same quarter last year.
Sales in the quarter fell to $39.3 million from $63.1 million in last year's third quarter.
Compiled by Warren Strugatch
E-mail: libiz@nytimes.com
