SIMON MORRISON bent forward and, with an easy sweep of his hand, popped a disc into his office CD player. He straightened as music from an early Prokofiev ballet crashed from the speakers, a harsh wash of grating horns and driving drums. It is difficult music for a casual listener, as mechanical as the din on a factory floor. Unlike some of Prokofiev's later work, there is little lyricism, as dancer and machine merge, no soft resting place for the ear.
But Dr. Morrison, a tall, thin assistant professor of music at Princeton University, was rapt. He finds a spare beauty in this music, grace in its discord.
It makes sense that he would. In some ways, the ballet, ''The Steel Step,'' is Dr. Morrison's wayward baby. After more than 75 years, in which the work had all but vanished, he is reviving it. If all goes well, Dr. Morrison and his collaborators will present the ballet at Princeton's Berlind Theater in the spring of 2005. It will be the first time that the ballet -- originally written as a pro-Communist work -- has been performed in full since it opened in Paris in 1927.
''It is a huge undertaking,'' Carolyn Abbate, who heads Princeton's music department, said of the reconstruction of the ballet. The job involves platoons of dancers, an expert in historic dance reconstruction, a designer from England who spent seven years recreating the original set, an orchestra, a conductor and Dr. Morrison. ''It is practically the Army Corps of Engineers,'' she added.
Prokofiev was a difficult composer. Perhaps best known for his children's work, ''Peter and the Wolf,'' his later pieces were stained by his life in the Soviet Union. Several of his Soviet-era works celebrated Stalin's rule and, for some, that approval of Stalin has made it difficult to accept some of his art.
''There are some nice tunes,'' Richard Taruskin, a leading scholar on Russian music, said, referring to Prokofiev's Stalin-related work. ''But I am not very sympathetic to the view that we can listen to the glorification of a mass murderer because we like the tunes.''
Dr. Morrison understands that, but he believes Prokofiev can be approached in the way he wrote his music, outside the ordinary world. ''He really believed that his creativity was something divorced from the concerns of the real world,'' Dr. Morrison said. ''The comment is paradoxical because a lot of his works, certainly his official Soviet works, are lodged in time and space like no others.''
Dr. Morrison's career did not always focus on resurrecting controversial pro-Soviet works of art.
In fact, Dr. Morrison, who is 39, began as a tuba player from Winnipeg, Manitoba. He was good enough to play for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation band, but when he attended the University of Toronto, he was exposed to the avant-garde Russian composers of the early 20th century and ''was hooked on the music,'' he said. He abandoned the tuba for the piano and journeyed from musical performance to musical analysis.
''It is a music that is comprised of drives, energies that are almost things you can't quantify,'' he said of the Russians. ''With Prokofiev, concepts -- religion, politics -- in his music, these are translated into abstract ideas.''
After a year as an exchange student in Russia as the Soviet Union was collapsing, Dr. Morrison wrote his master's degree thesis on Prokofiev's first Soviet opera, ''Semyon Kotko,'' which was started in 1938.
On the surface, the piece is a typical paean to the Socialist ideal. But it also reflects the conflicts that most artists, Prokofiev included, faced under Stalin, according to Dr. Morrison.
The story, about the defense of the homeland against German invaders, found official disfavor after the Soviet Union signed a nonaggression pact with Nazi Germany in 1939; Prokofiev was forced to change the text to reflect the new political reality. But even the changes did not save the work, which was ultimately banned by Stalin. And the Soviets eventually arrested Prokofiev's old friend and the opera's producer, Vsevolod Meyerhold, and killed him.
The piece ''has an extraordinarily beautiful musical score,'' Dr. Morrison said. But he said the work falters toward the end, probably because Prokofiev collapsed under the external political pressure he faced.
''That is the Prokofiev dilemma,'' he added.
Born in Ukraine in 1891, Sergei Prokofiev was a son of the solid upper middle class. His father was an agricultural engineer; his mother was musically inclined and determined to secure her son a place in the St. Petersburg Conservatory. Once there, Prokofiev made a name for himself as a skilled pianist but was considered a difficult and unusual composer.
There is a detachment in photographs of Prokofiev. Somewhere in the wide forehead and deep-set eyes, there's a sense that the composer is standing back, observing. ''He presented himself as someone of very little emotion,'' Dr. Morrison said. ''That is the nature of his music; it is forged out of steel.''
In June 1914, as World War I was starting, Prokofiev moved to Paris, where Russian composers like Stravinsky were establishing themselves. When he toured the United States, his early work was described as savage; he was sometimes called the Bolshevik pianist. He eventually gained stature and several of his early pieces were celebrated, but Prokofiev was not the leading composer in the West that he had hoped to become.
''When he was in Paris, he was second banana to Stravinsky,'' said Michael Pratt, who is scheduled to conduct the Princeton University Orchestra in the performance of ''The Steel Step.'' ''He came to the United States, and he was second banana to Rachmaninoff.''
Of the work, Mr. Pratt said: ''This is a machine piece, a machine ballet. This is not the lyrical side of the composer.''
Prokofiev completed ''The Steel Step'' in 1926, in Paris. The two-act ballet was written for the groundbreaking Ballets Russes, founded and led by the flamboyant impresario Diaghilev. The work drew inspiration from the blocky and mechanized Constructivist art of the period, and the artist Georgy Yakulov designed an elaborate set. Yakulov's set included a large locomotive and robot-like figures that symbolized the fusing of dancers and machines.
The story celebrates the rise of industrialism and the working class in Russia. It begins in a rural village, where the hero and the heroine meet on the eve of civil war. After separation and trials, the two are reunited in the final act and dance the triumph of proletarian spirit. The plot seems trite today, and Diaghilev, an anti-Communist, recast the ballet, Dr. Morrison said, changing Prokofiev's original intent. When it was eventually staged, in 1927, the ballet was interpreted as a condemnation of Soviet rule and the subservience of workers to their machinery.
Dr. Morrison became interested in the piece while doing research in Russia and Paris for essays on Russian ballet. Eventually, he collaborated on an essay about ''The Steel Step'' with Lesley-Anne Sayers, a professor at the University of Bristol in England who had reconstructed a model of Yakulov's original set. During the collaboration, they realized that the entire ballet, hard as the work would be, could be rebuilt.
''It is my pathology to pursue difficult subjects,'' Dr. Morrison said.
Ballet is an ephemeral art, he says, its ''history is packed with ghosts.'' Before film was common, ballets were frequently lost after performances because the choreography was often difficult to record. In the case of ''The Steel Step,'' researchers were able to put together some of the program by referring to the music and to historical records, but most of the work will be a recreation in the spirit of the performance.
Ze'eva Cohen, head of Princeton's dance program, expects that student dancers will fill most of the roles. ''The dance is about trying to capture the common man in the street,'' she said. ''It is not supertechnical, except for the lead couple.''
Dr. Morrison also has some familiarity with dance. He took a few ballet classes at the well-known Laban Center for Movement and Dance in London two years ago. Among the lithe professionals and young hopefuls, Dr. Morrison, a 37-year-old former hockey defensemen, was not a typical student.
''It was ridiculous,'' he recalled. But the training made him familiar with basic ballet moves.
Dr. Morrison has been shuttling between Princeton and Moscow, where he is working on a new Prokofiev project. In addition to supervising production of ''The Steel Step,'' he wants to answer this lasting question about Prokofiev: Why did the he return to the Soviet Union in 1936.
By most accounts, the move was a mistake. Prokofiev's wife, Lina, was condemned and sent to a prison camp, and much of Prokofiev's later work was co-opted by the Soviets. Still, Prokofiev seemed committed to Russia until his death on March 5, 1953, the same day that Stalin died. In his autobiography, Prokofiev said he had returned to Russia because he found a better reception for his music.
''I care nothing for politics -- I'm a composer first and last,'' he said, according to a Prokofiev Web site, Prokofiev.org. ''Any government that lets me write my music in peace, publishes everything I composed before the ink is dry and performs every note that comes from my pen is all right with me.''
Dr. Morrison thinks there is something more. He thinks Prokofiev believed that through his art, he could create a place apart from the outside world.
''He created a mental space for himself that kept him going,'' he said. ''Prokofiev worked 24 hours a day, every day, to close himself off from the madness. And on that level he was able to separate himself. But clearly, the madness existed.''
And, in a little more than a year, New Jersey balletgoers will get a taste of Prokofiev's place apart.
IN PERSON
