The horrible fear about having a conversation with Zac Posen is that he is going to say something to impress you. There must be countless young New Yorkers to whom this need to impress people is not merely a habit, like brushing one's teeth, but a virtue, to be borne with purpose and alacrity so that, over time, it acquires polish, and, with more effort, a stainless perfection. But whenever I see Posen at a party or some industry event, I am struck by the fact that of all the designers in his age group -- he is 23 -- he feels this need to impress more urgently than the others. It is as if time for him were measured not in minutes and hours but rather in incremental opportunities. And there is nothing remotely casual about the way in which he seizes those opportunities.
I recall standing last summer on the portico of the New York Public Library, on the night he lost the Perry Ellis emerging-designer award to Jack McCollough and Lazaro Hernandez, of Proenza Schouler, who had gone outside for a smoke. The portico had the pleasant atmosphere of truancy. Marc Jacobs was there. So were Narciso Rodriguez and some models, everyone smoking as the evening rush rolled down Fifth Avenue. Eventually Posen appeared, with his mop of curls and heavy Charlie Chaplin brows, and he gave me a report on his shirt, which was in an eye-catching pattern. Usually designers, in social situations, avoid the topic of fashion, except to remark meanly about a person's dress. But my lingering sense was that Posen wanted me to know that he was not like the others. He had fashion on his brain all the time.
I have also noticed that he has a talent, rare in someone so young, for adapting his conversation to the listener. If he senses, for instance, that you admire hard work over the easy street of celebrity, he'll leap in with a comment like, ''The greatest thing I've learned is that workaholics get ahead.'' If he knows that you are drawn to certain Paris designers, he'll mention that he recently dined with Azzedine Alaïa. He even has a ready, if somewhat mystical, explanation for how he managed to communicate with Alaïa, since they don't share a common language: ''He understands what I say.''
A year or so ago I ran into Posen in Milan, in a tent outside a show where drinks were being served. I knew from the newspapers that he had been invited to a party given a few nights earlier by the photographer Mario Testino, a party that drew a lot of important people. But I wasn't at all surprised, as we chatted by the bar, when he reported that he had come to Milan to buy fabrics, because it was the sort of thing that might impress a fashion writer.
I thought then, and I think now, that Zac Posen is an operator. He is a little bit adorable and a little bit awful, words I once used in reference to Arnold Scaasi during his Bush-fascination days.
But I have also come to the conclusion that of all the young designers gathering on the horizon, Posen is the one who is most likely to break through precisely because he possesses all the same qualities that worked so beautifully for his predecessors in this venal industry, including the former Mr. Isaacs (Scaasi spelled backward). Success in fashion is one part talent, one part luck and one part a tireless ability to hold a gaudy marquee over your head. Posen has all these qualities in excess.
I've watched other young designers hang back on the margins of success, like stricken sophomores at a dance. It embarrasses them to betray even normal ambition -- to be in the papers, to be seen with Tom Ford or dog-trotting an actress into a party. But Posen, beginning in his teens, when he showed up for his first day of school at Saint Ann's in Brooklyn dressed as Charlie Chaplin -- even then he got the joke of his performance -- doesn't suffer these kind of doubts. He is secure. ''His attitude is, 'I can do it,''' said Julie Gilhart, the fashion director of Barneys New York, who agrees that what separates Posen from most of his peers is that he doesn't ask himself if he's going to be a success or not. It isn't even a question in his mind. He said to me, ''I'm definitely planning ahead for a brand that spans the universe, a Zac Posen universe.''
O.K., it sounds incredibly phony and earnest; laugh all you want. But what else is he going to say at 23? ''I'm planning to have a brief, uneventful career spanning absolutely nothing''? It will take Posen another 20 years to reach his goal, which is exactly how long it took Marc Jacobs. All Posen can do at this stage is plant the idea of his success in the public's imagination, and then surround it by pure corn. But that's enough.
''I don't know that people really listen to all that Zac says, because he talks so much,'' said his friend Lola Schnabel, making a fairly important distinction, I think, between the man's fantastic chattering and what it symbolizes. For instance, Posen has said in print several times that his clothes represent ''a strong, intelligent, feminine'' woman -- a statement that, in 2004, could cover just about every female type from the Olsen twins to Lady Thatcher. Or he'll say, apropos of a trunk show at Neiman Marcus in San Francisco: ''Having a public persona is very helpful outside New York. You have to be a public face -- that's what the modern designer is.''
He pads these banal ideas with various homiletic tales about his precocious youth -- how he turned his parents' SoHo loft into a cutting room and so forth. But the point is that Posen is creating a story, and not a very complicated one for people to understand. The myth that designers suffer for their art is true for only a handful of greats -- Saint Laurent, Madame Grès. The rest, if they're willing to admit it, suffer from the boredom of having to repeat the same old stories (and styles) for years. But that's how you make an impression and money in this game, by knowing your lines, and Posen already has his down cold.
When guys like Bill Blass and Oscar de la Renta were coming along in the 1960's, it was a lot easier to make an impression. Of course, the world was a smaller place then. It also helped that Blass and de la Renta had a great deal of natural charm and savoir faire. But you don't think that, when Blass cranked up his British accent at a dinner party, he wasn't trying to impress some old nob? Of course he was, and it didn't bother him in the least. He made that deal with himself when he left Indiana at 17. Fashion is still a ruthless hustle, the one difference being that the media's interest in designers as celebrities has created a tremendous wall of noise. The chances for a new person to break through come only come in brief, incremental bursts.
The most important thing that Posen has going for him is his talent. I didn't like his first big show, in February 2002, which was filled with self-conscious effects and too many coats ending in points. And, frankly, it gave me the creeps when he came swanning out at the end in white tie. (I didn't know then that Posen had once gone to school with antlers attached to his pants, or about the Chaplin rig. Compared to that, what's a tailcoat?) ''It was a swashbuckling student show,'' said André Leon Talley, Vogue's editor at large. ''It was disjointed and messy.''
But, as Talley points out, that show not only anticipated the craze among young women for flirty dresses with a slight attic quality, but it also demonstrated, even in its messiness, that Posen is driven hardest by technique. This has become more and more evident with each show, especially his current spring collection, with its sensuous draping and fine use of insets. And isn't technique back in fashion?
That show was praised for its simplicity, but as his friend Schnabel told me: ''It wasn't about simplifying. It was about making these pieces useful and having some kind of function.
It's a step that every artist has to make.''
Posen is far from being a household name or a commercial success. His mother, Susan Posen, a former lawyer who helps her son manage his business in a TriBeCa loft, said that sales have doubled in the last year. But when you consider that a year ago he sold 900 garments, this is relatively small potatoes. Still, when you add everything up -- his talent, his self-promotional skills, his determination to succeed -- it begins to look like a bushel.
Cathy Horyn is the fashion critic for The New York Times.
