The power of the brand has been so thoroughly examined in recent years that it is pretty much taken for granted: brands have meaning, brands inspire trust and (crucially) brands command a premium from consumers. Millions of dollars in marketing have chased this idea. How, then, to explain Ol' Roy?
Ol' Roy Dog Food is a ''private label'' product -- what used to be called a ''generic.'' It's a dry dog food made especially for Wal-Mart, which is the only place you can buy it, and its attributes have been extolled in not a single clever TV commercial. Ol' Roy also happens to be the top-selling dog food in America by an annual margin of at least 20 percent, according to Wal-Mart. (Presumably, the closest competitor is Pedigree Dry Food for Dogs, the top name brand by volume with almost 214,000 tons last year, according to Information Resources, a market research company. Wal-Mart does not share its data with such firms.) The story of Ol' Roy, then, is this: in the age of massive and complicated ''brand building'' efforts, a nonbrand is quietly thriving.
When Ol' Roy first appeared in 1981, the idea of the store brand still called to mind plain white packaging with black letters (DOG FOOD) and low quality. Mr. Sam, as Wal-Mart officials still somewhat creepily call the retail giant's deceased founder, Sam Walton, apparently believed that the dry-dog-food market had an empty space at the ''opening price point'' -- that is, the cheap end of the scale. So he asked the Doane Pet Care Company to create a dog food to fill it. The idea was to make something of equal quality to the brand names, but with no marketing costs, and thus to undersell the competition. Roy was the name of Mr. Sam's English setter.
It was, of course, a long road to Ol' Roy's move to the head of the dry-dog-food pack. One key factor, obviously, is that during those 20-some years Wal-Mart became a monstrous force in retailing, with more than 3,000 outlets in the United States and net sales of $245 billion, making it the highest-revenue company in the world. It is now the nation's top seller of groceries, toys and jewelry, among other things. So being sold ''only'' at Wal-Mart is hardly a drawback.
The other factor is that store brands have gone from having a vaguely dodgy image -- what is in that can? -- to one of widespread acceptance. ACNielsen research shows that sales of private-label consumer packaged goods grew 38 percent between 1997 and 2002, compared with 19 percent growth in branded products. In other words, the nonbrands grew twice as fast. That's a pretty big threat to consumer-product companies, whose entire model is based on selling you a name you identify with and trust.
Why are consumers now willing to buy store brands? The two big reasons are that retailers made their store-brand products seem like branded ones, with better packaging and better products inside. Peter Belinski, editor of a trade publication called simply Private Label, says that retailers now push their store-brand suppliers to match the ''organoleptic attributes'' (taste, touch, smell) of the leading brand in a given category. Even so, savings on marketing and R.&amp;D. mean the knockoffs cost 15 percent to 25 percent less to produce and can thus be priced lower than the name brands.
Of course, just because Wal-Mart doesn't hype Ol' Roy in Super Bowl spots or hire packs of college-age hotties to talk up its dog food in chic bars doesn't mean it shuns marketing: the promotion strategy includes the underrated tactic of piling up huge mountains of bright red Ol' Roy bags in stores. The simple positioning of products in stores is not as sexy a marketing subject as, say, a carefully orchestrated ''buzz'' campaign, but it is extremely important -- and obviously gives retailers' house brands an advantage. Over time, it works. Wal-Mart says that its studies show that Ol' Roy now enjoys 65 percent ''unaided brand awareness,'' meaning that 65 percent of consumers asked to name brands of dog food will mention it with no prompting.
What has happened, then, is that in the shadow of our obsession with ''name'' products, private-label, supposedly no-name products have slowly gained both familiarity and acceptance. Ol' Roy has succeeded not by escaping the idea of the brand but by becoming one.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-22-04: CONSUMED
