Israel plans to begin dismantling a small section of its separation barrier on Sunday, the Defense Ministry said Saturday. The move to take down about five miles of fencing that has isolated a Palestinian town will take place a day before an international court hearing on the barrier is scheduled to begin in the Netherlands.
The Defense Ministry said plans had been in place for months to remove part of the fence around the town of Baka al-Sharkia, and the timing, on the eve of the highly publicized court case, was coincidental.
The town sits just inside the West Bank, and the Israeli barrier went up all around it, effectively creating an enclave for about 10,000 residents of Baka al-Sharkia and the neighboring village of Nazlat Issa. They can now only come and go through gates controlled by the Israeli military.
Israel will take down about five miles of fencing on the northern, eastern and southern sides of the two communities, allowing residents to travel more easily inside the West Bank, the Defense Ministry said.
However, a wall and fence to the west, which runs on or near the West Bank boundary, will remain in place, preventing the communities' residents from entering Israel.
''The fence on the eastern side of the town was only a temporary measure,'' until we could complete the barrier on the western side, said Rachel Niedak-Ashkenazi, a spokeswoman for the Defense Ministry. ''The Palestinians in Baka al-Sharkia will now be able to resume their normal daily routine.''
Still, the barrier on the western side of Baka al-Sharkia separates it from Baka al-Gharbiya, an Arab community that lies just inside Israel. Many people in the two communities are related, and residents were used to traveling back and forth for work, shopping and family visits.
Since Israel began construction of the barrier a year and a half ago, it has made several minor adjustments, saying it is seeking to ease the hardships imposed on the Palestinians. Israel has also sought to make it more palatable to the United States, which has criticized the barrier's route through the West Bank.
Meanwhile, Palestinians staged protests throughout the West Bank on Saturday as part of a series of demonstrations planned to coincide with the hearings at the International Court of Justice in The Hague.
The court is to hear several days of arguments that the barrier, much of it built on land Israel captured during the 1967 Middle East war, is illegal under international law.
Israel rejects the court's jurisdiction on what it says is a security issue and has refused to take part in oral arguments. However, Israel has submitted a long written argument stating its position that the barrier is intended to prevent Palestinian suicide bombings and other attacks.
The court's ruling is advisory and nonbinding. However, if the judges rule against Israel, the matter is likely to be raised again in the United Nations. Both Israel and the Palestinians are sending delegations to The Hague.
Israel says the barrier is being built to protect Jewish settlements on the West Bank, while the Palestinians say it effectively confiscates land they demand for a future Palestinian state.
Israel has built about a quarter of the barrier, which is expected to stretch for more than 400 miles. The United Nations has calculated the barrier would put about 15 percent of the West Bank on the Israeli side.
In violence on Saturday, Israeli forces in the Gaza Strip shot and killed a Palestinian man who approached the fence surrounding the territory, according to Israeli and Palestinian officials.
