Alex Rodriguez is the flashy quarterback with the glitzy résumé who has transferred from Terrible Tech to Steinbrenner University and is trying to fit in by being as mild-mannered as possible. Rodriguez is so elated to be on this team that he switched positions and is acting like the invisible man.
Rodriguez realizes there is a pecking order at Steinbrenner U. with Derek Jeter -- who was Rodriguez's close friend, then a foe and now just a cordial friend -- as the unequivocal Big Man on Campus. If the people who run Steinbrenner U. want Rodriguez to scoop up loose balls after practice, he will.
Before and after Rodriguez's nominal workout with the Yankees on Saturday, he continued uttering all the platitudes about being ''one of the guys'' and about how the Yankees are George Steinbrenner's team off the field and Jeter's team on it. No one can wear a ''C'' on the varsity jacket the way Jeter does, Rodriguez basically said, while noting how Jeter's fingers hold four World Series rings.
''He's the captain,'' Rodriguez said. ''I look forward to following in his footsteps and being a great team. I think we're going to be a great team for the next seven years.''
Maybe they will. Maybe Jeter will stay at shortstop, Rodriguez will make a smooth transition to third base and stay there and Steinbrenner U. will continue its tradition of winning. That would be a perfect script for the Yankees, clean and free of controversy.
But, more likely, the script will endure some twists as Rodriguez adjusts to his new surroundings and Jeter adjusts to having a player around who could someday take his position.
The Yankees have thrived with high-profile players with mammoth personalities, primarily because Manager Joe Torre has a soothing way of subduing the most combustible situations.
But the Rodriguez-Jeter relationship is different than anything Torre has encountered in his eight years as manager. It is a mammoth mixing of two young, competitive and accomplished players who are both used to doing things a certain way. Always comfortably separated by being in different dugouts, the two All-Stars and their egos are now separated by a mere 50 feet.
Although it is reasonable to wonder if Jeter's team will eventually become Rodriguez and Jeter's team or even Rodriguez's team, Rodriguez dismissed those possibilities. He declined to consider himself a challenge to the Big Man on Campus, facetiously speaking as if he can simply blend in at Steinbrenner U.
''If you think about it, it's real easy,'' Rodriguez said. ''If Derek was coming to Texas, obviously I would be the captain and I would help him out. It would be exactly the other way around.''
The Yankees want the transition to be easy, which is why they have emphasized that Jeter does not have to worry about losing his position. But the Yankees cannot control how Rodriguez is judged by his teammates, covered by reporters and perceived by fans. Jeter got to keep shortstop for himself, but Rodriguez will instantly inherit some clubhouse power.
Torre often saw Rodriguez lecture players while Rodriguez was with the Rangers, and lauded him as a player who gets involved with every aspect of the game. Rodriguez's behavior is one reason he clashed with Manager Buck Showalter, his manager with Texas and a controlling sort. Still, Torre figures Rodriguez will be the same kind of leader with the Yankees.
''He's used to having responsibility that's more than just taking his bats and going home,'' Torre said.
Steinbrenner ordered Jeter to fly from here to New York last Tuesday to attend Rodriguez's introductory news conference at Yankee Stadium. As Jeter witnessed Rodriguez receiving a lavish welcome before 300 people, he might have recalled how Steinbrenner refused to have a formal news conference when Jeter, a lifelong Yankee, signed a 10-year, $189 million contract in 2001.
Jeter usually takes Saturdays off during off-season workouts at the minor league facility, so he missed Rodriguez's first workout here. Steinbrenner would have loved to create an early photo opportunity of Rodriguez and Jeter, standing side by side on the $441 million left side of the infield. But that photo must wait until the Yankees begin official workouts on Tuesday.
''Again, one of the things that I'm focusing on is being one of the guys,'' Rodriguez said. ''That's the biggest release of pressure. That's the biggest anything.''
One of the biggest and best players to arrive on campus has set foot at Steinbrenner U. Rodriguez is smooth and savvy. No matter how hard he tries to act like some mild-mannered player, he is not. Life on an always chaotic campus is going to be fascinating this season, and beyond.
BASEBALL
