GROWING up in a slum in Soweto, South Africa, during the apartheid years, Bakithi Kumalo saw nothing in his future but music.
''I left school at 6 or 7 and didn't know how to write or how to read,'' he said. ''I didn't see school as something that can happen in my future.''
Both his mother, who raised him alone after his father abandoned them when he was a toddler, and his uncle were musicians, so the music came naturally, said Mr. Kumalo, whose future included performing as a bassist on Paul Simon's ''Graceland,'' and raising his family here in East Setauket.
As a child, he learned mbaqanga (a rhythm characteristic of Soweto), mbube (a cappella vocal music) and jive (electric, urban pop) on bass, drums and acoustic guitar.
He was 7 years old, selling oranges and newspapers on the street to help support the family and ''just playing music to have a good time'' when the bass player in his uncle's band got drunk and could not play, he said in an interview in his home here.
''I told my uncle I knew the songs and could play and he took a chance and let me,'' he said.
Mr. Kumalo began performing regularly with his uncle's band, and at 10 toured Zululand, where he stayed for 16 months and, he said, had a dream that defined his singular playing.
''In the dream I saw a bass being played by fingers, not just a thumb, the usual way,'' he said. ''So I taught myself to play that way, to play fast.''
Despite success performing and recording, frequently with white musicians, Mr. Kumalo was still not earning enough at music to support himself and his ailing mother. In 1985, at age 28, he considered taking a full-time job as a car mechanic.
But then Mr. Simon arrived in South Africa to assemble a band for ''Graceland.'' Mr. Kumalo won the job, and after some recording sessions in South Africa, came to the United States to complete the album and eventually tour with Mr. Simon.
''I was terrified to be in New York,'' he said. ''It was too big for me.''
Although he went back to South Africa, he continued to return to the United States to record and tour with Mr. Simon and other artists, among them Harry Belafonte, Cyndi Lauper, Laurie Anderson, Chaka Khan, Hugh Masekela, Gloria Estefan and Miriam Makeba.
He also had another reason to return -- to see Robbi Hall, a young woman who was working for Mr. Simon. She is now Mr. Kumalo's wife; they have two daughters, Mbali, 8, and Daliswa, 5.
''I saw him and liked this well-mannered man who didn't know much English,'' recalled Ms. Kumalo, a singer-pianist from Patchogue who has a degree in music from the State University of New York at Stony Brook. ''But he was always going back to South Africa.''
''It's too cold here,'' he interrupted.
''And in 1993,'' she continued, ''I told him that if he didn't stay this time, he'd never see me again.''
Their marriage produced a professional partnership as well. They have performed together at the 1998 Cape Town Jazz Festival and in libraries, schools, museums, and clubs.
''Sometimes at schools, the children ask me how I got to America,'' he said.
The answer will come in ''Set It Free: A Musical Journey from Apartheid to Freedom'' that will be offered at the Long Island Children's Museum in Garden City on Saturday and next Sunday.
With Ms. Kumalo as narrator and two musicians from Cape Town -- Anton Fig on drums and Morris Goldberg on saxophone -- Mr. Kumalo will use song, music and his personal story to tell of his coming of age in South Africa.
''I'm 57 now,'' Mr. Kumalo said, ''and I had no idea I could live this long in my life.''
''Set It Free'' will be offered at 1 and 3 p.m. Saturday and next Sunday at the Museum on Davis Avenue. (516) 224-5800.
MUSIC
