GAIA in Greenwich is such a special place, I could be happy dining there even if the food were merely ordinary, which it definitely is not.
The building's interior, designed in 1917 for a bank, is a work of art. The amber-golden tiled arches, pillars and ceilings are the work of Rafael Guastavino Jr., the son of a Catalan architect who used similar tiling at the Grand Central Oyster Bar in New York and the Main Hall at Ellis Island. The self-supporting arches on two dining levels make Gaia, for me, the most exhilarating dining room in the state.
To fully enjoy Gaia (pronounced GUY uh), request an upstairs table by the balcony to see the full sweep of tiled arches at both levels. At night, subtle, indirect lighting casts a magical aura over the entire restaurant.
As beautiful as Gaia is visually, it is also a gustatory treasure. The food, masterminded by Bjorn van der Horst, a former chef at Picholine in New York, is superb. Some familiar dishes reach new heights: sautéed Hudson Valley foie gras in espresso syrup (whose sweetness is tempered by sea salt), with almond brittle that melts on the tongue and an effervescence of almond foam.
A dish may sound familiar, but wait until the Gaia kitchen transforms it. I ordered stuffed organic chicken wings, wondering why this cliché was on a pricey menu in a stylish restaurant. The dish consisted of two deboned, large and meaty wings, filled with a mix of chopped Swiss chard greens, Parmesan cheese, garlic and herbs in a heavenly ''devil's sauce,'' (red wine vinegar and shallot reduction). Thus a clever kitchen showed how a snack food could morph into cuisine.
Sampling the New American menu with French accents on five separate occasions, I experienced nothing that fell below the level of excellent. Beginning the meals with a basketful of four different types of bread (all delicious) and a halibut amuse-bouche that tickled the taste buds, and ending them with petit fours and an assortment of loose tea properly brewed and steeped, was an unmitigated delight.
The plate presentations reflect the menu itself: casually elegant, arranged on handsome Portuguese pottery. A starter like crispy breaded oysters is typical: three large oysters, lightly breaded, crisp-edged, served in a succulent creamy leek purée with a garnish of American caviar. Another example that combines plain and fancy successfully: macaroni dressed up with truffles and Gruyere cheese, cooked in a jar.
Jar cooking is a Gaia specialty. Several starters, entrees and desserts are cooked in clear mason-type glass jars, on the theory that sealed jars enclose all the flavors during the cooking process. The results were delicious in each and every case, yet I am not convinced that braised short ribs (sealed with carrots, orange confit and red wine sauce and spooned over a turnip puree), duck leg confit (sealed, then released on a bed of mesclun) or pork belly and lentils (braised with Sauternes and honey) wouldn't have been just as succulent prepared the usual -- less gimmicky -- way, sans jars.
Some of my favorite dishes at Gaia were not prepared in jars. The exquisitely delicate potato gnocchi, combined with jamon Serrano, clams and romaine leaves, was terrific. Pan-seared sea scallops (with a mahogany burnish, each topped with American caviar) came in a cauliflower veloute with pools of watercress puree. Hudson Valley mallard duck breast (tender, rare duck slices embellished with slivers of Bartlett pear, over port wine sauce with salsify) was perfection.
Desserts, some cooked in a jar, some not, were all noteworthy. My favorites were apple confit with a Farmhouse Cheddar crisp crust (fabulous), almond brown buttercake (in an orange gelée with ginger ice cream) and a soft chocolate cake.
The well-selected, eclectic wine list travels the globe, with emphasis on French and American wines, priced from $20 up.
Gaia does indeed rule its terrain. Lunch or dinner is an experience not to be missed. I could easily become a regular - if it were nearer home.
Gaia  253 Greenwich Ave., Greenwich  (203)661-3443  Excellent
ATMOSPHERE -- Perfect for a romantic tête-à-tête, or a quiet business lunch or dinner.
NOISE LEVEL -- Lively.
SERVICE -- Attentive and well-trained.
RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Hudson Valley foie gras, stuffed organic chicken wings, duck leg confit, grilled jumbo prawn, crispy breaded oysters, macaroni with truffles, pan-seared sea scallops, potato gnocchi, mallard duck breast, pappardelle with rabbit, Niman Ranch rack of lamb, all desserts.
PRICE RANGE -- Lunch: appetizers $6 to $13; entrees $8 to $28. Dinner: appetizers $8 to $15; entrees $15 to $38; desserts $8; Sunday brunch: prix fixe $15.95.
CREDIT CARDS -- Most major cards accepted.
HOURS -- Lunch: 11 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday; Dinner: 6 p.m.-10 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, 6 p.m.-11 p.m. Friday and Saturday; Brunch 11 a.m.-3:30 p.m. Sunday.
RESERVATIONS -- Accepted.
WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- Street-level entrance.
REVIEWED BY THE TIMES -- Feb. 22, 2004.
RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING
