In life, Inna Kuperman is a 23-year-old graduate student with a soft voice and an aptitude for behavioral neuroscience. But in a poster-size photograph gazing out over Mulberry Street, she is immortalized as a pouting teenager, ''Miss New York City,'' the Lolita of NoLIta.
In a neighborhood that changes at the speed of chic, Ms. Kuperman's photograph and the accompanying caption have endured, becoming a billboard for all things beautiful and bizarre. The simple picture of a 15-year-old has spawned a small cult revolving around Miss New York City.
The tale of Ms. Kuperman's photo begins one September day eight years ago, when she ducked into a clothing shop to look around. The shop's owner, Makau Nzomo, said he was struck by the girl, and saw in her an avatar of New York's beauty. Ms. Kuperman's first impression was more muted.
''He didn't seem like he was a bad person,'' she said.
After getting permission from Ms. Kuperman's mother, Mr. Nzomo threw together a studio in his store and selected a tank top for Ms. Kuperman to wear. He snapped a few shots and hung one in his window, adding the caption ''Miss New York City.''
In the picture, Ms. Kuperman stares at the viewer with droopy eyes, pouting, her blond hair streaming down her arched back. The picture exposes nothing, but implies plenty. It stops people in their tracks.
''I like the Mona Lisa kind of look,'' Mr. Nzomo said. ''It's not like the run-of-the-mill beautiful. It has many questions about it.''
Over the years, the picture has become as iconic as a Byzantine painting and as anachronistic as a pair of stone-washed jeans. People in the neighborhood have gotten used to the picture, but many still halt when they glimpse it. Some stare, some ask questions and others snigger at her Glamour Shot gaze and round face.
''The worst volatile reactions we get is from thin women,'' Mr. Nzomo said. ''They hate it. They say she's ugly. They think she's fat. They say, 'Why is she Miss New York City?'''
Miss New York City, like any good business venture or virus, has spread. Mr. Nzomo has photographed other come-hither Miss New York Cities over the years and pasted them on a Web site. He has spun off T-shirts and occasionally sends out cryptic e-mail messages featuring poems and a signature line, ''Thank you Miss New York City.''
''Anyone can be Miss New York City,'' Mr. Nzomo said. ''You can be a prostitute. You can be pregnant. It doesn't matter. I think Miss New York City is much bigger than Miss America.''
Ms. Kuperman has moved on to the State University at Buffalo, but her photograph remains the glowing seed at the center of this enterprise. Mr. Nzomo has the lease on the ground-floor space that houses the clothing shop, and he will not allow any of the other businesses that occupy the space to mask or remove the picture.
It still entrances people, he explained.
PATRICK HEALY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NOLITA
