TESTED: 2004 Buick Rainier CXL Plus
HOW MUCH? Base CXL 2WD 6, $36,045. Top-line CXL Plus AWD 6, $39,045. $43,100 as tested, with V-8 and all-wheel drive.
WHAT MOVES IT? Rear- or all-wheel drive; 4.2-liter in-line 6 (275 horsepower) or 5.3-liter V-8 (290 horsepower); four-speed automatic transmission.
HOW THIRSTY? E.P.A. ratings range from 16 city, 21 highway (two-wheel-drive 6 cylinder) to 15/18 (all-wheel-drive V-8). Test-car average was about 16 m.p.g.
SAFETY: Antilock brakes; dual-stage front air bags, optional front-seat side bags.
ALTERNATIVES: GMC Envoy, base prices $29,000 to $36,000; Dodge Durango, $26,000 to $35,000; Jeep Grand Cherokee, $28,000 to $40,000; Mercury Mountaineer, $30,000 to $39,000.
YOU know the market has changed when Buick, which has almost exclusively made passenger cars since 1903, starts selling trucks. For the Rainier, Buick's first truck-based sport utility -- if you don't count the Rendezvous, a glorified minivan -- engineers dug into the General Motors parts bin and came up with the bits and pieces used on the many versions of the Chevrolet TrailBlazer, GMC Envoy, Oldsmobile Bravada and Isuzu Ascender.
The Rainier sets itself apart with Buick's distinctive oval grille and the exclusive right, among these G.M. utilities with two rows of seats, to a 5.3-liter V-8 engine. (The V-8 is offered in the other G.M. models only on longer versions that usually have three rows and seat seven.)
The Rainier, which comes only in the shorter, five-passenger configuration, effectively replaces the Bravada, which is being phased out along with other Oldsmobiles. In positioning the Rainier as a premium version of its ubiquitous S.U.V.'s, G.M. is emphasizing traditional Buick qualities like smoothness, quietness and luxury appointments.
Several changes make the Rainier quieter and smoother riding. Thicker laminated glass in the windshield and side windows help suppress noise, and a lot of sound-deadening material is stuffed into the body. I have driven the TrailBlazer and Envoy extensively, and the Rainier was noticeably quieter, especially on smooth expressways.
The Rainier's ride is tuned to be more pleasant than that of its cousins. But while it is also firmer than one might expect of a Buick, it is very smooth on good roads.
The Rainier's biggest advantage is the V-8. Although rated only 15 horsepower higher than the in-line 6, it feels like more. The response, especially at part throttle, is significantly better, as is the torque available for climbing grades on the highway. With the six, the four-speed automatic transmission often shifts in and out of overdrive, and the vehicle feels as if it is laboring. Not so with the V-8, and the transmission feels better matched to the engine.
You pay a price for the bigger engine in fuel economy -- in my experience, a penalty of about 4 m.p.g.
One might expect a vehicle at this price to have side air bags for the front seats as standard equipment, but they are a $350 option. Two other features often found on luxury S.U.V.'s, window curtain air bags that inflate from the roof and an electronic stability control to prevent skids, are not offered at all.
Inside the nicely trimmed cabin, the look is definitely Buick. The instrument panel is well designed and the gauges have attractive gray faces with green needles. The leather-trimmed seats are comfortable, with plenty of adjustments, and the seat heaters are powerful.
Buick is likely to have exclusive use of the V-8, short-wheelbase configuration only for 2004. Still, until the roads become even more crowded with G.M. clones, including a Saab S.U.V. due next year-- call it a Swedish utility vehicle -- the Rainier stands out for its smoothness, quietness and refinement, not to mention its higher pricetag.
BOB KNOLL
AROUND THE BLOCK
