To the Editor:
It would have been interesting to learn, from even one of the critics of the Joyce Theater's Altogether Different program quoted by Gia Kourlas [''When Altogether Different Becomes Same Old,'' Feb. 15], what companies they think should have been invited to be part of this year's program. Instead, what we get from Maria Hassabi is sour grapes. And what we get from Keely Garfield is a classic example of biting the hand that fed you: she was chosen to participate, she was unable to convert that exposure into additional bookings, and she blames the Joyce, not herself, for that failure. ''There really should be a commitment on the part of presenters to nurture artists,'' Ms. Garfield says -- as if presenting companies not ready to present themselves were not, in itself, a commitment to nurturing.
How long do you hold an artist's hand? The Joyce must confront that dilemma every time it assembles another Altogether Different program. If the theater errs on the side of caution, it is castigated for a lack of imagination; if it picks relatively untested artists, they may well fail to exploit the opportunity they have been given, and the nurturing comes to naught.
Damning the Joyce with the faintest of praise, Guy Yarden declares that New York's premier venue for smaller dance companies is ''a very middle-of-the-road presenting institution.'' I would say that the Joyce is every bit as daring as a fiscally responsible institution can afford to be, at a time when even well-known companies have trouble selling out the theater.
At best, Altogether Different can showcase only half a dozen companies each year, so scores of choreographers are left out of the festival for every one that is included. This cruel arithmetic is bound to lead to carping, and Ms. Kourlas has found her share of dissenters. But it has also jump-started the careers of any number of important artists. It would have been nice to hear from some of them.
EDWIN BAYRD  Los Angeles
The writer is an associate editor of Dance Chronicle.
ALTOGETHER DIFFERENT
