Kenny Leon  Director  ''A Raisin in the Sun''
KENNY LEON, who will make his Broadway debut this spring directing a revival of ''A Raisin in the Sun'' starring Sean Combs (better known as P. Diddy), is hoping to attract new theatergoers. ''I want audiences who buy Sean's albums to come into the theater,'' Mr. Leon said. ''There aren't enough hip-hop people on Broadway.''
There are plenty of parallels between Mr. Leon's childhood and the story of the family in Lorraine Hansberry's play, which also stars Audra McDonald and Phylicia Rashad and opens at the Royale Theater on April 26.
Mr. Leon's family, like the Youngers in the 1959 play, struggled to stay out of poverty: his grandmother worked as a domestic for white families, his mother washed sheets for the Softwater Lingerie company and his stepfather was a street laborer for the City of St. Petersburg, Fla.
Mr. Leon was in the first class to integrate the local public high school, and was faced with hostility and rioting. In the play, the Younger family decides to buy a house in an all-white neighborhood, and the local ''improvement association'' offers them cash to reconsider.
Yet when he first read ''A Raisin in the Sun'' at about 13 as part of Upward Bound, an after-school and summer program for poor children, Mr. Leon saw none of these connections. He only knew that the black people in the play ''sounded like me'' -- certainly more than Othello did. He loved the 1961 movie starring members of the play's cast -- Sidney Poitier, Claudia McNeil and Ruby Dee -- but it took another two decades for him to feel the full strength of the play, when he was asked to direct it for the first time.
This production of ''Raisin'' will be the fourth one in which he has been involved -- he previously acted in one and directed two. ''I never do a play that many times,'' Mr. Leon, 48, said in an interview at a Midtown rehearsal studio. But, he said, ''I want to do a show that will make a difference in people's lives, the way my life has been affected.''
Mr. Leon had been turned on to theater, and the possibilities of making it a career, when he became part of a black college theater community in Atlanta that included Spike Lee and Samuel L. Jackson. He worked for nine years at the Atlanta Academy of Music and Theater, mostly acting but also conducting improvisational workshops in schools, in prisons and among the homeless. In 1990, he was hired as the first African-American artistic director of the Alliance Theater Company, ''a traditionally white institution,'' he said.
Two years ago, having left Alliance, he founded the True Colors Theater Company, which will present all its productions in New York, Washington and Atlanta. ''Its purpose is diversity,'' he said, ''but at the center of it is reviving what I call the Negro-American classics.''
JONATHAN MANDELL
SPRING THEATER  Correction:  February 22, 2004, Sunday  An article on Page 12 of Arts &amp; Leisure today about Kenny Leon, director of the coming Broadway revival of ''A Raisin in the Sun,'' misstates the name of the company for which his mother worked in Florida. It was the Softwater Laundry company, not Softwater Lingerie.
