Since we are going back to fashion, it's not absurd to wonder what's out of fashion -- the laws of cultural physics state that what's in is defined by and dependent on what's out. One fashion legend who's on the far side of chic these days is the late Romain de Tirtoff, whose initials, if you pronounce them with Parisian flair, are air-TAY, written ''Erté.'' His influence on fashion in the 20th century cannot be underestimated, even though few of his visions were ever spun into cloth. He had no ''house'' from which to work or issue fiats on the fate of hemlines. But his cover illustrations for Harper's Bazaar from 1915 to 1937 put a new spin on glamour and turned women from hausfraus into femmes fatales with the stroke of a pen. Erté was more than a fashion illustrator, in fact; he was an artist and designer as well. A man of many hats, he is often considered the father of Art Deco.
Born in 1892 in St. Petersburg, Erté was descended from a long line of admirals in the Imperial Russian Navy. After he designed his first evening dress for his mother at age 5, it was clear his future would not unfold on the open seas. He lived in the days when the racetrack was the important showcase for fashion, and for 19 years he soaked up the lively cultural scene in St. Pete: opera, ballet, theater. In his autobiography, Erté talks of seeing Nijinsky perform at the opulent Mariinsky Theater, where the legendary dancer appeared jockstrapless in front of the Empress Mother, who was neither amused nor titillated. The following day, Nijinsky was dismissed from the Imperial Ballet. Erté left soon after, for Paris and the atelier of Paul Poiret.
In Paris, Erté found his muse: the city itself, along with its flamboyant social scene. He designed clothes for the exotic dancer and spy Mata Hari, who was later arrested on dubious charges of working as a double agent in World War I and executed by the French in 1917. Another dancer, Ida Rubinstein, was Erté's avowed muse; she was also the woman for whom Maurice Ravel wrote ''Bolero.'' Erté enlivened the Folies-Bergère with his fanciful costume designs, each painted with exquisite precision.
The turning point in Erté's career came with his first assignment to illustrate a cover for Harper's Bazaar, beginning a relationship that would last more than 20 years. His drawing style was meticulous, detailed, classically balanced, geometrically beautiful. Because the Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs et Industriels Modernes was held in Paris in 1925, Erté's fanciful creations fit in seamlessly with the new trend, to be known as Art Deco. Partly derived from Cubism, Deco also influenced textiles, furnishings, graphic arts and architecture in its heyday, and was revived again in the 1960's.
For those of us then in early adulthood, Erté and the Art Nouveau master Alphonse Mucha were literally the poster boys of our generation: everybody had an Erté on the wall. Or tea towels, ashtrays, knicks and knacks inspired by Deco.
Bauhaus, the movement that married science and technology to architecture and design, flourished simultaneously, but the baby boomers were saving that for coffee grinders, toasters and first apartments. Bauhaus's simple severity suited someone holding down a first job or trying to cultivate a semblance of adulthood. Erté and Deco were dreamy and romantic, conjuring the sleek, sylphlike creatures we would never be.
If Erté's not hot, it's in part because his unvarying stylishness is part of our collective past, like circle pins and Capezio shoes. You really never can go home again without cringing at the furniture and all the lame stuff stashed in the attic.
Erté did do a few clothing collections in the early 1900's: Henri Bendel gave him an order for 35 dresses and coats, and for a few years he designed dress and coat collections two times a year for the department store B. Altman. But he made his name at Bazaar drawing fashion and interior design.
Throughout his life, when he wasn't partying with minor European royalty or conducting discreet liaisons with unnamed boy toys, Erté designed lighting fixtures, tables, shutters, mirrors, cushions, floral arrangements, hats, jewelry, bags, shoes, gloves, parasols, fans, muffs and headdresses.
He wrote about the evolution of 20th-century fashion for the 1929 edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Somewhere in between all this activity -- Erté was productive almost till the day he died at 97 in 1990 -- he managed to eat, drink and be merry in Monte Carlo, Majorca, Barbados, Hollywood and Paris, where Elsa Schiaparelli once painted butterflies on the windows and mirrors of his apartment.
By 1967 he met up with two people who would be instrumental in keeping his career alive and well: Salome and Eric Estorick, the owners of the Grosvenor Gallery in London and New York. Exhibitions at both galleries introduced Erté to a new generation of enthusiasts and collectors: the actress Susannah York bought a series of set and costume designs that Erté had done during his brief stint in Hollywood; Barbra Streisand was an avid collector, as were several A-level tennis stars and a few lords and ladies of the British realm. The Estoricks, meanwhile, became his family; Erté vacationed with them and eventually conducted all his business through them.
Another person who met the Estoricks around this time was a Brooklyn-born deli owner named Mark Schachner. Schachner has owned the Mill Basin Delicatessen and Restaurant since 1973, when he was 21 and not wet behind the ears when it came to pastrami. His dad once owned a deli on Coney Island Avenue; his uncles Sam and Ben owned delis, too. Schachner started manning the meat slicer when he was 6; at 7 he served his first customer; at 21 he married his high school sweetheart, bought the Mill Basin deli and noticed quickly that there was nothing to look at on the walls while he sliced the corned beef.
He bought his first Erté in 1975 and put it on the wall. ''Why should art be confined to the home space?'' he asked no one in particular. A few years later, Schachner met Eric Estorick, then Erté's agent, unaware that he was about to take off his apron and rub shoulders with an aristocratic Russian expat who would fill his life with Technicolor.
Estorick turned out to be a landsman, born on Ocean Parkway, even though he moved in more rarefied social circles. He took Schachner under his wing and introduced him to the seemingly elegant, dog-eat-dog world of art collecting. As the historian and art critic Robert Hughes has so often said, the ethical level of the art world is no higher than that of the fashion industry.
But Schachner kept his eye on the glittering prizes. If every picture tells a story, then his growing collection of Erté lithographs, serigraphs, books and objets d'art told a tale of obsession and an itch for trade, whether as a purveyor of fine kosher fare or Erté's stunning gouaches and gold-embossed lithographs. Schachner eventually amassed a collection of Erté-abilia that rivals that of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Museum of Modern Art and the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.
He regularly puts several Ertés on the deli walls; sometimes a Lichtenstein and the occasional Chagall, but Erté is truly the star of the Mill Basin. For not only did Erté design the Mill Basin's awning and menus, but he also celebrated his 93rd, 94th and 95th birthdays there. When he was first offered some chopped liver on a bread wedge, Erté looked puzzled until someone pointed out to him that it was liver pâté and très delicieux. I'm told that Erté wolfed it down with great gusto.
Schachner not only makes the best chopped liver in the boroughs, but is also the force behind www.erte.com and several other Web sites dedicated to the proposition that Erté is a hot commodity, if not in the fashion world, then in other domains, like cruise ships and themed hotels in Las Vegas. Schachner's warehouse holds vast collections of serigraphs, statues, vases, posters, books and CD-ROM's of Erté's graphics. The warehouse is a steel-reinforced concrete bunker on the subterranean level of an undisclosed site in Brooklyn. I'd tell you where it is, but then I'd have to kill you. Schachner is putting together Erté's greatest hits for the International Artexpo of New York at the Jacob Javits Center next weekend, and that's a good place to slake your curiosity and maybe drop a bill or two. The detail and colorations are so much more vivid in real life than any reproduction has a right to promise.
''All I know,'' says Schachner, ''is when people come in for a sandwich and they look at the Ertés on the walls, they get such pleasure from them.''
And, hey, the tongue sandwich is a knockout, too.
S.S. Fair writes frequently about music and fashion.
