From under a set of sleepy eyelids, a trait that runs through all three quarterbacks sharing his family name, Eli Manning surveyed his future at the N.F.L. combine this weekend, his laconic look altered not one bit by the pressure that comes with being the likely No. 1 pick in the coming draft.
The slow, Southern drawl and smile that seems to sneak out one side of his mouth have not quickened. Manning watched his higher-strung brother Peyton go through this same process six years ago and has taken advice from quarterback dad Archie all his life.
Asked to compare himself to his fabulously successful brother, Eli calmly offered, ''Well, I think I'm better looking than Peyton.''
Manning's calm may be innate, but it is also befitting his position. Whatever spotlight focuses on him, it pales in comparison with the heat on the teams deciding whether to choose a quarterback high in this draft, set for April 24-25.
It is the most fraught decision for a franchise. Picking a quarterback high is huge a commitment of money, time, energy and perhaps the most valuable commodity, hope. What do the Chargers do, holding the No. 1 pick and a wavering confidence in their still-young quarterback Drew Brees? What about the Giants at No. 4, who have good years left in their incumbent, Kerry Collins? Do the Raiders stand pat and watch Rich Gannon age seemingly by the minute?
Or do they close their eyes and leap? Do they go conservative and trade down for more picks and more help across the board? Do the Giants take the safe step and pick Iowa's giant offensive tackle Robert Gallery, who plays a position with high upside and little danger?
Whatever they do, team executives know one thing. ''You'd better be right,'' Giants General Manager Ernie Accorsi said.
Right and wrong can mean the difference between rising to the top (see: Peyton Manning, Colts, 1998) and plummeting to the bottom (see: Ryan Leaf, Chargers, 1998).
The quarterbacks at the top of this draft, Ole Miss's Manning and Miami of Ohio's Ben Roethlisberger, are followed by perhaps two others who will also be first-round picks: Philip Rivers of North Carolina State and J. P. Losman of Tulane. Roethlisberger offers a tempting combination of size (6 feet 5 inches, 240 pounds) and mobility, but Manning is considered the can't-miss player, the one even Roethlisberger says, ''He's got everything, including the name.''
But the team that picks Manning must realize it is not getting Peyton. The two share a lot of qualities, but Eli does not approach his brother's almost obsessive study habits.
''I could tell you every quarterback in the Southeastern Conference for the last 20 years,'' Peyton said last season. ''We had to teach Eli the 12 teams in the S.E.C. before he went to Ole Miss.''
Still, it seems unfathomable that the Chargers would let Manning slip past No. 1, even considering their tortured history of picking quarterbacks. In 1998, when the world lined up to debate whether Manning or Leaf should be the No. 1 pick, the Colts picked Manning first and left San Diego to pick Leaf, who was an unmitigated disaster, going 4-14 as a starter and who was out of football by 2002.
The Chargers also traded the No. 1 pick that would have netted them Michael Vick in 2001. The Chargers' current general manager, A. J. Smith, hired since then, swore the team was not reluctant to take a quarterback because of Leaf. In fact, the Chargers picked Brees later in that 2001 draft.
''I talked to ownership about that before I became general manager,'' he said. ''We talked about that, long-range, and it's absolutely not a factor. If we feel a quarterback should be the first pick, that's a decision we will make.''
The Chargers' decision is made easier by their waning trust in Brees. They have announced they are shopping for an upgrade and did not hide their pursuit of Jacksonville's Mark Brunell, who has since been traded to the Redskins.
The Giants, though, are in a much tougher spot. They like their quarterback. Collins is only 31 and is negotiating for an extension of his contract, which expires after the 2004 season.
''You don't want to be out to create something,'' Accorsi said. ''Kerry's still young. He's had a number of good years, taken us to the Super Bowl, but, by the same token, it doesn't mean you ignore the possibility of a pick of the future because ultimately, you have to constantly be aware of the perpetuity of the franchise.''
Accorsi is also of the school that believes you never let a potential Unitas slip by, no matter what your current situation. It is extremely unlikely Manning would be available for the Giants at No. 4, but Roethlisberger could be. Accorsi said a team should always be developing a young quarterback, and with the Giants apparently giving up on Jesse Palmer as their project, that role is vacant.
The other potential prospect is Drew Henson, who dumped his Yankees career in favor of football. Houston, which owns his rights, is trying to trade him because the Texans have a young quarterback they adore, David Carr. The Giants were one of 19 teams to show up for Henson's workout in Houston last week.
But Houston wants some high draft picks for Henson and he is reportedly seeking a contract befitting a high first-round pick, even though Henson has been out of football for three years since leaving the University of Michigan.
''With quarterbacks, there aren't that many around,'' Accorsi said. ''If you have an opportunity to pick a great one, you do. The problem is 'Is the guy going to be a great one?' because we all know there have been so many of them who were picked high and did not make it.
''When you pick a QB that high you are going to pay a heavy price if he fails because you're committed to him for five years.''
So teams go to great lengths to evaluate what's behind the sleepy look of a Manning or the aw-shucks enthusiasm of a Roethlisberger. Many teams hire Jonathan Niednagel, a researcher who characterizes players by personality type. Known as the Brain Doctor, he most famously told the Chargers that Leaf had the worst personality type possible for a quarterback and they should not draft him. Niednagel predicted Leaf would fold under pressure.
More teams use intelligence tests, in-depth interviews and pore endlessly over films. It is an inexact science, but perhaps the most important one in the N.F.L. The winning quarterback of two of the last three Super Bowls, Tom Brady, has a league full of general managers puzzling over how they overlooked him. He was a sixth-round pick.
''It's a mystifying thing,'' Accorsi said. ''I don't know why.''
So, heading into another draft fraught with potential pitfalls, none of the league's decision-makers would dare to be the ones looking sleepy.
PRO FOOTBALL
