With Friends Like These
WHY have the Democratic presidential candidates been so reluctant to attack one another? Maybe because they have been too busy watching their backs. Treachery has always been part of politics, but this seems destined to be remembered as the Year of the Rat.
It was shocking enough when Gerald W. McEntee, the president of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, publicly withdrew his endorsement of Howard Dean while the candidate was still planning a last stand in Wisconsin. Then, after Dr. Dean lost Wisconsin and gracefully left the race on Wednesday, Mr. McEntee sent his version of condolences the next day. In lieu of flowers, he offered a public testimonial to Dr. Dean: ''I think he's nuts.''
Of course, Mr. McEntee was not the first. That distinction may belong to Chris Lehane, who after advising John Kerry last year went on to attack him while working for Gen. Wesley K. Clark. But at least he was advancing the cause of his current candidate. Steven Grossman was still chairman of the Dean campaign on Sunday, just before the Wisconsin primary, when he announced he would be switching his support to Mr. Kerry if Dr. Dean lost Tuesday.
Aides to Mr. Clark helped nudge their candidate out of the race more subtly by leaking a tip that the campaign would be folding. You could think of this as a modern version of the old vaudeville approach to failing acts, with the leaks serving as the equivalent of the hook dragging the performers off stage. Or you could use a Vietnam metaphor, as John J. Pitney Jr. does in his book ''The Art of Political Warfare.''
''Whereas soldiers in Vietnam did their 'fragging' with hand grenades, bureaucrats and political aides can do it with leaks to the press,'' writes Dr. Pitney, a professor of government at Claremont McKenna College in California. After watching this year's aides in action, he has come up with a new term for the trend: pre-emptive surrender.
''It's a bizarro version of the Bush doctrine of pre-emption,'' Dr. Pitney said. ''Waging political warfare is hard when the troops behind you are waving white flags. It's as if you're General Grant at Shiloh and you notice that your chief lieutenants are practicing their Southern accents.''
Candidate, Heal Thyself
IN general, the presidential candidates favor safe and healthy working conditions for Americans. Just not for themselves and their staffs.
No one this year looks quite as haggard as Bill Clinton did in 1992, when he gained 20 pounds and was constantly battling colds and allergies, but they have had their travails. Mr. Kerry said the campaign felt like one long exam week in college because of all the cold pizza, junk food and all-nighters. John Edwards got bronchitis and lost his voice. Dr. Dean lost his voice, too, and not simply because of that scream.
On Monday evening, as Dr. Dean was standing in the Orpheum Theater in Madison, Wis., after addressing the last rally before the primary, he was asked for his professional medical assessment of the hazards of political campaigning.
''Atrocious eating habits,'' he said, ''which have put 12 pounds on me in two years.'' This would not come as a surprise to anyone who traveled on his Gulfstream jet, perpetually equipped with bowls of peanut M&amp;M's and trays of brownies and cookies.
''The lack of sleep generally doesn't have that much of an effect on me,'' he said. ''I encourage people on my staff to take time off, but that's not easy to do on a campaign. We could run a reasonable schedule, but I don't.''
But doesn't the doctor in you want to encourage healthy behavior?
''Yeah, but the workaholic in me wants to drive through until I win.''
If the campaign ends tomorrow, would it at least be good for your health?
''It's not going to end,'' he said, and he almost seemed to believe it.
An Arms Race Of Oratory
IT was being billed as the most important speech of John Edwards's life, a chance to celebrate his surprisingly strong second-place finish in Wisconsin and reach those across America who would be voting Super Tuesday. But after uttering 10 sentences Tuesday night, he was suddenly abandoned by the cable networks, who switched to cover the start of John Kerry's victory speech.
Did Mr. Kerry deliberately silence his silver-tongued rival? ''We cannot claim that kind of genius,'' said David Wade, Mr. Kerry's spokesman, who blamed election-night confusion. But however it happened, it set a tempting precedent for future election nights. To deprive your rival of free national television exposure, just wait for him to go first and then upstage him. In crowded races, you could end up with an arms race mentality leading to five candidates speaking at once, a loss for voters, viewers and networks eager for live drama.
No one can force the candidates to stagger their speeches, but there might be a way to restore some order. Suppose one (or two or three) of the networks announced before Super Tuesday that it would not reward upstagers. Once a candidate began speaking, it would stick with him for, say, five minutes (or until he became boring). If someone else came on in that time, his speech would be taped and shown afterwards.
The proposal was not an immediate hit with the networks. ''Obviously we'd like to avoid making a choice between Kerry and Edwards,'' said Tom Hannon, the political director of CNN. ''But I'm not sure we're ready to set up ground rules for the candidates.''
Tammy Haddad, the executive producer of ''Hardball'' on NBC, did not dismiss the idea out of hand but warned it could be stifling. ''Part of the reason people watch election-night coverage is the messiness,'' she said.
Mr. Wade, the Kerry spokesman, diplomatically called it ''an interesting idea.'' The most enthusiasm came from Jennifer Palmieri, Mr. Edwards's spokeswoman.
''That sounds like a very fair way to do it,'' she said, looking ahead to Super Tuesday. ''I would never start with the assumption that the Kerry campaign would be snarky next time, but it would be nice to have a policy so that there's no incentive for anyone to game the system.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
