EMILY GELDWERT is a junior at Mamaroneck High School. She's almost 17, bright, pretty, and as it happens, an excellent soccer player. She plays for one of the area's premier club teams, the Eastchester Patriots, and takes part in the Olympic Development Program, and has the kind of talent that allows her name to be mentioned near the words ''college scholarship'' without the words ''wishful thinking.''
She is also at the heart of a court case that has the world of girls' soccer, an activity that lies very near the central nervous systems of thousands of girls in this vicinity, in a state of discombobulation.
Large numbers of girls are elated by a lawsuit Emily has filed, but many others are distressed. They are wondering if, under the banner of equality between the sexes, Emily hasn't improved the condition of some girls by diminishing the opportunities of others.
Two years ago, Emily, already a member of the Patriots, made the varsity soccer team at Mamaroneck High School. Almost immediately, she found that playing on both teams placed huge demands on her time. The varsity had a practice or a game every day after school, and the club team had three practice times a week and a game on Sunday. She was playing soccer seven days a week, and on at least some of those days, was playing four hours a day after school. The schedule not only consumed time, it also produced tension.
''Both coaches thought that their teams held precedence over the other,'' Emily said in an interview in her home here. ''There were scheduling conflicts, so sometimes I had to make decisions about going to one team's practice and missing the other. It was exhausting. Instead of playing better, I was playing worse.''
When weather or field conditions forced either team to make the kind of last-minute scheduling changes that are common to any school program, catastrophe resulted. Janice Geldwert, Emily's mother, recalled a day when a last-minute field adjustment torpedoed the family's timing.
''There I was,'' she recalled. ''stuck in traffic, a couple girls on the team in the back seat sobbing, everybody overwhelmed by this conflict.'' When Emily tried to leave varsity practice 15 minutes early to get to the club practice, her coach treated it as an absence, and benched her. Janice and her husband, Joe, a podiatrist, raised the issue with the school, but found no relief.
''My school coach would ask me, 'Do you really want to play here?''' Emily recalled. ''And I did want to play for my school, with my closest friends. It was really frustrating that I couldn't go practice with my club team, where the level of play was so much higher, and make myself a better player, which would benefit my school team. But when I did that, I got benched.''
Talking with other parents on the sidelines, the Geldwerts realized that they weren't the only family in such a predicament. One parent, Paul Robbins, a lawyer familiar with sports issues, told about the time his daughter had been suspended from her school team when she missed a practice so she could play in a Patriots game. He thought the parents should sue, and offered to handle the case if other parents would act as plaintiffs on behalf of their children. Dr. Geldwert and Barry McCormick, an architect whose similarly talented daughter, Katherine, faced the same problems in Pelham, agreed, and brought suit in April 2002 in Federal District Court in White Plains against the school districts of Mamaroneck and Pelham.
Their objective was to force the schools to move girls' soccer out of the spring and into the fall. Their complaint was that the hardships the girls were enduring were the result not of overbooking or overcommitting or the inflexibility of the coaches. Instead, the hardships were the result of gender discrimination being practiced by the school districts, a violation of Title IX, the federal legislation mandating equal treatment for male and female athletes.
WHY gender discrimination? In New York, their argument went, all 714 school districts schedule boys' soccer in the fall. This conforms with the natural order of the soccer world. The boys play for their schools in the fall and their clubs in the spring. Without conflict, they can join the Olympic Development Program and attract scholarship-bearing college scouts, and they can compete for a state championship, and enjoy all the excitement and glory that their talents can secure.
Of these 714 districts, 649 also schedule girls' soccer in the fall. The others -- including Pelham and Mamaroneck and others in Westchester and Rockland Counties, in the upper Hudson Valley region near Rhinebeck and New Paltz, and New York City -- play girls' soccer in the spring. In doing so, the plaintiffs said, they place their elite female players under terrible stress, put them at a disadvantage against other girls who play in the fall, expose them to injuries and handicap their college quests. Moreover, they argued, these districts deny all their female soccer players the chance to play for a state championship, since the title is awarded in the fall.
No boy has to suffer these problems. ''This is why Title IX was written,'' Mr. Robbins said. ''To stop schools from valuing and promoting men's sports while giving female athletes second-rate treatment.''
Nonsense, the school districts replied. Girls' soccer programs were introduced in the late 1980's to expand athletic opportunities. Schools scheduled the sport in the spring because most schools already had a slate of sports for girls in the fall, most notably field hockey, and because boys' soccer was already in the fall.
Certain harmonies presented themselves: the fields the games were played on, the referees who called the games, even some of the people who coached the boys in the fall could be used by the girls in the spring. Look at the big picture, the districts said. There are boys upstate who play volleyball in the winter, and they aren't eligible for a state championship; nobody is saying they are victims of discrimination, the districts contended.
The case was heard last spring. The school districts argued that they weren't responsible for Emily and Katherine's tight schedules. The districts produced affidavits from college coaches who denied that playing in the fall gave a player better exposure, and argued that Title IX didn't require a school to have exactly the same programs for boys and girls, as long as there was a general equivalence of opportunity. They also maintained that not being eligible to play for a state championship wasn't realistically a hardship, given that the girls could play for a Section One championship, which covers 65 school districts in Westchester, Rockland and Putnam Counties. And the districts argued that in the scheme of things, the number of girls who would really be affected by being prevented from advancing was very small.
When Judge Charles L. Brieant issued his decision on July 8, 2003, he agreed with many of the points made by the school districts. He found that Emily's and Katherine's stress wasn't the schools' problem (He wrote that ''alleviating someone's schedule to make conflicting activities easier is not why Title IX was enacted.'') He rejected the idea that the girls had been ''deprived of the opportunity to be recruited'' by colleges, and also held that while playing in one season had different effects than playing in another, the effects were not uniformly good or bad.
But Judge Brieant agreed with one of the plaintiffs' arguments. He found that Title IX clearly forbids discrimination in the scheduling of games and practice times, and that the school districts clearly had a schedule that allowed boys to be eligible for a state championship, but prevented the girls' eligibility. The judge ordered the school districts to move girls' soccer, pending appeal.
The decision was greeted with excitement for those involved in Section One, particularly among girls who are ardent soccer players and whose teams play in the spring. A survey taken for The Briarcliff Bulletin, the student newspaper of Briarcliff High School, where the decision to move has been postponed until after the appeal, shows that girls who played on club teams or who considered soccer their first sport were thrilled at the very thought of being eligible for the state championship.
''We should move to the fall, because the fall teams get to go to states,'' said one girl, emphatically stating a theme that was repeated by many others surveyed by the school paper.
The decision also pleased those parents of ardent soccer players.
''I think it's great,'' said Rick Wolff, an author and WFAN radio personality whose daughter, Samatha, plays soccer for Byram Hills. ''It's about time Westchester joined the rest of America in obeying Title IX.''
But the decision perturbed a lot of soccer players who already have a fall sport that they like. Melissa Gonzalez, a ninth grader at Lakeland High School, has a lot in common with Emily Geldwert. Melissa plays soccer for Lakeland and for a club team, and is part of the Olympic Development Program. Unlike Emily, she has not found the demands of her activities to be particularly stressful, and unlike Emily, she plays field hockey in the fall. Melissa is happy with the way things are, and is against moving soccer.
''Not playing for a championship doesn't really bother me that much,'' she said. ''I'd rather play two sports.''
Melissa is not alone; a number of girls resent being pushed into such a choice as much as Emily resented being pushed to choose between her teams.
'' It would be a big disappointment to me if soccer switched to the fall,'' one girl responded in the Briarcliff school paper's survey.
Another girl said in the survey, ''I think it's kind of unfair the way it's going to affect a lot of people.''
The districts where girls' soccer is played in the spring have had different reactions. Several districts, like Chappaqua and North Salem, switched as soon as the suit was filed.
''It's been great for us,'' said Steve Jones, the athletic director of Horace Greeley High School in Chappaqua. ''We had a one-year transition period, and started playing girls' soccer last fall. Our team won the section and went to the state quarterfinals. We had no problems.''
Some communities are content to wait, while others are split. A parents' group in Byram Hills is pressing the district to take immediate action. They are proposing to make the switch, but phase it in over two years, to accommodate juniors and seniors who play two sports who made their decisions about which sports to play based on the current arrangement.
''Some consideration has to be given to the girls who are well into the system,'' Mr. Wolff said. ''But we don't want to wait two years for the appeals process to be exhausted and then begin a transition. I don't know why the school district is delaying. We have a ruling. They're sending a terrible message to the girls.''
Some people expressed concerns that go beyond the current students' situations. ''This will absolutely kill field hockey,'' said Sharon Sarcen, who has coached the Lakeland High School field hockey team for 22 years. ''Field hockey is a sport most girls don't even play until seventh grade. It takes a year or two to learn the rules and the skills involved, and then the girls learn to love it. I've had girls who hated it in eighth grade who loved it in the ninth.''
''Field hockey doesn't have a big youth program out there the way soccer does,'' she continued. ''When it comes time for girls in seventh grade to pick a fall sport, how many are going to pick field hockey, which they've never played, over soccer, which they've played for five or six years? Maybe I'm shallow, but I think the people who are behind this are only out for themselves, not for what's best for the whole.''
Ms. Sarcen isn't the only field hockey professional who has wanted to avoid competing with soccer. As in New York, girls' soccer in Pennsylvania is played both in the fall and in the spring. A few years ago, there was a movement to get everybody to play in the fall. The proposal met resistance from the schools in Philadelphia and its suburbs, areas where there is a strong field hockey tradition. As a result, soccer is still played in two seasons, and the Pennsylvania Interscholastic Athletic Association, in a move that upholds Title IX, Solomonically awards two state titles: a fall championship for the 275 districts that play in the fall, and a spring championship for the 197 districts that play in the spring.
Although common sense would indicate that field hockey has reason to worry, the record in other states seems to indicate a situation less dire.
IN Massachusetts, for example, field hockey and girls' soccer are played in the fall. Information gleaned in 2001 by the Massachusetts Interscholastic Athletic Association shows that 289 schools offered soccer programs, in which approximately 12,000 girls participated, while 202 offered field hockey programs, in which just under 9,000 girls played. In Maryland, the Maryland Public Secondary School Athletic Association found in the fall of 2002, that 172 schools offered soccer, with 5,223 girls participating; 120 schools offered field hockey, and 4,042 played.
''We don't see a lot of growth in field hockey, but it seems to have its own niche,'' said Ned Sparks, executive director of the Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association. ''It appeals to its own type of girl -- more of a preppie type, for want of a better word.''
Assuming that the appeals court upholds Judge Brieant's decision, switching girls' soccer may be just the beginning of the changes. Will there be enough fields? Several athletic directors expressed confidence that their schools had enough fields to make the switch work.
''They'll say that,'' said Greg Ransom, executive director of Section One of the New York State Public High School Athletic Association, the group that governs school sports, ''because no athletic director's going to say that he can't do what a federal judge says he has to do. The reality is that most of them are going to end up using fields that they would rather not use.''
There will be costs associated with the finding, upgrading and maintaining of additional fields. Another practical problem is officiating. ''We don't have enough officials to ref the soccer and field hockey games in the fall now,'' Mr. Ransom said.
Finally, there will almost certainly be other changes in the seasonal menus.
At most schools, there are five girls' sports in the fall -- field hockey, volleyball, track, tennis and swimming -- while soccer, softball, track and in some places lacrosse are offered in the spring. While boys' participation is more or less even across the fall, winter and spring seasons, nearly half of the girls who participate in a sport do so in the fall.
Throwing soccer into the fall schedule will further unbalance the menu. The state is currently considering switching girls' swimming to the winter, a move that on the surface does not seem to address in any way concerns about fields, referees, a thin spring menu or what the girls themselves actually want. Judge Brieant's ruling may be overturned. He made strong use of a decision in a case in Michigan, where the state scheduled six girls' sports in different seasons than the boys'. The court found that action discriminatory, but the decision has recently been stayed pending appeal, and cannot be used as a precedent by the appeals court reviewing the Westchester case.
The appeals court is expected to issue a ruling in late spring or early summer. But even if Judge Brieant's decision is overturned, more school districts may be expected to switch of their own volition. The challenge then will be to minimize the number of people who will be unhappy with the move.
Correction:  February 29, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about girls' soccer programs misstated the name and title of an athletic director in Chappaqua. He is Steve Young, not Steve Jones; he is athletic director for the entire Chappaqua School District, not just for Horace Greeley High School.
