TOM SCHAUDEL is a creative, frenetic man on the move. He also has a sense of humor. On the menu of his latest enterprise, Tease, in Port Washington, he refers to himself as culinary director. Others might call him executive chef, overseer or even chief cook and bottle washer.
His present empire of Tease, Coolfish in Syosset, Passionfish in Woodbury and Starfish in Merrick is only part of the story. Over the years, he has been a collector of restaurants. He has had them in as far-flung locations as Montauk (Downtown Grille) and Locust Valley (107 Forest) and with a kaleidoscope of formats, from a Tuscan steakhouse (Maxwell's in Garden City) to creative Asian (Lemongrass in Roslyn) to his present upscale fish houses.
That brings us to Tease. There was a Tease in Roslyn from early 2001 to spring of 2003, but it was closed because its size (50 seats) made it less than profitable. The new restaurant is an immense stunner, situated in the building that housed Diwan for years and most recently was home to Port Seafood Grill.
Tease in Roslyn offered alternative dining by centering on small plates. Diners who liked variety could create a meal with three, four, five or more mini-courses. But, unlike tasting meals at other restaurants, the patrons called the shots and picked the dishes and number of selections. Alas, some diners has trouble breaking the standard appetizer-entree-dessert mold.
At the Port Washington Tease, the adventurous can still assemble a custom meal of numerous small plates while traditionalists may begin with a small plate (appetizer) and move on to a large plate (aka entree).
Tease makes a positive impression with its walls of windows, which afford views of Mill Pond and Manhasset Harbor. The décor is simple, with bare wood tables, votive candles and salmon-colored walls dotted with wrought-iron sconces holding fat white candles. The room's eye-catchers are large, illuminated vases filled with exotic blooms.
The service staff has not yet hit its stride. Waiters knew who ordered each dish but were slack in replenishing the bread basket (interesting assorted rolls) and the bowl of marinated olives. Empty water glasses were also ignored. But, to be fair, they were of dark blue glass and it was almost impossible to tell if they were full or not.
Not all small plates were equal. The nicely turned-out roasted Chilean sea bass garnished with a half artichoke heart, a few teardrop tomatoes and a lemon beurre blanc was tiny and suitable only as part of a succession of dishes. Yet the grilled portobello mushroom with a bevy of mushrooms set upon an herb salad blessed with slowly roasted plum tomatoes and hot and crispy potato pancakes was hefty enough to double as an entree. It was our favorite dish. Running a close second was the crispy rock shrimp salad, a pleasing treat with frisée, crunchy won-ton crisps and a lemon-soy vinaigrette.
Other substantial starters were the tasty grilled duck sausage with logs of seared polenta and slices of grilled zucchini, and an exemplary barbecue chicken quesadilla.
The tall, fluffy crab cake with roasted corn relish and zippy mustard crème fraîche earned high marks, as did two offerings with Asian spins: mussels in a Thai red curry-coconut-basil-soy broth, and crisp crayfish spring rolls.
The seaweed-soba noodle salad was so liberally laced with chilies that only spicy food lovers found it enjoyable. The same was true of an entree of spaghetti with lump crab meat, roasted tomatoes, tasso, scallions and Parmesan cream sauce.
The large plates (entrees) were led by homey, tender short ribs and the equally rustic Tuscan meat loaf placed upon creamy polenta with braised escarole and a dried cherry-pine nut relish. Bacon-wrapped prawns made the grade, as did the grilled sirloin, which, at $22, was a better buy than the Fred Flintstone rib chop at $35. The rib chop filled the plate but was thin and no better than the sirloin.
Desserts included all the Tom Schaudel signature sweets including the famous chocolate bag (a banana split in a chocolate candy bag) and banana Foster spring rolls.
Wine was as much fun as the food at Tease. Continuing the sampling mode, diners had a choice of 32 wines by the glass or half glass. Ordering a flight of four half pours proved a taster's paradise. The intelligently chosen wine list is twice as long as the Island's average. It is especially appealing since half of the bottles are under $30. Nor is there any reason to be intimidated. An enthusiastic wine steward, bubbling with enthusiasm, visits every table.
Tease  37 Shore Road, Port Washington (516)767-7878  Very Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Vast restaurant featuring exciting small plates.
SERVICE -- Needs polishing.
SOUND LEVEL -- Average.
RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Crayfish spring rolls, grilled duck sausage, barbecue chicken quesadillas, mussels, grilled portobello, crab cake, Chilean sea bass, rock shrimp salad, meat loaf, sirloin, short ribs, bacon-wrapped prawns, all desserts.
WINE LIST -- Interesting choices among wines by the glass, half glass or bottle on the reasonably priced list.
PRICE RANGE -- Lunch, entrees $6 to $10. Dinner, small plates $5 to $10; large plates $17 to $22 (rib chop $35); desserts $7.
CREDIT CARDS -- All the majors.
HOURS -- Lunch, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Sunday brunch, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. Dinner 5 to 10 p.m. Monday through Thursday, till 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday and 4 to 9 p.m. Sunday.
RESERVATIONS -- Recommended.
WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- Two steps at entrance. Restrooms are accessible.
REVIEWED BY THE TIMES -- Feb. 22, 2004.
RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING OUT E-mail: lidining@nytimes.com
