Playing Onstage, or Off
The pianist Andrew Armstrong is known for his performances of stalwarts like Mendelssohn and Rachmaninoff, but on Friday at 7:30 p.m. at Zankel Hall at Carnegie Hall he will give an altogether different world premiere. Mr. Armstrong will be the soloist in ''The Right Weather,'' a work for chamber orchestra and piano solo by Lisa Bielawa that was commissioned by the American Composers Orchestra for a new series called ''Orchestra Underground.''
The series will ''challenge conventional notions about symphonic music and the concert experience itself,'' according to the Manhattan-based orchestra's publicity materials. Ms. Bielawa, who was a composer-in-residence at the Copland House in Cortlandt Manor in 2001, based the four movements of ''The Right Weather'' on four verbs in Pushkin's ''Eugene Onegin.'' The piece calls for groups of instruments to play in unusual formations, stationed on the corners of the stage, for example, or outside the hall entirely. Mr. Armstrong, a Mount Kisco resident, said he found the effect moving. ''The first time I heard it I just sat there, staring, not wanting to hear any other music for a while,'' he said. Tickets to the concert are $20 and $30. Information: (212)247-7800.
Mr. Armstrong was raised in Connecticut but says he ''grew up musically'' as a student at Hoff- Barthelson Music School in Scarsdale. He was a frequent winner on the competition circuit at an early age -- he is 29 -- and received the Jury Discretionary Award at the Van Cliburn Competition in 1993. He is performing eight different concertos around the country, including Schumann's A minor concerto with the Greenwich Symphony Orchestra at Greenwich High School on April 3 at 8 p.m. and April 4 at 4 p.m. Tickets are $23 and $10. Information: (203) 869-2664.
Jazz and Now a CD
The trumpet player and jazz producer Mark Morganelli waited more than 13 years to release a new CD, but his fourth and latest is now on the market. The CD, ''My Romance,'' featuring Mr. Morganelli and the Jazz Forum All Stars, with Houston Person on tenor sax, includes nine standards like the title track, ''Stella by Starlight,'' ''Days of Wine and Roses'' and ''All the Things You Are.''
The music was recorded live at several of the free outdoor concerts Mr. Morganelli produced in the summer of 2002. Sites included the waterfront in Dobbs Ferry, City Hall Plaza in Mount Vernon and Kingsland Point Park in Sleepy Hollow.
''Jazz is so well experienced live,'' said Mr. Morganelli, who is executive producer of Jazz Forum Arts, based in Dobbs Ferry. The CD costs $15 and can be bought online at jazzforumarts.org.
Aside from a recent trip to Japan, where he played in a jazz festival, he is mostly spending the winter planning for the 50 free summer concerts he will give in Westchester for the fourth consecutive year.
In June he will celebrate 25 years of presenting jazz in and around New York City. Jazz Forum Arts will present Arturo Sandoval on March 6 at 8 p.m. at the Tarrytown Music Hall in Tarrytown. Other performers in the series include the Preservation Hall Jazz Band on March 20 at 8 p.m. and the Wynton Marsalis Septet on April 2 at 7 and 9:30 p.m. Tickets are $35; $10 for children. Information: (914)631-1000.
History Caught in Photos
It's not easy being a blue sky photographer, as Gray Williams can tell you. Mr. Williams is the author of ''Picturing Our Past,'' a book on the architectural history of Westchester County that was published last fall by the Westchester County Historical Society. The 492-page book's 615 illustrations include 275 of his own color photographs, many taken at sites that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
He found both the weather and parked cars to be a problem as he traipsed around to find the right angle to take a picture. He loved photographing at Playland in Rye, Sunnyside in Irvington and at the lighthouse in Tarrytown.
Mr. Williams, who is chairman of the New Castle Landmarks Advisory Committee, will give a free talk and slide demonstration about the county's historic buildings today at 3 p.m. at the Jay Heritage Center in Rye. Refreshments will be served, and Mr. Williams will sign copies of his book, which sells for $75. Information: (914)698-9275.
ROBERTA HERSHENSON
E-mail: westarts@nytimes.com
