ON the face of it, SSM St. Joseph Health Center, a small hospital in suburban St. Louis, does not seem very revolutionary in business terms. The hospital is a nonprofit institution run by the Franciscan Sisters of Mary. The chief executive, Alan Kevin Kast, is a former seminarian who begins his meetings with prayer and refers to his hospital as a ministry. A crucifix hangs in every room.
Yet St. Joseph is also guided by worldly objectives. The 364-bed hospital, part of SSM Health Care, which has 20 hospitals in four states and is led by Sister Mary Jean Ryan, is in the vanguard of health care change. By using the quality and productivity techniques that helped strengthen American industry in the 1980's, the hospital has improved patient care and reduced medication errors, waiting time in the emergency room and infection rates. It has even sharply reduced nursing turnover, which prevents many hospitals from delivering consistent care.
Other hospitals are also starting to use some of the techniques that have made industry more efficient in its quest to improve quality and save money. Every year, preventable medical errors cost $9 billion, and tens of thousands of lives, according to a recent study by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, part of the Department of Health and Human Services, and Johns Hopkins University.
Whether in industry or in health care, a quality strategy ''gives a unified vocabulary for thinking about production as a system with a focus on customers,'' said Donald Berwick, founder of the Institute for Healthcare Improvement, an advocacy organization based in Boston.
Many hospitals are using a road map provided by General Electric, which has been selling its productivity-enhancing, cost-cutting elixir known as Six Sigma, along with medical imaging equipment, to hospitals around the country. Six Sigma is a statistical measure that can be applied to any industry and refers to a goal of reducing errors to 3.5 parts per million. Two years ago, for example, the North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System contracted with GE Medical Systems and the Harvard School of Public Health to help start a leadership training center. Similarly, after close to a decade of cost-cutting, the Yale New Haven Hospital also recently signed up with GE.
New devotees of quality are beginning to measure and analyze everything from waste and waiting time to infection rates and the narrow avoidances of mistakes in treatment, as well as organizational barriers to improvement.
In a culture ruled by a fear of malpractice, the focus on quality involves a shift from secrecy to transparency -- including reporting and dissecting mistakes.
That shift may be helped by a provision of the Medicare legislation passed in December that withholds a small part of Medicare payments if a hospital refuses to disclose quality data. ''It's not a lot of money, but it's incredibly historic,'' said Robert Galvin, director for global health care of G.E. and a founder of the Leapfrog Group, an industry consortium aimed at improving health care.
A few hospitals, including Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center in New Hampshire and the nine hospitals that form the Wisconsin Collaborative for Healthcare Quality, have begun to publish comparative quality data on their Web sites, including statistics like mortality rates.
At St. Joseph, where a quality strategy was first embraced in the late 1980's, measurement, standardization and analysis are obsessions.
''When I came here, everything was done differently,'' said Filippo Ferrigni, who has led the hospital's intensive care unit since 1987. ''We didn't even measure blood pressure the same way in everyone. We decided we needed to have internal standards for measurement of at least blood pressure, pulmonary artery pressure, temperature, the fundamental building blocks of medicine.''
The quality push at St. Joseph and the other hospitals in the group has led to systemwide benefits. In 1999, the company was in the red, but in 2002 it had net income of $17 million, on revenue of $1.8 billion. Amid nationwide nursing shortages, it lowered annual turnover to about 10 percent in 2002 from 15 percent in 2000. The national average turnover rate is more than 20 percent.
At St. Joseph, the zeal for quality improvement is helping the sickest patients. When Dr. Ferrigni read an article in a recent issue of The New England Journal of Medicine linking high glucose levels to an increased chance of infections, he knew that he had found his next big opportunity for improving patient care. Infections acquired in hospitals and intensive care units are common, according to a report released in December by the government's Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; about two million patients are infected each year at a cost of more than $4.5 billion.
The stress of illness results in higher glucose levels for most patients -- not just those with diabetes. Dr. Ferrigni decided to see if lowering glucose levels in the intensive care unit by giving patients intravenous insulin would lower infection levels. Initially, the project ran into ''tremendous resistance,'' he said. Doctors were concerned that giving patients insulin might result in brain injury and seizures. Dr. Ferrigni, however, persuaded his colleagues to allow him to gradually reduce blood sugars of patients in the intensive care unit. As blood sugars declined among the patients, overall mortality in the unit declined by 40 percent.
The results were so astonishing that the hospital decided to make the reduction of glucose levels for all patients, not just those in intensive care, a quality goal. Today, all patients are given glucose tests and, if necessary, get insulin. Hospitalwide, that change is credited with reducing deaths over all, not just from infections, by 28 percent from the average recorded from 1998 to 2001.
BECAUSE each serious infection costs about $35,000, the savings are also huge. ''This is the single most important leverage point for reducing mortality that's available to hospitals,'' Dr. Ferrigni said. ''This is incredibly powerful stuff.''
The effort, however, also demonstrated a major organizational challenge. ''Doctors write the orders, but nurses have to make it work,'' Dr. Ferrigni said, explaining that the glucose initiative significantly increased nurses' workloads.
Blood sugar, once measured four times a day, now must be measured 12 times a day in intensive care. Once nurses saw the impact of the glucose testing, however, ''they got all over it,'' Dr. Ferrigni said.
Some of the greatest quality challenges involve persuading employees in various departments to cooperate. Consider the effort, known as 30/30, to cut waiting time in emergency rooms. The goal is to evaluate patients with life-threatening illnesses or injuries in just 30 seconds and to reduce the time needed to admit patients to a hospital bed from the emergency room to 30 minutes.
Improvements in the emergency room involved a number of departments. When X-rays were needed, it often took an hour for an X-ray technician to get to the emergency room. To solve the problem, one X-ray technician was permanently transferred there. Or, in admitting psychiatric patients, the hospital had to wait for an evaluation by an outside psychological social worker before moving patients out of the emergency room, a process that averaged 90 minutes. To reduce the wait, the hospital hired a psychological social worker.
WITHIN two years, SSM St. Joseph has met its objectives in the emergency room 94 percent of the time, up from about 65 percent when the project began. To help keep the organization from becoming complacent, patients receive a coupon for $10 of groceries when SSM misses its 30/30 target. The hospital spent $14,450 in 2003 on coupons.
The hospital now spends about $200,000 more each year on increased emergency-room staffing. But a jump in admissions has more than made up for that cost. In 2002, St. Joseph garnered about 68 percent of all new emergency room admissions in St. Charles County. After years without growth, the hospital also had a 7 percent increase in patient admissions in general in 2001, and the same increase in 2002.
Some major health care institutions, like Johns Hopkins and the Mayo Clinic, have been pursuing quality initiatives for years, but generally the mantra has been slower to penetrate big institutions.
Large teaching hospitals, which juggle teaching, research and patient care, have special challenges. Because of their residency programs, many of their doctors are temporary. At Yale-New Haven, one big question is whether a hospitalwide quality effort can succeed when only 10 percent of the hospital's 2,600 physicians are full-time. The rest are community physicians or professors at the School of Medicine.
The hospital began its Six Sigma effort in the intensive care unit, which had its own staff of nurses. The project involved reducing a relatively high rate of blood-stream infections that occur in patients who have catheters.
When management broached the subject with Heidi Frankel, director of surgical critical care at the hospital and a doctor at the Yale School of Medicine, she was skeptical. ''This isn't an assembly line; it's an I.C.U.,'' Dr. Frankel recalled saying. ''But it turned out to be a brilliant and inspired thing to use rigid corporate improvement techniques in a patient model because there are many things we do that are repetitive, and that we could standardize.''
After winning over fellow doctors and residents, Dr. Frankel standardized the catheterization procedure and created a training video for the regular influx of new residents. During the last year, the surgical intensive care unit cut its catheter-related infection rates by about 75 percent. A rigorous quality strategy appeals to many hospitals not only because it controls costs, but also because it can improve care. But the process can take years to master. That is why, at St. Joseph, the true believers would also recommend a little prayer.
