In America, we have always taken it as an article of faith that we ''battle'' cancer; we attack it with knives, we poison it with chemotherapy or we blast it with radiation. If we are fortunate, we ''beat'' the cancer. If not, we are posthumously praised for having ''succumbed after a long battle.'' If you accept the war metaphor (and not everyone does), then a diagnosis of cancer becomes a call to arms, an induction into an army, and it goes without saying that in such a war, optimism is essential. Memoirs of cancer survivors and the Web sites of some cancer centers state this as a creed: a ''positive attitude'' influences survival.
But a recent Australian study of 204 people with lung cancer found that those who were optimistic before and after treatment did not live longer; they did not fare better (or worse) than their less hopeful counterparts. Earlier studies have examined cancer patients' helplessness or depression or pessimism. The results are a mixed bag, with some studies showing that a negative attitude hurts survival and others showing no relation between one's temperament and one's survival. What makes the Australian effort different is that it focused rigorously on a fairly large group of patients with a single type and stage of cancer, and it used a well-accepted method for assessing optimism. The study followed patients for five years. By taking these steps, the Australians overcame many (though not all) of their predecessors' methodological weaknesses. (Ideally, they would have examined whether optimism detected before a diagnosis of cancer was ever made -- optimism as a character trait, rather than as an attitude after diagnosis -- correlated with outcome.)
Optimism, it seems, is overrated -- at least when it comes to this particular form of cancer. Biology (and the availability of effective treatment) determines fate.
Such a conclusion flies in the face of popular belief, or more important what we want to believe. Modern society has evolved to the point where we counter the old-fashioned fatalism surrounding the word ''cancer'' by embracing the idea of the Über-mind -- that our will possesses nearly supernatural powers. Of course, the breakthroughs that have rendered many childhood leukemias and other malignancies curable resulted from painstaking research, not from mind power. All the same, a cottage industry of books and a cult of author-gurus feed the idea that the correct amount of faith or laughter or visualization or quantum thinking or ''natural'' drugs are critical to beating cancer.
Unfortunately, the upshot of all this is that many patients feel they must be optimistic; they are pressured to deny those moments when they are dispirited or pessimistic. Those feelings, society implies, are shameful and will cost you the battle. And if the cancer progresses despite everything, there is an implication of personal failure: it was not the biology of the cancer that did you in but the weakness of your will or your temperament.
If the Australian study helps alleviate the pressure to be positive-minded, that's well and good. But the popular reception of the study may nonetheless obscure some important lessons. As the study's authors acknowledge, it is important to examine how optimism affects a patient's quality of life, whatever its quantity. In the early days of AIDS, the diagnosis of H.I.V. infection was tantamount to a death sentence. As a young physician in the mid-80's, caring for people who had contracted H.I.V., I lost two of my patients to suicide at a time when the virus was doing very little harm to them. I have always thought of them as having been killed by a metaphor, by the burden of secrecy and shame associated with the disease. It became urgent for us -- both patients and physicians -- to seek to lighten that burden.
In that era, my own experience as a clinician, anecdotal tales and at least one study all suggested to me that a good attitude and a good support system had a positive effect on H.I.V. sufferers' survival. But I saw much false optimism, unrealistic hope; I saw patients who sold all their possessions and used their parents' savings to obtain fringe treatments that did not work. I saw patients refuse preventive treatment because they believed in a divine intervention that never came or did not come in the form they wished for.
Those patients whom I think of as having negotiated the illness most successfully were those who managed to use the illness to find meaning in their lives. The phrase ''person living with AIDS'' reflected a salutary change of attitude; it became a willful counter to the notion that one was ''dying of AIDS.''
Many of my patients hung on long enough to experience the appearance of lifesaving antiviral drug combinations. Many others did not survive that long, but neither did they simply succumb. They did not give up hope, but, instead, the nature of their hope changed; they wished for simpler things like a good night's sleep or the strength to make a trip to a theme park with their children. In some cases, they seemed to live life more fully than the rest of us. Roxy Ventola, an artist who lived with AIDS until 1994, articulated what such a life is like in a performance piece: ''Everyone wears a watch, but the uninfected wear a digital watch. They have to look down to be aware of the passing of time. Those of us with AIDS wear a ticking watch. We can hear it -- tick-tock, tick-tock.'' She went on to add: ''I know time is precious. So I don't waste it anymore. Things that matter to the uninfected aren't important to me. . . . Now I'm free to be the person I always wanted to be. I make every moment count.''
It is not necessary to have a lethal medical condition to develop such a profound insight, but it is remarkable how often it takes no less. My deceased patients have taught me over the years to believe in the glass half full, to make good use of the time we have, to be generous -- that was their lesson for the Über-mind, and it was free. Do that, they said, and then perhaps death shall have no dominion.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-22-04 Abraham Verghese is the Marvin Forland Distinguished Professor at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, and the author of ''My Own Country.''
