NATASHA LaGoff, a level-headed 18-year-old with bright green eyes and bronze ringlets, has heard it said 100 times: ''Oh, my God, you're going to Iraq!''
She seriously doubts that, she tells her friends and family firmly. The Army recruiters have assured her she has a good chance of getting the job she wants, a clerical job in Army Human Resources, and a chance to finish college. Ms. LaGoff, you see, has just enlisted in the United States Army, though she is not due to leave her home in Washington Heights for basic training until July. Five long months of waiting. Meanwhile, she plans to keep her nose clean and continue her studies at York College, in Jamaica, Queens, where she is a freshman accounting major.
On many afternoons, she and Che Powdrill, her friend and fellow Army recruit, shoot the breeze with the officers at the Armed Forces recruitment station on West 125th Street near Lenox Avenue in Harlem. She and Mr. Powdrill are not yet in uniform, but they have been welcomed as part of the club. Hanging out with sympathetic Army officers in crisp green shirts and patent leather dress shoes, they share jokes and bravado without fearing that someone will say it again. ''Oh, my God, you're going to Iraq!''
Another Washington Heights kid and a friend of Mr. Powdrill who gravitates to the recruiting station as if it were his version of the local Kiwanis Club or VFW post is Pvt. First Class Adony Batista, who returned for home leave from his second tour of duty in Iraq late last month. And in a way, the Harlem recruiting station is a safe haven. Whether the Army will be as safe as Ms. LaGoff hopes -- and as the warm embrace of the recruiting station seems to promise -- is something the three friends don't care to examine too closely.
In more complacent times, offering one's life for one's country has been a patriotic cliché, more popular among politicians than among mothers. Now it is a statistical fact. More than 500 American service members have died since the war in Iraq began nearly a year ago. Suicide bombings have become routine. The hidden casualties of war include the 2,600-plus wounded soldiers, some permanently maimed physically and psychologically.
But many young people who turn up at this recruiting station are fatalistic. ''It's not that I'm afraid or not afraid,'' Mr. Powdrill said the other day, fingering the gold Virgin Mary pendant given by a girlfriend. ''I feel when it's your time, it's your time. You're gonna die regardless of where you are, in a tent, in a car, on the battlefield.''
Like others who are persuaded to enlist, he feels that he has made an honorable choice for his country, and the right one for him personally. There aren't many jobs in the city these days, even for bright, ambitious, squeaky clean kids like Natasha LaGoff, Che Powdrill and Adony Batista.
Ms. LaGoff is one of four children. Her mother is a housewife, and she'd rather not talk about her father; he is ''not home with us,'' as she puts it. She was glad to be able to quit her job on kitchen and cashier duty at McDonald's in anticipation of joining the Army. ''It's hard working full time and focusing on school,'' she said.
The Army's standards are high compared with those in the civilian world, and the three friends are proud of that. Sgt. First Class Luis Aviles, one of five Harlem recruiters, said he processed only five or six people a month who meet the Army's minimal requirements: a high school education, no criminal violations, good mental and physical health, and the ability to pass a basic reading and math test. Of those five or six, only about two a month end up enlisting.
A steady stream of people who don't qualify head for the private job training office next door, Urban Dynamics, which trains workers like security guards for a fee, no high school diploma needed. ''They don't want me, I don't want them,'' one candidate for such a job said resentfully of the Army people. Turns out he had been expelled from high school.
In the next few months, 110,000 more soldiers will be rotated into Iraq. At some point, Ms. LaGoff and Mr. Powdrill may be among them. Private Batista tells them stories about his experience. He was in a firefight and thinks that he killed enemy soldiers. That was exciting. Funeral detail was more upsetting, because the bereaved parents screamed, ''Why him? Why not you?'' at the living. He has had dreams about the war but mercifully no nightmares. He can turn off his wartime persona. ''When I'm not in uniform, I don't even shave,'' he said, smiling under his short black beard.
He is 19. Told that he looks at least 25, he agrees. ''I used to have a baby face,'' he said. ''Iraq was tough on me.''
COPING E-mail: amh@nytimes.com
