IT was with confidence that I started filling out David Bach's ''Finish Rich Workbook.'' I am no model financial citizen, but I have some of the fundamentals down. I've never paid any credit card interest, and I participate to the maximum in the employee stock purchase plan and leave it alone.
But after taking the Finishrich Financial Knowledge Quiz at the beginning of the book, I was devastated. My score was in the lowest group. That is because I've done nothing about life insurance or a will, I have no idea what my Social Security benefits will be (or even the annualized returns of my investments), and my wife and I have never talked about our wishes on emergency medical treatment.
Humbly accepting Mr. Bach's warning that unless I shape up, I face ''future financial disaster,'' I dove into the exercises. And though the prose, which is dense with clichés and catch phrases, veered close to insulting my intelligence, I learned many useful things, and even enjoyed some of it. It was entertaining, for example, to free-associate about the meaning of money.
It was less enjoyable to work my way through the Purpose-Focused Financial Plan, in which I am supposed to align my ''values'' (some of Mr. Bach's suggestions: freedom, happiness, making a difference) with my financial goals. I suppose that some people would find this enlightening, but it felt hokey and forced to me.
Making a list of my 50 dreams was challenging. As I got to the upper reaches of the list, I was almost making things up. Did I still want to learn how to speed skate, as I thought I did when I was a child? What about that tasting tour of the New Zealand wine country?
I preferred the straight-ahead, practical advice, like Mr. Bach's financial organization system. Nothing flashy, but easy and clear. I bought a packet of folders immediately, and now have all 13 properly labeled. We'll see how that goes. I've also scheduled an appointment with a trusts and estates lawyer.
Some exercises require stamina. Tracking every penny you spend for a week, as Mr. Bach recommends, is a certified way to rob the joy from your life, though the results are revealing. Here's what I learned: Never take a cab. Those three-a-day trips to the cafeteria add up to some serious coinage. And if I simply cut out sushi, I can retire to an ice castle in Sweden before I'm 55 (dream No.50).
On second thought, pass the toro.
HUGO LINDGREN
