If the Islanders bring out the best in the Rangers, then the rest of the N.H.L. brings out the worst.
The Rangers followed an emotional victory over the Islanders with an another embarrassing letdown yesterday, losing, 7-3, against the Devils at Madison Square Garden.
The Rangers, who defeated the Islanders, 6-2, on Thursday night at the Garden, are 5-0 against the Islanders this season and 17-28-7-4 against the rest of the league.
In games after their victories over the Islanders, the Rangers are 0-3-1-1.
''If I could give you an explanation that made sense, I would absolutely give it to you,'' said Glen Sather, the Rangers' president, general manager and coach. ''You sit up at night and wonder and think about why we have done what we've done. I can't give you an explanation, because it doesn't make any sense. We play like we've played against the Islanders, a solid team, and come out here today, and it looks like we have four or five guys that are skating. I can't give you an explanation for that.''
Rangers center Bobby Holik said he thought that ''we all got carried away with how well we played against the Islanders.''
''I just felt we were way too joyous about beating the Islanders, who one-quarter of our wins have come against,'' he said.
The Rangers are 22-28-7-4 and 11 points behind the Canadiens for the eighth and final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference. The Devils are 22-2-13-1 in the regular season against the Rangers since Feb. 17, 1997.
Devils center Scott Gomez, who opened the scoring 2 minutes 31 seconds into the game, equaled his career high with 5 points on two goals and three assists. Gomez's line -- he centered Patrik Elias and Brian Gionta -- combined for five goals and six assists. Elias had two goals and Gionta one.
Sather also could not explain why his No. 1 goaltender, Mike Dunham, could look so magnificent against the Islanders and so ordinary against everyone else. Dunham, who was pulled from yesterday's game at 2:37 of the second period after allowing 5 goals on 17 shots, is 5-0 against the Islanders this season and 9-21-6 against the rest of the league.
Gomez's first goal set the tone for the game. It came on a seemingly harmless shot from a bad angle at the bottom of the right-wing circle.
''He's going to make that save a thousand times in a row,'' Sather said of Dunham.
Not this time. The puck deflected off Dunham's stick and into the net, and the Devils (31-17-11-1) led, 1-0.
Gomez said that with Gionta driving toward the net, he was hoping the shot would bounce off Dunham and give Gionta a good rebound.
Gomez said he thought Dunham was a little surprised by the shot, but Dunham said he was not.
''My mistake,'' Dunham said. ''It actually hit my stick and went through my arm there. It was a bad goal. You really can't let something like that happen early in the game, but it did.''
The Rangers unraveled from there. By the time the first period ended, the Devils led, 4-1. Each time the Rangers scored, the Devils answered right back. The Devils' other goals were scored by Turner Stevenson and Grant Marshall. Martin Rucinsky, Jaromir Jagr and Holik scored the Rangers' goals.
''Most of the goals, we just gave it to them,'' Jagr said. ''They didn't do anything special.''
SLAP SHOTS
In 21 games against the Rangers, SCOTT GOMEZ has 9 goals and 13 assists. . . . Defenseman SCOTT STEVENS, the Devils' captain, missed his 21st consecutive game with postconcussion syndrome. ''He's doing better,'' said LOU LAMORIELLO, the Devils' president and general manager. . . . Rangers center ERIC LINDROS (concussion) missed his 10th consecutive game. He is scheduled to travel to Montreal this week to be re-examined by Dr. KAREN JOHNSTON, a concussion specialist.
HOCKEY
