''I really like this fellow, Hansa the eel fisher,'' my host Magnus Bolmstrand told me in a measured tone the night I arrived at his home in Ahus, Sweden. ''He is one of my favorite people. He is what I call naturkraft.''
I asked Magnus what naturkraft meant.
''It's a kind of nature power,'' he said. ''Hansa gets his power from being in nature, and then bestows that power to the people around him.''
In a sleepy region of southeast Sweden called Skane, there are three major emblems of culture: apples, wheat for vodka and eels. In many places, the wheat fields and orchards stretch to the Baltic Sea and a sandy beach shaped like a crescent moon 60 miles long, called the Alakust, or the eel coast.
Eels are not only eaten there, but also revered as a quasi-mythical creature. In Brantevik, near the Viking ruin called Ales Stenar, there is rumored to be an eel in a well that is over a century old, placed by a resident who recorded the event in his diary in 1850.
On the coast are old cottages, buried in the sand by storms so that they look like A-frames. They have been the homes of eel fishermen for more than 300 years, standing on the beach and marking the territory in the sea that has been handed down since the region of Skane (pronounced SKOH-na) was won from the Danes in 1658 in the Roskilde Peace. The generals who helped the Swedish nobility conquer the land were given the fishing rights, out to 600 meters off shore. It is the only place in Sweden where you can own property in the sea.
The southeast coast is special because it is along this beach that the adult eels, after spending 8 to 25 years in freshwater lakes and rivers make their way from Finland, Russia and Sweden, swimming through the Baltic and the Denmark Strait, to the Atlantic, and famously, to the Sargasso Sea to spawn.
Hansa, or Hans Inge Olofsson, an eel fisherman at the cottage called Rumpabowden, often contemplates this mystery as he pulls his boat off the beach into the surf to collect his nets. He has been fishing for eels here for 20 years, as his father and his grandfather did.
The fishing rights have been leased by the fishermen since they were acquired in the conquest, and the payment from the fishermen to the landowners was in eels, a coveted fatty food fish in Scandinavia. It was also stipulated that in exchange for the fishing rights that the fisherman would throw a party for the owner and his friends, sometimes for more than 100 people. These events, called an alagille, or eel party, were the reason I went to Sweden last August.
Traditionally, the party was for men only. In fact, if a woman was spotted in the morning by an eel fisherman on his way to go fishing, he would turn around and go home. Not only because he believed he would not catch anything, but also because he thought his life was in danger. Although the nets are usually not more than a quarter-mile offshore, the storms in the Baltic can come fast and the water is frigid. There are many superstitions, and many stories of eel fishermen who never made it home.
The parties begin in late August as the eels begin making their spawning migrations and, as long as the catch is good, run all winter. These days the parties are smaller, 12 to 20 people, and are attended by men and women.
At an alagille, eel is cooked six or more different ways: in soup, fried, grilled over linden wood, boiled, baked, or smoked. The first man to eat enough eel so that he lines the perimeter of his plate with eel spines is declared the eel king. Hansa said, pointing to a bottle of aquavit, that the sign of a successful eel party is when you do not remember anything the next day.
Within sight of Hansa's nets, which we pulled one morning at first light, is the town of Ahus (pronounced OH-hoos), where a tower marks the state-run plant that produces every bottle of Absolut vodka. The vodka, Hansa says, helps the eel go down.
These fish are prepared to make a journey of several thousand miles and are solid balls of fat. It is not easy to try one piece of the six different preparations at a traditional alagille.
After spending a week with Hansa, who tailors Beach Boys songs to his own lyrics and sings them while fishing, I was asked to participate in an alagille. He no longer prepares the dinners, these are done by his wife, an artist named Maria Brombarg, and their daughter Anna. I was careful, after a warning from Magnus, to try only a little of each dish so I would not be too full for apple pie made with native Skane apples.
I drank all that was offered because I believed the myth that the alcohol cut the fat and allowed you to eat more eel. And I suppose I attended a successful eel party, because I don't remember much -- except a dark room lighted with candles and Hansa playing his guitar and singing and laughing.
The eel is one of the most resilient animals, and one of the hardest to kill. At 5 a.m. as I lay in bed, it felt as if the pieces of eel I had eaten were assembling in my stomach and were trying to make an escape up my esophagus, determined to reach their place of spawning, in the wide Sargasso.
The alagille was a traditional Swedish event, which like Christmas, brought light to the approach of a dark period of time.
OUTDOORS
