CHARLIE LOUVIN was just about to play a show in Hinkley, Minn., two weeks ago when he found out that a Louvin Brothers tribute album had won two Grammys. Mr. Louvin, 76, had driven up from his home outside Nashville with his son, and they were setting up to perform with a house band. That's when his wife called and told him the news: ''Livin', Lovin', Losin': Songs of the Louvin Brothers'' had won the award for best country album, and the rendition of ''How's the World Treating You'' by James Taylor and Alison Krauss had won as best country vocal collaboration.
''I had hoped, but I wasn't betting anything on it,'' said Mr. Louvin later that week from Tampa, Fla., where he had just performed another concert. (''I'm all thawed out,'' he said.) He won two other Grammy Awards in the 60's for his solo work -- back when the country awards were televised, he noted, instead of presented before the telecast, as they are now. But the Grammys didn't even exist in the 50's when he was performing in a country harmony duo with his brother, Ira.
Remembered by a surprisingly wide array of fans, the Louvin Brothers are enjoying something of a moment, at least by the humble standards of old harmony groups. The album that paid tribute to the Louvins' delicate harmonies and enduring songs beat out sleeker releases by Shania Twain and Faith Hill. All 18 of their original albums are back in print, for the first time since the 60's. (All but one are on the Nashville-based IMG label; ''Satan Is Real,'' their best-known record, is available on Capitol.) And last year Mr. Louvin was asked to join the band Cake's ''Unlimited Sunshine Tour,'' where rock fans young enough to be his grandchildren were held spellbound by his spare songs about salvation and sin. ''There's something pure about that old Louvin Brothers stuff,'' said John McCrea, Cake's frontman. ''I think listeners are drawn in by the spirit of the music.''
To the modern ear, that spirit sounds not just as if it's from another time, but as if it were from another world entirely. (I once gave a friend a collection of the Louvins' music and it struck her as so strange she wondered whether it was some kind of performance art project.)
Growing up on Sand Mountain in rural northern Alabama, Charlie and Ira Loudermilk were influenced by the haunting harmonies of the great country brother acts: the Blue Sky Boys, the Monroe Brothers and the Delmore Brothers (to whom the Louvins later recorded their own tribute). Performing as the Louvin Brothers, they signed to Capitol Records, where they spent the bulk of their career. At first, they recorded only religious material. Ira, who felt called to the church, wrote songs like ''Do You Live What You Preach?,'' which drew an uncompromising line between the sacred and the profane and threatened eternal hellfire for anyone who dared embrace the profane. Another tune, ''The Great Atomic Power,'' suggested that the threat of apocalypse comes not from the weapons of man but from the kingdom of God.
Beginning their career when Hank Williams was still recording, and breaking up just before the Beatles arrived in America, the Louvins were definitely not of the rock 'n' roll era. Nonetheless, the songs they wrote ended up in places they would never have imagined. In 1968, the Byrds recorded ''The Christian Life''; Gram Parsons, the leading creative force in the Byrds at that time, later covered ''Cash on the Barrelhead.'' Just as important, he played their music for his friend and collaborator Emmylou Harris, who, according to legend, asked who was the woman singing the high part so beautifully. After Mr. Parsons died, Ms. Harris performed several Louvins songs and had her first top 10 country hit with ''If I Could Only Win Your Love.'' In the late 70's, when most of the Louvin Brothers' albums were out of print, she had Bill Ivey, the former director of the Country Music Hall of Fame, make her a tape of their songs that she passed around Nashville.
Country musicians have never stopped covering Louvin Brothers' songs, which have a timelessness that transcends their old-fashioned sounds. Ira, who wrote most of the material, ''was probably the best songwriter that Nashville ever produced,'' said Charles Wolfe, the author of ''In Close Harmony: The Story of the Louvin Brothers.''
But it seems listeners raised on rock are more drawn, as Mr. McCrea was, to the music's connection to a now-vanished way of life. The Louvin Brothers, like many great harmony duos, shared a bond -- each seemed to know what the other was singing before he did so. And the sound of Ira's eerie high tenor remains one of the most arresting in popular music.
At a time when much of contemporary pop sounds artificial and glossy, music like that of the Louvins stands out all the more for for its simplicity and directness. It has the same appeal to city dwellers and suburbanites that the old mountain songs on the best-selling soundtrack to ''O Brother, Where Art Thou?'' did.
''When I discovered the Louvin Brothers, I was listening to punk, and it has the same brutal frankness,'' said Gillian Welch, a current performer influenced by traditional harmony singing.
Perhaps inevitably, the Louvins have a sad story that resonates as much as their music. When they began recording secular songs and scored several top 10 country hits, Ira, increasingly guilty about not giving over his life to religion, started drinking more. Onstage, he would curse out the audience and stomp on his mandolin. When the Louvins opened for Elvis Presley, who told them how much he liked country gospel, Ira angrily asked why, if that was true, he played black music. After the Louvins broke up in 1963, Ira began to straighten out his life, but two years later he was killed in a car accident. He hadn't been drinking, but the other driver had.
Like Hank Williams or Johnny Cash, the Louvin Brothers embodied the conflict between salvation and sin that lies at the heart of country music. ''I think country at its best is a little bit gothic,'' said Rodney Crowell, who performs ''My Baby's Gone'' with Ms. Harris on the tribute album. ''Saturday night debauchery and Sunday morning redemption.''
Sober and businesslike, Charlie was the good brother, Ira the dark one, and his untimely death gives their story a tragic dimension. Charlie says he wishes his brother would have lived to see this award. When he performs, he still instinctively moves to one side when it's time for the high part to come in.
As the title ''Livin', Lovin', Losin' '' suggests, most of the songs on the tribute album convey a sense of tragic glory that comes as much from the Louvins' real lives as from the material they wrote. Songs like ''My Baby's Gone'' and ''The Angel's Rejoiced,'' sung by Dolly Parton and Sonya Isaacs, convey a sense of lived-in loss, and ''Keep Your Eyes on Jesus,'' performed by Pam Tillis and the Jordanaires with some preaching by Johnny Cash, practically scares listeners into church.
When he wrote those songs with his brother, Mr. Louvin says, he was more interested in making a living than creating a legend. ''In those days, we were modern country,'' he said. As the owner of most of the Louvin Brothers song copyrights (he bought Ira's share from his brother's children), he hopes the success of the tribute album will inspire others to record the songs. And he proudly notes that at his Hinkley show he sold 50 copies of the tribute album from the supply he takes with him on the road. ''Maybe,'' he said, ''they should call it 'Livin', Lovin', Winnin'.' ''
MUSIC Robert Levine is a senior editor of Wired magazine, for which he also writes about pop music.
