UNDER mounting pressure from the New York State Commission of Correction to end prison overcrowding or be ordered to transfer 350 inmates elsewhere, the Suffolk County Legislature appears to be edging closer to approving a major new maximum-security jail in Yaphank.
But the Republican-controlled Legislature may be bumping heads with Steve Levy, the Democratic county executive, who is looking for alternatives.
The new jail, with as many as 1,130 beds, would replace an existing minimum-security jail in Yaphank. Mr. Levy said last week that it would cost as much $208 million to plan and build, and an additional $49.5 million to $60 million a year would be needed to cover the cost of staff and utilities.
''It's far and away the biggest chunk of our future capital budget, and we best be sure that there are not any cheaper alternatives available before we dive in,'' Mr. Levy said.
He said he was asking to meet with the commission chairman, Alan J. Croce, a former Suffolk undersheriff, to ask for time to ''evaluate the breadth of this enormous cost that could be imposed on us.''
Alternatives the county would explore, he said, include a getting a waiver to allow two inmates per cell, building the new jail in phases or negotiating a contract with Nassau County to transfer some inmates there. Nassau's county jail in East Meadow is at about 88 percent of its 1,842-inmate capacity, officials said.
The overcrowding problem and state warnings are nothing new. In December 2002, the state commission's staff members told the county that it must ''literally address the problem'' rather than making ''a gesture'' at reducing overcrowding.
Suffolk's current maximum-security jail in Riverhead, which would remain, and the Yaphank jail, where inmates live in dormitories, are designed for 1,308 inmates but can actually handle just over 1,100 because of inmate classification requirements, the sheriff's office said. They typically house 1,400 inmates to more than 1,500.
The jail project could begin as early as next year, and it comes at a time when Mr. Levy is warning that the county is already facing a $235 million budget shortfall. It would be the most costly county capital project since the Southwest Sewer District of the 1970's and larger in size than the Riverhead county center, the Legislature's budget review office said.
David A. Bishop, the County Legislature's Democratic minority leader, is leading opposition to the project. Mr. Bishop, of West Babylon, said the county urgently needed to explore ways to reduce the number of inmates through probation programs or the use of high-technology equipment that would allow home incarceration.
''It must be avoided,'' Mr. Bishop said, referring to the new jail. ''Function follows form in a jail, and if you build a maximum-security, you have to staff it and operate it as such, and that's the most expensive type of facility.''
Mr. Bishop said the inmate population was linked to the state's drive to release patients from mental hospitals. ''The jail has become a modern poorhouse, a postmodern mental institution and a symbol of our policy failures,'' he added. About two-thirds of inmates are awaiting trial and are unable to make bail, officials said.
Sheriff Alfred C. Tisch and the union representing correctional officers say the new jail is needed and should be maximum-security to increase flexibility in handling inmates, even though many are serving short sentences or being held on charges involving nonviolent crimes.
Suffolk's undersheriff, Donald S. Sullivan, said last week that the three-member state commission had given the county until May 18 to take binding steps to provide adequate cell space.
Mr. Sullivan said a letter from the commission dated Feb. 3 warned that in the absence of county action, the commission would rescind variances allowing an excess jail population of at least 350 inmates.
''They have made it clear that if the plans don't move ahead, they will remove our remaining variances,'' he said. The commission rescinded 52 variances last spring, he said.
Mr. Sullivan said it would cost the county more than $20 million a year to transfer inmates to jails outside of Suffolk that have extra space. ''If we get up to 350 people, that means you are bringing people back and forth from upstate to go to court,'' he said.
Vito Dagnello, the president of the Suffolk County Correction Officers, said the county should have dealt with the jail problem years ago. ''They waste no time in putting more police out in the streets, and the police lock up people, and that's why the crime rate goes down,'' he said. ''But they chose to ignore this overcrowding problem, and it didn't go away.''
Mr. Dagnello said the union supported Sheriff Tisch's call for a maximum-security jail. ''That's what we're hoping for,'' he said. ''You have more flexibility in maximum security moving inmates around inside.''
But Mr. Bishop, the County Legislature's minority leader, said the correctional officers drove the proposal for the maximum-security jail. ''It's empire-building by a special interest,'' he said.
According to the state correction commission, 18 county jails currently have variances for overcrowding. The commission said that 9 of them were in the process of building new cells and 6 were in the planning stages.
