ON a howling cold Sunday night last month, at the fabulously anachronistic Players club on Gramercy Park, a bunch of older theater folk were having cocktails, and plenty of them. Peering balefully down on the scene from the walls, paintings of dead actors -- Booth, Barrymore, Kean -- reinforced the memorial tone of the event, at which, after dinner and speeches, a portrait of the late Jason Robards would be unveiled.
In the midst of the crowd, Christopher Plummer, ramrod straight and dapper in polka-dot bow tie and pinstripe suit, had a look on his face that seemed to say ''Get me out of here.'' It was almost as if he were still Captain von Trapp in ''The Sound of Music,'' afraid those damn children might start singing again. Neither sloppy sentiment nor intimations of mortality appeal to Mr. Plummer. Pretending to search for a portrait of himself -- ''I'd look good in stained glass, don't you think?'' -- he escaped to the card room upstairs, where he sat before a display case filled with stage swords, canes and jester sticks. In a large wooden chair rather like a throne, he seemed right at home.
He has always borne himself royally. The great-grandson of a Canadian prime minister and the only child in a household of doting, artistic women (his parents divorced when he was an infant and he didn't meet his father again until he was 18), Mr. Plummer comes naturally to his noblesse. It has served him well. In roles ranging from the creepy von Trapp to a fantastically neurotic Iago to the crusading Mike Wallace in the 1999 film ''The Insider,'' he has consistently thrilled audiences with the kind of voice and bearing that used to be taken for granted in an actor. Still, for all its high-tone glories, his career -- nearly 200 television and movie roles, by his estimate, and stage productions too numerous to count -- has thrived on his eagerness to strip away that noblesse and reveal the human muck beneath, the rot in the royalty. If there was ever a role to exploit that experience, it is the one he is bringing to New York now, the famously complex and allegedly unplayable King Lear.
''Of course,'' Mr. Plummer said, '' 'The Sound of Music' -- that albatross -- was far more difficult!''
Though he's smiling, he isn't quite kidding; he means that what he calls ''a hollow carcass of a part'' like von Trapp is harder to flesh out. At the same time, he wants to demystify Lear. Mr. Plummer and his director, Jonathan Miller, insist that they are not mounting a production of the Greatest Tragedy in the English Language. Rather, the play that opens on March 4 at the Vivian Beaumont at Lincoln Center is a family drama: a 17th-century ''Long Day's Journey Into Night'' with daughters instead of sons. (''It's 'Dynasty'! '' Dr. Miller told me later. ''It's 'Peyton Place'!'') More than that, they say, it's a comedy, at least insofar as it works best if the tragedy is not continuously underlined. Upon Lear's entrance -- traditionally the moment at which his kingly bombast is established -- Mr. Plummer, while certainly regal and peremptory, also establishes the old man's fumbling decrepitude. ''Attend the lords of France and . . . and . . .'' he mutters; shuffling his fingers in frustration, he can't remember his other potential son-in-law's name.
It gets a laugh, but an uncomfortable one; has he actually forgotten his first line? The palsy in his hands and the spasmodic jaw movements that suggest rotten teeth are also entirely feigned. (Dr. Miller's medical training has helped Mr. Plummer make sure that his Lear, whom he sees as 84, is symptomologically accurate.) What these shocks of humanity do is make you forget, as the play begins, that you already know the shape of the rest: how the daughter who loves Lear cannot say so and is thus disinherited, how the two daughters who say so nevertheless betray him at the earliest opportunity. At the same time, Dr. Miller hopes to keep your mind on the particulars of the man's encroaching senility and off the overblown image of Lear as a tragic figure raging at the cosmos. ''The play isn't about the cosmos, it's about homelessness,'' Dr. Miller said. ''The only people who live in the cosmos are astronauts, and they generally want to get back to Earth. What I want to know isn't 'What does it mean?' but 'Did they have underpants?' Take care of the details, take care of the comedy, and the tragedy takes care of itself.''
Mr. Plummer said blithely, ''It always does.''
Fit and at the top of his powers at 74, Mr. Plummer would not seem to have much to feel tragic about. His has been an extraordinary career, spanning radical changes in theatrical taste, garnering constant critical praise, earning him the kind of celebrity that results in the best tables at restaurants but not wackos with binoculars in the woods. He has a beautiful, much younger wife, a ''rambling pile'' of a house in Connecticut and constant offers of lucrative movies. The movies are often -- like ''The Sound of Mucus,'' as he sometimes calls it -- annoying diversions from his real work on the stage. But without them, there would be no ''free Shakespeare'' like this ''Lear,'' because Mr. Plummer has bills to pay.
There have always been bills to pay. Mr. Plummer was born in 1929 into the last remains of a Canadian railroad fortune. If it was a crumbling gentility -- a big house but few servants -- that was the best kind for an artist manqué, because its isolation from the world's tawdriness was never completely successful. After racing through a cosseted boyhood filled with poetry recitations and piano, he set out methodically to sample as much sin (brothels, gambling, jazz, cigarettes, alcohol) as Montreal in the 1940's could offer. Finding himself stage-struck after getting a good review as Darcy in a high school production of ''Pride and Prejudice,'' he plunged into that vice as well. By 18 he was a professional, performing radio dramas in French and English; by 23 his reputation as an actor was so established that he was proposed as a leading man for the inaugural company at the Stratford Festival in Ontario. Unfortunately, his reputation as a rake was also so established that he was promptly rejected.
It's a story Mr. Plummer doesn't mind repeating, and only in part because he soon became a Stratford mainstay. (The current production of ''Lear'' is based on the one he performed there two years ago, as the highlight of the company's 50th-anniversary celebration.) If one can still imagine the debauchery, it is hard now to imagine the vibrancy (and glamour) of the mid-20th-century theater. The opportunities for a young man with a Barrymore face and a plush voice were vast. Mr. Plummer did not have to train in a cloistered academy; he trained by appearing with great actors in classic plays for paying audiences. Over the course of a season with a company in Bermuda in 1952, he tossed off some 30 leading roles; soon he was appearing with Katharine Cornell, that grande dame, as she toured America for five months aboard her private train. True, she almost fired him for missing an understudy rehearsal after a night of carousing, but that was an education, too. By age 25, Mr. Plummer had made his debut on Broadway, been taken to Paris to play Jason opposite Judith Anderson's Medea and had hundreds of roles under his belt. A working stage actor today might not have 100 roles (let alone see the inside of a private train) in his entire career.
''The 50's were the last golden age of the theater in New York,'' Mr. Plummer said. ''Good God, we had Jean-Louis Barrault playing on Broadway -- in French!'' The Actors Studio was busy advancing its mumbly brand of realism, while sonorous old hams -- ''the noble wobblies,'' Dr. Miller called them -- still sang their roles as they imagined Shakespeare had intended. Mr. Plummer, without subscribing to any method, was incorporating everything. (''Like all great actors,'' Dr. Miller said, ''he's a magpie.'') At a time when the in-your-face realism of television and movies was beginning to make classic stage acting look overblown, he was not afraid to be very large indeed, because he knew that emotional acuity was worthless without the technical, almost ventriloquistic virtuosity to project it. On the other hand, he had learned from the modern psychological theater how to exploit his own character and eccentricities to imply the real texture of a life. (It's no coincidence that his performances are often sexually electric.) By the luck of timing and a natural absorbency, Mr. Plummer was able to join the two strains into a style that, according to critics, rivaled, and in some ways surpassed, the great classical actors of the day. And he was not yet 30.
By the time the scene moved to London -- and he with it -- in the 1960's, Mr. Plummer was an established theatrical star, a leading member of both the Royal Shakespeare Company under Peter Hall and the newly formed National Theater under Laurence Olivier. With ''The Sound of Music'' in 1965, he became an international celebrity. The two identities didn't always jibe: his theatrical seriousness made him something of a ringer in movies, while celebrity, especially the kind produced by a high-calorie musical, made him theatrically suspect in the long wake of the Angry Young Men. If this contradiction bothered him, he was too busy performing to worry about it much. Or, despite his impeccable professionalism onstage, too soused. ''Those were the days when life began at 11 o'clock,'' he said. ''Carousing all night with Peter O'Toole or Richard Harris or Trevor Howard. And those three-and-a-half-hour lunches where we all had wine and booze and everybody was driving Rolls-Royces and behaving like princes. Our ideal was Edmund Kean'' -- the 19th-century English tragedian. ''That's what you wanted, that demoniac power, to get on the stage without any sleep and scare the hell out of the audience!''
His voice, a quiet, rumbly basso, suddenly leaped several decibels; his eyes, normally hooded and downcast, bugged out and swiveled. A startling performance, if it was a performance, though it's hard to tell. In life, as onstage, he has instant command of a large arsenal of tricks so completely fused with the persona he has imagined for himself that they are no longer tricks at all.
''But in reality,'' he continued affably, ''everybody was completely conked and didn't know what was happening. Which was to the detriment of the work. When you look at some of those films we made! The . . . slow . . . pace. Of course, this couldn't go on forever. And it didn't.''
It was in Ireland, during the 1968 filming of ''Lock Up Your Daughters!'' -- a period sex comedy in the manner of ''Tom Jones'' -- that Mr. Plummer met and fell for an actress named Elaine Taylor. That Ms. Taylor, then 25, had previously played a romping Bond girl in the 007 spoof ''Casino Royale'' would not have escaped the notice of a man already famous as a kind of King Leer. By then Mr. Plummer was nearly 40, had been married and divorced twice and, with his first wife, the actress Tammy Grimes, had a daughter, Amanda, now an actress herself. If he was, by his own report, a bad husband, he was a worse father: ''I am ashamed to say I avoided it entirely.'' He did not even know where Amanda, who was being brought up in Manhattan, went to school. Can a man whose father never saw him from age 1 to 18 be forgiven for doing nearly the same thing to his daughter? At any rate, Mr. Plummer has forgiven himself. ''It was rather sad and not intended but it turned out fine,'' he said. ''She obviously, poor love, didn't need either of us at all.''
But life as a libertine did take its toll. ''I was getting paunchy,'' Mr. Plummer said, by which he meant more than his physical shape. The brashness that can be so alluring in a young man had curdled (or so Ms. Taylor felt) into conceit, and the boozy exploits began to be embarrassing. ''Elaine was desperately trying to look the other way while I did something about it,'' Mr. Plummer said. (''You look the other way only for a bit,'' she told me later.) When he decided to stop cavorting and drinking -- liquor, that is; he still loves his wine -- the two were married, in 1970.
Mrs. Plummer (as she chose to be called) has clearly stabilized her husband: keeping him active, cooking healthy meals, shielding him as much as possible from the excesses of theatrical life. They have bought, renovated and sold (for handsome profits) house after house, in England, France, California and Connecticut. But far from dulling the urgency of his portrayals, domestication has led Mr. Plummer to even greater triumphs, at least onstage, in roles like Cyrano, Iago and Barrymore himself. An actor needs to take great care if he is to last a long time -- Mr. Plummer's Broadway debut was 50 years ago; when he can't take care of himself, someone must do it for him.
''She's been a combination of Edith Clavell and Julia Child to me, a nurse and a cook,'' Mr. Plummer said, his eyes moistening. ''I feel guilty sometimes that I denied her a wonderful life, that she's wasted it on some terrible old ham. She could have married a duke or a prince! And she knows it.'' He paused for a delicate sniffle. ''But being British, you see, she never complains. She's very well trained.''
And so is he. At the Players club, during dinner, Mrs. Plummer ruled no on the appetizer, having detected some potentially allergenic oyster in it; he quickly pushed it aside. Later, anticipating his talk about Jason Robards (it involved a cop, a bar and a drunken horse), Mr. Plummer started fussing with his hair; his wife subtly passed him a giant comb. She laughed un-self-consciously. ''Every day when he leaves for the theater'' -- Mr. Plummer commutes from Connecticut rather than face what he sees as the temptations of nocturnal New York -- ''I have to go through a checklist as if with a schoolboy,'' she said. ''Do you have your glasses, your vitamins, your . . . ?'' The point wasn't that he has entered a Learish second childhood but that, as an actor, he had never left his first.
''I'm older than most Lears,'' Mr. Plummer had told me, up in the card room. ''I should have done it in my 40's or 50's. But I honestly feel I'm in better shape now than I was then.'' He knows more, too. He need not look much further than his own fears of aging to invest lines like ''O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven'' with an almost overpowering pathos. And only now that he has finally stopped moving does he see how having had so many houses and having spent so many years on the road can amount to a kind of spiritual homelessness akin to Lear's. ''Yes, it's a vagabond life, even when you live rather well,'' he said. ''But that's the way actors should be. We should be gypsies. Treading the boards is really the home. Everything else'' -- he paused, waving a hand toward Edwin Booth in the corner -- ''is temporary.''
Jesse Green is a contributing writer to Arts &amp; Leisure.
