Seton Hall point guard Andre Barrett has many refined basketball skills. Espionage is one of them. He eavesdropped on a conversation among Villanova players at the free-throw line in the final seconds Saturday.
He overheard the Wildcats plotting a way to get the ball to Randy Foye, a sophomore guard from Newark. Barrett delayed the pass just long enough to make Foye launch a shot after the buzzer. Seton Hall won a thriller, 70-68.
''I'd rather take my chances on him making one that way than a wide-open 3-pointer with momentum,'' Barrett said.
The Pirates (17-7, 7-5 Big East) nearly blew a 17-point lead in the second half. But Seton Hall managed just enough defense in the final minute against Villanova (14-11, 6-6) to end its two-game losing streak.
Seton Hall has not been invited to the N.C.A.A. tournament since 2000, and consecutive losses to Notre Dame and Boston College could have thrown its hopes of making the tournament as an at-large team into peril.
As far as the junior forward Andre Sweet is concerned, the Pirates' hopes are still in jeopardy despite Saturday's victory. ''We had 17 wins last year and didn't get in, and we have 17 wins this year,'' Sweet said. ''So this doesn't do anything, in my eyes.''
It would have been hard to gauge the Pirates' chances had they lost to Villanova. The Wildcats trailed by 13 points with three minutes to play and by 6 points with two minutes remaining. They cut their deficit to 69-68 when Foye hit a 3-pointer with 51 seconds left.
But Foye, who scored 12 of his 15 points in the final 2 minutes 50 seconds, missed another 3-pointer with 9 seconds left that would have given Villanova the lead, and then Barrett kept him from taking a last-second shot that could have won the game.
''We had a good shooter shooting, and he just missed it,'' Wildcats Coach Jay Wright said of Foye's missed 3-point attempt.
Seton Hall Coach Louis Orr was more pleased with the way his team held on than he was displeased at how the Pirates nearly blew a big lead. Seton Hall built a 16-point lead with a 19-4 run in the first 6:26 of the second half.
''We've got to be able to take it to another level and to handle prosperity,'' Orr said.
The decisive run was powered by the junior forward John Allen, who scored 6 points, and by the senior forward Marcus Toney-El, whose 3-point basket after a rebound by Allen opened a 52-36 lead. Villanova made only 2 of 13 shots during the run.
''They made us rush shots, and we took a lot of bad shots when they were making that run,'' Foye said.
Then Foye started making shots. He had 3 points after sinking a layup with 6:18 left. Foye then hit four straight shots, one a 3-pointer, that sliced Seton Hall's lead to 69-65 with 1:26 left. He missed a 3-pointer, then hit another to make it 69-68.
Barrett, who had missed a layup attempt with 1:02 left, was fouled by Will Sheridan with 28 seconds remaining. But Barrett missed the front end of the one-and-one, and the crowd of 12,231 at Continental Arena groaned.
Barrett said he thought to himself: ''We got to get a stop. We're still up.''
Foye's shot from the right side of the 3-point arc went long and landed out of bounds. As if the officials needed help, Allen thrust his finger toward the opposite end of the floor.
''We got the more important stop at the time we needed it,'' Allen said.
Seton Hall center Kelly Whitney was fouled on the inbound attempt. Whitney made the first shot, but missed the second. But before he did, Barrett had gotten a tip from the Villanova players where the ball was going. He got in the way.
''Didn't matter how we won it,'' Barrett said. ''We needed to win.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
