AND now let's take a walk down the shaded side of the street.
Be honest. Aren't you starting to overdose on escapism? Haven't you been experiencing cravings that ''Mamma Mia!'' and vicarious trips down the red carpet just aren't satisfying? Well, after an autumn of jaw-dropping silliness and thinness on Broadway (witches and drag queens and lounge acts, oh my!), the New York theater is poised to provide deliverance from the culture of triviality. Just around the corner is a spring season that suggests visions of gloom and doom do indeed have their cathartic values in dark times.
You can't, for example, get more magnificently grim than ''King Lear,'' Shakespeare's portrait of going most ungentle into that good night. And Lincoln Center Theater, which scored one of the fall's few unqualified successes with its galloping production of ''Henry IV,'' promises to provide a ''Lear'' to remember, opening March 4, with Christopher Plummer in the title role.
First staged at the Stratford Festival in Ontario in 2002 (and partially recast for Lincoln Center), Jonathan Miller's gripping, remarkably tender production was the most accessible I had ever seen. Mr. Plummer, the finest classical actor on the continent, turned Shakespeare's cosmic poetry into an angry, deeply personal journey into the haze and harshness of old age.
When in the final scene Kent asked, ''Is this the promised end?,'' it was impossible for anyone who has brooded on mortal decay not to nod in recognition. By that time, many of those in the audience were red-nosed from crying. Yet they also had the spirited glow that comes from knowing you've looked demons in the eye.
Another breed of demons is confronted in ''Assassins,'' Stephen Sondheim and John Weidman's mordant, insightful musical from 1990 about men and women throughout American history whose greatest aspiration was to kill a president. Originally scheduled to open in the fall of 2001 (and postponed for obvious reasons), the Roundabout Theater Company's production is at last set to open on April 22 at Studio 54. Directed by Joe Mantello, with a cast that includes Neil Patrick Harris and the invaluable Denis O'Hare, the show offers an alternative vision of American dreamers -- or, as one song title puts it, ''Another National Anthem'' -- in this time of furious flag-waving.
Before the United States invaded Iraq, even before the planes had hit the twin towers, the eerily prescient Tony Kushner (''Angels in America,''  ''Caroline, or Change'') had written a play called ''Homebody/Kabul,'' which sent a bewildered British family into Afghanistan, a trip that revealed their own hearts of darkness.
It was an intermittently brilliant, maddeningly unbalanced play when it was presented at New York Theater Workshop two years ago. But its first act -- a transcendent monologue about transcultural curiosity, exquisitely delivered by Linda Emond -- was beyond reproach. Be grateful that Ms. Emond is returning in the revised, restaged ''Homebody'' that opens at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on May 11, directed by Frank Galati and featuring Maggie Gyllenhaal. And be grateful that Mr. Kushner, in the liberal tradition of E. M. Forster, continues to probe the West's failure to connect with cultures different from its own.
The filmmaker and dramatist Neil LaBute has never shrunk from poking at the American underbelly, with plays that have taken on the homicidal habits of clean-cut Mormons (in ''Bash'') and antiheroism in the shadow of Sept. 11 (''The Mercy Seat''). His latest exploration of red, white and blue amorality is ''The Distance From Here,'' which implicitly compares the life of one suburban family to that of the monkey house in a zoo. Seen two years ago at the Almeida Theater in London, this dose of cold-eyed cynicism will be staged this spring by the Manhattan Class Company, under the direction of Michael Greif (''Rent'').
And for those of you who would still rather contemplate the peccadilloes of movie stars instead of the sins of a nation or the cruelty of the cosmos, there is the Roundabout's new production of ''Twentieth Century,'' Ken Ludwig's adaptation of the classic Ben Hecht-Charles MacArthur comedy. The tabloid appeal of this juicy story about Hollywood temper tantrums has been further raised by what sounds like devilishly appropriate casting.
In the roles of a Machiavellian producer and a high-strung screen siren are Alec Baldwin and Anne Heche, stars not unknown to the pages of The National Enquirer. Both performers, by the way, have already acquitted themselves admirably on Broadway stages. Expect them to behave badly beautifully.
SPRING THEATER
