Let me introduce myself: I'm the guy, heaven help me, who nearly spoiled the storybook romance between two young shortstops. And I'm here to say that, as a die-hard Cleveland Indians fan and lifelong Yankees hater, if I had dreamed that Derek Jeter and Alex Rodriguez would ever play side by side in the Yankee infield one dark day, I would have done a more thorough job of ruining their friendship.
Early one Friday evening almost three years ago, I got a phone message from A-Rod asking me to call him. I knew it had to be a matter of grave concern because Alex left his cell number, and one of the first things you learn writing about celebrities (A-Rod's call came just as my Esquire cover story about him was published) is that you never, ever, get their private cell numbers. Those are strictly reserved for close friends, agents, and herbalists.
So I called Alex right away and reintroduced myself, and he sighed and said, ''Scott . . . you're killin' me, man.'' You could hear his pain, his sadness. No anger, only despair. ''I thought we were just having a friendly talk,'' A-Rod told me. ''I thought you were just writing a nice story,'' he said. ''I didn't want any controversy.''
The problem was a few lines in the Esquire profile -- exactly seven sentences, buried in a 7,000-word feature. ''Jeter's been blessed with great talent around him,'' Alex had said. ''He's never had to lead. He can just go and play and have fun. And he hits second -- that's totally different from third and fourth in a lineup. You go into New York, you wanna stop Bernie and O'Neill. You never say, 'Don't let Derek beat you. He's never your concern.' ''
The quotation had been flogged by the New York news media, of course. Only a few months after A-Rod had struck his quarterbillion-dollar deal with the Texas Rangers, here he was, dissing the Clutch God of Pinstripe Nation. But the media storm didn't seem to bother Alex. To his great credit, he never claimed that I had misquoted or misled him, or taken his words out of context. The context was a 90-minute three-way conversation -- Alex, Scott Boras (his agent), and me, with a tape recorder on the table the entire time. But athletes, actors and politicians lie about such stuff every day.
Not Alex.
A-Rod didn't even berate me for using the quote. No, what bothered Alex -- what he had called to tell me -- was that Jeter was mad as hell at him. Their friendship was in jeopardy. And the 25-year-old kid on the other end of my phone line, his voice squeaking with anguish, didn't know what to do or say to patch things up.
I should've told him the truth. To begin with, Alex hadn't said anything wrong, or even disrespectful. Sure, he had failed to pay homage to the Steinbrennerian triumphalism that views anything short of worship as heresy. But there isn't a general manager in baseball who wouldn't swap Jeter and his World Series rings for Rodriguez's power and defense in the blink of an eye. I should've said that his good buddy's fury might be rooted in his own insecurity; that beneath the bushwah about cool, chemistry and leadership is another thin-skinned kid in his mid-20's living under constant scrutiny; that there's more to life than baseball and more to friendship than competition.
Instead, I offered to fax a letter to Jeter in Tampa, Fla., where the Yankees had begun spring training. Alex thought that would be a nice thing to do. So, I did:
''Dear Derek,
''I talked with Alex on Friday night and he was understandably upset that his friendship with you might be hurt because of a few of his remarks in the Esquire article. I hope that is not the case. In the course of our interview, Alex also spoke sincerely of his professional respect and personal affection for you, and I'm sure he did not intend to sound controversial or negative.
''I'm sorry for any friction the article may have created, and I wish you a healthy, successful season.''
I don't know if Jeter got the fax; I never heard from Rodriguez again.
The truth is that the only other thing Alex had said about Derek in the course of the Esquire interview was, ''It's like a brotherhood -- there is absolutely no rivalry there. It's weird, because even me and my brother have a little rivalry. But with Derek, I'm his biggest fan, and I think it's vice versa.''
Although, now that I think about it, Alex might've said something about Jeter's mama wearing combat boots.
Back Talk
