NEW YORK residents pay higher local taxes than residents of any other state in the nation, according to a recent study by the nonpartisan Citizens Budget Commission that showed that New Yorkers' taxes are 72 percent higher than the national average. Connecticut is a distant second at 20 percent above the national average.
How did this happen? Are New York's county executives, town supervisors, mayors and other local officials all reckless, big-spending, high-taxing incompetents trying to penalize senior citizens on fixed incomes while discouraging businesses from locating in their communities? Or is there something different that each local government in our state has in common?
Yes, it's our state government in Albany.
New York state's senators, assembly members and governor continue to pass politically popular programs and then shift the cost off the state's books and onto those of the local municipalities. Local officials are blamed for the high local taxes to pay for these programs.
New York's Medicaid program is the best example of this cruel game. It's the most expensive one in the United States, 2.5 times larger than the national average on a per-beneficiary basis. And New York requires the highest level of county financing in the country. The state requires counties to pay 25 percent of the cost of acute-care Medicaid services and a full 10 percent of the cost of long-term care; most other states do not.
In the past, economic growth would make up for the rising cost of programs like Medicaid. But that is no longer the case. We have stopped growing and Albany has to accept reality and responsibility for the burden they are placing on county governments throughout the state.
Nassau County is a good example. Like most of New York State, we have stopped growing. The county's population is the same today as it was in the 1960's. Its property tax base is the same as it was in the early 1990's. Costs are rising, but revenues are not.
Nassau County has three primary sources of revenue: property taxes, sales taxes, and state and federal aid. State and federal aid have been declining since the 1980's. Sales tax revenues rise and fall with economic cycles; this year in Nassau, they are predicted to produce about $20 million in new revenue. Property tax revenues go up one of two ways: by raising taxes, which people are sick of, or by building new businesses or homes. But we are not growing.
So cut spending, you say. We have. In Nassau we have reduced our public work force to the smallest it has been in 30 years, a reduction of 11 percent. We have eliminated $100 million in waste, fraud and abuse. We have negotiated the best union contracts in decades, including givebacks and productivity enhancements. And we are borrowing less than half the money that the county used to borrow.
But even with these improvements, we can't keep up with rising costs. With only $20 million in new revenue from sales taxes, Nassau's Medicaid costs are going up by $50 million, state-mandated pension costs are going up by $50 million and health insurance is going up by $20 million. The result is local government taxes that are out of line with the nation, undermining the competitiveness of our local economies.
For New York's counties, addressing this problem is not a matter of choice, but of necessity. And the solution will be a political one and a bipartisan one, for this crisis affects all county executives, regardless of political party.
The fundamental problem is that state government in Albany has, through bipartisan collusion in designing its legislative districts, ensured that the leadership and membership of the State Legislature rarely change, regardless of what they do to us.
For more than 30 years, the Republicans have controlled the Senate, the Democrats the Assembly, and rarely is a member of either body voted out of office. In the past 22 years there have been nearly 2,300 re-election campaigns for the State Legislature. In that time only 30 incumbents have been defeated.
As a result, state legislators feel free to impose whatever financial burden they want on the electorate, because they think that the electorate can't hurt them. And history suggests that they are right.
But they have gone too far. Local property taxes are 72 percent above the national average. The only option now is to replace some of those legislators, to send a message to Albany. I hope you will join me at the polls this coming November. Say no to Albany politics and yes to lower local taxes.
SOAPBOX Thomas R. Suozzi is the Nassau County executive.
