The smile, it appeared, was nothing if not brave. For here was Alfonso Soriano holding up his new Texas uniform for photographers at a news conference Saturday at the Rangers' spring training complex.
The uniform had the same number, 12, that he wore as a regular for the last three seasons with the Yankees. Cameras clicked, his teeth shined, but his mind may have been dealing with disappointment.
After playing second base at Yankee Stadium in a bushelful of playoff and World Series games, Soriano was now an infielder for a team that has finished last in the American League West in each of the three full seasons he has been in the major leagues. He was the other end of the blockbuster trade last Monday that sent Alex Rodriguez to the Yankees.
Rodriguez, considered by many the best player in baseball, was an All-Star shortstop. Soriano came up to the Yankees as a shortstop but had to learn second base because another All-Star, Derek Jeter, was the occupant there.
Because Michael Young was the Rangers' second baseman last season, hitting .306, Soriano was asked how he would feel moving to shortstop.
''I'm a two-time All-Star at second base,'' he said through an interpreter. When asked again, his reply was the same.
Soriano was not being testy, he was being prideful. But, with Manager Buck Showalter and General Manager John Hart sitting alongside him, he also said: ''I'll do anything I can to help this team win. It definitely feels comfortable at second base, but I have an open mind.''
He added that it had been hard making the adjustment to second base, particularly learning how to make the double-play pivot, but he managed it.
Concerning speculation that Soriano might be tried in center field, Showalter said: ''We're looking at Al as an infielder, but we have a month and a half of spring training to shake it out. Right now, we have two guys, Mike Young and Al, who came up as shortstops but who have played second base.''
Soriano said he felt no pressure to put up the extraordinary offensive numbers that Rodriguez did. ''All I can control is what I do on the field and try to win,'' said Soriano, who batted .290 with 38 home runs and 91 runs batted in last season.
''No, I never thought I'd be playing anywhere else except with the Yankees,'' he said. ''People told me it was possible, but I put it behind my mind. But I know this is a business.''
He said he heard about the trade from his agent, who called to tell him. His first thoughts? ''I thought about my family and friends in New York, that's what I thought about,'' Soriano said.
He said he received phone calls from Jeter, Jorge Posada and General Manager Brian Cashman, among others on the Yankees, and Joe Torre tried to reach him through one of Soriano's friends.
Soriano tried to look on the bright side, saying he felt comfortable with ''so many young players'' on the Rangers. Soriano is 28 (two years older than reported until recently).
''It feels like a right situation,'' he said.
Asked about his high points with the Yankees, Soriano recalled his home runs in Game 7 of the 2001 World Series off Curt Schilling of Arizona and off Kazuhiro Sasaki of Seattle in the 2001 American League Championship Series as memorable.
The low point? ''I took pride in being a Yankee, but,'' he said, and here came that brave smile, ''I'm glad to be a Ranger.''
Soriano appeared ready to do his best for the Rangers, arriving in camp three days early.
An official with the Rangers said he thought the change would be good for Soriano after a dismal offensive performance in the Yankees' World Series loss to the Florida Marlins in October. He hit only .227, struck out 9 times in 24 trips to the plate, and was taken out of the lineup in the fifth game but returned in the sixth and final game.
''I was just in a slump,'' Soriano said. ''It just happened to come at a bad time. But in the last game, I came out of it. I got two hits in three times at bat.''
It seems unlikely that, as a Texas Ranger, Soriano will have similar problems in the near future with World Series at-bats.
BASEBALL
