ALVIN J. BALTROP got control of the stoop at 89 East Second Street because the old Cuban guy took off for Puerto Rico and the Ukrainian who was older than the hills finally died. Mr. Baltrop was easy to pick out. He was a big man -- ''a tall, funky, elegant mix of Africana and military,'' as his friend Kelly Cogswell once described him in an online gay magazine -- who wore big jewelry and carried a big cane. He used to clean his nails with a large knife, a custom made, very ''Lord of the Rings''-looking item with a six-inch blade. He held court from that stoop, acting as a sex educator, minor medic and general mensch to rootless neighborhood youths, especially those who had been kicked out of their houses for being gay.
These days the stoop is empty. Mr. Baltrop died on Feb. 1, at the age of 55, after a long battle with cancer. But he left behind a trove of thousands of photographs that document a lost era in New York history. From 1975 to 1986 he chronicled life on the old West Side piers, which until the AIDS epidemic was the place gay men went to cruise and homeless children went because they had no place else to go. A few friends and neighbors are working to catalog and find a permanent home for the photographs taken by Mr. Baltrop, who will be honored Saturday at a 2 p.m. memorial service at St. Mark's Church in the Bowery.
Sometimes Mr. Baltrop brought a harness and suspended himself from the beams of the abandoned buildings in order to take pictures unnoticed. Sometimes he drove around taking photos from his banana yellow VW van. Other times, he took off his own clothes before taking out his camera.
''He was as exposed as they were,'' said Cassandra Lupi, a longtime neighbor. ''He was one of them.''
Mr. Baltrop supported himself by working as a street vendor, a mover, a jewelry designer, a printer, a bouncer and a cabdriver. He rarely made any money from his photography.
The photographs of sunbathers, victims of gay bashing and sensuous young men amid the decrepit warehouses are often explicit, but many have a beatific grace that works against the grittiness of the lives depicted. In one image, a young man wearing tube socks and white underwear stands by a window washing his clothes; according to Randal Wilcox, who worked as Mr. Baltrop's assistant, the subject had been thrown out of his house for being gay. In another, a naked young black man, shot from behind, reaches out toward a window; he ended up killing himself in jail.
When Mr. Baltrop wasn't hanging out on his stoop, he could often be found at the Laundry Center, on First Avenue and Second Street. ''We miss him,'' said Ann DeVita, who has worked there for 15 years. ''He used to be a landmark. He'd sit right there.''
She pointed to the front of the shop. Light poured in through the plate glass window. It was a perfect setup for a Baltrop photo: purifying light, a window, a room that wasn't quite clean. But there was no photographer, only gray tile and an empty wooden bench.
ERIKA KINETZ
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: WEST SIDE PIERS
