As a youngster growing up in Lansing, Ohio, John Havlicek always believed that he would be a basketball coach. But when the opportunity presented itself after his 16-year Hall of Fame playing career in the N.B.A., Havlicek turned it down. Again and again and again.
''They used to call me about coaching, but they pretty much knew what the answer was going to be, so they finally stopped calling,'' he said recently. ''Whenever the Celtics were changing coaches in the 70's and 80's, Red Auerbach would call and say, 'For the record, do you want to coach?' I'd say, 'No,' and then he'd say, 'Goodbye.' ''
Despite his versatility and intensity as a player and his knowledge of the game, Havlicek does not think he would have been a very good coach.
''I would have been hard on myself because I was so disciplined,'' said Havlicek, who won eight titles with Boston from 1962 to 1978. ''Oftentimes, players don't get on the same page as the coach, and I would have found that frustrating.''
After establishing himself as an all-time great player, as well as defining a couple of new roles in the game -- the 6-foot-5 Havlicek was one of the league's first great swingmen and sixth men -- he wanted to find his niche outside basketball. His Ohio heritage helped him do so.
During his playing career, Havlicek spent his off-seasons in Columbus, Ohio, where he became a close friend of Dave Thomas, the founder of Wendy's restaurants. Thomas's daughter, Wendy, whom the franchise is named after, used to baby-sit for Havlicek's two children.
Shortly after his playing career ended, Havlicek decided to buy his own Wendy's restaurants, securing the rights to Westchester County outside of New York City. Twenty-three years later, he still owns the same three franchises.
Havlicek, 63, also owns part of Lakeview Farms, an Ohio company that specializes in desserts, and he does promotional work for Alpha Gary, which makes specialty compounds like PVC for the wire and cable industry. With Beth, his wife of 37 years, Havlicek spends four months of the year living in West Palm Beach, Fla., Boston and Cape Cod.
Calling himself semiretired and acknowledging he was not a hands-on owner, Havlicek said he spent most of his time golfing, bird-hunting and fly-fishing. ''Those are my three passions,'' said Havlicek, who lives in the same West Palm Beach neighborhood as Bob Cousy. ''I have no reason to really keep up with the N.B.A.''
Then and Now
