News of the unfortunate flu epidemic did not come as any big surprise to those infected by the fashion bug. The only shockaroo was that the headlines were spelling it ''flu'' rather than ''flou.'' That's F-L-O-U -- not flu, or frou, short for froufrou, which is something specifically ornamental.
Flou -- pronounced FLU -- is French for all that is hazy, blurred, blowzy, vague and vaporific. And flou is all the rage in the current spring collections. Think: floaty and flirty. Think: Stevie Nicks-Aphrodite-Isadora Duncan, in a torn-butterfly, Empress Josephine sort of way.
Flounces, frills, ruffles -- yes, Muffy, it is true that some ruffles are more frou than flou, but let's not sally the beam here, at least not yet -- handkerchief hems, tiers and chiffon (lots and lots of tiers and chiffon), all stylishly contagious these days, something gaga and gossamer for everyone.
''What girl doesn't have a goddess fantasy?'' the fashion bible Women's Wear Daily recently asked on its front page.
From Alexander McQueen to Stella McCartney, from Diane Von Furstenberg to Dries Van Noten, from DKNY to Grès, flou is in the air. Serious cases? John Galliano's flowing ribbed lamé for Christian Dior is nothing to sneeze at, and neither is Marc Jacobs's neo-baby-doll dresses for Louis Vuitton, Dolce &amp; Gabbana's racy Lorelei looks or Viktor &amp; Rolf's 1920's-inspired chiffon frocks -- half long skirt, half trousers.
You don't have to be Diana Vreeland to surmise how fashion caught this bug, or to understand its appeal.
After a plague of slip dresses and low-riding bumsters (those species that focus on the derrière, observed the anthropologist Robert Brain, have the ''most aggressive and quarrelsome males''), the appearance of flou is confirmation that Mother Fashion always balances the scales sooner or later. Add to that the fevered response to last year's ''Goddess'' exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Costume Institute, and voilà: not since Sir Joshua Reynolds painted his society ladies in classical deity mode has fashion been so winged in its pursuit of sartorial victory.
In some cases the flou outbreak has gone straight to the patients' heads. If the crowns of such show-biz goddesses as Sarah Jessica Parker, Gwyneth Paltrow and Jennifer Aniston are any indication, gone are the ironed manes of seasons past. Raphaelite curls -- romantic, jolly, au naturel -- are in for spring and summer.
It remains to be seen how the wilder strains of flou will play out in that new pornography: the shopping magazine. For as much as flou is a continuation of last season's trend toward ladylike dressing -- innocence and frailty, ironic and otherwise, do have their appeal -- flou is also a reaction to democratically priced fashion (i.e., Isaac Mizrahi at Target), which seems to be the way of the future.
Not all flou is created equal; generally speaking, it is not easy to make a dress working umpteen yards of chiffon, let alone wear it. Flou generates status. It says that one is on intimate terms with fashion's most ambitious and complicated dreams and traditions. As the history of art attests, from the classical tunics seen in Greek statuary to the portraiture of Van Dyck, Ingres and Sargent, excess fabric signifies social prominence and affluence.
''Superfluous drapery has been a sign not only of wealth and high rank but of moral worth: angels, saints, martyrs and Biblical characters in medieval and Renaissance art often wear yards and yards of extra silk and velvet,'' Alison Lurie writes in ''The Language of Clothes.''
The drapery of the fabric derives ''additional prestige from its association with classical art, and thus with nobility, dignity and the ideal.''
In other words, we're not talking Juicy Couture sweat pants.
''We love flou,'' says the fashion designer Arnold Scaasi, who on the day we chat just happens to have the flu. Nevertheless, he enthuses specifically about an ombré chiffon evening dress that he recently made for the first lady, Laura Bush. Long on one side and short on the other, it is a major confection in a cascade of colors from burgundy to shocking pink.
For Scaasi, more is better.
''There are a lot of interesting clothes out there for young people to buy by young designers like those Proenza Schouler boys, but designers who are doing little chiffon dresses that end at the knees?'' he sniffs. That is not flou. ''That doesn't have retail appeal.
''For us,'' Scaasi continues, ''flou, at the couture level, will take about 15 yards of fabric, two or three layers of chiffon, worked very, very carefully.'' Done right, it hides a multitude of sins.
Nan Kempner says, ''Flou is better than a sea of denim any day.''
Kempner, the famous fashion plate, is concerned, however, that some of this season's flou may not fly for women of a certain age. ''Age 12 and beyond, and I wonder, Does it look like mutton dressed as lamb?''
Still, she admits to having flou on her mind. ''If it is a trend, I'll try it,'' she says, ''but I think the way to wear it is balance it with a simple T-shirt on top, or vice versa, a flou top and tailored trousers.''
Meanwhile, Cecilia Dean, the fashionable co-founder of Visionaire magazine, says flou is just what the doctor ordered, especially if the occasion is right and the mood strikes you.
''I am just back from hosting a party in Miami,'' Dean says. ''I wore a chiffony fuchsia, slightly see-through Ungaro dress that screamed winter in Miami. And you can't wear a chiffony fuchsia, slightly see-through dress if you feel as if you have to. You have to want to, and then it feels right.''
Unlike bouclé suits and tailored dresses, flou is not for the faint of fashion-heart. As today's goddesses know best, these frills and flounces must be obeyed.
So it comes to pass in the denouement of Plum Sykes's amusing first novel, ''Bergdorf Blondes,'' out this spring, that the heroine, a self-described, self-effacing ''champagne bubble,'' is felled by flou in the hallways of the Mercer Hotel.
Wearing a black chiffon ruffled Zac Posen dress that the heroine has put on because she is determined to cheer herself up, she is locked out of her room.
A total weak-attack: she sinks to the floor. Eventually, she rises. But the front of her dress pulls, and she hears an expensive tearing sound. A ruffle has become caught on the corner of a tea tray outside her door!
''The front of the dress was ripped and the poor ruffle was dangling by a thread from its seam,'' Sykes writes. ''That's chiffon frocks for you -- invariably they're wrecked on the first wearing, which is why most New York girls don't count on them in the long term.''
TheraFlou, anyone?
William Norwich is the editor of Style &amp; Entertaining Part 2 of The Times Magazine.
