FOR two years, Nassau County's government pressed its police unions for givebacks on wages and work conditions, arguing that budget reductions are mandatory if the county is to balance its budget. But a review of county budget documents shows that it ended 2003 with an unspent balance of almost $51 million in fringe benefits that were budgeted for the Police Department last year, money that was collected from the police portion of the county's taxes and was specifically earmarked for police services.
Most of the money is in the police retirement contingency fund, a new item added to the 2003 budget by the county executive, Thomas R. Suozzi. Allen Morrison, a spokesman for the county comptroller, Howard S. Weitzman, said the new fund was created as ''a contingency appropriation for salary and fringe benefits,'' in addition to the $517.5 million already budgeted for salaries and fringe benefits. The latter include retirement-related expenses and insurance for active and retired members.
This new item added more than $38 million to the total police budget, but Mr. Weitzman said none of that money was spent. Moreover, there was a surplus of $13 million last year in the other budget lines for fringe benefits, for a total surplus of $51 million.
Mr. Weitzman, whose office released the budget documents, said that overall the Police Department had a budget surplus of more than $50 million last year, suggesting that the rest of the police budget broke about even.
Officials of the police patrol officers' union, which agreed last September to a new six-year contract balancing with average pay increases of 3.25 percent a year, are asking why the money was put in the budget in the first place and why it was not used to hire new police officers for a department that they say is severely depleted.
''This obviously proves our case that they have enough money in the budget to hire more police officers,'' said Gary DelaRaba, head of the police officers' union. ''We are 400 police officers down from where we were, which is the equivalent to closing down two and a half precincts. Crime is going to go through the roof, overtime will go through the roof, which will accelerate retirements, and the illusion of saving $38 million in the contract will disappear very quickly. The county executive needs to use the money to hire more cops. With his hiring plan we will be an additional 150 short by 2006, leaving us with a grand total of 550 short.''
Included in the 2003 budget was the recent hiring of 47 new officers. Mr. Suozzi's office did not respond to several requests for comment on the county's police hiring program.
An additional $9.6 million was budgeted for the contingency fund for this year, while the regular appropriations for fringe benefits was increased by almost $36 million to $162.5 million. This year, the total budgeted outlay for police salaries and benefits is $525.3 million.
Mr. Weitzman said he was told by the county budget director, Mark Young, that ''the administration has decided to set aside $40 million to cover termination pay expected in 2004.''
According to Mr. Weitzman, the average termination pay for a police officer is $250,000. Based on his estimate, $40 million would cover retirement pay for 160 officers. Last year 84 officers retired from the department, a police spokesman said.
A $40 million payout for retirements would leave untouched $11 million from the 2003 surplus and does not include the nearly $10 million budgeted for the contingency fund this year.
Mr. Weitzman said the county was ''under very strict rules for estimated budgets'' and added that the pension system contributions were lower than budgeted because of state legislation and that the police officers' union contract saved the county $38 million.
In a statement released through a spokesman, Scott McMahon, the Nassau Legislature's minority leader, Peter Schmidt, said he had tried to hire more police officers last year. ''The Republican delegation consistently has raised its concerns with public safety,'' he said. ''In fact we attempted to put forward an amendment to the 2004 budget to increase the number of police officers and detectives. Unfortunately, the Democratic majority voted this amendment down.''
The office of Judy Jacobs, the Legislature's presiding officer and leader of the Democratic majority, referred inquiries to Mr. Young, who said the Suozzi administration wanted the surplus. ''The big picture is that we had a surplus and we are happy about it,'' he said. He attributed the $36 million increase in fringe benefits in this year's budget to health and pension costs. As for the additional $10 million set aside for the 2004 budget's contingency fund, he said the detectives' union and the superior officers' union were without contracts. ''We need to set aside resources somewhere to cover the potential costs and impacts of those contracts,'' he said. ''That is why it is there.''
