NOW that foreign stocks and currencies have produced spectacular returns for American investors for more than a year, overseas markets are far from cheap. Buyers may want to be especially picky after such a run, but there is no shortage of suggestions about what those picks should be.
Following are selections from fund managers, analysts and financial advisers who specialize in foreign markets. They were asked to name their top stock for the medium to long term, the only restriction being that the choice must be listed on an American market for easy trading. (All of the companies they mentioned trade as American depository receipts on the New York Stock Exchange.)
A Global Telephone Play
Jason James, head of global equity strategy at HSBC in London, recommended Vodafone, the mobile telephone service giant based in Britain. The company holds a 45 percent stake in Verizon Wireless and was a top contender for AT&amp;T Wireless, which has agreed to be acquired by Cingular Wireless for nearly $41 billion in cash.
Mr. James said that the overall industry was reviving after several dismal years and that Vodafone, which lost about 75 percent of its market value after the tech bubble popped, was still trading about 60 percent below its peak and stood to do better than most if the recovery continued. ''As the only mobile phone operator with a reasonable claim to be genuinely global, it has a significant competitive advantage in attracting high-end customers,'' he said. ''I also believe that the growth potential of the mobile business as a whole is being underestimated.''
Mr. James said mobile phone companies were shifting from a defensive to an aggressive posture, a change revealed in the scramble to acquire AT&amp;T Wireless. ''The industry has concentrated on paying down debt in the last few years, rather than chasing growth opportunities,'' he said. ''That priority is likely to change now that the debt situation has come under control. Vodafone is likely to show powerful dividend growth over the next few years as its huge cash flows finally start to be paid out to investors.''
Investors factored in far too much growth in calculating the value of Vodafone and its rivals a few years ago, Mr. James said. Now, he said, they may expect too little.
''In European telecoms, we are back to valuations seen in the early 1990's, when the sector was viewed as a boring utility,'' Mr. James said. ''And, indeed, many clients do assert that it is a boring utility again. So I don't think that the market is overestimating growth anymore -- quite the opposite.''
Vodafone's A.D.R.'s have gained 38 percent over the last 12 months.
Two Votes for Nokia
Fiona Page, a manager of European portfolios at Britannic Asset Management in Glasgow, likes another leader in telecommunications: Nokia, the cellphone maker based in Finland. Nokia raised sales forecasts for the year in January, sending its stock up 13 percent in a day as analysts increased earnings estimates.
Ms. Page said that she owned Nokia before the pleasant surprise lured masses of investors. ''It has had a very strong start to the year, and the upgrades confirm our view,'' she said.
Underlying Nokia's appeal are its economies of scale as the global leader, combined with interest in a new generation of phones with color screens and cameras. Demand for the latest technology has helped to halt a slide in average selling prices for its phones. The company is also having stronger-than-expected growth in its other main business, telephone network infrastructure. This business had been running at a break-even pace, she said, but now has profit margins of 12 percent. The company's A.D.R.'s are up 61.2 percent in the last 12 months.
Bill Blevins, managing director of Blevins Franks International, a large firm of financial advisers in London, also picked Nokia, citing its new repertoire of fancy phones. He said he also admired the company's ability to hold on to its leadership position.
''Nokia has proven to be resilient and innovative in the face of increasing competition and has a number of new-generation developments expected to come on stream in 2004, which is likely to increase their market share and long-term profitability,'' he said. ''Nokia has successfully developed a public perception and market position of the provider you cannot ignore before you decide whatever you eventually buy.''
He cautioned anyone who wants a stock portfolio with a large, steady income stream to look elsewhere.
''This is not a share for dividend seekers, but for those looking for longer-term capital growth,'' Mr. Blevins said. ''This is not a short-term punt, but a decent-quality medium-to-long-term buy.''
A Publisher's Online Strength
Ken Cox, a fund manager in Edinburgh for the Franklin Templeton Group, suggested Reed Elsevier, the educational materials publisher, which he said should be viewed as a stealth technology company.
Investors should focus on the fact that the company generates nearly $2 billion a year in Internet sales, he said. ''Demand for their products is strong,'' he said. ''These are essential publications for the legal, scientific and medical industries; it's a steady market.''
Despite the growth of its Internet business and investors' renewed affection for technology stocks, Reed Elsevier ''has been left behind, as if it has got some kind of problem,'' Mr. Cox said. ''But,'' he added, ''it hasn't.''
There are two ways to invest. Like Royal Dutch/Shell and Unilever, Reed Elsevier is an operating company owned jointly by holding companies in the Netherlands and Britain, each also named Reed Elsevier. The Dutch stock often trades at a discount to its British equivalent, Mr. Cox said. The A.D.R. of the Dutch stock, trading under the ticker symbol ENL, has gained 38.6 percent over the last 12 months. The A.D.R. of its English cousin trades under the symbol RUK and is up 31.2 percent over the same period.
Mixing One's Drinks
Hugh Young, who works in Singapore as head of global equities for Aberdeen Asset Management, recommended Coca-Cola Femsa, which he said was the largest Coca-Cola bottling company in Latin America and a business that has ''a good franchise and great cash flow.''
After describing its virtues, he proposed an alternative for investors who want a less focused enterprise and do not mind mixing their drinks. ''Maybe more interesting, when I think of it, is Coke Femsa's parent, Femsa itself,'' he said. ''You get the Coke business, plus beer, plus a chain of convenience stores, all professionally managed.''
Femsa, or Fomento Economico Mexicano S.A., makes the Dos Equis and Sol beer brands. Femsa's A.D.R.'s have risen 33 percent over the last 12 months; Coke Femsa's A.D.R.'s have gained 35.7 percent.
A Beverage Giant in Brazil
Alan Nesbit, deputy head of global emerging market equities in the London office of First State Investments, an Australian fund manager, picked a similar company, but farther south: Companhia de Bebidas das Americas, the Brazilian beverage producer known as AmBev. It has been able to generate strong earnings growth in a fairly staid industry by using its huge size to establish an overwhelming market presence throughout South America, while cutting operating costs, Mr. Nesbit said. Its A.D.R.'s are up 67.8 percent over the last year.
Mr. Nesbit said AmBev was the fifth-largest brewer in the world and the dominant Brazilian beverage company, with 70 percent of the beer market and 17 percent of the soft drink market. It is also growing in Argentina, Peru, Venezuela, Uruguay, Paraguay and Central America, he added.
Mr. Nesbit said the company was ''focused on brand positioning, marketing and distribution strategies in order to maintain growth and enhance profitability.'' It has been able to raise prices well beyond the rate of inflation, he said, and has been developing premium beer brands and improving product distribution. AmBev's operating earnings are growing about 15 percent a year, adjusted for inflation, and the stock trades at a low valuation of slightly more than 10 times earnings, he said.
