LYING in a hospital bed after a stroke, doped up on morphine, Robert Rauschenberg began to see things. The clock on the wall suddenly became a man, an evil count, who lived on a hill outside the hospital. The count was trying to kill him, so naturally Mr. Rauschenberg sought to escape. The next day, the nurses removed the clock from his room. The count did not bother Mr. Rauschenberg again.
This spacey experience inspired one of the more curious paintings in Mr. Rauschenberg's new show at the Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art in Hartford. The painting, ''Guide'' (2003), is from ''Scenarios,'' his latest series of pigment-transfer paintings, on public display for the first time. Also on view are two portfolios of prints from ''Currents,'' an important 1970 collage and silkscreen series, and several junk metal sculptures from the ''Gluts'' series.
Collage, assemblage and image transfer techniques have been central to Mr. Rauschenberg's artwork for a half-century. His most recent series of paintings are no exception, with the artist scanning, printing and then transferring 35-millimeter slide images onto archival paper mounted on large plastic sheets using a specially developed process. Measuring nearly 7 by 10 feet, these huge painterly panels depict blended snapshot imagery of everyday life.
Oddly, the key to understanding these paintings is the artist's use of empty white space. Carefully controlled, the white areas of the paintings lock the randomly combined photographic images together; it is the lubricant that holds things in place. The white spaces shove dramatic images apart, and pull together things that might normally be too delicate to be displayed with each other.
The one exception is ''Guide,'' which is pretty well covered in imagery. In addition, it contains dirty finger smudges and rough handprints, making it one of the only images here to contain traces of the artist's hand. If I didn't know better, I would say the 78-year-old artist, whose health has been patchy lately, jumped on the printing table and crawled about on the painting.
But what really makes ''Guide'' special is the way it relates to a specific event in the artist's life. Duplicated down the left side of the painting is an image of the interior corner of a room. On the wall is a clock, beneath which we see a television set and a vase filled with flowers. Could this be a reference to Mr. Rauschenberg's hospital experience? Yes it is, or at least that was the artist's reaction when I quizzed him recently about his choice of imagery.
Nailing down the meaning of the other imagery in the painting is a lot harder. In addition to the hospital interior, there is an image of an electricity meter surrounded by dirty smudges, handprints and partially obscured imagery of signs, urban scenes and building sites. Just off center is a pair of linked street signs, one for ''Captiva,'' the island off Florida where the artist lives, the other for a ''Dead End'' road. The coupling is decidedly ominous.
What, then, are we to make of this jumble of sensually elegiac imagery arranged with an intuitive finesse? Although I have no certain answer, ''Guide'' seems to me to sum up Mr. Rauschenberg's present preoccupations. There is a nervous energy here, and even a hint of primal fear. Is it a fear of death, illness or mental disintegration? I really don't know, but the weary gloominess of the painting left me with the feeling that something was being mourned.
Another provocative painting is ''Random Want'' (2003). Here Mr. Rauschenberg crowds his imagery on the right side for effect, finishing it off with an incongruous image of a water tower on the left. The painting summarizes the hurly burly of New York City life, with its endless temptations. But it is more than that, too, reflecting as it does the tangled, hazy mesh of memories that come to stand for a particular place or experience. This painting, like many here, are little mind mirrors.
As an artist, Mr. Rauschenberg has always been alert to the possibilities of visual disjunctions, oddities and juxtapositions. These qualities pervade the fine pair of print portfolios padding out the exhibition, ''Features'' and ''Surface,'' both 1970 works from ''Currents.'' Poetic and intelligent, they mix random headlines from newspapers collected by the artist for three months in 1970. It might not sound like a big deal these days, but they were among the most radically inventive prints of their time.
''Robert Rauschenberg: Current Scenarios'' is at Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art, 600 Main Street, Hartford, through Sept. 5. Information: (860)278-2670.
ART REVIEW
