EVEN the pioneers must have kicked up their heels at some point during their grueling journey westward.
Or so Craig Bartlett thinks.
His 90-minute animated film, ''Party Wagon,'' which has its premiere Friday at 8 p.m. on Cartoon Network, is about a covered wagon full of merry mischief-makers as they heave-ho along the Oregon Trail on their way to Seattle.
''I was really fascinated with the past by growing up as a kid in Seattle,'' Mr. Bartlett said in a telephone interview from his office at the Cartoon Network studios in Burbank, Calif. ''I would play cowboys and Indians with my friends and watch Seattle turn into a suburb before my eyes.''
Mr. Bartlett has long harbored an affection for his hometown, which he used as the unnamed setting for ''Hey Arnold!,'' the series he developed in the mid-90's for Nickelodeon.
The history of the Northwest captivated him as well, and he found himself musing about doing a wagon train story -- but with a twist. ''I thought, 'What if there were one bad wagon, and when they would circle the wagons at night, every night was like a town hall meeting?'''
Full of Western archetypes, ''Party Wagon'' follows 16-year-old Randolph P. McDuff after he jilts his bride at the altar in Kennebunk, Me., and heads west in a run for his life. As he reaches the Missouri River, Randy, with the voice of Sean Astin, hooks up with a motley crew, including the vagabonds Romeo Jonesand Lewis Clark Jefferson; the curmudgeonly wagon master Bumpy Schmitts; his Shakespeare-reading daughter, Ornery Sue; and the shoot-'em-up cowgirl Sublimity Jill, astride her trusty steed, Lariat.
Just as their rickety ferry is about to go under, a shifty little man named Three-Eyed Jack produces a map with the whereabouts of El Glitterado, a hidden mine overflowing with rubies, sapphires and diamonds, just north of Seattle. When a twist of fate washes Randy and the map onto dry land, he and his fellow travelers decide to head west together in a quest for the treasure, joining a wagon train of pioneers along the way.
Randy (at right, seated) was created in the likeness of ''the 16-year-old me,'' said Mr. Bartlett, now 47. But it is Romeo Jones, the film's Kid Rock look-alike (standing next to Randy, above right, and, above left, with Lewis Clark Jefferson and Sublimity Jill), who is Mr. Bartlett's inner voice -- literally.
Supplying the voice of the swoon-inspiring troubadour gave Mr. Bartlett a chance to use his singing and guitar-playing skills. He said he always tries to cast himself, partly because of SAG royalties and partly because he likes to be ''at the party.'' ''This wagon train had to have an instrument,'' he said.
True to its creator's heart, it also had to have a love story or two (just think of Hilda's relentless pursuit of Arnold). Randy wrestles with the affections of both Jill and Sue. ''Unrequited love is a big theme for me,'' Mr. Bartlett said. ''No one will ever hook up.''
That theme is not based on his own life, he quickly added, noting that he is married to Lisa Groening, sister of Matt Groening, creator of ''The Simpsons,'' and is the father of Matt, 14, and Katie, 11.
It may simply be that he's an incurable romantic. ''In the end, 'Party Wagon' is actually meant to be kind of moving,'' he said. ''Randy is sitting underneath a leaky wagon, writing a letter home in the rain, and he realizes the whole thing is a big mistake.''
-- Kathryn Shattuck
FOR YOUNG VIEWERS
