FOREST LAWN cemetery floats high above Los Angeles, offering a producer's-eye view of the television studios below. As cars streamed toward the memorial service for Mary-Ellis Bunim, the co-creator of ''The Real World,'' a member of the cemetery staff fretted over which visitors were allowed at the service. ''There's some controversy,'' she confided, ''about whether this is public or private.''
The memorial's subject might have relished the moment. Bunim -- who died on Jan. 29 of breast cancer at the age of 57 -- was the irascible mother of reality television: a woman who conquered the soap opera world, then built a second career engineering human behavior into vivid, addictive story lines. In collaboration with her partner, Jonathan Murray, Bunim was a pioneer in this new genre drawn from real life, a decade before the current flood of Survivors, Bachelors and Apprentices. Together, they sucked a whole generation through the fourth wall, democratized the nature of celebrity and permanently altered the way networks thought about programming.
As a strong breeze rattled the microphone, Mark Itkin, Ms. Bunim's gravel-voiced agent, affectionately recalled Ms. Bunim as ''one of the toughest and most demanding clients I ever had.'' Her old friend Millee Taggart-Ratcliffe, a former actress Ms. Bunim had shepherded into a career as a writer for soap operas, recalled the early Ms. Bunim as a ''gorgeous young blonde,'' an ambitious secretary hoping to climb the ladder of daytime television. Her daughter, Julianna, 24, described her mother, but weeks away from death, pressing her to rewrite her graduate school essays. And on screens that were almost invisible in the sunlight, viewers watched a short film, showing clips of Ms. Bunim on various sets, plus a shot of her skydiving on her 50th birthday, all set to the Des'ree song ''You Gotta Be.''
After the ceremony, television executives in power ties mingled with Bunim's friends and relatives. But equally conspicuous was a cadre of Bunim-Murray alumni, the amateur stars of ''The Real World'' and ''Road Rules,'' known to most viewers by only their first names: Trishelle, Kameelah, Theo, Veronica. Paris Hilton, lately of ''The Simple Life,'' strutted by, heading toward the parking lot.
Ms. Bunim, the child of a rice importer and a nurse, got her foothold in television in 1967, parlaying a secretarial position at CBS's ''Search for Tomorrow'' into a production assistant's job. Not long afterward, she became the youngest executive producer of daytime television ever. For two decades, she supervised production at ''Search for Tomorrow,''  ''As the World Turns,''  ''Loving'' and the witty and outrageous ''Santa Barbara,'' where she was hired to juice the ratings. In what was then a sedate genre, Ms. Bunim pushed for glamour: exotic location shoots in Greece, televised concerts with pop stars like Whitney Houston.
Then, in 1987, Ms. Bunim and Mr. Murray were introduced by their agent, Mark Itkin, who thought they might be a good creative team. Mr. Murray came from a news background: he had produced socially conscious news features, including one set in a doomed housing project. Despite their divergent specialties, the two shared a fascination with confessional storytelling, and they envisioned a new genre of television that would straddle drama and documentary. Working on the cheap, they set up shop at opposite ends of the same conference table. Even after their company succeeded, Ms. Bunim and Mr. Murray continued to work side by side, at desks in the same executive office, so they could hear each other's phone calls.
It was an ideal match between his newsy sensibilities and her eye for plot, his laid-back manner and her forcefulness. ''We were very different people,'' Mr. Murray recalled last week, sitting in the offices they had so recently shared and shifting back and forth in his tenses. ''She's sort of a take-no-prisoners kind of person. She feels her opinions very strongly. She has no doubts about any decision that she makes. She had a great sense of story. A real instinct for sort of cutting to the point in terms of what was right or wrong for the show. Though she wasn't the greatest diplomat. She would say: 'This show is a disaster. Let's start over.' ''
For several years, the two of them put together a series of proto-reality pilots, none of which succeeded. ''Unlike previous cinéma vérité, we wanted to make it very commercial; we wanted a hook at every act break,'' Mr. Murray recalled. ''Each scene advanced the story. We wanted you to come back next week.'' First there was ''Crime Diaries,'' meant to be a daily half-hour series that featured fictional detectives solving actual crimes. Then came ''American Families,'' a docu-soap inspired by the highly influential 1970's PBS documentary ''American Family.'' These strange genre-busting projects were a tough sell: the team had so much free time, Ms. Bunim told her daughter, that they took French lessons just to fill up the work day.
In 1992, MTV solicited Ms. Bunim to create a scripted soap opera about young people. She put together a traditional proposal, but the network balked at the price. ''They mostly played music videos, which they got for free,'' Mr. Murray said. ''So the idea of having to pay for programming was a little shocking for them. He and his partner pitched a cheaper alternative: an unscripted series starring actual twenty-somethings rather than actors.
Mr. Murray continued: ''We said, 'We could do something about a bunch of young people starting out their lives in New York. Except let's not have them on the Lower East Side in crummy digs, let's put them in a fantasy loft -- but the interactions, where they go to, what they feel, will be very real. It's just that they'll be attractive, and the place will be attractive, in the finest tradition of television.''
The outcome was ''The Real World'' -- as the opening sequence said, again and again, ''seven strangers, picked to live in a house, to find out what happens when people stop being polite and start getting real.'' The 1992 series featured a diverse cast of unknowns, including Julie Oliver, a fish out of water from Alabama, and the future host of ''The Grind,'' Eric Nies. It hit pay dirt with the channel's youthful demographic, and the show became an MTV perennial -- spawning 14 successive seasons set in various cities from New Orleans to Seattle to Las Vegas. (The latest is to begin filming in Philadelphia.)
In 1994, Bunim-Murray produced ''Road Rules,'' a road-trip spinoff featuring sports contests. It was the first example of a subgenre that now dominates the airwaves: the competitive reality series. Over the next decade, the company brought back its real-life characters again and again, for reunion specials and alumni challenges, and produced ''Making the Band,'' a variation on the formula in which teenage boys vied for the chance to be the next Menudo.
At their best, the Bunim-Murray productions distilled the poignant lunacy of early adulthood: doofus philosophizing, humiliating flirtations, cutlery flung across the room.Throwing disparate young people into a lush loft (or a Winnebago, or a music studio), they triggered some surprisingly raw discussions of race, sexuality and gender; years before Ellen DeGeneres came out, ''The Real World'' cast idiosyncratic gay ''characters'' who were neither tokens nor simple role models. At its tawdriest, the series could be a cautionary tale of what happens when you mix hot tubs with alcohol -- or magnify narcissism with a zoom lens. But it was also reliably watchable: melodramatic, hilarious, phony, raw and tender.
From its first season, ''The Real World'' pioneered the stylistic conventions that have since become clichés of reality programming: the ''confessional'' interview, the meaningful song lyric used to underscore an interpersonal crisis, the experimental friendship between a former bigot and a minority member. For viewers, it was often hard to tell what was ''real'' and what was mere posturing (or an editing trick), and that tension added to the show's unsettling allure. And the rerun marathons that MTV frequently ran allowed viewers to climb into the show's constructed reality and hang out there for an entire day.
''It was perfect for MTV, because we have an audience that loves to see themselves, to be on television, to find out what tribe they belong to,'' said Judy McGrath, MTV Networks group president. ''And Mary-Ellis perfectly tapped into this. She was funny and thoughtful and adult, but I always felt like there was a 14-year-old girl in there.''
Ms. Bunim's creative progeny had a tricky relationship with the producer who made them famous. ''Since you were young when you came to her, you treated her like the high school principal,'' said Jake Bronstein, who appeared on ''Road Rules 4,'' broadcast in 1997. ''Obviously, you wanted both of them to like you, because they could do things for you, but you didn't want anyone to think you wanted them to. But if she ever called and had a nice word to say, you'd jump at it.''
Ms. Bunim was the one who decided whether cast members were the heroes of their own lives or the villain of somebody else's. ''She wasn't one to baby people; she wasn't going to sit there and take their 'oh poor me' thing,'' Mr. Murray explained. ''Some of the cast members who don't come off well -- they're angry when they watch themselves. Some of them learn from that, and some feel exploited. But I always think Mary-Ellis didn't get enough credit for protecting people; there's lots of times we could have used unflattering footage and we didn't. She wanted the characters to be likable, for us to root for them. And she always pushed for romance.''
In the late 90's, reality television began to boil over, spurred by the European success of ''Big Brother'' and Mark Burnett's United States production of ''Survivor.'' Network executives quickly cross-pollinated Bunim-Murray's ''hamsters in a box'' technique with every conceivable genre -- including game shows, gross-out contests, makeovers, dating programs, sitcoms and satires. According to Mr. Murray, Ms. Bunim was frustrated at the way critics lumped all such shows together. ''Clearly there's all kinds of reality, just as there are different kinds of dramas,'' he argued. Ms. Bunim would ''sort of laugh when people would draw these big conclusions about reality programming,'' he added. ''She felt you had to look at people's motives. When the writer's guild is condemning it, duh, I wonder why?''
By the time she died, Ms. Bunim had been battling breast cancer for eight years. In contrast to the full disclosure she asked of her TV subjects, she had told few of her colleagues that she was ill. Even into her final weeks, she continued to chip away at new projects, never speaking of the possibility of death. These efforts paid off: though Bunim-Murray's reality movie ''The Real Cancun'' belly-flopped, this fall the company scored its first network television ratings smash with ''The Simple Life,'' a campy faux sitcom on Fox.
But Ms. Bunim's true labor of love was the company's other new show, ''Starting Over,'' NBC's oddball self-help experiment, which is broadcast each weekday morning at 11, just like a soap opera. Like ''The Real World,''  ''Starting Over'' features strangers picked to live in a house -- but this time, they are mostly middle-aged women. A team of ''life coaches'' alternately prod and cajole their subjects through Oprahesque crises: makeovers, postdivorce dates, job interviews. Ms. Bunim herself devised the show's tag line: ''Life has never been this real.''
Ms. Taggart-Ratcliffe, now a consulting producer on ''Starting Over,'' said the show exemplified Bunim's fundamental interest: to dramatize the complex mess of human character. ''Don't get me wrong,'' she said. ''I'm not saying she was a deified saint. She was tough, but I'm O.K. with tough, because underneath was a warm heart and a great inquisitive mind; in a city which was all about perception, she was always what she was. She wasn't nicer than she was, and she didn't have a phony bone in her body. She didn't apologize for it. And she was always about the story, about the journey. She was always about making it better.''
TELEVISION: RERUNS
