The odds are good that you have never heard of Roger G. Ling, and this is not surprising. He was not a movie star or famous athlete. He had no publicist or record deal.
Mr. Ling was a soldier, and his death in Iraq was posted yesterday in an 85-word notice on the Web site for the Department of Defense.
The notice said that he was 20, an Army specialist from Douglaston, Queens. It said he died on Thursday of injuries from a roadside bomb in a place called Khaldiyah. It said he had served with the Company C, 1st Battalion, 34th Armored Regiment, 1st Brigade Combat Team out of Fort Riley, Kan.
The military does not make a habit of talking about its dead. That task belongs to the families, and yesterday Specialist Ling's family said he was an ordinary man whose life had many ordinary joys - football games, trips to Disney World, television, malls, a love of cars.
''Mostly, he liked to hang out with his friends going to the city,'' said his sister, Leona Ling. ''He was a normal guy.''
Specialist Ling was the son of Chinese immigrants. His father, Wai, was drafted for the war in Vietnam.
But even Wai Ling tried to talk his son out of going to Iraq, said Carol Lai, the soldier's aunt. It did not work. The son had made his mind up, and last September he went.
It was hard at first, his sister said. In e-mail messages, he complained of being homesick, of missing Queens.
''I think most soldiers get like that,'' Ms. Ling said. ''Everybody misses home.''
Ms. Ling, 24, helped raise her brother. Their mother died when they were young. To ease his burden overseas, she said, she sent him little gifts - magazines, a book on card tricks, things to kill the boredom.
As for the war, they did not talk about it much. In their few telephone conversations, they talked of home.
''We talked about what was going on back here with all of us,'' she said. ''I knew he was going through a lot. I mean, I knew he saw a lot. But we never really talked about Iraq.''
Theirs is a large family, a family of cousins. There are six on the mother's side and four on the father's.
Growing up, Mr. Ling spent summers in New Jersey with his favorite cousin, Jansen Lai. They went to the mall and the movies. On weekends, it was baseball, football and the television set. At night, they stayed up playing pool.
Then, after high school, Mr. Ling signed up with the Army. No one seemed surprised. He had a big heart, a strong heart, Mr. Lai said. Mr. Ling liked to serve.
Now he is dead, and, to Mr. Lai, it makes no sense.
''I can't explain it,'' he said. ''I still keep thinking that he's hurt, not gone.''
Mr. Lai was sitting in a dormitory room in California. His cousin's body was still in Iraq.
''He can't be gone,'' Mr. Lai said.
