THERE was one thing that Kathy Vignau and Thomas Hynds knew for sure: neither of them would ever marry again. She was divorced, with three teenage children. He had been married twice and raised two children from his first marriage. Their certainty about staying single was, in fact, one of the things they bonded over.
Ms. Vignau, 47, is a pharmaceuticals sales representative. Mr. Hynds, 56, oversees clinical trials for pharmaceutical companies. In September 2002, on the last day of a medical conference in San Diego, Ms. Vignau spotted Mr. Hynds and mistook him for someone she had met at a business dinner. ''I said, 'Excuse me, didn't we meet in New Orleans?' ''
They chatted, discovering that they both lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, and they traded e-mail addresses. ''I fired off a few e-mails,'' Mr. Hynds recalled. ''It didn't seem to jell.''
Then last February, Ms. Vignau, who was working at her home computer all day, felt ravenous. She threw on ratty jeans and her daughter's track shoes and dashed without makeup into a Gourmet Garage to buy a prepared dinner. ''There he was,'' Ms. Vignau said, ''holding his little bag of onions. I said, 'Didn't I meet you in San Diego?' ''
''At that point, there was a little spark,'' she added. She soon sent an e-mail message that read, ''If you're not married, engaged, living with someone or otherwise occupied, I would like to meet you for a glass of wine.'' He wrote back, ''I don't fall under any of those categories.''
They made a date, but then Ms. Vignau took a spill at home. ''I decided to put some very heavy medical textbooks on a very high shelf while standing on an office chair with wheels on it,'' she said. ''My bicycle ended up on top of my face,'' which suffered a large purple bruise. Too self-conscious to be seen in public, she suggested they meet for wine at her place.
She kept the lighting low, and they plunged into a talkathon of several hours -- ''lovely deep conversations,'' Ms. Vignau said, about work, children and not marrying again. Both wanted a relationship of shared interests and separate apartments.
When they went into her brightly lighted kitchen, where her bruise was more noticeable, Mr. Hynds remembered thinking that if they were seen in public, he would have to wear a sign saying, ''I didn't do this to this poor woman.'' Ms. Vignau took the initiative. ''I said: 'I think I'm about to kiss you. Is that O.K.?' He said, 'That's more than O.K.' ''
The kiss was followed by a caveat. ''May I be very honest with you?'' Mr. Hynds asked. ''Oh, please don't,'' said Ms. Vignau, who had been dating for 10 years. ''I'm much more accustomed to men lying to me.'' He told her anyway: he needed to have ''closure'' on a relationship that was winding down.
She appreciated his honesty. He ended the other relationship within a week.
It was not long before they were talking of marriage and picking out a vintage satin and lace wedding dress.
''It was the most effortless relationship ever,'' Ms. Vignau said. ''I'd never had the feeling of your heart going pitter-patter. I feel it every day with Tom.''
Mr. Hynds said: ''There's a certain wonderment about her. There's no ambiguity or games. She'd make a lousy card player.''
Last October, he proposed on bended knee at his apartment in front of their children -- only days before the couple relocated to near Rochester, where they have new jobs. (Ms. Vignau's children live with their father and stepmother in a house in Little Siver, N.J., but see their mother often.)
Ms. Vignau and Mr. Hynds took their vows on Feb. 15 before the Rev. William McD. Tully in the chapel at St. Bartholomew's Church on Park Avenue, where all five children acted as attendants -- including Ms. Vignau's daughter Chelsea Bollerman, 16, who arrived in sweats, fresh from a track meet, and changed into a spaghetti-strap black dress minutes before walking down the aisle.
A reception for 40 took place at a nearby French bistro, Le Bateau Ivre, which the couple picked because it is a favorite of theirs and to make a statement. ''I was tired of everyone bashing the French,'' said the bride, whose father's family comes from France.
And her resolve to stay single? ''I didn't believe her,'' said Luke Bollerman, Ms. Vignau's son, who is a freshman at La Salle University. ''My mom's a very lovable person. When you're a lovable person, you need someone to love you.''
WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS: VOWS
