A.R. Rahman  Composer  ''Bombay Dreams''
THE composer A. R. Rahman has written the soundtracks for more than 100 Indian films, by his own count, and released some 70 albums that have reportedly sold at least 100 million copies worldwide. Most of the albums are in Tamil, Hindi or Telugu. But five of them are in English, and if until now he has been comparatively unknown in the West, his English-language musical, ''Bombay Dreams,'' produced by Andrew Lloyd Webber, was an audience hit (reviews were mixed) when it opened in London in 2002. With a cast of 39 and several new songs, it opens on April 29 at the Broadway Theater.
''I'd never done a stage musical before,'' Mr. Rahman, 38, said by telephone from Saudi Arabia, where he had recently gone on hajj, the requisite pilgrimage to Mecca for every Muslim. (Born A. S. Dileep Kumar, he converted to Islam in 1988 and took an Islamic name, Allah Rakha Rahman.) ''In the movies, when you finish a song, it's finished. In the theater, you need to tweak it forever. I kind of like that.''
That Mr. Rahman is trying something new is nothing new. His taste is as eclectic as his output is prodigious. He has been working as a professional musician since age 11, when the death of his father, a well-known musical director himself, drove him to start playing keyboards to support the family. He won a scholarship to Trinity College of Music in London, where he studied classical music -- he lists his favorite composers and music as Bach, Beethoven, Mozart and the classical music of Southern India, as well as ''rock and fusion.'' He also works in advertising and has composed more than 300 jingles.
Though Mr. Rahman has never attended a Broadway show, he says he has seen ''loads of shows on the West End.'' Many of them were composed by Andrew Lloyd Webber, and it was Lord Lloyd Webber, a fan of Mr. Rahman's, who commissioned him to write the music for ''Bombay Dreams,'' the story of a poor young man who dreams of becoming a movie star in Bollywood, as the Indian film industry in Bombay is known.
In an interview in The New York Times before ''Bombay Dreams'' opened in London, Lord Lloyd Webber said he thought Mr. Rahman ''could bring a whole new audience and new dynamic'' to musical theater.
Both the music and the movies of India seem to be gaining in popularity in the West. ''Each culture has its time,'' Mr. Rahman said. ''Now it's time for India.'' He gives as an example the 2002 Academy Award nomination as best foreign film for ''Lagaan,'' for which he wrote the songs. (Almost every Indian movie is in effect a musical, with at least a half-dozen songs that the characters sing.) The music of ''Bombay Dreams,'' he says, is a ''collage'' of the contemporary and traditional in India, ''with a Western sensibility.''
However audiences respond in New York, Mr. Rahman has apparently caught the theater bug already. He is writing songs for his second musical, expected to open on the West End next year: a stage version of ''The Lord of the Rings.''
JONATHAN MANDELL
SPRING THEATER
