THOSE who remember the haunting image taken at the funeral of President John F. Kennedy, the one in which John F. Kennedy Jr. salutes his father's coffin, may be surprised to learn that the photographer was only 17 when he took that picture.
The photographer, John Shearer, a Westchester resident then and now, was given the job of covering the funeral, his first assignment at the magazine, where he had dreamed of working since he was 13.
That photograph and others comprise the first major retrospective of Mr. Shearer's work in an exhibit, ''Four Decades in Pictures,'' at the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts in Mount Kisco. Now 57, Mr. Shearer looks back on that early work and says, ''I liked the idea of being invisible behind the camera, of people opening their lives and their souls for me to capture.''
His first pictures were shot in the Parkway Gardens neighborhood in Greenburgh where he grew up, in a community he described as ''full of interesting middle-class black families.'' There he and a neighbor, Gordon Parks, then a Life magazine photojournalist and the first black photographer to be hired by a major magazine, became friends. Mr. Parks became one of Mr. Shearer's primary influences.
''He'd drive up to visit us in his Jaguar,'' Mr. Shearer recalled, ''and I'd think, 'I want to do what he does!'''
When he was 12, Mr. Shearer approached Mr. Parks with some of his photographs. ''He looked at them and tore up all but one,'' Mr. Shearer said. ''But I understood. Two months later, I showed him another group of photos, and this time I came home with more.''
At Woodlands High School, he learned darkroom techniques from his math teacher. His father, Ted Shearer, a painter and published cartoonist, was another source of encouragement.
''He'd prod me, 'When was the last time you made a good picture?''' Mr. Shearer said.
And good pictures he made, enough that he began winning photography competitions and having his work exhibited at Grand Central Terminal and at the White Plains and Greenburgh public libraries. At age 17, he had an exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art.
He became the second black photographer to work for a major magazine when he was hired by Look in 1963, and in 1969, he was hired by Life magazine. His camera recorded significant events in American history, from civil rights marches in the South to street gangs in the South Bronx. He has earned nearly 200 photography and design awards.
In the 1970's, Mr. Shearer and his father founded Shearer Visuals in White Plains and produced industrial photography and animation. He taught photography and design at the Columbia University School of Journalism, and custom publishing at Columbia's School of International and Public Affairs.
In the early 1990's, he formed his current business, Image Partners, based in Katonah, which provides custom publishing and public relations services to Fortune 500 and other companies.
Remembering his years of constant travel, Mr. Shearer appreciates working in a town not far from his home in Goldens Bridge, especially now that Marianne, his wife of 18 years, has taken a job as director of foundations and corporate development at Fordham University. ''I'm being Mr. Mom lately,'' he said. The couple have two children: a daughter, Alison, 15; and a son, Will, 12.
Although he makes frequent trips into New York City, he said his clients there enjoy ''escaping to our hamlet'' for meetings.
Mr. Shearer continues to produce several photographs a month and is pursuing two projects. ''I am interested in documenting the Portuguese fishing community in New England, and the Rastafarians in Jamaica,'' he said.
''Photography has always been my jealous mistress,'' he added. ''My camera is always ready.''
IN PERSON
