When Chinese street peddlers first set up shop here in the 1850's in the bustling Mexican barrio that would eventually become Chinatown, they displayed their wares on carts and atop boxes, just as they had in China. With minor variations, they have been doing business that way ever since.
But that could change, and no one here appears happy about it. Los Angeles officials, citing concerns about pedestrian safety, have begun to enforce an ordinance that bars shopkeepers from placing merchandise on city sidewalks.
In the last two months, Building and Safety Department inspectors have issued more than 150 warnings to merchants in Chinatown, a 24-block area north of downtown, saying that violations could be punishable by fines of up to $1,000 and six months in jail.
The approximately 15,000 Chinese-Americans and other Asian-Americans here say the crackdown reveals a profound misunderstanding of their cultures and customs.
''If we don't display it outside, people don't know what we're selling,'' said Vi Liu, an employee at the Great Wall Company, where shoes, jewelry, hats, books and other items compete for space on shelves outside. ''We bring in more customers this way.''
Some call the move discriminatory, asking why other areas with crowded sidewalks are not going through similar crackdowns.
''It's never been an issue with the city before,'' said George Yu, executive director of the Los Angeles Chinatown Business Council. ''It has always been a part of the vibrant street scene. It exists in any Chinatown in the world.''
City officials say the restrictions were prompted by a small fire last year in a crowded Chinatown arcade, where dozens of shopkeepers display clothes, stereos, CD's, herbal remedies and other items.
''The inspectors said we were lucky no one died,'' said Councilman Edward Reyes, whose district includes Chinatown.
Merchants here were so rattled by the inspectors' warnings -- not to mention surprised, given that the sidewalk ordinance, passed in 1968, had almost never been enforced -- that several appealed to Mr. Reyes. He took up their cause.
''We're asking for a reprieve,'' Mr. Reyes said in an interview, referring to the enforcement action. ''We're asking Building and Safety to suspend it indefinitely, so we can figure out a better way to do this.''
A spokesman for the Building and Safety Department said that officials had agreed to back off from full-bore enforcement of the ordinance, except in egregious cases, while a solution was sought.
One possibility, Mr. Reyes said, is to designate Chinatown a so-called special-use district, where sidewalk vending would be permitted with certain restrictions.
''We're trying to do it in such a way that we don't penalize the small-business owner,'' Mr. Reyes said. ''The question becomes, what are the safety norms we can live with and keep them from jeopardizing people's lives?''
In a community where some people still remember the effects of the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, which forbade most Chinese immigration for more than 60 years, anything that suggests persecution is taken seriously. The forced uprooting of 3,000 Chinatown residents in 1933 to make room for Union Station is another painful memory.
Merchants up and down Broadway, the main shopping street in Chinatown, say that it is already a struggle to stay in business, and that the city's newfound zeal is only making things worse.
''If you don't make money you can't pay rent,'' said Susie Tan, an employee at Broadway Clothing, a small shop that pays $1,850 a month in rent. ''The profit in Chinatown is very, very low -- not even 5 percent. Some weekdays we only make $50.''
Ms. Tan said most vendors in Chinatown keep merchandise under awnings within a few feet of their stores. In most places, the 12-foot-wide sidewalks are otherwise uncluttered. ''It's not in the street, not on city property,'' she said. ''I could understand if we were taking up the whole sidewalk.''
Nevertheless, Ms. Tan said, inspectors have stopped by several times, warning her and other workers that they faced fines.
''We need to be out here,'' Ms. Tan said, watching passers-by from the door. ''If we could make money by sitting inside drinking coffee, that would be nice. But we can't.''
When the inspections began, many merchants responded by putting their goods outside only on weekends, when there is more foot traffic and, just as important, fewer inspectors. The problem for many is that their stores are so small that they serve principally as storage space; once everything is inside, there is little room to walk.
''I don't want to paint anyone as the bad guy,'' said Mr. Yu, the business council leader. ''To a man, the inspectors have been almost apologetic about having to deal with sidewalk display issues. But there's an unequal method of enforcement. It makes for a very heartbreaking situation.''
Mr. Yu and others point to other neighborhoods, most of them Hispanic, where sidewalk vending is common. MacArthur Park is one of the few places in Los Angeles where street vendors are given permits.
Inspectors from the Building and Safety Department said that they were simply following orders from City Hall and that they were too short-staffed to cover the whole city simultaneously.
In the last few months, most of Chinatown's 500 business owners have received notices that said the enforcement program was ''designed to revitalize your neighborhood.'' The notices addressed graffiti removal, abandoned vehicles and ''vending of miscellaneous products on the public way.''
Some merchants have been cooperative, some not. ''It's the hard-core cases that are ignoring us,'' said Luke Zamperini, a spokesman for the department. ''They bring their customs with them, and they can't figure out why they can't do it here.''
