A QUESTION OF BLOOD
By Ian Rankin.
406 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.
THERE'S an inescapably condescending tinge to the phrase ''tartan noir,'' devised to describe the contemporary school of Scottish crime writing. It's a touristy phrase, suggesting that there's something quaint about hard-boiled crime fiction that comes from the land of kilts and haggis. The cozy appellation calls up visions of some new niche market of genre fiction, and it gives readers no idea that this crop of Scottish mystery writers, like Val McDermid, Denise Mina, Louise Welsh (who arrived stateside last year with the knockout debut ''The Cutting Room'') and Ian Rankin -- about whose Inspector John Rebus novels the phrase was invented -- is currently doing the strongest work in the form. In the early 90's Scottish novelists like Irvine Welsh, James Kelman and Jeff Torrington were praised as heralding a new, darker face of Scottish fiction. With the exception of Alan Warner (''Morvern Callar,'' ''The Sopranos''), it's Scotland's mystery writers who deserved that praise.
I wouldn't attempt to hazard a guess about the national traits that have produced this night-blooming garden, though in a 2002 interview, Val McDermid put it this way: ''We have this sort of dark Calvinist past and it's still in place in the present. We also have this wonderful black sense of humor and we love to party. We've produced some of the greatest thinkers of the Enlightenment, and also some of the worst slag-faced bigots in the history of human thought. So there's always the dark pool of these opposites within us that produces a sort of dramatic tension.''
That's a pretty good explication of the different strains in the novels of McDermid and her colleagues. The work of this generation of Scots is certainly dark (Mina's brooding trilogy -- ''Garnethill,'' ''Exile'' and ''Resolution'' -- puts you so far into the mind of its troubled protagonist that the very idea of safety and security seems a cruel illusion), but also weirdly humane. The heroes may be loners, but they haven't shut out friends or colleagues. Some are verging on the dysfunctional, but life has not become a meaningless slog to them. If there's a sliver of hope, it lies in the very process of solving crimes, with its implicit belief in justice and accountability.
Ian Rankin's John Rebus novels hew more closely to the classic police procedural than the work of Rankin's Scottish contemporaries does. And yet Rankin, who's in his early 40's, has a younger writer's impatience with the dourness and rigidity of the form. The Rebus novels feel like the work of a man who was raised on rock 'n' roll and the pop culture of the 60's and 70's (several volumes share titles with albums by Rebus's beloved Rolling Stones). They are looser, hipper, funnier, more down-to-earth than what you'd find in the best contemporary British police procedurals from the likes of Reginald Hill or Ruth Rendell. Human fallacy is not judged quite so harshly here, certainly not with the cold Puritan disdain that sometimes scuppers detective fiction. The Rebus series exists in a recognizable world of work and relationships. In crime fiction, cops' personal lives are always imperiled because they can't leave their work at work. I'd suggest that one of the reasons mystery novels may be connecting with readers now is that for many of us, the boundaries between work and life have, often out of economic necessity, bled into each other.
The first Rebus book, ''Knots and Crosses,'' appeared in 1987. The new one, ''A Question of Blood,'' is the 14th Rebus novel. (There's also a collection of Rebus stories and a novella.) A quick outline of Rebus risks making him seem no different from many other cop heroes: he has a busted marriage in his past and a distant relationship with his daughter; he's disillusioned if not yet wholly cynical; he's willing to break the rules in order to get the job done; he commands the fierce loyalty of the cops who work with him and the ire of his superiors. What distinguishes Rebus is that he may just be the warmest recurring character in contemporary hard-boiled fiction. A borderline alcoholic and a heavy smoker, he is, emotionally and intellectually, anything but a wreck. Affable, more sadly resigned than possessed of a hair-trigger temper, Rebus carries an air of doughy melancholy balanced by his sarcasm. He has a protective paternal side, particularly with his partner, Detective Sgt. Siobhan Clarke, which doesn't always make their relationship smooth. He also has the sort of smart mouth that sounds great coming from private detectives but always winds up getting a cop in trouble.
Rebus is in plenty of trouble in ''A Question of Blood.'' A small-time hood who has been harassing Clarke is found burned to death in his own apartment. Rebus was seen drinking with the man on the night of his death and later entering his apartment. The next day, Rebus is in the hospital with a pair of scalded hands. Trying to avoid the inevitable official inquiry, he goes to work investigating a school shooting. An armed former Special Air Service officer has walked into a private school and killed two students and wounded another before turning the gun on himself. ''There's no mystery'' are the first words of the book, spoken by Clarke, and for much of ''A Question of Blood'' we are not dealing with a whodunit but a why'dhedoit.
THE cunning title refers to the blood-spray patterns that hold the key to the case, and also to the fact that one of the young victims is the son of Rebus's cousin, a man with whom, like most of Rebus's family, he has lost touch. Mysteries, of course, crop up, about Rebus's role in the death of that hood and also about the gunman's army past. But one of the real measures of how Rankin differs from the other practitioners of police procedural is that in ''A Question of Blood'' he doesn't pretend to answer the questions of what prompts random violence. It's to Rankin's credit that we are left with a bigger mystery at the end of the book than at the beginning.
The 1996 school shooting at Dunblane, Scotland, hovers over ''A Question of Blood.'' At several points Rebus and others assert that the gun-control laws that followed in the wake of Dunblane only increased the flow of illegal guns. It's unfortunate that Rankin puts the argument for gun restrictions in the mouth of the novel's least successful character, an opportunistic politician, but Rankin is hardly spouting the classic anti-gun-control argument. Rather, he's using an unpleasant fact to tarnish the attraction of easy solutions. It's one more way in which ''A Question of Blood'' is set up to disprove Siobhan Clarke's opening statement: ''There's no mystery.'' The real mystery here is never solved -- which only makes Rebus's persistence seem all the more heroic.
Charles Taylor is a contributing writer for Salon.
