Shortly after 9 p.m. Friday, dozens of people began gathering at the rear of the platform for Brooklyn-bound Q, N, R and W trains inside the Union Square subway station. Some wore flamboyant suits, others came in long gowns and strands of fake diamonds. One man wore a gray and white mask with the face of a cat. Another had dyed leopardlike spots in his short blond hair.
The group carried boom boxes, drums and noisemakers, and some passers-by wondered aloud whether an early Mardi Gras party was in the works.
Actually, the group had a timelier and more local focus. They had assembled -- by word of e-mail messages marked ''Please fwd to all interested parties'' -- to bid a fond and exuberant farewell to a humble fixture of New York City life for the two-and-a-half years: the Q-diamond train.
One of the last runs of the Q-diamond train was scheduled to depart from Union Square at 9:22 p.m., and as the moment drew near, anticipation mounted. When a W train pulled into the station, the crowd scoffed and chanted ''We want the Q.'' Moments later, as the Q-diamond rumbled down the tracks and approached the platform, those waiting counted down from ten to one. As the doors of the train opened, the crowd, which numbered about 300, shouted gleefully and then crammed into the last two cars.
Beginning today, the Q-diamond train, an express between 57th Street and Seventh Avenue in Manhattan to Brighton Beach in Brooklyn, will be replaced by the B train in Brooklyn and the Q-circle, which runs express in Manhattan and locally in Brooklyn. The switch is part of several changes among the B, D, M, Q, R and W trains after work recently completed on the Manhattan Bridge.
In the last car, yellow streamers made of plastic tape labeled ''Caution'' festooned the walls. On the streamers the letter ''C'' had been altered to read ''Q.''
As some of the partiers hoisted themselves up on top of handrails and dangled there, people who had boarded the train before Union Square looked on in amazement.
''I cannot understand what is going on here,'' said Natalie Babitsky, 64, who lives and works in Manhattan Beach and only moments before had been reading quietly. Somebody handed Ms. Babitsky a crescent of cantaloupe, and she took a bite. The partiers called for speeches and eulogies, and a tall, thin man wearing a three-piece seersucker suit and a waxed moustache obliged.
''Hey, man! Hallelujah and praise the Lord,'' he bellowed while standing on a seat. ''The Q-diamond train was a working-class creature born of grit and smarts and steel and sweat.'' He went on to describe the history of the line, and those in the crowd clapped and cheered.
As the train made stops, revelers dashed down platforms from one car to the other. In the second to last car a man blew through a conch, sounding long sonorous notes. A boom box blared a song by Big Audio Dynamite while riders danced. People sipped from metal flasks, passed bottles of wine through the car and swigged from tall cans of beer.
Teddy McBride, 44, a deliveryman from Sheepshead Bay, said that the party had taken him by surprise, but he approved.
''Everybody's friendly and everybody's having a good time,'' he said. A moment later he wondered, ''Do you think Bloomberg knows about this?''
As the crowd exited the cars at Brighton Beach, Garret Rodriguez, 26, of Long Island City, said that one of the points of the party was to honor the Q-diamond while using the train itself.
''Thus far no one has contested our sovereignty over the rails,'' he said. That was not to remain the case for long. A couple of minutes later, after the crowd had switched to the Manhattan-bound platform, several police officers arrived. They ordered the crowd onto a waiting Q-circle train, a local line, then ordered them off.
Eventually they directed the crowd back on the train and told them to go home.
During the return trip, a group of students from Edward R. Murrow High School on Avenue L in Midwood, Brooklyn, reminisced about the train.
''I have a close connection with the Q-diamond,'' said Eli Caref of Sheepshead Bay. Ms. Caref, 16, said that while riding the train regularly over the last two years, she had gotten to know classmates. ''We ended up being good friends, and the train was a big part of our routine,'' she added.
At Cortelyou Road, the crowd departed the train and walked upstairs to continue the celebration above ground.
''Goodbye Q-circle,'' somebody yelled as the train left the station. ''Long may you run.''
