TOUR OF DUTY
John Kerry and the Vietnam War.
By Douglas Brinkley.
Illustrated. 546 pp. New York:
William Morrow. $25.95.
IF the novel of John Kerry's life had been written by, say, F. Scott Fitzgerald -- a plausible fictive scenario, chronological discordance notwithstanding, since Kerry comes from the sort of stock that was Fitzgerald's métier -- its protagonist would surely have taken a bad turn somewhere down the road. He would have squandered his good breeding. Passed too many years in dissolution. Relied on his social connections or his father's friends to set him up in business. The end would not have been a happy one (although in today's nonfiction America, that sort of person ends up president, but I digress).
But Fitzgerald is dead, and Kerry, despite the most sincere efforts of Victor Charlie in the Mekong delta, is very much alive. This grandson of a successful (though unhappy -- he took his own life) Boston shoe merchant and son of a Foreign Service diplomat intuited his calling from a very early age. He watched and learned as his father did his part in the cold war, moving the family around Europe. He was enrolled in prestigious private schools when the family came back to the States. Summers at the Auchincloss place in Newport blended into Yale, thence to enlistment in the Navy in 1966, when he pined to go to Vietnam and, once he got there, requested the most dangerous assignment a naval officer could get.
And that's just the official stuff. In between, it seems that on every third page of the opening chapters of Douglas Brinkley's ''Tour of Duty,'' Kerry is flying an airplane, hang-gliding, mountaineering, lining up prominent speakers as the head of Yale's Political Union, winning speech prizes, hanging out in Greenwich Village with the future rock impresario Felix Pappalardi or scoring goals for Yale's soccer team (he was in the middle of a game when he learned that John F. Kennedy, his idol, had been shot). He seemed to know at every moment that he was moving through those formative years in preparation for some future test of will. No Fitzgerald needed; the novel of John Kerry's life has been written by Kerry himself.
''Tour of Duty,'' Brinkley's 16th book as author or editor, is packaged under a misleading subtitle; the book, as the above details suggest, covers far more than ''John Kerry and the Vietnam War.'' Kerry's perilous tour of duty was actually cut short -- four months instead of the normal year, but only because he had already taken fire, saved lives and earned his ticket out. One can't help thinking, knowing a bit about Brinkley's politics and considering that this is, after all, a presidential election year, that ''Tour of Duty'' was written less as a work of history and more as a brief for President Kerry.
It is, in other words, a campaign book. This is not intended as a dismissal; campaign books have a long tradition, going back at least to Nathaniel Hawthorne's quickie biography of his old college chum Franklin Pierce, and they can be useful things. This election season has brought the usual raft of them, and the reader who aches to learn the pasts, personalities and future plans of the men who would be president -- whoever that reader is -- can glean a little something from each of them. In ''Winning Modern Wars: Iraq, Terrorism, and American Empire,'' Gen. Wesley K. Clark gives us the secrets of American military power, and its limits. John Edwards's ''Four Trials,'' written with John Auchard and covering the senator's career in the courtroom, is both an attempt to position Edwards as the little fellow's champion, a theme he has invoked successfully on the campaign trail, and a between-the-lines argument against tort reform. ''Howard Dean: A Citizen's Guide to the Man Who Would Be President,'' by reporters for two Vermont newspapers, details the former governor's record+in+the+statehouse. Kerry's own ''Call to Service'' (Dean's+manifesto+is+titled+''Winning+Back+America'') lays out his plans for America should he get his hand on the tiller. It is hardly a riveting read, but at least it isn't disguised as something else.
The odor of salesmanship that lingers around ''Tour of Duty'' notwithstanding, Kerry's story is impressive. To cut to the chase: he arrived in Vietnam on Nov. 17, 1968; that dangerous duty he requested was the captaincy of a ''patrol craft fast'' or P.C.F. boat, charged with various duties that seem, and sometimes were, mundane: inspecting the passing sampans and junks for contraband, transporting matériel from one point to the next. But as anyone who's seen ''Apocalypse Now'' knows, those sampans and junks could bring danger; and always, the Vietcong lurked in the mangroves and bulrushes. The two incidents for which Kerry received his Silver Star and his Bronze Star for heroism occurred two weeks apart, in late February and mid-March 1969. It was in the second of these that he rescued Jim Rassmann, a member of his crew, when his P.C.F.-94 came under a hail of small-arms fire at the same moment that another P.C.F. traveling alongside Kerry's boat struck a mine. Kerry was injured in the arm by another mine (he has three Purple Hearts), but ''Christ knows how,'' Kerry recalls to Brinkley, ''somehow we managed to get him on board. . . . I didn't get the bullet in the head that I expected, and we managed to clear the ambush zone.''
The book is laced, especially in the Vietnam chapters, with quotations from Kerry's extensive diaries and letters. (See? He really did write the novel of his life.) They are at the least insightful and at best arresting. Dick Pershing, the grandson of ''Black Jack'' Pershing, with whom Kerry attended both boarding school and Yale, was Kerry's dearest friend. Pershing got to Vietnam while Kerry's+ship was still on Pacific tour; it had recently left Pearl Harbor when Kerry learned that Pershing had been killed. He wrote to Julia Thorne, who became his first wife: ''Everything is so hollow and ridiculous, so stilted and so empty. I have never in my life been so alone with something like this before. . . . I am really very frightened to be honest because when the news sunk in I had no alternatives but to carry on in the face of trivia that forced me to build a horrible protective screen around myself.''
Great material. But oddly, Brinkley brings the wartime passages to life only serviceably. He invests far more drama in Kerry's civilian exploits than his military derring-do. Note, for example, the book's first words, and the moment Brinkley selects for emphasis. ''Every public life has its point of origin,'' Brinkley writes. ''For the 27-year-old John Kerry, that dramatic moment came two years after he shipped out of the rivers of South Vietnam, in a committee hearing room in the Dirksen Senate Office Building in Washington, D.C.'' There, on April 22, 1971, Kerry testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, chaired by J. W. Fulbright, a fierce opponent of the Vietnam War.
Kerry had begun questioning the wisdom of the war long before he came back home: ''Nobody has been able to tell me why we have to do what we're doing here,'' he argued to a fellow P.C.F. man in 1968. By 1971, he was ready to take his doubts to Congress. ''In our opinion,'' he said, speaking for his fellow veterans, ''and from our experience, there is nothing in South Vietnam, nothing which could happen that realistically threatens the United States of America.'' For the government to justify the loss of American lives as having been given in the name of freedom represented ''the height of criminal hypocrisy.'' These were not words that even Fulbright was used to hearing from a decorated veteran. The appearance earned Kerry the enmity of the Nixon White House -- and immediate fame.
The passages in ''Tour of Duty'' that describe Kerry's personal and intellectual journey are the book's most passionate. In them, the quality of the prose usually overcomes the book's biggest flaw, which is Brinkley's very serious tendency toward prolixity. In Kerry's first three weeks in Vietnam, he did, well, nothing much, really, but we are nevertheless treated to a 24-page chapter itemizing those weeks. Surfeit of detail aside, though, ''Tour of Duty'' succeeds in its polemical point. It convincingly shows us a man driven from an early age by a sense of destiny -- his middle name is Forbes, lending him the monogram J.F.K. -- and almost obsessed with risk, especially physical risk.
''Risk'' might not be a word that would spring immediately to the minds of students of John Kerry's Senate career. On the other hand, the Senate is not a place that tends to reward risk takers. Now, he's taking the biggest risk a politician can take, and after being written off in 2003, he appears to be making the most of the opportunity.
Michael Tomasky is the executive editor of The American Prospect.
