YOU can tell right away that Julia and Reg are shallow. She wears sunglasses, dates aspiring rock stars and takes photographic assignments in Morocco and Tibet. He dates models, recoils with fear of commitment at the sight of a woman's toothbrush and owns the kind of bar-cafe where all the waiters are actors. You know exactly how people like this would react if their best friends died and left them their 9-year-old son.
And they do, in ''Raising Waylon,'' a CBS movie that has its premiere tonight. They argue over who has to stay with young Waylon the first night. Julia takes the boy to a fast-food cart for breakfast. Reg and his pals teach him poker. But you can also probably guess what's going to happen when they get a good, heartwarming look at little Waylon asleep in his bed.
After a while Julia and Reg, who could never stand each other and can't believe they have joint custody, are cheering at basketball practice, doing emergency laundry and making pancakes for Waylon, a soulful-eyed angel played by Jeremy Bergman. Oddly, they're beginning to look good to each other, too. Well, maybe not so oddly, since Julia is a sexy blonde played by Poppy Montgomery, and Reg is the tall, dark and classically handsome Thomas Gibson.
Julia and Reg have entered the overnight single-parenthood zone in which, if certain movies can be believed, the superficial, selfish and angst-ridden are transformed into selfless, fulfilled human beings overflowing with love. As a bonus, they also find the perfect romantic relationship, which has eluded them for so long.
We've seen it before, with J.C. Wiatt (Diane Keaton) in the 1987 film ''Baby Boom'' (which can be seen Saturday afternoon at 1:15 on TBS). J.C. is a high-powered New York management consultant who works 70 to 80 hours a week. When she inherits the cutest baby girl in the world from British relatives, she's so clueless that she lugs the baby like a briefcase to her 12:30 lunch meeting and deposits her in the coatroom. All she wants is to be rid of this nuisance. But then she pulls little Elizabeth through a nighttime fever and meets the Ma and Pa Kettle couple from Duluth who are adopting her. After some rethinking and some unfortunate developments at work, J.C. and Elizabeth are off for a new life in small-town Vermont. Eventually J.C. builds a successful new business (gourmet baby food) and catches the eye of the local veterinarian, who happens to look exactly like Sam Shepard.
Ms. Montgomery, a fan of ''Baby Boom,'' doesn't see her character, Mr. Gibson's or Ms. Keaton's as cold people magically turned warm. They're just demonstrating ''untapped warmth'' that was always there, she says.
Ms. Montgomery is single and has no children yet, but believes in the power of parenthood. ''Something sort of wakes them up,'' she says. Yeah. Irresistible children.
In the Oscar-winning Czech film ''Kolya'' (1996), Louka (Zdenek Sverak) is a happily single, womanizing 55-year-old cellist who needs money, so he agrees to marry a Russian woman who wants Czech citizenship. She promptly bolts, leaving Louka with Kolya (Andrej Chalimon), her traumatized 5-year-old son, who speaks only Russian. Parenthood cramps Louka's style, which includes goosing pretty women with his bow in midsong, but he develops sympathy for the homesick child and asks a girlfriend who teaches Russian to read Kolya a bedtime story in his native language. He also takes him shoe shopping and to a Russian movie, and by the time he loses the boy on the subway and helps nurse him through a fever (clearly a surefire route to attachment), Louka is hopelessly in parental love.
Which is equaled only by grandparental love. Doris Roberts, who plays Waylon's only living relative, a great-aunt, in ''Raising Waylon,'' can't say enough good things about her relationship with her son and her three grandchildren, ages 10 to 14, with whom she stays in constant touch by e-mail. But surely it isn't that simple, that children will solve whatever ails you? ''They bring my life purpose,'' Ms. Roberts says. It even happens to ''absolutely narcissistic individuals,'' as she describes Reg and Julia.
The same phenomenon can be seen in various genres -- from Adam Sandler movies (''Big Daddy,'' in which Mr. Sandler's character adopts a little boy to impress his girlfriend) to sitcoms (CBS's popular ''Two and a Half Men,'' in which Charlie Sheen's Malibu bachelor, royalty rich from a jingle he wrote, is entranced by his 10-year-old, poker-playing nephew).
Sometimes, all these guys seem strangely alike.
In the 2002 film ''About a Boy'' (shown Wednesday at 9:15 a.m. and 6:15 p.m. on Encore), Will (Hugh Grant) is a completely useless London bachelor who lives off the royalties of a Christmas song that his father wrote long ago. When one of his married friends predicts he'll ''end up childless and alone,'' Will answers, ''Well, fingers crossed, yeah.''
Will spends his days lying around his stylish apartment watching horror movies and ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire.'' In the world of dating, he acknowledges no rules so he invents a son, Ned, in order to join a single parents' group, where he can meet women. Indirectly that leads to his meeting Marcus (Nicholas Hoult), a 12-year-old who much prefers dropping in on Will to going home to his teary, suicidal music-therapist mother (Toni Collette). Will discourages the boy, until he learns Marcus is being bullied. Like Louka, he takes the boy shoe shopping (in this movie for a pair of supercool trainers) and reflects afterward, ''I was suddenly hit by an extraordinary rush of well-being.'' In the end Will has a close circle of friends, and his apartment is filled with laughter and good cooking smells.
To its credit, the latest version of this story, ''Raising Waylon,'' doesn't paint parenthood as one constant thrill. There's Waylon's tendency to rattle on about the life expectancy of turtles on long drives and his devotion to his favorite solar system documentary, which he likes to watch over and over.
''There is a kind of repetitiveness'' to children's tastes, acknowledges Ms. Montgomery, whose character is literally put to sleep by the documentary. But parents eventually get a kick out of it. ''I think the fascinating part is watching the kid love it,'' she says.
The single people in all these stories are incredibly good-looking jerks whose pathetic lives are miraculously repaired. But by the simple act of assuming responsibility for a child?
''I don't think the child in this story fully fixes it,'' says Dan Wigutow, executive producer of ''Raising Waylon,'' who has grown children and says he immediately saw the situation's potential for humor. ''He's the catalyst. I think it's them really coming to terms with who they are that moves the story forward.''
Apparently the best way to get there is not through years of psychotherapy but through months of tucking someone smaller than you into bed every night. I'm convinced. Let's just keep in mind that it didn't work that well for Marcus's mom.
RAISING WAYLON  Tonight at 9 on CBS
On the cover: Poppy Montgomery as Julia, Thomas Gibson as Reg and Jeremy Bergman as Waylon.
COVER STORY
