Some politicians can't get their names in the papers, try as they might. Robert G. Torricelli, nominally an ex-pol, can't seem to keep his out.
The former senator's latest bout of public exposure came last week, when he was arrested for doing 40 in a 25-mile-an-hour zone in Lambertville, which was also where he was accused previously of fleeing the scene of a parking lot fender-bender. Since 25 miles an hour is the standard in-town speed limit in New Jersey, and since few obey it perfectly, the second ticket seemed, at least to Mr. Torricelli, akin to piling on a guy who's already down.
But is he? Mr. Torricelli, presumed disgraced by his withdrawal from his 2002 re-election campaign under an ethics cloud, seems to be as much a political power player as ever these days, if only from behind the scenes.
For one thing, Mr. Torricelli had about a quarter-million dollars left in his campaign fund at the end of the year, even after donating $50,000 to a liberal group backing Senator John Kerry for president -- Americans for Jobs, Health Care and Progressive Values -- that ran ads attacking Howard Dean in several primary campaign states.
Although Dr. Dean scored some points by accusing Mr. Kerry of associating with an ''ethically challenged'' ex-senator from the tainted state of New Jersey, it is, once again, Mr. Torricelli who comes off looking smarter than some other heavy hitters -- the names Gore and McGreevey come to mind -- for guessing correctly as far back as November, when he wrote that check, that Mr. Kerry was the horse to bet on.
Now no less a liberal than Senator Edward M. Kennedy is calling the Democratic professionals who fell for Dr. Dean's charm and enthusiasm ''naïve.''
In fact, Mr. Torricelli made his reputation in his years in the Senate by combining keen political instincts with a rapacious capacity for fund-raising. Those are the qualities the Senate Democrats were investing in when they made him the head of their Senate campaign committee, not Mr. Torricelli's (Warning! Irony ahead!) warm and cuddly personality.
His successor in that job, Senator Jon S. Corzine, really is warm and cuddly, and has a list of rich friends a mile long to call on for contributions. But Mr. Torricelli comes off with something as valuable as money to politicians -- the ability to see ahead in the fog of politics. That is why he can still count on having his phone calls returned, said David Rebovich, a Rider University political scientist.
''The tip-off that he is still a player and still involved is the fact that he raises money,'' Mr. Rebovich said. ''Apparently there are regular donors out there who a regard him as a credible figure and a credible broker -- as an individual who can give advice on how to construct a campaign or build an agenda.''
So what to make of a man with such finely tuned political senses picking such a public fight over a few crummy traffic offenses? Mr. Torricelli at first denied being the driver in the parking lot mishap, and he now argues, through his lawyer, that the town of Lambertville is out to get him.
Mr. Torricelli is accused of leaving the scene of the parking lot accident, a charge that his lawyer, William Deni, maintains would have been all but automatically reduced to ''failure to report'' for such a trivial mishap.
Now Mr. Deni is demanding past records for similar situations to show that Mr. Torricelli is being singled out.
''What is unusual is not being charged with leaving the scene but not reducing it to failure to report,'' Mr. Deni said, ''and I believe I can show that he is the only guy they won't downgrade.''
But why would any place, let alone a town like Democratic-leaning Lambertville (with a Democratic mayor) pick on a paid-up party member like Mr. Torricelli?
Mr. Deni said he did not know.
''Maybe because you got a few people who want to read about themselves in the paper,'' he said.
ON POLITICS Iver Peterson reports from New Jersey for The New York Times.
