Early returns on Saturday in Iran's parliamentary elections showed the religious conservatives firmly ahead and likely to finish with a substantial majority, but the two main factions disputed just how many Iranians had actually turned out to vote.
Reports on television and radio -- a state-run monopoly -- said that 60 percent of the country's more than 46 million eligible voters had taken part. But the reformist movement, which has struggled unsuccessfully over the last four years to dilute absolute clerical rule, contended on its Web site that its call for a boycott had been at least partly heeded. It said that turnout was between 45 and 47 percent nationwide, and under 30 percent in the major cities.
The reformists condemned the elections as rigged because more than 2,000 candidates, including 87 of their members in the 290-seat Parliament, had been barred from running by the Guardian Council, the parliamentary watchdog body appointed by the country's supreme leader.
The Guardian Council issued a gloating statement, carried by the official Islamic Republic News Agency, saying the 12-member body was optimistic that ''a powerful and efficient Parliament has been created that would be guided by spirituality.''
With less than half the results in, the election clearly seemed to have sounded the death knell for the reformist movement as currently constituted. Though turnout was probably lower than in previous elections, people did not stay away from the polls in the numbers that the movement's leaders had hoped, in an effort to generate questions about the conservatives' mandate to rule.
Many voters expressed disgust with both factions. ''I did not find any of the candidates eligible, even the conservatives,'' said Hussein, 21, a militia volunteer who gave only his first name. He said he cast a blank ballot. ''The enemies, the United States and the counterrevolutionaries who told people to boycott the elections, would have been happy if we did not vote,'' he added.
Both Washington and the European Union raised concerns about the vote because so many candidates were excluded. ''These actions do not represent free and fair elections and are not consistent with international norms,'' said Adam Ereli, a State Department spokesman.
Early returns in Tehran, where the reformists said turnout was just 20 percent, showed conservatives ahead. But some half-dozen reformists were also likely to gain seats. One surprise candidate doing well was Saeed Aboutaleb, a documentary filmmaker with the state television station IRIB, who had been detained by American forces while reporting in Iraq and held from July 1 to Nov. 4. He was fourth on the list.
Complete returns are not expected until Sunday at the earliest. The conservatives were expected to easily gain the 146 seats needed for a majority. In the 2000 elections, reformists captured some two-thirds of the seats. In smaller, rural constituencies, voters tend to pick candidates who deliver services rather than on ideological lines. Reza Mohammadi, 54, said he had returned home to vote for his wife's cousin. ''All the relatives have always voted for him,'' he said, because he brings development to the village.
Although Parliament controls the budget, it has little real power in the face of the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khomeini, who runs the armed services, the judiciary and the state-run media.
With results largely predetermined, interest in the outcome seemed at best tepid on the streets of the capital. ''I did not vote because the results were already decided,'' said Ali Ashgar Hosseini, 46, a school teacher, browsing headlines at a newsstand. ''It is not such a victory for the hard-liners after they eliminated all the reformers.''
Newspapers of the conservative faction treated the vote as a return to sanity. Mohammed Imani, a columnist in the Kayhan daily, wrote, ''It seems that our good and discerning people yesterday put a full stop to extremism and the torching of opportunity.'' But conservatives played down predictions that a sweep by their side would bring a crackdown on social freedoms. The most marked achievement of the reformists was an easing of social restrictions, like not arresting women for the way they dress.
Amir Mohebian, a conservative columnist for the daily Resalaat, wrote in the paper on Saturday that his faction's victory would not lead to physical confrontations over social freedoms. He said the conservatives ''believe that desirable values must be promoted by adopting logical and wise methods, by increasing awareness and not exerting pressure.''
