GOTHAM TRAGIC
By Kurt Wenzel.
312 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $23.95.
LOVE MONKEY
By Kyle Smith.
336 pp. New York:
William Morrow. $23.95.
Cultural moments don't end like symphonies, grandly and emphatically; they linger on the fade, like ''Hey Jude.'' In the immediate aftermath of 9/11, the notion briefly prevailed that an age of excess had been terminated, and we Americans would finally be forced to relinquish our deep preoccupation with shallow things. This never happened, of course, and now we find ourselves in between, wondering whether events will turn really dark, in a state of tentatively modified glibness instead. Two new novels have arrived that attempt to capture the mood by putting a decorously somber face on a traditionally comic subject, the story of the unrepentant womanizer. In trying to elevate a perfectly respectable guilty pleasure, however, ''Gotham Tragic'' and ''Love Monkey'' go a long way toward proving the resilience of utter inanity.
Kurt Wenzel's ''Gotham Tragic'' continues the story of Kyle Clayton, a still arguably youngish Manhattan writer who has watched his celebrity dim since publishing a hip best seller in the late 80's. Wenzel's own first novel, ''Lit Life,'' a roman à clef about the New York literary scene, introduced us to Clayton, whom we're pretty clearly meant to take as Wenzel's alter ego. (Both are married to Turkish women; and to cinch it, both have written books called ''Gotham Tragic.'') Clayton is unsure about married life, but positive he doesn't like his recent slide onto the B list; and so he hangs around a Midtown restaurant known as City, ogling the hostess and making the scene. ''Somewhat inexplicably, the confluences of Wall Street, professional athletics, high-stakes publishing and Hollywood's eastern contingent had all decided that City was the place, the restaurant of the century's end.'' City is owned by a seedy near-billionaire named Lonny Tumin, the sort of man who can be overheard on the back nine bellowing ''Do you know who I am?'' Thanks to the tech boom, ''Gotham Tragic'' drags us back to 1998, the heart of the Maria Bartiromo years. Tumin, strictly a brick-and-mortar guy, has fallen off the Forbes 400. ''For Lonny, this was an event akin to finding out he had a brain tumor the size of the Chrysler Building.''
This, sadly, is not an unrepresentative sample of Wenzel's prose. Nonetheless, Clayton-Wenzel persists in the fantasy that we are all having a genuinely literary time of it here. ''Thus his fathers could be counted as follows: Mailer, Roth, Bellow, Updike and Cheever.'' Surely DNA samples are in order. Clayton comes off as a walking hangover from the ''Less Than Zero'' 80's, while Wenzel himself is struggling to present a multiethnic panoply à la ''White Teeth.'' But ''Gotham Tragic'' lacks any of that novel's wild, contrary pizazz. Wenzel thinks in stereotypes, and writes in a style somewhere between Cliffs Notes and journalese; which is to say, his most plausible literary forefather is Tom Wolfe. ''It was October of the year 1998,'' drumbeats one typical passage. ''The country was richer than it had ever been, and the marshals of wealth were here to commemorate it, to give tangible evidence of the most hysterical accumulation the world had ever seen.''
Science having settled the matter, a novel like ''Gotham Tragic'' should take roughly five hours to read, or just long enough to carry you through the flight from New York to Los Angeles. One page longer, and a pleasant diversion is in danger of becoming a slog. ''Gotham Tragic'' is tediously overplotted, with detours into the lives of a City waitress (fancy that, a frustrated actress) and her elderly aunt; Lonny Tumin's chief underling, whose wife, a Southern belle with the mouth of a marine, has borne Tumin's child; and into Clayton's almost completely uninteresting conversion to Islam. (Clayton's marital fights, centering on issues of religion and freedom of conscience, and meant to represent one of the novel's claims to genuine pith, read like transcripts from ''Crossfire.'') For all its big-city swagger, ''Gotham Tragic'' feels of a piece with the ESPN Zone restaurant and ''Cats'': a pit stop for the out-of-towner.
In 1995, Nick Hornby published his first novel, ''High Fidelity,'' and it is part of that book's genius to have made, ever since, a certain type of callow young aspirant think the bar for literary success has been lowered, when in fact it hasn't descended so much as a notch. ''Love Monkey'' is Kyle Smith's first effort, an English-style cad novel, written by an American and about an American, and updated to suit the age of Coldplay. (With its vaguely diaryish form and unapologetic lack of substance, it will no doubt also be heralded as the male ''Bridget Jones.'') Tom Farrell, a factotum at a New York tabloid (ingeniously named Tabloid), considers himself ''defiantly average, studiously O.K., the Gap of bachelors,'' and what follows does nothing to convince us otherwise. Farrell is, in fact, the perfect human average, if you take as your test population the young men from recent Hornbiana: 30-ish, media-related job, prone to picking one woman, then hyper-fetishizing her for 300 pages under the guise of true love.
A first novel deserves a serious handicap, but this book's is nearly spent in its opening pages. Right up front, just you and the blinking cursor, you have to make a decision: Is my hero going to be, deep down, a cad or a schlub? Kyle Smith makes Tom Farrell both, and what follows is mostly a shambles. For the endearingly egocentric loser, it turns out, is a very, very small bull's-eye. If you miss it, you end up with the unendearing loser, the misogynist, the overpriviliged martyr, the pest. ''Today I'm dressed just O.K. for a New Yorker but here I look like the king of Monaco or something,'' he burbles to himself on a trip into Kmart. ''Plus, here among the Kmart shoppers, I feel well above the Minimum Acceptable Height for an Adult Male. Poor people aren't just short of cash. Maybe I should look into a Kmart Kareer.''
As clotted with back story and silly twists as ''Gotham Tragic'' is, ''Love Monkey'' is eerily empty, like a city after the plague. The entire story is as follows: a young newspaperman dates a handful of women, then gets a better job. Otherwise, we move wearily from bite-size event to bite-size event: bars, parties, bars, more bars. ''And people to whom nothing has ever happened,'' T. S. Eliot wrote in ''The Family Reunion,'' ''cannot understand the unimportance of events.'' The distinction becomes a central one: when something finally happens -- when planes fly into the World Trade Center -- no one is on hand, in ''Love Monkey,'' to register it as momentous. The lack of emotional resonance is particularly strange, as each chapter of the novel is dated, making it clear that all along the story was leading up to 9/11. Shockingly, not a word is written to capture the surreal aftermath, the deep shift in the city's mood. It is alluded to as a Big Event, but nothing has happened. Crantinis and conquest-mentality romances flow forth unabated.
To be clear, there just aren't enough tone controls on Smith's console for this to be parody. Appearing dismally oafish yourself while portraying a dismal oaf isn't comical; it is what's known in lit crit circles as the mimetic fallacy. But in addition to being unfunny, something else stands in between ''Gotham Tragic'' and ''Love Monkey'' and the stinging comedies their authors probably intended them to be. The liberating shamelessness of the 1980's regarding personal ambition and material things, intended as a rebuke to the 60's and p.c. scolding, has now gone as long, and become as automated and boring, as the 60's and p.c. scolding themselves. For all their faked deviltry, these young would-be satirists are plainly gunning for the very lifestyles they affect to lampoon. As a result, nowhere in any of these many pages is a drop of real blood spilled. If this has to be palmed off on Gen Y readers as satire, so be it; but let's at least admit, nothing but Karo syrup runs in these novels' veins.
Stephen Metcalf is a freelance writer living in Brooklyn.
