COST basis can be a minefield. For proof, look at all the shapes that AT&amp;T has taken over the years, the latest complication being Cingular Wireless's deal last week to acquire AT&amp;T Wireless.
When I addressed cost basis last month, readers contacted me and essentially said ''thanks, but we have more questions.'' How, they asked, does one figure basis -- the original purchase price, adjusted for factors like splits -- for stocks like AT&amp;T that have had spinoffs? What about mutual fund shares that were bought at dozens of different times? And what about shares held in 401(k)'s and traditional Individual Retirement Accounts?
The answers can be complicated, so I'll start with the easiest. The 401(k)- I.R.A. question worried me so much that I didn't stop to think. I started typing each of my 401(k) purchases into my computer so I'd readily have the basis information when I needed it. I had entered about three years' worth of information when it hit me: 401(k) contributions are tax deductible, so the cost basis is always zero. And when I cash out, the money I withdraw will be treated as ordinary income, not a capital gain. Tax deductible I.R.A.'s are mostly treated the same way.
The spinoff question also looks complicated, but it often doesn't need to be. I own shares of AT&amp;T, but they are in my I.R.A., so I can ignore its history. But if you can't, turn to the company. AT&amp;T offers worksheets to help figure basis, and other companies also have basis tools. AT&amp;T's are on its Web site, at www.att.com/ir/ss/tbi/. Type in your purchase information and the site figures the basis.
The worksheets will also be useful for some investors after the Cingular-AT&amp;T Wireless deal is completed. For owners of AT&amp;T who received their AT&amp;T Wireless shares as part of their AT&amp;T ownership in 2001, the worksheet provides the basis. Cingular is offering $15 a share for AT&amp;T Wireless. So if the offer is approved, that would be your sale price per share, too.
For those who chose to exchange their AT&amp;T stock for AT&amp;T Wireless shares when the parent company made that offer, also in 2001, the sale price, of course, stays the same, but the basis is somewhat more complicated.
For every AT&amp;T share exchanged, investors received 1.176 shares of AT&amp;T Wireless. (Investors received cash for their fractional shares.) The basis is what you originally paid for the AT&amp;T shares that were exchanged. To get a per-share basis, divide the original cost of the AT&amp;T shares by the number of AT&amp;T Wireless shares received.
Investors who exchanged 100 shares of AT&amp;T, for example, would have received 117 shares of AT&amp;T Wireless (100 times 1.176) plus cash for the remaining six-tenths of a share. If they had paid, say, $3,000 for those 100 shares, they would divide that dollar amount by 117.6 to arrive at a price of $25.51 a share. This example is on AT&amp;T's Web site, so you can follow along. If the AT&amp;T shares were bought at different times, the exercise becomes more difficult because of the multiple bundles of shares and different purchase amounts.
And for those who bought AT&amp;T Wireless on the open market, the basis is whatever was paid for it. The stock never had a split or spinoffs.
One reader asked about Ford Motor and its spinoffs. Its Web site, www.ford.com, does not offer worksheets, but it includes enough information on the spinoffs so that investors can figure the basis themselves. Click on ''investor information,'' then ''stock data.''
The brokerage firm that sold you the shares of AT&amp;T or other stocks can also provide the basis -- that is, if you're still its customer. Donald W. Nicholson, an investment adviser in Wilmington, Del., said investors who changed brokers should send the original broker a letter asking for the old cost basis. That may not always work. The good news is that there is an industry movement to have basis information follow investors when they change brokers, and some are already doing so.
If only there were such worksheets for mutual funds. An investor could have hundreds of purchase dates and prices, especially if they reinvested dividends and capital gains. Fred S. Masulli, 48, a chemist from Newark, Del., said his tax return would have been lengthy if he had listed every transaction when he sold some fund shares a few years ago.
''It would have been a large number, probably 50 or 60 lines of purchase dates,'' he said. ''I instead used average purchase price.''
Figuring an average price seems the strategy of choice. Joseph L. Monte Jr., a partner and estate lawyer at Eckell Sparks Levy Auerbach Monte Rainer &amp; Sloane in Media, Pa., called average price ''the only practical way of doing it.''
''If a guy has purchased shares out of his paycheck every week,'' he added, ''how do you allocate the sales price?''
The Internal Revenue Service allows this shortcut. Actually, it allows several ways to account for basis, but using average basis seems to be the best for people with a large number of purchases. Taxpayers add up the total amount of shares they have bought in the fund, how much they have spent and all the capital gains and dividends reinvested, then come up with an average price. That price becomes the cost basis. It's work, but it beats the alternative.
As for determining the purchase dates under this method, the I.R.S. says the shares you sell are considered to be those acquired first. Some of the sales may be long-term gains or losses, others short-term, so list them that way on Schedule D. Under ''purchase date,'' just write ''various dates.'' The I.R.S. calls this the single-category method. There's also double-category, but I don't find it as easy. You can read more about it in I.R.S. Publication 564.
Don Roberts, an agency spokesman, warned that once taxpayers started using the single- or double-category method, they must stick with that method in determining the cost basis for that fund.
Joseph C. Sparano, a partner at Grabowski, Sparano &amp; Vincelette, an accounting firm in Newport, Del., said investors face problems when records are missing and they have no idea about when they bought shares or the amount of dividend and capital gains distributions they reinvested. That is when he resorts to what he calls forensics: looking at old tax returns, calling his clients' former brokers and looking at the dividend records of the fund.
''Sometimes, you just have to go with the seat of your pants and use all the information you've gathered to establish a fair number,'' he said. ''If you're reasonable with your calculations, the I.R.S. will work with you.''
MIDSTREAM James Schembari is an editor at The Times. His column on the prime earning, spending and striving years appears the fourth Sunday of each month. E-mail: jimschem@nytimes.com.
