THE ANATOMY OF HOPE
How People Prevail in the Face of Illness.
By Jerome Groopman.
248 pp. New York:
Random House. $24.95.
ON an October morning+only a few months ago, an 82-year-old man asked me to give him chemotherapy for a rapidly advancing leukemia. Before this goes any further -- before hard-nosed words like ''evidence'' and ''risk'' swoop down off their perches -- let me get one thing straight: we both knew that calamitous hazards were involved. The prospect of any response was slim; the possibility of a sustained remission even more dismal. There+would+be a monthlong confinement in the hospital, blisters, mouth sores and the constant threat of infections. And yet, for that tenth of a tenth of chance, this soft-spoken engineer shuffling through his papers in the clinic was willing to take the risk. Psychologists who study the phenomenon -- the choice of toxic therapies for even marginal benefits -- use the term ''treatment trade-off.'' Jerome Groopman has revived a simpler, more old-fashioned concept: ''hope.''
''The Anatomy of Hope'' is Groopman's 248-page reply to his own work. (Here he joins a long tradition of scientist-writers who have written back to their former selves: the older Freud is constantly conversing with the younger Freud; the later Richard Dawkins or Stephen Jay Gould often answer questions raised in their earlier books). In a fierce New Yorker essay called ''The Thirty+Years' War,'' Groopman argued in 2001 that the cancer establishment,+that immense whirligig of doctors, scientists and pharma-companies, had systematically misrepresented the prospect of hope to millions of patients. Yes, he acknowledged, some miraculous cures had appeared. But for by far the most part, chemotherapy for many forms of advanced cancer had turned out to be a resounding disappointment -- only most patients didn't know it. Instead of confronting the failings of the last 30 years, he said, the cancer industry had simply egged the public on with false promises and sketchy clinical trials. Why, Groopman asked, ''did doctors welcome therapies with known toxicity and uncertain gain, and why did patients . . . subject themselves to them?''
By the end of his article, Groopman had cobbled together an answer, a caustic one. ''Paradoxically,'' he concluded, for cancer patients ''this inability to predict the future becomes their sustaining hope.'' Hope, in other words, had become a deceptive force. Cancer medicine had slowly degenerated -- as an internist colleague of mine put it -- into a ''circus of cisplatin.''
''The Anatomy of Hope'' takes off from the last sentence of the essay. Groopman's biting cynicism has somewhat cooled. And this time, he enters the paradoxical hope of cancer patients with a different sort of sympathy. His project is to dissect it meticulously, to find patterns behind it and to understand its biology.
This, of course, is chancy territory. Any book on cancer with the word ''hope'' in its title runs the risk of falling into chicken soup and schmaltz. But Groopman manages to sidestep this greasy sentimentalism by turning to the surprising and troubling stories of his patients: there is George, a revered professor of pathology, who can find solace only in aggressive surgery, chemotherapy and radiation. And Esther, a quiet woman from Washington Heights in New York City, who can find solace only in resisting therapy. Dan, an Army veteran with a real chance, hesitates and nearly dies of a curable lymphoma. A feisty gambler called Eva thinks chemotherapy is merely a bluff -- and then dies ''at an advanced age'' nearly 20 years later.
Is there a systematic vision of hope -- an ''anatomy'' -- that coalesces out of these disparate stories? Groopman contends that hope itself is in effect a vital organ, an entity that desperately needs sustenance, and that this sustenance is as essential to living ''as the very oxygen we breathe.'' The absence or malfunction of this organ -- as with Dan or Esther -- becomes a pathological malfunction of the psyche. Without its proper nourishment, Groopman suggests, all his patients would perish.
That much is easy to stomach; it's when the book dives into the actual visions of hope that it reaches its deepest and most controversial core. For patients like George -- recalcitrant medical individualists -- the idea of ''hope'' becomes inextricably linked to ''cure.'' They want aggressive chemotherapy because that 5 percent or 1 percent chance of success gives them the most comfort. One man's bleomycin, George might argue, is another man's morphine. For other patients, the conflation of ''hope'' and ''cure'' turns out to be poisonous, for it dooms those who cannot be cured to hopelessness. And, as Groopman amply demonstrates, patients manage to find hope in the oddest of places: one woman, battling a virulent breast cancer, imagines herself as playing hide-and-seek with her disease; some learn to lean on their families; some discover spirituality; others stumble into skepticism.
If there is an ''anatomy'' here, it isn't an archetypal, unitary anatomy. Instead, hope turns out to be something negotiated between patients and physicians, imagined and reimagined at every visit. Oncologists need to rely on an incredible team of specialists: palliative-care physicians, social workers, psychologists and psychiatrists. Even so, the day-to-day practice of oncology is routinely humbled by the task. In its most introspective passages, Groopman's book manages to convey the perverse subtleties of these negotiations: Dan has to be tricked into hope; for Eva, hope becomes a joke that she snickers at, but never quite gets. In the end, you might not know how to define hope precisely+- but that seems to be the point. Groopman succeeds principally because he refuses to offer a simple, easily digestible thesis.
What of my patient, the octogenarian with leukemia? His condition declined -- slowly at first, then more rapidly. Over the last few months, we played cat-and-mouse. He always asked me if some novel therapy or experimental trial had suddenly emerged that would somehow cure his disease. And every time, I assured him that there might be+one -- once he recovered from his current setbacks: a small pneumonia, or an infection in his intravenous lines. Right till the end, the prospect of such an experimental treatment -- ''something knocking in the pipes,'' as he liked to call it -- gave him a kind of assurance that no other salve seemed to provide. I don't know whether to celebrate or expiate my approach. But I think he would have enjoyed -- and understood -- this book.
Siddhartha Mukherjee is a fellow at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard Medical School in Boston.
