Someone may yet beat St. Joseph's this season, but it will probably not happen on an afternoon like Saturday's. Shoot the basketball as if the hoop were always 10 feet wide and 5 feet away, as the Hawks did, and it is hard to lose. If St. Joseph's has a weakness, it is not putting the ball in the basket.
That was abundantly clear as the No. 2 Hawks routed Temple, 76-53, in a Big 5 matchup at the Palestra.
St. Joseph's, which improved to 24-0, and No. 1 Stanford (23-0), a 73-60 winner over U.C.L.A. on Saturday, are the only undefeated Division I men's teams.
Fueled by pinpoint perimeter shooting and some deft passing, the Hawks had few anxious moments.
They shot 52.2 percent from the floor, with a majority of the baskets coming on long-range jumpers, and made 11 of 20 3-point attempts (55 percent).
They recorded assists on 18 of their 24 field goals.
''We have a gifted group right now that moves the ball, and we're able to see the basket,'' St. Joseph's Coach Phil Martelli said. ''I hate to say it this way, but I expect us to make shots.''
It was the second time this season that St. Joseph's picked apart the famed Temple zone with its shooting. In an 83-71 victory at Temple on Jan. 31, the Hawks hit an Atlantic 10 record 20 3-pointers, while attempting 36. They tried only nine 2-point shots that night, hitting four.
Delonte West had 20 points on Saturday to lead St. Joseph's, which improved to 13-0 in the Atlantic 10. His backcourt partner, Jameer Nelson, was next with 18 points.
Mardy Collins and David Hawkins led Temple (12-11, 6-6) with 13 points each. But Hawkins, the Owls' leading scorer, had a miserable shooting game, going 5 for 21 from the floor.
The task of staying undefeated through the rest of the regular season and their conference tournament does not seem to faze the St. Joseph's players. Some critics had predicted that Temple had enough talent to stop the Hawks' winning streak, but it did not take long for this game to get out of hand.
''Personally, I didn't think this game would be a challenge,'' Hawks guard Tyrone Barley said. ''I don't say that to disrespect Temple. I say it because I know how focused we are and how we feel we can win each and every game. It's going to extremely hard to beat us.''
With 8,722 fans packing every inch of this fabled building and the St. Joseph's faithful hungry to keep the winning streak alive and defeat an intracity rival, the game was played in a raucous atmosphere. Still unhappy that they have still not convinced everyone that they are for real, the Hawks admitted that they played this game with chips on their shoulders.
They had more grist for their mill when Mark Macon, an assistant for Temple who played there in the late 1980's and early 90's, said this week that one of his Owls teams was better than this St. Joseph's team.
Martelli said: ''I told them I wanted them to play with an attitude. I want them to think of themselves as the best and play like the best.''
Temple, which shot 29.7 percent from the floor, had the dual problems of a sputtering offense and an inability to defend St. Joseph's. It never came up with a solution for either.
Trying to become the first team since Nevada-Las Vegas in 1991 to enter the N.C.A.A. tournament without a loss, the Hawks have three regular-season games left (on the road at Massachusetts and Rhode Island and at home against St. Bonaventure) before they begin play in the Atlantic 10 tournament on March 11.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
