Kate Fodor  Playwright  ''Hannah and Martin''
KATE FODOR says she was intrigued the moment she heard about Hannah Arendt and Martin Heidegger: After World War II, Arendt, the Jewish philosopher who became famous covering the trial of the Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann, tried to help rebuild the career of Heidegger, her former teacher and lover, despite the fact that he had been a member of the Nazi Party.
Actually, Ms. Fodor did not so much hear the story as overhear it. She was eating lunch at a Mexican restaurant in Chelsea with two friends she had met in college; one of them, an actress, was trying to interest the other one, a playwright, in dramatizing the story.
It didn't work, but Ms. Fodor, a journalist, saw in the story several themes that engaged her. She even saw parallels with her own life. After a romance had failed, she wondered whether she had been too readily forgiving: was her forgiveness a sign of compassion or of, as she put it, ''weak moral fiber''?
''Hannah and Martin,'' the play that conversation inspired, is opening on March 31 at the Manhattan Ensemble Theater on Mercer Street. Ms. Fodor's actress friend, Melissa Friedman, and David Strathairn play the title roles. The Epic Theater Center is the producer.
''What started as a whim has, at this point, become a five-year whim,'' said Ms. Fodor, 33, during a recent interview in a SoHo cafe near the theater.
Reviewing a Chicago production of ''Hannah and Martin'' last year, Hedy Weiss wrote in The Chicago Sun-Times that the play ''crawls under your skin and doesn't allow you to just stroll away from it without further thought.''
Ms. Fodor says she spent many weekends doing research for the play while working as a business editor at Reuters. ''I kept it secret for a long time,'' she said. ''I was embarrassed that I was doing a play about two philosophers, when I had training neither as a playwright nor as a philosopher.''
She grew up, though, in the company of both: her father, Jerry Fodor, is a philosopher and a professor at Rutgers, and she spent much of her time at Oberlin College performing in school productions and hanging out with theater people. She credits those friends with helping turn her hobby into a serious pursuit.
''There was something about the communal nature of the theater that got me moving along,'' she said. ''You spend time alone in front of your computer terminal, but you don't spend all your time there.''
Although she said she had read everything Arendt and Heidegger wrote, and most of what has been written about them, the play she wound up writing includes some dramatic invention and is composed entirely of her own words; none were taken from the letters, books or lectures.
''I have to believe that Arendt engaged in some sort of struggle to understand how she could still care so deeply for somebody who had embraced the very things she had spent her life fighting,'' Ms. Fodor said. ''But there is no evidence of this in her letters.''
JONATHAN MANDELL
SPRING THEATER
