Notre Dame's Chris Thomas recalled a one-sided conversation with Connecticut's Taliek Brown in the waning moments of Saturday afternoon's game. Brown recalled that it occurred early in the second half, while Thomas still had time to recharge his lagging shot.
''You ain't going to get 31 again,'' Brown told Thomas on the court. ''Sorry.''
The timing did not matter as much as the meaning. Pushing the Fighting Irish from the basket and harassing them on the perimeter, No. 8 Connecticut avenged an earlier loss and walked off with a 61-50 victory at the Hartford Civic Center.
''It was just remembering how they stormed onto the court the last time they beat us and visualizing a couple of people on the scorer's table,'' UConn's Josh Boone said, explaining the Huskies' motivation.
UConn's loss to Notre Dame on Feb. 9 was followed by a loss at Pittsburgh, which was ranked No. 4. Because of the losses, Connecticut lost its grip on the No. 5 ranking and much of its hope for one of the No. 1 seedings in the N.C.A.A. tournament.
Connecticut (21-5, 9-3 Big East) has spent much of its practice time since then hearing Coach Jim Calhoun preach about toughness and defense. The players realized both would be tested Saturday when they faced Thomas again. But this time Brown led a tag team of defenders who held Thomas to 6-of-23 shooting and 13 points.
''I knew they were going to bring their whole team at me,'' Thomas said. Of Brown's challenge, he said: ''I just laughed. At that point we were down 12 with 30 seconds left.''
Brown had help, and Calhoun credited Connecticut's all-everything center, Emeka Okafor.
Okafor set a career high with 22 rebounds, a UConn record for a Big East game, the most in a game at the Civic Center and the most by a UConn player since 1968. He added 14 points, 7 blocks and more reason to be selected college basketball's national player of the year. Calhoun spent much of his postgame news conference mounting an unsolicited campaign.
Calhoun said he reminded Okafor before the game that this would be his final game at the Civic Center; he is a junior and will most likely be a high pick in the N.B.A. draft. When Okafor expressed surprise at the news, Calhoun told him he was obligated to do something special.
''I tell people, 'Take some pictures mentally,' because you're not going to see his like again,'' Calhoun said.
Okafor was a bit more subdued over his performance. ''I looked up, I looked down,'' he said. ''The ball was in my hands.''
The Irish (13-10, 7-6) came as close as 4 points twice in the second half before Okafor, Boone (12 points, 11 rebounds) and the Huskies swatted them away. Notre Dame shot 18.8 percent in the first half and 29.7 percent in the game, largely because Okafor made layup attempts the equivalent of pitching quarters at a carnival. The few shots Notre Dame got off usually missed, and Connecticut came up with most of those, ending the game with a 59-30 rebounding advantage.
''They have the physical ability to really smother you on the perimeter,'' Notre Dame Coach Mike Brey said. ''The nice thing is that you can gamble a little bit when you have the big guy back there.''
Thomas wondered why Connecticut did not play such inspired defense every game. But for now, the Huskies' season seems to be righted, and their hopes of a national championship are a little brighter.
''I don't know what lies ahead,'' Calhoun said, ''but I do know you'd be a fool if you write us off.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
