Michelangelo Antonioni's ''Blowup,'' just out on DVD, is a touchstone of 1960's cinema culture. Released in 1966 to critical and popular acclaim, the enigmatic movie follows a cynical photographer (David Hemmings) as he moves among the pampered rich and the heedless young of swinging London. When he shoots a series of pictures of a tryst between Vanessa Redgrave and her lover in the park, he finds that he may have photographed a murder. The Times asked two film critics of different generations, Stuart Klawans, of The Nation, and his younger colleague Nathan Lee, of The New York Sun, to discuss the movie then and now.
NATHAN LEE -- When I was watching ''Blowup'' I was thinking that I may never see a film have a comparable impact on my generation. The closest thing I've witnessed to that kind of phenomenon was ''Pulp Fiction,'' but that's in a totally different league.
STUART KLAWANS -- I had a similar reaction. The first time I saw it was in Chicago, at a downtown movie palace. I was in high school, on a Saturday-night date, and the house was packed. It is impossible to imagine such a thing anymore, if only because the free-standing movie palace is now out of most people's experience. But to go into such a place and watch a film as odd and genuinely foreign as ''Blowup'' presented as a popular attraction, that's something I don't think we'll see again.
LEE -- Was there a shock for you at seeing the sexuality on screen? I'm thinking about the photographer's romp with the two young girls.
KLAWANS -- I cannot tell you what it was like to go on a date in 1967 and have that sprung on you. While it was going on, the girl and I couldn't look at each other. We didn't even dare breathe.
LEE -- When I had my first experience of the film, I was probably around the same age as you were. But I saw it by myself, in my bedroom, on video. And before I watched it this time, on the DVD, I tried to catalog what I remembered, what had had an impact. I didn't remember the sex or the drugs. I didn't remember the fashion models. What I remembered, of course, was the famous montage of the photographer blowing up his pictures and reconstructing the event he'd inadvertently captured in the park. The other things I remembered were the propeller that he finds in the antiques shop, and the tennis court scene at the end, where the mimes lose their nonexistent ball. I remembered all of these opaque symbols, rather than the things that were shocking when ''Blowup'' came out.
KLAWANS -- I think you've hooked onto precisely the things that were discussed most widely at the time.
LEE -- The ambiguities.
KLAWANS -- Yes. Of course, there was the widely marketed poster of Vanessa Redgrave in the scene where she strips off her shirt. That was certainly part of the film's appeal. But the ambiguities, the puzzles, were talked about at least as much, maybe more. But I'm interested to know, all the same, what you think about the period detail in ''Blowup'': the fashions, the music, the drugs, everything that smells of 1960's swinging London.
LEE -- I know that at the time, people felt that Antonioni was showing them all these things that had never been seen in a movie before, that he was capturing something important about the youth craze. But to me, all of the sequences have the same Antonioni detachment. The period detail is just another part of the abstract design. ''Blowup'' has never looked to me like reportage.
KLAWANS -- Now that you've seen it on DVD, letterboxed, you're getting the framing that you didn't have before. How did that affect you?
LEE -- There isn't a square millimeter in this film that's not put to use. And that's what I was thinking about the most, watching it now: this is a movie about looking. It's a movie about a filmmaker grabbing your imagination through your eyes and saying: ''Look at my images, look deep into them. Turn them over in your head.'' And that's the quality that is still really fresh and stirring. So the overriding experience I had with the DVD was about being able to really look at it, the whole of it, in a better way. And it's still a compromised look because, as one writer said, this is a series of photographs about a series of photographs.
KLAWANS -- Yes, you simply don't have the same physical sensations. That said, it is a vast improvement to have the DVD version, because it restores the original frame.
LEE -- I wonder if it's a loss, though, that I can respond to this movie only on an aesthetic level. I've gone back and reread all the interpretations that people made of the film in the 60's, all their attempts to untie the intellectual knots; and even though they're interesting, I can't imagine myself fighting over any of those positions. ''Blowup'' just seems to me like an interesting formal experience. It isn't emotional or personal.
KLAWANS -- That's fascinating, because what came across to me most strongly this time was not the intellectual gamesmanship or the abstraction of ''Blowup'' but its social and political critique. And that's something I did not understand at all when I first watched the film, that ''Blowup'' is a bitter diatribe against the hip young characters who go reveling through the movie.
LEE -- You mean their frivolity and cynicism?
KLAWANS -- Yes, starting with the montage at the beginning. The mimes are rioting their way through London, and Antonioni immediately contrasts these happy young people with the broken-down old men coming out of a flophouse. And then you discover that one of these wretches, David Hemmings, is not really one of them, he's a photographer who traffics in their images. He converts this misery into pop frivolity, on the same level as his fashion photographs. The way Antonioni sets it up, it's almost too blatant. And the end of the film is just as overstated: a man's been murdered in the park, and everybody's too stoned to care, or even understand.
Now, why didn't I register all that when I was 16? I think it's because people my age felt we were cool just because we were young. To go to a serious, artistic movie and see our pop culture up on the screen was, in itself, a validation. I was blind to the movie then. And watching it now really brought home to me a sense of the wasted possibilities of my own generation, of what we did not achieve in part because of certain attitudes and issues of temperament that are dealt with in this film. In that sense, ''Blowup'' became more personal to me this time, in a very disturbing way.
LEE -- That's interesting, that the film should make you think of the failure of the utopian ideals of the 60's. But whereas I recognize the political aspect of ''Blowup,'' I can't connect to it in any way, because it's not something I lived through. I don't see anything at stake. The other thing I wondered about, when you were talking about recognizing your generation on screen, is, how did people identify with this in the 60's? I mean, the photographer drives around in a convertible Rolls Royce. He lives in a gargantuan loft in the middle of London. He's shooting for these high fashion magazines, he's surrounded by beautiful people. This is the very apex of a moneyed culture. How was there such a wide identification with this character and his milieu?
KLAWANS -- Well, you would not believe how cool we thought we were. If we weren't partying with Mick Jagger this week, that didn't mean we wouldn't be doing it the week after. So we could ignore criticism that was directed right at us and speculate instead about all those opaque symbols, those riddles, that seem to have stuck in your mind, too.
LEE -- I think the kind of interpretive discourse that ''Blowup'' inspired back then is as much a period aspect of this movie as all the pop elements in it. It's almost inconceivable today that a film would stir up that kind of critical hand-wringing.
KLAWANS -- You may be right. And the reputation of ''Blowup'' has suffered over the years, precisely because it was such a big, glossy opportunity for bull sessions.
LEE -- We're embarrassed by that kind of talk now, aren't we? A certain amount of it still goes on, but it feels much more marginalized today. One of the reasons I value ''Elephant'' so much is the endless conversations and arguments it provoked among people of my generation and younger, who really grappled with the way its characters were represented. Like ''Blowup,'' it's a formally accomplished puzzle of a movie concerned with hot-button social and cultural issues that plays with clichés and exaggeration. There's even a central character who's a photographer! So there is a kind of equivalent, but the impact of ''Elephant'' on the mainstream was almost negligible.
KLAWANS -- But I can think of a very popular contemporary film that's engendered precisely the kind of pseudo-philosophical discussion that ''Blowup'' generated: ''The Matrix.'' There, too, the fans got caught up in the game of ''now you see it, now you don't.'' But what a difference, in the terms of the game, from ''Blowup.''
LEE -- The equivalent of the sex scene, in ''The Matrix,'' is bullet time: the pornography of pixels.
KLAWANS -- And ''The Matrix'' doesn't establish any distance from the cool people, or from its own coolness as a movie. In fact, you're supposed to identify with the coolness, whereas ''Blowup'' was actually a critique of coolness.
LEE -- But this idea of identifying with coolness -- that's partly what drove the success of ''Blowup.''
KLAWANS -- Guilty as charged.
So, at the end of the day, do you like ''Blowup''?
LEE -- Quite a bit, yes, I do. It makes you look, it makes you think. It's playing with you.
KLAWANS -- And I liked it better than I expected to, given the time that's passed and given what's happened to its reputation over the years. Considering that none of the characters is really alive, the movie itself has much more vitality than I was expecting it to have.
LEE -- Well, and now it's a really fun period piece.
KLAWANS -- Or not so fun.
MOVIES/DVD'S
