''IT'S taken us six years, but we're finally getting there!'' Douglas Riley, a partner in G&amp;S Investors, proudly observed one recent afternoon, pointing to his company's $45 million retail construction project here.
The 285,000-square-foot retail development of big-box stores and discounters is rising on two sides of Sandford Boulevard, a main thoroughfare along which Staples, CVS, ShopRite and stores in a small strip mall are already doing business,
But until last year, Mount Vernon's Sandford Boulevard Redevelopment Project was delayed, mostly by legal challenges filed in State Supreme Court by the neighboring village of Pelham. Now that the courts have ruled in favor of the city, G&amp;S has been able to move ahead, Mr. Riley said.
Among other things, Pelham, along with at least one private citizens' group, objected to the additional traffic that the retail stores would generate, asserting that the congestion would degrade the quality of life in the area and pose a risk to students walking to and from school activities on nearby playing fields. Pelham contended that Mount Vernon acted improperly when it approved a study of the property and rezoned the site to allow the project.
But this economically struggling city in southern Westchester viewed the project from a different perspective. City planners here eagerly await the creation of 400 new jobs and $5 million in annual sales tax revenues from the project, said Gerri Post, Mount Vernon's commissioner of planning and community development.
One new store, a 47,000-square-foot Best Buy, the chain's third Westchester store, has opened for business on the north side of Sandford Boulevard. The three other retailers -- Target, Bed Bath &amp; Beyond and TJ Maxx -- are to open next fall across the street.
Best Buy, the Minneapolis-based national retailer of consumer electronics, has a store in Yonkers, in a building formerly occupied by Pergament Home Stores, and another in Hartsdale, in a shopping center where a Service Merchandise was situated.
Patrick Matre, vice president of real estate for Best Buy, said the company sought high-density, high-visibility sites close to major highways. The newest Westchester store on Sandford Boulevard, which opened in July, is between two exits on the Hutchinson River Parkway and draws from White Plains to the north and the Bronx to the south. Mr. Matre described the Mount Vernon store as having ''a peekaboo view from the Hutch.''
THE retailer, which both buys and rents sites and has 600 stores nationwide, is leasing the Mount Vernon store, with its parking lot, from G&amp;S. The outlet here, which the developer built to Best Buy's specifications, is expected ''to take some pressure off of the Yonkers store and not detract from its success,'' Mr. Matre said, explaining why the two stores are situated only several miles away from each other.
''In our world,'' he said, ''cannibalization is not always such a bad thing.''
Under the deal it struck with the city, G&amp;S, which is based in Bethpage, N.Y., is renting the two acres on which Best Buy is situated (formerly the site of parking lots) from the Mount Vernon development agency in a 47-year renewable lease, Ms. Post said. Also as part of the agreement, G&amp;S is making payments in lieu of taxes, which come to $240,000 in the first year.
The developer bought 11 acres (in five parcels) on the south side of Sandford Boulevard from several owners, including private parties, Westchester County and Mount Vernon. On those parcels, the developer is building a two-story structure that will include 145,000 square feet on the first floor for Target, 45,000 square feet on the second floor for Bed Bath &amp; Beyond, and 30,000 square feet for TJ Maxx, also on the second floor.
G&amp;S is in negotiations with two more retailers for the building, but Mr. Riley would not say who they were. It will also be making payments to the city in lieu of taxes for that part of the project, Ms. Post said.
The developer has two other Westchester projects. In the late 1990's, it built a 137,000-square-foot Costco Wholesale Club on 12.3 acres in New Rochelle. In Port Chester, it is developing 27 acres of urban and waterfront property for new stores, restaurants and a multiplex theater. A 145,000-square-foot, two-level Costco has already opened there. Marshalls, Bed Bath &amp; Beyond and Super Stop &amp; Shop are among the stores expected to open in Port Chester later this year.
In Mount Vernon, the Target store will be the retailer's second outlet in Westchester. Last fall, the national discount merchandiser opened a 153,000-square-foot store in the City Center at White Plains, becoming the first retailer to ring up sales in a new $320 million retail-residential complex that also includes a Circuit City and a 15-screen National Amusements movie theater. White Plains represented Target's first basement-level store and its first outlet in a mixed-use residential-retail complex.
''The Mount Vernon store is a more traditional Target, on the first level and with a parking deck out front,'' said Paula Thornton-Greear, a Target spokeswoman. Usually, the retailer -- which has more than 1,200 stores in 47 states -- moves into one-level, free-standing stores in a regional shopping area.
Target, which opens up to 100 new stores a year and now has 1,225 outlets in the United States but has no immediate plans for further expansion in Westchester, had been considering Mount Vernon as a site for some time, Ms. Thornton-Greear said.
At the International Council of Shopping Centers in Manhattan, the global trade association of the shopping center industry, Malachy Kavanagh, a spokesman, described Mount Vernon as ''a good location for big-box retailers because of its proximity to the Hutchinson River Parkway.''
''Because of access to the parkway, the store will draw from not only Mount Vernon, which does not in and of itself have a large retail base, but also from Pelham and parts of the Bronx like Co-op City,'' he said. Co-op City houses more than 33,000 people.
While Best Buy is a ''destination in itself,'' and can function as a stand-alone store with its own parking, the three other retailers -- Target, TJ Maxx and Bed Bath &amp; Beyond -- work better together in a location where they can create synergy, Mr. Kavanagh said.
''BEST BUY'S customer is purpose-driven and will park and get in and out of the store and go home,'' Mr. Kavanagh said. ''The other three tend to attract a customer who likes to comparison shop and look around.''
TJ Maxx, which is based in Framingham, Mass., offers brand-name merchandise at prices below those in department stores. It has 700 stores -- 45 of them in New York -- across the country. In Westchester, it already has stores in Mount Kisco, Yonkers, Hartsdale and Yorktown Heights.
Bed Bath &amp; Beyond, which is based in Union, N.J., also has four other Westchester locations: in Hartsdale, Elmsford, Yonkers and Yorktown Heights.
In addition to its projects in New Rochelle, Port Chester and Mount Vernon, G&amp;S has built and leased a shopping center in Livingston, N.J., and another in Jersey City.
In the Region | Westchester  Correction:  February 29, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about retail development in Mount Vernon, N.Y., referred incorrectly to a building that housed a Shop-Rite supermarket on Sandford Boulevard. It is being enlarged for another retailer; Shop-Rite is no longer in business there.
