THE R.H.A.M. Board of Education will begin work on its budget for the 2004-5 fiscal year on Monday , less than two weeks after it finally won approval for its 2003-4 budget, a process that required 12 referendums over the past 10 months.
''It's good to get the old one off our plate, but we're already deep into next year, so it's all budget, all the time,'' said Dr. William M. Silver, the R.H.A.M. superintendent, who plans an April 5 public hearing on the budget for the fiscal year that begins July 1. Work on the new budget began last October.
''We don't get much time off from the numbers under the best of circumstances,'' Dr. Silver said. ''But it's nice to only be working on one at a time.''
Voters in Hebron, Andover and Marlborough (Regional School District 8) approved the $16.98 million budget by 2,061-1,570. The budget represents a 9.1 percent increase in spending. The R.H.A.M. Board of Education had cut about $20,000 from the budget that was rejected in January.
Officials had differing opinions about how to interpret the results.
''A lot of people were pretty tired of going out to vote every four weeks,'' said Brendan T. Shea, the Finance Board chairman in Hebron and head of the Tri-Town Committee, which is supervising R.H.A.M.'s finances. ''I don't think the cuts they made were enough to swing the vote this much. I think people just said, '12 is enough.'''
Marlborough First Selectman Nancy S. Bader said the vote reflected a campaign to get people to support the schools, including a public forum that was recorded and replayed on the local cable television public access channel.
''The dialogue was very good, people finally talked through the issues, and I think it inspired some confidence in the new Board of Education,'' Mrs. Bader said. ''I think people finally realized it was time to get on with the business of education.''
Donna J. McCalla, a spokeswoman for Hebron Dollars and Sense, a group that has argued for more fiscal restraint, said even though the budget passed it reflected the polarization of the towns that are now wedded in a regional school district.
Marlborough, which voted in favor of the budget in four of the 11 previous referendums, approved the Feb. 10 ballot, 699-363. In Hebron, it passed by a narrower margin, 1,133-968, for the first time in 12 tries. Andover voted against the budget for a 12th time, 239-229.
WORTH NOTING: UPDATE
