Redskins Coach Joe Gibbs said that when he was last working in the N.F.L., 11 years ago, the salary cap rested in the wallet of the team's owner, Jack Kent Cooke.
''In the old days, if I could convince Mr. Cooke that we needed a player, he'd spend the money and we'd get him,'' said Gibbs, who was attending the N.F.L. combine on Saturday.
It has not taken long for Gibbs to run up against the new system in the case of cornerback Champ Bailey, whose salary demands have the Redskins trying to trade him. Gibbs said six teams were in pursuit; one of them is believed to be the Jets. The Redskins have also allowed Bailey's agent, Jack Reale, to try to strike a deal with an interested team.
''We would love to have Champ,'' Gibbs said. ''Who wouldn't? You're talking about somebody who is a young guy, who's been to the Pro Bowl, who's never missed a game, and we love that. We felt like with what he was going to ask for it was going to be hard for us to do that.''
The other issue Gibbs has been dealing with is the trade for Jacksonville quarterback Mark Brunell. Although Gibbs said Brunell would have to compete for the starting job with the incumbent, Patrick Ramsey, Ramsey's agent, Jimmy Sexton, told reporters at the combine that Ramsey was upset by the trade.
Gibbs, though, said that he believed Ramsey understood the reason for the move and that the Redskins believe Ramsey, 24, was the Redskins' quarterback of the future.
''If not, we would be here looking for a young quarterback, and we're not doing that,'' Gibbs said.
Clarett Signs With Agent
Maurice Clarett had been keeping his options open until the last minute. He did not sign with an agent in case the N.F.L. managed a surprise legal victory that would keep him out of the draft. Once Clarett signed with an agent, he would be ineligible to return to play at Ohio State.
But on Friday, with no hint of successful legal maneuvering between now and the draft, which is April 24-25, Clarett committed himself and signed with Jimmy Sexton.
Browns Win Coin Toss
Cleveland won the coin toss with Atlanta for the seventh pick in the draft. They tied on all the criteria: they shared a .313 winning percentage (at 5-11), had the same strength of schedule rating, and their opponents' records were 138-118.
PRO FOOTBALL: NOTEBOOK
