FOR many entrepreneurs, building a company comes first, ideally followed by the rewards of success. But for Bruce H. Ross, the president and chief executive of Imagemark, it was the other way around.
Mr. Ross had an upbringing and business pedigree that many people would envy. He was the heir apparent to the family business, a successful Milwaukee maker of women's sportswear. On one of his Saturday visits to the office as a child, he marked up company business cards with Wite-Out, and his father's secretary helped him change them to read ''Bruce H. Ross: future president of Junior House of Milwaukee.'' His father later changed the company's name to JH Collectibles because he believed that the term ''Junior House'' pigeonholed it; sales doubled the next year.
The company was founded in 1945 by Mr. Ross's grandfather and a business partner. In its prime in the 1980's, it had a fancy New York showroom, took out multipage ads, featuring the model Cindy Crawford, in magazines like Vogue and Bazaar and had profits of more than $15 million a year. Bloomingdale's had a JH Collectibles boutique. The family owned two private jets.
Mr. Ross joined the company in 1980, after college. When he took the helm in 1989, his father, Kenneth B. Ross, presented him with a business card that read: ''Bruce H. Ross, president of JH Collectibles,'' framed next to the childhood version he had saved. ''My dad was my best friend,'' Mr. Ross recalled. ''We were on the phone 10 times a day.''
Then everything fell apart. The early 90's were a difficult time for the fashion industry, which Mr. Ross said became more focused on markdowns than quality. The senior Mr. Ross fell ill with heart disease and died in 1994. The banks asked the family to separate their personal finances from those of JH Collectibles, Mr. Ross said, and ''while we were moving the money, they thought we were going to do something; they got scared.'' So they called their loans, forcing the company to liquidate even though its sales were stable. In 1996, after more than a half-century of selling clothes, the company filed for bankruptcy.
''We were totally surprised,'' Mr. Ross said. ''We had no inkling this was coming.''
The double loss of the family business and his father and mentor ''took a lot of wind out of the sail,'' he said.
There was plenty of wind left, however. The family owned a half-dozen smaller businesses, including shopping centers and a helicopter company, and Mr. Ross continued to oversee them, though nothing really excited him. ''When you grow up in the fashion industry, it gets in your blood,'' he said. ''I missed the pace, the creative process.''
Then inspiration struck. He was meeting with officials from Nascar about producing a line of branded products for its 50th anniversary, he said, when ''a light went on.'' Nascar, he suspected, might be the tip of a huge untapped market for supplying corporate America with fashionable, high-quality clothing and other products emblazoned with company names or logos.
He was right. Companies' purchases of branded goods have tripled in the last 12 years, to $15.6 billion, according to the Promotional Products Association International. In talking with Nascar officials, Mr. Ross calculated that because of his manufacturing contacts and design background, he could deliver products that were better than most of the merchandise being sold at the time. And he could sell them for half the price by making them himself and selling directly to the customer. In November 1998, he opened JH Concepts, choosing the name as a salute to JH Collectibles.
There were minor glitches, like the client company that filed for bankruptcy after its order for 20,000 T-shirts was shipped. But orders picked up quickly -- and the ''JH'' in the name helped. Bonnie Rose, director of restaurant services at the New World Restaurant Group, which hired JH Concepts to make uniforms and promotional products like pens and pins for its Einstein Bros Bagels chain and other outlets, says she wore clothes from JH Collectibles when she was growing up, and her familiarity with the name got Mr. Ross in the door. ''I knew it was a quality brand,'' she said.
Among JH Concepts' first marquee accounts was ABC Sports, to produce and design clothing and promotional giveaways for the 2000 Super Bowl. Since then, it has also made custom products for Citibank, Hallmark, S.C. Johnson and American Express. In August, Mr. Ross renamed the company Imagemark to better reflect its focus.
Linda Knight, purchasing manager for Six Flags Great Adventure, said her company chose Imagemark over five other bidders for the redesign of staff and security uniforms for 30 of its theme parks. She said the company was impressed with Imagemark's creativity.
Rick Levine, publisher of Made to Measure, a magazine for the uniform trade, said that Mr. Ross was not the first to go after this market, but that he was just doing a good job of it. While it is unusual for a promotional-products company to have internal designers, it is not unusual for uniform makers, he said, citing Crest Uniform and Cintas as examples. Likewise, a growing number of companies provide both uniforms and promotional products.
But Imagemark, Mr. Levine said, ''has capitalized on the convergence in a very smart way.''
THE company now has 58 employees, and Mr. Ross expects 2004 to be its first profitable year. He also projects that revenue will double, after rising 40 percent last year, although he declined to give specific figures. The company opened an office on Park Avenue in Midtown Manhattan last year as part of a strategy to expand into new markets. Recently, a Los Angeles nightclub, Ivan Kane's Forty Deuce, hired Imagemark to help it create a branch that it plans to open in Las Vegas this summer. Imagemark will design the burlesque-style costumes and lingerie for the clubs' shows, set up an online store to sell the merchandise and oversee the design and marketing for both clubs.
''I'm trying to build a business that my dad would have loved,'' Mr. Ross said. ''If my dad was alive, I know we'd be working together.''
Private Sector
