INDUSTRIAL masks and helmets, electrostatic devices, antique toys and radios and countless peculiar scientific and cockamamie contraptions all make Steve Erenberg's accumulation more than a collection.
Mr. Erenberg, a Cortlandt Manor resident, owns so many complicated and unusual objects that it brings to mind a Dr. Frankenstein's latter-day laboratory or an upscale version of Diagon Alley, the shopping street for wizards in the Harry Potter books, only this time with help from eBay.
''It's a scary science museum, or technology-as-art museum, '' said Mr. Erenberg, 54, who is matter of fact about this monument that he has built to accommodate his compulsion to collect.
Mr. Erenberg's home is packed with thousands of pieces that he has bought in the last few decades, most of them since he began trading on eBay six years ago. He has a following of customers and fans there, he said, who pester him with e-mail messages about how to repair or to appraise their own treasures. He buys and sells as ''Radio-Guy'' on eBay, but many of his pieces are also displayed on his Web site, www.radio-guy.net.
Mr. Erenberg buys at least $1,500 worth of merchandise each week from eBay and from shows around the world, he said, but cataloguing it all would be a full-time job, so he doesn't. That is why, he said, he can't really say how much his collection is worth, but he estimates that its value could be anywhere from $500,000 to $1 million. He said the estimates are ''a wild guess, since I never did any inventory.''
''I hate to put a number on it,'' he added, ''but the value of the collection exceeds the cost of the house.''
He hasn't given up his day job, though, as a creative director at Pace Advertising Agency in Manhattan. Trained as an architect, Mr. Erenberg also paints and sculptures, and designs advertising campaigns and logos, like the five-story globe in front of the Trump International Hotel and Tower at Columbus Circle in Manhattan. But his true calling is collecting.
''I buy things that appeal to me,'' he said. ''I'm a designer, and it's inspiring to have all these things around, because I can't live in a static, empty house.''
And he most certainly doesn't. At his home here, Mr. Erenberg is surrounded by what he calls the ''ethnic art of the industrial age,'' which he describes as anything related to the beginnings of radio or electricity or technology. Some of Mr. Erenberg's favorite items are ''quack medicine gadgets,'' as he calls them, like an ''Important 1800's Radio Wave Quack Device,'' which he sells online for $6,500, or a ''Very Rare Quack Head Shaker Helmet,'' which goes for $6,000. He comes up with such prices based on his instinct, he said, ''since I'm dealing with the kind of things that have no price guide, like stamps or coins.'' Most of what he sells goes for $50 to $12,000, not including antique motorcycles and cars.
''His collection is worth serious attention and consideration,'' said Ellen Kuhfeld, curator of instruments at the Bakken Library and Museum in Minneapolis, known for its collection of 18th- and 19th-century medical and electrical artifacts.
''But I don't especially agree with his listing of some things as 'quack,''' she added. ''Electromedical coils don't count as quackery, since they're strongly related to treatments going on today.''
Nevertheless, part of the appeal of Mr. Erenberg's private museum is the striking and picturesque ways in which his items are displayed. Take, for instance, his 19th-century German craniometer, a device used to take head measurements, into which he has placed a real skull. He knows the craniometer is a rare item, he said, ''because I've never seen another one.''
''It was only made for museums or archaeologists, and it was never advertised,'' he said. ''It's a one-of-a-kind item.''
Then there is his Quack Shock Helmet, a phrenology-based gadget with metal prongs and eye cups, which he set up on top of a turn-of-the-century wig mannequin, the entire thing encased in a Victorian glass bell jar. Or there is his collection of Geissler tubes, improbably curved and tightly twisted glass cylinders displayed on glass shelves in a four-foot-tall brass and glass French curio cabinet. And there are century-old firefighter rescue helmets and smoke masks -- including one that has windshield wipers over the glass eye covers -- all arranged on antique metal stands in the kitchen, which stare across the dining table like a silent army of leathery, blank-eyed ghosts.
EVEN a dictionary on a 19th-century cast iron and wood stand has an antique mannequin's arm slung across it, to use as a pointer.
Mr. Erenberg altered his home, which he bought 26 years ago, to match the needs of his collection. He has transformed the ranch house into an Arts and Crafts-style home, complete with leaded-glass windows, many dormered, pyramid roofs, a trellised, multilevel deck, and a room with a 20-foot-tall vaulted ceiling.
Mr. Erenberg's wife, Helene, 52, is an eighth-grade math teacher in the Bronx. They have been married for ''what is becoming 30 very patient years,'' she said. Because the collection is not only valuable but also fragile, Mrs. Erenberg is the only one who dusts the pieces, which she does once a week for about two hours, she said. The neighbors are so enamored of the way in which Mr. Erenberg has transformed his home that four of them have remodeled using his drawings, Mrs. Erenberg said.
Besides his collection, there are Mr. Erenberg's bug drawings, including a 5-by-4-foot watercolor of a Goliath beetle, which was part of an exhibition of his watercolors called ''Entomechanica'' last summer at the National Arts Club in Manhattan.
Friends, relatives and other collectors use words like ''overwhelming'' and ''eclectic'' to describe the collection. Mr. Erenberg is just proud of it all. ''I think I could accessorize probably half of Manhattan,'' he said.
IN BUSINESS
