LONG known by authors and local history buffs, the Slater Collection, of 4,078 plate-glass negatives, which depict Ossining street scenes and social events from 1890 to 1934, has found a new home, at the Ossining Historical Society.
The collection of black-and-white negatives, all done by professional photographers, which was donated in December 2002, is now catalogued and available to the public at the society's headquarters, at 196 Croton Avenue here.
Such gifts are rare, as is the speed with which the historical society made them available, said Larry Gottheim, an expert in and appraiser of historical photography who lives in Yonkers. ''The only comparable situation I've ever encountered was in a small city in Canada,'' he said, ''where someone bought a building that contained a whole repository of generations of one photo studio.'' But in that case, ''the negatives weren't stored well and there were lots of shots of unidentified people.''
The trove is named after William A. Slater, a surveyor born in 1889, who lived and worked in Ossining and bought the negatives from photographic studios in town as they went out of business. He kept reliable records and stored them in a vault in his office -- which is the former library of the Mount Pleasant Military Academy -- which kept them in pristine shape. Mr. Slater died in 1977.
His son, William A. Slater Jr., 80, who has lived and worked as a surveyor in Ossining his entire life, is selling the office building and retiring. The time had come, he said, to find the plates a permanent home.
The collection is so brittle that it required a skilled art mover to transport it to the society. It also needed a specially built climate-controlled room to store it properly.
Weighing about a pound each, the 8-inch by 10-inch negatives have the heft and thickness of a phonograph record. An archival box containing 20 negatives is as heavy as a cinder block. Using a scanner, a printer and a home computer, the society is able to make prints on demand, thanks in part to Peter Kanze, who handled many of the cataloguing and setup duties. Digitized prints allow viewers to zoom in so close that it is possible to read the initials on a subject's buttons, said Roberta Arminio, the society's director.
Studios produced photos intended to be kept on glass-plate negatives, a technology that disappeared after World War II, Mr. Kanze said. The society owns a camera like the kind used to make the images. It stands five feet high and was used by the Ossining Police Department to photograph arrested suspects, said Mr. Kanze, who lives in North White Plains.
The Slater collection includes formal shots of families -- identified by name -- posing in their finery on national and religious holidays. The owners of Hart's Drug Store and Hilliker's Department Store commissioned photographs of display windows and interiors. Shots for real estate records included street scenes, along with photographs of buildings.
The five studios represented in the collection were ''the same good-quality studios existing in any community during the late 19th century,'' Mr. Gottheim said. ''You're not going to discover some great unknown photographer, but the content is so right there.''
The subject matter is about 40 percent industrial scenes, buildings and streetscapes, 30 percent individuals, families and groups, 22 percent schools, and the rest military organizations, churches, weddings and bodies in coffins. There are more than 100 scenes from Sing Sing prison. Some nearby towns are represented, including shots of downtown old Croton, which was bulldozed to make way for Route 9, Mr. Kanze said.
In one striking street shot from the 1890's, men in bowler hats walk up Main Street; two dogs play in the middle of the muddy street; a work crew puts in paving blocks; and horse-drawn carriages stand idle in front of stores, including one with a sign reading ''yeast delivery.'' Many of the buildings along the northern side of the street, illuminated by a streak of sunlight that splits the frame, still stand.
Other shots include a group portrait of 15 hawkers of The Daily Citizen, taken in 1903, which, according to handwritten notes, included Sadie Brody, the lone girl. At the spartan Marshall School, a student, Betty Crispin, hunches over a book.
t.
Mr. Kanze has printed about 1,800 copies of the images, most of which are in three-ring binders.
Many longtime residents have come in to view the collection and reminisce, said Ms. Arminio, 76, who has lived in Ossining all her life.
''Thanks to urban renewal, a lot of these places are gone,'' she said. ''These negatives recall a lot of memories growing up here. It's sad knowing it will never be like that again.''
Mr. Gottheim, who has appraised collections around the country, said that the Slater negatives are in good hands. ''I've seen some cases where historical societies would probably leave such a collection in boxes with no idea how to deal with it,'' he said.
MUSEUMS
