THE SETTING -- For some new immigrants, the computer, like snow, is a distinctly American oddity. But many immigrant entrepreneurs, whose small businesses play a significant part in New York's economy, quickly realize that a computer is not the extravagance it once seemed in places like Liberia, Belarus, Haiti and Algeria.
On a recent Wednesday night, a group of 12 entrepreneurs from around the globe gathered for a computer lesson at the offices of the New York Association for New Americans on Battery Place near ground zero; the immigrant aid organization has a comprehensive small-business assistance program. The eight weeks of classes, which run through mid-March, were financed by a $300,000 grant from Hewlett-Packard.
Some of the participants had never used a computer. For the lesson on accounting software, they sat in neat rows before sleek new Compaq Evo N800c laptops. But first came the part about the ''on'' button.
THE BUZZ -- ''This button right there will turn your computer on,'' Sotiris Cartsos, the instructor, said to Marlyne Coby, a Haitian immigrant who runs a small hair-braiding business from her home in Flatlands, Brooklyn.
Mr. Cartsos had only two hours to chip away at the mysteries of the track pad, the space bar and the double click, as well as the software (QuickBooks Pro Edition 2003), United States accounting standards and the American tax system.
Mistakes were made. The back button was introduced. The details soon got more devilish. Partnership or LLC? Common name versus legal name? Fiscal year?
Yefim Leyensol, an electrical engineer from Belarus, sped ahead but became marooned when a stubborn error message popped up on his screen. Back in Belarus, he had a computer. ''The same,'' he said, gesturing to the Compaq. ''But made in China. Cheaper in Byelorussia because somebody don't pay Microsoft.''
Adama Ture, a mechanic who came to New York from Liberia a year ago, is trying to start an auto body shop with his brother in Staten Island, where they live. Computers were not a necessity in Liberia, but here, he said, ''you cannot do all your work with your hands; you need computers to do most work.''
Record-keeping was especially unwieldy. ''Doing business in the Western world has to do too much with writing, with keeping documents,'' Mr. Ture said. He hoped the computer would help.
At one point in the lesson, the David Byrne song ''Like Humans Do'' started blaring from a computer at the front of the room. ''Is that part of QuickBooks?'' Mr. Cartsos asked. David Yakubov, a Russian mechanic with gray-streaked hair, smiled slyly. The music, he said, was no accident.
ERIKA KINETZ
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: LOWER MANHATTAN -- BUZZ
