MUCH to the surprise of analysts who watch corporate insiders' stock trades, the market has moved steadily higher since last summer, even though insider sales have far outnumbered purchases.
Jonathan Moreland, who is a money manager and the director of research at InsiderInsights.com, a weekly investment research newsletter, has been tracking insider trading activity among corporate managers for about a decade. He took some time last week to discuss why the market has been bucking this selling trend. Following are excerpts from the conversation:
Q. Market watchers started to become bearish over the summer, though stocks continued to plow higher. Historically, what has been the lag between changes in certain buying and selling activity and swings in the stock market? And why is it different this time?
A. In my experience, the lags are anywhere from three months to six months. Obviously, it is different this time, but I don't blame the insiders for this.
Last summer, I didn't expect the Federal Reserve to keep interest rates this low for this long, or to see the utterly fabulous growth we had in the third quarter of last year, or the good growth we had in the fourth quarter.
Q. Analysts compile their readings in different ways. What is your methodology, and what is it showing now?
A. I look at the number of companies where insiders are buying or selling and at open-market transactions, and make a ratio out of that. Right now there are about twice as many sellers as buyers.
Historically, it is an outrageously bearish reading. It is so negative that I am not going to pay any attention to it until it really starts to improve.
Q. Why is that?
A. The smart play is to still be long the market. There is nothing inconsistent with the insider signal being bearish. But right now it is correct to be hedged, it is incorrect to be leveraged, and it is very correct to be wary.
Q. It's not smart to look at one incidence of buying or selling to draw a conclusion about a company's prospects, is it?
A. One data point is not enough, but it is enough to get you looking at the history, and you wouldn't know what history to look at unless you used the data point. I think if you look at this you should look back a minimum of three years and preferably five years.
That is because within a six-month period insiders cannot sell and buy, or buy and sell, in the open market.
One other point: insider activity tends to be a good indicator. But it only gets me looking at the fundamentals of a company.
Q. Aside from your ''outrageously bearish'' sell/buy ratio indicator, what are you worried about?
A. A very delicate balance of factors is holding up the market and the world's economies right now. Low interest rates, a falling dollar and low inflation are keeping things going. I don't know how much longer these conditions can continue, but I don't think it's much longer.
If any of these factors change in the next year, they will probably be reflected first in the stock market, which is a harbinger of things to come. And we haven't even talked about the geopolitical uncertainties.
Q. A couple of weeks ago, buying activity by insiders at 3M raised some eyebrows. Why?
A. I can't remember the last time insiders at a component of the Dow Jones industrial average were buyers in the open market. And I can't remember the last time I had a Dow component on my recommended stock list.
Insiders at large-cap companies have less of a need to purchase in the open market because, by the time you become an insider, you have lots of stock options.
Q. Where else is there buying activity?
A. I have recently noticed buying trends in energy. We own Parker Drilling and Plains All American Pipeline. And we are looking at Tesoro Petroleum.
There was also a little splurge in biotechnology, and we have been looking at Genta and at Guilford Pharmaceuticals. We are invested in Enzo Biochemicals.
And you always see insider buying in regional bank stocks.
Q. Are there other stocks you favor?
A. In health care, I still like Microtek Medical, even though the stock is up by more than 300 percent over the last 83 weeks. At a price of around $6 it is arguably lots better than other stocks out there.
And Network Equipment Technologies is as safe a bet as there is out there.
Q. For the past several months investors have been piling money into stocks, particularly through mutual funds. Is that a sound strategy?
A. I really don't think people are paying enough attention to the risks in their portfolios. I think people should either be hedging more or not being greedy. Take some profit off the table and put it into more conservative investments.
MARKET INSIGHT
