A local dispute is gaining national attention as a religious school's case against Mamaroneck goes to a federal appeals court.
For the last three years, the Westchester Day School, which serves about 460 Orthodox Jewish students in kindergarten through eighth grade, has been seeking permission from Mamaroneck zoning officials to upgrade its school, including erecting a new building, on nearly 26 acres in Orienta Point here. After initial hearings by the zoning board of appeals, the project seemed on track to proceed, but permission was later denied after opposition from neighborhood residents.
The court battle is now before a federal appeals court, where lawyers will argue whether the village interfered with the school's practice of religion, which is prohibited by the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act. That legislation was passed by Congress in 2000 to protect religious institutions from discrimination by unfair and onerous land use regulations -- by preventing government agencies, including local planning boards, from blocking religious projects unless a compelling government interest is at stake.
The constitutionality of the act, which replaced a similar but broader law that was struck down by the United States Supreme Court in 1997, is at issue as the case moves to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York.
On March 1, the court is scheduled to hear Mamaroneck's appeal of a decision in which Judge William C. Conner of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York in White Plains ordered the village to grant the school's application for a permit to modify its property last September, after finding it had violated the religious land use act.
Judge Conner found that the village zoning board had failed to balance environmental concerns with the school's rights to a reasonable use of its property. Instead, he said, it appeared the board's denial of the application was ''a reaction to belated public outcry, a paradigm of what has been referred to as the Nimby (Not in My Back Yard) syndrome.''
The judge concluded that the zoning board's denial was ''a substantial burden on the plaintiff's exercise of religion because the modification'' the school sought would allow it to better serve its students and to fulfill its religious and educational mission. A wide range of religious groups has filed briefs in support of the school, while the New York Conference of Mayors and a neighborhood group, Save Orienta's Unique Neighborhood, have done the same for the village.
Michael D. Zarin, the lawyer representing the Orienta neighborhood group, said that ''the effect of the ruling is to essentially eviscerate and exempt religious institutions from any meaningful local land use review.''
The case dates to October 2001, when the school submitted an application to the Mamaroneck Zoning Board of Appeals requesting permission to renovate outdated structures and to build a 44,000-square-foot building to connect two 19th-century buildings.
The project at first seemed set to proceed, as the Zoning Board of Appeals, after holding hearings between November 2001 and February 2002, voted unanimously to issue a determination that no significant environmental impact would result from the construction, meaning that no further environmental studies would be necessary.
But the strident community opposition that followed the determination led the zoning board to reopen public hearings. On Aug. 1, 2002, the board reversed itself and told the school it needed further environmental impact studies to move forward.
The school filed suit in United States District Court in White Plains challenging the zoning board's reversal. It was successful, with the court ruling that there was no basis for the action. But later the board denied the school's application, leading the school to file an amended complaint.
Stanley D. Bernstein, a vice president of the school who is also a lawyer representing it, said the primary goal of the construction was to update the school's campus. While modest growth of 10 to 15 percent is expected over the next decade, Nelson M. Tuchman, the school's president, said expansion was not the main goal of the project.
Village officials and residents expressed concern that the changes would lead to increased traffic.
''There are only one or two roads in and out of this area and it's highly residential,'' said Kevin J. Plunkett, the village attorney and a partner at Thatcher, Proffitt and Wood in White Plains. ''There are traffic and safety concerns. There are concerns regarding size and height and things of that nature. These are all legitimate zoning issues.''
Mr. Bernstein, however, said that the proposed construction on the campus complied with the zoning and that the school had made every effort to modify its plans, including scaling back the project.
''It has school buses in the morning and school buses out in the afternoon,'' Mr. Bernstein said. ''It is not a nuclear reactor.''
Mr. Plunkett said that beyond challenging the act as unconstitutional, he would be focusing extensively on whether the board's denial of a special permit for modification ''substantially burdened'' the school's ability to exercise religion.
But without updating their campus, school officials said, it will be difficult for them to provide the caliber of educational opportunities expected in the 21st century. School officials said they believed the zoning board's actions were little more than an attempt to push them out of the area.
Mr. Plunkett disputed that notion, but said it is important for a municipality to be able to control growth.
THE LAW
