Mike Weir has figured out Riviera Country Club. Figuring out how to beat him will not be easy.
Setting the 54-hole Nissan Open scoring record with a 17-under-par 196, Weir took a commanding five-stroke lead into Sunday's final round, a major step toward becoming the event's sixth back-to-back winner. He looked as comfortable making birdies and crucial putts on Saturday as he did last year during the Masters, where he captured his first major championship.
Those chasing Weir, including John Daly, knew they were in trouble. Daly, who shot 72, fell eight strokes behind, and had this reaction to Weir's record-setting score:''Is he playing the same course that we are?''
Weir just played it better. Breaking the record of 197 set by Fred Couples in 1990, Weir (66) was five strokes ahead of Shigeki Maruyama (71), six strokes ahead of Jeff Maggert (69), seven strokes ahead of Scott McCarron (10 under par) and eight strokes ahead of four players tied at nine under: Daly, Stuart Appleby, Briny Baird and Loren Roberts.
After winning here in a playoff last year, Weir is trying to join Mac Smith (1928-29), Ben Hogan (1947-48), Paul Harney (1964-65), Arnold Palmer (1966-67) and Corey Pavin (1994-95) as back-to-back tournament champions. It was hard to believe, but Weir used to struggle at Riviera. The first four times he played the Nissan, he missed the cut. But he has developed into one of the world's best players, and at Riviera he has become a world beater.
''Even before last year, I felt like I knew how to play the golf course,'' said Weir, a left-handed Canadian who has six career PGA Tour victories. ''You have to shape it off the tee, you have to hit it on the correct side of the hole, and work the ball around. That's usually a good formula for me.''
Any formula works well when a player makes putts. And on a cool, wet day, Weir's putter was red hot. He needed only 22 putts to complete his round, and he made two outstanding par-saving putts: a 20-footer on No. 9 and an 8-footer at No. 18.
Beginning the third round tied with Maruyama for the lead, Weir took it for good at No. 6, Riviera's famous 203-yard par-3, which features a bunker in the middle of a two-tiered green. Daly double-bogeyed No. 6, and Maruyama and McCarron bogeyed it. But Weir hit a superb tee shot to 15 feet, and he buried the putt for birdie.
That moved him to 13 under, while Maruyama and McCarron, playing in the final group with Weir, fell to 11 under.
From that point, Weir took off. He birdied the short par-4, 315-yard No. 19, hitting an approach shot to 2 feet. He birdied the par-5 No. 11, making a 20-footer for birdie. He birdied No. 14 by making an 18-footer, and he birdied No. 16 by making a 10-footer. With Weir putting as if the hole were twice its size, the field did not have much chance to keep pace.
''Today Mike was putting unbelievably well,'' Maruyama said through an interpreter. ''Maybe that's because he is from Canada. He got used to the cold weather.''
Perhaps the only negative on Weir's résumé is that he has never won a Tour event as the 54-hole leader.
In all six of Weir's victories, including last year's at the Masters, he trailed heading into the final round. He is 0 for 5 when leading heading into the final round, and the last time Weir held the 54-hole lead, he shot a final-round 75 at the 2002 Honda Classic and finished tied for 11th.
Ranked No. 6 in the world, Weir is a better player now, but he also knows that keeping a large lead is not always easy. He viewed Sunday's final round as another test.
''I want to prove to myself that I can handle leading by five shots,'' Weir said. ''Maybe in the past I tried to do too much or something. I've got some things to prove to myself.''
Weir has already proved he can play Riviera.
CHIP SHOTS
Make TIGER WOODS 0 for 6 as a pro at Riviera Country Club. After a disappointing third-round 72, Woods was 14 shots behind the leader, MIKE WEIR, tied for 44th place. It was Woods's worst 54-hole position since the 2002 British Open, where he was tied for 67th after a third-round 81. Woods has never won at Riviera in six attempts as a pro, the most he has ever played a course without winning. He will try to defend his title at the Match Play Championship, which begins Wednesday.
JOHN DALY, who was tied for fifth place, will be attempting his second consecutive top-10 finish after winning last weekend's Buick Invitational. Daly had only two top-10 finishes in 22 Tour starts in 2003.
GOLF
