INSIDE the depths of the Plum Island Animal Disease Center, past the security guards and locked gates, new waterproof cameras watch the hallways and the cows, pigs and scientists passing through.
Eight months have passed since the Department of Homeland Security took over the management of Plum Island from the Agriculture Department, and last week, Homeland Security officials offered a rare glimpse into this veiled and mysterious island less than two miles off the North Fork. The timing of the tour for a dozen journalists coincided with the publication of a new book, ''Lab 257,'' by Michael Christopher Carroll, who argues that the Plum Island laboratories have an appalling safety record and can be linked to outbreaks of Lyme disease and West Nile virus.
But Homeland Security officials dismissed the book's claims and said during the daylong tour that they had bolstered security on the 840-acre island. ''The Department of Homeland Security takes security tremendously seriously,'' said Maureen McCarthy, the department's director of research and development. ''This is our business. This is our job. This is what we're supposed to do.''
There have long been questions about the safety of Plum Island's operations, but they became more prevalent after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. Mr. Carroll, a lawyer from Bellmore, writes that in 2002 American forces in Afghanistan found a file on the Plum Island laboratory in the home of a nuclear physicist identified by American officials as an associate of Osama bin Laden.
Mr. Carroll, who calls the lab a ticking biological time bomb, describes low employee morale and a decline in security after a private company took over support functions in 1991. The employees' union went on strike against a lab contractor in 2002, and the Department of Homeland Security has since brought in a new contractor.
A report from the General Accounting Office released in October also criticized security at the center, saying that officials did not control access to dangerous pathogens that could be adapted for germ warfare. The report also cited door alarms and sensors that did not work, weak outside lighting and insufficient background checks.
But during the tour, it appeared that many of those concerns had been addressed to some degree.
Armed private security guards dressed in black greeted visitors at the Orient Point ferry to Plum Island, checking identification when passengers boarded and when they reached the island. Inside the labyrinthine laboratories, anyone who wants to enter the biocontainment area where animal diseases are studied must first punch in a code to get through a floor-to-ceiling metal turnstile.
Plum Island officials say that they have stepped up security patrols and that guards now drive the island's bumpy gravel roads in white sport utility vehicles day and night. The officials add that they now digitally record who enters and leaves the lab and that potential employees are screened more vigorously.
''There are no exceptions to the rules,'' said Elizabeth Lautner, the lab's new director. ''I'm not allowed to go unescorted yet.''
In a joint statement released last Tuesday, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton and Representative Tim Bishop, both New York Democrats, pointed out that Plum Island is scheduled to receive an additional $13 million for upgrades in the 2005 federal budget and urged lab officials to use the money to address concerns raised in the General Accounting Office report. They also said that the union workers replaced after the strike should be rehired.
"We have a long way to go," Senator Clinton and Representative Bishop wrote in a letter addressed to Drs. McCarthy and Lautner. "Although strides have been made, the Local 30 workers have not returned to the job, the facility is in need of serious infrastructure and security upgrades, and the surrounding communities deserve to be better informed."
But Debbie O'Kane, the director of the North Fork Environmental Council, said she was not willing to take Homeland Security officials at their word. She is proposing an oversight committee to examine security.
''There has been no direct communication with the local community,'' Ms. O'Kane said. ''We need assurances that the concerns that were cited in the G.A.O. report were addressed systematically.''
Plum Island and Homeland Security officials said there have been no direct terrorist threats against the lab, which studies foot-and-mouth disease and swine fever, among other diseases. Dr. McCarthy pointed out that a direct attack on Plum Island would not be necessary for terrorists to obtain the naturally occurring pathogens studied here. ''This stuff is easy to get your hands on outside of the country,'' she said.
Officials used the tour as a chance to dispute the claim in ''Lab 257,'' which was published by William Morrow, that Plum Island could be the source of recent outbreaks of diseases like West Nile virus. They said pathogens were contained and controlled at the lab, and scientists described the elaborate precautions required for transporting blood and tissue samples from animal pens to laboratories.
''I believe the book missed its mark,'' Dr. McCarthy said.
And Building 257, where pathogens were once studied, was decontaminated and abandoned in 1995, Homeland Security officials said. It is now cordoned off behind a barbed-wire fence, sealed up, its metal exhaust system slowly rusting on the roof. The officials added that they were considering what to do with the building. ''It's there, not presenting a hazard,'' Dr. Lautner said.
