YOU'RE only young once, and for some, it seems, that's once too often. John Chamberlain was only 10 when he tossed the proverbial toy truck of boyhood aside and swiped a pack of Sunshine cigarettes from his father's saloon in Chicago, thereby embarking on what Horatio Alger would surely have deemed delinquency. And like that other delinquent artiste, James Dean, whose legend was crowned by a car crash in 1955, Mr. Chamberlain added a page to automotive history in 1957, when he took a wrecked Ford fender and bent it into an artwork.
Today his crushed-car-part sculptures occupy a unique place in art -- a collision of Pop, Minimalism, Abstract Expressionism and recycling. (His miniatures, some made out of Tonka trucks, are on view this weekend at the Seventh Regiment Armory.)
The artist's own 60-year game of chicken came to a climax eight years ago, when he suffered a heart attack at his home on Shelter Island in New York and had triple bypass surgery. That put an end to his smoking. Mr. Chamberlain, 76, had given up drinking and drugs years before, he said, and his life was appallingly vice-free. ''I don't drink, I don't smoke, I don't gamble, and I don't fool around with any woman that ain't my wife,'' he said. Then, in 1999, his son Jesse died, and he picked up his son's C-melody saxophone -- gingerly.
Before that, Mr. Chamberlain's musical career had taken a decided back seat to his art. ''I was the only clarinet in the high school orchestra, but I didn't stay long,'' he recalled dryly. Living in New York with some jazz musicians in the late 1940's, he had tried to learn the sax but didn't have the patience. ''I wanted to be Woody Herman right off the bat,'' he said.
Starting over, he bumbled around for a while. ''Then I decided to get serious,'' he said. He upgraded to a Yamaha student sax and began taking lessons from Hal McKusick, a jazz musician who teaches in neighboring Sag Harbor. In 2003, he upgraded again, to a gold-plated 1929 Selmer E-flat alto, bought at Perry Ritter Woodwind Repair in Manhattan, for about $2,200.
In the 1920's, the saxophone became the star of the dance and jazz bands that flourished in the United States after World War I. Patented by Adolphe Sax in Paris in 1846 and swiftly adopted by French military bands, it became a favorite of jazz musicians because of its flexibility: unlike many woodwinds, it can be held in a variety of ways and even lends itself to a little energetic swaying. That classical musicians looked down on it as more brash than brass did not hurt its outsider allure.
Nowadays, the sax has a nostalgic quality of 1950's-era disillusion -- the James Dean of instruments. It is the sound of that era, played loud, that appeals most to Mr. Chamberlain, who bought a Hummer last year because it has so many speakers. And while he basks in the Hummer's surround sound, the sax is a better nicotine replacement. For one thing, playing it makes him breathe. ''That's one of the rules, for passing an urge,'' he said. ''Take three deep breaths.''
Like smoking, the sax has also given him something he can both relax with and obsess over. ''I just wanted to be able to play six songs to my old lady,'' he said, meaning his wife, Prudence Fairweather. Now past that point, he is hooked and finds himself striving, resentfully, to play better and better. ''My problem is that I'm a total C student,'' he said. ''But I know how to get an A.''
So he remains locked in a kind of tortured embrace with the horn. Still, it's better than blowing smoke.
POSSESSED
