WITH 101 works, the exhibition of photographs by John Shearer titled ''Four Decades in Photographs'' covers a lot of varied territory. At times there are unexpected jumps between photojournalism and artful compositions on timeless themes.
The most famous image in the exhibition is also the first chronologically. It is of the funeral procession of President John F. Kennedy and shows 2-year-old John F. Kennedy Jr. saluting his father's coffin, an indelible image. It was published in Look magazine, one of the popular publications at the time devoted to graphic, black and white presentations of current events.
Mr. Shearer calls the legendary photographer and filmmaker Gordon Parks his inspiration, and Mr. Shearer has several of Mr. Parks's traits. A chief one is a deep involvement in a news story, followed by escape from mundane concerns.
Unfortunately, the works in the exhibition carry no dates, leaving viewers to rely on their own memories and recollections. When he covered the 1971 prisoner rebellion at Attica State Prison in western New York State, Mr. Shearer captured many aspects of those days of siege and horror. Action pictures show the release of the first prison guard hostage and troops leaving the prison when the riot was over.
Outside the prison Mr. Shearer photographed a group of women praying and an emblematic picture of a police officer holding what looks like the shot-up remains of his hat.
Another rich series features the young Muhammad Ali in the early 1970's after his release from prison for evading the military draft. He had three championship fights with Joe Frazier; he lost the first and won the other two. The stoical Frazier appears as a fine foil to the bumptious Ali in this visual story. Frazier watches silently as Ali taunts him through a window and sits alone under a spotlight as if he is about to depart the scene. Ali is best commemorated in a close-up portrait by Mr. Shearer. There are a couple of other close-up, skin-pore revealing portraits in the show, one of the state corrections commissioner during the Attica uprising and another of the jazz bassist Milt Hinton. There should be even more; Mr. Shearer is good at revealing character.
If one judges by the exhibition, Mr. Shearer was most involved with events and personalities early in his career and then pursued more contemplative subjects.
Only a couple of other groupings read as series and they are feature stories. ''Jamaica'' is one and is characterized by a lot of greenery that is soothing after first encountering a photograph of the dark interior of the airport. Otherwise, pictures like ''Girl in a Pink Dress'' and ''Youth in Hammock'' underscore Jamaica's reputation for hedonism. ''Black Biker Story'' is an intriguing photo, but with only five photographs devoted to the bikers we don't get a real understanding of them and their mores.
Gordon Parks often sought France as a refuge and Mr. Shearer has gone there at least once and explored it rather thoroughly. In this series, the work gets problematic and many of the pictures should be regarded as experiments. There are no media listed, apart from the fact that everything is a photograph, but Mr. Shearer obviously does a lot of manipulation on his computer. Mr. Parks and many other photographers do this, too, with mixed results.
What Mr. Shearer likes to do in some of the pictures taken in France is to insert bits of hot color in an otherwise ordinary scene. This makes no sense in a picture called ''Escalator,'' taken at the sleekly modern Beaubourg Museum in Paris, but it has some relevance in ''Côte Sauvage'' a beach scene in which a couple lie on a towel. The towel is made an irradiated orange that emphasizes the heat.
One of the finest pictures in the show, however, is the result of manipulation. ''Mont St. Michel'' is given an Impressionist treatment: the pilgrimage site is a lavender silhouette, and the reflection in the water is a mirror image, but appropriately shimmers in the water. ''Jardin des Tuileries'' is a stately black and white picture but the Eiffel Tower is made to look phantom-like, which gives new drama to a monument often taken for granted.
Mr. Shearer treats New York in much the same way. He tends to conflate rural and suburban New York and New York City so that the viewer keeps bobbing between country and city. One of the most compelling city images is the simple head of a parking meter. It is in deep shadow, making it look like the menacing object it is.
The Brooklyn Bridge has always appealed to artists as a symbol of vision and progress, and Mr. Shearer gives the bridge some appropriate dramatic lighting. ''Skyscrapers on Angle,'' though, doesn't induce vertigo. ''Twin Towers'' is certainly meant to be a tribute, but reinserting it, collage-like, into the Manhattan skyline seems flimsy and gratuitous.
Five works are under the umbrella ''Nudes.'' These are some of Mr. Shearer's most audacious efforts. But it's relative; they're modest by most standards these days. ''Trees,'' for instance, is the sinuous torso of a nude as painted by Modigliani imposed on a stand of bare trees. It's the age-old identification of woman with the landscape.
One wishes that the news bug would bite Mr. Shearer again. Contentiousness in real life has produced his most involving photographs.
''Four Decades in Pictures: The Photographic Work of John Shearer'' is at the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts in Mount Kisco through March 1. Information: (914)241-6922 or www.nwcaonline.org.
ART REVIEW
