IT'S hard enough for Sgt. Tom Field to get some people to put their children in car seats. He rattles the numbers off as though he has been reciting them while trolling the streets of South Windsor in his police car: six children from infancy to 14 are killed each day in car accidents, and more than 750 are injured, according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Once Sergeant Field persuades parents to put children in those car seats, though, he hears equally startling numbers. Almost 80 percent of Connecticut drivers who use the seats have installed them incorrectly.
The National Safe Kids campaign reported in 2001 that more than 200 children killed in car accidents were riding in car seats. Almost 31,700 children riding in car seats were injured. A push is on to change that, as safety organizations throughout the state, from AAA, formerly the Automobile Association of America, , Connecticut Safe Kids, and police and fire departments now offer free clinics to check for correctly installed car seats.
Gina Nutcher, a Hamden schoolteacher, took her 17-month-old twins and her Chevy Tahoe to the AAA office in Hamden recently for a car seat check. Mrs. Nutcher had stopped at the offices 17 months earlier, when the staff had reviewed the installation of her rear-facing infant seats. Now she was switching to front-facing toddler seats.
''I read about this in my Triple-A bulletin, and my husband and I went down and learned some information,'' she said. ''After we were done, we said to each other, 'It's a good thing we came.'''
Mrs. Nutcher's husband, Gregory, is a Hamden police officer, but because training in car seat installation is not standard practice in fire or police departments, he didn't know how to put the car seats in correctly, either.
The Connecticut Motor Club conducted a survey of members who were seeking help fitting their car seats correctly. Of the more than 3,000 car seats the motor club checked during the past year and a half, 78 percent were either installed incorrectly or consumers were using them in the wrong way. On a national level, AAA found that about 81 percent of the seats were installed correctly.
''People tie their car seats down with bungee cords, or use 2-by-4's as a base for the seat,'' said Fran Mayko, a spokeswoman for the Connecticut Motor Club, which includes members from Fairfield, New Haven and Litchfield counties. Loose harness straps are a common problem, authorities said.
Car seat data is hard to collect, authorities said. The majority of public safety officers are not trained in the specifics of car seat installation, so when they arrive at an accident, mistakes are rarely noted. ''There's so much data we would like that we don't have,'' said Karen Brock of Connecticut Safe Kids, a statewide safety organization sponsored by the Connecticut Children's Medical Center in Hartford and the Elks Club.
So safety officials rely on clinics to gather numbers, and on anecdotes, like the one Sergeant Field tells of a South Windsor mother who had her 3-year-old child's car seat checked at one of the South Windsor police's clinics. A few months later, her car was struck broadside while she was making a turn.
''We sent her to the hospital, and there wasn't a scratch on the child,'' Sergeant Field said. ''If you can secure yourself in the car, you don't become a projectile.''
Many parents in Fairfield County believe that a higher-priced car seat will improve a child's odds of surviving a serious accident, said Mark Blake of Weston Fire and Rescue.
''You can have the best car seat available,'' he said. ''But if it's not installed properly, you can still have a serious injury or a fatality from it.'' The Weston department checked about 600 car seat installations last year, and Mr. Blake said up to 96 percent were improperly installed. The department was the first firehouse designated by the State Department of Transportation as a ''fitting station'' for child safety seats. Now there are several fitting stations sprinkled throughout the state. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration posts a Web site rating child-safety seats for ease of use, www.nhtsa.dot.gov/CPS/CSSRating. Although no car seats received an overall C rating, they did receive low marks in various categories ranging from labeling clarity to ease of securing a child correctly in the restraint. The administration says it receives numerous complaints from consumers who have struggled with car seat installation.
Regulations enacted in September 2002 required car makers and safety seat manufacturers to install a system called lower anchors and tethers for children, which is otherwise know as the latch system on all car seats. latch, designed to simplify use, attaches to anchors in the car so that car seats are no longer held in by seat belts.
Seat belt laws have tightened in the past several years, as national and local automobile safety groups have gathered statistics citing the effectiveness of child safety seats and booster seats for older children. In 2001, an estimated 269 children younger than 5 were saved because they were riding in child safety seats, according to the traffic safety agency. Just within the past three years, 22 states and the District of Columbia have enacted booster seat laws, although Connecticut is not one of them. Booster seat legislation in Connecticut passed the Senate last year but died in the House. A study conducted by the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, which reviewed thousands of crashes, found that children age 4 to 7 riding in booster seats were 59 percent less likely to be injured than children wearing an adult seat belt.
''There are some people who are opposed to a mandatory booster seat bill,'' said Ms. Brock of Connecticut Safe Kids. ''The idea is if we only had a bigger public relations campaign, parents would listen. But if that is the way things worked, we wouldn't have laws. The N.H.T.S.A. has a seat-belt use chart that starts in 1983, and it shows a rise in use as states put laws into effect. It's not until you have the laws and the enforcement that we see results. Encouragement doesn't get very far.''
AAA lists car seat installation clinics in its periodic bulletin. Connecticut Safe Kids clinics, along with a listing of fitting stations, are listed at www.ctsafekids.org. Spokesmen said that they hope that, with education, more consumers, including grandparents who are driving their grandchildren about, will use the clinics. They last about half an hour.
''Our seats were not tight enough and they moved around a lot,'' Mrs. Nutcher said. ''I was concerned about that when we first installed them, but what did we know? We thought they were installed correctly.''
