Haircuts. Shower curtains. Parking reimbursements. Country club memberships. Use of corporate jets.
Recent criminal and civil court cases involving top executives have brought to the fore an open secret in corporate America: for executives with multimillion-dollar salaries, no company-paid perk is too small -- or too big -- to accept.
The details of the personal expenses that executives put on the company tab often are not known because loopholes in federal disclosure rules let publicly traded companies generally avoid disclosing the perks they give executives along with pay and stock options. But the recent trials of Martha Stewart and other executives have revealed the lavish benefits some receive.
During the criminal trial of Ms. Stewart, James Follo, the chief financial officer of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, testified that Ms. Stewart had asked the company to reimburse her $17,000 annually for her weekend driver as well as for trips to her hairdresser, coffee and other items.
The trial of L. Dennis Kozlowski and Mark H. Swartz, two former top executives at Tyco International, a manufacturing conglomerate, has revealed that Tyco paid an array of their expenses. The bills included tuition to private schools for Mr. Swartz's three children and $1 million for a birthday party in Sardinia for Mr. Kozlowski's wife. And then there was the infamous $6,000 shower curtain and a $15,000 umbrella stand.
Such extravagances draw criticism from an unlikely combination of corporate watchdog groups and management consultants who create executive pay packages. By avoiding expenses lower-level employees must pay, executives will only worsen the cynicism that ordinary Americans and professional investors have about them, the critics say.
''It just reflects a disconnect from the way that average people live,'' said Diane Doubleday, a principal at Mercer Human Resource Consulting.
Large benefits are often a danger sign for shareholders, Sarah Teslik, the executive director for the Council of Institutional Investors, said in an e-mail exchange. ''They reveal (a) no sense of boundary between personal and business expenses, (b) a desire to hide excessive pay by dividing it up into many pieces, including perks, and (c) a person who has no idea how much C.E.O. perks anger other employees.''
Another executive whose perks have recently come under scrutiny is Conrad M. Black, the former chairman of Hollinger International, a newspaper company that paid $8 million for Franklin Delano Roosevelt's personal papers while Lord Black was writing a biography of him.
In 2002, a filing in the divorce of John F. Welch Jr., the former chairman of General Electric, disclosed that G.E. was paying for a Manhattan apartment, New York Knicks tickets and other benefits for him even after he retired. He later agreed to give up many of the perks.
Not all the benefits are large. In 2000, Oracle gave Lawrence J. Ellison, its chairman, $8,360 for ''personal fitness expenses,'' a company filing showed. At the time, his stake in Oracle was worth more than $50 billion. Oracle declined to comment.
In 2002, Gillette paid James M. Kilts, its chairman, $2.7 million in salary and bonus. The company also reimbursed Mr. Kilts $3,240 for parking expenses, according to a filing. A spokesman for Gillette said Mr. Kilts' pay and benefits were set by its board and that Gillette's profits and sales had grown strongly since he took over three years ago.
The average chief executive at a big public company now makes well over $10 million a year, including stock options, almost 20 times the level in 1981 and 500 times the average worker's salary. In that context, perks are a relatively small part of executive compensation, said Joe Bachelder, a lawyer for many chief executives. And companies typically give midlevel executives some extras as well, including reimbursement of their cellphone bills, expense accounts for meals and occasionally company cars. ''The real question is perception,'' Mr. Bachelder said. ''It's a question of where you draw the line.''
Benefits are rarely made public in filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, where companies must report the pay and options that their five highest-paid executives receive.
In general, companies must disclose the total cost of these extras only if they are more than $50,000 per executive, authorities on compensation say.
In addition, if a company classifies a perk as related to its business rather than a benefit for its executive, S.E.C. rules permit it to avoid revealing the cost. In such cases, the executive probably would not even have to pay income taxes on any of the benefits, compensation experts say. Otherwise, the perks are usually taxable -- but, in another perk, companies often give executives extra money to pay the taxes.
The American International Group, an insurance company, reported in its latest filing that it provided its executives with ''the use of a yacht and corporate aircraft, club memberships, recreational opportunities and clerical and investment management services.'' The yacht rides and other free items were provided for business purposes, and any personal benefits to the executives are ''regarded as incidental'' and not reported, the company said.
Benefits should be better disclosed, said Paul Hodgson, a senior research associate at the Corporate Library, a governance research group. ''Stockholders are paying for these provisions and therefore have a right to know what they are,'' Mr. Hodgson said.
Because disclosure rules are so weak, it is impossible to know how much companies are spending on perks, he said. But he said proxy statements indicate that at least a handful of retired executives probably receive benefits similar to those Mr. Welch of General Electric gave up after they were reported.
Ms. Doubleday predicted that the S.E.C. would consider requiring companies to disclose more information.
Among the few perks that are generally widely disclosed is the use of corporate aircraft for personal purposes.Companies sometimes contend that they require executives to use the corporate jet instead of commercial aviation for security reasons.
Graef Crystal, an independent authority on executive compensation, said that explanation was a convenient excuse for executives who wanted to use corporate assets for themselves.
Executives like perks, he said, because ''they need to feel they have some control over something.''
''It's very hard to control a multibillion-dollar company,'' Mr. Crystal said. ''You try something; it works. You try something else; it doesn't. But if you can get your dry cleaning paid for, at least you've accomplished something.''
