Following are excerpts from the decision of Judge Charles L. Brieant of United States District Court in White Plains on July 8, 2003, in the case of McCormick and Geldwert v. the School District of Mamaroneck and the School District of Pelham, which ordered the school districts to move girls' soccer to fall, pending appeal:
Plaintiffs present a twofold argument. The first or absolutist argument is to the effect that under Title IX any inequality or significant differences with respect to men's soccer is discriminatory and therefore unlawful, even if some women players and their schools prefer the present situation, and alternatively, as a second argument, there is actual detriment to them, and to those similarly situated because of the temporal difference between men's soccer and women's.
The first, or absolutist argument presented seems the more forceful. The statute, 20 U.S.C. 1681, is simplicity itself. It provides, with exceptions not material, that: ''No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance'' The statute has been amplified by regulations adopted by the Secretary of Health and Human Services: ''(c) Equal opportunity. A recipient [of Federal funds] which operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics shall provide equal athletic opportunity for members of both sexes. In determining whether equal opportunities are available the Director will consider, among other factors:
''(1) Whether the selection of sports and levels of competition effectively accommodate the interests and abilities of members of both sexes
''(3) Scheduling of games and practice time
We interpret the designation of ''scheduling of games and practice time'' as a relevant consideration to mean that scheduling of women's soccer should be equal to that of men's soccer, to the extent that it must be offered during the same time of the year, absent inability to do so. There is no genuine reason why it cannot be done, since many other school districts in New York State and elsewhere are doing so. Any significant denial of a right under the Constitution or a federal statute is irreparable damage as a matter of law, and entitles a suitor to injunctive relief without proof of actual damage. Accordingly, Plaintiffs are entitled to prevail on this theory.
The second branch of the argument lacks the same force. Plaintiffs have not shown they are genuinely damaged apart from the damage which follows denial of a right. Plaintiffs claim they are inconvenienced and suffer ''burnout'' as a result of conflicts between club practice and school practice in the spring, and that they are denied the opportunity to compete for a high school state championship. These plaintiffs have chosen to participate in several sports in the same season, and naturally, as a result of these choices, they have conflicts. Moving soccer to the fall would alleviate some of these issues, but alleviating someone's schedule to make conflicting activities easier is not why Title IX was enacted.
JAMIE MALANOWSKI
