THE sale of large blocks of Long Island office and retail properties made 2003 the year of the mega-deal, real estate specialists say, adding that they expect the market to stay strong throughout 2004, especially in the retail area.
Low interest rates, tax incentives and the attractiveness to investors of an alternative to the stock market, along with Long Island's strong purchasing power, will continue to make shopping centers a good investment, they say. ''Shopping centers are hot today; people are buying them fully leased,'' said Leo Farrell, a partner with John P. O'Hara in Smithtown-based Corporate Realty Services. ''Investment-wise, it is good because the vacancy rate is low and the sales are robust because consumer spending keeps going.''
Pearl M. Kamer, chief economist of the Long Island Association, said: ''I don't see a major pullback because Long Island has had several back-to-back years of heavy consumer spending, which has held up despite a national and regional economic weakness. We are a very affluent market and ideal for retailers.''
The United States census showed in 2001 that almost half of Long Island households had an income of $75,000 to more than $200,000, said Dr. Kamer, who in addition to being the chief economist for the Commack-based business group is a professor of finance at Adelphi University in Garden City.
''I am sure the figures are higher today,'' she said. ''We have a high-income population that shows strong purchasing power. There are a lot of households with multiple incomes and a lot of professionals.''
According to Bruce C. Nelson, a vice president of the investment properties group of the Woodbury office of CB Richard Ellis, the real estate services company, commercial sales for 2003 doubled on Long Island over 2002.
This was primarily due to the sale of large properties, which included two major shopping centers: the 421,000-square-foot Roosevelt Raceway Center in Westbury and the 400,000-square-foot Riverhead Centre.
In the office market, the sale of the 1.1-million-square-foot EAB Plaza office complex in Uniondale, which sold for $200 million, accounted for most of that market segment's increase.
''Long Island doesn't usually get this many mega-deals in one year,'' Mr. Nelson said. ''Our strong economic and demographic characteristics are driving investor interest and sales activity. Investors have followed national retailers to Long Island, buying up good-quality properties, which are generally anchored by good credit-rated tenants, including large home improvement chains and supermarkets.''
MORE than 3 million square feet of office space sold in 2003 for $470 million, compared with 1.8 million square feet for $252 million in 2002, according to CB Richard Ellis.
In the retail area, seven shopping centers of approximately 100,000 square feet or more sold in 2003, totaling 1,796,497 square feet, for $321.6 million. In 2002, two major properties were sold, totaling 503,000 square feet and $42.5 million.
A change in the type of investor is a factor in the sale of these properties, according to H. B. Gianos, president of Manhattan-based East End Properties, which in December sold its newly built Riverhead Centre to the A.F.L.-C.I.O. Building Investment Trust, a $1.6 billion fund serving union pension plans.
''The world of buyers is different from those of 20 years ago,'' he said. ''For example, pension funds did not allocate as much of their assets to real estate then as they did to stocks and bonds. With many investors burned in the stock market recently, real estate has become a big beneficiary of money needing to be put to work. Combined with low interest rates and the 1031 exchange, it makes for a dynamic market.''
The use of Section 1031 of the Internal Revenue Code is becoming a popular tool on Long Island in the purchase of commercial properties, according to Felix Tschanz, the chief underwriting counsel for Advantage Title Inc. in Huntington.
The federal regulation defers taxes on capital gains on the sale of one property if the owner reinvests the equity in acquiring another property, or up to a total of three properties, within 180 days of closing.
''A lot of people are using this method, mostly with shopping centers and office buildings,'' said Mr. Tschanz, who insured the purchase and mortgage on the 250,000-square-foot Independence Plaza shopping center in Selden last year. ''Up to 25 percent of the commercial business we do use it.''
The 12-year-old center, which includes a King Kullen supermarket, Home Depot and Old Navy clothing store, was bought in November for $52.6 million by Manhasset-based Sivan Properties, a 35-year-old family-owned real estate investment and management company.
To buy the property under the tax-free program, Sivan sold three smaller properties -- two in Long Island and one in Maryland -- for $13.25 million. The centers, built in the 1960's, totaled 72,000 square feet.
The purchase of the Selden center was financed through the sale of those properties, a first mortgage of $38 million and cash, according to Mr. Tschanz. ''This was a big step up for us,'' said Daniel Mermel, a principal. ''The three that were sold to buy this larger one were older and smaller.''
Independence Plaza, which has 26 stores and was 99.5 percent occupied, ''was a good investment.'' Mr. Mermel added, ''It had high-quality tenants with long-term leases, and it was in a prime location on Middle Country Road, a major retail corridor in Suffolk.'' He added that there were ''strong demographics as it was in an upper middle income area with a population of more than 235,000 people within a five-mile radius and a median household income in excess of $85,000.''
In December, ING Clarion Partners, a subsidiary of the ING Group, a Dutch financial company that provides real estate investment advisory and management services to pension funds and manages $12.5 billion in real estate assets for its investors, was involved in its first Long Island deals.
The group bought the Roosevelt Raceway Center for $89 million from LNR Properties of Miami Beach on behalf of the ING Clarion Lion Properties Fund, an investment fund managed by ING Clarion Partners. It also advised the A.F.L.-C.I.O. trust in the $67.4 million purchase of the Riverhead Centre.
''Both properties were chosen for their excellent location and strong tenant mix,'' said Craig Tagen, senior vice president of ING Clarion Partners.
''The Roosevelt Raceway Center will be a core holding for the Lion fund.'' The nine-year-old shopping center, which had been a harness racing track for nearly 50 years, has nine major tenants and is making room for another. The center will be managed by the Hutensky Group of Hartford.
To create space for a 130,000-square-foot Home Depot, existing tenants -- Babies ''R'' Us and Michaels -- will be relocated to two of three vacant stores, according to Jeremy Isaacs, a broker at Ripco Real Estate in Jericho, which is the leasing agent.
There had been 13 bids for the raceway property, which had an original asking price of $92 million and was on the market for less than three months, Mr. Isaacs said.
ABOUT 45 miles east, on Route 58, a short distance from the 150 Tanger Factory Outlet stores, is the Riverhead Centre. After years of debate between environmentalists and community members, the center was finally completed last July.
The 17 tenants include a Borders bookstore, a Home Depot and a Waldbaum's supermarket. According to Mr. Tagen, the one vacancy, a 6,200-square-foot space, will be filled by the first Long Island branch of the New Jersey-based Hudson City Savings Bank.
The center will be managed by the New Jersey-based Levin Management Corporation.
''It took us eight years to build and 60 days to sell,'' Mr. Gianos said. ''The center had not been for sale. We were contacted by ING looking to conclude deals for its client. They made us a good offer and our four other main partners agreed unanimously.
''It was a moment in time we were not sure we'd ever see again. It's an extraordinary time to be a seller.''
In the Region | Long Island
