JOE TORRE offered the only explanation he could. Asked on Tuesday why the Yankees are moving their newest Fabergé egg, Alex Rodriguez, to third base rather than unseat Derek Jeter from shortstop, the team's diplomatic manager cited no hard evidence to support his claim that Jeter is the superior defender. The reams of statistics that baseball churns out every year were of no use. Instead, he burrowed into the impregnable haven of opinion, where baseball arguments go to die.
''It's really tough to try to measure,'' Torre said of Jeter's defense. ''There's something special about Derek Jeter. It's something that you can't put down on paper.''
And that was that. If one had suggested that Jeter is the better hitter, even Torre would trot out the many statistical categories (home runs, slugging percentage, on-base percentage, and so on) that prove that preposterous.
But any appraisal of Jeter as being the superior fielder (an equally untenable claim, given that Rodriguez has won the Gold Glove award two years running), one hears no statistical barrage of ''A-Rod had a higher fielding percentage!'' or ''Derek made six more errors!''
The argument remains fuzzy -- fuzzy enough to obscure that the Yankees plan to play their better shortstop at third base.
For all the clarity that newfangled numbers such as O.P.S. (on-base plus slugging percentage) and park-adjusted Win Shares (don't ask) have provided modern baseball, fielding statistics remain a fossilized snapshot of the game's younger days, when folklore reigned over figures.
Campfire debates over whether the young Ted Williams was a better hitter than Ty Cobb crackled with memories of how the players looked as they performed, the aesthetics of their actions. They were not doused in a deluge of numbers.
Meanwhile, experts have known for more than 100 years that standard fielding statistics are essentially useless.
A fielder's job is to make as many plays as possible. But errors (the number of times he fails) and fielding percentage (the rate at which he doesn't fail) often obscure the great glovemen who make dozens of plays that the mediocre don't have a chance to attempt. The 19th-century father of baseball statistics, Henry Chadwick, argued way back in 1868 that ''it is in the record of his good plays that we are to look for the most correct data for an estimate of skill.''
(Even that is faulty, in that playing defense in baseball is a lot like playing pool; flashy maneuvers might get raves, but the best are deft enough to make everything look easy.) Baseball's 20th century guru, Branch Rickey, declared in 1954 that ''there is nothing on earth anybody can do with fielding.''
Many have tried, the most zealous inventing statistics with names like Defensive Linear Weights, Zone Rating and the like, but fielding skill has proven too elusive for human quantification.
So many variables enter the equation -- How many balls were hit into the fielder's area? How hard were they hit? Where was the fielder positioned at the moment of contact? How fast was the runner? -- that most statheads have simply given up, letting subjective sentiment rule the roost. How does Jeter himself evaluate defense? ''You just want to be consistent,'' he offered.
Fielding's fogginess might soon lift, though, if grand plans at Major League Baseball come to fruition. The league's Internet portal, mlb.com, is beginning to outfit every stadium with a three-dimensional camera system that will measure everything that happens on the field, from the exact trajectory of fly balls to the precise velocity of the fielders who chase them. The data would instantly allow for the grading of plays from easy to hard, and which fielders converted the most into outs.
''It would answer a lot of questions that we have to just speculate and extrapolate on,'' said Theo Epstein, general manager of the statistics-savvy Boston Red Sox. ''We wouldn't have to do that anymore.''
THIS technique was actually tried as early as 1910; Chicago writer Hugh Fullerton wrote a long magazine piece in The American magazine called ''The Science of Baseball,'' where he used a 20th-of-a-second stopwatch to measure the speed of ground balls and how quickly infielders converged on them. One reader complained that baseball was no place for ''a tape-measure, a T-square and an intimate knowledge of algebra and fractions.''
The new camera system at mlb.com won't be fully operational until about 2007, when Rodriguez's move to third base in deference to Jeter will be in its fourth season.
Should the cameras prove scouts correct and pull the curtain on how Rodriguez makes the plays that Jeter does not, the folklore of fielding -- and the last vestige of old-time baseball arguments -- will have moved, like so much else, straight from campfire to computer.
Alan Schwarz is the senior writer of Baseball America magazine.
