FOR the past two years, Carol A. Casale's mother, Albertina Ascerno, 92, has lived at McPeak's Adult Home in Patchogue, where she has paid about $2,300 a month. But now, with her mother's savings depleted and unable to afford the cost herself, Mrs. Casale said she may be forced to place her mother in a nursing home, where she fears the care will be less personal.
''She had at least $50,000 in savings and now every bit of it is gone,'' said Mrs. Casale, 65, of Patchogue. ''So she'll now have to apply for Medicaid, and the tragedy of it is that that will not keep my mother in a facility such as McPeak's. Medicaid would rather place her in a nursing home that costs $9,000 a month. How can they justify that?''
Lisa Newcomb, executive director of the Empire State Association of Adult Homes and Assisted Living Facilities, said an increasing number of adult home owners on Long Island and across the state could not afford to accept Medicaid residents, many of whom also rely on Supplemental Security Income, a federal program to provide cash to cover food, clothing and shelter for the aged and disabled. She said S.S.I. would pay adult home owners only $872 a month or $29.06 per day for each recipient.
Adult homes serve the frail elderly and those with psychiatric disabilities who do not need the close supervision of a nursing home but who do need assistance with daily activities. They provide all meals and snacks, laundry service, housekeeping, 24-hour supervision and structured activity programs.
''Our residents average 8 to 10 medications per day and we have to make sure'' they take them, Ms. Newcomb said. ''We also provide assistance with their daily living, like personal hygiene and case management. Our staff is very involved with the residents because of the attention they need.''
But to have a ''good staff is impossible'' with the current reimbursement rate, Ms. Newcomb argued.
James P. McPeak, the owner of the Patchogue adult home, said he used to accept S.S.I. recipients but that it was no longer possible.
''My parents opened McPeak's in 1956 as a nursing home and it became an adult home about 1970,'' he said. ''When we first started, we had mostly S.S.I. recipients. But now, because there has been no increase in the reimbursement rate since 1988, it's not feasible anymore.''
Mr. McPeak said he had only private-pay residents; his last S.S.I. residents left three years ago. He added that he would prefer ''to sit on empty beds than to take S.S.I.''
''I'm resisting taking S.S.I. because it does not pay,'' he said.
Leon Hofman, owner and operator of the New Brookhaven Townhouse in Brookhaven, another adult home, said that the state's share of S.S.I. payments used to be 60 percent and that the federal government paid the rest. But because the federal government has paid a cost of living increase each year while the state has not, he said, the federal government's share is now 60 percent and the state's 40 percent.
Ms. Newcomb said that if the state would increase the reimbursement rate by $12 to $15 per day -- which she said would equal the cost of living increases since 1988 -- ''it would at least stop the hemorrhaging and you would no longer see mass closures.''
In a statement read on Feb. 3 before a joint hearing of the Senate Finance and Assembly Ways and Means Committees in Albany, Mr. Hofman and Jim Kane, the owner of 14 adult homes upstate, said the state's failure to increase the reimbursement rate since 1988 has placed the adult home industry, with about 550 homes, in a financial crisis.
''Since January 1999, 74 homes have closed, resulting in more than 3,500 residents being displaced,'' they said. ''Almost half of the 3,566 beds lost were in this past year, 2003, and virtually all of the homes closed since 1999 served indigent residents.
''We know of at least six more adult homes on Long Island alone that are in the process of closing and are not reflected in these numbers, and more homes throughout the state are facing the difficult decisions as to whether they will need to do the same.''
Robert Kenny, a spokesman for the State Health Department, said there were 8,157 beds in adult homes on Long Island and that 22 of the homes were in Nassau and 62 in Suffolk. He said that 2,102 of those beds -- 26 percent -- are occupied by residents who receive S.S.I.
Mr. Kenny said that since 2001, 16 adult homes on Long Island had closed or were in the process of closing, 10 in the last year alone with a total of 400 beds. He said that before an adult home is permitted to close, all of its residents must be relocated and that 80 percent were relocated on Long Island.
''The majority went to other adult homes, a few went to hospitals and a few others were relocated to housing under the State Office of Mental Health,'' he said. ''The rest went to adult homes in Queens and a small percentage to Manhattan and other boroughs, primarily adult homes in Queens.''
Some of the homes were closed because state inspectors found repeated health and quality-of-care violations, Mr. Kenny said. He insisted that a ''well-run adult home can be financially viable and make money.''
''In 2002, a report by the State Commission on the Quality of Care for the Mentally Disabled found that adult homes have more than adequate resources to provide for the care of adult resident,'' he said. ''It is a mistake to assume that the state is spending only $29 a day, because when you combine S.S.I. and Medicaid expenditures for those in adult homes, it is almost three-and-a-half times the $29 a day, or about $37,000 per year per resident. To say they cannot remain financially viable is merely a red herring. It's simply not true.''
But Ms. Newcomb said that in claiming adult homes make money, Mr. Kenny ''incorporates two-thirds of the industry that serve predominantly private pay'' residents and that charge at least $50 per day.
And she insisted that except for relatively few adult homes certified to provide Medicaid-funded home care services under the Assisted Living Program, adult homes do not receive Medicaid payments. Medicaid money, Ms. Newcomb said, goes to ''other providers of health care and mental health care, primarily physicians, specialists, psychiatrists, mental health programs and home care agencies -- not the things that the adult home provider is responsible for.''
Assemblyman Harvey Weisenberg, a Democrat from Long Beach, said he had tried to impress upon his fellow lawmakers the need to increase the level of reimbursement to adult homes but that ''it's not a popular cause and doesn't receive the attention it should get.''
''People are getting out of the adult home business now, and what is the future of those who need a place to live and the oversight adult homes provide?'' he asked. ''These are the throwaway people and it's a heartache. These are mothers and fathers of people and you have to maintain a facility that gives them dignity and respect. And you don't get that with the lowest-paid people.''
