THE best -- actually the worst -- bar mitzvah story: my older brother was bar mitzvahed on Nov. 23, 1963, the day after President Kennedy was assassinated. The second worst, or best: the mother of a 13-year-old in Montclair who did not wish to give her name -- ''everyone will know it's me when they read this story'' -- slipped five minutes after stepping out onto the dance floor, broke her wrist and spent most of her son's bar mitzvah at the hospital. Four years later, her daughter's bat mitzvah offered a reprieve. ''The check from the lawsuit arrived two weeks before her party and covered the entire cost of it,'' she said. ''I wore rubber-soled shoes and had a fabulous time.''
Most lavish party: parents of a 13-year-old in Short Hills recently invited guests, via private jet, to two days of partying at a luxury hotel in Palm Beach.
Least or less lavish: ''So how's it going?'' the mother of a soon-to-be bat mitzvah asked another in Summit. ''One more tray of meatballs, and then I'm finished.''
Big or small, over the top or ultra politically correct -- graduates of a Jewish workshop in Montclair celebrated their coming of age with Islamic girls from a nearby mosque -- bar and bat mitzvahs have always generated questions among Jews. Perhaps because my daughter recently became a bat mitzvah (which literally means ''daughter of the commandment'') I have been thinking more about these parties, which were once unique to Jews but now, if you believe The Wall Street Journal and other publications, inspire larger, coming-of-age parties among non-Jews, too.
''In the last five to eight years, the number of Sweet Sixteens we've held here has doubled,'' said Preston Postlethwaite, a spokesman for The Manor in West Orange. The effect that increasingly child-oriented bar and bat mitzvahs have on adolescent culture, some say, is clear: everyone wants a party.
''When I was 13 and growing up in Brooklyn, I attended three or four bar mitzvahs -- total,'' one Short Hills resident said recently. ''My daughter is invited to that many on a weekend.''
Has the ritual become more popular? Are the parties more lavish? Or does it only seem that everyone now owns a pair of running shorts emblazoned with ''I shook my booty at Allison's Bat Mitzvah''?
In terms of numbers, there has been a substantial increase in these ceremonies worldwide, said Rabbi Steven Kushner of Temple Ner Tamid in Bloomfield. ''All of a sudden, girls are having them'' -- most did not in a previous generation -- and even among Reform Jews, the custom is less of an option.
''Growing up in Detroit,'' he said, ''I had 110 kids in my confirmation class. Two had had bar mitzvahs.'' Today, those numbers are likely to be just the opposite.
As for size, bar mitzvahs have always generated epic parties, the kind in which 385 guests drink 50 different types of martinis from a bar sculptured entirely of ice. More recently, however, they generate ''themes,'' causing some rabbis to question what ''camp,'' ''Broadway'' and ''Arabian Nights'' have to do with religion, let alone Judaism.
''When I worked in Manhattan, I had one student who said his theme was going to be Greek gods and goddesses,'' recalled Rabbi Melinda Panken of Temple Shaari Emeth in Manalapan. ''I said to him, 'You're going to stand up and say the Shema, a prayer about God's oneness, and have a pagan theme?'''
As for artistry, even parties that are the most successful, at least by Hollywood standards, have their downside. Upon leaving a luxury hotel in Manhattan at which the honored girl's name had been emblazoned all over the gorgeously decorated ballroom, one guest remarked, ''She might as well die now because she is never going to have any experience that will live up to that bat mitzvah.''
Fortunately, the more opulent parties are the exceptions, ''the ones you hear about,'' said Rabbi Panken. The more typical party is what it has always been: a warm and meaningful way to cement bonds of family, community and religion.
To guide parents, Temple Shaari Emeth has expanded its family education program to include discussions about not only the religious ceremony but also the choices surrounding the party.
''It's always been a struggle to do this appropriately,'' Rabbi Panken said. ''As far back as the Middle Ages, people expressed concern that some celebrations following the service were too elaborate.''
From another perspective, a friend in Israel writes: ''The scene is quite different here than there. One bar mitzvah I attended consisted of a service followed by a kiddush at which there wasn't enough food for everyone -- like not even enough bagels and cream cheese! And nobody cared, either.''
JERSEY
