WHILE Carrie Bradshaw in ''Sex and the City'' agonizes over settling down, at least 3,000 couples jumped at the chance to marry during the frenzied first eight days that San Francisco allowed gay marriages.
And I, a straight bachelor, have happily performed about 60 of the ceremonies, in the cavernous rotunda of City Hall. My unexpected role at this great moment in the struggle for gay rights is only one of the surprising, spontaneous events that took place over Valentine's weekend and last week.
''We had no idea what we were in for,'' said Rich Hillis, a deputy assessor for the city. Since Feb. 12, when Mayor Gavin Newsom issued a directive allowing same-sex marriages in San Francisco, Mr. Hillis has been the master of logistics for the wedding fest.
He has also been performing marriages, along with other city employees and politicians, and volunteers like me. We were deputized before the county clerk, Nancy Alfaro, and received stickers with the handwritten title: Deputy Marriage Commissioner.
We were given photocopies of the city's new marriage vows, which replace the words ''husband and wife'' with ''spouses for life.'' And we were legally empowered to sign the wedding licenses, which now bear the labels Applicant 1 and Applicant 2 instead of Bride and Groom.
With its legions of new deputies and eager couples, the City and County of San Francisco racked up about 370 marriages a day, a whopping increase over the usual 30 a day before same-sex marriages were allowed. Nobody knows for sure how long the city will be able to allow the marriages to go on.
On Feb. 19, San Francisco moved to force a constitutional showdown with opponents of same-sex marriages by suing the State of California over laws that define marriage as between a man and a woman.
The city had no trouble finding volunteers to handle the surge of weddings. Many came from the ranks of the newly married same-sex couples themselves and their friends. My friends John and Duncan Crabtree-Ireland of Los Angeles, who came to San Francisco as soon as they heard about the policy and were one of the first couples married, on Feb. 13, stayed to help. And since they were my guests for the weekend, I went along with them.
I was immediately pulled in by the euphoria. On Valentine's Day, we helped hundreds of people fill out applications. We were deputized the next morning, and by the end of that day, we had each performed about 30 ceremonies. Other volunteers served as witnesses (and photographers) for couples that arrived without family or friends.
''It just seems spontaneous,'' Mr. Hillis said. ''None of it was planned.''
Supporters from flower shops spread rose petals on the steps of City Hall. Students from the University of California at San Francisco supplied a giant wedding cake. On Valentine's Day, a retired music teacher commandeered a piano and played for the couples as they exchanged vows. On another day, a flutist and harpist showed up to play, and once the San Francisco Gay Men's Chorus serenaded the couples lined up outside.
Few people were dressed for the cold, rainy weather, but wore formal wear. Last Sunday, Elizabeth McElhinney and Siddiqi Ray of Minneapolis strode to the top of the grand staircase looking like actors fresh from the makeup room. Though they had been outside most of the day, not a speck or stain showed on Ms. McElhinney's black tuxedo and tails or on the white cashmere shawl Ms. Ray wore with her crimson dress.
As we prepared to start the ceremony, Ms. Ray said that her last meal had been an order of French fries that was not sitting well, and she feared she would be sick to her stomach. But the ceremony proceeded beautifully, and Ms. Ray made it.
When I left City Hall, I found Ms. McElhinney and Ms. Ray with other couples gathered on the steps. ''Are you feeling O.K.?'' I asked Ms. Ray. ''Yes,'' she said. ''I feel wonderful.''
FIELD NOTES
