THE sun is brilliantly awash on the stunning Fire Island beach house, deck and shimmering pool that R. Michael Miller designed for the George Street Playhouse production of Terrence McNally's 1991 play ''Lips Together, Teeth Apart,'' directed by Michael Morris. But it does not shine for long.
The first act begins with the soothing strains of Mozart's ''Soave sia il vento'' from ''Così Fan Tutte.'' Once the music ends, however, and the opening tableau of four solitary, alienated beings springs to life, reality threatens to send that sun packing.
This is McNally-Land, where love, loss and death are the themes that fuel the creative engine. Rueful, struggling to negotiate their lives and lies in a world increasingly filled with unknown terrors, the play's two married couples spend the Fourth of July weekend in less than connubial bliss.
Sally Truman, ''too frightened, too sad, too late'' (Deirdre Madigan in a gripping performance) , is once again trying to carry a pregnancy to term. David, Sally's brother, has recently died of AIDS. The beach house, in one of Fire Island's gay communities, is now Sally's, yet she is troubled by the thought of David's lover, Aaron, not sharing in her windfall.
Sam, her husband (the comically gifted Kevin Carolan), will have none of this. Watching his neighbors cavort in the woods only reinforces his negative feelings about all gays. That Aaron is black does not help.
Sam has his own demons, and Mr. Carolan mines the inner torment of a man whose self-esteem is constantly in question and who, in despair over what he suspects is his wife's adulterous betrayal, teeters on the edge of madness as he admits forgetting ''how to knot my tie.''
Chloe, Sam's sister, and her husband, John, are visiting. ''New England's longest running, happiest, most fecund shotgun marriage'' is John's cynical description of his frazzled relationship with the outrageous and ever needy Chloe, acted to manic perfection by Alison Fraser, a Goldie Hawn lookalike. (David Murin's eye-popping costume design is right on target).
The facts speak otherwise. John, played by John Bolger with a simmering malevolence born of a sense of superiority and growing awareness of his own mortality, cannot accept that his brief fling with Sally is history. Neither can Sam and Chloe.
''Lips Together, Teeth Apart,'' (the title involves nothing more salacious than a dentist's recommended mantra for avoiding teeth grinding while sleeping), suffers from a long-windedness, especially in the last act, that saps energy. John's preachy, teary Act II ''mea culpa,'' for example, in which he castigates himself for harboring racist and homophobic sentiments, seems more didactic than dramatic.
Still, the humor and humanity of its characters will not be denied. While Mr. McNally may be a master of heartache, he remains a harbinger of hope.
''Lips Together, Teeth Apart'' is at George Street Playhouse, 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick, through March 7. Information (732) 246-7717.
THEATER REVIEW
