SINCE it opened on Feb. 6, ''The Dreamers,'' Bernardo Bertolucci's fever-dream of Paris in the fevered spring of 1968, has emerged as perhaps the most unexpectedly divisive movie of the year so far. The controversy has been more a matter of raised eyebrows and disappointed frowns than of raised voices and red faces. Mr. Bertolucci's film, in spite of its politically fraught setting and enough full-frontal nudity and uncut sexuality to revive the moribund NC-17 rating, does not plant itself in the midst of a culture war combat zone. It's not ''The Passion of the Christ.'' But the responses to it, whether rapturous or dismissive -- my own was decidedly rapturous -- , have been unusually passionate, and it seems to be one of the few recent movies that live up to the cliché: you either love it or hate it.
Which, in a way, is entirely appropriate, since the film, saturated with intense, sometimes uncomfortable emotion, is all about love. Not the usual love-story love between two people, exactly -- nor, for that matter, in spite of the erotic triangle at its center -- among three people. Mr. Bertolucci evokes young love -- the headlong, reckless, all-consuming affect of romantic 20-year-olds -- as an all-encompassing condition of being, a world view in its own right. Matthew, the American exchange student played by Michael Pitt, has come to France, like so many of his compatriots, in search of art, exaltation and intensity of feeling. At the Cinémathèque Française, where he goes to feed his aesthetic hungers, he meets Isabelle and Theo, Parisian twins, who become both accomplices in his desire and the objects of it.
Mr. Pitt, with his big, sad eyes and soft, heavy lips, conveys Matthew's sensitivity and his aching, post-adolescent seriousness almost too well. Louis Garrel and Eva Green, who play Theo and Isabelle, enact their brooding, impulsive, incestuous amour fou with a similarly disconcerting conviction. The criticism that has been most frequently leveled at these young people -- who come to the screen from a 1988 Gilbert Adair novel pointedly called ''The Holy Innocents'' -- is that they are fatuous, silly, possessed of comically grandiose ideas that they express with melodramatic zeal. Theo and Matthew, in particular, throw themselves into humorless, either/or arguments -- Eric Clapton or Jimi Hendrix? Buster Keaton or Charlie Chaplin? Chairman Mao or American imperialism? -- that they conduct with fierce and lofty sententiousness, often while naked. If only they could see themselves (and there are, after all, plenty of mirrors in the twins' huge apartment), they would realize just how ridiculous they look.
But Mr. Bertolucci never subjects them to ridicule, and this, it seems to me, is what drives his detractors crazy. ''The Dreamers'' is adamant in refusing to distance itself in any way from the way Matthew, Isabelle and Theo perceive their experiences: there is no corrective historical hindsight, no flash-forward to the sobriety of the present, no application of an elder's wisdom (Mr. Bertolucci, the one-time wunderkind of Italian cinema, is now 63), no irony. And all of this is, for some, especially hard to take. If the filmmaker is unwilling to demonstrate his superiority to these high-minded, self-deluded kids, then he must be as blind, or perhaps as dumb, as they are.
The assumption behind such criticism is that we -- the skeptical and sophisticated post-60's film audience -- know better. Perhaps we do. But one of the revelations of ''The Dreamers'' is its implicit assessment of what this knowledge has cost. Matthew, Theo and Isabelle are, above all, lovers of what they unself-consciously insist on calling ''cinema.'' It has been a very long time since a young American uttered that word with a straight face, and the ardor with which Matthew utters it poses an uncomfortable challenge to the current state of movie love, which prefers to speak its name only in quotation marks.
The movie culture of the 1960's -- whose holiest shrine was Henri Langlois's Cinémathèque -- was built on the pleasures of discovery and surrender. The idea that film was the exemplary modern art form was new enough that even old movies could be experienced as if for the first time. The kind of giddy, obsessional devotion that the dreamers (and ''The Dreamers'') display has long since passed from fashion. This may be, in part, just to say that movie trivia games are not played for such high stakes anymore. Of course, even in 1968, it's unlikely that too many film buffs lost their virginity on a wager involving a scene from William Wellman's ''Scarface,'' but Mr. Bertolucci makes such an event seem not only plausible but, in the cinematic dream logic of his film, reasonable.
What you think of ''The Dreamers'' may ultimately come down to whether, at the level of feeling, you agree. You can't really be argued into rapture. But you can, unfortunately, be talked out of it, or, worse, inoculated against it by an easy, derisive sophistication. I would hope that even those viewers most suspicious of ''The Dreamers'' resist the urge to dismiss it out of hand. The idea that the best way to take art seriously was to make yourself vulnerable to its power -- an idea represented in the 60's by critics like Susan Sontag, whose books Matthew reads with furrowed brow -- has been replaced by a kind of knowing, pre-emptive mastery.
Liz Penn, one of the most insightful critics on the Internet and no fan of ''The Dreamers,'' thinks it may survive as a campy cult object, in the tradition of ''Showgirls'' and ''The Rocky Horror Picture Show.''  ''If I were 20 years old and bursting with cinematic passion (or just wanted to pretend I was),'' she writes on her Web site, The High Sign, ''I'd gladly line up on a Saturday at midnight to yell snarky things at the screen.'' This is perhaps less incisive as a judgment of ''The Dreamers'' than as an account of how the expression of cinematic passion has changed from one generation to another. Movie lovers like Mr. Bertolucci's dreamers risked derision and embarrassment, which their spiritual children are happy to supply.
FILM  Correction:  February 29, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about Bernardo Bertolucci's latest film, ''The Dreamers,'' which includes a re-enactment of a scene from ''Scarface,'' misidentified the director of that film. He was Howard Hawks, not William Wellman.
