THEY may be big and powerful. They may even get to dictate what kinds of flowers residents can plant by the front door. But, according to a ruling by the New Jersey Superior Court last week, homeowners associations are not governments.
And that is a good thing, according to representatives of the Twin Rivers Homeowners Association in East Windsor. In the court case, the association beat back a challenge by dissident residents and the American Civil Liberties Union that sought to declare it a quasi-municipal agency, subject to the same Constitutional restraints that govern towns and school boards.
''The issue here is whether a private community, a private association, has the right to regulate itself without interference from groups like the A.C.L.U.,'' said Barry S. Goodman, the lawyer who represented the homeowners association. ''This is a vindication for Twin Rivers.''
The case, Committee for a Better Twin Rivers v. Twin Rivers Homeowners Association, was the first in New Jersey to argue that homeowners associations, which often have the power to regulate architectural details and property use, also have some of the same responsibilities that governments have regarding record-keeping and oversight. With one in six Americans living on property governed by some form of association, A.C.L.U. lawyers argued that associations like Twin Rivers had adopted some of the functions of local government, becoming quasi-municipalities.
But a Superior Court judge in Mercer County disagreed, ruling that homeowners associations do not have to conform to rules governing municipalities, even if they provide municipal services like clearing snow. ''Private organizations, even when they perform municipal functions, do not become quasi-municipal agents,'' Judge Neil H. Shuster wrote in an 80-page decision filed on Tuesday.
Frank Askin, the lawyer for the Committee for a Better Twin Rivers, said the plaintiffs planned to appeal. He said that in similar cases, the New Jersey Supreme Court has found that ''individual rights take precedent, they trump property rights.''
''This is the end of the regular season,'' Mr. Askin said. ''We are now in the playoffs. The appellate courts will decide this case.''
The case began in December 2000, when a group of the development's residents formed the Committee for a Better Twin Rivers and sued the homeowners association. They challenged some of its rules, including those that governed the placing of campaign signs on property and access to the association's financial records. They argued that the homeowners association had failed to balance their individual rights against the association's right to regulate behavior within the development.
In many ways, Twin Rivers does look like a town. With 10,000 residents, the 1970's-era development has a larger population than roughly two-thirds of New Jersey's municipalities, and it provides some services that are municipal in nature, like running a community center and picking up garbage.
''Twin Rivers exercises a lot of governmental powers over people,'' Mr. Askin said. ''They tax them, they control zoning regulations, they control a lot of aspects of their lives.''
Mr. Askin argued that with that authority came the responsibility ''to act in a way that accommodates and acknowledges individual rights.''
But representatives of the homeowners association argued that it is a private group, governed by contracts signed by residents when they buy property. For example, they said, all homeowners must abide by rules that govern placement of signs on their property: they cannot violate these rules and then claim to be exercising their right of free speech. For the most part, Judge Shuster agreed with the homeowners association. He found that its rules are part of the contract signed by residents, and that it does not constitute a form of government.
He wrote that the association ''does have considerable impact on the lives of residents in the Twin Rivers community.''
But he also wrote: ''This impact is a function of the contractual relationship that residents choose when they elect to purchase property or live in Twin Rivers -- its burdens come with concomitant benefits.'' Mr. Goodman, the lawyer for the homeowners association, said the A.C.L.U. had been trying ''to stretch the Constitution.''
''I think the court appropriately found the board has acted properly in creating certain regulations to deal with the 10,000 people who live there,'' he said.
The court's ruling, he said, held that ''the rules and regulations of Twin Rivers are reasonable and appropriate and they apply to everybody equally.''
''This is not a Constitutional issue,'' he added.
COMMUNITIES
