In ''Eyes of Laura Mars,'' the 1978 movie that gets my vote for the campiest murder mystery ever filmed, there is a Hollywood version of a New York art opening, with all the beautiful people in attendance dripping with compliments and air kisses, though not everyone is impressed. A very well-dressed, well-coiffed -- especially when it comes to the sideburns -- detective, played by Tommy Lee Jones, says, ''I think it's really tragic that this is the kind of junk that's passing for art these days.'' Ouch! His pan is a smack to the ego of Mars herself, the creator of the works on the walls and an oh-so-successful, wickedly provocative fashion photographer, played with perfect over-the-top white-hot cool by Faye Dunaway.
This is one of those films that ricochets with real life. Dunaway's character is modeled loosely on Helmut Newton, whose photographs are not only used in the film, but are also central to it. Laura Mars shows at the Elaine Cassel gallery (a play on Leo Castelli), and much ado is made out of everyone's hairstyles, perhaps because the producer, Jon Peters, is an ex-hairdresser. These are the twists and turns that have always made the film extra fun (or extra irritating) for art and fashion insiders. But its true accomplishment is that it is flat-out honest about the art world's biases about, and fears of, fashion -- something that few cultural critics have managed. When a reporter confronts Mars about her work, asking, ''Do you consider yourself a serious artist?'' she cleverly sidesteps the quagmire and replies, ''Honestly, I think I'd better take the Fifth.''
The Fifth Amendment may come in handy this spring when the Museum of Modern Art opens ''Fashioning Fiction in Photography Since 1990.'' As the museum's first official fashion-photography exhibition, it is a landmark event and will no doubt stir up that old question: Is fashion art? Which, to be honest, is the wrong question.
A more useful question is: Why has fashion become of such increasing interest to artists and the art world since the early 1980's?
It has been a long saga. Despite the modern mantra that fashion was the enemy of art, the two had some wild meetings in the 20th century, including Futurism, the Bauhaus, even a midcentury abstract painter like Lucio Fontana, who made slashed clothes. But for all that, in art's eyes, fashion remained too shallow, and 25 years ago it was still considered the last taboo in art. Then, inevitably, it became the last frontier. And since the 90's, it has practically been de rigueur as a subject for art.
The Modern, which comes late to the party, has a chance to sum this all up. Susan Kismaric, one of the show's curators, explains, ''Within the last 10 years there have been so many art photographers doing fashion photography, and at the same time so much fashion photography has been influenced by art photography, that it seems to me that the exchange between the two has become intense.''
Still, for the Modern, the show is a major break with tradition. When Alfred Barr founded the Museum of Modern Art in 1929, he took the revolutionary step of including film, design, architecture and photography within its purview. Fashion was never part of the program, and it was almost as if photography, which had its own battles as a sort of second-class citizen of the arts, could not afford to be too mixed up with such riffraff. The Modern is not alone. In general, high culture's skittishness toward fashion has affected the careers of more than one photographer. Take Richard Avedon, one of the greatest fashion photographers of them all. When museums present his work, they tend to shortchange his body of fashion images, while giving his other photography more serious treatment. When you consider what his legacy will be, this is ironic.
It's not as if the Modern has never shown fashion photography. John Szarkowski, the former director of the museum's department of photography, was always interested in vernacular imagery, and he occasionally included fashion photos in various installations, books and catalogs. He also introduced the idea that practically all photography can be looked at through the lens of fashion. But when he organized his brilliant Irving Penn exhibition in 1984 -- the closest the museum had come to a full-on engagement with fashion photography -- it was fascinating how the show was ultimately about getting Penn out of the fashion trenches by featuring a lot of his nonfashion work, like his remarkable still-life photos of cigarette butts.
But now, with ''Fashioning Fiction,'' Kismaric and Eva Respini, the show's other curator, have actually embedded themselves in the fashion world. They had an informed guide: Dennis Freedman, the creative director of W magazine. He was also interviewed for the catalog, and his interview is unusual in its attention to the nitty-gritty stuff. In fact, what is refreshing about the show's approach is how it has integrated the pressures and commercial realities of the fashion world, not presenting them as the dirty facts that need to be avoided, but as part of the challenge that everyone in it faces. As Respini says: ''We are taking a focused and critical look. We are not simply showing our favorite fashion photographs. We are showing something that has some teeth to it.''
This critical bite may not please the more established magazines in the field, since the curatorial choices primarily rely on alternative views and not the obvious institutional names. When I spoke with the curators about this, they were most candid about their reasoning. ''While we were working on the show, the biggest surprise was to learn about the pressure on the magazines from some of the big advertisers,'' Respini says. ''It shattered the illusion of editorial voice in many of the mainstream magazines. That's why the most interesting photography holds up in more alternative publications, which can operate outside the rules and where the pressures don't play out the same way.''
The curators point out that in some of these pictures -- editorial and advertising -- fashion is the least of it, as opposed to one of the great classics by Penn from the 50's, say, when all eyes were on the dress, and all of the other details were orchestrated in exquisite orbit around it. Yet, in every picture in the show, the photographer has had to consciously confront the the idea of showing clothes in some way. The solutions tell us plenty. There are 12 photographers in all, half of whom consider themselves fashion photographers and half artists who take on fashion assignments.
While the group is truly diverse, their loose connection lies in the fact that each of them, in one way or another, has produced fashion imagery that is influenced by the cinema or by personal snapshots. Some of the work that was chosen, like Cindy Sherman's, is an out-and-out transgression of the usual rules in fashion photography. Sherman's self-portraits -- originally shot as campaigns for Dorothée Bis and Commes de Garçons and as editorial for Harper's Bazaar -- take the mickey out of the whole business and are the most obviously playful among the 90 or so images that make up the show. Her independent attitude -- ''If they like it, they publish it; if they don't, it's more grist for the mill'' -- is the polar opposite of that of Steven Meisel, whose photography will also be on display. He is the only mainstream one in the bunch apart from Ellen von Unwerth whose work really straddles several worlds.
Although Meisel originally worked as an illustrator, by now he's one of the consummate pros in the business, under contract for American and Italian Vogue and a top choice for fashion advertisers who can afford him. To Meisel, making the fashion look good is part of the job. ''I never say I won't photograph a certain outfit -- never,'' he says. ''I think that part of the job is having to photograph a dress, even if it's a dog. It's my job to make it interesting and make it fun. That's the challenge. Once in a while I'll get some incredible clothes to shoot, but I don't usually get major, major things. Is it easier to take a great picture with an incredible outfit? Not necessarily -- because sometimes it's all there for you, and when it's all there for me, I'm, like, 'Hmm, there's nothing for me to really do.'''
Meisel's really the odd man out in the Modern show. He's not at all involved in trying to get art-world credibility, and while he's as savvy as it gets when it comes to the fashion world, he's really a naïf about the current art scene and about the continuing art and fashion debate. But lately the art world has taken note of Meisel's work, no doubt in part because it is so conceptually strong as well as supersophisticated on the fashion front. For the series of pictures that the Modern will be showing, which were originally published by Italian Vogue, Meisel used the films of Douglas Sirk as his jumping-off point. In the same way that Todd Haynes was inspired by Sirk's sense of overripe melodrama in his recent film ''Far From Heaven,'' Meisel's photographic inventions -- of a perfect family, in perfect clothes, washing a perfect car, on a perfect day -- picked up on the saturated richness of Sirk's Technicolor and on the undercurrents running through his seemingly perfect scenarios.
Meisel's fictional family might be the suburban cousins of the urban families that Larry Sultan captured when he shot the fall 2000 Kate Spade campaign, also in ''Fashioning Fiction.'' Sultan has often photographed his own family, and the results have been both intimate and sometimes even disquieting because of what they reveal. The Spade commission was a clever variation of his past work and at the same time an effective platform for the company's products.
Perhaps a subplot of the coming show at the Modern is how it really does not mimic the old clichés about women that one is so used to seeing. Kismaric says: ''The notion that women are still portrayed as sex objects, which they are to this day in most mainstream magazines, is amazing to me. And why? Because it's easier. But I really believe that the audience is shifting.'' The photographs in the show reinforce her point. Even the most simple-seeming shots by von Unwerth are tongue in cheek. The others either play with stereotypes in different ways or criticize them. Or they are about something else entirely -- like Tina Barney's portraits that pivot around group dynamics; Mario Sorrenti's modern-day urban operas; Simon Leigh's abstracted still lifes; and Juergen Teller's rather obvious sociological take on couture clients.
The curators treat Nan Goldin's 1985 portfolio of female friends hanging out in the Russian baths on the Lower East Side, originally shot for The Village Voice, as a sort of watershed. Which is perhaps an overstatement. As they themselves note, fashion photography may be by and large a medium of conformity, but it has always attracted people who want to break the conventions, from Man Ray's surreal concoctions to Guy Bourdin's twisted narratives articulated with pop finesse.
Whether the old stereotypes about men and women will eventually be dropped, it won't be for lack of trying on the part of some of the protagonists in this show. One of them, the designer Miuccia Prada, has a behind-the-scenes role in this exhibition, as a client who commissioned two of the advertising campaigns that are on display, one shot for Prada in 1997 by Glen Luchford, the other created for the 2001 spring line by Cedric Buchet. Since Prada changed the direction of her family's leather-goods business in the 1970's, the designer -- who studied political science and whose earlier life as a feminist and communist is part of the perspective she brings to her work -- has been on a mission to change the way that women have been represented in fashion. The key to her success is the way she integrates this consciousness with her love for, and even obsession with, fashion. She is also adamant that fashion is a whole different ballgame than art, and that each field has its own particular challenges.
''I don't want to present a typical fashion image of a generically beautiful, sexy woman,'' she says. This has sometimes led her to work in an experimental way with the photographers she hires, though she is anything but laissez-faire. Prada wants her clothes to have an honest presence in the final result, which somehow has to represent the feeling and mood of the season. Sometimes, as with Buchet, this means imagery that has a more arty, graphic, abstract feel, almost like a Pina Bausch dance performance on the beach. Then there is Prada's longstanding attraction to certain movies, something that for a while led her to the work of Luchford, whose slightly voyeuristic Prada campaigns conjure up the films of Alfred Hitchcock and Stanley Kubrick. Of course, the delicate issue here is how Prada lets an individual photographer have his head and at the same time express what the designer wants to say. So far, so good. She laughs when we talk about the whole art-and-fashion debate. ''I'll tell you one thing, doing these campaigns can be as much trouble as what an artist goes through creating a show,'' she says.
Of all the photographers who have been walking the art-fashion tightrope of late, Philip-Lorca diCorcia is probably the most deeply involved. Unlike Sherman or Barney, who only rarely take on photographic commissions, diCorcia has shot more than a dozen fashion layouts and about half as many advertising campaigns. ''I've done enough work in the fashion world that I know many of the hairdressers by their first names,'' he deadpans. Included in the Modern show is diCorcia's best-known fashion piece, ''Cuba Libra,'' originally a 30-page portfolio in W. This cinematic narrative typifies the way in which diCorcia works when on a fashion job. He starts out by thinking about the story and the characters that are in his mind, and discusses his ideas in broad terms with the job's creative and fashion directors. They make suggestions about the rest of the team and the clothes, and then they all go from there, with diCorcia functioning like a movie director, who has the ultimate say. He sees the pressures and challenges that come with all this as part of what makes the work worth doing. ''I think of photography as a way to have experiences,'' he says. ''I don't rely on a set of tropes that I pull out of my hat every single time anybody asks me to do things. I'm not going to learn anything that way.'' DiCorcia likes a bit of irony. When I ask him if the Modern show symbolizes a sea change in how seriously fashion is regarded, he pauses. Then, referring to the show's venue in Queens, now that the museum is undergoing renovation, he says: ''It's been noted that the show would probably never have happened if it was in the main museum on 53rd Street.''
So much for progress.
Ingrid Sischy is the editor in chief of Interview magazine.
