DESPITE his fancy triple-barreled name, Anthony David Pino is a Jersey guy to the soles of his feet. He grew up in Medford Lakes, in the Pine Barrens, he and his grade-school buddies keeping a wary eye out for the Jersey Devil. His father was a jack-of-all-trades, his mother an accomplished home cook.
Now 34, Mr. Pino says he knew from an early age that he wanted to run a restaurant. Small wonder that when he opened one it was in Hoboken, a town that would be utterly out of place in any other state. (Hoboken, Conn.? Hoboken, Ohio? Please.) A compact, outgoing man with an all-purpose Jersey accent and a morning-to-midnight work ethic, he took an old corner store on a gentrifying brownstone block and turned its mission from shoes to food -- first as a deli and then, in September 2002, as a full-fledged restaurant.
It is a stage set of a place, with just 34 seats in two rooms. (The number more than doubles in warm weather, when tables sprout outdoors.) The entrance gives onto the deli, a burnished turn-of-the-20th-century grocery store with ancient dark-wood shelves, a ceiling of pressed tin, barrels of coffee beans, great glass jars of olives and, in the front window, iron Doric columns. A refrigerated display case of cheeses hums contentedly. Diners sit at tables arrayed along the walls.
An open kitchen occupies one corner, and off to the left is the namesake dining room, a mirrored, candlelit space with pillowed banquettes. Quiet and pleasant as it is, it lacks the visual energy of the deli. In either room, though, the welcome is warm and the service attentive.
As the restaurant's name and setting lead you to expect, the cooking is Italian, at least in its foundations and many of its components. But like many young American chefs, Mr. Pino, a culinary graduate of Johnson &amp; Wales University in Providence, R.I., ranges widely. For example, his mother's specialty is cassoulet, and this archetypal French casserole has a proud place on the menu. It is terrific, a simmering crock of white beans studded with rabbit, veal, pheasant and Mr. Pino's own spiced sausage. A crust of browned bread crumbs gives it crunch, and garlic and wine give it depth.
Not everything is as triumphant as the cassoulet. But like that dish, every meal here is layered with vigorous, straightforward tastes and textures. Even the green, peppery olive oil that comes with the breadbasket is exceptional; so are the black and green olives the server presented on our arrival. (She didn't mention the $4 price tag.) One arctic Saturday night in January, the giveaway amuse-bouche was a cup of deep-flavored lobster consommé with toasted corn -- a kind of liquid poultice for the cold.
Two showpiece appetizers are turned out with full respect for their high-end ingredients. A grilled Maine lobster tail, chewy and full of character, comes on a pillow of creamy polenta with wild mushrooms. A crescent of Hudson Valley foie gras is perfectly seared, and stewed cherries, a grilled cipollini onion and Chianti sauce keep its richness in check. My only complaint about these appetizers is that they are almost too much food; even less ambitious ones, like roasted beet salad and warm walnut-ricotta salad, tend to be rich with cheeses and nuts. Flawless mussels are heady with orange, fennel and Pernod; I could do with less cream in the sauce.
Pastas, available in half portions or as main courses, are generous and beautifully done. Homemade ravioli are stuffed with rabbit and ricotta salata and perfumed with sage. Wild boar, a bit dry but vigorously gamy, comes with narrow tagliatelle noodles, a creamy sauce and a delicious overlay of truffle oil. Wild-mushroom ragout over fettuccine and spinach is earthy and comforting, but it needs less salt.
Aside from cassoulet, the most satisfying main course is grilled pheasant with wilted greens and mashed potatoes -- four generous pieces of bird, surprisingly tender and mild, their flavor enhanced by pepper. Lamb osso buco ought to be just as rewarding, but it is salty and slightly dry.
A thick, mild fillet of roasted sea bass is enlivened by brussels sprouts and the elegant prosciutto called Speck. Sea scallops, cooked perhaps 30 seconds too long, are nevertheless well mated with crunchy kernels of creamed corn. But seared, peppered Ahi tuna is oddly chilly inside.
Desserts are uniformly fine. Mr. Pino makes some of the planet's best doughnuts, frying them to order and serving them with a wicked aged-bourbon sauce and miniature cinnamon-sugar beignets. Chocolate ganache cake is light and eggy, lushly encased in chocolate frosting. A little seckel pear conceals a welcome surprise: blue cheese. Somehow this combination works well with vanilla ice cream and flowery Tupelo honey. Baked apple is irresistible in a pastry crust with a ramekin of cinnamon gelato. And lemon panna cotta is not custardy but dense, alongside cherries in a thick red-wine sauce a great, elemental combination.
Then there are the cheeses. Describing them in a phone interview, Mr. Pino swelled audibly with pride, like the coach of a dream team: potent, creamy Explorateur; grainy aged Gouda; fruity, semisoft Mahón; manchego and Idiazábal, the sheep's-milk twins from Spain. Just one of these babies would keep the Jersey Devil at bay for a week. They are fully mature, well handled and ripe for sharing the gift of a chef who knows his ingredients and loves them just the way they are.
The Dining Room at Anthony David's  111 10th Street, Hoboken  (201)222-8359
VERY GOOD
ATMOSPHERE -- A former deli successfully converted into a high-end restaurant; small but not cramped.  SERVICE -- Engaging and attentive.  SMOKING -- Not allowed.  WINE LIST -- Bring your own, or order from a short list of bottles delivered from a nearby store.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Mussels, foie gras, grilled lobster; rabbit ravioli, pasta with wild boar; grilled pheasant, pan-roasted sea bass, cassoulet; doughnuts, poached seckel pear, baked apple, chocolate ganache cake, lemon panna cotta, cheese course.  PRICE RANGE -- Dinner: appetizers, $9 to $17; entrees, $21 to $28; desserts, $8; cheese course, $11 and up. Five-course tasting menus: $29 (Tuesdays through Thursdays only) and $54. Brunch entrees average $9.  HOURS -- Closed Mondays. Dinner: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 5 to 10:30 p.m. Brunch: Tuesdays through Sundays, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.  CREDIT CARDS -- American Express, MasterCard, Visa.  RESERVATIONS -- Recommended.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Fully accessible.
REVIEWED -- Feb. 22, 2004.
IF YOU GO -- The restaurant is at 10th and Bloomfield Streets in downtown Hoboken, a mile north of the PATH station and the light-rail stop. On-street parking places are rare and jealously guarded; the nearest lot is at 14th and Washington.
RATINGS -- Poor, Fair, Satisfactory, Good, Very Good, Excellent, Extraordinary. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
RESTAURANTS
