THERE are so many stories in Tracey Scott Wilson's ''The Story,'' at Long Wharf Theater's Stage II, that the play ends up a series of set-ups leading nowhere.
Staged Off Broadway in December at the Joseph Papp Public Theater in Manhattan, the play is a co-production of Long Wharf and the Public. Its subject is journalism, and its title refers to a reporter's scoop.
Yvonne is a conniving rookie at a fictional Boston newspaper. She has been assigned to work on a section of the paper, edited by Pat, that covers a local neighborhood ''abandoned and neglected since the 60's.''
In that neighborhood, Tim, a teacher of ''inner city kids with monumental problems'' is murdered in the play's first act. Yvonne finds the killer and writes ''the story.''
But her article is published in the metro pages of the newspaper, not the section Yvonne works on, causing yet another face-off between Yvonne and Pat. Yvonne is having an affair with Jeff, the metro editor.
Yvonne and Pat are black; so, we are led to believe, is the killer. Jeff and Tim, a rich, idealistic liberal, are white. For six other characters, color is a dominant or defining issue. Three actors in a company of nine are double cast, including David Wilson Barnes as Jeff and Tim.
All attempts at plot synopsis stop here. The intricacies of racial and newspaper politics infuse every detail in Ms. Wilson's play, which cannot be fairly summed up, or for that matter, figured out.
In an imbalanced second act, far shorter than the first, the plot, desperately seeking coherence, comes undone. It remains for us to put the pieces back together before a trite, stagy, open-ended ending.
Still, Ms. Wilson can spin a good yarn; with judicious editing and focus, this one is made to order for ''Law and Order.''
Although characters here are stereotypical agendas, not people, Lizzy Cooper Davis works to convey some dimension for Yvonne. Sharon Washington is plausibly tough as Pat. Neither actress appeared in the show at the Public last year.
Tammi Clayton portrays Latisha, an extraordinarily bright teenager, a role she played in the Public's version. Hers is the most complete performance.
''The Story'' is at Long Wharf Theater, Stage II, 222 Sargent Drive, New Haven, through March 14. Information: (203) 787-4282 or www.longwharf.org.
THEATER REVIEW
