It was one of my most memorable encounters with Mahler's Third Symphony. James Levine conducted the Philadelphia Orchestra in the Academy of Music in 1996. Like Wagner's ''Parsifal,'' this is one of those pieces Mr. Levine can't get enough of, so he stretched it to the limit and beyond, and the Philadelphia strings responded as only they could, with warm, full, endless tone.
Much has changed since. Wolfgang Sawallisch, no Mahlerian, has given way as the orchestra's music director to Christoph Eschenbach, who has now taken up the Mahler Third himself. The orchestra two years ago vacated the old academy for the Kimmel Center, where it gave the first of the current performances on Thursday. Tomorrow, Mr. Eschenbach will bring the work to Carnegie Hall, with the stellar mezzo-soprano Lorraine Hunt Lieberson, the women of the Philadelphia Singers Chorale and the American Boychoir.
Mr. Eschenbach is not always the subtlest of conductors. His Dvorak, for one, tends to sound clangorously like Mahler. But how -- I hesitate to ask -- could he make Mahler sound louder than Mahler? (Dvorak we will worry about next season, when Mr. Eschenbach and the orchestra offer a major tribute.)
In any case, Philadelphians will soon learn much about Mr. Eschenbach's conception of Mahler and related figures, for these performances of the Third kick off ''Mahler's World,'' a four-week festival in Philadelphia, including the Rückert Lieder, the ''Blumine'' movement discarded from the First Symphony, the Adagio of the Tenth and Mahler's arrangement of Schubert's string quartet ''Death and the Maiden.''
This festival -- which also offers chamber concerts and, as an appendage, a performance of the First Symphony in late April and early May -- is itself just the beginning of a five-year cycle of the nine completed symphonies and ''Das Lied von der Erde.'' It is the orchestra's first presentation of the symphonies as a cycle, and it will surely stand as a major benchmark of Mr. Eschenbach's tenure, however long that may last.
JAMES R. OESTREICH
MUSIC: HIGH NOTES  Correction:  February 22, 2004, Sunday  A brief article on Page 35 of Arts &amp; Leisure today about the Philadelphia Orchestra festival ''Mahler's World'' gives an incorrect date in some copies for a performance of Mahler's Third Symphony at Carnegie Hall. It is tomorrow, not Tuesday.
