State regulators are proposing that local governments and cable television companies in New York be allowed to enter franchise agreements of up to 15 years rather than the current maximum of 10 years.
The regulators, as well as the cable TV industry and many municipal officials, say the change is among those needed to loosen rules enacted when cable companies had less competition in television delivery. Today, they say, those rules handcuff the companies in a sharply changing telecommunications market.
They cite stiff competition from satellite television companies and partnerships that some of those businesses have formed with telephone companies to offer television, voice call and Internet-access service. They also say that the existing rules hinder the cable companies as they increasingly seek to offer the same bundle of services through their own lines. They maintain that cable TV customers and local governments could benefit from the opportunity to agree to longer franchise periods.
But the proposal's opponents, including consumer advocates and some state legislators, say that longer agreements would reduce governmental scrutiny of the cable companies' service quality and response to consumer complaints, which the opponents say are often poor. They say that the only time the companies have to account meaningfully for their service quality is when they seek to renew their franchises.
The opponents also maintain that the very changes in the telecommunications market cited by those who advocate longer franchises are, in fact, reasons for not providing that possibility. With cable companies increasingly providing vital communications services beyond television, ''the community may have a greater interest in more frequent reviews,'' said Gerald Norlander, executive director of the Public Utility Law Project, a consumer advocacy group active in New York.
A cable industry spokesman, Richard F. Alteri, the president of the Cable Telecommunications Association of New York, responded that the 30 cable companies in the state were overregulated compared with their satellite competitors. Satellite companies ''don't have to deal with local government, aren't regulated by state government, don't have to pay franchise fees,'' he said.
The rule change is being proposed by the staff of the State Public Service Commission, which regulates utilities and aspects of cable TV. The commission itself has not yet considered the proposal, and there is no indication when it might, a spokesman, David Flanagan, said on Friday.
The franchise length change was part of a larger package of changes in cable regulations proposed by the commission staff last February. Two other major proposals in the package were withdrawn after strong criticism at public forums across the state between April and August.
One withdrawn proposal would have reduced the cable companies' reimbursement obligations for service disruptions. Mr. Alteri said he was disappointed that this proposed change had been canceled. ''If the satellite goes out, the consumer gets nothing'' in terms of state protection, he said.
The second rescinded proposal would have reduced to one from two the minimum number of public, educational and governmental access channels required in a franchise agreement.
''Reducing from two to one would have no meaningful impact in New York City,'' where Time Warner and Cablevision, the dominant providers, each have nine such channels, said Thomas J. Hillgardner, general counsel to the Association of Cable Access Producers. In New York City, he said, the cable companies badly want the lucrative cable market, so they have been willing to provide that many public service channels, which do not produce commercial revenue but offer outlets for unorthodox or dissenting viewpoints, for community-oriented programming and for broadcasting local government proceedings.
Mr. Hillgardner said the change would have had ''meaning upstate'' because local governments there were less able to bargain for more than the minimum number of public service channels. ''Franchises are less lucrative'' in many upstate areas, he said, so cable companies are not as ready to give up commercial space in their systems.
Mr. Hillgardner said his group, while gratified that the state's minimum of two public service channels will be retained, was unhappy that the commission staff was sticking to another proposed change.
Under the current rules, all public, educational and governmental channels must be part of the smallest, least expensive package of channels offered to subscribers, unless the commission waives this requirement for a particular franchise agreement. Under the proposed change, only the minimum two public service channels would have to be in the lowest service tier, and a franchise agreement could allow additional public service channels to be offered in the wider, more expensive packages, without a commission waiver.
Mr. Flanagan, the commission spokesman, said that the duration of franchises would still be decided by the municipalities and cable companies in their negotiations.
The Bloomberg administration favors extending the maximum to 15 years, said Bruce Regal, a senior counsel at the New York City Law Department. ''If you tell a cable company, 'We want an upgrade of a system in our community,' it may cost a billion dollars, and the company might say it can't do this because it can't amortize the costs over 10 years,'' he said. ''You can then offer 12 years.''
Edward Farrell, executive director of the New York State Conference of Mayors and Municipal Officials, said the possibility of a 15-year franchise could have a ''positive fiscal impact'' on some local governments.
But Assemblyman Ryan S. Karben, a Rockland County Democrat on the Assembly committee that oversees the Public Service Commission, argued that local governments' interests were not always in line with those of cable subscribers.
