HARRY A. LeBIEN recently sent an e-mail message to members of the Greenwich Planning and Zoning Commission explaining that he would not be able to attend the next meeting because would be attending the funeral of his former college roommate in Texas.
''That's kind of an emotional thing, and I'm not sure I would care to make an e-mail like that accessible to the public,'' Mr. LeBien said. And he is not sure whether it would be open to public disclosure, under a draft ruling by the State Freedom of Information Commission that would make e-mail and voicemail part of the public record.
The commission said that electronic communications are already public records and the ruling would simply explain how and why they would have to be made accessible.
''We were getting more and more of a sense that there was a problem and figured sooner or later someone was going to file a complaint,'' said Mitchell W. Pearlman, executive director of the commission. ''That didn't happen, so we decided to bring it up ourselves.''
Mr. Pearlman noted that the governor issued an executive order several months ago requesting that state agencies use electronic communication whenever possible because paper costs are so high.
Mr. Pearlman said there is no timeline for enacting the ruling. But the commission would vote on the proposal and, and unless the legislature or a court overturns it, that would be the final word.
''More and more government business is being dealt with in e-mail and voicemail,'' Mr. Pearlman said. ''If those messages are not available to the public, that business is conducted in secret. Can we, as a democracy, tolerate that?''
But there has been an outcry that it would lead to unwarranted intrusion, eventually reaching into home computers and answering machines, since so many public officials conduct at least part of their official duties from their residence.
''I realize we need to get away from the image that things get done by the old boy networks and in smoke-filled rooms,'' said Norwich Mayor Arthur L. Lathrop. ''But I'm also afraid of the creeping encroachment on my personal liberty. No one should be able to reach into my house. Somewhere there to be a balance between the rights of the press and individual privacy.''
Barton D. Russell, executive director of the Council of Small Towns, said after the draft ruling became public in November he sent out a survey to get members' reactions, and within days had 71 responses -- all opposed to the ruling.
''This was visceral and it was immediate. The message was loud and clear, from Democrats and Republicans, that the proposal is bad public policy,'' said Mr. Russell, who said he has only seen a similar response to a state proposal to cut aid to towns for roads.
''Small towns don't have the administrative capacity or the technical capability to comply, even if they wanted to,'' he added. ''Financially, it would be a nightmare for smaller municipalities. It is ill-conceived, and should be defeated.''
Kevin Maloney, a spokesman for the Connecticut Conference of Municipalities, agreed. He said most towns don't have the equipment save voicemail, or messages left on cellular phones. They would either have to spend money for clerical help to have messages transcribed, or invest in digital voice recording systems and transfer them.
''Towns have always supported the notion of freedom of information,'' Mr. Maloney said. ''But if the Freedom of Information draft ruling is upheld, it's going to mean towns have to put in a lot more work or buy a lot of new equipment.''
In addition, most towns are already having problems finding people to run for elective office. The commission's ruling would increase the administrative duties of elected officials, ''And it could discourage people from getting involved with government even more,'' Mr. Maloney said.
Kelly D. Balser, a staff attorney for the Connecticut Association of Boards of Education, also questioned whether the commission had overstepped its bounds because state statutes require the Public Records Administrator, Eunice DiBella, to determine which records must be maintained and for how long.
''The Freedom of Information Commission doesn't even have the jurisdiction to issue this kind of a ruling,'' Ms. Balser said.
Opponents can point to statutory language that gives the public records administrator authority to determine exactly what can be considered public records.
The commission, though, maintains that a letter from Ms. DiBella's in 1998 is what opened the door for the commission to make e-mail and voicemail an issue for the Free of Information Commission to consider. Mr. Pearlman said in that letter, three classes of voicemail and e-mail were recognized: transitory, which do not have to be retained; less-than-permanent, which have to be retained for a various lengths of time depending on the category; and archival records, which must be retained indefinitely.
Again, it would probably take a court challenge to determine whether they have gone too far.
Mr. Pearlman acknowledged that the draft ruling has created a furor. A total of 53 organizations filed motions to intervene in the case, and only three -- two newspapers, and the Connecticut Council on Freedom of Information, an advocacy group -- championed the ruling. During several days of commission hearings in February, most people spoke against it.
''Much of the testimony was warning that the sky will fall in,'' Mr. Pearlman said. ''I think the impact is being overstated.'' He said the reality is that probably very few voicemail and e-mail messages would have to be retained.
Mr. Pearlman said voicemail that leave only a name and call-back number would not have to be retained. But e-mails and voicemails that provide substantive information would have to be made available for public review.
Not all officials oppose the ruling. Salvatore J. Ferrante, co-chairman of the Board of Education in Bethany, said years ago the superintendent told the board that e-mail should be considered subject to disclosure and retained.
''I keep them on a disk and make them available to anyone who wants them,'' Mr. Ferrante said. ''We've always been very cautious about making sure we meet all Freedom of Information requirements.''
Darien First Selectwoman Evonne M. Klein was also untroubled by the prospect of having to open her electronic communications to public perusal.
''I treat everything I write as something that could be out there in public,'' Ms. Klein said. ''I always operate on the assumption anything I do or say would be subject to Freedom of Information.''
She said if towns lack storage space for email or voicemail, she doesn't see it as an undue burden to print them out or transcribe them. But she added that she believes the ruling could change the way people communicate.
''Nobody is going to say anything pointed in a voicemail if they think it could become public, they're just going to leave a name and a phone number,'' Ms. Klein said. ''And people will stop putting things in writing, which is unfortunate, because we do need a paper trail on some issues.''
But Representative James O'Rourke, a Democrat of New Britain, co-chairman of the Legislature's Government Administration and Elections Committee, said he worried that a lack of openness in e-mail and voicemail could have the opposite effect. The committee, which proposes legislation regarding what constitutes a public record, narrowly passed a bill last year that would have prevented the commission from issuing the ruling that is under consideration, but it never made it to the flood.
''If we exempt e-mails and voicemails from Freedom of Information requirements, we may encourage people to avoid scrutiny that way -- if there's something you don't want the public to find out, you send it via e-mail and you don't have to disclose it,'' Mr. O'Rourke said. ''E-mails are pretty easy to keep, particularly those that have important information. Anything that's about a substantive public issue should be open to public review.''
Ms. Klein of Darien said one effect of the ruling might eventually be better government, if officials know that even informal musings can turn up in the public record.
''You just can't be sloppy -- you've got to make sure you don't say anything or write anything that you wouldn't want to become public. Maybe it will make us all a little more accountable, a little more responsible,'' Ms. Klein said. ''Government is supposed to be an open process. Behind the scenes should not exist.''
