I was a New York kid who grew up during the hurly-burly World War II years, a Jewish American girl who was influenced by the astonishing Europeans who had landed on our shores. I still retain in my head images of Manhattan streets crowded with servicemen and sophisticated women who wore amazing hats. My father was a lawyer who involved himself in sorting things out for some of the exiles. One of them, the photographer Lotte Jacobi, became my parent's close friend.
I watched Lotte's every move when she came to dinner at our apartment (she definitely wasn't an amazing-hat woman). Her hair fell in every careless direction, her shoes were flat and she argued as an equal with my father (an iconoclastic Republican) about politics.
Sometimes Lotte would take me into her small darkroom in her studio on West 52nd Street over a jazz club (that really impressed me: nobody else I knew lived over a jazz club). She wanted to show me how she made her ''photogenics'' (abstracts of light and dark swirls of light) on light-sensitive paper without using a camera. She enjoyed making circular movements with her arms while pulling the paper through the developing liquid.
During our time in that room, while my mind was on Hollywood movies, she would throw me nuggets of information that I didn't always know how to process -- for example, that Heinrich Mann was a better writer than his brother Thomas Mann. Occasionally I would complain about the slow and very still time it took her to photograph me. ''Can't it be more candid?'' I'd ask. She would reply, ''Art requires artifice,'' a remark that proved handy when I became a writer.
When Lotte photographed the natural world during our long walks near my parents' Connecticut summer home, she used the same calm deliberation as she did with her portraits, as if waiting for the salt grass doubled over by gusts of wind to connect spiritually to her. I knew Germany was on her mind: when she saw a rolling hill or clump of trees that particularly pleased her, she would say, ''It looks like Germany.'' Lotte, who was Jewish, talked German to my sort of surrogate mother, a Lutheran who had been born in Magdeburg. What would I do, I wondered, if our circumstances were reversed? Give up speaking English?
Lotte told me about her photo documentary travels through Poland and the remote outposts of Russia; she was heartbroken that, when she and her family fled Germany in 1935 (she was Jewish, a ''degenerate artist'' and a leftist) she had been forced to leave behind more than 90 percent of her archives, all of which the Nazis destroyed. I sensed she was particularly disturbed about the loss of the record she had made of Polish rural and city life. She would say to me in her low-key explanatory mode: ''There are towns in Poland that are very, very cultured.'' It wasn't until I was much older that I realized that Lotte had been born in Thorn, a town that at times was part of Poland, at times part of Prussia.
Lotte's family had been in the portrait-photography business since the mid-19th century. She was the fourth generation of the Atelier Jacobi, the leading photography atelier in Germany, with studios in Thorn, Posznan and Berlin. Her sensitive photographs of men (Albert Einstein, Marc Chagall, Chaim Weizman, Robert Frost and Konstantin Stanislavsky) reveal a woman who must have felt deeply loved by her father. Not only did he teach her photography, he gave her permission to become a photographer in a period when such acts of independence by women weren't all that common.
Lotte wasn't in rebellion against her parents, she wasn't a transgressive photographer of the weird, the naughty or the outrageous: there's no shock, nothing gimmicky, no narcissistic static in what she did. She told me that before deciding to join in the family business, she had wanted to be an actress; she was enamored with modern dance and hung out with the Berlin theater crowd. Her photographs of an unknown Lotte Lenya holding a cigarette; the actor Emil Jannings casually peeling an apple; Peter Lorre staring outward, his eyes heavily made up for the stage; and the dancer Claire Bauroff (''The Turn''), pure movement of light in motion, capture the essence of Berlin theater life.
Whether it was a pigeon calmly walking across a Berlin street, a political figure like the Russian journalist Karl Radek, executed by Stalinists in 1939, or of Grock the Clown, Lotte chose to photograph and document what she considered the morally legitimate world. In 1940, in New York, she married her second husband, the German avant-garde publisher Erich Reiss; (his publishing house created ''Dada Almanach''). The Danish writer Karen Michaelis, with help from the Scandinavian royal family, had rescued him from an early Nazi death camp.
Back then the specific word Holocaust wasn't used. But Erich's body and spirit had been wrecked in it. Watching his gaze as he sat so silently in our living room or in Lotte's studio, I felt he was still living inside that camp. Years later, in 1970 (Erich died in 1951), Lotte finally went back to Germany for a museum exhibition of material from Erich's distinguished publishing house. She wrote my mother that ''everything went well,'' even though her own archives were never recovered.
Last week, seeing her photographs again, in a show at the Jewish Museum, I realized that Lotte had deliberately left out of her work the destruction of her legitimate world: there are no images of Nazis. But in all its black-and-white intelligent strength, she preserved what she loved, the dazzling moment of the Weimar Republic.
Focus on the Soul: The Photographs of Lotte Jacobi.  Jewish Museum, Fifth Avenue and 92nd Street.  Through April 11.
PHOTOGRAPHY Barbara Probst Solomon, a novelist and essayist, is a professor in the graduate writing program of Sarah Lawrence College.
