''We understand that John Henry must be embarrassed, frustrated and disappointed by his failure in this transaction. Unlike the Yankees, he chose not to go the extra distance for his fans in Boston.''
-- George Steinbrenner on the Yankees' acquisition of Alex Rodriguez, whom Henry, owner of the Red Sox, failed to obtain from the Texas Rangers.
FEB. 14 (LATE) -- I cannot seem to stop laughing. The more I think about Boston, the harder I laugh. I don't mean to be cruel, but I must say I enjoy the feeling tremendously. I'm laughing so hard I just spit up soup. Alex Rodriguez. How will the residents of Boston feel when they see the newspaper tomorrow morning? Is there nothing I can't have? I shall try to buy a space shuttle. Maybe give it to Jeter.
FEB. 15 -- There is something about Boston I find quaint. The Federalist architecture, the cobblestone streets, the constant losing. Also, there is that lovely little park across from the Ritz with the pedal-powered boats. The swan boats, I think they are called. I shall buy the swan boats. This I like. I will fill in that little moat and in its place put in a go-cart track. And all the go-carts will have swans with maniacal looks painted on their faces and fire coming out of their little beaks. Again with the laughing. ''Make Way for Go-Carts.'' Stuff that in your Caldecott Medal.
MONDAY -- I do not like the name ''A-Rod.'' It doesn't sound right. ''Alexander'' is so much more regal. Ask him, by which I mean demand of him, that he go by the full name. Also, Ruth didn't actually ''build'' the place. It's just an expression.
TUESDAY -- I want to buy more things in Boston. Just thinking about it makes me feel warm. Once I punched a sleeping badger in a zoo because I thought he disrespected me. I like the state house in Boston. There's a gold dome and it was designed by Bulfinch and I think I could move it to the spring training facility and put in a food court.
WEDNESDAY -- Look into buying the rights to the word ''Boston.''
THURSDAY -- I awoke this morning and jotted down this thought from a particularly vivid dream: contact Bucky Dent. Pay him to move to Boston. Finance his candidacy for mayor. (Do they even have a mayor, or are they too small? City? Town? Which is it?)
FRIDAY -- Why do the Red Sox whine so? John Henry says baseball doesn't have an answer for the Yankees. Not true. It's called the off-season. I'm having two special hats handmade in Cuba. Stitched on the front are dollar signs. I'm sending them to John Henry and his little boy general manager -- here's your salary cap. Maybe I'll also send them a pair of Sergio Valente sunglasses from my collection.
SATURDAY -- Consider buying Boston's soul. Although, if I think about it, they already sold it to us with Babe Ruth. Again I'm laughing. I wonder if David Beckham would be interested in playing baseball?
Op-Ed Contributor John Kenney, a lifelong Red Sox fan, lives in Brooklyn.
