A week ago, Indiana's Jermaine O'Neal sounded as if he did not want to be associated with the rest of the Eastern Conference.
''People are not giving us the love we deserve because we're in the Eastern Conference,'' O'Neal said. ''But we don't consider ourselves an Eastern Conference team and we don't consider ourselves a Western Conference team. We consider ourselves a league team. If you want to talk about good teams, or the top teams in the N.B.A., you have to talk about the Indiana Pacers.''
But after what happened a few days ago, you might have to talk about the Detroit Pistons and the Nets before the Pacers. Detroit suddenly became the most talented team in the East after acquiring Rasheed Wallace from Atlanta for a bunch of role players, and in winning 12 straight under their new coach, Lawrence Frank, and 13 straight over all, the Nets are playing like the team that rolled through last year's playoffs.
The Pacers?
Though still a contender for the conference title, they are no longer the favorite they seemed to be just a month ago, especially with Ron Artest missing the next few weeks after thumb surgery. Artest is expected to be back before the playoffs and he is clearly tough enough to play through the pain, but Indiana's competition is gaining ground.
In fact, the East may finally be gaining a little ground on the West.
By adding the 6-foot-11 Wallace, the Pistons become the first Eastern team since Chicago won the N.B.A. championship in 1998 to have the size necessary to go nose to nose with the Western champion in the finals.
It is not hard to imagine the Wallace gang, Ben and Rasheed, returning the crown to the East, especially if the injury-plagued, controversy-riddled Los Angeles Lakers don't get it together.
''Normally, big men go from East to West,'' said Rod Thorn, the Nets' president, who tried to trade for Rasheed Wallace last summer. ''Here's a case where a quality big player went the other way. I think it certainly helps Detroit, and it's certainly good for the East as far as having another outstanding player.''
That said, Thorn and Donnie Walsh, the Pacers' chief executive, say they believe the East-West imbalance was overstated, even before Detroit landed Rasheed Wallace. Walsh said that when the Lakers' Shaquille O'Neal is taken out of the equation, so is the West's invincibility.
''I always looked at it like Shaq was in the West and that's what the difference between the two conferences is,'' Walsh said. ''Not discounting Tim Duncan and anyone else out there, but when you're hearing all this stuff about East-West, I don't know if it applies to some of the teams in the East. There are teams in the East that can certainly compete against anyone in the West besides Shaq. There's really nobody out West except Duncan that can compete with Shaq.''
Thorn said the Nets' performance against San Antonio in last year's finals showed that undervaluing the East is not accurate.
''I think whoever comes out of the East will have a very good chance in the finals,'' Thorn said. ''I really believe that. Last year, we lost, 4-2, and every game except one could have gone the other way. I think we're going to see a really competitive series this year.''
Especially if Detroit represents the East.
Minnesota Still Cruising
After running to the second-best record in the West without Wally Szczerbiak, Michael Olowokandi and Troy Hudson, the Minnesota Timberwolves wondered if the return of those players from the injured list would disrupt their chemistry. On Thursday night, they got an early indication when Szczerbiak and Hudson returned against the West-leading Sacramento Kings.
With Szczerbiak coming off the bench behind Latrell Sprewell and the defensive stopper Trenton Hassell, Minnesota trounced the Kings, 92-75. Granted, Sacramento was without Brad Miller, who sprained his ankle at the All-Star Game, but the Timberwolves were still impressive.
Chemistry problems were nonexistent, and if Szczerbiak, a onetime All-Star who averaged 20 points and 7 rebounds two seasons ago, embraces the role of providing instant offense off the bench, the Timberwolves will only improve on their strong performance in the first half of the season.
Szczerbiak, who missed the first 52 games with plantar fasciitis in his left foot, and Hudson, who had been out with a right ankle injury, combined for 16 points off the bench. Hudson had 10 points and 3 assists in 13 minutes. Olowokandi, recovering from right knee surgery, returned Friday night.
''That's the biggest question mark -- how we're going to jell with Wally and Kandi coming back, also with Troy coming back,'' Kevin Garnett said before Thursday's game. ''I think that's the million-dollar question. But it shouldn't be a problem. We're a team that shares the ball. We're a team that plays defense for 48 minutes.''
With four players who have played in the All-Star Game within the last three years, Minnesota has as much firepower as Dallas. The difference is the Timberwolves' firepower is not all at one position, and their players defend. Rob Babcock, Minnesota's vice president for player personnel, acknowledged the challenges that bringing back three starting-caliber players presents.
''Even if you're the most unselfish guys around, going from 25 minutes and 8 points a game to 12 minutes and 3 points is not easy,'' Babcock said. ''But we know we need those guys. Without those guys being healthy, it will be tough going through a seven-game series because Sam Cassell and Latrell Sprewell, at their age, are going to wear down if they have to play too many minutes.''
Sprewell is 33, and Cassell, who made his first All-Star appearance last weekend, is 34.
Stern's Observations
Commissioner David Stern said he believed that the Maurice Clarett ruling, which brought down the N.F.L.'s longstanding policy that a player must wait three years after his high school class graduates to enter the league, would be overturned.
''The Clarett decision was wrongly decided, as a matter of law, and will likely be reversed on appeal,'' Stern said.
Referring to O. J. Mayo, the freshman basketball sensation at North College Hill High School in Ohio, he said, ''There's a very good 14-year-old player in Cincinnati, and under the logic and reasoning of the decision in Clarett, he could mount litigation against us.''
Stern would like to put in a minimum age requirement of 20 for the N.B.A.; the players association is against it. But Billy Hunter, the executive director of the union, and Stern do agree that a line must be drawn somewhere.
''If a 14-year-old steps forward, I'm going to join hands with David Stern,'' Hunter said. ''Even if he has a body like LeBron's.'' He was referring to the 6-8, 240-pound LeBron James, who is 19.
Stern and Hunter, meeting last Saturday, also agreed to end this season's trial of giving veterans the first three days of training camp off. Veterans will go back to participating fully in training camp next season, and they will be given one extra day off over the All-Star Game break.
Heard Around the League
When asked before last weekend's slam-dunk contest whom he most resembles as a dunker, Boston's Ricky Davis said: ''Michael Jordan and Dominique Wilkins. A little bit of both.'' The next night, Davis missed two of his three dunk attempts in failing to get out of the contest's first round.
Sacramento's Peja Stojakovic has a simple solution for slumps: ''When I'm shooting poorly, I just hit my head really hard a few times and everything is better.''
Unlike many international players, Yao Ming has yet to fully embrace hip-hop. When asked what kind of American music he listens to, he said: ''I like the national anthem. I listen to it at least 82 times a year.''
INSIDE THE N.B.A.
