1. Big fashion names are cropping up in Shanghai faster than skyscrapers in the Pudong area. Giorgio Armani, Vivienne Westwood, Manolo Blahnik and Marni are just some of the designers opening stores in the bustling city this year. The New York-based designer Vera Wang has even bought a house there. Of course, where fashion goes, glossy magazines invariably follow. One of the hottest homegrown publications so far is WestEast (shown here). (The magazine's Melvin Chua assisted with the production of our Shanghai shoot.) Another is Vision, which is owned by the artist and style-entrepreneur Chen Yifei. The Terence Conran of Shanghai, Chen also owns a chic home-furnishings shop in the trendy shopping area Xintiandi, a high-end clothing store, an Internet company, a modeling agency and a stake in Shanghai Tatler. All after becoming an internationally successful painter in the 1990's.
2. The Bund, a strip of European-style buildings built by China's colonizers in the early 1900's along the Huangpu River, is home to some of the city's most ambitious and stylish projects to date. Three on the Bund, the Great Mall of China scheduled to open this spring, will have four swish restaurants and bars (including the chef Jean-Georges Vongerichten's first foray into China), the new Shanghai Gallery of Art and an Evian spa. Two floors of high-end retail are to be anchored by an enormous Giorgio Armani store. The architect Michael Graves designed the public spaces and some of the other sites, including the restaurant Laris (shown here). Go to www.threeonthebund.com.
3. If the number of pirated videos of ''Sex and the City'' floating around China is any indication, Jean Georges Shanghai's signature elixir, the Shanghai Cosmo, will be the most coveted cocktail in town. The series that made the original Cosmopolitan famous is so popular among young Chinese that last year a Shanghai television station started its own version of the show (a lot tamer, to placate government censors, of course) called ''Hot Ladies.'' To make a Shanghai Cosmo, fill a shaker with ice and add 1 ounce each of vodka, Choya plum wine and cranberry juice, and a splash each of pineapple juice and lime juice. Shake and strain into a martini glass. Top with soda, and garnish with a lemon twist.
4. The Shanghai Gallery of Art's first show features the work of 26 leading contemporary Chinese artists, including the 32-year-old Yang Fudong, a Shanghai-based video artist and photographer on the short list of China's hottest exports. His work, including ''Honey'' (shown here), explores the country's seismic changes and was included in both Documenta in Germany and the Venice Biennale last year. Yang's videos were featured this month at the Museum of Modern Art and TRANS area, a nonprofit gallery in Chelsea. In June he is slated to participate in a show of new Chinese photography and video at New York's International Center for Photography and the Asia Society.
5. You can't do it at Dior, so if you want to try your hand at the hallowed art of bargaining Chinese style, you must abandon the boutiques of new Shanghai for the markets of old Shanghai. The Chinese supermodel Qi Qi (who appears on these pages) loves Xiang Yang, in the old French Concession, for casual clothing. Dongtai Lu is a popular outdoor antiques bazaar. Our stylist got this satin bag for 33 yuan (about $4) at Fangban Lu, a lively market near the Yuyuan Gardens.
6. A small clutch of travel-savvy architects, designers and other creative types nostalgic for a bit of old Shanghai stay at No. 9, a five-room jewel of a bed-and-breakfast located in a 1930's house in the residential district of the French Concession. Rates range from $80 to $160. For more information, e-mail David Huang at ad50192907@online.sh.cn.
Sandra Ballentine
