FEBRUARY
BIG BILL -- A. R. Gurney's new play, directed by Mark Lamos, is about the dominant tennis star of the 1920's, Bill Tilden, who was also secretly gay. John Michael Higgins plays the title role. Opens tonight. Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center. Tele-charge. www.lct.org
WINTERTIME -- The New York premiere of Charles L. Mee's romantic farce involving a young couple, his parents and two other men. Marsha Mason leads a cast of 10. Directed by David Schweizer. In previews. Opens March 2. Second Stage Theater, 307 West 43rd Street. (212-246-4422 or 800-766-6048) www.SecondStageTheatre.com
BEAUTIFUL CHILD -- Terry Kinney directs a strong cast -- including George Grizzard, Penny Fuller and Steven Pasquale -- in this new play by Nicky Silver (''The Food Chain''), a dark comedy about an art teacher in emotional trouble who seeks refuge at the home of his parents. In previews. Opens Tuesday. Vineyard Theater, 108 East 15th Street. (212-353-0303)
SEA OF TRANQUILITY -- A comedy by Howard Korder (''Search and Destroy'') about a couple who leave the Connecticut suburbs for the open spaces of the West. The cast of 11 is led by Patricia Kalember and Dylan Baker and directed by Neil Pepe. In previews. Opens Wednesday. Atlantic Theater Company, 336 West 20th Street. Tele-charge. www.atlantictheater.org
FIDDLER ON THE ROOF -- And another chorus of biddy biddy bom. In this revival of the 1964 musical based on the stories of Sholom Aleichem, Alfred Molina is the peasant Tevye, a beleaguered husband and father of five daughters in the Russian village of Anatevka as the revolution approaches. The book by Joseph Stein, music by Jerry Bock, lyrics by Sheldon Harnick and choreography by Jerome Robbins (which this production retains) are all classic. David Leveaux (''Nine'') is the director, and the promising cast includes Randy Graff, Nancy Opel, Sally Murphy and the soon-to-be Mary Poppins, Laura Michelle Kelly. (Murphy and Kelly? Molina? In the shtetl?) In previews. Opens Thursday. Minskoff Theater, 200 West 45th Street. Ticketmaster.
KING LEAR -- In a reprise of a production that was first presented at the Stratford Festival in Canada, Christopher Plummer takes on the towering challenge of Shakespeare's merciless portrait of a monarch in decline. Jonathan Miller directs. In previews. Opens March 4. Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center. Tele-charge.www.lct.org
COOKIN' -- It sounds like ''Stomp'' in the kitchen: a nonverbal show in which four Korean chefs prepare a meal at top speed while playing percussion with the cookware. Conceived and directed by Seung Whan Song. In previews. Opens March 7. Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane. (212-420-8000) or Ticketmaster.
SMALL TRAGEDY -- Craig Lucas's new play gets its New York premiere in a production directed by Mark Wing-Davey. It's a backstage story about actors preparing a production of ''Oedipus Rex.'' With Rob Campbell and Mary Shultz. In previews. Opens March 11. Playwrights Horizons, 416 West 42nd Street. Ticket Central.www.playwrightshorizons.org
EMBEDDED -- A satire written (quickly, it seems) and directed by Tim Robbins, sending up the news media and the government and set during the war in Iraq. It was first performed last fall in Los Angeles by Mr. Robbins's company, the Actors' Gang. Previews begin Tuesday. Opens March 14. Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street. Telecharge. www.publictheater.org
THE MOONLIGHT ROOM -- This accomplished first play by Tristine Skyler had a brief run last fall at the Worth Street Theater, where its success inspired the move to Off Broadway. It's a realistic drama set in the waiting room of a New York hospital as a couple of teenagers -- and their single parents -- await word on whether a classmate has survived a drug overdose. Jeff Cohen directs. Previews begin Tuesday. Opens March 1. The Beckett on Theater Row, 242 West 42nd Street. Tele-charge.
FROZEN -- A drama by Bryony Lavery about events set in motion by the disappearance of a child. Doug Hughes directs Swoosie Kurtz, Brian F. O'Byrne and Laila Robins. Previews begin Wednesday. Opens March 18. An MCC production at the East 13th Street Theater, 136 East 13th Street. Ticket Central. www.MCCTheater.org
TWENTIETH CENTURY -- This Roundabout Theater Company production of a classic comedy, starring Alec Baldwin as a downward-spiraling producer and Anne Heche as an upward-soaring starlet, is not precisely a revival; it's actually an adaptation of an adaptation. Ken Ludwig has updated the 1932 Broadway script by Ben Hecht and Charles MacArthur, who themselves had refashioned the story from a character in a play called ''The Napoleon of Broadway'' by Charles Bruce Mulholland. Walter Bobbie directs. Previews begin Friday. Opens March 25. American Airlines Theater, 227 West 42nd Street. (212-719-1300) www.roundabouttheatre.com
HUMANA FESTIVAL OF NEW AMERICAN PLAYS -- The 28th annual festival includes work by Naomi Iizuka, Gina Gionfriddo, Kirsten Greenidge, Rinne Groff, Jordan Harrison and Melanie Marnich. Performances begin Feb. 29. Actors Theater of Louisville. (502-584-1205)www.actorstheatre.org
MARCH
OPEN HEART -- Robby Benson, once a teenage heartthrob, has written a musical (music, lyrics and book) about his affairs of the heart -- including two open-heart operations. And yes, it's a comedy. Mr. Benson also stars, with his wife, Karla DeVito, and Stan Brown. Directed by Matt Williams. Previews begin March 4. Opens March 17. Cherry Lane Theater, 38 Commerce Street. Tele-charge.
JOHNNY GUITAR -- This is a new musical, believe it or not, based on Nicholas Ray's cult classic film from 1954, about two women in a New Mexico cattle town in 1885 and the men who inflame their rivalry. Music and lyrics by Joel Higgins, who also directs. Book by Nicholas van Hoogstraten. Choreography by Lara Teeter. With Judy McLane, Steve Blanchard and Ann Crumb. Previews begin March 4. Opens March 23. Century Center for the Performing Arts, 111 East 15th Street. Telecharge. www.JohnnyGuitarTheMusical.com
THE JOURNALS OF MIHAIL SEBASTIAN -- The Pulitzer Prize winner David Auburn (''Proof'') has adapted writings from the notebooks of Sebastian, a Romanian playwright who chronicled the rise of anti-Semitism in Bucharest during World War II. Presented by the Keen Company and directed by its artistic director, Carl Forsman. With Stephen Kunken. Previews begin March 6. Opens March 23. Theater at 45th Street, 354 West 45th Street. SmartTix.
SLY FOX -- A sterling cast led by Richard Dreyfuss and Eric Stoltz and directed by Arthur Penn is among the attractions of this revival of Larry Gelbart's 1976 comedy of greed -- an updating of Ben Jonson's ''Volpone'' set during the gold rush. Also appearing: Bob Dishy, Rene Auberjonois, Bronson Pinchot, Rachel York, Elizabeth Berkley, Peter Scolari, Nick Wyman and Professor Irwin Corey. Mr. Penn directed the original ''Sly Fox,'' which starred George C. Scott. Previews begin March 12. Opens April 1. Barrymore Theater, 243 West 47th Street. Tele-charge.
MATCH -- Frank Langella, Ray Liotta and Melora Walters star in a three-handed play by Stephen Belber (''Tape'') involving a husband and wife who travel to interview a retired dancer (Mr. Langella), ostensibly for the woman's doctoral dissertation. Guess what? There's something else on their agenda. Nicholas Martin directs. Previews begin March 12. Opens April 8. Plymouth Theater, 236 West 45th Street. Tele-charge.
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM -- Helena is going bald. Puck wears a tutu. Titania has chest hair. Propeller, an all-male English company specializing in gender-bending productions of Shakespeare, makes its American debut with the famous comedy of love, sex, magic and dreams. Directed by Edward Hall, son of Sir Peter. March 16-28. Harvey Theater, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 651 Fulton Street. (718-636-4100)www.bam.org
INTIMATE APPAREL -- Lynn Nottage's new play, directed by Daniel Sullivan, is set at the start of the 20th century in New York City and tells the story of a young black woman, played by Viola Davis, who sews lingerie for Park Avenue socialites. Previews of the Roundabout Theater Company production begin March 17. Opens April 11. Laura Pels Theater, 111 West 46th Street. (212-719-1300) www.roundabouttheatre.com
BARBARA COOK'S BROADWAY -- Songs from favorite shows, 1951-71, performed by one of the theater's great voices, with her longtime accompanist, Wally Harper, on piano. Twelve weekend performances between March 19 and April 18. Opens March 28. Vivian Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center. Tele-charge. www.lct.org
HANNAH &amp; MARTIN -- The Epic Theater Center presents a drama by Kate Fodor based on the real-life philosophers and lovers Hannah Arendt and Martin Heidegger -- she a Jew, he her mentor who, for a time, aligned himself with the Nazis. David Straithairn and Melissa Friedman star. Directed by Ron Russell. Previews begin March 20. Opens March 31. Manhattan Ensemble Theater, 55 Mercer Street. Smarttix.
THE LIFE OF SPIDERS -- A poetic fantasy play by Kelly Stuart, presented by the Holderness Theater Company, set in Paris just before World War I, about a man who weaves garments from the silk of spiders. Directed by Rebecca Holderness. Performances begin March 20. The Culture Project, 45 Bleecker Street. (212-352-0255) www.theatermania.com
SIXTEEN WOUNDED -- Set in Amsterdam in the 1990's, this timely melodrama is about an elderly Jewish baker, played by Judd Hirsch, and the young Palestinian he hires as an apprentice. The author is a young Israeli, Eliam Kraiem, and this is his first play; the baker's apprentice is portrayed by Omar Metwally, the son of an Egyptian father and a Dutch mother. The excellent cast includes Martha Plimpton and Jan Maxwell. Garry Hynes directs. Performances begin March 22. Opens April 15. Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street. Tele-charge.
ROAR -- The New Group (''Aunt Dan and Lemon'') presents a play by Betty Shamieh about a Palestinian-American family in Detroit after the first gulf war, and the disruption of their lives when a relative expelled from Kuwait arrives on their doorstep. Annabella Sciorra and Sarita Choudhury lead the cast; Marion McClinton directs. Previews begin March 22. Opens April 5. The Clurman at Theater Row, 410 West 42nd Street. Telecharge. www.thenewgroup.org
MR. FOX: A UMINATION -- The season of Bill Irwin at the Signature Theater Company comes to a close with this new work, a reflection on the career of George L. Fox, who, in the second half of the 19th century, became America's first celebrity clown. Mr. Irwin stars. James Houghton directs. Previews begin March 24. Opens April 13. Peter Norton Space, 555 West 42nd Street. (212-244-7529) www.signaturetheatre.org
ASSASSINS -- This Roundabout Theater Company revival of Stephen Sondheim and John Weidman's controversial 1990 musical that presents the history of presidential assassination in America was deemed too close to a sensitive nerve and postponed after the events of Sept. 11, 2001. Directed by Joe Mantello (''Wicked''). Starring Neil Patrick Harris (Lee Harvey Oswald), Michael Cerveris (John Wilkes Booth), Alexander Gemignani (John Hinckley) and Mary Catherine Garrison (Squeaky Fromme), as well as Becky Ann Baker, Mario Cantone, Marc Kudisch, James Barbour, Jeffrey Kuhn and Denis O'Hare. Previews begin March 26. Opens April 22. Studio 54, 254 West 54th Street. (212-719-1300) www.roundabouttheatre.org
BOMBAY DREAMS -- Broadway meets Bollywood. This musical about a poor Indian boy who dreams of being a movie star was produced in London by Andrew Lloyd Webber. The music, by A. R. Rahman, has a disco flavor. The lyrics are by Don Black, choreography by Anthony Van Laast and Farah Khan. Thomas Meehan (''The Producers'') and Meera Syal wrote the book. Steven Pimlott directs. Previews begin March 29. Opens April 29. Broadway Theater, 1681 Broadway. Tele-charge.
A RAISIN IN THE SUN -- In one of the season's starrier productions, Sean Combs (a k a Puff Daddy, P. Diddy, Puffy, etc.) makes his Broadway debut in a cast that also includes Audra McDonald and Phylicia Rashad. Lorraine Hansberry's landmark drama -- it was the first play written by an African-American woman to appear on Broadway -- is about three generations of one family, the Youngers, on the South Side of Chicago in the 1950's. When it was first produced on Broadway in 1959, directed by Lloyd Richards, Sidney Poitier played Walter Lee Younger, the character Mr. Combs will portray. Previews begin March 30. Opens April 26. Royale Theater. Telecharge.
APRIL
BIRO -- A biographical one-man show about a young Ugandan who works both for the country's liberation and against the African AIDS epidemic. Derived from hundreds of hours of interviews, the show, receiving its New York premiere, is performed by its Ugandan-American author, Ntare Guma Mbaho Mwine, and directed by Peter Dubois. Previews begin April 6. Opens April 18. Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street. Tele-charge. www.publictheater.org
THE NORMAL HEART -- It's hard to believe it is nearly 20 years since this angry, moving play by Larry Kramer first appeared at the Public Theater and rattled the cages of America's health officials. Set between 1981 and 1984, it concerns Ned Weeks, a gay activist (and Mr. Kramer's alter ego), his public campaign for AIDS awareness and his own battle with the illness. It was a political, polemical and effective work, and it will be intriguing to see how it stands up today. Jeff Cohen directs; Raúl Esparza and Joanna Gleason star. Previews begin April 6. Opens April 21. A Worth Street Theater Company production at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street. Tele-charge.
JUMPERS -- This revival of Tom Stoppard's 1972 comedy/philosophical rumination/murder mystery comes to Broadway from the National Theater in London, where it first appeared last year, and the West End, where it is now. Simon Russell Beale and Essie Davis make their Broadway debuts. David Leveaux directs, hooking up again with Mr. Stoppard after their Tony-winning revival of ''The Real Thing'' in 2000. Previews begin April 6. Opens April 25. Brooks Atkinson Theater, 256 West 47th Street. Ticketmaster.
SAFE IN HELL -- This new historical comedy from Amy Freed, the author of ''The Beard of Avon,'' draws from a couple of figures not exactly known as fun guys: the 17th-century preachers Cotton Mather and his father, Increase Mather. Fire and brimstone comes in for serious satire. Directed by David Emmes. Performances begin April 9. South Coast Repertory, Costa Mesa, Calif. (714-708-5555) www.scr.org
THREE SECONDS IN THE KEY -- Deb Margolin examines issues of health and race in this play, based on her own experiences with cancer, about a woman who endures her treatments by watching the New York Knicks with her young son and engaging in a dialogue with a larger-than-life Knick who steps out of the television screen into their living room. A New Georges presentation. Directed by Alexandra Aron. Previews begin April 12. OpensApril 14. Baruch Performing Arts Center, 55 Lexington Avenue at 25th Street. Smarttix.
CAROLINE, OR CHANGE -- The Off Broadway musical by Tony Kushner (book and lyrics) and Jeanine Tesori (music) moves to Broadway. The story, set in Louisiana in the early 1960's, has a pebble of a plot -- a young white boy's stepmother tries to teach him respect for money by telling the family's black maid to keep whatever change he leaves carelessly in his pockets -- but it resonates as though it had been dropped in a pond. The potent Tonya Pinkins plays the title role. Directed by George C. Wolfe. Previews begin April 13. Opens May 2. Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street. Tele-charge.
THE DISTANCE FROM HERE -- In characteristic fashion, Neil LaBute's newest play looks at the suburbs -- scornful kids, rotten parents, shopping malls -- with bitter humor. Directed by Michael Greif. Previews begin April 14. Opens May 5. The Duke Theater, 229 West 42nd Street. Ticket Central. www.MCCTheater.org
WHERE DO WE LIVE -- The American premiere of a play by the young and talented Christopher Shinn (''Four,''  ''What Didn't Happen'') about neighbors in a Lower East Side apartment building. With Michelle Williams from ''Dawson's Creek.'' Directed by the playwright. Previews begin April 14. Opening date to be announced. Vineyard Theater, 108 East 15th Street. (212-353-0303) www.vineyardtheatre.org
TENNESSEE WILLIAMS EXPLORED -- Following last year's successful series of Stephen Sondheim musicals, the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington presents five new productions of works by the American South's greatest playwright. April 20-May 9: ''Five by Tenn,'' an evening of one-acts directed by Michael Kahn. May 11-30: ''A Streetcar Named Desire,'' directed by Garry Hynes, with Patricia Clarkson as the fragile and deluded Blanche DuBois. June 11-13: the actor Richard Thomas performs a one-man show, ''A Distant Country Called Youth,'' adapted from Williams's early letters by Steve Lawson, who also directs. June 15-July 4: Patrick Wilson will be Brick, the distraught former athlete in perpetual search for an alcoholic ''click,'' and George Grizzard and Dana Ivey his parents, Big Daddy and Big Mama, in ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof,'' directed by Mark Lamos. Maggie the Cat is not yet cast. July 20-Aug. 8: Sally Field will play the destructively delusional mother, Amanda Wingfield, in ''The Glass Menagerie.'' Gregory Mosher directs. (202-467-4600 or 800-444-1324) www.kennedy-center.org
SIGHT UNSEEN -- A Broadway revival of the Off Broadway drama from 1992 by Donald Margulies (''Dinner With Friends'') about a trendy painter, his ex-lover and issues of authenticity in art and character. Daniel Sullivan is the director of the Roundabout Theater Company production. Laura Linney, who was in the original production as a possibly anti-Semitic German journalist, has moved up to the female lead. Previews begin May 6. Opens May 25. Biltmore Theater, 261 West 47th Street. Tele-charge.www.ManhattanTheatreClub.org
CHINESE FRIENDS -- A new play by Jon Robin Baitz (''The Substance of Fire,''  ''Ten Unknowns'') is always an occasion. This one is a drama about a politician in exile and the estranged son who tracks him down. Robert Egan directs. Cast to be announced. Previews begin April 30. Opens May 25. Playwrights Horizons, 416 West 42nd Street. Ticket Central.www.playwrightshorizons.org
MAY
BYE BYE BIRDIE -- The final presentation of the season in the Encores! series of musicals in concert is this 1960 favorite about an Elvis Presley-like pop star who has been drafted, and the lucky girl who wins a date with him in a publicity contest. Music by Charles Strouse, lyrics by Lee Adams, book by Michael Stewart. Kathleen Marshall directs and choreographs. May 6-10. City Center, West 55th Street between the Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue. City Tix. www.citycenter.org
HOMEBODY/KABUL -- Tony Kushner's prescient opus about the evolution of the politics and culture of Afghanistan focuses on a British woman who leaves her home in London and vanishes in Kabul. This new production, changed since the play first appeared in New York at the end of 2001, was developed at the Steppenwolf Theater in Chicago and the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles. Directed by Frank Galati. The deservedly praised Linda Emond returns as the ''homebody,'' whose hourlong monologue opens the show, and Maggie Gyllenhaal (''Secretary'') makes her New York stage debut as her daughter. May 11-30. Brooklyn Academy of Music's Harvey Theater, 651 Fulton Street. (718-636-4100)  www.bam.org
HOME LIFE and THE ZOO STORY -- In 1959, a one-act play set on a bench in Central Park and pitting a complacent and comfortable mainstream New Yorker against a jittery, self-destructive outsider helped steer American theater onto a new and abrasive path, and it also gave an initial boost to the career of one of the last century's most significant playwrights. The play was ''The Zoo Story,'' the writer Edward Albee, who has now written another short play, ''Home Life.'' A prequel of sorts, it takes place in the apartment of Peter, the stuffy publishing executive, on the morning of his fateful encounter on the park bench. They are to be performed together, with previews beginning May 20. Opens May 28. Hartford Stage. (860-527-5151)www.hartfordstage.org
FORBIDDEN CHRISTMAS: THE DOCTOR AND THE PATIENT -- Mikhail Baryshnikov performs in this new theater piece conceived and directed by Rezo Gabriadze, the creator of the exquisite puppet theater piece ''The Battle of Stalingrad.'' In it, a doctor's late-night visit to his mentally ill patient becomes a dreamy, fantastical event. The musical score includes tango music, Georgian folk songs and Shostakovich. Performances begin May 27. Spoleto Festival, Charleston, S.C. (The show will also be presented at the Lincoln Center Festival in July.) Other presentations at Spoleto include ''Love's Fowl,'' an operatic musical in miniature -- it's a puppet show with a score (by Henry Krieger) about the life and loves of a chicken. (843-579-3100)www.spoletousa.org
JUNE
THE IMAGINARY INVALID -- France's venerable national theater company -- it was established in 1680 by Louis XIV -- the Comédie-Française, makes its fourth visit to the United States in the last quarter century with Molière's bristling farce about doctors and their gullible patients. June 9-13. Brooklyn Academy of Music's Harvey Theater, 651 Fulton Street. (718) 636-4100. www.bam.org
AFTER THE FALL -- A revival by the Roundabout Theater Company of Arthur Miller's most personal play, first produced in 1964 and ostensibly inspired by the playwright's marriage to Marilyn Monroe, about a man parsing the experiences of his life, from his childhood through the death of his mother and a string of relationships gone bitter. Michael Mayer directs. Previews begin June 11. Opens July 8. American Airlines Theater, 227 West 42nd Street. (212-719-1300) www.roundabouttheatre.com
THE FROGS -- Nathan Lane has adapted Burt Shevelove's 1974 adaptation of Aristophanes' fifth-century B.C. comedy about a journey to Hades by Dionysus (Mr. Lane) and his slave Xanthias (Chris Kattan). And oh, yeah, it's a musical. Stephen Sondheim wrote the book and lyrics for the show, which was initially less than an hour long and staged in the swimming pool at Yale University, with a cast that included Meryl Streep, Sigourney Weaver and Christopher Durang. For the new production, Mr. Lane has greatly expanded the book and Mr. Sondheim has written several new songs. Directed and choreographed by Susan Stroman (''The Producers''). Previews begin June 17. Opens July 15. Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center. Telecharge. www.lct.org
SPRING THEATER  Correction:  March 7, 2004, Sunday  An annotated listing in the Spring Theater Preview issue on Feb. 22 for ''Sixteen Wounded,'' which begins performances on March 22 at the Walter Kerr, misstated the nationality of the playwright, Eliam Kraiem. He is American, not Israeli.
A listing for ''Caroline, or Change'' misidentified the theater in which it will begin on April 13. It is the Eugene O'Neill, not the Walter Kerr.
Because of an editing error, a listing for ''Sight Unseen,'' beginning May 6 at the Biltmore, misidentified the presenting company. It is the Manhattan Theater Club, not the Roundabout Theater Company.
