Edward Valentin's wife has applied to come home from Iraq. For him, that may or may not be a good thing.
Mr. Valentin spent two days in jail last week after police charged him with falsely reporting his wife's death, making a false statement and making harassing phone calls. For Mr. Valentin and his neighbors, the arrest culminated a week of emotional twists and turns that began Feb. 11.
Until it completely unraveled, Mr. Valentin's story was heartbreaking. The unemployed Waterbury resident whose wife, Betsy, is an Army reservist stationed in Iraq, has raised three children by himself for the past year. On Feb. 11, shortly after 4 p.m., he got an ''official-sounding call'' from a man who identified himself as a lieutenant colonel and had devastating news, Mr. Valentin later told police. The man said Betsy had been killed in a firebombing in Baghdad.
Thus began a strange saga that by Sunday had landed Mr. Valentin in jail. On the way, the sympathy of his neighbors turned to anger and confusion. Though Mr. Valentin may have been under great stress, waiting for his wife to come home, his actions were inexcusable, neighbors said.
''It's just crazy,'' said his next-door neighbor David Rivera. ''He has to wait just like everyone else.''
Though police suspected Mr. Valentin falsely reported his wife's death to woo another woman who had said she wouldn't date a married man, Mr. Valentin and his family disputed that. Mr. Valentin told police that he thought the incident would generate enough attention so that the Army would send his wife back to him.
It might have worked. Calling from Iraq early last week, Sergeant Valentin told a Waterbury police officer that she applied for a leave of absence from the Army to come home and see her family.
''I didn't have the sense that she was angry,'' said Sgt. Scott Stevenson of the Waterbury Police Department, who fielded the call from Ms. Valentin.
''I think she was bewildered.''
Mr. Valentin was released on a $5,000 bond after his arraignment Tuesday.
His next court date is March 2.
AVI SALZMAN
WORTH NOTING  Editors' Note:  February 22, 2004, Sunday  A report in the Worth Noting column on Page 2 of the Connecticut section today describes the case of a Waterbury man charged with having falsely reported that his wife, an Army Reserve sergeant, had died in Baghdad. It said the reservist, Betsy Valentin, had since applied for leave to come home. On Thursday evening, after the section had gone to press, Sergeant Valentin arrived in Connecticut.
