ALBERT W. BLEAU JR. was in Maine one weekend in January when he received a call notifying him that the boiler had broken at the residence hotel in Willimantic he had been managing for a month.
Instead of returning to Connecticut, Mr. Bleau called a tenant who had worked as a pipe fitter. Within hours, the heat and water were restored to the hotel's 50 residents.
''He did a great job,'' Mr. Bleau said of the tenant's work. ''I could never have gotten a regular boiler person to come in here then.''
The situation is typical of how Mr. Bleau has managed to make what tenants and state and municipal leaders said are astounding changes at the residence, the Hotel Hooker, since he became its court-appointed receiver in November. Enlisting the tenants' help is at the heart of his efforts to clean up and improve the building, which has a long history of ties to drug-related crime and prostitution.
Many of the hotel's residents suffer from mental illnesses, disabilities, alcoholism and addiction problems. Danielson Superior Court records detail a number of shootings, drug-related crimes, prostitution and deaths from heroin overdoses at the hotel.
Tenants said it was common to find strangers sleeping in the hallways or to be awakened by intoxicated people knocking on doors begging cigarettes or quarters.
About a dozen tenants are working for Mr. Bleau and for the hotel's executive director, Pamela S. Hall, performing tasks like cleaning and preparing rooms for new tenants, answering telephones, monitoring security cameras, setting up a computerized record-keeping system, and painting rooms and scrubbing bathrooms.
''The people have said this is the first time anyone has treated them like real people,'' said Cindy Masi, who has lived at the hotel for two years. ''We even had a Christmas tree this year.''
Christopher L. Morano, the chief state's attorney, said he was happy with how Mr. Bleau of Swampscott, Mass., had managed the hotel. ''It's very positive,'' Mr. Morano said. ''There is a lot of cooperation.''
When first appointed, Mr. Bleau was at the hotel every day, mostly all day. He has since reduced his schedule, and within a few weeks he expects to be at the hotel once or twice a week as needed.
The hotel has long been a Main Street landmark. Developed by Seth Chauncey Hooker, the hotel was considered among the state's finest lodgings when it opened in 1887, long before the owner's name became associated with the slang term for a prostitute. Soon after Mr. Hooker sold the property in 1909, the burgeoning use of automobiles and lack of parking at the site sent the hotel into a long period of decline. In recent decades, the property has operated as a residence hotel.
In November, the hotel was appointed a receiver under the state's 1998 Nuisance Abatement and Quality of Life Act. The act allows the state to take action in cases where properties are found to be magnets for illegal activity, according to a written statement by the chief state's attorney's office.
Since then, the court has banned the owner of the hotel, Robert Riquier of Columbia, from the property and ordered him to pay for some improvements.
Jeffrey Kestenband of Glastonbury, the lawyer for Mr. Riquier, said his client had paid more than $90,000 to cover repairs and hotel expenses.
''Because he was losing so much money, we asked the judge for permission to close the hotel,'' Mr. Kestenband said. ''The judge would not give us permission to do so.''
Mr. Kestenband also said Mr. Riquier, whose family bought the hotel in 1938, maintained that he made repairs to the hotel as necessary and took steps to reduce the crime in the building, including installing video cameras in the common areas.
Mr. Bleau has announced that he was changing the name of the hotel to the ''Seth Chauncey Hotel,'' which would remove the negative connotation of ''hooker,'' but still reflect the name of the original owner.
Mrs. Hall, who has worked as a social worker and alcohol and drug abuse counselor, was hired by Mr. Bleau to be the hotel's executive director less than a week after he was appointed receiver. She said she found a filthy office, no tenant records, no computer system, almost no security and not even any toilet paper in the bathrooms.
''There wasn't even a pen in here,'' she said. ''We had no real idea who was living here and we had 20 unrentable rooms.''
Mrs. Hall turned to the tenants for help.
''The first thing I had to do was meet with the tenants,'' she said. ''They could tell us their needs and what was going on here.''
For their services, the tenants receive regular pay, or they can get credit toward their rent.
Mr. Bleau, who has a background in human services and managed similar properties in New Britain and in Lynn, Mass., said his first priority was to remove drug dealers from the hotel.
''One said they were selling 100 bags of heroin a day out of here,'' Mr. Bleau said of a former tenant. ''Two of the biggest drug dealers who were in here are now in drug treatment. We want to work with them and help them out.''
Virginia Fulton, the executive director of Windham Area Interfaith Ministries, a social services agency, said she was impressed by the recent changes. Ms. Fulton said she recently had clients move into the hotel who previously would have refused to live there.
Paul Doyle, the director of the Covenant Soup Kitchen at St. Paul's Episcopal Church on nearby Valley Street, said he was optimistic.
''He's committed to making it a safer and more hospitable place to live,'' Mr. Doyle said, referring to Mr. Bleau.
Several of the tenants said that life is more peaceful under Mr. Bleau's management.
Patrick Kelly lives in a cozy and coordinated room. A burgundy comforter on his bed matches the wallpaper, and theater masks decorate the walls. Mr. Kelly, a recovering heroin addict who receives daily methadone treatments, said Mr. Bleau and Mrs. Hall had worked hard to make the hotel a better place to live.
''There are not people coming and going at all hours,'' he said. ''The majority of the people here are pleased.''
Mr. Kelly said he works for the new management, cleaning rooms, running errands, doing laundry and performing other odd jobs.
''They've been good to work for,'' he said.
Kelvin Perry, who has lived in the hotel for nearly a year, said he liked that the building is quieter and more secure.
''There used to be people sleeping in the halls and locked in the bathrooms,'' he said. ''People OD'ed in the halls.''
Riccardo and Cindy Masi also pointed out the physical improvements. New carpeting awaiting installation was rolled up in the hallway, 180 insulated shades had been ordered, windows had been caulked and sealed, the roof had been patched, plumbing repaired and security increased.
''I never saw an inspection in here before this,'' Mr. Masi said.
He also said that he hoped Mr. Bleau goes ahead with plans to add a recreation room with a pool table and telephones.
Despite the positive changes, the tenants remain nervous about the building's future. The receivership is temporary and court documents show that Mr. Riquier has threatened to evict all tenants.
The Savings Institute, a Willimantic bank, has an option to buy the hotel and Mr. Bleau and local officials said they were committed to providing safe and decent housing for low-income tenants, while also bolstering Main Street's image. Common Ground Community Inc., an agency in New York City that provides supportive housing for tenants who may also need social and medical services, has been working with local officials on long-term plans.
''We are excited to be a part of this,'' Rosanne Haggerty, Common Ground's president and founder said. ''Town officials are very committed to turning things around and to the model of supportive housing that is decent and attractive that we created in New York.''
First Selectman Michael T. Paulhus of Windham, which governs Willimantic, said he visited two Common Ground buildings in New York.
''The issue is, we can do better than the current model,'' he said, referring to the Hooker. ''Nothing has been invested in that building in decades.''
