AS we dined on conch salad and grilled dolphin sandwiches at an outdoor restaurant overlooking the marina in the Coconut Grove neighborhood of Miami, my wife, Carole, and our children, Maggie, 13, and Jack, 11, reflected on how unlikely it was that we were there. Eight hours earlier we'd left our home in a cold, gray New York City.
A week earlier we had had no plans to travel, resigned to spending the Christmas school vacation at home. An unplanned opening in our schedules encouraged us to try for a last-minute warm-weather vacation. Because this was an unanticipated trip, we committed to traveling on a tight budget. The only moderately priced tickets we could find on short notice were to Miami, so to South Florida we went: two days in South Beach, five days in Key West.
We all enjoyed South Beach, though it isn't exactly a family destination: Carole and I are a decade too old for the hip neighborhood; Maggie and Jack are about a decade too young. We checked into Nassau Suite Hotel, one block from the beach in the heart of the Art Deco District. Our large L-shaped room had two queen-size beds, a small kitchen and a close-up view of the building next door. It isn't the chicest spot in South Beach, but the location is ideal, the staff helpful, and the price -- $149, including a bare-bones breakfast -- on the low end for high-season South Beach.
We headed for an outdoor lunch on Lincoln Road, a rare pedestrian mall that hasn't degenerated into chain-store homogeneity. In fact, it feels a bit like a boulevard in southern Europe, with cafes, laid-back visitors and aggressive waiters hawking menus to passing tourists. At Paninoteca, one of the less expensive spots, the ''design your own'' panini, starting at $5.75, were delicious.
After lunch we cut through the Delano Hotel on our way to the beach; the sense that we'd reached the epicenter of South Beach cool was confirmed when Nicolas Cage emerged from the billowing white curtains in the front doorway and hopped into a waiting red sports car. Later we hopped into our own car (a rented Oldsmobile Alero) and headed for Scotty's Landing, an attractive, moderately priced dockside restaurant in Coconut Grove.
We spent the next morning at Villa Vizcaya, the spectacular palazzo built in 1916 by the International Harvester executive James Deering. From palaces and churches across Europe he brought back not just artwork but entire ceilings and floors as well, a perfect symbol for the phenomenal rise of South Florida from a swampy backwater to its current status as a world-class cultural and financial capital.
Touring a Renaissance palace wasn't what Maggie and Jack had in mind when they signed on to the trip, so we headed to the equally amazing Venetian Pool in Coral Gables. The Venetian turned out to be the ideal place to entertain kids while experiencing a surprisingly uncrowded slice of old Miami. Built in 1923, it's an 820,000-gallon extravaganza with a waterfall, a cave and even a small, sandy beach.
For dinner that night we headed to Versailles, the incongruously named Cuban restaurant on Calle Ocho, as Southwest Eighth Street is known locally. Charmingly tacky, Versailles was mobbed on a Sunday night but worth the wait for an assortment of empanadas, followed by rice and beans, lamb shanks and fried plantains. The tab for four, with sodas and beer, was under $40.
On to Key West, a 160-mile drive. We'd hoped to stay in one of the island's many inns in the historic district, but those we contacted were booked, didn't allow children, billed themselves as ''gay hotels'' or had a ''clothing optional'' policy. So we settled on El Patio Motel, on the Atlantic side of the historic district, a 1950's building set around a lushly planted courtyard, with a pool and roof deck. Our two-room suite, at $159 night, was a bargain by high-season Key West standards.
A Key West vacation means different things to different people. For some, it's one long bar crawl. For others, Key West is all about the water: fishing, snorkeling, sailing, Jet Skiing, parasailing. (There are few naturally sandy beaches on Key West; this is a place to be on or under the water, not lying next to it.) Then there's cultural Key West, with an extraordinary collection of Victorian houses and a rich literary history.
We made a point of experiencing a bit of all three. Bar crawling wasn't on the agenda, not with two teenagers in tow, but as we strolled the crowded docks and bustling streets of Key West, passing dozens of bars (and T-shirt shops), we couldn't help soaking in the relaxing, slightly intoxicating aura the island exudes. We joined the crowd for sunset-watching from the Mallory Pier, a defining island ritual. While the sun melted into the sea, we saw a sword-swallower, an escape artist and a juggler wielding bowling balls and lighted torches.
Our first excursion on the water was snorkeling on the famous coral reef, about six miles offshore. We signed on with Lost Reef Adventures, which took us and 12 others out on a 40-foot motorboat. We were treated to a spectacular array of fish, including barracudas. Unfortunately, seasickness claimed several passengers, including Carole and Jack. The cost -- $138 for the four of us, including snorkeling gear and wet suits -- made us a bit queasy, too.
With half of us having succumbed to seasickness, we scuttled our fishing plans. Maggie and Jack immediately found a way to spend the money we saved: a 90-minute, 26-mile guided tour around the island on Jet Skis, agreed to only after they consented to some serious sightseeing. Having long resented noisy Jet Skis, it pains me to admit that I had a blast. A very expensive blast: $200 for four of us on two Jet Skis. The kids would be seeing a lot of history.
We began with an old standard: the tour of Ernest Hemingway's house. Hemingway lived on the island from 1931 to 1939, and his limestone house offers a glimpse of him through artifacts like his typewriter and the special shelves on which he stored manuscripts. The many cats on the property are all descendants of Hemingway's; many sport extra toes like the originals.
Next up was a tour of ''the Little White House,'' where Harry Truman often vacationed while president. It was unsettling to observe younger visitors gaping in awe at Truman's phonograph player as if it were a relic from ancient times. But the house brought him to vivid life, especially the table on which he played poker with visiting cabinet members and the desk at which he wrote the order to fire Gen. Douglas MacArthur.
Jack particularly liked the Mel Fisher Maritime Heritage Society and Museum. Named for the famous undersea treasure hunter, it displays items he salvaged from nearby shipwrecks. This has to be the only museum where the stuff in the gift shop at the end of the tour is as valuable as the items on display. There's a 16th-century gold spoon on sale for $530,000 or, if that stretches your souvenir budget, a more affordable 17th-century emerald ring for $280,000. A second gift shop offers reproductions, which are much less expensive.
We decided to see the historic parts of town on our own, and rented bikes for $10 each per day through our hotel. Most of the island's 19th-century gingerbread houses are disguised behind dense tropical foliage. Only on foot or bicycle you can peer around the foliage.
WE found no shortage of inexpensive restaurants in Key West. PT's Late Night Bar and Grill has a sign in the window boasting ''No. 1 Locals Spot'' so I fully expected nothing but tourists inside. But the clientele at this casual spot looked more weathered than suntanned and the food was well prepared and modestly priced. We particularly liked the fresh-from-the-docks grouper ($14.95) and the fish and chips ($8.25). The Grand Cafe is in an elegant old mansion, with a patio that offers an excellent view of the passing scene on busy Duval Street. We had delicious thin-crust pizzas ($11.50) and an excellent Caesar salad ($7). At Alonzo's Oyster Bar, we enjoyed the marina view as well as the crispy lobster sandwich ($12.95) and lobster cakes ($17.50). Abbondanza, a casual Italian restaurant, offers delicious linguini with white clam sauce ($14 for a portion that could easily feed two people).
Most mornings we biked to I Love Bagels on White Street. For lunch, numerous restaurants and street vendors offer excellent conch fritters (usually $6 for six). Dozens of vendors line the street off Smather's Beach, the island's largest sand beach; a Cuban chicken sandwich ($5), was quite good.
Every restaurant and many shops sell Key lime pie, and we felt duty bound to try most of them. Jack favored the version from the Blond Giraffe Key Lime Pie Factory on Truman Avenue, which had the limiest pie. Maggie favored the crust on the slice we got at the Key West Lime Shoppe on Front Street. We all liked the custardy consistency of the Grand Cafe's pie. After a dozen slices, we never managed to reach consensus on the best. But when dessert is the only significant source of family conflict, you know the vacation is working its magic.
The bottom line
In Miami, our family of four spent about $250 a day on hotel, meals and sightseeing. In Key West, we averaged about $350 a day.
Getting There
Our round-trip tickets on American Airlines between La Guardia Airport and Miami were $429, including taxes. Our midsize rental car from Alamo, which we picked up and returned at the Miami Dade Airport, cost $200 for seven days, plus taxes, with unlimited mileage.
Where to Stay
At the Nassau Suite Hotel, 14 Collins Avenue, in Miami, (305) 532-0043, fax (305) 534-3122, nassausuite.com, our spacious one-room ''studio suite'' with kitchenette and bath was $149, including breakfast.
Our two-room suite at El Patio Motel, 800 Washington Street, Key West, (305) 296-6531, fax (305) 295-0658; www.elpatiomotel.com, was $159, plus taxes and a $15 supplement for each of our children.
Where to Eat
In Miami, the popular Versailles Restaurant and Bakery, 3555 Southwest Eighth Street, (305) 445-7614, doesn't accept reservations, but the inevitable line moves quickly.
Scotty's Landing, 3381 Pan American Drive, Coconut Grove; (305) 854-2626.
PT's Late Night, 920 Caroline Street, Key West, (305) 296-4245.
Alonzo's Oyster Bar, 700 Front Street, Key West, (305) 294-5880.
Abbondanza, 1208 Simonton Street, (305) 292-1199, Key West.
The Grand Cafe, 314 Duval Street, (305) 292-4740, Key West.
What to Do
Vizcaya Museum and Gardens, 3251 South Miami Avenue, Miami, (305) 250-9133; www.vizcayamuseum.com. $12.
Venetian Pool, 2701 De Soto Boulevard in Coral Gables; (305) 460-5356. Admission $9 April through October; $6 the rest of the year.
The crew at Lost Reef Adventures, 261 Margaret Street; (800) 952-2749, www.lostreefadventures.com, led our snorkeling expedition.
Ski Key West, 617 Front Street; (305) 296-2210, www.skikeywestcom, arranged our Jet Ski tour.
At the Ernest Hemingway Home and Museum, 907 Whitehead Street, Key West, (305) 294-1136, www.hemingwayhome.com, admission is $10, including a guided tour.
The Harry S. Truman Little White House, 111 Front Street; (305) 294-9911, www.trumanlittlewhitehouse.com. Admission $10, including tour.
The Mel Fisher Maritime Heritage Society and Museum, 200 Greene Street, (305) 294-2633, online at www.melfisher.org. Admission $10.
SETH MARGOLIS
FRUGAL TRAVELER SETH MARGOLIS is a novelist who writes frequently about travel.
