BONNIE HEMRAJANI, a perky 29-year-old, arrived from Bombay six years ago, freshly married but without a job. She found work as a telemarketer but was fired after a few weeks. She took another job as a gofer in a garment factory, but that seemed like another dead-end job, so she quit.
Through a friend, she heard about a sales opening at a cellphone store in Glen Cove, Long Island. The pay wasn't great (about $300 a week), there were no benefits, and the workweek was 52 hours long.
''I was just killing time,'' Ms. Hemrajani recalled. ''But then I got serious when I realized there was a lot of growth potential. The industry was booming.''
Today, Ms. Hemrajani is president of Mobileistic, a company based in Melville, Long Island, that supplies cellphones and cellular plans to hundreds of independent New York stores with names like E-Wireless City and Wireless Plus.
In moving into this field, Ms. Hemrajani is not alone among her countrymen. Although hard numbers are hard to come by, largely because this industry is less than a decade old, she estimates that nearly half of the independent cellphone stores in the city are Indian-owned, whether they serve ethnic enclaves like Jackson Heights, Queens, or the predominantly white Upper West Side.
In addition, Ms. Hemrajani estimates that 7 of the 13 so-called master dealers that do business in the city are Indian-owned. (Unlike the branded stores that are owned and operated by Verizon and the other major wireless carriers, these independent stores must go through a middleman, or master dealer, such as Mobileistic.)
Those who have studied New York immigrant life see a parallel between these Indian mom-and-pops and the city's history of immigrant-dominated businesses, from Chinese laundries and Greek diners to Korean delis and Arab-owned corner stores.
''This is an entrepreneurial niche, but one that is wide open to immigrants,'' said Philip Kasinitz, a professor of sociology at the CUNY Graduate Center and an expert in immigrant affairs. ''Small business is typically a place for people who don't speak English well. You have immigrants who are highly educated, with some money, but not much English. And a lot of jobs in the service sector are not available to them.''
Mr. Kasinitz added: ''This technology is also new, so it is opened to new players. I suppose one Indian person started in this business, and got their friends involved.''
Indeed, the owners of many cellphone stores cite as their entry into this new wireless world a friend or relative. Brad Sharma, a soft-spoken man with round, patient eyes, is typical. Shortly after he emigrated from New Delhi in 1994, a friend of a cousin recommended him for a job selling cellphones at a store in Forest Hills, Queens.
''I was new to the country,'' Mr. Sharma recalled the other day, while waiting on a walk-in customer, ''and this was the first opportunity I got.''
Cellphone by cellphone, Mr. Sharma saved up enough money to open his own store three years ago at Eighth Avenue and 16th Street in Chelsea. The store, Wireless Choice, will look familiar to anyone who has shopped for mobile phones. It is clean and brightly lighted, like a food court at a highway rest stop. A carousel of color brochures greets visitors near the door, advertising plans from T-Mobile, AT&amp;T, Nextel and Verizon Wireless.
Inside, a glass counter occupies the length of the narrow space, showcasing the latest camera-phones and clamshell designs. Behind the counter, a wall of wooden slats functions as a pegboard for displaying hands-free headsets, car chargers and other cellular accessories. A mirrored wall makes the little space -- not more than 200 square feet -- seem twice as large as it really is.
Unlike new restaurants, grocery stores and other startups, cellphone stores require a relatively small initial investment, sometimes as little as $2,000. Mr. Sharma, who is the store's only employee, lowered construction costs further by buying all his fixtures from American Connections, a master dealer based in Woodbury, N.Y., whose owners include an Indian immigrant. Even the store's name and logo were acquired from the master dealer.
''It takes about $40,000 to open a store, which is not bad,'' he said. That sum includes $4,000 for the monthly rent, a two-month security deposit and an initial payment of $25,000 for construction and inventory.
PERHAPS surprisingly, since this is a retail business, the bulk of Mr. Sharma's profits do not come from selling phones or other physical items; cellphone store owners often lose money on the phones. Instead, most of his earnings are derived from setting up new accounts for service, for which he earns a one-time fee of $200 to $550. (Cellular companies also pay out a monthly commission, roughly 4 percent of the customer's monthly bill, but that is pocketed by the master dealer.)
''To make my rent and everything else, I have to create about 50 lines a month,'' Mr. Sharma said. ''It's a good profit margin.''
For many upstarts, however, owning a cellphone store is about status as much as money. A number of Indian subagents were former taxi and limousine drivers who traded careers in one immigrant-dominated industry for careers in another higher up the food chain.
''It's a more respectable line of work,'' said Ricky Singh, an Indian immigrant who drove a black town car in the 1990's, and now owns 16 metropolitan-area cellphone stores named Wireless Concepts. ''Before, you were driving some stranger around in a limousine. Now you're driving your own Mercedes, or you have your own chauffeur.'' As with any high-volume business, a few dollars a month from many customers can quickly turn into a small fortune.
Of eight Indian friends that used to drive limousines, all made the switch to cellular. ''One jumped and everybody followed, like monkey-see, monkey-do,'' he said. ''And everybody succeeded. We all have our own stores now.''
Other immigrant groups are also making inroads into the cellphone industry, particularly Korean and Chinese. In Chinatown, for example, more than 10 cellphone stores clog a three-block stretch of East Broadway, and a few owners are starting to branch outside the neighborhood.
Among the newer stores is Hua Ming Trading, a cellphone booth that shares a storefront at 34 East Broadway with a jeweler and a clothing importer. Nicky Cheng, a 22-year-old immigrant from the Fujian Province of China, has been working there for 10 months, and she has big plans for her future.
''I heard about this job through a friend,'' she said. ''They've been training me and teaching me about this industry. It's pretty easy to start your own business. Maybe I'll open my own store.''
URBAN TACTICS
