Chandra Wilson  Actress  ''Caroline, or Change''
CHANDRA WILSON doesn't sit around her Harlem apartment dreaming about Tony Awards or Hollywood openings. The unsung spark plug of ''Caroline, or Change,'' the Tony Kushner-Jeanine Tesori musical that opens at the Eugene O'Neill Theater May 2, has less glamorous long-term ambitions: to work regularly enough so she can pay her bills; to leave her job at Deutsche Bank, where she has temped for eight years; and to move back to Houston, where her family still lives (and where there is an active theater scene).
''I don't have to be a star -- I don't have to be famous,'' Ms. Wilson said in an interview in a dressing room at the John Golden Theater, where she is understudying the role of Gary Coleman in ''Avenue Q.''  ''If I can work all the time and go shop at C-Town, I'm fine.''
Such modesty comes from a career in television, theater and film dominated by minor but memorable roles in work that often had trouble finding an audience. Ms. Wilson, whose boisterous laugh fills up a room, played the clumsy secretary in ''Bob Patterson,'' Jason Alexander's short-lived 2001 sitcom; a maid in last year's revival of ''The Miracle Worker'' starring Hilary Swank, which collapsed before making it to Broadway; and three small parts, including Flossie's Friend, in the Public Theater's 1998 Broadway flop ''On the Town.''
Unlike career-obsessed actresses, Ms. Wilson will tell you her age (it's 34) and doesn't obsess about typecasting. In fact, she'll pigeonhole herself. ''I like to play the comic relief. Or parts that aren't necessarily comedic but that I can find the comedy in,'' she said. ''I just don't take stuff too seriously.'' Of course, she can do much more than comic relief, as evidenced by her dynamic turn in ''Caroline,'' in which she moves from breezy to angry in seconds. Ms. Wilson, along with the rest of the cast, are expected to make the transfer from the Public Theater to Broadway, but at press time, contract negotiations were still going on.
Her character, Dotty Moffet -- as optimistic and forward-thinking as her old friend Caroline (played by Tonya Pinkins) is dour and tentative -- might be a little too old to be wearing bobby socks and saddle shoes, but she makes no apologies for keeping up with the fashions of the early 60's, when the show takes place. Dotty has always looked up to Caroline, a feeling Ms. Wilson says was easy to bring to the stage because of her high regard for Ms. Pinkins. The actresses had worked together in one of Ms. Wilson's first professional jobs: ''Believing,'' a play at the 1990 Young Playwrights Festival at Playwrights Horizons. ''I've always had such reverence for her,'' Ms. Wilson said. ''So I can give some of that to Dotty.''
In one of the most intense and driving songs in the show, Dotty confronts Caroline, who has criticized her for smoking, drinking and acting younger than her age. ''Sorry you is sick and shame./ Sorry you drinking misery tea./ Sorry your life ain't what it should be,'' Ms. Wilson belts.
For Ms. Wilson -- who, typically modest, says she doesn't think of herself as a singer so much as an actor who sings -- this moment is the musical's biggest challenge. ''Those sorrys scare me to death,'' she said. ''When I get offstage, the first thing I do is say to myself, 'Thank you, God, for letting me hit those notes.' ''
JASON ZINOMAN
SPRING THEATER
