A RECENT academic study seriously undermines a popular reason for not worrying about the high price-to-earnings ratio of the stock market today: the idea that the ratios should be high when interest rates are low.
The theoretical basis for this claim is the so-called Fed Model, which compares the interest rate on the government's 10-year Treasury note with the inverse of the stock market's P/E ratio -- known as the market's earnings yield. The stock market is considered undervalued when its earnings yield is greater than the Treasury note rate.
According to this model, the stock market is significantly undervalued right now. The P/E ratio of the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index is now 18.2, based on companies' estimated operating earnings for 2004. That translates into an earnings yield of 5.5 percent, much higher than the current yield of 4.09 percent for the 10-year Treasury note.
The Fed Model was constructed by Edward E. Yardeni, now the chief investment strategist at the Prudential Equity Group, who based it on comments in the Fed's Monetary Policy Report to Congress in July 1997. The Federal Reserve has not endorsed the model.
If the Fed Model held true, earnings growth should be slower when Treasury note rates are high and faster when those rates are low. Historically, however, that has not been the case, according to the new study, ''Inflation Illusion and Stock Prices,'' by the Harvard finance professors John Y. Campbell and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. The study has circulated this month as a National Bureau of Economic Research working paper and is at www.nber.org/papers/w10263.
A similar conclusion was reached in a study by the finance professors Jay R. Ritter of the University of Florida and Richard S. Warr, now at North Carolina State. That study, published in 2002, covered 1978 to 1999, but the new one covered a much longer period: 1927 through 2002.
The government's 10-year Treasury note has not traded during all those 75 years, but according to the professors, interest and inflation rates are highly correlated. And over those 75 years, earnings growth has tended to be higher during periods of high inflation and lower when inflation is low.
Put another way, the professors conclude that stocks are a good long-term hedge against inflation. They found that the growth rate of real, or inflation-adjusted, earnings is relatively constant when measured over several-year periods. That means the growth rate of nominal earnings tends to rise and fall with inflation.
Many investors overlook that point, because they assume that changes in inflation will not affect nominal earnings growth. Economists call that assumption an ''inflation illusion.'' If it were true, real earnings growth should be faster in periods of low inflation, justifying higher P/E ratios.
But the assumption has not been true over time, according to Professors Campbell and Vuolteenaho. As a result, they found that the stock market has tended to become significantly undervalued in times of high inflation and overvalued in times of low inflation.
CONSIDER equity valuations during the late 1970's and early 1980's, when interest rates and inflation were high. Investors used the equivalent of the Fed Model to justify a low P/E ratio for the overall market. The late Franco Modigliani, who was a finance professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology during that time and in 1985 would be the Nobel laureate in economics, recognized the inflation illusion that was implicit in this argument. In a 1979 article, he argued that stocks were significantly undervalued -- a view that was vindicated in the 1980's and 90's by the strong bull market in stocks.
The situation today is the mirror opposite of what prevailed in the late 1970's, suggesting that stocks may be as overvalued today as they were undervalued then.
STRATEGIES Mark Hulbert is editor of The Hulbert Financial Digest, a service of CBS MarketWatch. His column on investment strategies appears every other week. E-mail: strategy@nytimes.com.
