IF you see a new home go up in Westchester County, chances are good it's a brute, one of those 10,000-square-foot jobs, maybe done up as Fake Tudor and quite possibly topped by my very favorite in overdone design, the fake widow walk.
New subdivisions are filled with such houses and the teardown is now commonplace in the county -- a house full of memories and bad 1970's shag is bulldozed to make way for great rooms and nanny suites, robber-baron chic.
So what's the consensus on this weighty local issue?
On the one hand you have those who want action. The people on this side might not like the Patriot Act for fear it will allow the government to peek at what library books they are checking out. But when it comes to flauntingly large homes, they want the taste police. Terrorism is no cause for government intervention, but triple-height atrium entries? Let's pass a law!
On the other side you have those who see putting restrictions on the size and scope of the houses we build on the land we own as nothing short of a Bolshevik plot. Owners of homes the size of steamships are in this camp, as well as those who make big bucks building them.
So where do we go? Ask anyone with experience in trying to write rules that balance these interests and they will say that they are not completely sure, but wherever it is we try to go we should be sure to take aspirin along for the ride.
''Huge parts of the public don't see it as a problem,'' said Reese Berman, a councilwoman for the village of North Castle and co-chairwoman of its Large Home Studies Committee. She ran on a platform of controlled development, which can be a fancy way of saying we'll outlaw anything in your neighborhood with a turret. Mrs. Berman yields to no one in her thought that overgrown houses can be an environmental and aesthetic horror. But she admits that it's tough to rein them in.
''As a politician, which I guess I am now,'' said Mrs. Berman, a retired middle school librarian, ''you don't want to overly antagonize people. On the other hand, you have to stand for something. But sometimes this issue is like climbing through a big muddy wall.''
In Scarsdale, Elizabeth Marrinan, the village planner, said that a number of attempts were made to put some sort of cap on ''the mini-estates that started sprouting in the 1980's'' and accelerated in the 1990's. The first attempt ''went down in flames,'' she said. The second, which involved residents' submitting anonymous suggestions on which homes to consider for study, passed with some tweaking to the size of the house you can put on certain land. But nobody really knows whether such limits provide a ceiling to house size or, perversely, a minimum.
''We've done a quick and dirty analysis,'' Ms. Marrinan said, ''but need to do a more extensive one.'' The county is in on the act, sort of. Ed Burroughs, the deputy commissioner of Westchester's Department of Planning, said there was a legitimate problem that regulations that have been on the books since forever didn't anticipate people even trying to put homes the size of airplane hangars on small plots.
''We have to bring regulations up to speed,'' Mr. Burroughs said. The problem from the county's perspective, he said, was that it had no land use authority. No small complication that. As a result, though they plan to have some meetings on the topic, don't expect much more.
The whole issue, said Thomas K. Wright, the executive vice president of the Regional Plan Association and the former deputy director of state planning in New Jersey (where Mr. Wright said the problem of McMansions was ''stark''-- score a point for not being in it alone) has caused a loss of confidence in the planning profession.
''There have been a lot of poor local attempts to deal with the issue,'' he said. ''People are casting about for something to work, but I don't expect anything to be more successful than previous attempts.''
Limits on bedrooms show a soft bigotry toward children, he said, and other restrictions tend to be easily circumvented.
Maybe that's because legislating against what is, in the end, taste, in a free system is a tough game to win. But if a lack of tasteful restraint is part of the price of freedom (see: Janet Jackson and columned entryways), I'll still sign up. Though our forefathers did not guarantee the inalienable right to life, liberty and the pursuit of offending the neighbors with triple height atrium entries, they might just as well have. If some of us want to express our opinions, there's a recourse already on the books.
Give the house a big sniff of displeasure.
COUNTY LINES
