LeBron James hovers four stories tall above Seventh Avenue on a giant red billboard a block from Madison Square Garden.
''The Chosen One,'' the advertisement boldly proclaims.
Every time the Knicks' Allan Houston drives past it, he cannot help noticing James, the Cleveland Cavaliers rookie, infringing on his turf.
''From a player's perspective, it's like, man, this is our arena,'' Houston said after practice Saturday. ''This is our gym, where we play. He's a talented player and he's in a position that very few people, if anybody, can be in. Very few young black people get a chance to do what he's doing.''
Houston added: ''It's not upsetting. But it's disappointing to see it. I understand it. But that doesn't mean I like it.''
On Sunday, the 19-year-old James will take his first step inside the Garden for a nationally televised initiation. The Knicks, by the way, will also be on the bill for the 1 p.m. game.
They hope to showcase their new look, as opposed to the dreadful effort they gave in Friday night's 92-78 defeat against the Utah Jazz. But Houston, who is rehabilitating his aching knees, will miss his 10th straight game and said he would also most likely miss Tuesday's game in Sacramento as the Knicks begin a road swing. Without him, the Knicks will try to avenge two losses this season to the Cavaliers in Cleveland.
''When you're playing for the first time in the Garden, you remember every shot,'' Houston said, alluding to James's debut. ''It's almost like you're not playing against the Knicks, you're playing against the Garden. At least, that's how I felt.''
Houston, in his first Garden appearance, played 21 minutes off the bench for the Detroit Pistons on Nov. 27, 1993. He scored 7 points, had 3 assists and shot 2 for 6.
Houston was a No. 11 overall pick. For many of the No. 1 picks before James, their Garden debut served as indicators of their talent and eventual success.
Houston's Yao Ming scored 24 points last season. San Antonio's Tim Duncan scored 25 in 1997, and Philadelphia's Allen Iverson had 35 the year before. Shaquille O'Neal had 18 for Orlando. On the flip side, Chris Webber scored 13 for Golden State in 1993, and Washington's Kwame Brown scored 2 points two seasons ago. In 1985, the Knicks' Patrick Ewing had 18.
The Garden still has a mystique drawn from the knowledgeable fans, the intimate atmosphere and the history.
''Even the visual is different,'' Houston said. ''In most places, you see the whole arena and it's all lit up and it's like you're outside. In the Garden, it's like you're playing in your bedroom. People are on top of you, it's dark around the crowd, real light on the court.''
Stephon Marbury played his first game in the Garden as a sophomore at Lincoln High School in Brooklyn. As a senior, he won his only championship, the city crown, at the Garden.
He was thrilled to return as a visiting N.B.A. player, but nothing, in his mind, compares to wearing a Knicks uniform.
''It's just way, way better,'' he said. ''When they announce your name, the cheers get louder and louder.''
James comes to the Garden averaging 20.6 points, 5.7 rebounds and 5.8 assists for the 21-34 Cavaliers.
PRO BASKETBALL
