SHARES of many shipping companies have doubled in the last year, as growing global trade has propelled these businesses' revenue higher. But analysts are divided over whether this volatile part of the market can continue to prosper.
Optimists say a strong global economic outlook and a weakening dollar appear to favor the industry. But investors should also be aware that shares of these companies tend to mimic the movements of commodity markets, which can be capricious, said Boniface A. Zaino, the manager of the Royce Opportunity fund.
For instance, shares of companies that own tankers typically rise with oil prices. Early in 2003, before the war in Iraq, rates for the largest tankers were as low as $20,000 a day, barely the break-even point. Now the rates for these vessels, which move more than two million barrels of crude oil, hover near $80,000; they peaked at around $100,000 a few weeks ago.
Royce Opportunity, a small-cap value fund, holds more than 500,000 shares of the OMI Corporation, a tanker company based in Stamford, Conn., which it bought at an average cost of $4.36 each; the stock is now at $10.09, up 120.3 percent in the last 12 months. The fund also owns 350,000 shares of Stelmar Shipping Ltd., based in Athens, bought at an average cost of $15.37; the stock is now at $27.27, up 81.9 percent over the same period. Both companies trade on the New York Stock Exchange.
Although Mr. Zaino is cautious about shipping companies today, after the sharp increase in their shares last year, he says he still thinks they have some room to grow. ''For now there is a good balance of ships to demand,'' he said, ''and we expect an improving world economy.'' But he advised investors to be wary. ''More than with most companies, you walk on eggshells when dealing with commodities, in terms of economic outlook.''
Even after the run-up, he said, shares are roughly in line with historical prices for the industry, based on ratios of price to cash flow and price to earnings. Typically, the market values the companies in the industry at four times cash flow, and often at less than 10 times earnings.
John Kartsonas, an equity analyst at Standard &amp; Poor's, called the sector ''a cyclical industry, not a growth industry.'' Demand for heating oil in the Northeast typically bolsters revenue for shipping companies in the first and fourth quarters, but revenue usually falls back in the second and third quarters. Mr. Kartsonas said he expects the usual seasonal declines over the next two quarters, although he predicts that annual revenue will be higher than it was in 2003.
Ship supply and demand also bears watching. Competition has often led to overbuilding when leasing fees rise. That tends to reduce the industry's pricing power in economic expansions, said Magnus Fyhr, a shipping analyst at Jefferies &amp; Company in New York. Mr. Fyhr said stricter environmental regulations for tankers would force the industry to retire older ships in coming years, mitigating the tendency to overbuild.
Single-hull tankers, for example, which are more prone to oil spills, are on their way out. The European Union has already banned them from its waters, and the International Maritime Organization, a United Nations agency that regulates shipping in 163 nations, passed similar rules in December. As a result, Mr. Fyhr estimates that 10 percent of tankers will need to be scrapped by the end of 2005, and an additional 30 percent by the end of 2010. He still predicts a net increase in tankers through 2005, but not as large as in previous economic recoveries.
''Tankers will retain good pricing power,'' he said.
Economic growth in China also should help stave off an oversupply of container and dry bulk vessels -- those that move raw materials -- said Daniel J. Rice III, manager of the State Street Research Global Resources fund. China is ''relatively poor in natural resources,'' he said, so it needs to import a lot of raw materials. And finished products that were once produced in Mexico and moved by truck into the United States are now being transported from China.
MR. RICE says shipyards are booked up for the next three years, so he does not think that the industry can overbuild as long as annual growth in China's gross domestic product tops 5 percent until 2007 or 2008, as is widely expected.
Royal Nedlloyd, a Dutch container company that trades primarily in Amsterdam, is the 10th-largest holding in the State Street fund, which also holds OMI and Frontline, a tanker company based in Bermuda, and Daiichi Chuo Kisen Kaisha, a Japanese dry bulk shipper that trades in Tokyo.
Some analysts are less sanguine that Chinese economic growth alone will be enough to sustain high shipping fees. The Chinese impact on global trade is ''absolutely real,'' said Jonathan Chappell, an analyst at J.P. Morgan Chase. But, he added, ''it's also the biggest wild card.''
Mr. Chappell speculated that China might be building strategic oil reserves. He said oil imports grew by 14 percent in 2003 -- much faster than overall economic growth, which the Chinese government reported at 9.1 percent for the year. He expects G.D.P. growth closer to 5 percent in 2004.
Continued weakness in the dollar could improve profit margins for some of the companies. By making imports more expensive, a weaker dollar may reduce demand for goods shipped into the United States. But a weaker dollar may increase exports and tighten the trade imbalance, which has been a headache for carriers because it is expensive to send ships away empty from the United States.
