''WELCOME to the age of un-innocence,'' declared Carrie Bradshaw (Sarah Jessica Parker) at the start of the very first episode of ''Sex and the City,'' six years ago. ''No one has breakfast at Tiffany's, and no one has affairs to remember.'' The reference could not have been plainer. Anxious to give their new series the same jaded, cynical, contemporary tone as the Candace Bushnell stories from which it was drawn, the show's creators were seeking -- almost defiantly -- to distance themselves from the glowing, romantic vision of New York shaped by decades of Hollywood films (including, of course, ''Breakfast at Tiffany's'' and ''An Affair to Remember'').
It didn't quite work out that way. Indeed, as the series' six-season run comes to a much heralded conclusion this evening, it is clear that ''Sex and the City,'' perhaps more than any film or television project of recent decades, has succeeded in re-establishing the vision of a glamorous, mythic New York that had been a fixture in the popular imagination for much of the 20th century: a sophisticated wonderland, replete with nightclubs and cocktails, spacious terraces and skyline views, elegant shopping streets and sidewalks filled with stylish women.
That gleaming filmic metropolis, born with the rise of the talkies in the early 1930's, had been displaced in the late 1960's by what was, in many ways, its exact opposite: the cinematic vision of the city as a gritty urban battleground -- or, at its worst, urban wasteland -- filled with tough-talking ethnic characters whose only common ground seemed to be their distance from mainstream ''American'' values. As the earlier mythic New York had heightened the glamour of the real place, films as varied as ''Taxi Driver,'' ''Death Wish,'' ''Little Murders,'' and ''Escape From New York'' inflated a city struggling with immense social and economic problems into a spectacularly dysfunctional urban environment, separated by an almost unbridgeable gulf from the rest of the country. But in one of the swiftest and most stunning transformations in the history of cities, New York emerged in the mid-1990's from its decades of troubles to become the safest big city in the country -- a burgeoning, prosperous and essentially orderly (indeed, some might say too orderly) metropolis.
In ways obvious and not, the mythic New York of ''Sex and the City'' not only reflected that astonishing change, but restored a vision of the city that had flourished during the 1930's and 40's: a New York that stood not in opposition to the United States but as its apotheosis, the undisputed American metropolis, luring talented and ambitious young people from all around the country. Indeed, in an era when quotas had cut off the flow of foreign immigrants to New York, it was the energies of native-born newcomers that defined the character and spirit of both the real and filmic cities. To a remarkable degree, ''Sex and the City'' recalls that vision of a white Protestant urban culture; at least until the last few seasons, ethnic, foreign-born and African-American characters have tended to occupy marginal roles in the show as work colleagues, love interests or the subjects of ''people on the street'' interviews. The filmic city of the 1960's, '70's and 80's was dominated not only by ethnic characters -- Jewish, Italian, African American, and others -- but also by native-born New Yorkers. Though their origins are not entirely clear, it is obvious that ''Sex and the City's'' four major characters (whose last names -- Bradshaw, Jones, York, Hobbes -- would not look out of place in a white-shoe investment bank) are not native New Yorkers but women who have come to the city from elsewhere and made it their own.
In fact, it is the series' loving focus on its four female leads that links the show most closely and movingly to one of the earliest incarnations of the movie city. In the mid-1930's, in a series of romantic comedies made at Paramount, RKO and Columbia, the weepy or sentimental heroines common to earlier (and later) Hollywood films gave way for a time to what the critic Elizabeth Kendall, in her fine book on the era, ''The Runaway Bride,'' describes as ''loose, successful, eccentric and emotionally unmaimed young women in the city.'' Played by feisty, strong-willed stars like Claudette Colbert, Jean Arthur, Ginger Rogers and Barbara Stanwyck -- actresses whose own personalities, Ms. Kendall notes, ''were related to the city . . . and to the habits of self-preservation that the city required of its citizens,'' these breakthrough characters found their natural home in the vast urban arena of New York, where they could pursue romance and career, and seek to balance conventional social pressure toward matrimony with their own instincts for independence. Like the four friends in ''Sex and the City,'' these women inhabited the metropolis but also personified it; when Ms. Kendall observes that Colbert, for instance, ''projected a certain artificial childlikeness, overlaid with irony -- the essence of big-city sophistication,'' she could be describing Carrie herself.
Nor did the parallels end there. In ''Sex and the City,'' as in those classic romantic comedies, the distinctive texture of the city was sometimes evoked as much (or more) through witty dialogue or unexpected plot turns as through urban locations or production design. Indeed, for the generation of New York writers in Hollywood whose urbane banter propelled the best early talkies, the big-city way of life, Ms. Kendall notes, ultimately ''came down . . . to a way of speaking, a way of telling anecdotes, a way of talking at parties -- and a way of inventing movie stories.'' Like those 1930's films, ''Sex and the City'' played freely with the scale of the city, sometimes shrinking it to that of a smallish community where everyone seems to know each other, at other times enlarging it to allow for the kind of classic romantic trope that is possible only in a big city, such as the accidental sidewalk meeting of strangers. (Charlotte first encounters her future husband, for example, when she accidentally falls in front of a taxi with him in it.) Like the movie city of the 30's, the New York of ''Sex and the City'' is built from a rich and complex mix of the real and the imaginary, in which actual establishments -- Pastis, Bond Street, Bar Code, Sushi Samba -- are interspersed with invented clubs and restaurants, often sporting parodic one-word names like ''Fusion,'' ''Chaos'' or ''Denial'' (''Everyone in Manhattan wanted to be in Denial,'' Carrie remarks at one point). If both the series and the old Hollywood films, created for a national audience, tended to focus on Manhattan at the expense of other boroughs, the series took greater care -- and pleasure -- in delineating the character (and changing fortunes) of individual neighborhoods. Since the narrative transition was often a geographic reference (''Meanwhile, up on Park Avenue . . . '' or ''Later that night, on a date across town . . . ''), the city took on the quality of an immensely complex organism, embracing and sustaining within itself a dizzying multiplicity of disparate activities.
Of course, ''Sex and the City'' is a television series, not a feature film -- but that only reinforces its ties to the cinematic city of the 1930's. Because of the limitations of lighting and film stock, movies of that era tended to be shot in shallow focus: close-ups or ''two-shots'' of the characters, standing in front of backgrounds that remained slightly indistinct. By the late 1930's, to be sure, directors like William Wyler and his cinematographer Gregg Toland (in films like 1937's ''Dead End'') were beginning to employ more complex sets and a new kind of deep-focus photography to provide a fuller, more architectural sense of urban space. After the war, the adoption of this new approach to filmmaking (given the name mise-en-scène by French critics) accelerated dramatically, as screen formats widened, film stock grew faster (allowing more depth-of-field) and both stage sets and urban locations became more ambitious, providing a breathtaking, three-dimensional feel to movie New York.
But the creators of ''Sex and the City,'' recognizing the small size and traditional format of the television screen, made the wise choice to hark back to the earlier 1930's tradition, generally presenting its characters in tightly framed two-shots, set in front of a wide variety of city backgrounds (now shot almost entirely on location, of course, rather than a backlot or process stage). The series resembles those fast-paced features, too, in the economy with which it evokes the city's landscape, using a handful of wide establishing shots, a couple of sidewalk tracking shots and occasional special locations, from the Chelsea Piers to a hidden courtyard in Greenwich Village to the backlit fountains of Columbus Circle. Like those early black-and-white films -- and unlike the lush, wide-screen color films of later decades -- ''Sex and the City'' almost never indulges in picturesque views for their own sake; no matter how glamorous or romantic, its images of the city always serve to propel the storyline. Even the spectacular city views that fill the show's opening credit sequence (especially in its original, pre-9/11 version) are used to tell a story -- indeed, the story of the series' essential relationship, between Carrie and New York itself: an entire romantic arc, complete with first glimpses, emerging demands, growing intimacy, sudden setbacks and ultimate affirmation, all condensed into exactly 38 seconds.
This last theme became explicit after Sept. 11, when the show's evocation of New York grew especially tender and Carrie began to wonder whether the city, in the end, was her ''one great love.'' But it was less this outward declaration than the series's continuing portrayal of its four characters, bravely (if sassily) navigating their way through New York's complex social landscape, that truly celebrated the special relationship between women and the city first explored in the comedies of the 1930's. Those films had suggested that the city might be a place of liberation for independent women, but also that the very lure of the place might lie as much in its romantic opportunities as its economic ones. The idea is still relevant today, when New York's urban vitality rests not only on its traditional strengths but on a simple demographic trend: that ambitious young people who decades ago might have paired off in 15 months now often take 15 years to find a partner. That extended search, the true subject of the series, not only fuels the engines of city life -- bars, restaurants, shopping, cultural activities -- but has helped to make the city itself an object of affection. Through its fictional texture, the New York of ''Sex and the City'' --- like that of the older comedies it evokes -- ultimately reveals a significant truth. As much as commerce or finance, it is the dreams of romance, and the energies of desire, that give New York its special place in the world's imagination.
TELEVISION James Sanders, an architect, is the author of ''Celluloid Skyline: New York and the Movies.'' (www.celluloidskyline.com).
