FOLLOWING a design her mother had drawn as a young girl in India, Taara Sajnani, 12, of Manhasset squeezed a tube of mehendi paste, squiggling lines on Henna Khanijou's outstretched palm and down her finger.
''I like to learn our culture,'' Taara said, explaining that the ornate swirls would dry into an orange-colored pattern that might last weeks if Henna,11, of Great Neck, didn't wash her hand too often. ''I like meeting my friends here.''
It was Saturday afternoon at the Young Indian Culture Group, a school for Indian-Americans that meets weekly at Herricks Middle School. After art, there were lessons in Hindi, Tamil, Telegu and Vedic culture and scriptures. Down the hall, 17 children, hands clasped together, sang ''Hey Jaga Drata,'' a light classical Bhajan. In the gymnasium, 25 adults took a yoga class while their children studied.
When Rathi Raja started the cultural, religious and linguistic program with a group of friends a decade ago, she wanted to reach out to the local Indian community. Mrs. Raja said a few families had been gathering to teach their children about their heritage in small basement operations rather than in formal schools.
''If you do it in your home, it isn't structured enough,'' said Mrs. Raja, 46. ''You can't reach out. You need a public space.''
Started with 30 children, the school now has more than 120, ages 4 to 18, a staff of 14 teachers and a flock of volunteer parents. While Indian associations run various events, the Young Indian Culture Group is believed to be the only formal, comprehensive Indian school on the Island. Electives include classical dance, South Indian music, vegetarian cooking and rangoli or mandala painting. And as the Indian-American population in Nassau County has multiplied in the past few years, the culture group has become a social gathering point with the makings of an institution.
''It really takes a while to build a community,'' Mrs. Raja said, dreaming of someday having a community center to call their own. The group runs a summer camp and hopes to start a nursery school and a program for the elderly.
''Culture has to be communicated, it has to be lived, it has to be taught,'' she said. ''Only then can the next generation take it on.''
Initially, however, it was hard to relay the importance of identity and roots, especially to first-generation immigrants who clung to their sub-communities.
''It being a land of so many languages, so many states, people stay within their own little world,'' said Mrs. Raja, though most of the students were born in America or moved here when they were very young. ''This school has served the need of bringing people across the board.''
Mrs. Raja's own upbringing was less parochial. She was born in northern India to parents from the south. Because her father was in the Indian Air Force, the family moved frequently. She attended British schools and developed a fascination for Shakespeare but listened to her father recount Hindu epics. In 1981, she moved to the United States with her husband, Ramani, and went to work on Wall Street. Raising her children in Manhasset, she felt her Hindu background slipping away.
As the main teacher, Mrs. Raja initially drew children in with stories from the Mahabharata and Ramayana. But what can be imparted in a few hours a week transcends formal lessons.
''More important than the facts is that the kids have a community,'' Mrs. Raja said. ''The kids meet each other. They do something together.''
Neel Chugh, 16, of Manhasset Hills has been coming to the Saturday school for eight years. Initially, his mother, Nalini, had to bribe him with lunch at Wendy's or McDonald's before she dropped him off. Now he looks forward to Mrs. Raja's Vedic heritage class.
''Through the course of the week, we only partake in American culture,'' Neel said.
Mrs. Chugh is co-president of the Herricks High School parent-teachers association and on the board of the Indian center.
She said that instruction in Indian traditions often led to richer discussions in the mainstream classroom.
''The school gives them wings but we are trying to give them their roots,'' she said.
The culture group runs on a shoestring budget, with tuition $10 a session. In the hallway, Dr. Urmila Shivaram, another of the founders, was selling $40 tickets to the 10th-anniversary gala in May.
''Among Hindus, there is no structure,'' said Dr. Shivaram, a Manhasset resident.
While there are temples in Hempstead and Flushing, most Hindus have temples at home to pray privately.
''We don't come from a culture where all this is very organized.'' Dr. Shivaram continued. ''We have to organize it ourselves. It is new ground for us.''
Vasundhara Sureka of Manhasset Hills has been running the Hindi program since the school began. The language curriculum has six levels, culminating in a proficiency examination and certification from the Indian government.
''If you know the language you learn the culture,'' Ms. Sureka said as the children practiced writing the 53 letters of the alphabet on worksheets, worked on phonetics and then came up to the blackboard to re-create them.
Natasha Singh, 9, of Floral Park waved her hand to be called to the board. She struggled to draw a curvy letter Ms. Sureka pronounced as ''yah.''
Natasha said coming to school on Saturdays with just her Indian friends was special, even if she had to learn to read and write in the language of her grandmother.
''It's actually kind of exciting,'' Natasha said. ''It's different than regular school. Our teachers speak to us in Hindi so we get used to it. I kind of feel proud.''
Women in Flight
Why do women fly?
''Because they can,'' said Mary Scott.
But what got them started? Why do they keep flying? And why is the percentage of women in aviation stuck at the same 6 percent it was in 1929? That was the year Amelia Earhart and Faye Gillis Wells founded the Ninety-Nines, an international group of female pilots, at Curtiss Field in Valley Stream, where the Green Acres Mall now stands.
To find the answers, Ms. Scott, 52, of Melville, and her fellow earthbound filmmaker, Abby Dress, 55, of Huntington spent several months during this centennial year of flight interviewing more than 200 female pilots across the country.
The result was ''Wings of Their Own,'' a sweeping glance at women in aviation that goes far beyond the usual historical footage on Women's Air Service Pilots and the 1929 Powder Puff Derby, the first all-women's air race. To obtain aerial views, Ms. Scott circled the Island in a single-engine Cessna 172 with Carol Levine, former chairwoman of the Long Island Ninety-Nines and a recreational pilot from Brentwood. A two-hour-plus rough cut of the documentary previewed recently at a party at the Cradle of Aviation in Garden City for the Long Island chapter of the Ninety-Nines. The final 90-minute version will be distributed by Women Make Movies, a nonprofit agency that helps female filmmakers.
''It was time to get women off the ground,'' said Ms. Scott, the owner of Make Believe TV, a television production company. Ms. Dress has made corporate videos, is a partner in a public relations company and teaches communications at the C.W. Post campus of Long Island University in Brookville.
Among those interviewed was Elinor Smith Sullivan, the former Freeport daredevil who flew under New York City's East River bridges in the 1930's as a teenager, set a woman's solo endurance record of 26 hours, 21 minutes, 32 seconds in a monoplane at Roosevelt Field and teamed up with her West Coast rival, Bobbi Evelyn Trout, to pioneer midair refueling so that they could win a race.
Bonnie Tiburzi Caputo, who in 1973 was the first woman hired as a pilot with a major airline, American, came to the preview. Her father helped her earn her pilot's license before she learned to drive, she recalled, even though her high school career counselor gave her a flight attendant application when she expressed an interest in aviation.
''Other people thought you could be a flight instructor, maybe even a charter pilot but never a commercial pilot; those jobs were reserved for the men,'' Ms. Caputo recalled. ''It's taken a long time but we are getting there.''
Ms. Scott said that female pilots were just beginning to earn recognition.
''From Kitty Hawk to Cape Canaveral, a few women have found wings of their own,'' Ms. Scott said.
Ms. Dress, who plans to start flying lessons, said learning to fly gave women confidence, a sense of accomplishment, power and perspective about what's important.
''The message here is you can follow your dreams,'' Ms. Dress said. ''Flying is a metaphor for not holding yourself back.''
E-mail: lijournal@nytimes.com
