IN ''Something's Gotta Give,'' Diane Keaton, who plays the comically uptight 50-something playwright Erica Barry, startles Jack Nicholson, her leading man, when she appears, albeit briefly, entirely in the nude. The baring of her middle-aged flesh is not nearly so shocking, though, as her decision, about midway through the film, to discard the white turtleneck sweaters she wears like a talisman in favor of a black jersey T-shirt and skirt. The slinky fit and plummeting neckline made the most of her curves.
By shedding the high-necked sweaters and trademark glasses she has kept behind for years, Ms. Keaton, some say, has finally come out of hiding. ''It's like seeing her for the first time,'' said Nancy Meyers, a friend, who not only wrote and directed the film but conceived the role with her in mind. ''She doesn't wear glasses -- she wears Gap shirts -- but they're form-fitting,'' Ms. Meyers told a reporter. ''She's not hiding behind anything.''
To others who have watched Ms. Keaton morph from a jittery ingenue into a deliriously flighty adult, trading her turtleneck for something more sultry represents a long-delayed coming of age. ''For the first time Diane let herself be grown-up,'' said Caroline Rennolds Milbank, a fashion historian who has studied Ms. Keaton's career. What is striking about her in her latest role, for which she won an Oscar nomination (for best actress), is ''how confident she has become,'' Ms. Milbank said, ''more confident than many women half her age.'' Ms. Keaton is an unabashed 58-year-old, a fact she proclaimed to great laughter at the Golden Globe Awards in January.
Her self-assurance has been a long time coming. For the better part of her 30-odd-year film career, Ms. Keaton has hidden her light under bowler hats, oversize jackets and calf-grazing skirts -- and almost always prim gloves -- cultivating a persona that on screen and off is less siren than librarian. In her life, ''she tends to cover herself up,'' said Suzanne McCabe, who designed Ms. Keaton's ''Something's Gotta Give'' costumes. ''She wears a lot of layers, and she definitely likes to have the structure of a blazer.'' Conservative she may be, but Ms. Keaton has wilfully nurtured a maverick streak by forging a fashion identity that is two parts WASP and one part whimsy.
A fashion plate? Maybe not. ''She is too quirky for that,'' and her mature style has never been widely copied, Ms. Milbank said. ''But that's just it -- what made her style so notable and hard to imitate was that it was so personal.''
André Leon Talley, Vogue magazine's editor at large, elaborated. ''When you do see her out, she is not overegging the pudding,'' he said. ''It's never too rich, the way she looks. It's like Katharine Hepburn in a way, the mystery of being covered up, the simplicity -- that's the ultimate American style.''
Ms. Keaton began charming film audiences in the late 1970's with her Oscar- winning performance in ''Annie Hall.'' Her character, a Midwestern naïf determined to make it in Hollywood, was loosely based on Ms. Keaton herself, who was at the time the muse and girlfriend of Woody Allen, who directed the film. Her apparently haphazard chic, based on a wildly discordant mélange of mannish hats, baggy pants and loose-fitting overscaled jackets, helped to sear her image into the minds of filmgoers.
''Her throwaway verbal style and her thrown-together dress style became symbols of the free, friendly, gracefully puzzled young women who were busy creating identities out of the epic miscellany of materials swirling in the American cultural centrifuge,'' rhapsodized Jack Kroll, Newsweek's film critic at the time.
Her fashion influence in those days should not be underestimated, Mr. Talley said last week. ''What Sarah Jessica Parker is to young women today, Diane Keaton was in that day,'' he said.
Her style, starchily eccentric, has remained consistent through the years, indeed sometimes doggedly so. In preparing for ''Something's Gotta Give,'' ''we did have to work at getting Diane to give up the protective coating of a suit jacket,'' said Ms. McCabe, the costume designer. ''She didn't need that armor.''
Other colleagues have said that Ms. Keaton has been known to arrive on film sets with her own wardrobe, creating a look that seems self-conscious, even fey: the ingénue who simply will not grow up. She was demure as a Mafia wife in the ''Godfather'' films, her shoulder-length hair center-parted, her long neck concealed in a round-collar blouse and satin bow; she was sulky as Louise Bryant in ''Reds,'' the 1981 epic, in velvet from her hemline to her crown, her face scarcely visible under long bangs and a cloche.
Flash forward to ''Town and Country'' (2001), in which Ms. Keaton played a friend of Goldie Hawn's character. Sitting on a park bench, Ms. Hawn flaunts her sexuality in a tight-fitting, summery dress. By her side is Ms. Keaton, positively puritanical in a rigid white collar, fitted jacket, trousers, wire-rimmed glasses and beret.
That schoolgirl image has become part of Ms. Keaton's public persona. Consider the ensemble she pulled together for the premiere of ''Marvin's Room'' in 1996: a stiff white shirt that set off a swirling plaid tafetta skirt, cinched at the waist by a wide leather belt. Or the look she assembled for a premiere in Los Angeles two summers ago: a fitted roll-neck sweater, voluminous cheerleader skirt, white ankle socks and Mary Jane pumps.
Last fall, Ms. Keaton appeared in Beverly Hills at a press conference for her television film ''On Thin Ice'' turned out in a donnish outfit reminiscent of her former mentor, Woody Allen: tweedy fedora, sport coat, starchy shirt and bow tie and, of course, those wire-frame specs.
Then there are the gloves, sheathing Ms. Keaton's slender hands wherever she goes (reminding fans with a more twisted turn of mind a bit of Michael Jackson). She wore gloves with her Woodyesque sport coat, and once again in Beverly Hills at the Oscar nominees' luncheon on Feb. 9. Leather gloves covered her wrists at the International Film Festival in Berlin a few days before that, a counterpoint to the black-and-white-checkered coat she wore. White leather gloves provided the creamy finish to the ivory-colored suit Ms. Keaton wore two weeks ago on ''The Tonight Show.'' And white satin gloves accented her Richard Tyler coat at the Golden Globes Awards in January.
Her near fetishistic devotion to those gloves has inevitably prompted queries. Is she making a style statement, or is she simply hiding a pair of hands she deems too unsightly for a close-up?
Ms. Keaton, who declined to be interviewed for this article -- because she is talked out, a publicist said -- did nothing herself to clear up the mystery.
To some minds, her oddball accessories run the risk of looking forced or, worse, dowdy. ''Those gloves at the Golden Globes -- they were a mistake,'' Mr. Talley said. So was her waist-length strand of pearls. ''All that white on white -- at any age, it's just too difficult to wear,'' he added.
Ms. Keaton is no trend-setter, but never mind. Even her critics admire her stiff-backed independence, her insistence on dancing, however awkwardly, to her own tune. Since the days of ''Annie Hall,'' when she borrowed liberally from Ralph Lauren's showroom, Ms. Keaton has not been identified with the look of any one designer. On the red carpet, she has appeared in styles that vary from conventionally tailored to offhandedly hip, by designers as diverse as Mr. Tyler and Dolce &amp; Gabbana.
Nor has she placed herself unthinkingly in the hands of a cabinet of stylists, the better to play to the public's appetite for the louche. In Hollywood, her image is distinctly at odds with those of many younger stars, and even with those of her contemporaries, a string of 50-something icons like Susan Sarandon and Jane Fonda, who thumb their noses at discretion, routinely flaunting generous cleavage for the cameras.
But then Ms. Keaton has no need to show off. She has always been a babe, said Isaac Mizrahi, the fashion designer and a longtime fan. ''When I was in high school, we all wanted to look like Diane Keaton, men and women, straight and gay,'' Mr. Mizrahi said. ''She was a sex symbol for our time.''
