IN the off-season, after the summer crowds have drifted away, residents of this historic seaside village just south of Asbury Park are rarely ruffled.
Only the sounds of gulls, the ocean and an occasional carpenter's hammer interrupt the silence. In fact, Ocean Grove, which is part of Neptune Township, was never particularly rowdy, having been founded as an open-air religious resort by Methodists in the 1860's.
But in recent weeks, some measure of the serenity here has evaporated. A revaluation of the township's properties by Monmouth County is rattling elderly residents and setting a course for what locals say could be a forced flight from the village by longtime homeowners.
On average, Ocean Grove's bungalows have soared in value by 350 percent since the last valuation in 1990 -- a gain even larger than the 250 percent average increase recorded in revaluations across the township, according to the tax assessor.
Neptune's tax rates for the coming year have not been decided, but owners in Ocean Grove can expect an increase in their tax bills on the order of 40 to 50 percent, said Bernard Haney, the township's assessor.
''Is there going to be an impact on seniors with fixed incomes? Absolutely,'' Mr. Haney said. ''But they are living on some of the most desirable real estate in Monmouth County.''
Alarm has been registered in council meetings and local newspapers, as well as in talk along the boardwalk, and a movement is stirring for Ocean Grove's independence. Ray Huizenga, a resident and local real estate agent, is pushing for the village to secede from Neptune unless property taxes in the village are reduced by 30 percent. He said housing prices in Ocean Grove ranged from $200,000 to $850,000.
''They're treating us like we're another country,'' Mr. Huizenga said, adding that his own house had nearly tripled in value. ''If we are not going to be fairly taxed, then we may be better off creating our own town.''
Yet the issue here is only part of a greater frustration with property taxes statewide. Except in special instances, New Jersey requires municipalities to pay for their own public schools in addition to bearing the costs of municipal and county governments. Adding fuel to the frustration here is the fact that Ocean Grove does not have its own public schools or even a police station, and it helps pay for services provided by the larger township.
Meanwhile, the burden of maintaining schools has become so unwieldy around the state that property taxes have soared in order to help support them. Critics like William G. Dressel Jr., executive director of the New Jersey State League of Municipalities, are calling for a constitutional convention to review the state's tax structure.
''The situation in Ocean Grove is being replicated in 100 other towns,'' Mr. Dressel said. ''That is tragic and unacceptable.''
He added: ''We're reaching a new and catastrophic level for folks living on fixed incomes, in the most regressive property tax system in the nation. And quite frankly, I don't think the state Legislature has the stamina to do anything about it.''
Indeed, Neptune is only one of several townships in Monmouth County to undergo revaluation in recent months. Matthew S. Clark, the county's tax administrator, says that the Monmouth Board of Taxation regularly reviews property values in all of its 53 communities. Neptune was last appraised in 1990, and demand for oceanfront properties has helped propel the growing values. A similar increase is expected in Manasquan, and revaluations have also been completed in Atlantic Highlands, Highlands, Neptune City, Rumson and Sea Bright.
Mr. Clark conceded that the results of reappraisal might be most severe in Ocean Grove. But ''a failure to reflect their increase would be unfair to the rest of the county's property owners,'' he said.
Weighing the social effects of higher tax bills, Randy Bishop, president of the Ocean Grove Chamber of Commerce, said that some residents had been exploring the refinancing of their houses and that others were considering selling. By his estimate, 30 percent of the village's 5,000 year-round residents are retired or live on limited incomes. Most have been drawn by Ocean Grove's lack of fanfare. Unlike many other spots along New Jersey's fabled shoreline, the village still issues no liquor licenses, and until its blue laws were relaxed in the 1970's it banned the driving of cars on Sundays.
''We have this sense of small-town America,'' Mr. Bishop said. ''Everybody greets everybody. I'm hoping that we're not about to see a wholesale flight away from that.''
The mayor of Neptune Township, Thomas J. Catley, said that he held out little hope for relief from property taxes in the short term and predicted that social change might be inevitable without a sudden shift in the state's tax structure.
''The solution to our problem has got to come from Trenton,'' he said, explaining that about 60 percent of the township's budget goes to its schools. ''The costs of education have gone up and up, and we've had to pay to keep up.''
Even so, the outrage of residents has not fallen on deaf ears. State Assemblyman Sean T. Kean, a Republican from Wall Township, said that he planned to draft a special bill to add Neptune Township's tax increases gradually, over a five-year period. In the longer term, he supports Mr. Dressel's idea of a constitutional convention to examine how the state directs its tax revenues. He even suggested levying a consumption tax on luxury goods like electronics to help pay for public education. Regardless, he acknowledged that his proposal would really only cushion the tax blow.
''We do need to give people a financial breather, a chance to address these tax increases,'' Mr. Kean said. ''Otherwise, with the snap of the fingers, you're going to be displacing hundreds of residents.''
State Senator Joseph A. Palaia, a Republican of Ocean Township, who also represents Ocean Grove, said he favored broad changes in the state's tax structure.
''It's very discouraging that we can't give people better answers,'' Senator Palaia said.
While the education debate simmers, some senior residents of Ocean Grove are braced for an onslaught of wealthier people looking to buy up homes in the village. They are also courting the idea of secession, if only as a gesture of defiance.
Joel T. Scranton, a retired librarian's assistant, calls secession ''a wonderful idea'' and has petitioned Mr. Palaia and Governor McGreevey to visit the village and to confront the tax increases. They could stay in any number of elegant local hotels -- the Albatross, the Laingdon and the Melrose, to name a few -- and visit Ocean Grove's Great Auditorium, an enormous wooden structure that survives as the most impressive symbol of the village's Victorian and religious origins. Most of the town is listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
''This is getting outrageous,'' Mr. Scranton said of the tax uproar. ''We were a melting pot before this, a homogeneous melting pot where we all got along.''
REAL ESTATE
