WHEN you hear the surname Adams, and photography, you automatically think of the American landscape photographer Ansel Adams, or perhaps the photojournalist Eddie Adams who captured one of the most memorable, and horrifying, images of the Vietnam War, a South Vietnamese police chief executing a suspected Vietcong leader.
But then again you might think of Robert Adams, who was born in 1937, and made a name for himself in the early 1970's documenting the boredom and banality of American quotidian life -- supermarket shelves, a parking lot in Denver, a hotel room with nothing more than a bed. Later, he turned his attention to the wide, open spaces of the American West.
A selection of Mr. Adams's photographs of the West is on view here at the Princeton University Art Museum. These photographs, recently acquired by the museum, avoid romantic visions of the West as an untouched wilderness. Rather, they trace more than a century of human impact and environmental abuse.
''When else has a region of more than a million square miles been so damaged in so short a time?'' Mr. Adams asks, rhetorically, in the introduction to a 1983 book on American 19th-century landscape photography. The same note of despair that pervades his words floats throughout many of the images in this exhibition.
Mostly, evidence of human impact on the landscape in Mr. Adams's photographs is subtlety conveyed. You have to hunt for it with your eyes. But once found, and it is always there, it leaves you with little doubt that the place depicted has been irrevocably changed. For Mr. Adams, culture has everywhere subsumed and colonized nature.
The Wasatch Mountains, near Willard, Utah, seem like a fairly remote place. Not any more, according to a shrewdly composed 1978 photograph by Mr. Adams. Take a quick look at the photograph and see if you can spot the human intervention? It is the tree to the left, which is actually an electricity pole with a little metal plaque. Up close, you can just make out the words: ''Utah Power and Light Company, 40, 1973.''
''Cottonwood Along the Colorado River, Garfield County, Colorado'' (1978), one of the more beautifully composed photographs here, once again suggests an unwelcome human presence. To the right of a wild cottonwood tree along the banks of the river is a hastily erected barbed wire fence. Even here, we are told, nature has been tamed.
Other images documenting human impact on the environment are far less subtle. Three photographs, ''Clear-Cut and Burned, East of Arch Cape, Oregon'' (1976), depict in shocking detail the aftermath of deforestation. What was once primeval forest has become a wasteland. It seems as if a severe hurricane has swept through the area.
Quite a few of the places Mr. Adams photographs are sparse and depressing, or at least arouse no desire in me to make of them a holiday destination. But they are so carefully observed, and the images so meticulously printed, that they retain an alluring mystery. I guess this speaks to Mr. Adams's supreme command of his medium.
It is also worth mentioning that many of the photographs in the exhibition were included in Mr. Adams's seminal 1980 publication, ''From the Missouri West.'' The book documents the artist's journey through the West from 1975 to 1978, using the imagery of early 19th-century landscape photographers as his inspiration and guide.
A handful of old sepia-toned photographs by William Bell, Timothy O'Sullivan and A.J. Russell, among the first to photograph the West, are being shown alongside Mr. Adams's images. They lend the exhibition an air of nostalgia, reminding us of what the landscape once looked like.
One of the most beautiful early images is Mr. O'Sullivan's 1873 photograph of the Grand Canyon. The photograph was taken somewhere within the canyon, the artist surrounded on all sides by towering walls of rock. Adding to the sense of monumentality is an intense, almost eerie quiet.
Mr. O'Sullivan spent eight years in the West, on and off, as a photographer on government survey expeditions. One of those surveys, no doubt, provided the occasion for this photograph, which has a row of little white tents in the foreground. In contrast to Mr. Adams's photographs, nature eclipses the human presence. It would not last.
''Robert Adams: From the Missouri West'' is at the Princeton University Art Museum, McCormick Hall, Princeton University, through June 6. Information: (609)258-3788.
ART REVIEW
