OUT here in Brooklyn, we hear that New Jersey's Nets are coming. This could be great news, but at the same time it brings back the bitter memory of the nasty departure of our baseball Dodgers in 1957. And just over a week ago, Gage &amp; Tollner, our oldest restaurant and most charming culinary relic of the dear departed 19th century (sorry about that, Peter Luger), closed its doors, bringing to many residents, and former denizens, of Kings County yet another tear-stained loss of a classic past. In my household, such emotions don't always run as high as they might: here is the response of one of the younger members of the family: ''Gag! That good-old-days stuff is so over. Especially in Brooklyn.''
Pretty cold, eh? And a bit hurtful to someone like me. I like to make a pretense of skeptical rationalism but must admit that I felt a secret tickle when it became likely that a real major-league sports team would extract sweet revenge for the loss of the Dodgers; not to mention a pang of remorse to realize that the prospect of visiting a gaslit restaurant a couple of subway stops away from my house was, well, over.
This despite the fact that although I've worked in Brooklyn since 1969 and lived here for most of those years, I haven't forgotten that I was still a high school kid in Pennsylvania rooting for the Phillies against the Dodgers when that not always distinguished team (aka Dem Bums) still occupied Ebbets Field, or was it ''Wait-Till-Next-Year'' Shrine? And the gaslit seafood palace in question (along with the Fulton Street shopping district it occupied) had been flying well below my personal consumer radar for decades.
I raised the issue with Martha Nadell, a colleague who recently taught a course called ''Brooklyn in Literature.'' One of the striking discoveries she made in preparing the reading list was just how thoroughly the books were shot through with nostalgia. Was it knee-jerk nostalgia? ''Depends on the writer,'' she said, ''but you can bet it's out there, in literature and life. Especially life. I'm from Brooklyn, but I of course meet the newcomers every day, and it seems for a lot of them it takes about 24 hours to acquire this sort of patina of enhanced memory.''
This struck close to home. In spite of sympathy for my neighbors across Flatbush Avenue in Prospect Heights who may lose homes and jobs if the Nets build their arena, I still can't erase from my mind the stirring echoes of certain faces and names -- Pee Wee, Jackie, Duke, Campy -- or my enduring romance with local Victoriana. Am I afflicted with enhanced memory syndrome, too? Are we just still suffering the hangover from that old outer borough inferiority complex, grasping at mythical straws from the past to shore us up against Manhattan's perceived superiority?
To this last question, the answer seems a simple negative. Cabbies no longer hesitate to bring us back across the bridges after a night in what, regrettably, many of us still call ''the city.'' Dozens of fine new restaurants can be found only blocks from Gage &amp; Tollner. Even Miranda of ''Sex and the City'' and Grace of ''Will and Grace'' have made their fictional crossings of the East River to join us in domestic bliss (though not without the requisite, and finally obsolete, outer borough jokes). Economic and cultural revivals in place in the brownstone neighborhoods are spilling over into corners of our borough not dreamt of as cozy or cutting-edge, at least for the past century.
Brooklyn suffers the usual urban problems of crime, poverty, bad housing and racial inequality. But statistics show that things are getting better. Bed-Stuy, with its beautiful architecture, is undergoing restoration. Once-devastated neighborhoods like Bushwick are on the verge of rebirth. Places like Brownsville and East New York are seeing their vacant, refuse-strewn lots and burned-out buildings filled in with affordable housing and decent stores.
Which brings us back to the nostalgia for the good old days. Why is it so pervasive here, so much so that we embrace even the dimmest and least reliable memories? Believe me, the old saw that one in seven American families passed through here in pursuit of streets paved with gold doesn't wash as a reason for schmaltzy retrospection. Even those writers who choose to dwell on the pleasures of their Brooklyn youth seem ultimately to subvert what at first glance appears to be a misty-eyed dream.
PETE HAMILL, writing in New York magazine in 1969, conjured up a Park Slope past as ''something special, almost private'' that was about to disappear with the loss of The Eagle, the jobs at the Navy Yard and, of course, the Dodgers. But 25 years later, in ''A Drinking Life,'' he made sure the reader got a frightening sense of those gang-ridden 50's streets: ''The codes demanded that all loyalty go to the gang, ahead of the family, church, city, or country. Everybody had to drink hard and fight to the death; the women had to 'put out' for the men.''
Jonathan Lethem's recent novel ''The Fortress of Solitude'' deals with danger and racial strife from the perspective of the child of one of the first ''new'' families in Boerum Hill and Cobble Hill in the late 60's and the 70's. In ''Bailey's Cafe,'' the Brooklyn College grad Gloria Naylor seems ambivalent: ''I grew up in Flatbush believing that Brooklyn was the capital of the world and that all colored people except my family were rich.''
The photographer Weegee said about certain good old days in Brooklyn: ''Looking back on the years of Murder Inc., I find I used up 10 press cameras, five cars, and every night 20 cigars and 20 cups of coffee. For me crime had paid, in a very lush way.'' And his famous photograph of Coney Island, taken July 28, 1940, at 4 p.m.; do these millions of close-packed revelers suggest a paean to community or induce a nightmare of sweaty claustrophobia? Take your pick.
Brooklyn is a place where change is dramatic, constant, often sudden. Coney Island Avenue can change within a block or a year from Irish to Polish to Mexican to Pakistani to Orthodox Jewish. How can one pin down a thought, a moment, a generation, without resorting to a little polishing of the veneer of the past?
I guess the more we know, the less we know. I think, finally, of Thomas Wolfe's 1935 story ''Only the Dead Know Brooklyn,'' a title I once borrowed for a book of my own. Wolfe's narrator, a man with one of the ''dese, dem and dose'' accents that barely survive today, encounters a stranger with a map on a subway train headed for New Utrecht Avenue, Borough Park and Bensonhurst. The stranger says he is lost because he wants to go to Red Hook. Why would anyone want to go to Red Hook, the narrator asks in disbelief. Because, the stranger says, I'm trying to get to know Brooklyn. The narrator scoffs that nobody can get to know Brooklyn with a map; he's been living here all his life and he can't get to know it. Indeed, he finally says, to get to know Brooklyn, you'd have to be so old you'd be dead.
Thus, Wolfe's title. Thus, the patina of enhanced memory.
CITY LORE Thomas Boyle, a professor of English at Brooklyn College, is the author of several crime novels set in Brooklyn.
