FRANZ FERDINAND -- Musicians have been wearing their influences on their sleeves since rock 'n' roll began, and in the last few years we've seen a whole slew of young bands giving their spin on their parents' and older siblings' record collections. As the cycles go we're back at the tail end of the 70's and beginning of the 80's, with bands like Interpol and the Strokes from New York and Clinic from Liverpool. Now from Scotland comes Franz Ferdinand with a self-titled debut on Domino. The group is named after the Archduke of the Austro-Hungarian Empire whose murder in 1914 kicked off the First World War. The musical lineage stretches back to Joy Division, Talking Heads and the Gang of Four, who all left musical time capsules that rocked with sarcasm and anguish. In the 21st century however, Franz Ferdinand is showing us the moves with a grin.
JEM -- Jem is from Wales. Tom Jones is from Wales, so is Shirley Bassey. Wales is known for singers with big voices. Jem's voice isn't big, but it's warm and inviting and on her debut EP from ATO records, ''It All Starts Here,'' it's surrounded by myriad beats, hooks and grooves. Songs like the effervescent ''Just a Ride'' and the pleading ''Save Me'' bounce along with a pop sensibility that could just make Jem's full-length album ''Finally Woken'' the surprise of the year.
VAN HUNT -- Thanks to the success of artists like India.Arie and Alicia Keys, the term neo soul has become a marketable genre and the major record labels have spent the last couple of years putting their dwindling resources into the search for the next cool cat. Van Hunt was worth the money. His self-titled debut record on Capitol oozes soul and sex. Hardly surprising: his dad was a pimp and the young Van grew up hanging around some pretty seedy joints with characters who lived their lives in a dope-filled haze. Van has absorbed the likes of Marvin, Rufus, Curtis and Prince and then added the most important ingredient, himself.
GARY JULES -- How much do you love the music industry? The San Diego native Gary Jules released an album in 1998 on A &amp; M records called ''Greetings From the Side'' featuring a fine collection of confessional songs. Immediately afterward, Universal records swallowed Polygram (which owned A &amp; M), and he got dropped by the new regime. Two years ago, he released ''Trading Snake Oil for Wolftickets'' himself, featuring his observations on life delivered in a folk-tinged voice reminiscent of Paul Simon and Michael Stipe. The album buzzed big time in his adopted home town of Los Angeles and then something truly unlikely happened. Around Christmas, a song from the album that had also been featured in the indie film ''Donnie Darko'' -- ''Mad World,'' originally by Tears for Fears -- became the No. 1 single in Britain, selling almost a million copies. Last month Gary Jules signed a mid-six-figure deal with Universal records.
ZERO 7 -- Henry Binns and Sam Hardaker began their music careers making tea in a London recording studio. After graduating to engineering duties and remixes for the likes of Terry Callier and Radiohead, they started to make their own music releasing a collection of laid-back soul, acid jazz and funk tracks called ''Simple Things'' (Palm) in 2001. Zero 7's songs breathe dramatically with the addition of the vocalists Sia Furler, Mozez and Sophie Barker, who all return, joined by the newcomer Tina Dico, on the band's new release ''When It Falls'' (Elektra). It sounds similar to their previous release, but one hopes that with a major label on board this time it will find a bigger audience.
JULIETA VENEGAS -- Latin alternative music is a genre with no radio home. Young artists from countries like Mexico (Café Tacuba, Kinky, Plastalina Mosh), Chile (Los Tres), Columbia (Aterciopalados), and Argentina (Bersuit) have been mixing the traditional sounds and instrumentation of their homelands with rock and hip-hop beats for the last 10-plus years. As the demographics in the United States continue to shift, however, and young Latinos exert their influence and form their own bands, the format is starting to look like a sleeping giant. Julieta Venegas started Chantaje, a band in Tijuana; since moving to Mexico City she has become an accomplished accordion player and singer-songwriter. Her third album, ''Sí'' (BMG Latin) is an optimistic collection of electro pop songs sung in Spanish. But that shouldn't stop Anglos from joining in on the fun.
SKE -- It seems that Icelanders have more bands per habitable square mile than anywhere else on earth, handy for getting them through the long cold months of winter. Following in the footsteps of Bjork, Gus Gus and Sigur Ros, the core members of Ske (which means happening in Icelandic) have infused their debut release, ''Life, Death, Happiness and Stuff'' (Smekkleysa or available online at www.ske.is), with a genuine brew of experimemtal, alternative melodic pop. Completing the hip factor are various guests including both a French and Japanese female vocalist. Winter feels warmer already.
MUSIC: PLAYLIST Nic Harcourt is the music director of KCRW (89.9 FM or online at kcrw.com) in Santa Monica, Calif., and the host of its daily music program ''Morning Becomes Eclectic.''
