CASUALTY OF WAR
The Bush Administration's Assault
on a Free Press.
By David Dadge.
330 pp. Amherst, N.Y.:
Prometheus Books. $26.
THE NAKED CROWD
Reclaiming Security and Freedom
in an Anxious Age.
By Jeffrey Rosen
260 pp. New York:
Random House. $24.95.
THE SOFT CAGE
Surveillance in America
From Slavery to the War on Terror.
By Christian Parenti.
Illustrated. 273 pp. New York:
Basic Books. $24.95.
LOST LIBERTIES
Ashcroft and the Assault
on Personal Freedom.
Edited by Cynthia Brown.
324 pp. New York:
The New Press. Paper, $17.95.
THE WAR ON
THE BILL OF RIGHTS
And the Gathering Resistance.
By Nat Hentoff.
176 pp. New York:
Seven Stories Press. $18.
ENEMY ALIENS
Double Standards and Constitutional Freedoms in the War on Terrorism.
By David Cole.
315 pp. New York:
The New Press. $24.95.
THE WAR ON
OUR FREEDOMS
Civil Liberties in an Age of Terrorism.
Edited by Richard C. Leone
and Greg Anrig Jr.
317 pp. New York:
A Century Foundation Book/
PublicAffairs. Paper, $15.
TERRORISM, FREEDOM, and SECURITY
Winning Without War.
By Philip B. Heymann.
210 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
The MIT Press. $24.95.
When I have computer trouble at the office, I call the systems support department on the fifth floor. It used to be that if we couldn't fix the problem over the phone, I would have to wait until a nice young technician came by. Sitting at my desk, he (or she) would plunge into program files that mean nothing to me and readjust my machine. Lately, the waiting has been eliminated. When phone advice fails, the technician doesn't move from his workstation. Instead, I sit back and from another floor he commandeers my computer, pushing my cursor around, opening and closing programs until the problem is solved.
It is remarkable to witness, and profoundly eerie. If you were to ask me whether I had privacy on my work computer, I would know to answer no. But it is one thing to understand in the abstract that nearly every word I have ever typed at The New York Times can be retrieved by my employer and quite another to watch my files being opened and closed by someone not touching my keyboard. If the nice New York Times technician can do it, after all, how hard would it be for the nice F.B.I. agent?
That question haunts a number of books that began appearing last year and are still coming out, lamenting the state of individual privacy and liberty, especially after Sept. 11, 2001. The books raise two sets of related concerns. Most of them focus on changes to laws and regulations made by the Bush administration and Congress in the name of stopping the next terrorist attack. The authors say the changes do little if anything to improve security and amount to a power grab by a paranoid, power-hungry government. These are serious and increasingly familiar charges, and it is helpful to have them spelled out in some detail and measured against history, as the best of these books do. Many of the steps taken by the administration are wrong, even abhorrent. A few others, however, seem to me less harmful than portrayed, and some of these books examine the difference.
The second set of issues goes beyond civil liberties to the essence of what we mean today by privacy. Every time we use a cell phone, strike a computer key or do business with a bank, we leave retrievable digital marks. Most of us rarely give it a second thought. This is partly because it happens so noiselessly but also, I suspect, because privacy itself has changed. Between the ubiquity of television and the Internet -- and the utterly uninhibited manner in which people speak on their cellphones in public -- we live in an era of unprecedented exhibitionism. Several of the authors under review can barely breathe, they are so outraged by the way we are allowing ourselves to be tracked. They are consumed by visions of Bentham's panopticon, a prison where inmates are under constant surveillance. And they argue, intelligently but to my mind unconvincingly, that by allowing companies and the state to capture and record us in this way, we are not only opening ourselves up to government snoops, we are permitting the corrosion of what it means to be human.
(There is, by the way, a third set of complaints, that of David Dadge, the editor of the World Press Freedom Review, who in ''Casualty of War'' asserts that following 9/11 the Bush administration launched a campaign that muzzled the news media both here and abroad by insisting that national security concerns trump those of the exchange of information. He quite rightly points to harassment of Al Jazeera and the Voice of America. But Dadge's most persuasive allegations involve the way countries like Benin, Egypt and Uganda use the war on terror as an excuse to suppress their media.)
Most of the books under review are about civil liberties as traditionally defined. Nat Hentoff in ''The War on the Bill of Rights,'' Cynthia Brown in a collection of essays she edited called ''Lost Liberties,'' Richard C. Leone and Greg Anrig Jr., editors of ''The War on Our Freedoms'' and David Cole in his ''Enemy Aliens'' are focused on government abuse under such things as the USA Patriot Act, passed in a panic weeks after the terror attacks. The books focus on Attorney General John Ashcroft, the shameful continuing detention of hundreds of foreigners at Guantánamo Bay in Cuba after the war in Afghanistan, and new F.B.I. and Justice Department regulations.
Jeffrey Rosen in ''The Naked Crowd'' and Christian Parenti in ''The Soft Cage'' are concerned with how we have allowed ourselves to be monitored, photographed and tracked. If the government is investigating you, the amount of information about your interests, actions and whereabouts it can gather is staggering. In effect, Parenti notes, routine digital surveillance is everywhere -- credit cards, workplace ID's, gym memberships, health insurance records and Internet accounts.
At the same time -- and this is the issue that most exercises Rosen -- cameras that can scan facial structure and retinal patterns are recording our movements. As Rosen puts it: ''Before 9/11, the idea that Americans would voluntarily agree to live their lives under the gaze of a network of biometric surveillance cameras, peering at them in government buildings, shopping malls, subways and stadiums, would have seemed unthinkable, a dystopian fantasy. . . . More concerned about feeling safe than actually being safe, they demanded the construction of vast technological architectures of surveillance even though the most reliable empirical studies suggested that the proliferation of surveillance cameras had 'no effect on violent crime' or terrorism.''
Of course, keeping terror suspects imprisoned for years without access to lawyers may seem like a more serious problem than online companies tracking your purchases (''Corsets! Corsets! Corsets!'' screamed an Amazon welcome message to a colleague who had been researching 19th-century clothing). But like the complaints about the muzzling of the media, both smack of Big Brother. And, in the end, that is what ties all these books together -- the concern that under the threat of militant Islamic terrorism, we are handing over the keys of our souls to the state and corporations, and we don't even realize it. As Kathleen M. Sullivan, dean of the Stanford Law School, puts it in her contribution to ''The War on Our Freedoms'': ''We would surely object if the government required us to live in glass houses, carry all of our personal belongings in clear plastic bags, send our mail in glassine envelopes and leave our houses and drawers unlocked -- even if such measures made law enforcement easier. Would the same objections apply to government efforts to gather personal data in digital form on a national ID card?'' The message of all these books can be summed up in five simple words: be worried, be very worried.
Here is what there is to worry about: We are engaged in a ''war on terrorism'' but it turns out that this phrase is not, like the war on drugs or crime, a marketing slogan aimed at connoting seriousness of purpose. It is a legal term of art. The long-term struggle against Al Qaeda and other radical Muslim groups has been cast in military terms -- war -- for a specific reason. The enemy has made the entire world the ''battleground,'' the administration says, so anyone we capture in ''battle'' can be labeled (by the commander in chief) an ''enemy combatant,'' meaning someone with few rights under our Constitution. This is true even if that captive is an American citizen caught in the United States -- like Jose Padilla, the man detained at Chicago's O'Hare Airport and accused of being part of a Qaeda plot to explode a ''dirty bomb.'' As Ashcroft said, ''The last time I looked at Sept. 11, an American street was a war zone.'' As nearly all of these books point out, Padilla may indeed be a terrorist but that does not excuse holding him in solitary confinement in a Navy brig since June 2002 without charge.
Here is something else to worry about: Six weeks after Sept. 11, when the Capitol was sealed off because of an anthrax scare and legislators were working in temporary quarters, they rushed to pass a 342-page bill with the almost comically Orwellian name of ''Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001'' -- or the USA Patriot Act. It allows F.B.I. agents to obtain individual business and educational records without certifying that the target is considered a foreign agent or suspect of any kind.
If you believe these changes are eroding the liberties that make this nation great, these books are for you. They will give texture and sharpness to your rage. You can pick from among them based on your level of concern. If you are incensed, go for the Brown essay collection, ''Lost Liberties.'' In it, Aryeh Neier says, ''We are at risk of entering another of those dark periods of American history when the country abandons its proud tradition of respect for civil liberties.'' And Nancy Chang of the Center for Constitutional Rights says that executive measures taken in the wake of the Patriot Act ''are responsible for some of the most egregious civil liberties violations in the history of our nation.'' Given the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus during the Civil War, the Palmer raids in World War I and the internment of Japanese-Americans in World War II, both of these statements seem to me hard to defend.
For a similar level of outrage, along with a smart, readable history of government infringements in previous times of crisis, pick up Nat Hentoff's ''War on the Bill of Rights.'' In it he argues that overcoming the Patriot Act ''will be one of our severest tests yet to rescue the Constitution from our government.'' While such statements also strike me as exaggerated, I found the book helpful. Hentoff has been a civil liberties fiend for half a century and he brings together his fury at Ashcroft with illustrative anecdotes and quotes from the likes of Justice Louis Brandeis to make a strong case.
In ''Enemy Aliens,'' David Cole, a professor at Georgetown University Law Center, and an active civil liberties lawyer, focuses on the most egregious outrages of 9/11 -- the way in which thousands of foreigners have been rounded up, held without charge or on minor immigration violations, and simply forgotten. It is a powerful work and amply documented, but I do not accept Cole's thesis that there should be no distinction between the constitutional rights of Americans and those of foreigners. It's a noble thought but impractical. I am horrified that the prisoners at Guantánamo have not been charged or given access to some judicial forum to make their case. But it is far from clear to me that they should be treated precisely as American citizens should be. Nonetheless, Cole's indictment of the way we have handled foreign captives is accurate and sears the conscience.
More measured complaints come in ''The War on Our Freedoms,'' a distinguished collection published for the Century Foundation by PublicAffairs. Stephen J. Schulhofer, for example, has plenty of criticism for new foreign intelligence surveillance tactics but first tells us, rightly, I believe, that some of the provisions in the Patriot Act ''simply correct oversights in prior law or adapt technically worded statutes to new technologies and practices.'' He also reminds us of the horror of 9/11 (which many of these authors seem to forget) and points out that President Bush has preached respect for Muslims and ''has not sought to prosecute dissenters for political speech.'' Nonetheless, he laments that ''we have seen inexcusable opportunism on the part of the law enforcement establishment, which has exploited the momentum of 9/11 to expand government power to intrude on privacy in pursuit of wholly unrelated goals.''
The breathtaking ur-Ashcroft dismissal of such concerns is reproduced in many of these books. In December 2001, at a Senate hearing, he said, ''To those who scare peace-loving people with phantoms of lost liberty, my message is this: Your tactics only aid terrorists, for they erode our national unity and diminish our resolve.''
Of course, one legitimate complaint that Ashcroft and many others could lodge against nearly all these books is that they fail to spend any time on the threat to liberty not from Ashcroft but from Al Qaeda. Liberty is meaningless without security, as Viet Dinh, the former assistant attorney general who wrote much of the Patriot Act, has often said. Stuart Taylor Jr., a legal journalist, put it this way in The National Journal in December 2002: ''Should we eschew fishing expeditions through Ryder truck rental records and fertilizer purchases? Not if we want to prevent terrorist mass murders. And I, for one, am a lot less worried about the government snooping through my credit card bills and psychiatric records than about being anthraxed in the subway or killed by a nuclear explosion in my downtown Washington office.'' While this strikes me as too far in the other direction, such words are useful to keep in mind while reading of Ashcroft's sins.
One book in this group does thoughtfully balance safety and freedom -- Terrorism, Freedom, and Security,'' by Philip B. Heymann, a Harvard law professor who served as deputy attorney general under President Clinton. His prose is not the most stirring. But Heymann gets something that most of the other authors here do not acknowledge -- that whatever Big Brother motives may be at work in the Ashcroft Justice Department (and they are certainly there), a threat from terror organizations exists and the government has a responsibility to confront it.
Heymann is frank about the difficulties such a confrontation poses. Under the changed regulations, F.B.I. agents are permitted to attend public meetings and surf the Internet to the extent that any member of the public can do so, without needing a basis of suspicion. Heymann calls those changes defensible and I agree, especially because the previous rules were largely ignored. While agents, in theory, needed to justify an initial investigation, it was a pro forma rule -- they needed only to justify it in their own minds, not to a superior.
Heymann is as critical of this administration as some of those who refuse to face the fact that balancing liberty and security involves making hard choices. But the result, at least for me, is that Heymann's critique ends up being more powerful. Whether it is the decision to set up military tribunals, hold deportation hearings in secret, send suspects to foreign countries where torture is routine or hold hundreds without charge at Guantánamo, Heymann says these are techniques ''whose promise does not warrant their cost in lost values of a democratic society.'' Precisely so. Moreover, by refusing to consult Congress, the courts or our allies on so much of what it does, the administration is increasing the danger of terrorism rather than decreasing it. As Heymann says, we face a vicious cycle: ''The more we sense a hostility to, or disdain for, our plans, the more we will feel we have to rely on our own capacities, to meet our own needs, and not trust our welfare to cooperative international relations. But the more we disparage cooperative relations, the greater the actual hostility we will encounter.'' In the end, Heymann makes a persuasive argument for just the kind of multilateral approach to fighting terrorism for which the Bush administration has shown utter disdain.
We are at an odd moment in our political debate. Liberals, who favor big government, oppose the one we have now because of who controls it. Conservatives, who shun big government, have discovered the pleasures of having one at their disposal. And in this election year, every debate feeds into a partisan struggle for victory. The truth is that even most liberals would not be so upset about tightening border controls and easing F.B.I. restrictions if this administration showed some understanding of how to confront militant Islam with something other than force. It acts unilaterally and calls it leadership. That only makes one suspicious of everything it does. But liberals must realize that some things are correct and legitimate even if George Bush believes them.
The struggle over liberty and security often feels like the one over abortion, with neither side willing to concede an inch to the other and most Americans caught somewhere in between. The result is a cheapening of public discourse through a suggestion that the other side is so off base that there is nothing to debate. But as all these books make alarmingly clear, there is a great deal to think through for a society that needs to protect itself from a new kind of enemy -- a stateless terrorist consortium -- while keeping in check an old one: a zealous government with an enormous amount of power at its disposal.
Ethan Bronner is the deputy foreign editor of The Times.
Correction:  March 14, 2004, Sunday  A review on Feb. 22 about eight books on the domestic effects of the war on terrorism misstated the timing of detentions and expulsions of suspected subversive aliens now known as the Palmer raids. They took place in 1919-20, not during World War I.
