A short time after the World Trade Center came down, I went rat-trapping in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn with a couple of scientists from the New York City health department. The outing turned out to be historic: the city was trapping live rats for the first time in several decades. Dan Markowski, a Tennessee-born vector control officer, wore a health department windbreaker, and a ponytail stuck out from underneath his cowboy hat. Anne Li, an epidemiologist, was also dressed in a health department windbreaker and jeans. Born in Brooklyn, Li is tall, with a dry sense of humor, and has a complete nonaversion to rats, though most of her work with them occurs in a lab. She had never trapped a Rattus norvegicus on the streets.
Li had a lot of complimentary things to say about rats, like: ''I think rats are so underappreciated.' At another point, she turned to me and said, ''Rats are the smartest creatures.'
We were all picked up by Isaac Ruiz, a city exterminator who lives in the Bronx. Ruiz, who was wearing a wool shirt and sunglasses, told me that, unlike Markowski and Li, he was not especially eager to see rats. He lays the poison but doesn't linger. ''I don't like to be around them,' he said.
The city was trapping rats for two reasons. First, the health department wanted an indication of how well its rodent-control measures were working; at that time, Bushwick was the site of a pilot control program, which was expanded citywide last fall. The program uses a little 21st-century technology (more rigorous mapping of rat problem areas, for example, sometimes using mapping software) and a lot of traditional rat-proofing techniques: plugging rat holes, inspecting for landlord sanitation lapses and 8,000 new-and-improved rodent-resistant garbage cans.
The other reason for trapping rats came out of the heightened fear that gripped the city after the World Trade Center attacks. Concerns about biological terrorism led the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to reach out to the New York health department to help study rat populations in preparation for a potential release of plague bacteria. The C.D.C. wanted to get an idea of the density of the rat population and, more important, how many and what kind of fleas they were host to _ fleas, especially Oriental rat fleas, being the main conduit of disease. If there is a big flea population and there is an outbreak of plague, the last thing you want to do is start killing rats. Fleas jump off the dead rats' bodies and, in the absence of warmblooded rat hosts, could leap to humans. Thus Markowski and Li were out in Bushwick, rat-trapping to better prepare for the possibility of New York City being host to the Black Death.
Despite a recent influx of artists and young loft-seekers, Bushwick is one of the poorest neighborhoods in the city, and is still feeling the effects of the night it was looted during the blackout of 1977. In meetings back at the health department, the rat-trapping team debated releasing the rats after catching them. On the one hand, they didn't want to tamper with the rat population for the sake of the experiment. On the other hand, they didn't think the people of Bushwick would appreciate seeing the health department releasing rats into the community. The decision was made: check the rats for parasites, draw blood to check for disease and then kill the rats.
Trapping the rats turned out to be fairly easy. We went to an abandoned, fenced-in lot beneath an elevated train line above Grove Street. The fence had been put up by a local community group, Make the Road by Walking, which once protested a rat infestation in their neighborhood by bringing Rudolph Giuliani, then the mayor, a dead rat on a bed of lettuce. (Make the Road by Walking transformed the lot into a playground last year.) We laid out some rectangular, steel rattraps, made by Tomahawk, a Wisconsin company that is a favorite of scientific rat-trappers. We put peanut butter on the bait trays. ''Just a little dab'll do you,' Markowski said, as we looked around for appropriate places. Laying down about a half-dozen cagelike traps, we locked up the lot, went for bagels at a Russian bakery in Greenpoint that Ruiz knew about and returned the next morning, our traps filled with skittering, gray-blurred Rattus norvegicus. One had pulled a garbage bag off the street and into the cage, shredded the bag and made a makeshift nest; the others darted from corner to corner, trapped rats. Ruiz was half-repulsed, half-pleased, for he seemed to have caught the largest one: close to two pounds and more than a foot long, not including the tail _ the size of a large California-style burrito. ''I put the cage next to the biggest hole,' he told me.
The rats in their cages were put in large black plastic trash bags and then placed in the back of the van. We drove off to a shack in an abandoned lot that Markowski had previously scouted for the rat bloodletting. Once at the lot, Ruiz brought the rats out of the van. He then went back to the van and waited alongside it. He didn't want to watch Markowski draw rat blood. Li, on the other hand, was eager to observe; she said she hoped to learn how to draw rat blood in the field.
On the floor of the abandoned shed, they cleared away what appeared to be the debris of a drug addict and took out several clean syringes, some blood containers, cotton swabs and a bottle of halothane, an anesthetic. The wind was blowing hard, slamming a door on the shed. The scene felt somehow illicit.
As we prepared to look closely at the rats, Markowski cautioned me not to make too much of them; he seemed to be saying that I shouldn't get caught up in rat lore and rat mystique _ the images of rats as big as cats, rats that control the city's underworld. They were only rats, he explained to me, easily sedated, easily controlled, good scientific subjects, even in the wild. As he spoke, he opened the garbage bag covering one of the cages. Li treated two cotton balls with halothane. She dropped the cotton balls into the garbage bag and twisted it shut tight. This was an attempt to put the rat to sleep.
In a few minutes Markowski looked into the garbage bag at the rat. He shook his head as he closed the bag. Markowski looked a little incredulous. ''He's livelier than he was before,' Markowski said.
They increased the dosage of tranquilizer, putting in three treated cotton swabs this time. The wind was picking up. They waited and looked in the bag again. The rat was still alert. ''That rat's one tough bastard,' Markowski said.
Markowski increased the dosage again.
Finally, the rat looked unconscious, its tail limp, though when Markowski took it out of the cage he quickly discovered that it was still awake. He held the rat down on the ground with his hands and placed a halothane-treated swab directly over the rat's nose, holding the cotton with tweezers. The rat was going from groggy to woozy to sleepy to asleep, and as this happened, I was able to see that the rat was a large female, measuring, as we later determined, about 11 inches long, not including the tail, which was close to another 10 inches and looked to me like something belonging to an armadillo. At last the rat seemed at peace. Markowski held the rat down on the ground and plunged the needle into its chest, aiming for the rat's heart. He drew out the rat blood and bottled it; the blood was a deep, rich mammalian red. I looked away, over at Ruiz, who was still standing next to the van. Markowski put the rat in a freezer bag, with another dose of halothane. The halothane would kill the rat: it slipped from rat sleep to rat death.
Rat-control programs are like diets in that cities are always trying a new one. In the city, rats and men live in conflict, one side scurrying from the other or destroying the other's habitat _ an unending and brutish war. Rat stories are war stories, and they are told in conversation and on the news, in dispatches from the front that is all around us, though mostly underneath. The stories considered the most newsworthy in New York usually involve seemingly huge rat infestations and surface with regularity, like last summer's story of the firemen forced to move from a rat-infested firehouse in Queens.
There are, of course, rats throughout New York at any given time, but when a large, local infestation is noted, it leads to the perception that rats are gaining ground against humans. When this happens, certain predictable patterns of behavior occur on the human side. First, the city moves to a higher state of rat alert, and as a result New Yorkers begin to see rats where they never noticed them before. Then, whoever is mayor at the time makes numerous statements that seek to ensure the public that ''this ugly condition,' to use the phrase of Mayor William O'Dwyer in 1950, will be taken care of. ''Something should be done,' O'Dwyer said in a statement that was followed by the appointment of a citywide rat specialist. In 1997, during a rat alert, the city formed the Interagency Rodent Extermination Task Force. This rat offensive was typical in that the city trapped and poisoned rats until the rat population was reduced, but of course not eradicated.
The mother of all New York City rat battles took place on Rikers Island, beginning around 1915 and lasting well into the 1930's. Rikers Island sits in the East River at the opening of Bowery Bay. Once it was small and bucolic and green, an 87-acre patch of land owned since 1664 by a family of early Dutch settlers named Rycken. The city bought the island in 1884 and used it as a dump for old metal and cinders. It was one of the first designated dumps in New York. Rikers Island worked as an antidote to the city's garbage problem until people began to complain about Rikers Island itself. Very soon, it had grown into a 415-acre island _ a mass of garbage on and surrounding the original island, which in addition to being a dump was now also home to a prison farm. ''Such a mass of putrescent matter was perhaps never before accumulated in one spot in so short a time,' Harper's Weekly wrote in 1894. One complaint about Rikers Island was rats.
Rats from all over the city came to Rikers Island, arriving on the fleets of garbage scows. Within the island was a huge lake of stagnant water, and the rats lived along the shore, feeding on garbage, drinking in the refuse-infused lake; in its putrid isolation, Rikers Island was a rat utopia. An official with the Department of Corrections at the time estimated that there were a million rats. The rats ate from the prison's vegetable garden. The rats ate the pigs on the prison farm. The rats ate a dog that was supposed to kill the rats. The Corrections Department baited and trapped, but as is often the case in particularly large infestations encouraged by particularly large amounts of potential rat food, the rats bred faster than they could be killed. There was a suggestion that the city bring thousands of snakes to the island so that the snakes could kill the rats, then a suggestion that the rats be killed with rat-destroying bacteria. Neither of those suggestions was acted upon. Then, in 1930, there were reports of rats swimming from Rikers Island to Roslyn, a high-toned summer community on Long Island. That fall, according to newspapers, the Sanitation Department used World War I-era poison gas to kill some of the rats. The next year, a Manhattan dentist named Harry Unger proposed leading a hunting party of a dozen rifle-armed men. Unger and his posse were poised to invade the island until the city called them off, fearing the hunters might shoot the prison guards or one another.
At last, in the spring of 1933, two exterminators _ the Billig Brothers, Irving and Hugo _ had some success, when, after supervising the placement of 25,000 baits around the island, they carried off 2,000 rat carcasses on the first day. They estimated three million rats were living on Rikers Island. They estimated that they would be able to kill 25,000 rats, and they saw those rats killed as an investment toward rats that would not need to be killed in the future. (It is not known how many rats they actually killed.) ''Remember,' Irving said, ''each female rat can have four litters a year. Every litter contains from 5 to 21 rats. These young rats will have families of their own in four months, and their children will be having other children in four more months. Now, just figure how many rats we have killed by killing 25,000.' The Billigs were successful, in that they reduced the population significantly, though modern studies indicate that Irving Billig probably underestimated the rat's reproductive capacity.
Rats live in the world where man lives. As the grizzly bear indicates wilderness, so Rattus norvegicus indicates inhabitedness, or at least the opposite of wildness, which is garbage and trash and homes and apartments and man. The not-so-epic-seeming story of rats is close to one version of the epic story of man: when they arrive as immigrants to a newfound land, rats proceed to push out creatures that preceded them, to multiply to such an extent as to stretch resources to the limit, to consume their way toward famine. At that point, they decline. Rats live in man's universe, surviving on the effluvia of human society; they eat our garbage. Rats command a perverse celebrity status _ nature's mobsters _ because of their habits and because of their disease-carrying ability. And yet, despite all this, rats are ignored or destroyed but rarely studied in their natural habitat; disparaged but not often described.
The precedent for trapping live rats in New York City came from the work of David Davis, the little-known city rat scholar, who was the first naturalist to apply to an alley rat the same kind of up-close nature research applied to, for instance, the threatened marbled murrelet in its habitat on the Northwest coastal forest. Davis began studying rats during World War II. The U.S. government was concerned that the Germans might use rats to spread disease through Europe, the way the U.S. government is concerned about Al Qaeda today. After the war, with Europe's infrastructure in ruins, the U.S. was concerned about rats ruining food supplies and spreading disease.
The Rodent Ecology project was founded in Baltimore at Johns Hopkins University; the scientists there were working at the dawn of ecology, studying the relationship of an organism to its environment and to its fellow organisms and doing so with an organism that, frankly, no one wanted to have any kind of relationship with. They went into neighborhoods that didn't see a lot of scientists _ beat-up, rundown, near-the-waterfront neighborhoods. It was a new frontier for wildlife biologists. As P. Quentin Tomich, a biologist who worked with Davis as a graduate student and subsequently went off to study plague in rodents in Hawaii, told me, ''No one had thought of the urban slums as a habitat.'
Davis trapped rats, marked them, released them, trapped them again, and his papers opened a floodgate of myth-busting and groundbreaking rat information. Davis showed that rats, commonly thought to be wanderers, in fact live in very small areas, in colonies; that rats generally stay within 65 feet of their nests; that rats, when released far from their nest, will nonetheless wander for miles; that male rats tend to go farther away from their nests than female rats; that one way rats may protect themselves is by becoming completely familiar with their home territory, their city alley or block; that rats are likely to cross alleys but not roads; that rats use regular runways or paths to feed, taking the same paths night after night, rarely diverging, rarely straying (''For example, a rat may live under the steps, run along the fence to the alley and there feed on garbage,' Davis wrote); that rats in the city are often bigger than rats in the country; and that the social rankings of the rat colony are of great significance. In ''Characteristics of the Global Rat Populations,' an article published in The American Journal of Health in 1951, Davis wrote: ''As the population increases relative to its food supply, the higher ranking members still get adequate food, but the low members begin to starve. Low-ranking females have poor reproductive success, and progeny from low-ranking females have little chance to grow normally.'
Throughout the 50's, Davis was America's rodent-control guru. He traveled with America's rat populations. He consulted with cities on their rats, preaching his most important discovery throughout the country _ that poisoning rats was not in itself an effective way of controlling them. In fact, when rats are killed off, the pregnancy rates of the surviving rats double and the survivors rapidly gain weight. The rats that survive become stronger. ''Actually, the removal merely made room for more rats,' Davis wrote. The only way to get rid of rats was to get rid of the rat food, or garbage. But no one wanted to hear this: it was the dawn of the age of the chemical, of poisons and pesticides, and people seemed to want a sexier, chemical-based fix.
A forgotten accomplishment of David Davis is his debunking of what is still today the most often quoted statistic about rats _ the one-rat-per-person rule. This statistic is ritually used in news stories about rats and has been for almost a hundred years. It is not true. It is a bastardization of a statistic derived from a study of rats written in England in 1909 by W.R. Boelter, titled ''The Rat Problem.' At the time, Boelter toured the English countryside and asked the following question: Is it reasonable to assume that there is one rat per acre? People responded by saying things like ''certainly' or ''absurdly low.' Boelter did not ask people in cities the same question, and in the end, he made an educated guess: one rat per acre in England. Because there were 40 million cultivated acres in England at the time, he concluded that there were 40 million rats. Coincidentally, 40 million people lived in England in 1909. The one-rat-per-acre statistic became one rat per human.
People loved that statistic, perhaps because they abhorred it. They did not bother to recalculate for their own particular rat and human populations _ an extremely labor-intensive process that only Davis even seemed interested in doing. And thus, it has become the sacred rat statistic. The United Nations has used it. Pest-control companies use it. Health departments use it. Even today, it is commonly said that in New York there are eight million rats, one for every New Yorker.
We don't know exactly how many rats there are in New York City today. ''The newspapers, they all want that number,' says Robert Corrigan, a rat-control consultant recently hired by the city. ''It's all gobbledygook.' But we know that there are probably fewer than eight million. We know this thanks to Davis, who in 1949 analyzed New York's rat population and called the one-rat-per-human statistic ''absurd.' He had just completed a precise calculation of the rat population of Baltimore by trapping, counting burrows and measuring such things as rat runways and rat droppings. In New York, he began his work in six blocks in East Harlem, bringing in an experienced trapper. At first, Davis determined there were an average of three rats per apartment in infested Harlem buildings, mostly in kitchens and bathrooms.
But he further determined that more people thought they had rats than actually had them. When he added up his calculations, New York's rat population was nowhere near eight million. Even the New York waterfront, which was mythically associated with rats, was less infested than assumed. ''Certainly, there are no more than a few thousand in the entire dock areas of New York City,' Davis wrote. In all, Davis put the rat population of New York at one rat for every 36 people, or 250,000 rats _ a rat population roughly the size of the human population of Akron, Ohio, today. When the health department read Davis's report, it canceled a citywide rat extermination plan. Still, the number-of-humans-equals-number-of-rats formula would not die. It is something people want to believe. A few years later, even the New York City Health Department was telling people that there were eight million rats in New York.
Rat hysteria continues, some of it understandable, some of it successfully playing up the larger-than-life news-selling power of rats: see the excellent night shots of rats that show up like seasonal bird migrations on summer TV news broadcasts, the rats skittering in the camera light, the grease-slicked sidewalks shimmering. Rat-infestation complaints to the health department increased this year, from 16,000 for fiscal year 2002 to 21,000 for 2003. This past summer, in addition to the evacuation of Engine Company 298 from its fire station in Queens because of Rattus norvegicus, there were reports of rat infestations throughout the city: one well-publicized rat sighting nourishes the next. On Aug. 14, the day of the big blackout, Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced an expansion of the experimental Bushwick program, increasing inspections and exterminations in the Bronx and Harlem and budgeting $300,000 for rat-resistant garbage cans _ news that was lost in the blackout. ''New York to rats _ drop dead!' he said from a lot in Bushwick.
The city's largest rat problem, the infestation in and around ground zero following Sept. 11, was successfully controlled by advance work by the health department, as well as exterminators who volunteered from around the country. But their efforts got little attention in the press. Months later, James Gibson, the Health Department commissioner who heads the city's rodent-control program, testified to the City Council that they had successfully contained a potential rat explosion. After it was all over, Markowski, who like Li has since left the health department, summed it up this way: ''This is our dilemma. If you're out there doing your job, there are no rats. But it's notoriously hard to confirm your job. The only way to prove it is to stop.'
That autumn afternoon in Bushwick, after we had trapped the rats and were setting up our rat-blood-drawing station in the abandoned lot, Markowski and Li began to tackle their second rat. They started with a larger dosage of halothane on the second rat, hoping to anesthetize it quicker. It was a larger rat, a foot long. ''He's very healthy,' Li said. ''He's missing a little hair on his nose, but I think that's because he was trying to get out of the cage.'
They found no fleas on the rat, which was a good thing. (In fact, the C.D.C. would eventually find that there did not appear to be a significant rat-flea infestation in New York City rats, making a potential flea-borne biological plague weapon less effective.)
''Anne, you want to bleed this one?' Markowski asked.
''O.K.,' Li said.
Two cotton balls soaked with halothane were not enough. They tried more. ''This is what, four balls?' Markowski asked. ''Man, four balls after taking two balls already.' Markowski shook his head again and held a cotton ball to the rat's big rat nose. ''We're underestimating these rats,' Markowski said.
Li agreed. ''These guys are amazing,' she said.
She began to draw blood from the rat, but as she did it became clear that the rat was not asleep.
''Uh, he's still awake,' Li said.
Markowski had already noticed this. He had seen the rat moving, seen it reviving and regaining consciousness, and rather than waste precious rat crisis time alerting us to the rat's movements, he was, in an impressively unfrantic way, looking for a way to stop the rat _ any way to secure the rat, to hold it down. Finally he just stepped on the rat's tail. ''Oh, you were just play asleep, weren't you?' Markowski said. The rat rose up and seemed to slash at Markowski; it snarled. In a minute, they had it anesthetized again.
The wind blew and the shed door slammed and I saw a white cat come out of the trash, emerging from behind a plastic replica of a Greek bust. In knocking out the third rat, Markowski and Li increased the halothane dosage significantly. When they thought the rat was asleep, they took it out of its cage. It, too, was a large healthy rat, a foot long. Markowski was beginning to bleed the rat. As he did, he noticed something on the rat's fur.
''What's that?' Markowski said.
''It's a tick,' Li said.
Markowski leaned into the rat. ''It's a mite.'
''O.K., Dan,' Li said. But as they were talking, the rat began to squiggle greatly.
This time, the rat's movement was more than just the groggy squiggling and snarling that the other rats had made; this time, even after a large dose of tranquilizer, the rat was somehow recovering all its rat strength. Markowski stopped drawing blood. He moved calmly but rapidly. He seemed to think about trying more halothane on the rat. Then the rat moved again _ this time less rat-on-drugs and more wild rat. Markowski put his foot down on the tail ''Oh, that's it,' Li said. She backed away _ never once taking her eyes off the recovering rat. Markowski pulled up his foot. I was standing there, too, right next to the rat, and I looked around to figure out where I could run, if necessary, and then realized that I was between the rat and a wall _ trapped. So I just stood as still as possible, as the rat lifted his big body up and first waddled, and then walked and then wearily scampered off. I was trembling a little.
Markowski was not trembling, but he did seem as if he were in shock. ''I'm using my foot,' he said. He was speaking in the present tense, as if watching a replay. ''But the rat still gets up, and pulls himself away.' Markowski was really shaking his head now. In fact, he was no longer telling me to keep rats in perspective. ''Rats are incredible, they really are,' he said. ''I mean, there aren't many animals you can bleed like that and that can take it.'
Li added: ''And the thing is you're never going to beat them. They have something going for them that you don't, which is natural instinct. Like you don't instinctively get rats. You're not a cat. But they instinctively avoid death and the obstacles that we put in their way to kill them. Besides, I always say that if you killed every rat in New York City, you would have created new housing for 60 million rats.'
''Let's put it like this,' Markowski said. ''If you put that cat in that bag with the halothane, he'd be dead.'
We all stood there and looked over at where the rat had returned to the wild.
''It's a New York City rat,' Markowski said.
Robert Sullivan, who writes frequently for the magazine, is the author of ''Rats: Observations on the History and Habitat of the City's Most Unwanted Inhabitants,' to be published this spring by Bloomsbury and from which this article is adapted.
