Gutted, Not Given Up
Q. The Metro-North train stops in Harlem right next to a gutted and burned-out red-brick building at 125th Street and Park Avenue. Since it's been in that shape for decades, why don't they tear it down?
A. Because it's a landmark, it's in better shape than it looks, and developers have had big plans for it, even before plans for a Marriott Courtyard hotel were announced last year for the parking lot across 125th Street.
The six-story building, formerly occupied by the Corn Exchange Bank and the Mount Morris Bank, was completed in 1883, packed with ornamentation. It has been gutted since at least the early 1970's. But a year ago, the Economic Development Corporation sold the charred, roofless city-owned structure to a partnership between Full Spectrum Building and Development, a Harlem concern, and Ethel Bates and her nonprofit corporation, Resurgence Inc.
''We have fought hard for that building,'' Ms. Bates said. She plans a Harlem Culinary School for people interested in a restaurant career along with stores and office space to help finance the culinary school. Renovation is expected to start in late spring or early summer, Ms. Bates said, and the $11 million project should take no more than a year to complete.
Bears of New York
Q. With all the talk about bears encroaching on the New Jersey and northern suburbs, when was the last time a bear roamed in Manhattan?
A. Not only bears, but wolves, too, roamed Manhattan in the 17th century, even after the British took it over from the Netherlands.
''Memorial History of the City of New York'' (1892), edited by James Grant Wilson, says of the late 1600's: ''A dense forest in which deer herded plentifully covered the middle and upper parts of the Island, where a few of the Manhattans lived in almost primitive barbarism. Wolves roamed at large through this wilderness, and committed occasional ravages during the remainder of the century; and bears were not infrequent in their visits to the island, and afforded rare sport to the settlers, as the annals show.
''A bear hunt which took place, as late as 1680, in an orchard between the present populous Cedar Street and Maiden Lane, is chronicled by the Rev. Charles Wooley.''
A different, apocryphal-sounding account, possibly inspired by the same shooting, claims that a freshly killed bear that had crossed the Hudson was displayed by a butcher on the site of what later became the Washington Market in Lower Manhattan. According to this account, that was the origin of the term ''bear market,'' meaning a fall in stock prices, or speculating in anticipation of a fall.
Another explanation of the term comes from the Dictionary of Phrase and Fable (1898), which cited the proverb of ''selling the skin before you have caught the bear,'' and referred to those who entered into contracts in the notorious South Sea bubble in the early 18th century, to transfer stock at a stated price.
The Town of Linoleum
Q. Didn't Staten Island once have a neighborhood called Linoleumville? How did that happen?
A. Travis, on Staten Island's west shore next to the now-closed Fresh Kills landfill, was first settled in the 1600's and used to be called Travisville, after Col. Jacob Travis, a major property owner.
Frederick Walton, the Englishman who invented linoleum and patented it in the early 1860's, opened a factory in the community in 1872, in partnership with Joseph Wild, called the American Linoleum Manufacturing Company. The first linoleum factory in America, it even had its own company town, Linoleumville.
By 1900, the plant employed 800 people, and brought in many Polish immigrants. The plant closed in 1931 and was later replaced by a Consolidated Edison generating plant. The community has gone back to being Travis.
MICHAEL POLLAK
F.Y.I. E-mail: fyi@nytimes.com
