LIKE many of his colleagues, Stuart Schnur, the superintendent of the 25-square-mile Montgomery School District in Somerset County, feels a little maligned these days.
It is not just the letter from the State Commission of Investigation seeking information on salaries and benefits of school superintendents and assistant superintendents that he and leaders of 49 other school districts received last month. It is also the hostile tone that he and others perceived. The letter ended with the words: ''This request is made in lieu of the issuance of a subpoena.''
''We're all public figures; we're used to people asking about such things,'' Dr. Schnur, 56, a career educator who earns $168,500 a year, said as he made his usual early morning rounds of the sprawling high school in this affluent, rural district, where scores on the SAT are among the highest in the state.
''But ask, and you receive,'' he said. ''I mean, to send out this extremely heavy-handed letter inferring subpoenas and investigating things gone wrong, that kind of set us all off when we're supposed to be in a time when we're supposed to be working together.''
By ''we'' he means local school administrators and state education officials who are trying to cut administrative costs at the request of Governor McGreevey, who has focused largely on education to cover an expected $5 billion budget shortfall, much as he focused last year on cuts in funds for the arts. Because the State Commission of Investigation began its inquiry soon after the governor's call for educators to cut costs, many suspect that the investigation is politically motivated. But the governor's aides and S.C.I. officials deny any such connection.
The inquiry also came on the heels of newspaper accounts in the last year reporting excesses in salaries and perquisites in some areas. The retiring superintendent in Ridgefield, a relatively affluent district in Bergen County, for instance, added to his $205,000 salary by cashing in unused personal, sick and vacation days accumulated over 17 years for some $256,000. With some other benefits, his total one-year earnings reached $588,000.
Many educators say some salaries look distorted if not put into context with the time-consuming and increasingly complex duties of their jobs as a result of new state and federal programs. Many superintendents complain of 60- to 80-hour work weeks.
''Their salaries are commensurate with their responsibilities as C.E.O.'s of their school districts, and they shouldn't be defensive about it,'' said James Murphy, executive director of the New Jersey Association of School Administrators. Indeed, some school districts are the largest employers in their towns.
One in four superintendents in the state makes $143,000 or more, said Frank Belluscio, a spokesman for the New Jersey School Boards Association. The average salary of 570 superintendents in New Jersey was $125,865 in 2002-03, a 3.7 percent increase over the previous school year.
Defenders of the Ridgefield superintendent, Richard A. Sabella, said he had attracted millions of dollars for the district in tuition payments by creating a magnet program for special education students that also kept the school tax rate stable for nearly a decade.
Lee Seglem, executive assistant to the investigation commission, would neither affirm nor deny that the agency was conducting an investigation. But he said it was not unusual for the S.C.I. to investigate salaries and pensions of public officials.
In 1998, the commission found that thousands of public employees including school superintendents and police chiefs had made secret deals with local governments to use their vacation and sick days to inflate their pensions. The S.C.I. recommended a $15,000 limit for pay on unused sick days for employees of municipal governments and school districts, similar to a policy that is in effect for state employees.
''There was legislation introduced to do that in the wake of the report,'' Mr. Seglem said. ''But it never passed.''
Nonetheless, Mr. Belluscio of the school boards association said some school boards were capping carry-over vacation time.
Marion A. Bolden, the Newark schools superintendent, likens her job to running a corporation, and in her case, it is one beset with social problems that the more affluent districts do not have.
Dr. Bolden gets $202,000 a year plus bonuses ranging from 4 to 16 percent if certain goals are met; she also gets a $7,500 annuity. For this she is responsible for a $7.3 million budget, 7,500 employees in 76 schools and a student population of 42,395.
''That's bigger than some colleges in New Jersey,'' said Bill Garner, professor of education at the Graduate School of Education at Rutgers University.
In a recent conversion, Dr. Bolden remarked: ''I went to two basketball games of my students on Saturday and tried to get to three. On Sunday I met with two parents, and so I'm working on Saturday and Sunday too, and somebody wants to begrudge me a good salary?''
Since the Legislature removed tenure for school superintendents more than a decade ago, Mr. Murphy of the administrators' association says, school boards have had trouble just getting good candidates to apply and have had to sweeten the pot with perquisites. Many teachers and principals who have tenure and have had salary increases over the years no longer have the incentive to become superintendents, he added.
Before hiring Dr. Schnur, the Montgomery school board turned down eight candidates and started a second search. The board then lured Dr. Schnur away from the Monroe School District, where he had earned a reputation as an innovative administrator and in 1999 was named superintendent of the year by the New Jersey Association of School Administrators.
Linda Romano, president of the Montgomery board, said that the district was building a much bigger high school with the latest technology, and that Dr. Schnur, who was known as a technology expert, had already built a high school in Monroe.
He also brought ''his vision for a new administrative structure,'' she said, to deal with a growing number of students.
''During my nine years on the board, we went from 2,500 to 5,000 students and we are a completely different district than we were,'' she said, ''and he had some very creative ideas on how to address our needs.''
One idea was to guarantee a sound curriculum for all students by adding six new curriculum directors, one each in math, science, language arts, humanities, instructional technology and physical education and health. They report to the assistant superintendent for instruction and are responsible for creating and overseeing coordinated instruction programs from kindergarten through the 12th grade.
Over all, they are among 600 employees for whom Dr. Schnur is responsible, including 500 teachers, principals and nurses and 100 other employees including cafeteria workers, custodians, computer technicians and bus drivers for the district's 45 routes.
Dr. Schnur's salary of $168,500 is only $5,000 more than he made at Monroe, he said. But, he added, under his five-year contract, he receives an annual $5,000 minimum increase plus a merit increase as determined by the board. His merit increases have been about $7,500 a year in his three years at Montgomery.
In addition, he receives a tax-sheltered annuity of $3,500 a year, and the district pays the premium on a $50,000 life insurance policy, several thousand dollars for his dues in professional societies and a car allowance of about $3,500 a year. In the Monroe district, which covers 50 square miles, he was given a car.
Mr. Belluscio said school boards commonly give their superintendents annuities and dues for professional societies. He said that car use depended in part on the size of the district, number of schools and the distances among them, with districts usually providing a daily payment or a lump sum for use rather than providing a car. Districts are also increasingly providing laptop or home computers and cellphones.
Mr. Schnur said the investigation had not upset his school routine. Each morning he still drops by the high school or the middle school to chat with teachers and students in the halls before heading over to his office several miles away, because, he says, it is a way of ''touching base.''
''Maybe this sounds corny,'' he said. ''But I'm in a good place. I'm working with great people. I'm able to see I'm making a difference. And I don't get beaten up on a regular basis.''
EDUCATION
