CLASSICAL music has long been enchanted with its own interpretive past. For its most ardent fans, the great soloists of the early-  and mid-20th century have acquired a near-mythic status, as if they stood a few decades closer to the source of some original musical truth.
Whether or not you agree, there is plenty of documentation to support this belief, thanks to the endless stream of historic recordings now being released. The newest trend in this vein is historic performances on DVD, including the ambitious Classic Archive series on EMI Classics, culled from almost 1,000 hours of mostly live performances that were filmed for television broadcast from the late-1940's through the 60's.
More than 25 DVD's have already been issued, spotlighting individual singers (including Régine Crespin and Teresa Berganza), conductors (including Herbert von Karajan and Leopold Stokowski) and -- the bulk of the series -- instrumentalists (including Jascha Heifetz, Arthur Rubinstein, Nathan Milstein, Yehudi Menuhin, Claudio Arrau, David Oistrakh, Mstislav Rostropovich and many others).
For the uninitiated, the names might spark dim recognition or vague curiosity, but for music lovers of a certain vintage, they are like talismans, instantly evoking a golden age of interpretive authority and musical grandeur. For some, they will also call to mind cherished memories of performances heard with their own ears. Indeed, having heard these artists live is still something to boast about, a story you might tell your younger music-loving friend who would listen with a mixture of awe and envy.
For many years, I was that young friend, born too late to have had any direct contact with this generation of players, most of whom were in their prime in the 1950's and 60's. We have access to these decades through audio recordings, of course, but that remains strictly an aural experience.
So it has been a pleasure to watch these DVD's and indulge in the visual dimension of a fabled era. The experience benefits further from the virtues of the DVD format, which enables you to cue up a particular movement of a piece or even watch a sequence in slow motion to catch those lightning details that would be a blur onstage.
Most of the video is black-and-white and of decent quality, though the camerawork in the original films varies widely and can sometimes be frustrating. Just when you want to see a player's hands, the camera will zoom in on his face or cut to a long, pointless shot of the orchestra. Other period television quirks bring chuckles, as when, in the middle of Leonid Kogan's performance of Beethoven's Violin Concerto, the camera pans across a copy of the score, tracing the piece's progress measure by measure. (All that's missing is the bouncing ball.) Another amusing moment comes in the middle of Heifetz's rendition of Debussy's ''Girl With the Flaxen Hair,'' when a shot of Heifetz playing dissolves into a staged scene with a willowy woman and her long, flowing tresses.
But such quaintnesses aside, there are many hours of great musicians in their prime. Contrary to what golden-age myth-makers might have us believe, not every performance leaves you breathless, yet there are plenty of truly arresting moments. Rostropovich and Richter give an electrifying recital of the Beethoven cello sonatas. Other highlights include Henryk Szeryng's stylish Brahms Violin Concerto and Rubinstein's pellucid Beethoven Fourth Piano Concerto under Antal Dorati.
Some of the best gems appear in ''bonus'' material, oddly tucked away at the end of each disc: Stravinsky at 83 conducting his ''Firebird'' Suite, the pianist Solomon playing Beethoven's ''Appassionata'' Sonata just before his debilitating stroke, and the violinist Mischa Elman playing short works by Fritz Kreisler with a weeping old-world tone.
Many of these players recorded this repertory during their lifetimes, sometimes in better performances than we find here, but those recordings capture only disembodied musical voices. Here, the smallest kinesthetic details can bring pleasure: the sleek geometry of Heifetz's form, his rapid-fire delivery in a showpiece like Grigoras Dinicu's ''Hora Staccato.''
Another example is Milstein, whose recordings of Bach's unaccompanied sonatas and partitas are legendary for their architectural vision, their refinement of tone and their clarity of articulation. Did you ever wonder just how he pulled it all off? Here he is in 1968, playing the pinnacle movement of solo Bach, the Chaconne from the D minor Partita, with unflinching musicality and perfect eloquence. His impeccably honed technique wastes not a millimeter of motion while producing an amazing accuracy of intonation. Watching this performance, one can sympathize with Isaac Stern's memorable description of Milstein as ''the man who did not have fingers on his left hand but radar.''
Unfortunately, not all artists are so well served in this series. The first Oistrakh disc, for example, is a disappointing hodgepodge of mostly studio recordings that do not come close to conveying the full breadth of his artistry or the fierce intensity of his playing in live performance. Thankfully, another disc just out rectifies this imbalance, and then some.
The new DVD features three notable Oistrakh collaborations, which get only better as you go. First he plays the Bach Double Concerto with Yehudi Menuhin, a performance more remarkable for its double-star power than for its interpretation or sound quality. But next comes Oistrakh with his son, Igor, in Mozart's Sinfonia Concertante under Menuhin's baton. It is a joy to watch this rare footage of a father and son rendering one of the most conversationally sublime works Mozart ever wrote. The elder Oistrakh in this case plays viola, his tone a Gibraltar of autumnal depth and beauty beneath his son's lithe solo violin. Their stern stage rapport keeps sentimentalism in check, but there is no mistaking the deeply felt connection in their music-making.
The true prize of this disc, however, is Oistrakh (back on the violin) and Rostropovich playing an explosive Brahms Double Concerto with the Moscow Philharmonic under Kirill Kondrashin. Both players are in top form: Oistrakh's phrases are deeply chiseled and majestic, Rostropovich's tone is a smoldering river of molten sound. With Rostropovich spurring them on at every turn, the duo generates enough heat to warm a midsize Siberian city. The outer movements, in particular, produce some of the most combustible string playing of the entire series.
Taking a step back, one might legitimately wonder whether this cherished interpretive past, made more palpable by every release, threatens to overshadow the interpreters of today. Should one even be compared with the other? These are questions for another occasion, but it is at least worth noting that golden ages can be tricky to pin down. When the legendary violinist Eugène Ysaye died, critics pronounced the end of an era and criticized the performers of the day as rich in technique but poor in poetry. The year was 1931, and just look at what still lay ahead.
What's more, the stature these players acquired had to do with more than just their formidable talents; it was connected to the status of music in the broader world that made them heroes. Soviet artists like Kogan, Oistrakh, Rostropovich and Richter were products of a superpower bent on projecting its artistic supremacy to the world. That their readings have a grand, monumental quality is perhaps inevitable; that these instrumentalists can at the same time be subtle and discerning is a tribute to their individual genius.
Finally, part of the bittersweet allure of watching these historic performances no doubt comes from their very irretrievability. None of these players (except, perhaps, Mr. Rostropovich) will be heard again next season at Carnegie Hall. These are ephemeral moments rescued from a past that, even with all this documentation, recedes as quickly as sound itself.
MUSIC
