''This is what you should be writing about -- this gap,'' Jewelle Bickford says over flutes of Champagne in her Park Avenue living room. A dynamic presence in her high-heeled blondness, Bickford is a senior manager in charge of new business and development at Rothschild North America, an investment-banking unit of the Rothschild Group. She has just returned from a conference of high-level businesswomen, where a fierce debate erupted over plastic surgery after someone mentioned ageism in corporate life. Not since the battles of the 1970's between careerists and stay-at-home moms has Bickford seen such polarization. ''Those who had had it were trying to tell everyone how great it is, how it helps your career.''
Rather than hiding their surgery, Bickford says, post-op patients are now recruiting others. She mentions an acquaintance who invited about a dozen friends to her ski house in Utah and then invited her plastic surgeon to give everyone free consultations. On the other hand, those who won't have surgery, she says, ''pick on the ones who do.'' I listen guiltily, recalling my schadenfreude over the art dealer whose face had come out crooked, and the fashion editor who had suffered a minor heart attack on the operating table.
''Atavistic'' is a word Bickford uses when describing the out-for-blood nature of the arguments. I am not surprised, because women are tribal animals. We seek consensus. Stray too far from the norm, and you risk being branded an outcast. What we are fighting over is the appearance of normal.
The gap is not new. What is new is how it is moving. It used to separate faces seen onscreen and in society pages from those encountered at the office and in the gym. Now the fault line runs down the middle of the boardroom and the faculty lounge. Also new is the look of the lift. Although some still go for the ultrasmooth space-alien effect, most patients and surgeons prefer to leave some lines, so the overall impression is not pulled up but pulled together. The lifted face has started to seem normal, leaving the unlifted one looking, well, strange.
Back in the last century, I wrote an essay for Allure magazine in which I deplored the erasure of history from the faces of my friends and vowed to preserve what time was etching on my own. It was a clarion call -- heeded only by me -- to face up to old age. I taunted surgically inclined friends with doubts about their sanity, all the while stoically enduring the fruits of my convictions: the woman at the next table mistaking my friend for my daughter, the well-meaning offers of senior discounts at museums, the insinuating hiss of the bus lowering itself for me. Smugly insisting that it is the writer's voice, not her face, that must remain vital, I took comfort in the proud, ruined countenances of female writers: Edith Sitwell, Isak Dinesen, Lillian Hellman.
Then I meet a writer friend (a little younger than me) for lunch at Mercer Kitchen, to celebrate the completion of her latest novel. Am I becoming delusional, or did the writing of that novel have a miraculous rejuvenating effect on her chin? After some badgering, she confesses, claiming that for female authors of a certain age, the plastic surgeon is fast becoming the first stop on the book tour.
Over cappuccinos at Via Quadronno, an actress friend recalls the poetry in the haggard lineaments of Jeanne Moreau and Simone Signoret in their later roles. She names respected actresses who have felt the cold kiss of the scalpel. Who will be left to play the parts of time-ravaged wrecks? It would seem that no one is immune to this morphing. ''If Eleanor Roosevelt were alive today, Franklin and his mother would be packing her off for a lift and a nose tip,'' my friend conjectures. ''Golda Meir would look like Tovah Feldshuh.''
I recall that about the time I wrote my antiplastic manifesto, Diane Keaton wrote one of her own for Mirabella. So I get a front row seat to her latest movie, ''Something's Gotta Give,'' in which she is a playwright of menopausal years. While everyone else is laughing and crying, I am fixated on Keaton's face: real lines on the forehead, no Botox. Neck and chin are holding up nicely. Her courage to appear with the original uncut version of her face is inspirational. Now if only I had her looks and her lighting crew.
That night at a party on the Upper East Side, I feel I am the only woman wearing wrinkles. The eyes of the other guests sweep by, refusing to connect, as if my nasolabial folds are disfigurements too painful to bear. Perhaps I am deluded in thinking that my jowls are an advertisement for courage, proclaiming that I'm not afraid of growing old. Maybe they are shrieking that I am a clueless loser who doesn't have the wherewithal to have my chin taken care of.
''Taken care of,'' ''having work done'' -- we now use home-maintenance terms when referring to surgery.
Deciding to beard the lion in his den, I visit Dr. Gerald Imber, a Fifth Avenue plastic surgeon. Imber wrote ''The Youth Corridor,'' a book positing that women can look the same as they age from 35 to 55 if they maintain a rigid beauty regimen and have small surgeries over the years.
A hermetically sealed elevator whisks me down to the subterranean chambers where he performs his operations. A young and pretty nurse motions me to an aqua leather reclining seat in the examination room. Imber enters wearing immaculate scrubs that almost match the chair and his eyes. His hair is white yet youthfully cropped. His face looks firmer than in the photo on his Web site, yet nothing screams, ''Lift.'' His complexion is pink and slightly scraped.
I confide my fear -- that the gap is shifting. He cheerfully confirms, saying that he noticed it 9 or 10 years ago, when in one August he operated on 17 psychiatrists and psychologists. ''It was the turning point,'' he says, ''when surgery entered the mainstream.''
I accuse: ''You've changed the norm. Compared to my friends, my 60 looks 70.''
He takes this as a compliment: ''We no longer have to look like our parents.''
I ask what he would do for me -- hypothetically, of course. Handing me a looking glass, he places a cold thumb in front of my ear and gently lifts back my skin. The long crease from nose to corner of mouth disappears, and a voice inside cries, ''Where do I sign up?'' He explains a short-scar technique he helped popularize: tunneling in from a small incision that stretches from the sideburn to the bottom of the earlobe, where he grasps slack muscle and pulls it back, smoothing the skin and snipping off the excess.
He would make incisions in the crease over my eyelids to tighten the droopy corners. He would cut below my eyes, filling in depressed wrinkles by moving fat deposits around. More fat, taken elsewhere from my body, would go into the folds around my nose and onto my upper lip to plump out lines. In 10 days I'd be back to work. In two weeks I'd be able to exercise.
What could go wrong? He could cut a nerve, paralyzing my face, but this has never happened to him or his students. There could be blood under the skin, which he would have to remove. In the thousands of faces he has done, there have been no serious complications -- even if, as he says, ''it's more art than science.'' When I go home and look in the mirror, there are pucker lines on my lip that I have never seen before. It takes a long weekend at a deeply rural retreat populated by Ted Kaczynski types, for whom a seamed visage goes unremarked, for me to feel comfortable enough to go out in public again.
A week later, still in recovery from Dr. Imber, I meet with Dr. Nicolas Tabbal, on Park Avenue. A young and pretty nurse ushers me into a tiny examining room with grass cloth on three walls, bright turquoise paper on the fourth. Tabbal is boyishly short with white hair, but has no excess skin on his face; he has a pink, slightly scraped complexion and soulful brown eyes.
We do the thing with the looking glass. The doctor immediately zeroes in on the neck, where he says the first signs of aging appear. Those two cords down the middle are the edges of the platysma muscle. He would suture them together. With limited incisions, he could tighten my neck and jowls. He indicates uneven fat deposits under my eyes, two bags full. He would make a cut on the underside of my eyelid and remove fat. Then he would cut at the rim of the eye to remove a strip of skin. He would cut at the crease of the upper lid to tighten slack.
As I hold the mirror, Tabbal pulls my skin back, showing where brows belong -- on the bone, not hanging off it. He recommends a forehead lift, which would involve a substantial cut about three inches back from the hairline.
Eyelid surgery could result in dry eyes. It doesn't cause the problem, but it may worsen a pre-existing condition. He runs a tear test beforehand to see if the patient has this propensity. I begin to blink uncontrollably.
Walking home through the park, I think I recall the exact day my eyebrows dropped. It was during the summer of my 41st year; the children had just left for camp; I'd met some friends for gin-and-tonics, when suddenly my forehead lengthened, and it was as if I were looking out from inside a cave. How had I let myself go for so long? Tabbal said that most of his lift patients are between the ages of 49 and 52. Women in their early 40's are coming in for eye tucks. When he sees someone of my advanced age, she's generally in for her second lift.
It is no wonder that surgeons can command $20,000 for procedures like the one I am contemplating. They have not only skilled hands but also prodigious powers of persuasion. There is no flashy salesmanship, only the cool appraising eye, the precise pressure of finger against flesh and the utter conviction that signs of aging are problems that should be solved. Thanks to the good doctors, my eyes are now open (figuratively, of course; literally, it's a wonder I can see at all through the slits between fat bags and fallen brows). I had been ignoring the deterioration of my face because I had decided against surgery. Now that I am considering it, I see only disaster in the mirror.
Then comes the sad news that Olivia Goldsmith, 54, the author of ''The First Wives' Club,'' checked into the hospital for a face lift, had a bad reaction to the anesthesia, went into a coma and died. It brings me to my senses: why obsess over the face when the whole body is aging? Let lines be a memento mori, cautioning that this is the time of life to seek spiritual enlightenment, not chase the chimera of perpetual youth. What kind of novel would ''A Passage to India'' be if Mrs. Moore were preoccupied by the state of her dewlaps?
And yet, a week later, sitting in a dim-sum restaurant with too many mirrors, I catch myself pulling back my skin with my chopsticks. I confide to a friend who has had a chin lift. Saying she's ripe for a another, she suggests we do it together, as if planning a bike trip through France. A friend who hasn't had surgery tells me I don't need it. Then there are the friends I won't even tell, women like the one I used to be, who would be appalled to learn that I am thinking about going under the knife for two and a half hours, and forking over the cost of a new car, to look -- not younger, not prettier -- just normal.
This is the gap. I never thought I would find myself teetering on the brink.
Mary Tannen is the beauty editor of The New York Times Magazine.
