Stephen Belber  Playwright  ''Match''
STEPHEN BELBER is the kind of emerging playwright who usually gets swallowed up by television and Hollywood. He writes cracklingly funny dialogue, tricky plots and the kind of vaguely threatening average guys who would be perfect for Nicolas Cage or Ed Norton. Mr. Belber also knows how to hit a deadline, and may be the only playwright in New York who says he has never experienced writer's block.
So when he signed on to work for the 1999 season of ''Law and Order,'' it seemed like the same old story -- yet another promising playwright lured away from the stage. But, as in so many of Mr. Belber's plays, there's a twist. He says that he never showed much interest in such formulaic work, refusing even to move out to Los Angeles to join the rest of the staff. After a year and a half, Mr. Belber's experiment with writing for series television was over and he would soon start writing for the theater again. He returns to the stage this spring with ''Match.'' Starring Ray Liotta and Frank Langella, Mr. Belber's Broadway debut opens April 8 at the Plymouth Theater.
Mr. Belber, 36, says he plans on staying in both theater and television. ''I'm a multitasker,'' he said in the writing room he rents near Times Square. Besides ''Match,'' he has a world premiere called ''Drifting Elegant,'' opening at the Magic Theater in San Francisco on May 1, and is working on a political drama about an exonerated death row inmate who runs for office. He also has three screenplays and teleplays in development.
Growing up in the Washington area, Mr. Belber was initially interested in politics and briefly worked as a reporter for the Saudi Arabian Press Agency. But he eventually tired of journalism -- and, after a failed stint as a novelist, turned to the theater.
Early in his career, Mr. Belber, who has the mischievous smile of a man who has outgrown a wild youth, wrote and performed Eric Bogosian-style solo shows with names like ''Eclectic Mulatto Moondance.''  ''It was me thinking I was smarter than I was,'' he said.
He went on to write small-scale thrillers that often explored the roots of a dark incident from the past. ''Tape,'' which concerns a reunion gone wrong of high school buddies, was his biggest hit. Richard Linklater made it into a film in 2001 starring Ethan Hawke and Robert Sean Leonard. ''Match,'' like ''Tape,'' is a three-character suspense story in which the truth can be elusive. In fact, there are so many surprises that the playwright and his producers are loath to reveal much more than its setup: a couple from Seattle visit a lonely dance instructor from Juilliard (Mr. Langella) to interview him for a dissertation. ''It's about worlds colliding and conflicting responsibilities,'' Mr. Belber said.
''It's not as scandalous as his previous plays,'' said Michael Rego of the Araca Group, which is helping to produce it, ''and it's his most structurally sound.''
Mr. Belber agrees. ''I'm older, I got married,'' he said. ''I've gone to those dark places over the last 10 years to get at something truthful, but maybe as I've learned to write a little more, I don't need to go so dark.''
JASON ZINOMAN
SPRING THEATER
