WHEN word spread that Sean Combs, better known as P. Diddy, had signed on to star alongside Phylicia Rashad, Audra McDonald and Sanaa Lathan in a Broadway revival of ''A Raisin in the Sun,'' even his biggest fans probably rolled their eyes. Not because the news was so unexpected but because, in hindsight, it seemed so obvious.
This is an era of pop stars turned Broadway stars, of rappers turned actors, of P. Diddy turned everything. (Did you see him last weekend, coaching a celebrity basketball team as part of the N.B.A.'s All-Star Weekend?) And so when the play opens on April 26 at the Royale Theater, it will be, among other things, a neat hat trick: three trends in one.
Mr. Combs has come to seem like the perfect celebrity for a culture that can't take its eyes off its celebrities: that's how devoted we are, and how distrustful. Greatness isn't his claim to fame; fame is his claim to greatness. To see his face is to expect nothing more or less than a spectacle.
He first emerged as a star -- Puff Daddy -- in 1997, and it seemed possible then that his run at the top would be brilliant and brief. His big hit, ''I'll Be Missing You,'' was an unlikely hybrid: a hip-hop eulogy based on an old song by the Police, performed by a record executive moonlighting as a rapper. Seven years after his debut album, his place on the A-list seems more secure than ever, but -- quick! -- name one recent hit. (Here's a hint: one of them just won a Grammy.)
He helped guide the careers of Mary J. Blige, one of the great voices of the 1990's, and the Notorious B.I.G., one of the great rappers of all time, who was murdered in 1997. And yet Mr. Combs has always taken a perverse pride in having more modest abilities.
His rapping is rarely more than competent, and whereas nearly all rappers pride themselves on writing their own lyrics, Mr. Combs may be the only hip-hop star who has ever rapped about hiring ghostwriters: ''Don't worry if I write rhymes, I write checks,'' he once boasted. (Give up yet? The Grammy winner is ''Shake Ya Tailfeather,'' a collaboration with Nelly and Murphy Lee, which won best rap performance by a duo or group.)
More than anything else, of course, Mr. Combs is the pre-eminent hip-hop capitalist. He has mastered the art of conspicuous consumption, and over the years, his excesses have often provoked four stages of envy, no less acute than those five stages of grief. First comes shock: he chartered what? Then scorn: who does he think he is? Then amusement: I suppose he'll want to pilot it himself. And then, finally, understanding, maybe even sympathy: how else were all those guests going to get to his birthday party?
And yet no one who has been paying attention could describe him as merely some publicity-hungry playboy. Any hip-hop capitalist must be not just a reckless spender but also a ruthless earner, and Mr. Combs personifies the hip-hop work ethic: he is an indefatigable hustler, in the best and noblest sense. If you watched his recent MTV reality series ''Making the Band,'' you saw him try to instill this ethic in the would-be stars he was coaching. In the most famous episode, he had them walk from Midtown Manhattan to Junior's, in downtown Brooklyn, just to fetch him cheesecake; he said he wanted them to know that hip-hop was hard work.
Like many other hip-hop stars, Mr. Combs seems inspired by the outsize legend and fearsome reputation of Donald Trump, but he more closely resembles Richard Branson, the peripatetic tycoon of the Virgin empire, who doesn't let his record company, his airline or his cellphone venture quash his enthusiasm for adventure. (His current project is the Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer, an airplane capable of circumnavigating the globe without refueling.)
Mr. Combs is, if anything, more omnivorous: the dancer, record executive, producer and rapper is now also a fashion mogul (he runs Sean John), a former boyfriend of Jennifer Lopez (gossips have been predicting a reunion ever since they broke up, in 2001), a philanthropist (his charitable foundation is called Daddy's House) and a marathoner. His 2003 jog raised $2 million for New York City schoolchildren and spawned a catch phrase sure to turn up in one of his rhymes: Diddy runs the city.
In the coming months, we will be reminded that he is also an actor. He had a small role in the 2001 Jon Favreau film ''Made'' and as Halle Berry's husband in ''Monster's Ball.'' He handled both roles well, although neither could have prepared him for ''A Raisin in the Sun,'' a play that may last nearly as long as his four-hour marathon run. Unlike Mos Def, the rapper who was already an accomplished actor before he won raves in ''Top Dog/Underdog,'' Mr. Combs will undoubtedly have to learn a lot on the job, but then again, that seems to be his favorite way to learn.
In Lorraine Hansberry's text, Walter Lee Younger is described as ''a lean, intense young man in his middle 30's, inclined to quick nervous movements and erratic speech habits.'' The role has come to be associated with Sidney Poitier, who played Walter in the original 1959 production on Broadway and in the 1961 movie.
Walter is constantly storming in and out of the worn-down Chicago apartment where the play takes place, and he delivers a series of diatribes that only underscore his fundamental ambivalence and confusion. Even when he laments belonging to ''a race of people that don't know how to do nothing but moan, pray and have babies,'' he seems to be merely thinking out loud, as if he can evaluate the truth of a statement only by saying it and seeing how it fits.
As Walter, Mr. Combs will have a hard time persuading the audience to forget who he is; no matter how the scene is staged, he is likely to generate a laugh when, in the middle of a money-hungry fever dream, he says, ''Rich people don't have to be flashy.''
Although lots of people may be wondering what Mr. Combs will bring to Hansberry's play, it's just as tempting to wonder what the play will bring to Mr. Combs. Near the end, Walter surrenders, for a while, to bitterness: ''Mama, you know it's all divided up. Life is. Sure enough. Between the takers and the 'tooken.' ''
This is Hip-Hop 101, the hustler's credo: that the undercurrent of terror is just as important to hip-hop capitalism as flash and swagger. Ever since the late 1990's, critics have been belittling hip-hop's big-money talk as vulgar materialism, but perhaps Hansberry's ambivalent, unsentimental play will help complicate that picture. For Mr. Combs and all the other hip-hop capitalists, the object isn't merely to take, but to avoid being tooken.
Mr. Combs will keep hustling, no matter what: next month his record company, Bad Boy, is to celebrate its 10th anniversary by releasing a greatest-hits CD; the third season of ''Making the Band'' begins on March 3; and this summer, Sean John is to open a flagship boutique on Fifth Avenue. His track record is by no means perfect: while the recent ''Bad Boys II'' soundtrack was a success, Da Band, the group he put together for his reality series, earned middling sales and poor reviews.
It's far too early to tell how ''A Raisin in the Sun'' will turn out: rehearsals haven't yet started, and when reached by telephone, Mr. Combs struck an uncharacteristically cautious note, saying he wasn't sure if the producers wanted him to comment on the play.
But in a sense, it doesn't much matter: Mr. Combs's failures are as important to his persona as his successes. His second album, ''Forever,'' was released in 2000 and didn't match the success of his debut. Some commentators (including the comedian Chris Rock) mocked the hubris of the title, but in retrospect, it's possible to discern something else. For P. Diddy, Donald Trump, Walter Lee Younger, Richard Branson and every other hustler and striver, forever isn't always a promise: sometimes it's a curse.
