NEW YORK CITY finally has a new law on lead-based paint. Again.
On Feb. 4, the City Council voted to override Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's veto of a lead paint bill passed in December. The new law that results from the veto override, Local Law 1 of 2004, is intended to protect children from the hazards of lead-based paint in residential buildings.
Proponents of the law say it provides the most effective method for identifying and rectifying potential lead-based-paint hazards in apartments with young children. Opponents -- including the mayor, the city's health commissioner and organizations representing property owners -- say the law could increase the likelihood that children will be victims of lead poisoning and could subject property owners to significant increases in insurance premiums.
And while owner-occupied co-op and condominium apartments are exempt from the new law, lawyers and property managers say that the exemption may cause considerable confusion in buildings that have many rental units or apartments sublet by their owners. Owners of such apartments might hesitate to sublet their units to families with young children, they say.
''The new law basically requires landlords to take a proactive approach to lead poisoning prevention in their buildings,'' said Andrea Rodriguez, a staff lawyer with the Northern Manhattan Improvement Corporation, a community-based organization.
Local Law 1 of 2004, Ms. Rodriguez said, is a compromise between two previous lead paint laws: Local Law 1 of 1982 and Local Law 38 of 1999. Local Law 38 was struck down by the state's highest court last June.
''The new law represents an attempt to find a middle ground between the 1982 law, which required removal of all lead paint regardless of condition, and the now-nullified 1999 law,'' Ms. Rodriguez said.
Under Local Law 1 of 2004 -- which takes effect on Aug. 4 -- landlords will have to determine whether children under age 7 live in multiple-dwelling units they own, and, if so, must inspect those units at least once a year. If lead hazards are found, the landlords must promptly and safely correct them. (The under-7 trigger is required only for the first year the law is in effect. After that, the Department of Health can reduce the age trigger to children under 6.)
Lead hazards, Ms. Rodriguez said, include not just peeling paint, but also friction surfaces (painted surfaces that rub), impact surfaces (painted surfaces that can be damaged by being hit) and chewable surfaces (like windowsills.) ''Lead dust is also a defined hazard,'' Ms. Rodriguez said. ''And peeling lead paint in common areas must also be corrected.''
In addition to inspecting apartments occupied by children under 7, the new law requires landlords to take measures to make apartments ''lead safe'' when they become vacant. This includes permanently removing or covering lead paint on friction surfaces of windows and on the contact areas of doors, and repairing windowsills and floors to make removal of lead dust from such surfaces easier.
Another provision in the law requires the Department of Housing Preservation and Development to ask whether a child under 7 lives in an apartment any time it is making an inspection. If so, the inspector must inspect all surfaces for peeling paint and underlying defects. If a violation is found, landlords have 21 days to make repairs. And while the department may extend the time for making repairs to 60 days, it itself is responsible for correcting the violation if the landlord does not.
Violation of the law, Ms. Rodriguez said, can result in a fine of up to $250 a day for each violation to a maximum of $10,000.
Opponents of the law say that in trying to make children safe from lead-based-paint hazards, the new law goes too far. In the message accompanying Mayor Bloomberg's veto of the bill, he noted a number of specific objections. First, he said, the law may result in ''unintended consequences'' that could adversely affect New York City housing. ''Increased demands on landlords (such as difficult and probably unachievable time frames and unreasonable tort liability exposure) as well as the possible unavailability of insurance may result in deterioration of the city's housing stock,'' he wrote.
Second, the mayor said that the bill exposed the city to up to $200 million in lawsuits stemming from the requirement that the department inspect for -- and, as a last resort, abate -- lead paint hazards.
Finally, Mayor Bloomberg said the law ''fails to protect conscientious owners from potential tort liability even when they comply with all components of the bill.''
Mitchell Posilkin, general counsel of the Rent Stabilization Association, an organization that represents property owners, said that under Local Law 38 -- the one struck down by the Court of Appeals -- if a child under 7 had lead poisoning, the child lived in a building built before 1960 and the apartment had peeling paint, the department could legally presume that the building was the source of the poisoning. At the same time, however, the former law did not extend that presumption to lawsuits brought against owners.
Under the new law, however, the building is presumed to be the source of the poisoning both for purposes of issuing a violation and for use at trial if a liability case is filed against the owner. ''That presumption creates a significant change in the litigation dynamic,'' Mr. Posilkin said. Such a presumption makes it easier for lead-poisoned plaintiffs to prevail in cases against owners even if the poisoning possibly occurred elsewhere. ''The law has so dramatically changed the liability climate that insurers will likely exclude coverage for lead-based-paint claims in their coverage,'' he said. ''And if owners can't get coverage, lenders are afraid to lend, and that can cast a pall over the entire real estate market in the city.''
Another potential problem created by the new law was pointed out by Robert Grant, a director of Midboro Management in Manhattan. Mr. Grant noted that in exempting owner-occupied co-op and condo units from its provisions, the new law created the potential for significant confusion in buildings with rented or sublet apartments.
''Let's say a co-op shareholder sublets an apartment,'' he said. ''Who is responsible for sending out the notice to the tenant asking whether or not a young child resides in the apartment, the co-op, which is the legal owner of the building, or the shareholder?''
And while it may be easier for co-ops to keep track of apartments that are sublet -- because of the requirement for board approval -- the task could be difficult for condos.
''In a condominium, the owner can basically rent the unit out any time he or she wants,'' Mr. Grant said.
Eva Talel, a Manhattan real estate lawyer, said the law contained a provision that might make it a bit easier for co-op and condo boards to ensure compliance. ''The law allows the board to allocate responsibility for compliance to unit owners and shareholders,'' she said. In other words, Local Law 1 permits boards to require unit owners and shareholders to be the parties responsible for complying with its terms.
With condos, she said, that can probably be accomplished by changing the bylaws. In co-ops, on the other hand, boards can make the shareholder's assumption of responsibility a condition of allowing a sublet.
''And since co-ops and condos are frequently named in suits even in cases when they don't have responsibility, it might also be wise to require shareholders and unit owners to indemnify the building for any legal expenses it may incur in defending such an action,'' she said.
Ms. Talel added, however, that shareholders and unit owners might adopt a simpler strategy to avoid responsibility under the new lead paint law. ''One of the fundamental criticisms of the law is that it will have a chilling effect on subletting,'' she said. ''And it seems to me that that is a reasonable criticism.''
YOUR HOME
