IN early December 2002, Howard Dean sat for an interview about his long-shot presidential campaign in the first no-cost place that came to mind: the lobby of the Waldorf-Astoria in Manhattan. Not a soul noticed, not even when a reporter held a table lamp into the candidate's face so he could be photographed in better light.
Just a few miraculous months later, Dr. Dean streaked across the political landscape like a comet, transforming everything about this year's presidential race, from the suddenly tougher tone of the Democrats' attacks on President Bush to John Kerry's decision to forsake public financing. Even now, many supporters say his impact was huge. ''There's not a one of us who doesn't feel like the world has changed because of what you've done,'' Zephyr Teachout, who was director of Internet organizing for Dr. Dean, assured supporters after he dropped out last week. ''Possibility has changed, and politics have changed forever.''
Have they?
In the beginning and at the end, the supposedly smart money in American politics missed much about Dr. Dean, from his stunning early potential to the accumulating missteps that started to spell his doom just as some of the biggest names in politics endorsed him. Odds are good that some early post-mortems predicting his lasting impact may be similarly shortsighted.
Dr. Dean and his campaign manager, Joe Trippi, raised $41 million last year, much of it in small contributions through the young medium of the Internet. But they spent almost all of it on old media: direct mail and television, the medium that John F. Kennedy used to transform politics 44 years ago.
''He's going to be a milestone in the history of the Internet, but there's just no way of knowing how much farther we have to go,'' said Michael Cornfield, director of the Institute for Politics, Democracy and the Internet at George Washington University. ''We can look at what he didn't do: he never got on his own blog. We have yet to see the J.F.K. of the Internet. It's going to be someone like Bob Graham, a compulsive diarist, who's going to be able to command a blog with a distinctive voice, either through a Cyrano staffer or himself.''
Like Eugene J. McCarthy and George S. McGovern before him, Dr. Dean inspired a new generation of young volunteers, but their orange hats and intensity may have repelled as many voters as they energized.
''The Dean legacy is that he taught people how to use the social networking piece of the Internet, and that's permanent and lasting,'' said Lee Rainie, director of the Pew Internet and American Life Project, a research group. ''But it's not yet clear that younger people will get more involved in politics. It might be that we're seeing the beginning of a re-engagement of young people with politics that these new tools are particularly attractive to. There's hope for that, but there's more hope than evidence so far.''
And unlike some other famous losers before him, Dr. Dean lacked a broad public policy agenda that was sharply different from most of his rivals'. He was for expanded health care, smaller tax cuts and a humbler foreign policy, but so, more or less, were they. Under pressure to deliver an alternative economic plan of his own, he talked of a cut in payroll taxes, but dropped out before he had time to unveil it. In the end, his message was strong and sharp, but more strategic than substantive.
''If you think of the things we're proudest of as Americans -- Social Security, women's rights, these were all achieved by people who are written out of history, or remembered but in a foggy way,'' said Tom Hayden, the 1960's student radical and former California state senator. ''I'm old enough to have actually met Norman Thomas, and he once told me how someone had come up to him in the 40's or 50's and said, 'Well, you should be proud: The New Deal carried out your Socialist Party agenda,' and he said, 'Yeah, the New Deal carried out our program in a coffin.'''
By contrast, Mr. Hayden noted that Dr. Dean ''never got a chance to completely enunciate a positive message.'' The message, Mr. Hayden said, ''was against Washington, against the war in Iraq, and so on.'' He added: ''If Dr. Dean ponders a little more what he really wants, he could probably get it in the Democratic platform. But that's just paper. It'll have to be enforceable as things that need to be embraced by the Democratic Party if they expect the Howard Dean constituency to come through. He needs to be organized in the swing states. He needs, in a polite way, to make himself absolutely necessary to the outcome in November.''
History suggests that may not be so easy. Dr. Dean has ruled out a third-party candidacy, the usual route to influence for outsiders, from Ross Perot to Ralph Nader. After Senator John McCain of Arizona saw his presidential hopes collapse four years ago, he fought hard to support like-minded Congressional candidates, but even some of those who won failed to stand with him in his effort to overhaul campaign finance laws.
The Democrats' shattering divisions in 1968 led to reforms in both major parties that emphasized grass-roots power over party insiders and paved the way for Mr. McGovern's nomination in 1972. In 1976, Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan both surged to prominence as outsiders, and four years later, Mr. Reagan and his conservative backers took over the Republican Party with effects that remain obvious today.
But those three candidates were riding historical forces -- opposition to a years-old, stalemated war; the corruption of Watergate, and the sense that liberals had forsaken middle-class America -- that, at least in hindsight, seem more powerful than the anti-Bush backlash that propelled Dr. Dean.
In 1992, Bill Clinton began his run as the first Democrat to serve two full terms since Franklin D. Roosevelt by dragging his party toward the center -- an impulse that Dr. Dean largely shared as governor of Vermont, then partly rejected in the face of the partisan polarization that followed the 2000 presidential recount. There is reason to believe that Dr. Dean's clear power to press his party to the left this year might turn out to be similarly transitory, rather than transformative.
In an interview last week, Mr. Trippi, who was replaced as campaign manager last month, maintained that the power of incumbency, the party establishment and money remain stacked so strongly against insurgents that Dr. Dean's ability to rise as far as he did will stand as a model to follow. ''History will look back on this and say that it was a dot-com miracle,'' Mr. Trippi said, ''not that our candidate was a dot-com bust.''
Cass R. Sunstein, author of ''Republic.com,'' a study of the social impact of the Internet, agreed, in part. ''One thing that might be exploited,'' he said, ''is that if you get like-minded people in constant touch with each other, then they get more energized and more committed, and more outraged and more extreme. The intensity of Dean's support came less from his own personal efforts than from the fact that Dean supporters were in pretty constant touch with each other, whereas geography would normally isolate them and spread them out.''
He likened the Dean movement to other intense followings that have flared and faded. ''You can create a cult,'' he said, ''but long-term political change requires more than that.'' Still, he added, ''I'm sure we'll see someone, another version of Dean, who uses the same strategy, but is successful.''
The Dean Comet  Correction:  February 29, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday assessing the legacy of Howard Dean's presidential campaign misstated the title of Michael Cornfield, an executive at the Institute for Politics, Democracy and the Internet at George Washington University who described Dr. Dean's effort as a milestone in the history of the Internet. He is the institute's director of research, not its director.
