THE placement last week of baseball's most prized player, Alex Rodriguez, at third base -- alongside Derek Jeter at shortstop -- turned the Yankees infield into something like Centaurus, the constellation bearing two of the brightest stars in the sky. But it also raised the question of whether two outsized personalities, talents and egos can ever really get along.
History is replete with insights.
Just a subway ride from Yankee Stadium, the effort to rebuild the World Trade Center site evolved into an epic struggle between two architects. Daniel Libeskind, whose site plan was favored by the Port Authority, disagreed with David M. Childs, the architect of choice for the developer Larry A. Silverstein, on the appropriate size and shape of a new main tower.
''That's typical of so many great artistic collaborators throughout history,'' Gov. George E. Pataki said in a speech on Oct. 30, 2003. ''Michelangelo and Pope Julius II made the Sistine Chapel, Philip Johnson and Mies van der Rohe made the Seagram's Building, just think what Libeskind and Childs will make.''
One might also consider two great, warring collaborators in another field: Kobe Bryant and Shaquille O'Neal have won three National Basketball Association championships together on the Los Angeles Lakers, all the while criticizing each other for hogging the ball and hustling too little.
''They know that they're a better team and they have a better chance to win if they're both there,'' said John Ireland, a Los Angeles television commentator who travels with the Lakers.
But even with well-disposed stars, there is a measure of unpredictability. Dan M. Friedberg, a partner at the consulting firm Bain&amp;Company, said that corporate mergers provide clear rules for the Yankees to follow, and that failure would most likely be a result if ''the chemistry doesn't work.'' The rules, as Mr. Friedberg describes them, translate from business jargon to sports cliché: concentrate on fundamentals, have a clear sense of purpose and move quickly and decisively.
And if that's not guidance enough for the Yankees, they might just listen to the album ''Abbey Road.'' Looking outside the business world for inspiration on the topic, Bruce A. Pasternack, a senior partner at the consulting firm Booz Allen Hamilton, spent some time studying The Beatles.
''In some groups, there's a clear star and supporting cast,'' Mr. Pasternack said. ''The Beatles didn't seem like that. Ringo didn't sing much, but he had his own thing to do and his own fan base for what he did.''
