VOTERS keep calling John Kerry the most electable candidate, the one most likely to defeat President Bush, and are quick to cite his many admirable and heroic qualities. But when they went to the polls in the Wisconsin primary last week, many seemed to have the same reservations about Mr. Kerry that Willy Loman had about his neighbor: he is liked, but not well liked.
In Wisconsin, as in some earlier primaries, John Edwards rose in the polls as more voters saw him in action, and exit polls showed he was the first choice of voters looking for a candidate who ''cares about people like me.'' His sunny disposition and charismatic performances led to an unexpectedly strong finish.
It was not quite enough to win, however, and few expect Mr. Edwards's charm to prevail. Mr. Kerry, after all, has the experience and gravitas, not to mention a string of victories, while Mr. Edwards's affability could easily wear thin as voters take a closer look at him. What seems fresh and polished now could seem naïve and glib later. But for now, he has at least exposed a likability gap that might be a problem for Mr. Kerry even if he wins the nomination.
''Voters find Kerry aloof and distant,'' said Frank Luntz, a pollster who has conducted focus groups for MSNBC among primary voters in a half-dozen states. ''They find Edwards smooth and enticing. Women really find him sexy. Men like his personality.''
Mr. Edwards has been criticized for not having enough government experience, but a pleasant disposition can overcome a lot of handicaps. Intellectuals made fun of Eisenhower's mangled syntax, but they were outnumbered by voters wearing ''I Like Ike'' buttons. Gary Hart's candidacy in 1988 was ended by his sexual indiscretion, but Bill Clinton survived his, thanks in no small part to his charm. Al Gore may have been a better debater than George W. Bush, but the audience was put off by his supercilious manner.
''A majority of Americans disagreed with Ronald Reagan's policies in 1984, but he won because they liked him personally,'' said Mr. Luntz, who has advised Republican candidates. ''People look at presidential candidates in a special way because they can't get away from the president. They can ignore a senator or governor, but a president will be in their living rooms for four years. At a minimum they have to like him.''
Michael Deaver, the crafter of Mr. Reagan's image, said that in his cheerfulness Mr. Edwards reminded him of Mr. Reagan, as did Mr. Edwards's response to criticisms by Mr. Kerry.
''Edwards responded to Kerry's negative statement by saying, 'Well, I wouldn't put it that way. I would say it this way,''' Mr. Deaver recalled. ''That was exactly the way Reagan would rephrase a negative question and put a positive twist on it.''
Daniel Hill, the author of ''Body of Truth,'' an analysis of body language, has studied the candidates' styles by tracking 23 facial expressions during televised debates. He counts, for instance, the number of ''social smiles'' using just the mouth, ''genuine smiles'' using the eyes and mouth and signs of disgust or anger.
''Dean consistently showed anger by pressing his lips together or tensely holding his mouth slightly open,'' Mr. Hill said. ''Last fall, Kerry was showing definite signs of contempt and disgust by raising his upper lip, but that's gone now. He's trying to be more likable by smiling more, but rarely can he get past the social smile to the genuine smile. Edwards gets there much more often. He conveys the most optimism, and lately he's been adding gravitas by knitting his eyebrows to show that he feels the pain of the other America.''
If Mr. Edwards wins the charm contest, why is Mr. Kerry winning the primaries? Likability is not everything, especially in times of war. Richard Nixon proved that in 1968, when he defeated everyone's favorite uncle, Hubert Humphrey. Just as voters then worried about the Vietnam War and social unrest, today's voters are concerned about Iraq and terrorism, and they may prefer Mr. Kerry, a war hero, even if they don't particularly want to invite him for drinks.
When Americans were asked to describe Mr. Kerry in a national poll last week by the Pew Research Center, two of the most common words of praise were ''good'' and ''qualified,'' while two criticisms were ''arrogant'' and ''phony.'' The strengths of his character and experience outweighed the objections to his personality, giving him an overall favorable-to-unfavorable rating of two to one. Mr. Edwards had the same favorable rating.
''Likability and caring about people have always been important factors, but this year, Democrats' main determinant seems to be the strength to go up against Bush,'' said Mandy Grunwald, a media consultant who advised Gen. Wesley Clark's campaign. ''John Edwards is very likable and articulate and connects with people, and it's possible he can redefine what it takes to beat Bush, but so far voters have liked Kerry's swagger.''
Last fall, when Mr. Kerry's campaign seemed doomed, he worked hard to change his aloof image and stentorian style developed after years of delivering speeches to an empty Senate chamber. He won over Iowans through a series of town-hall meetings that enabled him to converse with voters, instead of orate. Still, some old habits remain. He started a town-hall meeting in Wausau, Wis., last week by saying, ''I'm not going to talk at you.'' But then he commenced a soliloquy that lasted 20 minutes.
Mr. Edwards, who learned his speaking technique from looking into the eyes of jurors, has connected with audiences by telling of the obstacles he has overcome as a millworker's son. ''Unlike many of his rivals, Edwards is believable because his body, his voice and his words are all saying the same thing,'' said Nicholas Boothman, the author of ''How to Make People Like You in 90 Seconds or Less'' and a consultant who trains speakers. ''He has mastered the fundamental rule of motivational speaking, which is tell the audience that I'm one of you -- I had it worse than you and look where I am today, so we can all dream together.''
But some critics have wondered whether over time Mr. Edwards will seem superficial and inexperienced, and whether voters will believe that a multimillionaire could really identify with working people. ''People might start to see him as a touch too polished and smooth,'' said Andrew Kohut, the director of the Pew Research Center. ''His larger problem is his lack of experience and his youthfulness, which is both an asset and a problem when people are looking for the steady hand of experience.''
Mass Appeal  Correction:  February 23, 2004, Monday  An article in the Week in Review yesterday about the Democratic presidential campaign misstated the role of Mandy Grunwald, a Democratic media consultant. She worked for the campaign of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, not for Gen. Wesley Clark's campaign.
