Michael and Nancy Fisher were hoping for answers as they drove to a New Jersey hotel last December. Sitting in the lobby was a pretty blond stranger just two months past her 20th birthday -- a link to the Fishers' son, Mark.
The young woman, Meredith Denihan, had arranged the meeting and brought along her own mother. She told the Fishers what an impression Mr. Fisher, a popular, strapping 6-foot-5 college sophomore, had made on her when they met at an Upper East Side bar. The meeting took place just hours before he was shot to death in the early morning of Oct. 12, 2003, his body wrapped in a yellow blanket and left on a sidewalk in a stately Brooklyn neighborhood.
She wanted them to know that in his last hours, ''he was thinking of us,'' Mr. Fisher's mother recalled.
The couple were moved, but unsatisfied. Ms. Denihan seemed to mean well, but questions remained: What happened at the house party they went to in Brooklyn, two blocks from where Mr. Fisher's body was found? When was the last time she had seen him alive? The meeting captured the grating mystery of a case that, four months later, remains unsolved.
Mr. Fisher's body was found on a quiet street in Prospect Park South, an architectural enclave of tall Victorian homes with sweeping porches that line wide streets. He had been shot five times in the upper torso. The police retraced his movements beginning the night before at Bar Harbour, on First Avenue near 77th Street, where Mr. Fisher had met Ms. Denihan, and ending at the house party, at 152 Stratford Road, a pillared colonial in Prospect Park South. They also identified several young people who were with him at various points along the way.
Beyond that, though, the investigation has stalled, and Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly described eight of the young people as ''uncooperative.''
Though not one of them has been called a suspect in the killing, several of the eight have retained lawyers and refused to speak to investigators without them present. All eight have denied, either through a lawyer or a family member, that they had not cooperated fully with the authorities, or they have declined to comment publicly.
While it would not seem out of the ordinary for a young person, especially from a family of means, to be accompanied by a lawyer to a police interview, a Police Department spokesman, Paul J. Browne, said it was unusual, and potentially hindering, for people identified only as possible witnesses.
Ms. Denihan is among those the police say may know more than they are sharing with detectives about the final hours of Mr. Fisher's life.
She and the others claim the opposite. ''I've been completely cooperative,'' Ms. Denihan said last week at her sorority house at the University of Vermont. ''I've done all I can.''
The conflicting versions of cooperation are among many contradictions that cloak this case, which is playing out in distant worlds linked in mistrust. College classmates in Connecticut and neighbors in Brooklyn eye one another warily: what does this one know that she's not telling? Old friends and complete strangers, children of privilege and tough neighborhood kids are painted with the same suspicious brush, their only tie the house on Stratford Road.
The Fishers had never heard of Prospect Park South until they drove there the morning they learned their son was dead. It is a historic preservation district, the kind of neighborhood where one or the other of its 200 or so homes attract the occasional Hollywood film crew, where wine tastings are announced in a local newsletter. But it is also a neighborhood that abuts a far less grand reality: bustling avenues marked by 99-cent shops and liquor stores.
Since that morning, the Fishers have driven from their home in New Jersey to Prospect Park South so many times that they have lost count, as if they hope the tree-lined streets might tell them what the police and their son's companions from that night have not: What happened in the hour before Mr. Fisher's death. ''The only thing I see in my head all the time is him lying down, face down, dead,'' his father said. ''It's haunting.''
Mr. Fisher's last weekend began with three fellow students from Fairfield University in Connecticut, a young man who played football there with Mr. Fisher and two young women. The three were identified in earlier news reports, but they spoke on the condition that their names not be published in this article.
They spent Saturday, Oct. 11, visiting two families. First came the Fishers, who have lived in the bucolic hills of Andover, N. J., for 18 years. Michael Fisher, 50, is an engineer for I.B.M.; Nancy, a Colombian-born real estate agent. Mr. Fisher was the middle child of three, with an easy smile and gentle manner. In high school he was voted the most valuable football player and prom king. ''He just walked in the room and you were touched,'' Mrs. Fisher said.
After Mr. Fisher spent some time talking to his sister, he and his friends left for their next stop, the home of one friend in Saddle River, N.J. After dinner there, the four caught a ride to Manhattan. It was Mr. Fisher's first trip to the city as a man, his parents said, untethered from their supervision. None of the four was 21, but with fake ID's, they all slipped easily into Bar Harbour.
The four ran into another Fairfield student whom they say they did not know well, Angel DiPietro, from Garden City, N.Y. Ms. DiPietro was there with Ms. Denihan, a friend from Garden City known as Merri.
''All of a sudden, I looked over and he was talking to her,'' Mr. Fisher's football buddy said of Ms. Denihan. ''I just let him be.''
The group chatted and drank. All the while, Mr. Fisher and Ms. Denihan talked and laughed off to the side.
''They were kind of away from the bar,'' one of the Fairfield girls said. ''We just took notice, like, 'Oh, he found somebody.'''
Around 1 a.m., the Fairfield group walked down First Avenue for pizza. Mr. Fisher and Ms. Denihan lagged behind. Over slices, the group decided to go to another bar. They could not fit into one cab, and Mr. Fisher and Ms. Denihan stayed back, the Fairfield students said. ''I remember seeing him on a corner, and he was like, 'We'll be right behind you,''' one student recalled.
None of Mr. Fisher's friends remember their last words to him. They thought he was going to meet them in a few minutes, so they did not say goodnight. They also had no way to reach him; he had left his cellphone at the home in Saddle River. After an hour or so at the new bar, the friends gave up, assuming Mr. Fisher had changed his mind about joining them.
The police have provided an outline of the rest of Mr. Fisher's night: he and Ms. Denihan went to another bar nearby, Tin Lizzy, where they met Ms. DiPietro and three young men from Prospect Park South: Al Cleary, 19; John Guica, 20, and Tommy Saleh, 21. When Mr. Fisher realized that he was stuck in the city long after the last train to Fairfield, Mr. Guica offered to put him up at his family's home, at 152 Stratford Road. His parents were out of town, traveling in Florida.
They piled into a cab.
That night as many as 15 people may have dropped in and out of the Stratford Road house. At some point the party whittled down to nine people, the police said, and four of them left long before the shooting: Ms. DiPietro, Mr. Cleary, Mr. Saleh and another man who lives nearby, Arty Gminsky. That left Mr. Fisher and Ms. Denihan at the party, along with Mr. Guica and his half-brother, Matthew Giuliano, a high school student, and Antonio Russo, 17, who lived around the corner, on Turner Place. Ms. Denihan told the Fishers that she ''was getting uncomfortable with the people there,'' they said.
At 4:23 a.m., Mr. Fisher withdrew $20 from an A.T.M. in a nearby bodega, the police said. Around that time, he called the football buddy he had begun the night with. The friend said he missed the call, but he remembered that Mr. Fisher had used his nickname on the message he left: '''It's Fish. I'm wondering where you guys are. Give me a call back on Angel's phone.'' Mr. Cleary's mother said she saw her son and Ms. DiPietro enter her house around 4:30 a.m. By then, the Fairfield friends said, they were back in New Jersey. Mr. Fisher returned to the Stratford Road house and, at some point, fell asleep on a sofa in the den.
Around 6:30 a.m., sleeping residents on Argyle Road, two blocks away, were awakened by loud claps outside in the dark. Gunshots. At 6:41 a.m., police officers found Mr. Fisher's body on a sidewalk outside 150 Argyle Road, wrapped in the blanket.
He had $12 in his pocket, but no wallet; it was later found in a gutter on Stratford, and investigators said they thought that it had been tossed their to slow their identification of the body. The police said Ms. Denihan had told them that she slept fitfully on a couch in the living room of 152 Stratford, hearing a side door open and slam repeatedly during the night. She said she awoke after 10 a.m., wondering where Mr. Fisher had gone.
On Sunday evening, Nancy Fisher grew nervous. It was unusual for her son not to call. Before she went to bed, she tried his cellphone. One of the Fairfield students answered and said that Mr. Fisher had left his phone behind. When they hung up, she called the police.
At 2 a.m., the doorbell rang at their sprawling, two-story home. Two New York City police officers stood outside. As if to stave off the awful news, Mrs. Fisher did not want to let them in. They said they needed to see a photograph of Mr. Fisher. She asked why. ''They said, 'Mark was murdered.' I said, 'No. You're wrong.''' The next morning, the Fishers drove to Brooklyn to identify their son's body and then see the spot where he had died.
The investigation got off to a difficult start, with detectives struggling to piece together the different groups from the night before the killing. Ms. DiPietro, for example, was ''not immediately available,'' in the early hours of the investigation, said Mr. Browne, the police spokesman. ''She was difficult to locate.''
Her father, James DiPietro, said she met detectives promptly the day after the killing and had cooperated fully. ''She left that young man earlier in the evening,'' Mr. DiPietro said, referring to Mr. Fisher. ''He decided to stay. My daughter left. She knew nothing about this until a day later.'' According to Mr. DiPietro, detectives have praised his daughter's cooperation. Mr. Browne said, though, that her insistence that her lawyer be present when she talked to police ''demonstrates a lack of full-hearted cooperation.''
A lawyer for Mr. Russo said that when his client left the party, Mr. Fisher was alive. The lawyer, Neil S. Ruskin, also said Mr. Russo, whom he called ''a very, very decent young man,'' was ''threatened and intimidated by the police.''
The police have a different account. An official said Mr. Russo ''tried to misdirect'' the police by saying that another man from the party had been involved in the shooting. In fact, the man was already home when the crime occurred, the official said. A month after the killing, Mr. Russo was charged with menacing after threatening to shoot a companion if the person did not join him in throwing rocks through windows, according to court records. He pleaded guilty in January to a lesser charge of disorderly conduct.
Investigators said they had not settled on a motive for the killing. Earlier this month, they held a news conference outdoors on Stratford Road, near the gutter where Mr. Fisher's wallet was found. Before reporters, Mr. Fisher's father accused Ms. DiPietro and Mr. Cleary of not cooperating with detectives.
A few days later, the police said they thought that a man who lived in the same building as Mr. Russo, Gregory Ware, who is awaiting sentencing after pleading guilty to second-degree murder in an unrelated case, had information about the Fisher killing. Mr. Ware's lawyer denied this.
Fluent in the language of loss, the Fishers still talk about Mr. Fisher in the present tense with words like, ''He's always smiling.''
Their suspicions of their son's peers -- from the ones who separated from him on the Upper East Side to those he met that night -- are fueled more by distrust than by knowledge. ''We don't have any grounds to know who's saying the truth, who's not saying the truth,'' Mrs. Fisher said.
Though the Fishers cried alongside their son's Fairfield friends at his funeral, their sorrow is singular. ''We have to pick out a tombstone for our son,'' Mrs. Fisher said. ''It doesn't matter how much crying you do or how sorry you are. Everything is excuses, excuses. Everyone can find excuses, even to kill.''
Correction:  October 26, 2005, Wednesday  An article on Thursday about the sentencing of two men for the murder of Mark S. Fisher, a student at Fairfield University in Connecticut, misspelled the surname of one defendant and referred erroneously to the spelling on T-shirts worn by supporters in the courtroom. (The error also appeared in several articles between February 2004 and the end of last month.) He is John Giuca, not Guica; the spelling on the T-shirts was not erroneous.
