AS a site for one of his conversations on the future of the economy the other day, President Bush chose a Florida factory that is not exactly on high-tech's leading edge: it makes aluminum-encased windows for new houses. And when Senator John Kerry accepted the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s endorsement on Thursday, he swore again to take on ''every Benedict Arnold executive'' who ships jobs abroad -- without a hint that during the boom of the 1990's, a Democratic president embraced the opportunities of globalization.
Back then, the Clinton administration argued that the movement of jobs is inevitable, and that government's role is not to protect dying industries, but to help workers graduate to higher-tech, better-paying jobs.
In short, both Democrats and Republicans, while highlighting the economy as a critical issue in this election, seem sometimes to be describing an economy that hasn't existed in the United States in years.
It is almost as if the 1990's never happened, and that the forces of globalization have been suspended.
Perhaps it is just a symptom of the odd confluence of the election cycle and an uncertain economic cycle. Bill Clinton did not fully embrace Nafta -- or the idea of trading a nation's way to prosperity -- until after he was elected in 1992, and many Democrats never came with him. Anyway, it is much easier to talk about capitalizing on global forces in times of boom than in a bust that followed.
Moreover, neither Mr. Bush nor his Democratic rivals seem to want to remind anyone of the commanding global position that the technology boom created for America; to do so is to invite discussion of what happened when the party was over.
But the result is that all the candidates are avoiding discussing a basic reality: that economic interdependence has hardly gone away.
With a record deficit, in fact, the United States is more dependent than ever on Asia's central banks to lend it money. With the dollar remarkably low, candidates might be talking about exports; instead, they are convinced that voters want to hear only about preserving jobs, not learning new skills.
Consider China, the bogey-nation of this election. In 1994, as the American economy recovered, an emerging China was being called the biggest of the ''Big Emerging Markets,'' and it was at the center of a relentless effort in Washington to focus American business on exports. Arguably, that paid off: 10 years ago American exports to China amounted to $8.7 billion; last year they were $28.4 billion, more than a threefold increase. (Exports of goods and services to the entire world rose only 58 percent.) And American carmakers, who had been blocked from real participation in China's market, are finally moving in.
But neither Mr. Bush nor the Democrats describe China as a great opportunity for American workers. Quite the opposite. Partly that is because imports from China have increased nearly fivefold, outpacing what Americans sell there, and there is a sense on the hustings that China is stealing jobs.
When the president's chief economic adviser, N. Gregory Mankiw, said openly that ''outsourcing'' has its advantages (all those low-cost goods Americans snap up in Wal-Mart, for example) he was shouted down by both Democrats and Republicans and forced to issue a retraction.
''What's missing now is this sense we had in the 1990's that American companies had become ultracompetitive,'' said Jeffrey Garten, the Clinton emerging-market strategist and now dean of the Yale School of Management. ''But it's more than that: politically, both sides are pandering to voters who feel more insecure, and both sides feel that extolling America as an exporter is incredibly unsexy as an election strategy.''
Something else has changed as well since the 90's: those now being displaced are not just manufacturing workers. Senator John Edwards last week recounted how his wife found herself talking to a technician in India when she tried to fix her cable television service. The story was meant to tap a new anxiety -- among white-collar workers afraid their jobs will go to Bangalore.
''It's a different issue,'' said Charlene Barshefsky, who was President Clinton's United States trade representative, ''and it makes it dangerous for any candidate to publicly talk about the benefits of free trade.''
So it was no accident that on Friday Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, who never has to worry about running for office, stepped in to remind the candidates of a few things. ''Keeping the current period in context is instructive,'' he said in a speech in Omaha. ''Jobs in the United States were perceived as migrating to low-wage Japan in the 1950's and the 1960's, to low-wage Mexico in the 1990's and most recently to low-wage China. Japan, of course, is no longer characterized by a low-wage work force, and many in Mexico are now complaining of job losses to low-wage China.''
He was making the obvious point that economies evolve. The political trick is to manage that process by stressing the new opportunities that arise.
But new opportunities are hardly the campaign staple today. Like the Democrats' criticisms of trade agreements, President Bush's conversations are as fascinating for what they omit as for what they focus on -- his tax cuts. Mr. Bush has been in Silicon Valley only once recently -- to visit a company that produces tanks, not software.
Mr. Bush's aides say he will continue to conduct his conversations at small businesses because they are where the job growth is. And Democrats who once taught at the Clinton school of globalization also say that times have changed.
''We need to be talking about wage insurance,'' said Mickey Kantor, the former commerce secretary. ''We need to admit that everyone -- Democrats and Republicans -- have done a poor job of enforcing the provisions of trade agreements.''
But Mr. Kantor, at least, is unhappy when candidates leave it at that.
''Eventually,'' he said, ''you have to talk realistically about how you manage economic transitions.''
Exports? What Exports?
