John Edwards and John Kerry are pursuing sharply different strategies as they gird for the 10-state rush of contests that take place on March 2. Mr. Edwards is focusing on six states in search of an upset to trip up Mr. Kerry's march to the Democratic presidential nomination. Mr. Kerry is pressing in all 10 states, seeking to build a prohibitive lead in delegates, aides said.
Beyond the state-by-state logistics of dealing with this daunting coast-to-coast sprawl of contests, aides to Mr. Edwards said he would increasingly contrast his style, background and personality with those of Mr. Kerry. In doing so, aides said, Mr. Edwards is seeking to capitalize on what many Democrats have described as Mr. Edwards's superior political skills, and thus directly challenge Mr. Kerry's claim that he is the strongest Democrat the party has to put up against President Bush.
Mr. Edwards pressed Mr. Kerry on Friday for an intensive schedule of debates in the calculation that a side-by-side television appearance would highlight what even some Kerry aides said was Mr. Edwards's more appealing personality.
And in a speech on Saturday morning at Hofstra University here, Mr. Edwards, a senator from North Carolina who lives in Washington, sought to present himself as an outsider who would ''fight for change'' in a Washington political culture he derided. Aides said it would be a recurrent theme as he headed into economically distressed parts of the nation.
''The real issue here is who can really inspire people and motivate people in the way that we need to win this election,'' said David Axelrod, a senior adviser to Mr. Edwards. ''You put him on a platform with the other guy and I think there's a real difference: Edwards inspires people. He fires people up. The contrast is there for people to see.''
Mr. Kerry's advisers said he would seek to sharpen what some aides said had become a an increasingly unfocused campaign appeal, with the candidate coasting on victories in 15 of 17 contests.
On Tuesday in Ohio, an aide said, Mr. Kerry will begin a series of speeches on job loss as part of a ''national jobs tour'' as he seeks to push back on a subject Mr. Edwards has raised with success. Not incidentally, Mr. Kerry will be doing this in a battleground state where, should he win the nomination, he is anticipating a spirited battle this fall with Mr. Bush on many of these same issues.
But more immediately, Mr. Kerry's campaign is spending time and money in all 10 states voting on March 2 in an effort to broaden his lead in delegates and mathematically eliminate Mr. Edwards.
Under Democratic Party rules, delegates are allocated based on the percentage of votes a candidate wins, meaning that Mr. Kerry will earn delegates even if he loses states. Mr. Kerry now has 497 of the 2,162 delegates needed to win the nomination; Mr. Edwards has 188, putting pressure on him to win increasingly large victories in order to catch up with Mr. Kerry.
''The biggest difference between us is we are running a full-bore campaign,'' said Mary Beth Cahill, Mr. Kerry's campaign manager. ''We have organizers on the ground in all 10 states. We are doing it everywhere, and we are not cherry-picking.''
The contrasting strategies were described in interviews by senior aides as the candidates moved to prepare for what is by far the most challenging day on the nominating calendar. There will be voting from California to New York, resulting in the selection of 1,151 delegates. With Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards now locked in the two-person contest that Mr. Edwards has long pushed for, the day has emerged as a major test of Mr. Edwards's viability.
The different strategies reflect the different pressures on Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry. Mr. Edwards has won just one contest -- in South Carolina, where he was born -- and his aides said he needed to score a series of victories on March 2 in order to continue to present himself as a credible alternative to Mr. Kerry.
Mr. Edwards is looking to hang on at least through March 9, when there are contests in four Southern states -- Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas -- where his aides said he would enjoy a regional advantage. Mr. Edwards lost to Mr. Kerry by large margins in two other Southern states, Virginia and Tennessee.
Mr. Kerry's advisers, while increasingly confident of victory, were startled by the extent to which Mr. Edwards managed to turn a six-point loss in Wisconsin into a platform for an unexpectedly well-publicized challenge. The Edwards campaign described it excitedly in a news release as his ''incredible second-place finish in the Wisconsin primary,'' and once again here on Saturday morning, he drew a huge crowd of reporters to hear his short speech at Hofstra.
This turn in the campaign has given some Kerry advisers pause, they said, both because they have long viewed Mr. Edwards as their strongest barrier to the nomination and because of what several described as Mr. Kerry's own limitations as a candidate, underlined by the memory of the near-collapse of his campaign last fall.
Mr. Edwards's aides said he had chosen six states to focus on because they include economically troubled regions that they said would be particularly receptive to his attacks on trade policy and to the biographical and stylistic contrasts he is drawing with Mr. Kerry. Those states are Ohio, Georgia, New York, Minnesota, Maryland and California.
Mr. Edwards plans to begin broadcasting television advertisements on Sunday in Georgia and Ohio, emphasizing his opposition to the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Mr. Edwards's decision to focus as well on stylistic and biographical differences comes after a week in which Mr. Kerry challenged Mr. Edwards's effort to distinguish himself on free trade. For three weeks Mr. Edwards has criticized Mr. Kerry for voting for Nafta in the Senate in 1993, saying his opponent had supported a policy that cost American jobs. Mr. Edwards was not in the Senate at the time but said he would have voted against it.
But both men said they would support changes in future trade treaties to protect workers, and Mr. Kerry heralded the support of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. last week as he sought to rebut Mr. Edwards's suggestion that he had embraced anti-labor policies.
Mr. Edwards's efforts to knock Mr. Kerry off his perch is, to some extent, complicated by Mr. Edwards's repeated denunciation of candidates who attack other candidates, an admonition he delivered again Saturday morning to a round of applause. And although Mr. Edwards pledged to draw distinctions on issues with Mr. Kerry, his advisers said there were not many differences between the men on issues.
''The truth is, in terms of positions they are taking now, our positions may be more nuanced, but they are both Democrats,'' Mr. Axelrod said. ''They don't agree on everything, but they agree on a lot of things. If you are looking for differences between them, it transcends issues of difference and gets to style.''
To that end, Mr. Edwards has been pushing for forums to display his strengths as a speaker and candidate; on Saturday, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards agreed to a second debate, next Sunday in New York, following one set for Thursday in Los Angeles. Perhaps looking ahead to the general election, Mr. Kerry on Saturday night offered to debatePresident Bush on the ''Vietnam era.''
Both Edwards and Kerry aides said the debate last Sunday in Milwaukee, which included just 5 Democrats in a field that once included 10, provided a forum for contrast between the two senators and accounted for Mr. Edwards's strong second-place showing.
''We have a general rule: The more people see John Edwards the more they like him,'' said Nick Baldick, his campaign manager. ''That came into play in Iowa and Wisconsin.''
One senior Kerry adviser, asked about that, responded: ''He's likable. Let's concede what is the obvious. There's no two ways about it. Edwards is a handsome, energetic man.''
Aides to both candidates said they see perils in the weeks ahead, which will take them to some of the most complicated political environments in the nation.
For example, Mr. Edwards's aides said his effort to criticize Mr. Kerry without appearing to run afoul of his own warning to Democrats against running a negative campaign may be put to the test in New York, a media environment that loves a political fight and that regularly proves, as one Kerry aide said, that ''conflict equals coverage.''
In California, the image of hundreds of same-sex marriages taking place in San Francisco has made aides to both men wary that they will get drawn into a debate they have assiduously tried to avoid this year. Both Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards say they oppose same-sex marriage but would support some legal protections for same-sex couples.
And three states, Georgia, Minnesota and Ohio, allow Republicans and independent voters to participate in Democratic primaries. That is a matter of concern to advisers to Mr. Kerry after the vote in Wisconsin, where independents and Republicans were permitted to vote, and tended to support Mr. Edwards.
Finally, Mr. Kerry's record on Nafta, no matter his effort to address it by lining up the support of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., has clearly dampened the enthusiasm of labor supporters and could complicate his effort to get the kind of turnout he is looking for in states like Ohio.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE DEMOCRATS  Correction:  March 2, 2004, Tuesday  An article on Feb. 22 about the different strategies planned by John Edwards and John Kerry for today's 10 contests for the Democratic presidential nomination referred incorrectly to the type of election Minnesota will hold. Its votes are cast in caucuses, not in a primary.
