Before the start of the game, Kenyon Martin was a question mark, struggling with a sinus infection that left him worn down and barely able to breathe.
But on the floor Saturday night, he showed something different, chasing down balls and swatting away shots in a comfortable 97-84 victory over the New Orleans Hornets at Continental Arena. The victory was the Nets' 13th straight -- matching the longest streak in the N.B.A. this season -- and their 12th in a row since Lawrence Frank took over as coach from Byron Scott.
Martin, who did not start for the first time in his career Friday night, played as if he never wanted that to happen again. In the fourth quarter, with the game comfortably in hand, he raced out to defend Jamal Mashburn near the top of the key, only to follow the ball when it was passed to Darrell Armstrong, who was alone in the corner. Martin jumped toward Armstrong and blocked his 3-point attempt, punctuating his block with a defiant shout.
He was not the only Net racing around the court.
On another possession, Jason Kidd chased down an errant pass and skidded across the floor to a skin-burning stop. Richard Jefferson later dived onto the floor to force a turnover.
In an effort to dissect the components of the winning streak, the Nets' detractors could point to the easy schedule and the lucky breaks, but the true common denominator has nothing to do with the opposition.
''It starts with effort,'' said Kidd, who had 11 points, 9 rebounds and 9 assists. ''The big thing is hustle. We've always played hard for whoever the coach was. That's what makes this team unique is that when we take the floor, we play hard.''
Not losing a game since Jan. 23, the Nets have avoided the lapses and slip-ups by doing it with effort, focusing on defense and rebounding. And just as important, focusing on the one game, one possession.
The Nets have won by playing with an energy that was not consistently exhibited before Frank took over on Jan. 26, a point made last week by Scott, the man who took the hit for the struggles. Tonight would have been the understandable lapse, playing on the second half of back-to-back games with the Hornets well-rested and healthier than they were when the Nets easily beat them in the fourth game of the current streak.
''The first thing is -- and this goes a long way about the makeup of our guys -- we don't even bring those up,'' Frank said. ''Once you do, that's a crutch. Everyone can use a crutch in this league. We're not going to be a team that uses a crutch. The game is on the schedule. Were going to play it and play to win.''
By the time it was over, Martin had 23 points, 13 rebounds, 4 steals and 4 blocked shots. Richard Jefferson had 21 points, and the Nets had outrebounded New Orleans, 53-44. But it was the effort that the Nets wanted to talk about.
''Kenyon Martin is Superman,'' Frank said. ''I've never seen a block like that, guarding five men on one possession.''
Kidd added: ''That defensive play was something I've seen before in the sense of where he came from, guarding someone on the other side to taking a step from outside the key and just jumped and blocked the shot. That's just unheard of.''
Asked about the Superman comments, Martin said: ''On that one play, maybe. I feel terrible actually. It was just pure effort. Jamal had the ball on the wing, I contested the ball. They swung and swung, and I just jumped, hoping I could get a hand on it and did.''
Still, it appeared destined to go the other way earlier. Down by 10-3 almost before they realized what city they were in, the Nets called timeout and quickly got back on the same track that they have been riding for nearly a month. The Nets ran off a 14-5 burst to take the lead in a span of just 3 minutes 7 seconds and held a 25-24 advantage at the end of the first quarter.
Just as the Nets had used a 14-0 run to take control on Friday, it was a 12-2 burst to start the fourth quarter tonight that separated the Nets from the opposition. A 74-68 lead to start the quarter opened to an 86-70 lead with 7:45 remaining.
But the help came from up and down the roster. When Jefferson, who has been shooting the ball at a torrid pace, started off by misfiring on his first five shots, Lucious Harris came off the bench and delivered 11 first-half points on 4-of-6 shooting.
PRO BASKETBALL
