The census counts 46,490 same-sex-partner households in New York State, and some estimate there are a half-million gay men and lesbians living in the state. Yet New York has been strangely quiet as the issue of same-sex marriage has played out in Boston, in San Francisco, in Vermont and in other states across the country.
There have been no Stonewall-style protests, no street demonstrations at City Hall. Gay and lesbian leaders have not been besieging the State Capitol.
Two declared gay people serving in the State Legislature -- both considered activists when it comes to such issues -- are not exactly bombarding the legislative leaders with bills to change state laws affecting who can marry and who can not.
While the silence might seem odd, advocates for expanding the rights of homosexuals and their families say it is based on a combination of pragmatism and resignation. Gay leaders and rank-and-file lawmakers say they do not expect Albany's leaders to address the issue of civil marriages, and certainly not to resolve it, any time in the near future. Gov. George E. Pataki says he is comfortable with the current laws. His fellow Republican, Joseph L. Bruno, the Senate majority leader, is staunchly against same-sex marriage. The Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, a Democrat, has not taken a position on the issue and his aides say he has no plans to bring it up in conference.
More important, the advocates say, they believe they may have a more effective means for changing the state's laws: the state's courts.
Advocates and lawyers said they were waiting for cases to emerge that may force the courts to address the constitutionality of New York's domestic-relations law, which has historically been interpreted to accept only marriages by those of the opposite sex.
At the same time, they are also looking for cases to better establish the rights of partners in same-sex relationships -- primarily by testing the state's recognition of same-sex marriages performed out of state.
As such, advocates and legal experts say, they expect the issue of same-sex marriage to play out in New York in much the same way it has in Massachusetts, before panels of judges.
''I think that what will happen, more quickly than the Legislature acting is that people will return from other jurisdictions and seek to have some level of governmental recognition, based on being married elsewhere, and that that will precipitate a court review,'' said Assemblywoman Deborah J. Glick, a Democrat from Manhattan who is the Legislature's only openly lesbian lawmaker.
Advocates and gay leaders say they are not quite seeking out a test case to press the issue here but expect one to emerge from the hundreds of marriages that some estimate have taken place between New Yorkers of the same sex in Canada since two provinces of that country made it legal in July, and from the current spate of marriages in San Francisco.
Massachusetts, too, which will start recognizing same-sex marriages in May, may ultimately contribute cases, and there is talk in such disparate places as Chicago and New Mexico of issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples.
''I would say it's totally true that it's the natural progression that individuals are going to look to have their legal marriages fully honored and respected here in New York,'' said Ross Levi, director of government affairs for the Empire State Pride Agenda, the largest gay and lesbian political organization in the state. ''That may lead them, very well, to the courts.''
Obviously, gays and lesbians would welcome a victory to allow same-sex marriages in New York, on constitutional grounds, which would require either a court challenge or a new law. But at the least, they are looking to the marriages in other states for court victories on individual social justice issues. For example, among other things, they want funeral leave from work when a partner dies, the ability to make medical decisions for a partner who cannot and the right to collect death benefits if a partner is a uniformed officer killed in the line of duty -- all of which can be addressed in a case seeking those rights in New York's courts.
Of course, should a case reach the Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, it would be received by a bench far more conservative than it has been in the last two decades, said Vincent M. Bonventre, a law professor at Albany Law School.
''That is why groups that represent gay rights are very hesitant to bring a challenge in New York courts for civil unions or gay marriages,'' Mr. Bonventre said. ''Because they don't trust this court to be willing to do what it might have done in the past.''
Thomas K. Duane, a Democrat from Manhattan and the only openly gay member of the State Senate, said there was also the option of the federal courts. ''If the Legislature doesn't take action, the courts will provide the leadership,'' said Mr. Duane, who is planning a March 3 forum on the topic in Albany and has drafted a marriage equality bill.
Gary D. Buseck, the legal director at Lambda Legal, a national gay and lesbian advocacy group, said the flurry of same-sex marriages elsewhere might finally prompt a serious discussion in New York's Legislature.
Short of that, he said, the developments in California, Canada and Massachusetts might well lead to court cases on recognition of marriage issues ''without ever having to touch'' the broader constitutional question in New York.
As an example, he spoke of the case of John Langan. A lower court ruled that Mr. Langan must be recognized under the state's wrongful-death statute as the surviving member of a gay couple who had obtained a civil union in Vermont. That case is under appeal.
''That case could just as easily have happened, or could happen in the future, with a couple that has a San Francisco marriage license who are New York residents,'' Mr. Buseck said.
In Massachusetts, it was a court case brought by 14 people, gay and lesbian partners from across the state who all sought marriages licenses in 2001 from their town or city offices, that led to the state's highest court to rule on Nov. 18 that gay couples have the right to marry under the state's Constitution.
New York has an array of other laws in place that address the issues that affect homosexuals, including a gay rights bill that was finally passed in December 2002 after 30 years of efforts by advocates. That measure simply added sexual orientation to race, religion, age and other factors that may not be used to discriminate against someone.
In 1989, the Court of Appeals expanded the definition of family to include same-sex partners for the purposes of inhabiting rent-controlled apartments after a tenant dies. A month after the Sept. 11 attacks, Mr. Pataki issued an executive order making surviving domestic partners eligible for government relief, and the state provides domestic partnership benefits for its employees.
But symbolism in the case of marriage is important, too, and the issue has ignited a battle throughout the nation, become a major issue in the presidential campaign and fueled heated debates in the White House and in Congress.
''There is nothing to say that a few years from now, or sooner, that New York State won't be ready to recognize the equality that our families should have,'' Mr. Levi said.
Meanwhile, if there is little effort in Albany to change the laws to allow same-sex marriages, there is also silence on the other side of the issue. A bill that would outlaw same-sex marriages is just as stalled as the one to allow it.
