IN Bernardo Bertolucci's new film, ''The Dreamers,'' three nubile cinéastes play film-mimicking games. In an extremely Parisian equivalent to collecting baseball cards, they act out favorite film scenes and then impose sexual penalties on one another if the identity of the scene cannot be guessed. Thus the heroine is seen flouncing around her apartment à la Garbo in ''Queen Christina,'' and pretending to be in the ''Blonde Venus'' tropical conga line.
Most of us react less literally to what we see on screen. We process and absorb it, sometimes even echo it. What more? How often is there a direct cause-and-effect link between events on screen and behavior in the real world? Movies spawn fads and fashions, but can they change real attitudes and catalyze real action? Starting Wednesday, Mel Gibson's graphic re-enactment of the Crucifixion may offer answers to some of these questions.
Nobody seriously doubts that movies exert some influence. Trust me: you can tell the difference between a crowd that has just seen ''Star Wars'' and one that has seen ''The Seventh Seal.'' Part of this involves self-selecting groups with built-in demographic differences, but most of it is a direct response to mood, subject matter and imagery. There would be no advertising industry without faith in the ways that visual propaganda prompts a visceral response. You would never have bought white polyester had it not been for ''Saturday Night Fever.''
The faith addressed by Mr. Gibson in his film ''The Passion of the Christ'' has provoked a more somber look at these dynamics. Having made a film so violent that he himself advises the squeamish to stay home, he has elicited volcanic anticipatory reactions.
Will his film about the crucifixion of Jesus Christ wind up prompting vengeful responses, in light of aspects of how it portrays the Jews' role in Jesus' death? All we know is this: If Mr. Gibson's film does a land-office business, there will be other filmmakers who get religion.
The mounting frenzy surrounding ''The Passion of the Christ'' has led to a remarkable willingness among entertainment-oriented media to parse matters of theology. It's not all red carpets and sunglasses, the host of ''Access Hollywood'' sardonically remarked, after even that glittery show had devoted a segment to the suffering of Jim Caviezel, the actor who plays Jesus. Mr. Caviezel was on the air to explain that he had gladly endured hypothermia, flaying and a lightning bolt for the sake of Mr. Gibson's vision.
Even Joe Ezsterhas (and beware any sentence that begins this way) acknowledges the power of film to persuade. For those who concentrated on the cigarette smoking in his ''Basic Instinct'' or ''Showgirls,'' the screenwriter admits complicity in endangering viewers' health.
But the putative link between cinema and peril goes back to the very origins of the medium. According to Neal Gabler, the author of ''Life: The Movie -- How Entertainment Conquered Reality,'' a federal censorship bill proposed in 1916 argued right from the get-go that lunatics might imitate the actions they saw on screen.
There has always been evidence to support that claim. From the acts of racial violence spawned by ''The Birth of a Nation'' to the mere audio-induced panic linked to Orson Welles's radio broadcast ''War of the Worlds'' to John Hinckley's re-enactment of ''Taxi Driver'' with President Ronald Reagan as his victim, cause-and-effect links to the movies exist. In remembering the egregious imitations, we tend to forget the more felicitous ones, from the good times unleashed by ''Easy Rider'' to the April-in-Paris brand of movie-star romance.
''There are a zillion movies about love, but you don't see a vast outpouring of it,'' said Mr. Gabler. ''So why should you expect outpourings of violence?''
He points out that the movies' real role in our lives is not to provoke individual action but instead to provide general templates (''Some of us learned how to walk down the street watching James Dean'') and larger cultural shifts.
By and large, Mr. Gabler emphasizes, movies are more apt to facilitate behavior than actually incite it. ''And in the process of facilitating, they also legitimize,'' he said. ''Film is a form of vicarious empowerment. That's true of American films in particular. The composition of an American film usually centralizes a single figure, in a way that French films, for instance, do not. And what you wind up with is the centrality of one individual imposing his will on the world.''
There may even be a part of the population that has received basic history lessons from Oliver Stone. '''JFK' seems to have persuaded a lot of simple-minded people of the validity of the 'grassy knoll theory,''' said Terry Teachout, the drama critic for The Wall Street Journal, and also a writer of a Web log for ArtsJournal.com. ''Film has a special capacity for this because of the nature of the medium. Because it consists of photographs. Because all film creates the illusion of a documentary reality.''
Will Mr. Gibson's celebrity and his crusading zeal give ''The Passion of the Christ'' a similar power? Will every frame of the film be perceived as true? ''It's important to remember that most of the people who see 'The Passion of the Christ' will regard it as a film about something that actually happened,'' Mr. Teachout said. ''That's something that a lot of the people writing about it are apt to misunderstand.''
Mr. Teachout cited a line from W.H. Auden: ''Poetry makes nothing happen.'' The poet was addressing the inability of art to galvanize, and, indeed, much moviegoing is strictly a passive experience.
But Mr. Gibson's film may prove too gut-wrenching to be viewed that way. For better or worse, won't his audience be forced to question, examine, embrace or reject what it sees? ''The people who'll watch it in some critical way,'' said Mr. Gabler, citing widely promulgated suspicions that the film demonizes its Jewish characters, ''are not the people most of us are worried about.''
As Mr. Gibson has lately demonstrated with a politician's finesse, the mark of a smart movie star is to attract and manipulate attention without appearing to be involved in self-promotion. In Mr. Gabler's opinion, this appears riskier than it actually is. In fact, in this case, it may actually have no downside.
''I don't believe that general audiences will punish Mel Gibson when he comes back in 'Lethal Weapon 8,''' Mr. Gabler said. ''If anything, in a pure branding sense, he's just expanding his audience. And in this culture you can be a murderer and still have people come to your movies. Failure is the only sin.''
Seeing and Believing
