The scoring drought of the Islanders' Shawn Bates did not pass for breakfast conversation.
''Around the house, we tried not to talk about it,'' Trent Hunter, Bates's housemate and linemate, said.
Maybe now the talk over morning cereal will be less muted.
Bates, a forward, knocked in a crossing pass from Hunter on Saturday night. Not only did it end his string of 32 games without a goal, it also helped the Islanders beat the Buffalo Sabres, 4-1, and give them a firmer foothold in the playoff race.
The Islanders (29-22-8-2) shook off their fight-filled loss to the Rangers on Thursday night with an efficient dismantling of the Sabres (28-27-6-1). They never trailed after a first-period goal by Arron Asham, and the teams skated freely, combining for only three penalties.
Buffalo, with a six-game unbeaten streak, entered Nassau Coliseum as the N.H.L.'s hottest team. The Islanders are now alone in seventh place in the Eastern Conference, 5 points ahead of the Sabres and 2 ahead of Montreal after the Canadiens lost to Toronto.
Renewed production from Bates would be a big plus as the Islanders chase a third straight postseason berth.
''It was a load off all our shoulders,'' said defenseman Adrian Aucoin, who added a goal and an assist. Cliff Ronning also scored.
Bates last scored Dec. 13 against Atlanta. He had felt the tension mount. ''Mentally, it gets to you pretty bad,'' he said. Coach Steve Stirling said he had reassured Bates until ''I was blue in the face.''
Moments before he scored, Bates was merely trying to regain his footing after being leveled by Dmitri Kalinin near center ice in the second period. He took his time to peel himself off the ice and first thought about skating to the bench. But on the Islanders' next possession, he streaked down the middle of the ice and did not break stride in ramming the puck past Sabres goaltender Martin Biron. That gave the Islanders a 2-0 lead with 12 minutes 14 seconds to go.
''It's just a great feeling to get back on the scoresheet,'' Bates said.
A goal by Kalinin cut the lead to 2-1 with 11:07 remaining, but the Islanders pulled away. They have not lost at home in eight games. They will be host to Boston, which is fifth in the conference, on Tuesday.
The Islanders created numerous quality chances among their 36 shots. Goalie Rick DiPietro (24 saves) is unbeaten in six of his last seven games.
Jason Blake's no-look backhand flick to Asham froze the Sabres enough for Asham to lift the puck past Biron's right shoulder for a 1-0 lead 1:23 into the game.
It was a far cry from Thursday's game against the Rangers, in which the Islanders trailed, 3-0, after the first period.
''That was a huge wake-up call for us,'' Aucoin said.
The Sabres carried momentum and three straight road victories into Saturday's game. Buffalo is the league's youngest team, with an average age of 25.3 years.
But Bates and his teammates had a mission to accomplish.
Aucoin said, ''He's one of those guys who's always putting pressure on himself.''
HOCKEY
