MOVIE and television production in New York City is a small industry with big visibility. It accounts for only a tiny percentage of all of the city's jobs. But many New Yorkers are more likely to have seen ''Law and Order'' being shot in their neighborhood than to have, say, seen the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, and movies, television shows and commercials shot in New York City propagate the Gotham mythology all around the world.
As much as the late 1990's were a boom time for film and television production in the city, the recession that followed laid the industry low. Data from New York State suggest that as many as one in four jobs vanished, at least temporarily. Production companies closed, prop houses folded, people wandered into new careers. The percentage decline in jobs in motion picture and video production seemed at times to exceed the decline in famously hard hit industries, like clothing manufacturing and finance.
But while it appeared that many of the lost jobs would never return to New York, some economists predicted that film and video production jobs would be different. ''The loss of apparel jobs is probably a semipermanent feature of the landscape, whereas the loss of motion picture jobs is not,'' Marc M. Goloven, a senior regional economist for J.P. Morgan Chase, said last year. ''I think this is an industry that can awaken as quickly as it hibernated.''
Spring is coming, and there are signs that the city's movie and television production industry is waking. The numbers kept by the city are not current, but data from 2003 suggest that the number of film, television and commercial shooting days is rising. And production company executives, cinematographers, editors and others now express something approximating hope.
''There's work -- not consistently, but it comes in spurts,'' said Bob Bailin, president of Feature Systems Inc., which provides equipment like lighting, generators and cable to the motion picture industry. ''Let's put it this way: Considering last year, I think we're doing better. My view, and I think from speaking to folks in the commercial end of the business, they're a lot more optimistic than last year.''
Others are even more upbeat.
''I think there's clearly been a tremendous growth in production in New York,'' said Jon Kamen, chairman and chief executive of @radical.media, a 10-year-old company that produces everything from films and documentaries to television shows and commercials. ''When you hear about things being as busy, stages being booked, it's clear that things have rebounded very nicely here in New York.''
The size of the industry is unclear. Katherine Oliver, the city's commissioner for film, theater and broadcasting, estimates that the film, television and commercial industry ''is a $5-billion-a-year business for the city, employing about 100,000 people.'' Jim Brown, a labor market analyst for the State Department of Labor, said employment in the city in the category the state defines more narrowly as motion picture and video production hit a peak of 50,000 in May 2001.
''It's an industry where a large part of the employment is sort of like construction -- they go from job to job,'' Mr. Brown said. ''Depending on who's shooting, you see significant moves in employment from month to month.'' He said the state data showed there were 35,500 people employed in motion picture and video production in the city at the end of 2003, up from about 33,000 in early 2003. ''It's been bobbing around but still trending upward,'' he said.
In the late 1990's, film and television production was one of the city's fastest growing industries. ''There was no slow time,'' Mr. Bailin said. ''I saw five years of 12 months a year of constant flow of business.'' Things began slowing down in 2000. Then came Sept. 11, 2001. Television production remained relatively strong, but production of feature films and commercials dropped sharply, production union officials say.
But in the first half of 2003, on-location shooting days for films, television and commercials rose by 36 percent over the same period in 2002, Ms. Oliver said. ''We have more work now than we certainly have had since 9/11,'' said Paul G. Moore, an assistant executive director at the Motion Picture Editors Guild. ''But I don't think we'll see the kinds of record levels of employment that we had in the 90's.'' Alan Suna, chief executive of Silvercup Studios in Long Island City, Queens, said his studio had its best year ever in 2003. ''I can't tell you what 2004 is going to bring,'' he said. ''But I think it will be a good year.''
HOME FRONT This column about the local economy appears every other week. E-mail address: homefront@nytimes.com
