Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, storming through as many Super Tuesday states as the hours would allow, campaigned Saturday in New York, Minnesota and Ohio, shifting his emphasis from trade and job losses to the influence of Washington lobbyists.
''We are in the middle of a fight in this country, a fight for change,'' Mr. Edwards told several hundred people at Hofstra University in Hempstead, N.Y. ''And the Republicans are going to throw everything they can at us.''
In St. Paul on Saturday afternoon, about 2,000 Edwards supporters filled the main auditorium and three overflow areas at the headquarters of the regional council of the Carpenters and Joiners union, with a few hundred others outside.
''If people want to know whether the American people want this campaign to go on, all they have to do is be in this building today,'' Mr. Edwards said.
He also made a direct appeal to supporters of Howard Dean. ''He and I both believe desperately that this country needs change,'' Mr. Edwards said. After the speech, he met privately with more than two dozen Dean organizers in Minnesota.
Since beginning his Super Tuesday push in some of the 10 states that will vote on March 2, Mr. Edwards has emphasized his differences with Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts on trade issues, denouncing the loss of American jobs overseas.
On Saturday, Mr. Edwards shifted his focus to include more attacks on President Bush's handling of the economy and to portray himself as an outsider who wanted to reduce the influence of ''that gang of Washington lobbyists.''
''We ought to cut them off at the knees,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''These people are stealing your democracy.''
Mr. Edwards proposed a ban on campaign contributions from lobbyists. He called for regulations forbidding government officials from becoming lobbyists and forcing lobbyists to disclose immediately which government officials they have met with and which companies they represent. And he proposed a ban on contributions from lobbyists for companies bidding for contracts in Iraq or any other federal contract.
''We've got to put a stop to this war profiteering,'' he said.
Later, Mr. Edwards told reporters that he considered his anti-lobbyist stance to be a major distinction between him and Mr. Kerry.
Mr. Kerry, who has been attacked by Republicans and rival Democrats for accepting contributions from lobbyists and other special interests, has pointed out that Mr. Edwards draws much of his donations from fellow lawyers.
Mr. Edwards objected to the comparison. ''My money comes from individuals,'' he said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: CAMPAIGNING
