Senator John Kerry accused President Bush on Saturday of trying to smear him about his record in Vietnam, his role in the antiwar movement and his commitment to the military, and he challenged Mr. Bush to a debate on the Vietnam era and ''the impact of our experiences on our approaches to presidential leadership.''
In a letter released late Saturday night, Mr. Kerry said Mr. Bush had ''initiated a widespread attack'' over the past week. He noted that on Saturday morning, Senator Saxby Chambliss, Republican of Georgia, had attacked him as soft on defense in a conference call arranged by the Bush campaign.
Mr. Chambliss said in the call, ''When you have a 32-year history of voting to cut defense programs and cut defense systems, folks in Georgia are going to look beyond what he says and look at his voting record.''
After arriving in Atlanta to campaign for Georgia's March 2 primary, Mr. Kerry said, ''I don't know what it is that these Republicans who didn't serve in any war have against those of us who are Democrats who did.''
Mr. Kerry's remarks, which he made first in a taped interview for ''This Week'' on ABC -- to be broadcast Sunday -- and then repeated at the airport here on Saturday night, made for one of his most aggressive offensives yet against the president. They indicate that the Vietnam war could well be a major issue in the presidential race if Mr. Kerry wins the nomination.
Scott Stanzel, a spokesman for the Bush re-election campaign, said Mr. Kerry's letter ''comes after his campaign has run 15 negative attack ads against President Bush.'' Mr. Stanzel said it was ''further evidence that Senator Kerry says one thing and does another.''
He added, ''We look forward to a spirited debate about the most important issues facing our country, including how to grow the economy and win the war on terror.''
Mr. Bush's military record has come under attack by some Democrats, who have raised questions about whether he fulfilled his obligations while in the Air National Guard in the early 1970's. Mr. Kerry's suggestion that he and Mr. Bush discuss their ''experiences'' during the Vietnam War was a none-too-subtle jab at the president.
The White House has released hundreds of pages of Mr. Bush's military files in an effort to prove he showed up for training at a base in Alabama during that period.
Speaking to reporters here, Mr. Kerry specifically cited Mr. Chambliss and Vice President Dick Cheney and other Republicans who, he said, were questioning the patriotism of Democrats who challenge the Bush administration's policy in Iraq. He called it a common tactic. ''This is what they did to Max Cleland,'' he said.
Mr. Chambliss defeated Mr. Cleland, a Democratic incumbent who lost three limbs in Vietnam, in a 2002 race in which he ran television advertisements showing pictures of Mr. Cleland, Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein to suggest that Mr. Cleland was soft on defense. Mr. Kerry has often said that Mr. Cleland's failure to hit back hard cost him his seat, and on Saturday he appeared to be showing he would not make the same mistake.
He noted that Mr. Bush campaigned for Mr. Chambliss in 2002 and ''didn't say a word'' about his tactics.
''Well, I'm going to say a word about it,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''I don't think that has a place in American politics. I'd ask the people of Georgia what more Max Cleland has to leave on a battlefield to prove his commitment to the defense of our nation.''
As Mr. Kerry spoke, his campaign released the letter it said had been sent to the White House.
''As you well know, Vietnam was a very difficult and painful period in our nation's history, and the struggle for our veterans continues,'' Mr. Kerry wrote. ''So, it has been hard to believe that you would choose to re-open these wounds for your personal political gain. But, that is what you have chosen to do.''
He added: ''America deserves a better debate. If you want to debate the Vietnam era, and the impact of our experiences on our approaches to presidential leadership, I am prepared to do so.''
''This is not a debate to be distorted through your $100 million dollar campaign fund,'' he continued. ''This is a debate that should be conducted face to face.''
Mr. Kerry has campaigned heavily on his combat record in the war, in which he won the Silver Star, the Bronze Star and three Purple Hearts as the skipper of Navy swift boats on the Mekong Delta.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MILITARY
