The world is full of performers intent on reinventing flamenco. On Thursday night at City Center four first-rate dancers and a hallowed flamenco singer just went ahead and did it, to paraphrase George Balanchine and the Nike ads. ''Gala Seville,'' their vibrant, thought-provoking program, which opened Flamenco Festival New York 2004, proved that flamenco lives on exuberantly in these two generations of performers.
Flamenco dance and music have their own demanding techniques. But the most important ingredients are the performance itself and the individuality and integrity artists bring to it. On Thursday Manuela Carrasco and the singer known as Chocolate represented classical flamenco. Israel Galván, Rocio Molina and Juan de Juan opened the evening with dancing that suggested how much traditional flamenco, like tap, has been shaped by individual style and personality and contemporary art forms.
Mr. Galván got things off to an oddball start with ''Homage to Manuel Soler: Bulería y Romance del Amargo'' and ''Tona -- Milonga,'' solos that established his enjoyably eccentric style. His off-the-rack shirt hanging over his black pants gave him a roly-poly look that combined with his desultory manner to comic effect.
He sprang on and off the stage like a large bird for short bursts of dancing, then joined Ms. Molina in ''Angelus (A Dalí),'' a piquant little shrug of a duet filled with vividly peculiar complementary arm gestures. To complete the oddity of Mr. Galván's segment, Rafael de Utrera, a young singer, walked out, turned on a small boom box and sang along to recorded flamenco clapping by Soler, the festival's percussionist, who died last year.
Ms. Molina, at 19 the youngest of the three, is a brooding treasure. Small, round-bodied and coolly determined, she seemed to be channeling pure flamenco dancing in a decidedly nontraditional Solea solo.
Ms. Molina moves like someone who may have looked in on a modern-dance class or two. Mr. de Juan looks as if he had performed along with Michael Jackson videos as a child. And he knows, even better than Mr. Jackson, how to inhabit couture costumes so that they dance with the body. But in his Alegrías solo you were never in doubt that he was a superb flamenco technician, particularly in his lightning-fast, unslurred footwork.
Compañía Manuela Carrasco followed in the second half of an already long program. The world-weary passion of La Susi's singing came through clearly. And best of all was the raw wail of Chocolate's refinement of flamenco singing.
Ms. Carrasco, seen on Broadway in ''Flamenco Puro,'' is a master of tantalizingly deconstructed flirtation. She and Chocolate raised the stage temperature by keeping things relatively cool, acknowledging each other's closeness with delicately contrapuntal armwork.
The festival is produced by the World Music Institute and Miguel Marin Productions.
