YOU knew from their milky clam-chowda accents that they were from two of Boston's finest families. No, not the Cabots and the Lodges. Those two over by the Super Bowl souvenir stand, where the Patriots' T-shirts with ''champions'' were already on display yesterday, had to be from the Foxboro and the Fenway families.
''Congratulations,'' Fenway was overheard saying. ''Two Super Bowls in three seasons. And we haven't won the World Series since 1918.''
''Sorry to do that again,'' Foxboro said gently. ''I know it must hurt. The National Football League wasn't even organized until 1920.''
Foxboro wasn't gloating. Proper Bostonians don't rub it in. Everybody has heard the old saying that up there the Cabots speak to only the Lodges, and the Lodges speak to only God, but the Foxboros and the Fenways speak to each other. They understand that they have always suffered more than celebrated, so this was a calm, consoling conversation. The pro football Foxboros and the baseball Fenways coexist, like Giants and Yankees fans in New York or Bears and Cubs fans in Chicago.
''Hey, for years we were bad enough on our own,'' Foxboro said. ''We didn't need the Curse of the Bambino to be bad.''
''But you never got rid of a Babe Ruth,'' Fenway said. ''You traded two guys who went on to the Pro Football Hall of Fame with other teams, Nick Buoniconti with the Dolphins and Mike Haynes with the Raiders, but neither one was Babe Ruth, so no curse was involved.''
''Tom Brady is our Babe Ruth,'' Foxboro said. ''He's 2-0 in the Super Bowl with two most valuable player trophies. One more and he'll have as many as Joe Montana -- Joe Montana! -- but all he talks about are all the great teammates and great coaches he has. He's a team guy.''
''He's a Red Sox guy,'' Fenway said. ''He wore a Red Sox cap to his Super Bowl news conference last Wednesday at the Patriots hotel.''
''What a great kid,'' Foxboro said. ''The week before, the president invited him to Washington to hear his State of the Union address.''
''The Red Sox could take a lesson from Brady,'' Fenway said. ''He's the Patriots' best player and all he talks about is how great his teammates and coaches are, and how they're going to win. All the Red Sox talk about is how they're going to trade their best players, Manny Ramirez and Nomar Garciaparra, if they can swing a deal with Texas for Alex Rodriguez.''
''With Brady's arm,'' Foxboro said, ''he'd be a good pitcher.''
''Maybe so,'' Fenway said, ''but the Patriots guy I want for the Red Sox is Bill Belichick. The way he analyzes everything, he'd be as good a baseball manager as he is a football coach. Both jobs depend on how well a guy is a leader of men. Belichick is a leader of men. He wouldn't have let Pedro Martínez stay in too long against the Yankees.''
''I can't believe how the Patriots got a chance to win Sunday night.''
''What chance are you talking about?'' Fenway said. ''What chance?''
''John Kasay's kickoff for the Panthers that went out of bounds with 68 seconds left,'' Foxboro said. ''That gave the Patriots the ball on the 40 instead of maybe back around the 20, and that made it easier for Brady to take us down to where Adam Vinatieri kicked the 41-yard field goal to win it, 32-29.''
''I know,'' Fenway said, sighing. ''Something like Kasay's kickoff is what the Red Sox usually do. Like Bill Buckner's error in the World Series with the Mets. Or Mike Torrez throwing that home run ball to Bucky Dent.''
''Or Grady Little not taking out Pedro in Game 7 of last year's American League Championship Series when everybody else in Yankee Stadium knew he was done,'' Foxboro said. ''Oops, sorry about that. I didn't mean to bring that up. No disrespect intended.''
''Hey, I'm used to it.''
''You're right,'' Foxboro said. ''Strange things like that seem to happen against the Red Sox, but they also seem to happen in the Patriots' favor. Like Brady throwing a touchdown pass for a 29-22 lead to a linebacker, Mike Vrabel -- a linebacker!''
''The Panthers must have felt like the Red Sox always feel,'' Fenway said.
''The way the Patriots' history has turned for the better, I'm beginning to think I know what the Red Sox' real problem is,'' Foxboro said. ''Fenway Park itself.''
''Fenway Park? That's our heritage. Our charm.''
''Heritage, shmeritage,'' Foxboro said. ''The Curse of the Bambino has seeped into Fenway Park's red bricks, into the Green Monster. The curse is there forever. What you need is a new ballpark that will exorcise that curse.''
''What's the ballpark got to do with it?''
''Look what happened to the Patriots,'' Foxboro said. ''Until construction began on our Gillette Stadium in 2000, the Patriots had never won the N.F.L. championship or even an American Football League championship after the Sullivan family founded the franchise in 1960. But now we've won two Super Bowls.''
''Maybe you're right about the ballpark,'' Fenway said, a sudden edge in his voice. ''But stop reminding me about your two Super Bowls. I thought we were friends.''
Sports of The Times
