The budget President Bush proposed on Monday would nearly double the pool of money that the federal government would set aside for the 2005 fiscal year to help defend New York City and other localities considered vulnerable to terrorist attacks.
President Bush proposed to increase federal antiterrorism funds for so-called high-risk cities by $721 million, to $1.44 billion, according to city lawmakers reviewing the budget.
But his proposal did not include a major change that New York lawmakers had been demanding in the federal budget: a strict limit on the number of cities entitled to the money. That means that the best New York can expect to receive is $94 million, a figure that New York lawmakers say would be much higher if the president and Congress agreed to revise the formula and spread the money among fewer cities.
For months, New York officials have been complaining that federal antiterrorism money specifically intended for the most vulnerable cities is being funneled to a growing list of cities that do not have urgent security needs.
In April, for example, the first installment of money from a fund established by the president and Congress for high-risk areas was distributed among seven cities, including New York, Washington, Los Angeles and Chicago. But in recent months, the number of eligible cities has grown -- first to 30 and then to 50 -- thereby reducing the share of money available for New York and other major cities.
The reaction to the president's budget proposal was strong and swift. Members of the city's Congressional delegation complained that Mr. Bush's plan would shortchange New York and other more obvious terrorist targets if Congress did not move to limit the number of cities eligible for the antiterrorism money.
''They have taken a tightly targeted program and made it into a run-of-the-mill pork barrel program,'' said Representative Anthony D. Weiner, a Democrat who represents parts of Brooklyn and Queens, who proposed legislation that would limit the number of cities entitled to such money to no more than 15.
Mr. Weiner continued: ''If we are at the point where the terrorists are targeting the Charlotte Raptor Museum, or whatever it is they have down there, then we are in big trouble. That was not what this program was intended for.''
But Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said he was satisfied with the president's budget. ''I am pleased that President Bush's budget has nearly doubled the amount of Homeland Security funding for high-threat localities,'' the mayor said. ''Washington is listening to us, abandoning its population-based funding schemes and moving more money toward New York City, where it is needed.''
The president's proposal is an opening bid in budget negotiations with Congress, where lawmakers will very likely make extensive election-year revisions before giving their approval.
In his budget proposal, the president also called for spending cuts on a handful of programs important to New York City and State, with education and law enforcement hit the hardest, according to Congressional budget analysts.
The budget would eliminate $120 million to hire police officers nationwide, including $10.4 million for New York City, where the money was to be used to hire as many as 139 officers, according to New York Congressional officials.
New York lawmakers also complained that Mr. Bush was not living up to his word in the area of education.
His budget, they said, would give New York an additional $72 million in Title I education money for poor and disadvantaged children.
But Democratic lawmakers from the city pointed out that that was $505 million less than what the president and Congress agreed to provide for the program two years ago when Mr. Bush's major educational initiative, the No Child Left Behind Act, was enacted.
New York Democrats also sharply criticized the amount the Bush budget set aside for housing. They said the proposal provided $2 billion less than the Congressional Budget Office estimated was needed to provide vouchers for people enrolled in the Section 8 housing program nationally. With 80,000 New Yorkers in the Section 8 program, that means 7,800 are at risk of losing their vouchers, they said.
