There was none of flamenco dancing's agony, rooted in age-old laments, in the two Spanish companies that performed at the fourth annual Flamenco Festival New York over the weekend.
As usual City Center was packed, and as usual the festival confirmed that with some major exceptions, younger flamenco artists are less interested in their art form's hermetic essence than in creative experiments.
These can be mildly conventional as in the dance-dramas of Compañía Andaluza de Danza, a troupe of excellently schooled dancers that made its New York debut on Saturday and Sunday nights. There can also be a canny mix of tradition and pop style, as in Ballet Flamenco Sara Baras, which returned with a different format from last year's dance-drama, ''Mariana Pineda.''
On Friday night Ms. Baras offered a bare-bones approach in ''Sueños (Dreams),'' a suite of traditional dances for soloists and a small ensemble. Nonetheless, this concert presentation had a contemporary cool, down to the fashionable gowns and polished formality.
Ms. Baras, her hair dark and no longer golden brown, saves the show from slickness by the sheer power of her dazzling technique and projection.
The opening ''Martinete'' turned a traditional cane dance into an Astairesque chorus with twirling canes, and a violin melody imposed over the guitarists, singers and percussionist lent a strange New Age tone.
All this is deliberate, a background for the skillfully dissolving patterns for five women and two men (including the long-haired standout Raúl Fernández), who make way for Ms. Baras's precise rhythms in her heel work, with its staccato attack in the solos, especially in her brilliant ''Farruca.'' She is joined by José Serrano, who saves his energy for his solo, ''Seguiriya.''
In the finale the company offers a fleeting gloss on gypsy passion. All is beautiful and sharp angular form, with no curve in sight.
Compañía Andaluza de Danza was formed in 1994 by the Andalusian Regional Government. Its focus on dance-drama here recalled the National Ballet of Spain, where José Antonio Ruíz was a lead dancer before becoming the Andalusian troupe's current director.
In Ursula López, a statuesque dancer with impressive attack, the company has a stunning dance actress. In the New York premiere of ''La Leyenda,'' Mr. Ruíz's memorial tribute to the flamenco star Carmen Amaya, she is ''the real woman'' who crosses paths with an alter ego, ''the immortal woman.'' The latter is subtlely personified by Elena Algado, who dances with lyrical, serpentine grace. The piece is too long, and the music has no dance pulse. But the theme of outer success and inner torment gets some imaginative abstract treatment.
Ms. López's performance as the abandoned wife in Antonio Gades's familiar ''Blood Wedding'' was a revelation. When the Ballet Naçional de Cuba performed the work last fall, that role looked minor.
Flamenco dancers, not ballet dancers, can give the choreography its full value. Although the décor was absent, the overall performance was outstanding. Ana Moya was the bride who left her groom, Raul Gomez, and his mother, Guadalupe Torres, for her lover, Miguel Ángel Corbacho.
FLAMENCO FESTIVAL REVIEWS
