Sweet Memories
The sense of smell is a powerful thing, able to evoke memories through just a whiff of a familiar odor. After all, it was the smell, as well as the sight and taste, of that petite madeleine soaked in tea that unleashed ''Remembrance of Things Past.''
Honeybees have a little Proust in them, apparently, according to new research from scientists at the Australian National University. They have discovered that just the whiff of a familiar scent from a feeding place can make the bees return to the spot, by bringing out memories of the route.
The researchers trained bees to visit two sugar feeders in different locations, each about 150 feet from the hive. The feeders carried different scents -- rose and lemon in one test, for example.
After the bees were trained, the researchers replaced the feeders with empty unscented ones and blew one of the scents into the hive. Most of the trained bees flew to the corresponding feeder, even though it had no food or scent. The results were reported in Nature.
Bees returning from a foraging trip normally perform a ''waggle dance'' for their hivemates, informing them through visual and other cues where to find food. But this research suggests that the sense of smell may do much the same thing. A familiar nectar scent brought to the hive by a returning bee may prompt others to head out to the same remembered spot.
Ancient Ecology Problems
Eutrophication of lakes and other bodies of water is often thought of as a modern problem, a result of too much fertilizer use, say, or inadequate sewage treatment. When these nutrients get in the water, the result is too much algae and other plant growth and too little oxygen; the lake's ecological balance is changed.
But it turns out that even the ancient people of Arctic Canada could do a little balance-changing of their own. That was the finding of a study of a Thule Inuit settlement on Somerset Island in the high Arctic.
In the study, reported in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, researchers from the University of Toronto and several other Canadian institutions examined a pond at the settlement, which was occupied from about 1200 to 1600.
The Thule Inuit hunted bowhead whales from summer camps and brought them to Somerset, their winter quarters. They used the whales for food and fuel and even used the bones to build their dwellings. Over time, nutrients from decomposing whale flesh and bone leached into a shallow pond and nearby soil.
By studying pond sediments, the researchers were able to construct a timeline of the changes that these nutrients brought. They found that around 1200 the dominant algae in the lake changed, from one common to other Arctic sites to another that is an indication of substantial moss growth. After 1600, the common algae resumed its dominance.
Isotopic analysis showed that the changes were related to the nutrients leaching from the whales. The researchers say that even though the site was abandoned four centuries ago, some changes to the pond's ecology were still apparent today.
Mining for Genomes
Scientists have reported success in ''environmental sequencing'' of a group of microbes, determining the genetic code of several in a sample from a polluted mine in Northern California.
Normally, genome sequencing of microbes is done on one strain that has been cultured in the lab. But in a study published online by Nature, researchers from the University of California at Berkeley and other institutions said they had had success with a shotgun approach. A sample of a microbial biofilm from the mine was ground up, DNA sequences were obtained and then the sequences were sorted into five genomes.
Only two of the genomes are complete, but the researchers say the approach should advance understanding of the way bacteria and other microbes work together under certain conditions.
Observatory
