Senator John Edwards of North Carolina says he will drop out of the presidential race if he does not win the primary in South Carolina tonight. Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri withdrew two weeks ago after losing the caucuses in next-door Iowa.
Howard Dean's new campaign manager, Roy Neel, says Dr. Dean, the former Vermont governor, will continue to fight and is hoping for a turnaround beginning with the Wisconsin primary on Feb. 17, two weeks and more than a dozen contests down the road. Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut say that they, too, have no intention of dropping out.
Still, there is a moment when candidates must ask themselves whether dwindling resources and repeated defeats leave any hope alive. Often, this is accompanied by behind-the-scenes pressure to clear the field for the putative front-runner in the name of party unity.
''It's a very hard decision, as personal as a decision can be,'' said Bob Kerrey, a former Nebraska senator who ran unsuccessfully for president in 1992 and is now president of the New School University in New York. ''In life and in politics, getting off the dance floor is about as important as getting on. In fact, I think it's more important how you get off, because at some point you begin to draw attention to the fact that you're dancing all by yourself.''
This year, the pressure to get out may be magnified by what polls say is a tendency among Democrats to rally quickly behind the candidate they believe has the best chance of unseating President Bush.
''The voters do not want a sideshow,'' Donna Brazile, a Democratic strategist, said. ''They want the real thing. They want a candidate to emerge soon. So these guys need to get some gas, and the way to get gas is to get votes. And if they don't get the votes, they need to get out of there.''
As long as the money lasts, however, the urge is to persist, said Robert H. Frank, a professor of economics at Cornell. ''So they end up like Bruce Willis in 'The Sixth Sense,' '' Professor Frank said. ''They're dead, but they don't know it yet.''
And with presidential campaigns becoming more front-loaded in recent decades, when early primary victories can all but assure the nomination, this moment of truth is arriving earlier and earlier.
In 1996, the Republicans Lamar Alexander and Richard G. Lugar did not drop out until after Super Tuesday, in early March, and Steve Forbes resisted public pressure from Republican leaders until mid-March. Even then, Patrick J. Buchanan and Alan Keyes stayed in the race until just before the Republican National Convention in August.
In 2000, the main challengers, Bill Bradley on the Democratic side and John McCain, a Republican, stayed in the race until mid-March.
But this year, just barely into February, with Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts sitting on back-to-back victories in Iowa and New Hampshire, the talk is already about which of the seven remaining Democratic candidates will withdraw next.
''I can point to instance after instance over the years where a candidate will say, 'Oh, I'm in this all the way to the convention,' and then drop out a couple of days later,'' said William G. Mayer, a professor of political science at Northeastern University and author of ''The Front-Loading Problem in Presidential Nominations.''
Terry McAuliffe, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, has said he expects a nominee by the second week of March, but he advises voters in the meantime to let the process unfold. ''It's still early,'' Mr. McAuliffe said. ''We've only had two days of voting. Let the system work. The system will do it.'' Still, Mr. McAuliffe is quietly orchestrating efforts to narrow the field after today, some Democrats said.
To win the Democratic nomination, a candidate needs the votes of 2,161 delegates at this summer's national convention in Boston.
Mr. Neel has said that Dr. Dean expects one or more of the other candidates to drop out after Tuesday's voting, and more in the next two weeks, until by the Wisconsin primary Dr. Dean will be head to head with Mr. Kerry. Because so many major states are voting in the first two weeks of March, enough time remains to win the race or to at least deny Mr. Kerry a majority going into the convention.
Whatever the case, Dr. Dean has said that should Mr. Kerry or any other candidate lock up the nomination, he will drop out of the race.
The rush to nudge candidates out of the race is relatively new. Until 1968, candidates usually made it to the convention, Professor Mayer said. Even in the early 1980's, many stayed in until late June.
Only in more recent elections, as campaigning has become more expensive and the calendars increasingly compressed, have so many candidates dropped out within weeks of the first contests, long before anyone has a lock on the nomination.
In this climate, only a handful of maverick candidates -- among them Mr. Buchanan, the conservative broadcaster, in 1996, and the Rev. Al Sharpton this year -- have remained in the race long beyond any hope of victory, because they were running not simply to win but to spread a message or to raise their profiles.
''I think public calls on candidates to drop out are unfair,'' Mr. Kerrey said. ''They have the exclusive right to decide when to get out. Everyone gets real anxious about this, but these things have a way of working themselves out.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: CAMPAIGN MEMO
