While courting a new business client, a lawyer at Pillsbury Winthrop made an uncomfortable discovery. The potential client wanted to sue a subsidiary of another company that the firm represented.
What the lawyer did next may be just one more sign of the times. He called his own lawyer -- the general counsel at the firm.
Law firms, it turns out, are finding that they need their own lawyers to advise them on how to practice law.
''A big firm in the modern era has to show great sensitivity and care,'' said Ronald E. Van Buskirk, who is general counsel at Pillsbury and is still investigating that particular conflict. ''Even though the lawyers in your firm may be very bright and they can go do research, you want someone who's been through it before.''
This may not be quite like shipping coal to Newcastle, but it is akin to a consulting firm hiring its own change agent, or perhaps a software firm taking on a programmer to review the work of other programmers. After all, law firms -- especially the largest ones -- already employ plenty of lawyers.
But more and more law firms are hiring a general counsel or naming someone to the position. They are spurred in part by fears of greater regulation, aggressive plaintiff-side securities lawyers, the prospect of criminal prosecution and the demise of Arthur Andersen, the accounting firm convicted of obstruction of justice for hindering investigations into the accounting at Enron. In explaining the trend, lawyers generally play down those risks and emphasize that firms have grown very large, making it harder to rely on traditional, more informal ways of managing legal concerns.
''It's sort of like the story of the shoemaker's shoes,'' said William J. Perlstein, managing partner of Wilmer Cutler &amp; Pickering in Washington, referring to the cobbler who neglected his own shoes. Mr. Perlstein's firm recently hired a second lawyer to assist with general counsel-type duties.
In addition to handling employment and other types of contracts and representing the firm in disputes -- duties that would fall on a general counsel at any company -- the counsel at a law firm often oversees training programs to make sure that lawyers recognize ethical issues, advises lawyers confronting thorny conflicts, ensures compliance with state bar association rules and provides advice on firm management. While some of the largest firms have had general counsels for several years, the trend has picked up speed of late, lawyers say.
''Firms have said, 'We need someone to ensure that we are doing the right things the right way,''' said Thomas S. Clay, a principal at Altman Weil, a consulting firm to law firms. ''They want to have somebody whose job it is to make sure that the firm is staying on the straight and narrow.''
One problem, lawyers say, is that figuring out the right thing to do in increasingly complex transactions or lawsuits has become too difficult for the average lawyer.
Though mega-firms may have thousands of lawyers, nowadays each has fairly specialized knowledge of a particular type of law, and it is unfair to expect a mergers-and-acquisitions lawyer to know how to handle a potential conflict of interest that comes to light while reviewing documents from a company that a client wants to buy, said Anthony E. Davis, a partner at Hinshaw &amp; Culbertson who advises law firms. But, he added, it is reasonable to expect that lawyer to spot the potential conflict.
''The applications of the rules of professional responsibility and the other laws governing how lawyers behave toward each other and toward their clients and toward the courts have gotten very much more complicated,'' Mr. Davis said. ''When a conflict of interest is waivable and what's required to get a waiver is not something every lawyer can possibly know.''
At the same time, the consequences of a mistake may never have been higher. The government's conviction of Andersen, a partnership like many law firms, ended the idea that a successful professional firm could weather any crisis.
Furthermore, if big law firms recommend that their large corporate clients follow various policies and procedures -- such as employing a general counsel -- the firms would be remiss if they did not do so themselves, Mr. Perlstein of Wilmer Cutler &amp; Pickering said.
When consultants at Hildebrandt International, a consulting firm that advises law firms, were trying to decide what kind of event would be popular with their clients, they came up with an informal roundtable of firm general counsels, James W. Jones, a director at the firm, said.
''I noticed that this was a position that was popping up at a number of the larger firms,'' Mr. Jones said, though he noted that there were no statistics on how many firms have general counsels. The new group, which meets three times a year, held a meeting last month in Phoenix, attended by representatives of about 20 firms, he said. ''We found great eagerness in the market.''
One reason for the demand is the uncertainty about how best to structure the role of a general counsel in a law firm, Mr. Jones said. Some firms have designated a lawyer to be a full-time general counsel, while others have lawyers who are also representing the firm's clients.
At Baker &amp; McKenzie, the tasks are divided. One person handles conflicts of interest and professional responsibility, while another deals with potential liability, negotiating insurance coverage and representing the firm in disputes.
''It's a fascinating job,'' said Edward J. Zulkey, who has held the job dealing with liability issues at the firm for about 10 years. Lawyers from around the world call with concerns or questions, meaning he deals with a great variety of issues.
At many law firms, partners take home bigger salaries if they bring in more business. Because general counsels are often senior partners with extensive experience and a store of prestige, firms need to restructure their pay so that the partners are not penalized because they no longer represent outside clients.
Initially, Mr. Zulkey served as a litigator and performed some of his general counsel functions. The time that he billed to any client went directly to the firm so that he would have no incentive to shirk his in-house responsibilities. Now, Mr. Zulkey says his role as general counsel is a full-time job, and lawyers at other firms say the job is also getting more demanding.
When Mr. Van Buskirk was named general counsel at Pillsbury Winthrop in 1999, less than a third of his time was spent on advising the firm, he estimated. Now, he said, ''It's climbing past 50 percent.''
Having a general counsel may reduce a firm's insurance premiums and could afford some protection to law firms if they are sued, several lawyers said. The traditional privilege afforded to communications between a lawyer and a client is very weak when the communication is between lawyers at the same firm, but may prove to be stronger if one lawyer is formally designated as the firm's legal representative.
''There is the sense, with some legal justification and authority, that by having a general counsel, firms create the appropriate function so that attorney-client privilege can attach,'' said Mr. Davis of Hinshaw &amp; Culbertson. He added that some recent decisions had made the law less clear.
One of the most time-consuming tasks for general counsels is teaching other lawyers to recognize situations in which they should seek advice, rather than relying on vague memories of ethics training courses or rules that are outside their area of expertise. Such training will become more important as lawyers cope with new rules from the Securities and Exchange Commission on how they must respond to potential improprieties at corporate clients.
''You don't want somebody who is not an expert in it, trying to determine or remember what the rule is,'' said Mr. Perlstein of Wilmer Cutler &amp; Pickering. ''What you want them to do is what we call 'issue-spotting,' which is to know that this is an issue and know that they need to go and inquire from somebody who is an expert on it.''
Of course, the need for such training raises the question of why lawyers might not know how to recognize potential ethical issues after three years of law school and continuing education programs on the subject.
''I don't think it's fair to legal education to say that it doesn't teach people about the subject'' of ethics and professional responsibility, Mr. Davis said in response to that question. ''But it is fair to say that it doesn't teach them how to practice law.''
