The exposure of Janet Jackson's right breast by Justin Timberlake during a risqué halftime concert at the Super Bowl in Houston on Sunday led to apologies by CBS and MTV executives yesterday, and a call by the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission to investigate the incident.
Michael Powell, the F.C.C. chairman, called Jackson's display a ''classless, crass and deplorable stunt.'' The commission could impose fines of $27,500 for each CBS-owned station and affiliate. Both CBS and MTV are divisions of Viacom.
Judy McGrath, the group president of MTV Networks, said, ''We have deeply apologized to CBS, to the viewers and to the N.F.L.'' She called what happened ''a renegade mistake by a performer'' and said that MTV, the producer of the halftime show, was not taking the F.C.C. investigation cavalierly. She added, ''We absolutely, unequivocally, did not know this thing was going to happen.''
At a White House press briefing yesterday, a reporter asked if President Bush had any criticism or comments. Scott McClellan, the White House spokesman, said: ''Well, one, I think the F.C.C. has already said that they're looking into the matter. I think our view is that it's important for families to be able to expect a high standard when it comes to programming.''
Jackson and Timberlake did not rehearse stripping anything from Jackson's body in front of MTV, CBS or National Football League officials. But McGrath said they privately planned an ending to coincide with the lyrics, ''I gotta have you naked by the end of this song.''
Timberlake was to remove Jackson's skirt to reveal her skintight black leggings, but the skirt proved too heavy for her to dance in. McGrath and several other MTV executives said they would have objected to the suggestive nature of ripping the skirt off and never would have approved it.
According to two executives close to the production, the idea for what is called a ''reveal'' at the end of the song was dropped, and Jackson, Timberlake and Jackson's choreographer, Gil Duldulao, apparently worked out new plans in her dressing room.
In a statement, Jackson said: ''The decision to have a costume reveal at the end of my halftime show performance was made after final rehearsals. MTV was completely unaware of it. It was not my intention that it go as far as it did. I apologize to anyone offended -- including the audience, MTV, CBS and the N.F.L.''
Her spokesman, Stephen Huvane, said the breast-baring was a result of a ''garment malfunction.'' He said that Timberlake was supposed to ''peel away'' Jackson's rubber bustier ''to reveal a red lace bra.''
''But the garment collapsed,'' Huvane said.
McGrath said that at the end of their song, Jackson and Timberlake were supposed to return to the show's ''freedom to choose'' theme. When she saw the plan go awry, she wondered what had happened.
After the fact, CBS executives were told that the plan had simply gone wrong. Again Jackson was supposed to have something on under the outside costume. But Timberlake's action pulled off both layers of material, leaving her breast exposed, except for a medallion she wears as a nipple ring.
In a memo to CBS employees, Leslie Moonves, the chairman of CBS, wrote that the rehearsals gave no indication to network executives that ''such an inappropriate display was contemplated.''
He added, ''We are angry and embarrassed that this happened during our superb broadcast and have apologized to our viewers.''
One immediate effect of the incident was CBS's decision yesterday to impose a delay of several seconds on its live coverage of the Grammy Awards show this Sunday. Radio shows conventionally use a seven-second delay to allow producers time to excise language deemed inappropriate, but live events generally do not use the delay.
Another result was a decision by Virgin Records to rush its release to radio stations of Jackson's new single, ''Just a Little While,'' from her album ''Damita Jo,'' which is to be released March 30.
For the N.F.L., the Jackson-Timberlake incident overwhelmed news of a compelling Super Bowl, which New England won, 32-29, over Carolina. The broadcast was seen by a record total audience of 143.6 million.
Paul Tagliabue, the N.F.L. commissioner, who did not see the incident live at Reliant Stadium, was told of it soon after by his aides. He was still angry yesterday. ''We will change our policies, our people and our processes before the next Super Bowl'' to prevent a repetition of the incident, he said.
A senior league official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the N.F.L. would never rely on a network, especially one like MTV, which has a narrow agenda to reach young viewers, to produce a halftime show. ''MTV is history,'' the official said.
In the days before the show, N.F.L. executives complained to MTV about several elements of the show that it demanded be removed. The league's primary concerns about suggestive dancing by one of the other performers, Nelly, who grabbed his crotch repeatedly, and the lyrics sung by Timberlake and P. Diddy were ignored, the senior league official said. ''Our concern was much deeper than that final moment,'' the official said. ''It was the overall content.''
An MTV spokeswoman, Carole Robinson, said network executives gave notes to Kid Rock, another performer, ''one of which he honored, two he didn't.'' As for Nelly, he made moves on the air that he did not display during rehearsals, Robinson said.
In the days before the Super Bowl, the MTV Web site promised something ''shocking'' during Jackson's performance. Yesterday, the Web site summed up her routine by saying, ''Janet Jackson got nasty''; that item was later pulled.
The timing of the scandal could hardly have been worse for CBS, and all of network television, which is under scrutiny from congressional committees investigating indecency and what critics have called a deterioration of standards in televised language and sexual content.
Rep. Fred Upton, Republican of Michigan, is chairman of the House Subcommittee on Telecommunications and the Internet, which is holding hearings on indecency next week. He introduced legislation last month to increase tenfold the F.C.C.'s fines for indecency.
''I spoke to Mel Karmazin today,'' Upton said, referring to the president of Viacom, ''and he said he intends to investigate this. I know Mel, and they are not happy there. He was appalled and apologetic.''
PRO FOOTBALL
