In an e-mail message, a reader said he found last week's column about my difficulties in using cellphones overseas to be the most ridiculous thing he had ever read in a newspaper. That certainly gave me pause for reflection, not just on my own long years of newspaper-writing but also on my even longer years of newspaper-reading.
To those of you who scolded me for technological ignorance and general cellphone incompetence, I can only say again: Guilty, and you may thank your stars that I am not flying your plane. My ineptitude in this area is no pose. I continue to regard the PEZ dispenser as a marvel of technological innovation. At home, lest I haplessly poke the wrong button and set off an electronic tizzy, my wife prohibits me from unsupervised use of the three remote-control devices required to turn on a single television.
We have a parrot. The parrot has begun to shriek ''What's that?'' when my cellphone rings. He didn't learn it from her.
There were a very large number of responses to last week's column (sorry, I can summarize only a few here). Lots of them offered patient, useful and often remarkably detailed advice on how to rig a cellphone -- or acquire one -- for easy use abroad. More than a few took issue with a contention in the column that people hate cellphones.
This contention was supported by the annual Lemelson-M.I.T. Invention Index, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology survey, which found that the modern invention adults hate most but cannot do without is the cellphone. That cut no ice with many readers.
''I don't hate my cellphone; I love it,'' said Roger J. Baccigaluppi. Like many who insisted domestic cellphones can work well overseas, Mr. Baccigaluppi has a G.S.M.-enabled phone with service provided by T-Mobile, which works in ''every major U.S. metropolitan area'' as well as in ''the U.K., India, China, France or wherever you happen to be,'' he wrote.
Chuck Albertson wrote, ''I don't see what all the fuss is about.'' He also has a T-Mobile phone operating on the G.S.M. system, which is standard in most of the rest of the world, but is one of a variety of systems used in the United States. ''When I arrive in the U.K., Europe or Australia, a simple click on one of the setup menu items switches the phone to the frequency band of the local wireless carriers,'' he said.
The same for Elaine Hirschl Ellis, who has T-Mobile service on a Motorola V60 that works ''just about anywhere'' with a simple change of band. ''I don't find it particularly complicated,'' she said.
Denise O'Connor has a Nokia phone, also with T-Mobile service: ''Once you put the phone on the European system, a simple change to make, it follows the local systems and changes at each boundary, locking onto the next available system'' and with ''no roaming charges,'' she reported.
And Judy Solomon likes her Nextel i2000 just fine. ''No chip change, no nothing. I've used it all over the U.S., Europe, Australia and New Zealand, and the connection is perfect,'' she said.
Robert G. Thomas offered this advice: ''Join the G.S.M. crowd. I use Cingular, which has good roaming agreements all over the world, anywhere I go (except for Japan, since they're proprietary).''
George J. Ellis said last week's column ''puzzled me.'' He added, ''G.S.M. technology has been available here in the United States for quite some time on the 1900 MHZ frequency, dating back to the mid-90's with Omnipoint, which is presently T-Mobile.''
O.K., noted. G.S.M. phones - the letters stand for global services for mobile -- operate in over 100 countries, including the United States, with one drawback: Only a few service providers here use the G.S.M. system, and coverage is somewhat patchy in the United States.
But frequent world travelers say that despite the less-comprehensive domestic coverage outside major metropolitan areas, G.S.M. phones provide an excellent alternative to options many other international travelers use. One option is to have two cellphones, one for use on standard domestic networks and a separate G.S.M. phone for use abroad. Another is to rent a G.S.M. phone for each trip.
Now it gets a little more complicated.
Lucy Kosimar advises that once I have a G.S.M. phone, I must have a ''SIM card'' collection the next time I go abroad. SIM stands for subscriber identity module. ''Get a G.S.M. phone that takes European (and many Latin American, Asian, etc.) SIM. cards,'' she suggested, which give ''prepaid minutes when you hit each country.'' Cards are available ''generally in the airport or downtown,'' she said, adding: ''I've done this in France, Switzerland, Brazil, India, Morocco, the U.K. My only complaint is that no one has designed a folder in which to store the SIM cards.''
Rest assured, Lucy, someone will. This week, is my guess.
Nonna Skumanich wondered, ''When will European cellphone companies learn they can expand their market to the U.S.?'' That, too, may be in the cards, as AT&amp;T Wireless is on the block and foreign operators are reportedly interested.
Noelle Eckley, who lives in Massachusetts, had the most immediate comment to last week's column. ''I have just read your article from the departure lounge at the Amsterdam airport, where I have made several calls from my American T-Mobile cellphone,'' she wrote. ''You've certainly missed the boat by not identifying the one carrier that provides international, seamless and relatively cheap service. I can even check my e-mail from my phone in several countries that have WAP systems. I even use my phone as an alarm clock when I travel.''
A WAP system is, oh, never mind. But did I tell you what the second most despised modern invention listed in that M.I.T. survey was? The alarm clock.
On the Road appears each Tuesday.
BUSINESS TRAVEL: ON THE ROAD E-mail: jsharkey@nytimes.com.
