Iraq's American-appointed leaders have begun deliberating a temporary constitution that would grant broad rights to ordinary Iraqis and serve as a guide until a permanent Iraqi system is adopted next year.
The 25 members of the Iraqi Governing Council, which took up a draft of the constitution on Saturday, have until Feb. 28 to approve a final version of the document, which is supposed to remain in force until a permanent constitution is ratified by Iraqi voters in October 2005. Nationwide elections for a new government would be held two months later.
The interim constitution is a central element in the transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqi people from the American occupation forces, now scheduled to take place by June 30. Even though the proposed constitution would probably be in force for less than two years, it is seen as the starting point for debates on the permanent one.
The document now being discussed by the Iraqi Governing Council would confer on the Iraqi people broad political and civil rights that were unknown here during the era of Saddam Hussein and which are unknown in many parts of the Arab world today. The draft constitution would grant full and equal rights to women, as well as guaranteeing them two of every five seats in the proposed national assembly.
Some members of the council have objected to parts of the plan, particularly the number of seats allotted to women. Mowaffak Al Rubaie, a governing council member, said he did not think the governing council would endorse a quota that large. ''Twenty percent for women is much more realistic,'' he said.
The draft constitution would grant freedom of speech and assembly, the right to free movement across the country and the right to privacy. It would confer on every Iraqi a right to health care and schooling. It would also establish such American-style bedrocks as an independent judiciary and civilian control over the military.
The role of Islam is explicitly recognized in the proposed structure, but in a carefully delineated role. While Islam is described as the official state religion, it is regarded in the draft document as ''a principal source among other sources of legislation,'' and not the only one. The draft also recognizes the freedom of non-Muslims to practice their faiths.
The proposed interim constitution, also known as the ''basic law,'' defers some of the trickiest questions for another day. In setting up a federal system, the plan would grant wide autonomy to the country's Kurdish region, which has governed itself since 1991. It also puts off the difficult issue of who would control Kirkuk, the northern city that is one of the centers of Iraqi oil production. The city has a mixed population of Kurds, Arabs and others, and is seen as one of the country's economic prizes.
''Within the parameters of reintegrating the Kurdish region into the country, the idea is to maintain the status quo,'' said Feisal Istrabadi, one of the principal drafters of the document. ''We don't want to spend a lot of time arguing about the basic law.''
The plan calls for the formation of a 258-member national assembly, but carefully bypasses the question of how those members will be selected. American administrators here are engaged in intense negotiations with Iraqi leaders over the means by which the national assembly will be chosen.
Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the country's pre-eminent Shiite leader, is insisting that the members be chosen by direct election. The Americans, as well as many Iraqis, are opposed to elections on the grounds that the country does not yet have adequate voter rolls. There are also concerns that the Iraqi and Americans forces would not be able to provide security in a nationwide election.
The deadlock over the selection of assembly members threatens to drag the completion of the interim constitution past the Feb. 28 deadline.
In one of the plan's more widely disputed proposals, opposed by some governing council members, the government would be run by a three-member presidency, chosen by the national assembly. The presidency would presumably include a member of each of the country's three major groups, the Shiites, the Arab Sunnis and the Kurds. The three members of the presidency would select a prime minister and would be required to make a unanimous choice.
Mr. Istrabadi, who helped draft the document, said one of the principal ideas in the plan was to set up several power centers in the government to ensure that no one part of it became too strong.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: IRAQI SELF-RULE
