A small bomb exploded on Monday outside the apartment of a journalist who has created a political sensation with a behind-the-scenes account of the Kremlin during President Vladimir V. Putin's rise to power.
The journalist, Yelena Tregubova, was not injured, but she said in an interview that she feared that the bombing was an attempt on her life. The bomb exploded moments before she left her apartment for a taxi that was waiting downstairs, she said.
The force of the blast, estimated at one to two pounds of explosives, destroyed a door opposite hers and broke windows and fixtures in the hallway of her apartment building in the heart of Moscow. A police official said the explosion was being investigated as an act of hooliganism and refused to comment further.
It was not clear whether the bombing was related to Ms. Tregubova's book, ''Tales of a Kremlin Digger,'' which recounts, in gossipy detail, her four years as a member of the Kremlin's exclusive news media pool, first as a reporter for Izvestia and then for the business newspaper Kommersant.
Ms. Tregubova declined to speculate who could have put a bomb outside her apartment, but she obliquely linked it to the presidential election on March 14. She also said she believed that her telephone was tapped and recounted a recent mysterious call in which a suspicious caller wanted to deliver to her apartment a package she was not expecting. ''It is becoming uncomfortable to live in this city,'' she said in a telephone interview. ''I thought nothing would happen before the presidential election.''
In a country where the inner workings of the Kremlin are shrouded in secrecy and details of Mr. Putin's character are cast in hagiography, Ms. Tregubova's book, which came out last November, was a shock -- and very soon a best seller with more than 100,000 copies sold.
In the book, she described meeting Mr. Putin in 1998 when he was still director of the Federal Security Service. At that time, she wrote, he pressed her for her telephone number. A year later, she wrote, she accepted an invitation to a dinner at a sushi restaurant that she expected would be business but that became uncomfortably intimate.
In interviews publicizing the book, Ms. Tregubova said she wrote it to highlight how the Kremlin's efforts to control news organizations had greatly restricted freedom of speech. She described warnings by Mr. Putin's press aides not to report some of the president's remarks, including the time in his 2000 election campaign when he told a boy hit by a car, ''From now on, you won't be violating traffic regulations anymore.''
By her account, she lost her access to the Kremlin pool because she refused to hew to the official version of events. After the book appeared, she lost her job as a correspondent for Kommersant. In Novemember, the state-controlled NTV network pulled an interview with her after promoting it for days -- reportedly under pressure from the Kremlin, though network officials denied that.
