The president's new budget proposal is an exercise in election-year cynicism. It calls for cuts in programs President Bush knows Congress will protect and future tax cuts he knows the nation cannot afford. Meanwhile, vital domestic programs, like environmental protection and housing for the poor, wind up as the sacrificial victims.
The budget acknowledges the need to increase spending on homeland security. But the rest of the domestic budget, excluding Medicare and Social Security, would be financed at less than 1 percent growth -- a cut, in effect, when inflation is factored in. ''Listen, government has got plenty of money,'' the president insisted last week. It is easy to tell people that a $2.4 trillion budget should have enough in it for everything we need. But when specifics pop to the surface, people will discover that a great deal is lacking -- including fiscal responsibility.
The central fiction in the budget is that it constitutes the first step in halving the record $521 billion deficit over the next five years. Mr. Bush accomplished that feat on paper, in part by pretending that there would be no additional costs for the military in Iraq and Afghanistan this year -- a supplemental request for an additional $50 billion or so will presumably arrive safely after Election Day. He also ignores the long-term effects of his proposal to make permanent most of the administration's $1.7 trillion in temporary tax cuts.
The budget includes worthy ideas for cuts in wildly overfinanced programs like agricultural subsidies. But without firm White House pressure against election-bound members of Congress, these are simply imaginary savings. Anyone who believes that Mr. Bush is planning to waste large amounts of political capital this year to reduce money for farmers or highway builders is living in a fantasy.
Meanwhile, the president proposes an unconscionable 7 percent cut in spending for the Environmental Protection Agency. His budget proposal plays havoc with the Section 8 housing voucher program, whose main purpose is to keep low-income families from becoming homeless. Education appears on first look to be one of the few winners: the administration requests an additional $1 billion for Title I, the financing stream aimed at impoverished children. But the money does not come close to meeting the needs of local school districts, which are now being required to meet the stiff standards of the president's No Child Left Behind initiative. That is particularly true since the proposed budget would cut other sources of school funds.
Mr. Bush's talk of proposing mandated budget controls on Congress is the final fairy-tale element. The president and the Republican-controlled House and Senate have sent the country swan-diving into debt with their tax cuts. They approved a huge new entitlement for prescription drugs for the elderly that the revenue-starved Treasury could not afford to support. Now they have seen the cost estimate of that new Medicare drug subsidy rise by a third before it even takes effect. The idea that the financial hole can be filled by simply passing a law to demand that Congress make it so is utterly senseless -- but it will be useful as a platitude for the coming campaign trail.
Polls are beginning to show that the Republicans are losing their reputation with voters for fiscal integrity. The president's latest proposal will only feed their new image as budget buccaneers.
