On Saturday, the day before he died, Sami Abdul Rahman and I sat in the living room of my elegant government guest house here and discussed American negotiating techniques. We had become friends when we fled together from his hometown, Dihok, as the 1991 Kurdish uprising collapsed. Sami became deputy prime minister of the Kurdish regional government and, since last year, one of its negotiators in discussions on Iraq's interim constitution. As such, he was fully familiar with one American technique: papering over differences with nice-sounding language. As he took his leave, he said he would be looking hard at a new American proposal to see if cosmetic changes in language masked a loss of actual authority for his government.
Sami Abdul Rahman was one of six senior Kurdish government officials who, along with at least 60 others, was killed here on Sunday in suicide bombings at the offices of the two principal Kurdish parties. I visited one of the bomb sites on Monday, and even with the bodies removed, the scale of the destruction was evident in the mangled furniture, collapsed walls, scorch marks and pools of bright blood. The Kurdish leaders are a tightknit group, many related by blood or marriage, who have worked together for decades and across generations. Seeing so many die so suddenly and so horribly has left them in shock.
Politically, however, the Kurds are probably better able to weather the losses than other Iraqi victims of similar attacks. During the 12 years in which some four million Kurds have administered northern Iraq as a de facto independent state, they have developed institutions that provide for continuity. At Erbil's main mosque today, leaders from both major parties, the Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, stood for hours as the people of the city streamed in to offer prayers for the dead. No one was discussing the political fallout of the attacks, but there is sure to be some.
Public pressure will increase on both parties to end the division of the region between the Kurdistan Democratic Party government here in the north and the Patriotic Union government in Sulaimaniya to the south. Indeed, the parties have already agreed on the terms for a unified government.
Until Sunday, the Kurdish lands had been largely free of the terrorism and chaos that has plagued the rest of the country. In April, they protested American demands to dismantle the controls on the border separating them from the rest of newly freed Iraq. They argued that it would let terrorists in. When the Americans relented months later as chaos grew in the south, many Kurds felt it was too late. The bombings on Sunday will reinforce widely shared doubts about a closer association with Baghdad.
L. Paul Bremer, the American administrator of Iraq, is pressing the Kurds to give up some of the powers they now exercise. The Kurds want to retain control over oil in their region, continue to have exclusive taxation powers and keep the new Iraqi Army out. The Americans, prodded by Turkey, see these demands as setting the stage for secession. For the Kurds, however, the issue is not sovereignty but security.
The Kurds see control of oil and taxation as further insurance against future Baghdad regimes treating them as those of Iraq's first 80 years did. And they are also skeptical of Mr. Bremer's request that they rely on a unified Iraqi Army and a reformed internal security organization -- the two institutions responsible for decades of repression, culminating in Saddam Hussein's genocidal assaults of the 1980's. The Kurds would rather maintain their own military, called the peshmerga, and want a clause in the transitional constitution requiring regional approval for any entry of Iraqi armed forces into Kurdish areas.
The Sunday bombings deprived the Kurds of one of their shrewdest negotiators, Mr. Abdul Rahman. And it will probably harden their diplomatic positions as the Kurdish public comes increasingly to feel it must rely on its own institutions -- the peshmerga, the local police and security services -- to protect it against a danger that most see as coming from the south.
Op-Ed Contributor Peter W. Galbraith is a former United States Ambassador to Croatia.
