Spain's second-largest bank, Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, is offering to pay $4.1 billion to gain total control of Bancomer, Mexico's leading bank.
Banco Bilbao already owns nearly 60 percent of the company, which controls a quarter of Mexico's banking. Bilbao will pay 12 Mexican pesos in cash for every Bancomer share, nearly 14 percent more than Bancomer's closing price on Friday.
The deal announced on Monday highlights the attraction Mexico has had for foreign banks in recent years. Second in size only to Brazil among Latin American economies, Mexico offers stability and potential for growth -- 60 percent of workers do not have a bank account. Since 2000, foreign banks have spent $18.6 billion to acquire Mexican banks.
Banco Bilbao and its larger Spanish rival, Banco Santander Central Hispano, have been among the most aggressive financial investors throughout Latin America, encouraged by a common language and culture. The Spanish banks have also sought to expand in the region because growth at home has been limited -- savings banks now control about 50 percent of the market.
Consolidating its stake in Bancomer will immediately add to Banco Bilbao's earnings. And Banco Bilbao, or BBVA, decided to take advantage of the recent surge in the euro in making its offer at this time.
''Bancomer is a great bank, the moment is perfect because of the strength of the euro and Mexico is the best place in Latin America to invest,'' Banco Bilbao's chairman, Francisco González, said. Although Banco is paying a premium of nearly 14 percent, some analysts said the deal was a bargain. ''My first reaction is that this seems very cheap,'' said Edgar Amador, a Mexico City-based economist for Stone &amp; McCarthy Research Associates, a consulting group. Shares of Banco Bilbao fell 1.1 percent, to 10.59 euros, in Madrid.
Bancomer has a national network of 1,653 branches. Earnings last year rose 10.6 percent, to $695 million.
Bancomer also benefits from a steady flow of deposits from Mexicans working in the United States. Banco Bilbao estimates that 25 million Mexicans sent roughly $14 billion into Mexico in 2003, and Bancomer controls 40 percent of that money.
Still, Banco Bilbao and Bancomer face stiff competition in Mexico from much larger global banks like Citigroup and HSBC. Citigroup spent $12.5 billion to buy the No.2 bank in Mexico, Banamex, in 2001.
While the foreign influx has restored the country's banking system to health after near collapse in the mid-1990's following the peso collapse, Mexican consumers are still waiting to see the effects. The banks have concentrated on consumer loans, mostly through credit cards, and have been slow to restart mortgage and small-business lending.
Instead, Mexico's banks have raised their profits by increasing commissions. Mr. Amador of Stone &amp; McCarthy estimates that bank lending contributes to only a third of bank profits, while commissions and payments on government bonds held by the banks account for the rest. ''Banking in Mexico is great business,'' he noted.
Other analysts were more cautious about Banco Bilbao's expansion.
''I'm skeptical about the growth potential in the region,'' said Carlos Garcia, chief analyst for European banking at ING. ''Except for Chile, it has generally underperformed. But if I had to bet on one country, it would be Mexico because it has the legal and financial framework in place.''
