Senators John Edwards and John Kerry leveled a last-minute round of charges about each other's credentials on Monday, as Democrats marched toward a round of contests in seven states that party leaders said could transform the nomination battle by forcing some candidates out of the race.
The exchanges between Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry, conducted in the course of a day crammed with rallies, bus and jet rides, and telephone calls to supporters, reflected the significance of Tuesday's votes.
Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, who has said he must win South Carolina to keep his candidacy viable, broke his self-imposed vow of political civility on Monday, criticizing Mr. Kerry for supporting trade treaties that are highly unpopular here and for accepting contributions from lobbyists.
''We want someone who hasn't been there for 15 to 20 years, if you're going to bring change,'' Mr. Edwards told reporters here, referring to Mr. Kerry's service in the Senate. He added: ''I don't take contributions from lobbyists. He obviously does.''
Mr. Kerry, speaking with a Columbia, S.C., television station via satellite from Albuquerque, suggested that Mr. Edwards, who has spent five years in the Senate, did not have the experience to take on President Bush or to lead the nation in perilous times.
''This is not a time for on-the-job training in the White House for national security issues,'' Mr. Kerry said. A moment later, after the interview was over, in an aside that his aides insisted had not been intended for public consumption, Mr. Kerry mocked Mr. Edwards's claim that he was the strongest Democrat the party could put up against Mr. Bush because he was from the South.
''Edwards says he's the only one who can win states in the South,'' Mr. Kerry said to a senior aide, David Wade, in a remark that was picked up by a reporter's microphone. ''He can't win his own state.''
Even as he batted at Mr. Edwards, Mr. Kerry turned an eye to the general election, saying he had not made up his mind about whether to follow up attacks made by senior Democrats challenging Mr. Bush's record of attendance in the Air National Guard. On Sunday, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Terry McAuliffe, accused Mr. Bush of being AWOL, a reference to questions about whether Mr. Bush showed up at required drills in his final months of service.
Tuesday's contests, with 269 delegates at stake, stretch from Delaware to the Great Plains and the Southwest. But the day is particularly pivotal for Mr. Edwards, who is looking to a win here to keep his campaign going, and to Mr. Kerry, whose aides view Mr. Edwards as the biggest obstacle to a sweep of the contests Tuesday night that they said could almost guarantee him the nomination.
At one point on Monday, Mr. Edwards's chief spokesman, Jennifer Palmieri, disputed the suggestion that Mr. Edwards appeared to be abandoning his vow not to criticize his opponent.
''He's not going on the attack,'' Ms. Palmieri said. ''How is that an attack? It's not an attack. It's an important distinction for him. He does not take money from registered lobbyists.''
Mr. Edwards was criticizing Mr. Kerry for voting for the Nafta trade agreement, a pact that Mr. Edwards said he would have opposed had he been in the Senate, and for accepting contributions from lobbyists. Mr. Edwards has accepted contributions from former lobbyists, Ms. Palmieri said, but not current ones. His campaign manager is a former lobbyist.
Mr. Edwards is not the only Democrat whose political future may be riding on Tuesday's voting, -- with contests in Arizona, Delaware, Missouri, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma and South Carolina.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark is looking for a win in Oklahoma, after all but abandoning his effort here, and Democrats said that General Clark appeared to be in a strong position to win in that state, which has 40 delegates.
''I am one tough hombre, and I can stand against George W. Bush, and we will take him down,'' General Clark told a tiny audience of voters in a stop in New Mexico on Monday, using some of the more bellicose language of the day, and displaying his campaign's attempts to draw support from Hispanic voters.
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut was looking for a win in Delaware, though Democrats said that Mr. Kerry appeared to be in a strong position there, too.
General Clark, Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Edwards are all certain to face intense pressure to step aside on Wednesday if they fail to win a single state. An effort to clear the field is already being orchestrated by Mr. McAuliffe, who has been pushing for the party to rally around a nominee as soon as possible, to present a strong challenge to Mr. Bush.
''Our nominee could be closer at hand than we had ever imagined,'' said May Scheve, the Missouri Democratic leader.
The biggest obstacles to a Kerry sweep on Tuesday are Mr. Edwards here in South Carolina and General Clark in Oklahoma. Democrats described Mr. Kerry as being in a strong position in Missouri -- which has the most delegates, 74, at stake that night -- North Dakota, Arizona, Delaware and in New Mexico.
In New Mexico on Monday, Gov. Bill Richardson, a Democrat, turned up alongside Mr. Kerry. He climbed the stage, joined hands with Mr. Kerry for a victory pump into the air, and jumped down afterwards. A moment later, Mr. Richardson told reporters that he considered Mr. Kerry ''virtually unstoppable'' in New Mexico.
The events on Monday served to dramatize the extent of the collapse, at least for now, of Dr. Dean's campaign. Just three weeks ago, he had looked to Tuesday as the day when he would effectively seize the nomination by sweeping to victory in most of the states. Now, nearly out of money, Dr. Dean has no television advertisements running in any of the states, though he has campaigned in Arizona and New Mexico, in hopes of at least winning some delegates there.
He told reporters aboard his campaign plane that he expected to do best in New Mexico. Asked about his reversal of fortunes, he responded, ''It's just the same as it was a year ago: just put one foot in front of the other and keep going.''
And he also attacked Mr. Kerry's candidacy, saying he thought the senator would be a weak contender in the general election.
''He's going to have a hard time if he's the nominee,'' Dr. Dean said. ''I think electability's a real issue for him. He appears to change his mind so often.''
Dr. Dean went on to assert that Mr. Kerry's ''credibility is under enormous attack, repeatedly,'' citing his votes in favor of the use of force in Iraq and of President Bush's education plan.
''He has this pattern,'' Dr. Dean said, ''you saw it with No Child Left Behind, you saw it with the war, you see it with special interests, which I think is terribly damaging. It appears that his word is no good.''
Mr. Edwards was not the only one campaigning furiously through South Carolina. The Rev. Al Sharpton conducted his own bus trip, starting on Monday morning at the site of a 19th century slave market. Mr. Sharpton, the only black candidate remaining in the race, has long argued that he will do well in a primary where as much as 50 percent of the electorate is African-American.
In his appearance, Mr. Sharpton vowed that he would not run as an independent candidate if he lost his party's nomination. Dr. Dean made a similar pledge on Monday.
In a late move, South Carolina election officials dropped a requirement for voters to sign an oath binding them to the Democratic Party in order to vote in the primary. The move was expected to increase turnout by independents and perhaps Republicans, which some strategists said could help Mr. Edwards.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
