The Pentagon said Monday that the Halliburton Company would repay the government for overcharges estimated at $27.4 million for meals served to American troops at five military bases in Iraq and Kuwait last year, but the company did not admit to any wrongdoing.
The potential overbillings were identified during a routine evaluation of contract costs submitted for payment by Kellogg Brown &amp; Root, a Halliburton subsidiary that has several major military contracts in Iraq and Kuwait, the Pentagon said in a statement on Monday. The charges took place over nine months.
The auditors' allegation of a $16 million overcharge at one base in Kuwait was first reported Monday by The Wall Street Journal. Pentagon officials said Monday that the company had also agreed to repay the government $11.4 million for meals served at four other bases.
Pentagon auditors have started a review of the 53 remaining dining facilities in Kuwait and Iraq operated by Kellogg Brown &amp; Root, according to the Pentagon statement.
The latest disclosures follow two other disagreements between the Pentagon and Halliburton.
Last month, the company disclosed that two employees had taken kickbacks from a Kuwaiti subcontractor who was providing services to American troops in Kuwait. The company reimbursed the government $6.3 million.
Kellogg Brown &amp; Root has also been involved in a debate over whether it overcharged for gasoline shipments to Iraq under a military contract. While military officials cleared the company of any wrongdoing, the Pentagon inspector general is still investigating the matter.
Halliburton insisted Monday that the allegations of overcharges for meals were simply routine questions from the Defense Contracting Auditing Agency, and that no conclusions had been reached.
The company noted that it had served more than 50 million meals to soldiers in the last year, and the questions from the auditors deal with the way Kellogg Brown &amp; Root estimates the number of meals it serves.
''This is not about charges,'' Randy Harl, president and chief executive of Kellogg Brown &amp; Root, said in a statement on Monday. ''This is about finding a good way to estimate the number of meals so soldiers can be fed.''
He added that Kellogg Brown &amp; Root planned and prepared meals based on estimates because ''at times soldiers are on leave or are shifted to other locations.''
The auditors appear to be alleging that Halliburton substantially overestimated the number of meals it would serve and then charged the government for all the meals prepared instead of those served.
Kellogg Brown &amp; Root said it had agreed to reduce its future bills to the government to make up for any overcharges, ''while the company works with the government to improve the counting method.'' The statement added. ''This is not any sort of 'admission.' It is an agreement to temporarily delay billing'' while the matter is investigated.
The food services are part of a contract awarded in 2001 by the Army Field Support Command in Rock Island, Ill. The contract called for the Halliburton subsidiary to provide a range of logistical services for troops in Iraq and Kuwait, including transportation, housing, food, laundry and recreation. Kellogg Brown &amp; Root typically contracts with local companies for much of the work.
Pentagon officials expressed surprise on Monday at the latest overcharging incident, and said they expected lawmakers to question Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld on the matter when he testifies to House and Senate committees this week about the military's proposed fiscal 2005 budget.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: MILITARY CONTRACTS
