Presidents like to keep their budgets tight in their first years in office, then loosen up with an array of splashy new domestic programs during re-election campaigns.
But President Bush turned that tactic upside down, and on Monday unveiled a budget with cuts in domestic programs but big increases for the military, showing himself a gambler willing to bet his re-election that he made the correct fiscal choices.
Mr. Bush's calculation is that voters will care far more about protecting the nation from another terrorist attack than about cuts to popular programs, or, for that matter, the record-high deficit.
To that end, Mr. Bush's $2.4 trillion budget provides the back-up material to the re-election theme that the president first set forth in his State of the Union address: He is the national security candidate to take care of America's fears.
The strategy, Republicans said, is also designed to give Mr. Bush some political cover from a projected deficit of more than $500 billion.
''It's clear that defense and homeland security are two areas where he can spend a lot more money and be insulated from criticism,'' said Walter Russell Mead, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations and the author of the forthcoming ''Power, Terror, Peace and War: America's Grand Strategy in a World at Risk.'' ''I don't think you're going to hear a lot from the Democrats that he's increasing defense spending too much. People are not going to turn around and say you did too much on national defense. The big danger is that you didn't do enough.''
A former Bush administration official involved in economic policy put it this way: ''Five, 10, 15, 20 years from now, when people look back at the Bush administration, there's only one thing they're going to care about -- it's the war. Did you prosecute the war, did you make America safer? Everything else is irrelevant. If you have to blow a gasket in the budget, then they're going to do it. Ronald Reagan had big deficits and they eventually went away. It's the end of the cold war that people remember.''
But even Republicans said there were huge downsides to Mr. Bush's strategy, which they acknowledge effectively prohibits the president from announcing major new initiatives in an election year. Like his State of the Union address, Mr. Bush's budget calls for no big new domestic programs and in fact forces him to cut so deeply that even his Republican allies in Congress called it politically impractical and said restorations were inevitable.
''It's going to be a heavy lift,'' said Senator Don Nickles, Republican of Oklahoma, the chairman of the Senate Budget Committee.
At the same time, Mr. Bush was faced with an embarrassing deficit that for the first time in 50 years a Republican president could not blame on Congress, since members of Mr. Bush's party control both the House and the Senate. Although voters do not seem to have seized on the issue yet, Democrats are increasingly using the deficit as a symbol of what they say are Mr. Bush's disastrous economic policies.
''We're on a course that takes us toward the fiscal cliff,'' said Senator Kent Conrad of North Dakota, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Budget Committee. ''This course cannot be sustained.''
A focus of Mr. Bush's budget -- and his re-election campaign -- is his promise to halve the deficit in five years, a pledge intended to show he has not lost touch with fiscal reality. But members of both parties expressed deep skepticism that Mr. Bush would be able to make good on that pledge because, they said, he had spent so freely in the past, and had so often underestimated fiscal bad news.
''If you show no inclination to walk the walk as well as talk the talk, then people are just not going to believe you,'' said Bruce Bartlett, a conservative economist who worked in the administrations of Ronald Reagan and the first President Bush. ''I don't think you'll find anybody in any party who takes seriously the administration's promise to hold down spending. The president has never made small government a major element of his philosophy.''
Senator Jon Corzine, a New Jersey Democrat and former chairman of the Goldman Sachs investment banking firm, was even more pointed.
''Asserting that we're going to cut this in half by 2008 is right in there with Richard Nixon saying 'I've got a secret plan to end the war,' '' Mr. Corzine said.
Mr. Bush's budget also offers up what the White House is deliberately framing as an election-year battle: the president's call to make his trillion-dollar tax cuts permanent. Democrats have denounced the president for what they say is a fiscally reckless plan, which Republicans say is just what Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief political adviser, wanted. Mr. Bush can then run, they say, as the candidate who will not raise taxes.
Bill McInturff, a Republican pollster, said that although voters were clearly concerned about the economy ''actual voting behavior shows, guess what, people don't want their taxes raised.
''It's a battle that unites our party,'' Mr. McInturff said, ''and separates us from the Democrats.''
Mr. Bush is not expected to face a major battle with Congress over the military budget, which he proposed to increase to $401 billion, an amount that brings him close to the height of the Reagan-era military buildup. But budget analysts noted that many of the big-ticket items driving the increase -- like new fighter planes, helicopters and a destroyer for the Navy -- were not directed specifically at fighting terrorism.
''Most of the stuff they're buying is really for conventional kinds of foes,'' said Steve Kosiak of the Center for Strategy and Budgetary Assessments. ''It's not geared to classic antiterrorist activities.''
THE PRESIDENT'S BUDGET PROPOSAL: THE AGENDA
