For what might have been the first time in his short tenure, Lawrence Frank stood perfectly still on the sideline, mouth closed, hands on hips. There was nothing left to say, nothing else to do.
At some point, Frank, the Nets' new coach, is going to lose a game -- the odds demand it -- but right now, the players won't let him. On Monday they blew out New Orleans, 91-70, winning their fourth game in a row on a trip for the first time in franchise history.
When the Nets started the toughest stretch of this season two weeks ago, they predicted it would make or break them. In the end, it did both. The franchise was sold, the coach was fired, and one player, Eddie Griffin, was sent to jail Monday.
But the Nets have a new owner, a new coach and a whole new outlook on their Eastern Conference title defense. As they headed safely home, they had turned a five-game losing streak into a season-high five-game surge.
''It's huge for us, huge for our psyche,'' Kenyon Martin said. ''Now we have to take it home and keep going.''
They started this trip with Frank's first game and finished it shortly after he picked up his first technical, given by the official Zach Zarba. When it happened, 9 minutes 4 seconds remained in the third quarter and the Nets were down by 4.
From that moment on, they out-scored the Hornets, 54-29, running their fast break with precision and shooting 66.7 percent in the second half. For the game, they racked up 34 assists.
''The Southern hospitality was nice, the food was good and we got some gumbo sticking to our ribs,'' Jason Kidd said. ''I guess we couldn't breathe. Once it started circulating, the greyhounds started to run.''
Six Nets scored 12 to 16 points, and although the New Orleans native Kerry Kittles led the way, everyone seemed to do his part.
Kenyon Martin had 12 rebounds, Kidd had 12 assists and the underachieving bench pitched in 27 points.
But Frank's influence has been felt more on the defensive end than anywhere else. Since he arrived, no opponent has reached 80 points against the Nets, and New Orleans committed 23 turnovers.
After Jamaal Magloire scored 10 points in the first quarter, Frank ordered his post players to get position behind him. Magloire scored 12 the rest of the game.
''He's our coach,'' Richard Jefferson said. ''He believes in us and we believe in him. He's out there fighting for us. We're all in this together.''
Frank voiced his displeasure at halftime, when Kidd, Jefferson and Martin were a combined 5 of 20 and the Nets were shooting 34.9 percent.
They looked exhausted, having played seven of eight games on the road during a swing that started with losses at Dallas, San Antonio and Miami.
But Frank accepted no excuses, and in the second half, the Nets showed no signs of complacency or fatigue. Kidd, Jefferson and Martin shot a combined 13 of 15. Aaron Williams and Rodney Rogers supplied respite for the starters, sinking 11 of 17 baskets for the game.
The Hornets could not keep up with the swarm, not without Baron Davis and David Wesley, who are injured. New Orleans made six field goals in the third quarter and five in the fourth, watching the Nets run all their favorite lob plays.
With the outcome no longer in doubt, Frank had a moment to talk with Zarba about his technical and receive an explanation as to why a foul was not called on the Hornets when contact was made with Jason Collins.
''I have no comment,'' Frank said. ''I've learned not to comment on the officiating. I was wrong.''
After four games and four victories, he couldn't be wrong.
REBOUNDS
Nets Coach LAWRENCE FRANK called every Eastern Conference coach in the past four days to lobby for his players who are All-Star contenders. The reserves, voted on by coaches, will be announced Tuesday, and Frank believes JASON KIDD, KENYON MARTIN and RICHARD JEFFERSON deserve to be on the team.
PRO BASKETBALL
