HIGHLIGHTS
FILM: HARVEY WEINSTEIN, AUTEUR -- Yes, it's true. Harvey Weinstein, left, the co-chairman of Miramax Films and renowned scourge of directors, is planning to become one of them himself. If all goes according to plan, Mr. Weinstein could find himself in the ranks of auteurs as early as spring 2005, he said yesterday; and what is even more likely to intrigue those who believe that turnabout is fair play, Mr. Weinstein has been talking to a couple of directors, Martin Scorsese and Anthony Minghella, about assuming the role he usually plays: producer. Does Mr. Weinstein have any qualms about directing? ''I don't think anybody thinks I'm capable, including me,'' he said. But having watched many a director steal from David Lean, he added jokingly as he discussed sources of inspiration, ''I plan to go to the same well.'' The property is ''Mila 18,'' and Mr. Weinstein's film would represent a promise kept and a dream realized. ''When I was a boy growing up in Queens, one of the great influences in my life was my Aunt Shirley, who loved best-selling books,'' he said in an interview with The New York Times three years ago. ''Aunt Shirley loved Leon Uris and gave me all of his books. My favorite was 'Mila 18,' which was kind of the prequel to 'Exodus,' about the uprising in the Warsaw Ghetto. As a kid I swore to my aunt that 'Mila 18' would be made into a great movie.'' A few years ago, after 20 years of trying, Mr. Weinstein acquired the rights. He said, ''I swore to my aunt that I would make it.'' Hossein Amini, a Lebanese Arab Christian whose credits include ''The Wings of the Dove'' and ''Jude the Obscure,'' is doing the screenplay. Mr. Weinstein, noted for cutting films despite directors' protests, said laughingly that a growing list of directors is already volunteering to edit his film without fee. And who will have the final cut on ''Mila 18''? ''Are you kidding?'' Mr. Weinstein said. The producers will. ''This movie is going to be the shortest epic you've ever seen.''
THEATER: BROOKSIAN GRATITUDE -- Mel Brooks to Hitler: Thanks. Yesterday in London, where he was beating the drums for the forthcoming West End production of his hit musical ''The Producers,'' Mr. Brooks expressed his gratitude to Hitler for inspiring it and advised Jews not to worry: ''The Producers'' is a joke. ''May I warn some old Jews,'' he said in an interview with Reuters Television, ''it is make-believe. Hitler is not really on the stage. We are making fun of Hitler.'' He said he was grateful to Hitler for letting him deride him and make some money, too. The London production of ''The Producers,'' starring Richard Dreyfuss and the British comedian Lee Evans, is to open in November. Mr. Brooks, 77, said he had no plans to retire. ''Do I lift?'' he asked. ''Do I drive? Am I bagging groceries at a very busy supermarket. No. I sit with a little pencil, and if I have an idea, I write it down. It's light work. I can do that forever.''
THEATER: CLOSING NOTICE -- ''Never Gonna Dance,'' the Broadway musical based on the 1936 Fred Astaire-Ginger Rogers film ''Swing Time,'' is to close after its 3 p.m. performance on Feb. 15. After previews that began on Oct. 27, the show, at the Broadhurst Theater, received mixed reviews when it opened on Dec. 4. Despite songs like ''A Fine Romance,'' ''The Way You Look Tonight'' and ''I Won't Dance'' from writers like Jerome Kern and Dorothy Fields, among others, ''Never Gonna Dance'' never built an audience and suffered, as did many other shows, from the impact of the harsh winter. The matinee on Feb. 15 will be the 84th regular performance of ''Never Gonna Dance''; it played 44 previews.
RUSSELL CROWE: DOWN BUT NOT OUT -- Russell Crowe, left, survived the fangs and claws of jungle beasts in ''Gladiator'' and the cannon fire of a Napoleonic warship in ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World.'' But even before the cameras could roll on his latest star vehicle, Mr. Crowe was felled by a dislocated shoulder, Reuters reported. The injury occurred while he was in a boxing ring in Sydney training to portray James J. Braddock, the heavyweight champion from 1935 to 1937, in the Universal Pictures production ''Cinderella Man.'' Co-starring Renée Zellweger and Craig Bierko, the film, produced by Brian Grazer and directed by Ron Howard, tells the story of the boxer, who rose from obscurity in the Depression to take the crown from Max Baer. Universal said that Mr. Crowe's injury, calling for arthroscopic surgery followed by therapy, would delay the start of production by about a month, to April.
PIANO: AMATEUR CONTEST  At the Sorbonne Olivier Herbay, a gardener from Chevreuse, southwest of Paris, defeated 91 challengers from 27 countries to win the 15th annual piano competition for amateurs established in 1989 by Gérard Bekerman, a professor of economics who was himself an amateur pianist. Concluded on Sunday, the contest, judged by an international panel of critics, draws competitors from all walks of life, Agence France-Presse reported.
FOOTNOTES
A plague. A pact with the Devil sealed by a kiss. A black widow spider on the loose. All these are ingredients of ''Die Schwarze Spinne'' (''The Black Widow'') by the Swiss composer Heinrich Sutermeister. In what is billed as its American premiere, this chamber opera is to be performed by the Gotham Chamber Opera, formerly the Henry Street Chamber Opera, at 8 p.m. Friday and on Feb. 10, 12 and 14 at the Harry de Jur Playhouse, 466 Grand Street on the Lower East Side. . . . With standards like ''What Are You Doing the Rest of Your Life?,'' ''Alfie'' and ''In Sentimental Mood,'' as well as contemporary works, Christine Andreas will be singing at the Café Carlyle from tonight, at 8:45, through Feb. 28.
Correction:  February 5, 2004, Thursday  A report in the Arts Briefing column on Tuesday about plans by Harvey Weinstein, co-chairman of Miramax Films, to direct a movie misstated the precedent. He has been the director or co-director of three movies; the new one would not be his first.
