Eric Lindros felt well enough yesterday to take a walk outside. For Lindros, who sustained the eighth concussion of his career last Wednesday, that was progress.
''Everything is going along the way the doctors thought it would,'' Lindros said in a telephone interview. ''I've been doing a lot of resting. Today's my first day out of the house.''
It was actually his first day out of his Manhattan town house since he traveled to Montreal and back last Thursday to see Dr. Karen Johnston, a concussions specialist, who has examined Lindros in the past.
The first protocol for Lindros's recovery is for him to go 48 hours without experiencing a postconcussion-related symptom, like headache, dizziness, grogginess, blurred vision or lack of concentration. Lindros did not sound as if he had reached that stage yet.
''This one will hopefully pass,'' said Lindros, the Rangers' top-line center, referring to his latest concussion.
Earlier yesterday, after some of Lindros's teammates had participated in an optional morning skate, Glen Sather, the Rangers' president, general manager and coach, indicated that there would be no update from the team regarding Lindros's condition until after this weekend's All-Star Game break.
''There won't be any news about Eric probably for another week or 10 days,'' Sather said. ''I've spoken to him. He sounded very positive and upbeat.''
Lindros, who has 10 goals and 22 assists in 39 games this season, had been the Rangers' best player for more than a month.
Lindros said he planned to attend tomorrow night's game against the Minnesota Wild; a ceremony will be held retiring Mike Richter's No. 35. Richter, the Rangers' career leader in victories by a goaltender, announced his retirement in early September because of postconcussion syndrome.
''I wouldn't miss that,'' Lindros said yesterday.
Lindros sustained a concussion last Wednesday after being leveled by Washington defenseman Jason Doig in open ice. Lindros's desire to continue playing is clear, his roommate on the road, Matthew Barnaby, said. ''I have no doubt he's coming back,'' Barnaby said.
HOCKEY
