Bill Belichick began the morning after winning his second championship as a head coach by confessing that Super Bowl XXXVIII had left him more drained than any of the more than 500 N.F.L. games he had been involved in.
Belichick prides himself on not only winning games but also ensuring that his defense dominates. He is, first and foremost, a defensive-minded coach. This, his fourth Patriots team, had already shown him that it could win in numerous ways, but some of what happened Sunday had to be extremely disturbing to him.
The Carolina offense put pressure on the Patriots' defense that was more than a bother, it was downright unsettling.
*With 18 seconds left before halftime and Carolina at its 47-yard line, Stephen Davis bolted through the Patriots' defense for a 21-yard gain that set up John Kasay's 50-yard field goal as time expired. The Patriots' 14-7 lead had fizzled to 14-10.
*Belichick preaches preventing big plays, and the Patriots had not allowed a run of more than 23 yards going into the game. But Carolina scored on a 33-yard run and on Jake Delhomme's 85-yard touchdown pass, the longest in Super Bowl history.
*Belichick dared Delhomme to beat him and he nearly did, passing for 323 yards and 3 touchdowns. He finished with a higher passer rating (113.6) than Tom Brady (100.5), the game's most valuable player.
*This season New England allowed an average of 4.5 points in the fourth quarter and 14.9 points a game. Carolina scored 19 fourth-quarter points.
Add it up and the Carolina Panthers made Belichick sweat. The game, which New England won, 32-29, was slipping through the Patriots' fingers and the usually reliable defense was a major culprit.
But what makes Belichick such a successful coach is that he has learned how to adjust on the fly. In the final minutes with the Super Bowl championship at stake, Belichick realized that the vehicle to use to get to the championship was his offense. He turned to Brady, Deion Branch, Troy Brown and Adam Vinatieri and found a way for a linebacker (Mike Vrabel) and a defensive end (Richard Seymour) to contribute offensively.
Belichick practiced what he had preached all along. In building this team, he has shown that he does not want a superstar in this corner, another in that corner and a bunch of no-names in between. He would rather blend them, superstars and reserves, into one vanilla personality that produces a collective bang.
The amazing thing is how Belichick has been able to pull this off in a league where players starve for individual attention.
Consider what he did Monday in talking about Brady. First, he said: ''Tom deserves everything he gets. He played a great game. He made some great throws.''
Then, when asked if the future of the Patriots looked bright as long as Brady was around, Belichick answered: ''You can't single guys out. This is not a one-man show.''
Later, when talking about his team in its entirety (again, something he prefers to do), Belichick said: ''A lot of guys like to be football players, but they don't like to be around everything that goes into being a football player. This group had as good an energy and attitude as I've been around.''
In the wild and dramatic game, Belichick was pushed emotionally and mentally to the hilt.
Essentially, he has reinvented himself since a colossal collapse in Cleveland from 1991 through 1995 when his team compiled an overall record of 36-44 with one winning season and one playoff berth. He started in New England with a 5-11 record in 2000 and then started the next season at 1-3 before turning things around and going on to win his first Super Bowl as a head coach.
Now, he has won two of the last three Super Bowls, he has two other championship rings from his tenure as an assistant coach with the Giants and is in a position to win more titles thanks to the Patriots' abundance of draft choices in April. In the first four rounds, they have three additional picks.
The Patriots had to give the Jets a bundle of draft picks four years ago, including a high first-round pick, as compensation for hiring Belichick. He took the job determined to return that investment. He already has.
PRO FOOTBALL
