Nearly seven years ago, Mohammad Khatami won an upset presidential election over the candidate favored by conservative mullahs, electrifying an Iranian population fed up with almost two decades of clerical dictatorship. Now, as hard-line clerics maneuver to exclude Mr. Khatami's reform allies from running in this month's parliamentary election, millions of his disillusioned supporters watch passively from the sidelines.
Iran desperately needs the kinds of reforms that Mr. Khatami and his parliamentary allies have repeatedly promised: a freer press, a more independent judiciary, more power for elected officials and less for unelected clerics. But Iranians have wondered for some time now whether their reform politicians are tough and resourceful enough to deliver. Mr. Khatami, who refuses to confront the conservative clerical leaders, has never found an alternative formula for overcoming their resistance to serious reforms.
Four years ago, reformers won control of Parliament, only to see their legislative initiatives neutralized. The mullahs have used their control of the police and the courts to jail outspoken reformers and shut down critical newspapers. An unelected, clerically dominated body, the Guardian Council, has regularly vetoed reform legislation. The council also has the power to prohibit candidates from running. In January, it excluded hundreds of reformers -- including 87 incumbents -- from the parliamentary election, guaranteeing that regardless of how Iranians vote, the conservatives will regain a parliamentary majority.
Rather than accept such a travesty, the reformers are at last putting up a fight. More than 100 members of Parliament have resigned, and the main reformist party is boycotting the election. As many as 28 provincial governors are threatening to resign as well. Their refusal to accept a sham election is praiseworthy, but their show of resolve may be too late. Unless their actions arouse so much popular indignation that Iran's supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, is forced to intervene, they may be only hastening the end of the reform era. One way or another, the conservatives seem poised to consolidate their hold.
On some international issues, that may not make much difference. The conservatives support more access for international inspectors of Iranian nuclear sites and have shown themselves open to some forms of pragmatic cooperation with the United States over Afghanistan and Iraq.
Inside Iran, however, crushing the reform movement would be felt acutely. The mullahs have failed to prepare their country for the modern world. A quarter-century after its Islamic revolution, Iran remains utterly stagnant. Its economy, supported by one of the world's largest oil reserves, is mired in corruption and mismanagement, and is failing to generate jobs and prosperity. The young are keenly frustrated. By shutting off the last safety valve within the political system, the conservatives are sowing the seeds of more radical forms of discontent.
