Anna Mae Pictou Aquash, a young mother and American Indian activist, was shot in the head and left to die on the Pine Ridge Reservation in the winter of 1975. The trial of one of two men accused of killing her begins here on Tuesday. Between those moments, decades apart, lies a mystery, and a bitter struggle.
Law enforcement authorities and Indians across the country are watching closely, not just for what the trial will reveal about Ms. Pictou Aquash's death, but for what it threatens to expose about suspicion and violence inside the American Indian Movement, or AIM, the militant group whose clashes with federal authorities drew the eyes of the world to the Pine Ridge Reservation in the 1970's.
Ms. Pictou Aquash was a member of AIM, one of scores who seized the Sioux village of Wounded Knee in 1973, demanding civil rights for Indians while holding federal officials at bay for 71 days. The men indicted in her murder, Arlo Looking Cloud and John Graham, were in AIM, too.
Did the movement kill one of its own? Or was Ms. Pictou Aquash a victim of corrupt, even murderous, federal law enforcement? On the eve of the trial, Indians are clashing over these questions -- in newspaper and magazine articles, in television interviews, on the Web and in court.
AIM leaders insist, as they always have, that federal agents engineered the killing as part of their conflict with AIM. Other Indians point the finger at the movement itself, saying they believe that AIM leaders ordered her killed because they suspected she was a federal informer.
The editor of a national Indian newspaper has made an even more explosive accusation: that the trial will lead back to one of the American Indian Movement's best-known members, Leonard Peltier, whose life imprisonment in the killings of two federal agents at Pine Ridge has made him an international human-rights celebrity among those who believe he was framed by vengeful federal authorities.
The editor, Paul DeMain, has written in News From Indian Country that he believes that Ms. Pictou Aquash knew too much about Mr. Peltier's case and may have been killed by AIM members to protect Mr. Peltier. Mr. Peltier has sued Mr. DeMain for libel, denying any connection to the killing of the agents or of Ms. Pictou Aquash.
Being at the heart of such fire is familiar territory for AIM, a polarizing force in Indian country since its birth in Minneapolis in 1968. AIM's founders demanded civil rights, treaty recognition and a return to traditional ways. Warlike in attitude and dress, they won admirers and enemies on reservations. For many, AIM meant pride and cultural rebirth, but others criticized its tactics -- like the siege at Wounded Knee -- as too radical and violent.
Wounded Knee ended in a truce, but the armed conflict at Pine Ridge dragged on for years. Among the bloody incidents, one stirred an intense manhunt. On June 26, 1975, two F.B.I. agents, Jack Coler and Ronald Williams, were trying to arrest a robbery suspect on a farm. In a gun battle, an AIM member and both agents died. The agents, lying wounded by their car, were finished off by bullets in the head at close range. Several Indians were later arrested, but only Mr. Peltier was convicted.
Another Pine Ridge killing drew less notice. On Feb. 24, 1976, a rancher found the body of Anna Mae Pictou Aquash curled in a gully. Ms. Pictou Aquash was 30, with a broad smile and a sharp, determined attitude. She believed in AIM, family members said, and was close to AIM leaders.
Indians here and on other reservations immediately suspected federal agents or the Guardians of the Oglala Nation, a security force allied with the tribal government and federal authorities.
Peculiar circumstances fueled those suspicions: at first the authorities said they could not identify the body, though they had questioned Ms. Pictou Aquash in the past. A coroner said she had died of exposure, overlooking the bullet wound, which was found only when her body was exhumed for a second autopsy.
Vernon Bellecourt, a longtime AIM leader and its spokesman, said recently that he still believed federal authorities were responsible for her death. ''How they did it? I don't know,'' Mr. Bellecourt said. ''How they set it up? I don't know.''
Among Indians, there was another theory. Ms. Pictou Aquash's daughter said she heard it: that AIM itself might have killed Ms. Pictou Aquash, thinking she was a spy. At the height of the Pine Ridge conflict, federal authorities wanted inside information, and AIM members often suspected their own of talking.
Robert D. Ecoffey, now deputy director of law enforcement services at the Bureau of Indian Affairs, heard the whispers many times, too, in decades of pursuing the Pictou Aquash case. But they went nowhere, Mr. Ecoffey and other law enforcement officials said, because most people on the reservation would not talk, perhaps fearing retribution, perhaps to keep a united front for AIM.
''The case would be dead for a long time, then it would come back to life and you would hear something,'' said James E. McMahon, the United States attorney in South Dakota. ''But then that would not pan out.''
Finally, not long ago, Mr. McMahon said, people once inside AIM spoke up.
''Feelings changed,'' said Mr. Ecoffey, a Lakota who grew up in Pine Ridge. ''There had been a distrust between those who had the knowledge and the F.B.I. People realized now that justice had to be done for Anna Mae.''
Last year, the authorities indicted Mr. Looking Cloud and Mr. Graham. Mr. Graham, arrested in Canada, will fight extradition in a hearing in March, said his lawyer, Terry La Liberté. ''There's no evidence in this case,'' Mr. La Liberté said. ''What we have is a bunch of hearsay, innuendo and politics.''
Mr. Looking Cloud, who goes to trial on Tuesday, has a straightforward defense, said his lawyer, Tim Rensch: ''He didn't do it.''
Law enforcement authorities declined to discuss their theory of the motive in the case before the trial. But they said they did not believe that Mr. Looking Cloud, a low-level AIM member who became a drifter after leaving Pine Ridge, plotted the killing on his own. And even a former AIM leader, Russell Means, has publicly said he believes that AIM leaders ordered the killing.
Mr. Bellecourt, the spokesman, in turn accused Mr. Means of being a ''C.I.A. snoop.'' He said his group had posted an ''urgent appeal'' on the Web for money for Mr. Looking Cloud's defense after Mr. Looking Cloud's family sought help to prove his innocence.
Mr. DeMain, the editor, said he once undertook a similar mission for Mr. Peltier. Mr. DeMain, an Oneida-Ojibwe, said he began researching the case a dozen years ago, hoping to prove -- as Robert Redford, the Dalai Lama, Archbishop Desmond Tutu and others have insisted over the decades -- that Mr. Peltier was unjustly imprisoned.
Mr. DeMain said he believed that ballistic evidence against Mr. Peltier was flawed, and that a witness had lied. But after years of interviews, he said, he became convinced that Mr. Peltier, now serving consecutive life terms in the federal prison in Leavenworth, Kan., was a murderer.
''What I found was not a case where the government may have framed an innocent man, but where the government may have framed a guilty man,'' he said in an interview at his home in Hayward, Wis.
Mr. DeMain said he had determined from interviews that Ms. Pictou Aquash had at one point heard Mr. Peltier brag about shooting both F.B.I. agents, and even re-enacted the crime. That knowledge made her a target of AIM, Mr. DeMain said.
Last year, Mr. DeMain published as much in his newspaper, writing that the ''primary motive'' behind the killing was Ms. Pictou Aquash's knowledge of what Mr. Peltier claimed to have done.
Another person who was once close to AIM leaders and who declined to be named in this article, saying she feared for her safety, said that she, too, had seen Mr. Peltier brag in front of Ms. Pictou Aquash and others about shooting the agents. That person has been summoned as a witness at the trial.
Mr. Peltier has sued Mr. DeMain for libel in federal court in Minneapolis. Mr. Peltier's lawyer, Barry A. Bachrach, said that after years of court appeals, even the government had said it could not prove that Mr. Peltier executed the agents. The government, Mr. Bachrach said, has argued merely that he ''aided and abetted'' in their deaths. The 1975 shootout, Mr. Bachrach said, was chaotic and confusing, with many people firing guns, some in self-defense. ''It was a war zone,'' he said.
Eric F. Melgren, the United States attorney in Kansas, argued the government's side in a hearing last fall. He said that to persuade appeals courts to uphold the murder convictions, some prosecutors had asserted that the government needed only to show that Mr. Peltier at least aided and abetted in the killings. The government still believes that Mr. Peltier fired the fatal shots, he said.
Mr. Bachrach said his client rejected the government's allegations and any ties to Ms. Pictou Aquash's death. ''He denies shooting the agents and thus denies that a motive for the murder of Anna Mae was because he supposedly admitted to her that he killed the agents,'' Mr. Bachrach said. ''You can get people to say anything. But it's a falsehood that Anna Mae was murdered as a result of something Leonard supposedly admitted to her.''
Besides, Mr. Bachrach said, Mr. Peltier considered Ms. Pictou Aquash a friend.
The 28th anniversary of Mr. Peltier's imprisonment is next week, with events planned in Boston, Toronto and Tacoma, Wash. His legal battle, meanwhile, goes on.
Among Indians, especially here in southwest South Dakota, the coming trial has stirred painful memories.
''It's awesome to know hundreds of people knew intimate details,'' said Richard Two Elk, who grew up with Mr. Looking Cloud. ''How the community knew all this time. And how a massive orchestra was conducted to hide it.''
AIM, meanwhile, splintered. Some leaders went off to Hollywood or the lecture circuit. Nevertheless, Mr. Bellecourt, 72, said AIM was alive and well. He said its legacy was vast -- culturally, economically and philosophically. ''We've changed things forever,'' he said.
Denise Maloney Pictou was 11 when her mother died. Her mother believed firmly in AIM values, she said: human rights, treaty recognition, tradition. Ms. Maloney Pictou said she was struggling to mesh those values with the thought that AIM could have killed her mother.
''I really do believe in their purpose in what they started out to be,'' Ms. Maloney Pictou, now 39, said. ''I cannot believe that everything they did back there is in vain.''
Still, she said, she suspects there may be more revelations ahead.
''I truly believe that this is just the tip of the iceberg,'' she said. ''If Anna Mae opens up the door to the rest of the injustices, I'll be there to push forward.''
