Since the Rangers obtained Jaromir Jagr from Washington on Jan. 23, a pattern has begun to emerge. They do not win when Jagr does not record a point, and they are undefeated when he does.
Last night at Madison Square Garden, Jagr had a goal and an assist and forced a key turnover on the game-winning goal, and the Rangers, who had lost seven of their previous eight games, staved off the high-powered Vancouver Canucks, 4-3.
Bobby Holik scored two goals, including the winner with 2 minutes 41 seconds remaining, after the Canucks, whose 30 victories lead the league, rallied from a 3-1 deficit to tie the score with two third-period goals. Brian Leetch assisted on Holik's winner, one of his three assists.
The Rangers even scored on the power play -- not once, but twice -- for the first time since the Jagr trade. Holik and Aleksei Kovalev each scored on second-period power plays.
Jagr, an All-Star right wing, was on the ice for all four of the Rangers' goals.
''That's why we got him,'' Rangers Coach Glen Sather said. ''He's a great player. He makes a difference. Alex made a difference, too.''
Jagr assisted on the Rangers' first power-play goal, a one-timer from the right circle by Holik that broke a 1-1 tie at 10:13 of the second period. Jagr was also on the ice when Kovalev scored only his second power-play goal of the season, on a rising slap shot with 13.9 seconds remaining in the second period.
For Holik and Kovalev, it was each player's first goal in nine games.
The Rangers (20-23-7-4) are 2-4 since obtaining Jagr. They pulled to 6 points behind the Islanders for eighth place in the Eastern Conference, and for the moment, took a little pressure off Sather, who again heard the chants of ''Fire Sather!'' after the Canucks rallied in the third period to tie the score.
At yesterday's morning skate, Sather was combative when asked whether he would consider stepping down as coach. He is also the team's president and general manager.
When pressed about reports that Mike Keenan, who coached the Rangers to their first Stanley Cup championship in 50 years in 1994, had spoken to him recently, Sather said, ''I don't think it deserves a comment.''
A person with knowledge of the conversation confirmed what Keenan told the Canadian cable television outlet Sportsnet yesterday: that Keenan called Sather after the Rangers phoned Keenan to invite him to tomorrow night's ceremony retiring Mike Richter's No. 35 at the Garden.
Sportsnet and the person familiar with the conversation between Sather and Keenan said the subject of coaching the Rangers was never broached.
''I can't make it any clearer for you,'' Sather told reporters yesterday.
Things began inauspiciously enough for Jagr and the Rangers; a little over four minutes into the game, Jagr missed an open net on a two-on-one break.
''I wanted to hide,'' Jagr said, adding that he missed the shot because, unbeknownst to him, he was playing with a broken stick. ''I wanted to leave Madison Square Garden right away. But I had my skates on, so I couldn't leave.''
SLAP SHOTS
The Rangers were without defenseman TOM POTI, whose sore back flared up again. ''It's never gotten any better since I hurt it two weeks ago,'' he said before the game. The rookie defenseman LAWRENCE NYCHOLAT dressed in place of Poti. Nycholat, recalled from Hartford, said he arrived at the Garden a little after 3 p.m. . . . Left wing JAN HLAVAC returned to the Rangers' lineup after being a healthy scratch the previous two games. Defenseman VLADIMIR MALAKHOV (wrist) missed his fifth consecutive game. . . . GLEN SATHER did not comment on his pregame threat Saturday to make the Rangers take the bus home from Buffalo if they lost to the Sabres. The Rangers lost, 3-1, then flew home on their charter. ''I don't think we're going to get into that either,'' Sather said at yesterday morning's skate.
HOCKEY
