Much of the pretrial wrangling in the sexual assault case against the basketball star Kobe Bryant has centered on his accuser and the question of how much of her background can be used by the defense to challenge her account that Mr. Bryant raped her at a hotel near the Vail ski resort last June.
On Tuesday, the focus will shift to Mr. Bryant and how much of what he said after the matter can be used against him.
What Mr. Bryant told the police, particularly on a tape recorded by investigators before his arrest, will probably not be released to the public on Tuesday. And it might never be if his defense team is successful in its contention that the investigators botched the questioning.
But as a story of police procedure -- how law enforcement in this mountain community went about building a case against a famous athlete -- the hearing is likely to open a window into those first hours last June after the 19-year-old woman made her accusation. The police and investigators have said they followed every rule in obtaining evidence. Mr. Bryant's defense team is dissecting every minute of the investigation in its search for mistakes or bias.
Mr. Bryant, 25, faces a wide range of penalties, from four years to life in prison or life on probation under a sex-offender treatment program if convicted on a single felony sexual assault charge. The charge stems from an encounter on June 30 with a front-desk clerk at the hotel where he was staying. Mr. Bryant said the two had consensual sex; the woman, whose name has not been made public, said he forced himself on her.
What makes the pretrial hearings important is that they add elements that go beyond he said, she said. What the prosecutors are allowed to present to a jury about Mr. Bryant's statements and what his defense lawyers can present about the woman's background and medical history will be a big part of what a jury hears when the trial begins.
Many of the broader issues that have emerged from the case, particularly the need to balance the rights of the accused versus the need to protect the privacy of victims in sex-crime cases, also revolve around the questions of admissibility of evidence and protection of privacy.
In fact, the defendant and the accuser agree on some of what happened. Both say they began flirting soon after Mr. Bryant checked into the hotel, and that the woman went to his room voluntarily, according to a judge in the case who summarized some of the evidence last fall in a written ruling. Mr. Bryant and the woman hugged and kissed, both sides agree. The accounts then diverge: Prosecutors say Mr. Bryant grabbed her by the neck, forced her over a chair and raped her. Mr. Bryant's lawyers say that the two had intercourse and the woman then went back to work.
Another issue surrounding what Mr. Bryant said in those hours involves his legal status at the time he spoke to investigators. Although he was not arrested until July 4, his lawyers have argued that he was really being held in de facto police custody when investigators recorded his comments without his knowledge on July 1, and that the evidence should not be admitted at trial.
Mr. Bryant, who plays for the Los Angeles Lakers, was not present on Monday at hearings. A spokeswoman for the office of the state court administrator, Karen Salaz, said that Mr. Bryant was ill and had been given permission not to appear.
