THE GRANDMOTHERS  Four Short Novels  By Doris Lessing  311 pages. HarperCollins. $23.95.
Demi Moore and Ashton Kutcher have nothing on the characters in ''The Grandmothers.''
The heroines of the title story in Doris Lessing's new collection are two middle-aged women who have been best friends since childhood. Years ago they began sleeping with each other's teenage sons, and these romances have endured until the boys are getting on toward 30. We're told that the four of them radiate ''an air of repletion, as if they had been soaking in pleasure all their lives and now gave it out in the form of invisible waves of contentment.''
Although Ms. Lessing has done just about everything in her long and varied career -- from anatomizing the convolutions of the individual psyche in her early fiction to mapping the metaphysics of distant galaxies in her ''Canopus in Argos'' series -- she utterly fails in this, the weakest of the four stories collected here, to make these two bizarre romances the least bit credible.
''The Grandmothers'' is reminiscent of Ms. Lessing's 1996 novel, ''Love, Again,'' which features a 65-year-old sex kitten who becomes the love object of a 40-year-old movie star, of a 35-year-old director and of a 26-year-old stud. Like that book ''The Grandmothers'' lacks all the psychological insight that has distinguished Ms. Lessing's most celebrated writing.
Instead there are embarrassing bouts of romance novel prose and lots of icky descriptions of her two heroines, Roz and Lil, leering at their offspring: ''The women stared at these two young heroes, their sons, their lovers, these beautiful young men, their bodies glistening with sea water and sun oil, like wrestlers from an older time.''
Throughout the story Roz and Lil are described as self-reliant, talented women, like many of the women in Lessing's fiction. Their decisions to seduce each other's adolescent sons are not depicted as pathological, or even selfish acts; rather, their lengthy affairs are portrayed as a kind of golden idyll for all concerned. Later, when the boys grow up and finally marry, it is their wives who will seem like outsiders.
The characters in this volume's other stories are also susceptible to delusions, fantasies and yearnings for other lives. Though ''The Reason for It'' is a more engaging performance than ''The Grandmothers,'' it quickly devolves into another of this author's clunky, one-dimensional fairy tales, calling to mind not the grandly operatic ''Canopus'' series, but her cartoonish futuristic novel, ''Mara and Dann.''
In this case an elderly wise man -- the last of his kind it turns out -- mourns the loss of the glorious civilization he knew in his youth. Many decades ago he and his fellow wise men made a foolish choice for ruler; they elected a handsome and charming ignoramus who allowed all the old virtues like education, storytelling and reverence for the past to fade away. What was once a noble, humane society has since become a vulgar, warlike one.
In this story Ms. Lessing mechanically compares and contrasts the good old days with the bad new ones, hitting us over the head with obvious and ungainly analogies between her fairy tale world and the real world we live in.
It is the two remaining stories in this volume that best showcase the author's myriad gifts as a realist: her keen, sociological eye for class and ideology; her understanding of the contradictory impulses of the human heart; her ability to conjure a place, a mood and a time through seemingly matter-of-fact descriptions.
''Victoria and the Staveneys'' starts off somewhat predictably, juxtaposing the indigent London world inhabited by a bright young black woman named Victoria, with the bright, cozy world of her schoolmate, Thomas Staveney, the son of well-to-do white liberals. Deftly compressing years into pages, Ms. Lessing swiftly complicates this story: A teenage Victoria has an affair with Thomas, becomes pregnant, breaks off the affair, has the baby without telling him, marries another man, becomes a widow and eventually tells Thomas about their daughter, Mary.
It's not long before the Staveneys have welcomed Mary into their lives, but as she spends more and more time with them, her mother begins to worry that she will lose her to the Staveneys' white, upper-middle-class world, the very world Victoria once longed to join herself.
In the final story in this volume, ''A Love Child,'' an illegitimate baby plays a similarly pivotal role. During World War II a young Englishman named James and his military unit set forth on a long, brutal sea voyage (expertly conjured by Ms. Lessing in all its excruciating discomfort) to India, and their transport ship stops for a few days in Cape Town for supplies. There, James has an intense affair with a married woman named Daphne, who nine months later bears his child. Though Daphne answers none of his letters, James will continue to think of her as his one true love, even as he goes on to a more banal, if altogether respectable life in postwar England.
While this story follows the melodramatic arc of many an old-fashioned wartime romance, Ms. Lessing recounts James's adventures with such authority and such a wealth of emotional detail that the story possesses both a palpable immediacy and a haunting afterlife. In little more than a hundred pages, she has given us a resonant portrait of a man convinced that he is ''living the wrong life.''
It is a story that demonstrates the easy mastery of her finest work, a story that stands in sharp contrast to the cringe-making title story of this oddly uneven volume.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
