If seeking the presidency is like reaching for the stars, then why not look to the stars -- and the other heavenly bodies -- for insights on the candidates. The Democratic hopefuls face seven primaries today. Here's what their astrological charts can tell voters about their character -- and who may have a celestial advantage:
Wesley Clark was born on Dec. 23, 1944, with Sun in Capricorn and Moon in Aries, two leadership and executive signs. He has a warrior signature: when civilized it indicates a master strategist; at its most martial, it is ruthlessly determined and messianic. For him, this year is an astrological rite of passage into elder status. His conservative Capricorn nature is now at its most rigorous, so what we see is who he is. Endowed with wit and a youthful nature, General Clark is a man's man. His horoscope shows him at a high point of achievement, having opportunities to be influential and willing to take what he can get.
Howard Dean was born on Nov. 17, 1948, with a Scorpio Sun and Gemini Moon. Thus, Dr. Dean's character contains a paradox: he is both deep and shallow. He can be cool and distant or passionate and intense. The position of two of the planets in his chart shows erratic energy and emotional volatility. His horoscope for June 2003 through the coming spring shows a period of soul searching. Astrologically, it is a time of the mythic ''brother battle,'' in which Mr. Dean's confrontations with others really reflect his own inner conflict.
John Edwards, born on June 10, 1953, is a Gemini with the Moon in Gemini. There is much in his horoscope that makes him the puer aeternus, the eternal boy. His mind is playful and rich with ideas. However, his chart shows him to be a true son of the messenger and trickster god, and so capable of exceptional dualism. His horoscope tells us that he abhors confrontation unless he knows he is morally justified. Having battled inner demons over the last three years, Mr. Edwards will rise this summer like a giant refreshed.
John Kerry, born on Dec. 11, 1943, is a Sagittarius with four Gemini planets in the public relationship sector of his birth chart. He has a judicial character, but also has little tolerance for fools. Born with the rare Mars retrograde, he entered life with a rage -- a deep, inner need to overcome (the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. also had the Mars retrograde). He has a strong sense of responsibility as well as feelings of caution about his message. Over the last 18 months the planets have empowered him with core strength. The long-term picture depicts him achieving his highest goals.
Dennis Kucinich, born on Oct. 8, 1946, has his Sun in Libra with its opposite sign, Aries, rising at birth. This is the signature of the peaceful warrior, who desires serenity but is willing to spar for it. The planetary formation at birth endows Mr Kucinich with a profound dedication to conservation of resources, both natural and manufactured. He is relentless in his pursuit of justice and truth. He deeply empathizes with the collective suffering of humanity. The planets show his life at a major juncture; he is only just beginning to establish roots and a sense of real security.
Joseph Lieberman was born on Feb. 24, 1942. Although his exact time of birth is uncertain, based on the Sun in Pisces and Moon in Gemini on his birth date, he is primarily motivated by his intellect as it is applied to his spiritual values. He is stubborn and not adaptable. His star chart shows him to be hard working and reliable, but also feeling overwhelmed by his labors and the influence of those around him. He is in a vital transitional phase. His capacity to reveal himself is blocked, limiting his drive and ambitions.
Al Sharpton was born on Oct. 3, 1954. His birth time is also uncertain, but based on the day of his birth, he is a Libra with the Moon in Sagittarius. His horoscope reveals him as witty, quietly subversive, and having lofty intentions. He is fascinated by other cultures and desires global harmony, seeing the whole world as his home. Right now, his chart indicates he is seeking a way to consolidate his many talents and focus on one or two main themes. He will feel the increasing pressure of those who are in greater places of power over the next 10 months.
Op-Ed Contributor Erin Sullivan is the author of ''Saturn in Transit'' and the forthcoming ''Astrology and Psychology of Midlife and Aging.''
