Drew Henson, whose goal once was to be the Yankees' third baseman, parted ways with them yesterday to pursue a professional football career.
Henson severed his contract with three years and $12 million remaining, allowing him to play football for the first time since he was a quarterback for Michigan in 2000. One baseball official who had spoken with Yankees executives yesterday said that the team had no intention of buying out any of Henson's remaining salary. Henson's agent, Casey Close, would not offer details of the agreement other than to say ''the parties are going to be relieved of their obligations.''
Henson, who has been working out with college players in Florida, issued a statement through Close's office: ''I am pleased to announce that I will be pursuing a career with the N.F.L. I have truly enjoyed playing professional baseball, but after a great deal of thought and discussions with the people closest to me, I have decided to make football my career.''
The Houston Texans, who drafted Henson in the sixth round last year, have a promising young quarterback in David Carr.
''If and when the Yankees relinquish his rights, we'll try to work out a trade immediately,''' Texans General Manager Charley Casserly told The Associated Press on Sunday at the Super Bowl.
Miami is among the teams believed to be interested in Henson. If he remains unsigned, Henson will re-enter the N.F.L. draft in April.
The Yankees had pursued Henson aggressively, envisioning him as the replacement for Scott Brosius, then Robin Ventura, but he eventually fell out of the running for the third-base job. By the time Aaron Boone injured his knee on Jan. 16, the Yankees had all but given up on Henson.
The Yankees drafted Henson in the third round of the 1998 amateur draft, and he showed promise, hitting for average and for power in parts of three seasons at Class A and AA before being traded to the Cincinnati Reds as part of a package for pitcher Denny Neagle in 2000. The Yankees reacquired Henson in a trade in March 2001, and they gave him a six-year, $17 million contract to forgo football and play baseball.
But Henson's career stalled at Class AAA Columbus, where his modest power was offset by his numerous strikeouts. His numbers at Columbus last year included 14 home runs, 122 strikeouts and 28 errors.
BASEBALL
