Iran's leading reform party announced Monday that it would boycott the parliamentary elections this month. The boycott was announced one day after more than a third of the Parliament's members resigned to protest a ban on hundreds of reformist candidates.
Mohammad Reza Khatami, the party leader and younger brother of President Mohammad Khatami, said that his Islamic Iran Participation Front had decided by a large majority not to take part in the poll.
''We have no hope that free and legal elections will be held on Feb. 20,'' he said at a news conference. ''Therefore, it is impossible for the Participation Front to take part in the elections under current circumstances.''
The tension between reformist supporters of President Khatami, who control Parliament, and their hard-line opponents has been building since early January, when nearly half of the 8,200 people who had filed as candidates were rejected by the conservative 12-member Guardian Council. Last week, after protests, the council reinstated more than a 1,000, but most of the liberal candidates, including 87 sitting members of Parliament, were excluded.
With the Islamic Participation Front out of the running, conservatives stand a good chance of winning enough seats to retake the 290-seat Parliament, which has been controlled by reformists since 2000.
On Sunday, hard-liners attacked the office of one of the reformist party's outspoken members, Akbar Alami, in the northwestern city of Tabriz. Mr. Alami, one of the few reformists whose candidacy had been approved by the council, was among the 125 legislators who resigned in protest on Sunday.
The assailants painted statements like ''death or withdrawal'' on the walls and severely injured an employee. Mr. Alami said he had received several telephone threats in recent days, demanding that he end his campaign, the Islamic Republic News Agency reported.
One pro-democracy student group had said on Sunday that it was seeking permission to hold public demonstrations on Wednesday to protest the ban. Iran is celebrating the 25th anniversary of its Islamic revolution.
''Unfortunately, at a time when the world is moving toward democracy and free elections, and we have good experience of democracy, at the 25th anniversary of our revolution, we do not see conditions appropriate for healthy competition,'' Mohammad Reza Khatami, the party leader, said on Monday. ''The government cannot be called the reformist government anymore if it goes ahead with the vote.''
He said his party was not calling on people to boycott the polls but warned of a recurrence of what happened a year ago, when less than 15 percent of eligible voters in large cities cast ballots in local council elections.
For a second time, the Interior Ministry urged the Guardian Council to postpone the election and review more candidates. The speaker of Parliament, Mehdi Karroubi, appealed Sunday to the supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who has the final word on all state matters, to intervene and resolve the issue.
But a member of the Guardian Council, Reza Zavarehi, said Monday that the council's work ''was finished,'' the agency reported.
