When American designers unveil their collections for fall 2004 beginning Friday, one of the behind-the-scenes influences on the trends for the season may turn out to be an unlikely source: a fashion spread from the October issue of Vogue. ''Mad About You,'' the 16-page feature photographed by Steven Meisel and conceived by Camilla Nickerson, showed a succession of models in whiteface, smothered in vivid fox furs, outsize houndstooth and tweed, their ensembles garnished with egret plumes, jewel-toned gloves and violently colorful hose.
They were the kind of visually arresting images that simmered in the imaginations of designers, including Narciso Rodriguez, Derek Lam and the team behind Proenza Schouler, who cut them out and pinned them to their studio walls. Interviews with these designers indicate that the mood of the layout -- its sense of eccentricity, of clothing plucked from a madwoman's closet -- will resurface in a strong way during Fashion Week.
''We were asked to do a coat story,'' said Ms. Nickerson, 38, a lanky, hollow-cheeked woman, whose title at Vogue is sittings editor at large, a freelance position.
To designers like Mr. Rodriguez, she is something of a muse. Ms. Nickerson, who wore Mr. Rodriguez's fox-trimmed black shearling jacket, jeans, athletic socks and evening sandals to be interviewed, has an authority rare for a fashion editor. ''Camilla is a great inspiration for fashion now,'' said Mr. Rodriguez, for whom Ms. Nickerson works as an independent consultant. ''Her influence is her eclecticism.''
Lazaro Hernandez, half of the Proenza Schouler design team, said: ''Camilla is one of our major sources of inspiration. She has the courage to mix things up, the humble with the refined, the classic with the crazy.''
To fashion insiders, Ms. Nickerson, originally from England, embodies the spirit of the fashion moment: bold, iconoclastic, perhaps a little reckless. ''Her style right now is a considerable influence,'' said Robert Burke, the fashion director of Bergdorf Goodman. ''It's bohemian but not down and dirty. It has a certain sophistication and intellectualism.''
Bergdorf Goodman will pay homage next week to that quirky style -- not just Ms. Nickerson's, but as embodied by other fashion eccentrics -- with windows filled with saucily mismatched outfits chosen by New York social figures like Sally Albemarle, Amy Sacco, Blaine Trump and Valesca Guerrand-Hermès. Ms. Albemarle, a Persian-Danish sculptor, combined a brightly colored Yves Saint Laurent ribbon dress with a marabou vest. Ms. Sacco, a nightclub owner, slipped a bright green Chanel leather trench coat over a Mickey Mouse T-shirt and jeans. The socialite window dressers ''reflect the way real women want to dress right now,'' Mr. Burke said.
He was not talking about most American women, or even most New Yorkers, for whom Jennifer Lopez in a tight-fitting white Dolce &amp; Gabbana suit is closer to the epitome of style. The woman he had in mind is one who does not mind raising eyebrows, even relishes the thought. At a time when movie stars employ battalions of stylists to help achieve a bland perfection that passes for good taste -- an exception, Ms. Nickerson said, being the singer Bjork -- such eccentricity is rare.
It was more common in previous generations, embodied by trendsetters like Isabel Eberstadt, a New York society fixture of the 1960's. With a leonine mane of hair and a wildly original fashion sense, Ms. Eberstadt counted herself among an influential minority for whom ''looking pretty is not so important as creating a mood,'' as she told Marilyn Bender in the 1967 book ''The Beautiful People.'' Ms. Eberstadt occasionally wore a feathered headdress and a jeweled mask, adopting the white boots and architectural dresses of André Courrèges long before most American women had caught wind of the designer.
Such boldness has few parallels today. ''It's hard to find a context for it now,'' Ms. Nickerson said. This may explain why designers seeking inspiration fall back on past icons: fashion originals like Millicent Rogers, a debutante of the 1920's; Jane Forth, the Andy Warhol muse; and Marisa Berenson, the former actress and society figure.
''In the past, and as late as the 60's, people were inspired by a handful of ladies who set the fashion for themselves,'' said Valerie Steele, the director of the museum at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York. Their wardrobes were collaborations between the women and their dressmakers, a partnership that allowed for fantasy and whimsicality. The advent of mass-produced clothing threw cold water on many an imaginative flight, Ms. Steele said.
Hollywood has had an even more flattening influence, Ms. Nickerson said. ''I really wish they would banish the red carpet,'' she said. ''When a person insists on being photographed looking glamorous but conventional, it kills experimentation, and fashion cannot move forward.''
Ms. Nickerson found the inspiration for her Vogue spread in the decadence of Europe between the World Wars and, in particular, the colors of German Expressionist painting. The pages were also shaped by the surrealistic vision of the fashion designs of Elsa Schiaparelli in the 30's, and by the contemporary surrealistic films and anthropomorphic sculptures of the artist Matthew Barney, she said.
The feature was a departure for the magazine, Ms. Nickerson said. The eccentricities represented by the models' outfits are not likely to be repeated in the magazine anytime soon. ''Publishers like to tell us that we are dressing the woman in Middle America,'' Ms. Nickerson said. ''But who is to say that she's happy? Who says she wants to look bland.''
