Despite warnings from the White House and conservatives about the cost of a new transportation measure, the Senate agreed on Monday to move ahead with the legislation, which significantly exceeds what President Bush wants to spend on roads, bridges and mass transit.
Senators voted 75 to 11 to take up the proposal, which would provide $311 billion for thousands of federal, state and local transportation projects over six years. Leaders of both parties called the bill essential to bolster the economy and relieve congestion on the nation's roads.
''It's a jobs issue,'' said Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, the majority leader, estimating that every $1 billion invested in transportation led to $2 billion in related economic activity and 47,000 jobs. ''This bill is a quality-of-life issue. And it's a serious safety issue as well.''
The Senate vote came just hours after the Bush administration issued its budget for 2005, which called for $256 billion in highway and transit spending. The differing price tags illustrate the difficulty the White House is going to have in meeting its spending targets and sets up a showdown between Mr. Bush and lawmakers interested in securing all the election-year highway money they can get.
The White House budget director, Joshua B. Bolten, was not yet ready to threaten a presidential veto against the transportation measure. But he said spending at the levels envisioned by the Senate -- or an even larger number sought by some House members -- would endanger the administration's goal of cutting the deficit in half over five years.
''I expect the administration will be taking a firm line to keep that cost down,'' Mr. Bolten said, adding that the administration figure represented a 21 percent increase over the previous six-year program.
Senate critics called the highway measure just the latest in a line of deficit-digging legislative plans pushed by lawmakers incapable of spending restraint.
''This highway bill takes the American taxpayer for a ride, moving us down the road toward higher deficits and budgetary gimmicks that conceal its enormous cost,'' said Senator Jon Kyl, Republican of Arizona, who promised to fight the bill.
Other lawmakers from both parties said the measure was justified.
''I strongly support the president on virtually everything he is doing, but in this case I don't agree,'' said Senator James M. Inhofe, Republican of Oklahoma and chairman of the Environment and Public Works Committee. ''We have a crisis in the country in terms of our infrastructure and we must meet this crisis.''
Despite the vote to cut off debate and allow the Senate to begin consideration of the bill, its fate is uncertain. Dr. Frist said the Senate would devote most of the next two weeks to trying to fashion a measure that could attract the 60 votes necessary to defeat any filibuster. And even if the Senate passes a bill, the highway money is tied up in the House in a dispute over the spending level, with some members there pushing for an amount up to $375 billion, to be paid for with an increase in federal gasoline taxes, a plan the House leadership opposes.
As has been the case in the past, lawmakers will also fight over the formula that allocates highway money to each state, with senators from states like Texas contending that their residents unfairly pay more in gasoline tax revenues than they get back in federal aid.
THE PRESIDENT'S BUDGET PROPOSAL: TRANSPORTATION
