The trial of Kirk Kerkorian's fraud lawsuit against DaimlerChrysler will resume next Monday for two days of testimony, with the company's chairman, Jürgen E. Schrempp, scheduled to return to the stand, a court spokeswoman said on Monday.
Mr. Kerkorian's investment company, the Tracinda Corporation, sued DaimlerChrysler in 2000, contending the transaction that created the company was deceptively described as a merger of equals instead of an acquisition of Chrysler.
At issue with Mr. Schrempp is whether as the chairman of Daimler-Benz he misled Mr. Kerkorian into exchanging his 13.7 percent stake in Chrysler for DaimlerChrysler shares at a much lower premium than he would have demanded in an outright takeover.
In an interview with The Financial Times in 2000, Mr. Schrempp said he had always intended to make Chrysler a division of the merged company.
Mr. Kerkorian is seeking $1.2 billion in damages.
A two-week trial of the lawsuit was about to end in mid-December when Judge Joseph J. Farnan Jr. of Federal District Court here abruptly halted it after lawyers for DaimlerChrysler disclosed that they had just discovered documents they had failed to provide to Tracinda.
The documents included more than 61 pages of handwritten notes made by a former Chrysler executive, Gary Valade, during negotiations on the merger. A special master appointed by Judge Farnan found after a daylong inquiry that Daimler had not deliberately withheld the documents.
Tracinda appealed that finding, and Judge Farnan ordered both sides to submit written arguments of the company's request for sanctions or penalties against Daimler. Judge Farnan advised the automaker on Friday that it will have to pay at least a part of Tracinda's legal costs.
A lawyer for Tracinda, Terry N. Christensen, said that when he questions Mr. Schrempp next week, ''I'm going to focus specifically on his intent during the original discussions and try to hold his feet to the fire on that issue.''
A Daimler spokesman said, ''As for the notes, we intend to demonstrate that they provide compelling support for our case.''
