''The Inflammation Cure,'' by Dr. William Joel Meggs, with Carol Svec. Contemporary Books, $19.95.
''Lupus, the First Year,'' by Nancy C. Hanger. Marlowe &amp; Company, $15.95.
Inflammation keeps people alive after injuries or infections by limiting damage to their bodies, but when it is out of control, it gives rise to a host of ailments and autoimmune disorders like lupus and rheumatoid arthritis.
Dr. Meggs, an inflammation specialist at the Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, makes the point that inflammation ''may well turn out to be the elusive holy grail of medicine, the single phenomenon that holds the key to sickness and health.''
Inflammation, Dr. Meggs writes, is a common thread that links heart disease, some forms of cancer, diabetes, migraine headaches, irritable bowel, and even periodontal disease. ''Every fever, bump, rash, or bruise is the result of inflammation,'' he says. ''On a microscopic level, the inflammatory response involves dozens of different chemicals, each performing a specific action.''
In addition to explaining inflammation's causes and its role in various diseases, the author offers advice -- ''an anti-inflammation game plan'' -- on how to maintain ''inflammation balance'' and feel better. He notes that research labels some foods as pro-  or anti-inflammatory, and he boils ''anti-inflammatory eating'' down to some familiar items: plenty of fruits and vegetables, fish three to five times a week, olive oil in the diet, few animal products ''or become a vegetarian,'' drink green tea, and use turmeric, the yellow spice ''shown to have potent anti-inflammatory properties.''
His ''pollution solutions'' include avoiding chemicals that can contribute to inflammation-related disorders, like those in cleaning products, pesticides, paints and adhesives; perfumes and fragrances that can cause inflammation of the skin and airway; and watch out for carpets that harbor allergens and endotoxins.
Dr. Meggs also addresses the role of various inflammation-fighting medicines, like nonsteroidal drugs and corticosteroids, and the newer statins, which were originally introduced to prevent atherosclerosis by lowering cholesterol.
Ms. Hanger, who has lupus-related disorders, offers a look at a rheumatological autoimmune disease that attacks connective tissues, ebbs and flows, and mainly afflicts women. There is no known cause, though there may be a genetic link, and no cure.
''Lupus is, in a nutshell, a disease that attacks your own body out of confusion,'' she writes. Ms. Hanger takes the optimistic view that the disease can be controlled to a degree, through stress reduction (which may cause the disease to wax and wane), learning the triggers that cause flare-ups, and managing medications and therapies.
''Lupoids,'' as she calls those who have the disorder, take many medications. ''The main reason for this,'' she says, ''isn't the lupus itself, but the overlapping syndromes and conditions that arise from having a screwy immune system.''
Ms. Hanger also addresses the neurological and psychological effects that are ''mostly undocumented scientifically by the medical community.'' Among these are ''lupus fog'' characterized by forgetfulness, loss of short-term memory, loss of words, clumsiness and inability to handle a variety of tasks at once. She outlines coping techniques, and concludes, ''Only you can and will develop little tricks to get you through your fog times -- hang in there, you will learn them.''
BOOKS ON HEALTH
