Heirs of Kasimir Malevich, the Russian avant-garde artist, are suing the city of Amsterdam in an attempt to recover 14 artworks that they say are rightfully theirs.
The suit was filed last month in United States District Court in Washington and is expected to be served on the city of Amsterdam this week, Lawrence M. Kaye, one of the lawyers for the heirs, said yesterday.
The paintings were the subject of an exhibition last year at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York and the Menil Collection in Houston. Lisa Dennison, deputy director of the Guggenheim, said that at the time of the show the United States government had given the museum immunity from seizure.
This is not the first claim made by the artists' 35 grandchildren, nieces and nephews in Russia and elsewhere. In 1999 the Museum of Modern Art in New York agreed to a payment of what is believed to have been $5 million along with one painting in exchange for keeping 15 works by Malevich that have been at the Modern since 1935, when they were taken there for safekeeping. Also in 1999 the Busch-Reisinger Museum at Harvard University returned a painting and drawing to the heirs.
Lawyers for the heirs said that the 14 artworks identified in the suit were worth $150 million. They were part of a larger group of more than 100 works that Malevich took to Berlin in 1927 for display at the Great Berlin Art Exhibition..
When he was unexpectedly called back to the Soviet Union, he entrusted the art to several friends, including Alexander Dorner, director of the Landesmuseum in Hanover, and the German architect Hugo Häring. Malevich did not return to Germany (he died in Leningrad, now St. Petersburg, in 1935), and the Nazis banned such art as ''degenerate.'' So Dorner sent some of the art to the Museum of Modern Art in New York and took others to the Busch-Reisinger Museum. The rest of the works were lent to the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam, and in 1958 they were sold to the city, which runs the museum.
''As the complaint alleges, we do believe, based on available documents, that the Stedelijk was aware and had been told that Häring did not have the authority to sell them,'' Mr. Kaye said.
Talks between the heirs and the city have been going on since 1997. Two years ago the city called off the talks, telling the heirs it would not return any of the art to them.
''Now they have up to 60 days to respond,'' Mr. Kaye said. Efforts to reach city officials in Amsterdam have been unsuccessful.
