Prosecutors in the trial of Martha Stewart sought to prepare the stage yesterday for the testimony of a crucial witness, while her lawyers tried to undermine the anticipated testimony through their questioning of other government witnesses.
The testimony of Douglas Faneuil, an assistant to Ms. Stewart's former stockbroker and co-defendant, Peter E. Bacanovic, is expected to be pivotal in the government's case. Mr. Faneuil is expected to tell the jury that he was ordered to tell Ms. Stewart to sell her 3,928 shares in ImClone Systems in late December 2001, just before the company announced that a much-anticipated drug had run into serious regulatory obstacles. Ms. Stewart does not face a charge of criminal insider trading; she is charged with lying to investigators about what prompted her to sell her stock.
The presiding judge, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum of Federal District Court in Manhattan, announced yesterday morning that Mr. Faneuil would probably testify this afternoon.
Mr. Faneuil's turn on the stand was delayed last week when lawyers for Mr. Bacanovic said that they needed time to analyze notes provided by the government on Wednesday night. The notes describe an interview of Mr. Faneuil's former lawyer, Jeremiah Gutman, who said that Mr. Faneuil had told him that he was told to tip off Ms. Stewart to sell her ImClone shares either by Mr. Bacanovic or by Waksal, probably referring to Samuel D. Waksal, the former chief executive of the company. Dr. Waksal is serving a seven-year sentence after pleading guilty to securities fraud and other charges in connection with ImClone trades.
The equivocation matters to Mr. Bacanovic's lawyers because if Mr. Faneuil received instructions from Dr. Waksal, then they may argue that Mr. Bacanovic is innocent -- or at least that there is reasonable doubt of his guilt.
The witnesses called by the government yesterday seemed selected to pave the way for Mr. Faneuil's testimony today. They helped to clarify the workings of Merrill Lynch's brokerage business for the jury and described some of the events of Dec. 27, 2001, the day Ms. Stewart sold her ImClone shares. But they did not establish clearly whom Ms. Stewart spoke to on that critical date.
The witnesses included an executive assistant to Dr. Waksal, who took a phone call from Ms. Stewart the day that she sold her ImClone stock, and two employees of Merrill Lynch, which employed Mr. Bacanovic, who was also one of the brokers for Dr. Waksal.
''I remember speaking with Martha,'' the first witness, Emily Perret, the assistant to Dr. Waksal, told the jury. ''I answered the phone. She said, 'Where is Sam, get Sam.'''
Ms. Stewart wanted to know what was going on with ImClone, Ms. Perret testified.
Asked to describe Ms. Stewart's tone, Ms. Perret said she seemed ''very hurried and harsh and direct.'' On cross-examination, however, Ms. Perret agreed that Ms. Stewart often treated her that way.
The next witness, Brian Schimpfhauser, worked in Merrill Lynch's surveillance department, responsible for investigating suspicious stock trades. Mr. Schimpfhauser began investigating sales of ImClone stock made on Dec. 27, 2001, just days later, on Dec. 31. That investigation led to a referral to the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr. Schimpfhauser said.
Defense lawyers tried to discredit Mr. Schimpfhauser's description of Merrill Lynch interviews of both Mr. Bacanovic and Mr. Faneuil in January 2002 by asking him whether he took detailed notes on those meetings.
''I wasn't there to be a paralegal,'' Mr. Schimpfhauser said at one point. ''I took some notes.''
The last witness of the day, Julia Monaghan, was perhaps most important in setting the stage for Mr. Faneuil's testimony. Ms. Monaghan, the administrative manager of Merrill Lynch's branch in Rockefeller Center, where Mr. Faneuil and Mr. Bacanovic worked, described how Mr. Bacanovic approached her early in 2002 to increase the amount of compensation received by Mr. Faneuil. The criminal information by prosecutors against Mr. Faneuil charges him with receiving money or some other valuable item in exchange for not reporting wrongdoing.
Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic -- she wore an orange jacket and black slacks, he a gray suit -- were stoic through the day's proceedings. Ms. Stewart, though, enjoyed a celebrity supporter with the appearance of Rosie O'Donnell, who is recovering from a bitter legal battle against the publisher of the magazine, now defunct, that bore her name. Ms. O'Donnell was characteristically blunt in denouncing the decision to prosecute Ms. Stewart, telling reporters after the lunch recess, ''This is an unfair prosecution of her.''
After the day's proceedings, it was Ms. O'Donnell, not Ms. Stewart, who gave an impromptu news conference on the courthouse steps.
She reminded reporters, just minutes before the defendant herself walked carefully down the slippery steps to a waiting car, that Ms. Stewart ''is not charged with insider trading.''
