For more than a century, Americans have expressed confidence that an ever-increasing, well-trained cadre of physicians and medical scientists will protect and enhance their health. So for much of this period, the steady expansion of medical schools, research laboratories and teaching hospitals has been justified as an agent of public good.
More recently, however, with the fiscal crisis in health care, experts are beginning to question whether the nation's academic medical centers are financially sustainable in these times when Americans tend to worship the free market.
It has become increasingly difficult in recent years simultaneously to educate and train young doctors, treat patients, advance medical research, and hew to the bottom line. All these endeavors require more and more costly technology. Salaries and health care delivery expenses continue to rise. And the competition among all medical centers, whether affiliated with universities or independent, is ferocious.
In the book ''Governance of Teaching Hospitals'' (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004), Dr. John A. Kastor, a cardiologist at the University of Maryland, explores how academic medical centers grappled with their problems in the 1990's. He focused on the University of Pennsylvania Health System and the Johns Hopkins Hospital.
Fiscal crises all but exploded at Penn in the late 1990's, Dr. Kastor explains, because of a combination of shrinking clinical revenues, a federal audit for Medicare resulting in costly fines, the adversity surrounding the death of a teenager with a treatable form of a serious metabolic disorder, and a lenient and medically inexperienced board that approved an ambitious program of buying local hospitals and medical practices.
Overexpansion was less of an issue at Johns Hopkins, where the board of trustees was linked exclusively to the hospital, was far more involved in planning decisions and was more conservative in its acquisitions. Conflict arose instead over decreasing clinical revenues and unwieldy structures of governance among those charged with running the university, the medical school and the hospital.
Yet as Dr. Kastor's study amply demonstrates in the two cases and at many other academic medical centers in the late 90's, success or turmoil was far more a function of managerial styles than of the specific structure of corporate authority or any fiscal dynamic.
More pointedly, Dr. Guy McKhann, a professor of neurology and a former member of the Johns Hopkins Hospital's medical board observed: ''In many academic medical centers, there is a real split between those who run the hospitals and those who run the medical school. They'd rather undercut each other than survive.''
Historians of American medicine are quick to point out that academic medicine has always been caught between serving the public's needs and competing in the marketplace.
Early in the 20th century, explains Dr. Guenter Risse, an emeritus professor of medical history at the University of California at San Francisco and the author of ''Mending Bodies, Saving Souls: A History of Hospitals'' (Oxford University Press, 1999), medical schools and their hospitals began to be firmly lodged within the American university.
This partnership emerged largely as a result of Abraham Flexner's 1910 muckraking survey, sponsored by the Carnegie Foundation, on the poor state of medical education. Almost half of the medical schools described in Mr. Flexner's survey closed within two decades after his report was published. Most of those were run independently by doctors, as adjuncts to their private practices, on a for-profit basis at the expense of their students.
What has changed most over the past century is that today's academic medical centers are almost or completely financially independent from their parent universities. To make matters more precarious, when economic times are good, many university presidents look to their hospitals' profits to support other growth plans in the less lucrative schools or colleges. But when these revenues are threatened or reduced, they often seek ways to minimize the university's financial responsibility to its academic medical center.
''This places an enormous premium on the entrepreneurial skills of administrators and faculty and seriously threatens the older notions of humanitarianism and scholarship that guided these institutions,'' Dr. Risse said.
Dr. Ruth Macklin, a bioethicist at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, observed, ''Academic medical centers are caught in a squeeze to bring in more and more dollars, leading to the common doctors' complaint: 'I just don't have time to talk to patients because I am not reimbursed for it.' ''
Dr. Arthur L. Caplan, a professor of medical ethics at Penn, believes this tension may be largely generational in nature. ''Older physicians and medical scientists who came of age before the end of the 1980's tend to be more concerned about the public service mission of academic medical centers than their students, who are very much the product of the concept of medicine as a business,'' Dr. Caplan said.
In the mid-1990's, one popular approach for academic medical centers to cut costs, protect assets and pool resources was the merger. In a few cases, like the marriage of the Peter Bent Brigham and Massachusetts General Hospitals in Boston, and the New York and Presbyterian Hospitals in Manhattan, the strategy appears to have worked. At others, like the failed merger of Stanford University and the University of California at San Francisco hospitals and the troubled relationship between New York University Hospitals Center and the Mount Sinai Hospital, the results have been far from successful.
Dr. William T. Mallon, director of organization and management studies at the Association of American Medical Colleges, compared the merger movement to medical alchemy. ''The movers behind many academic hospital mergers during the 1990's tried to make gold from two separate structures,'' he said, ''without a complete view or understanding of each substance and with too much focus on outcome rather than process.''
Looking to the future, Ralph W. Muller, the chief executive of the University of Pennsylvania Health System, said, ''The real challenge of running an academic medical center will be tempering the business ethos of acting instantly with the professional tendency to make measured judgments.'' He also worries that hospitals that mainly serve the poor and uninsured are more vulnerable than those that mainly serve patients who are insured or can pay for their own medical care. ''If you do good, you get penalized and that has to change,'' Mr. Muller added.
Dr. Robert P. Kelch, chief executive of the University of Michigan Health System, predicts that research-oriented medical centers will need to be run and financed differently from the centers that focus mainly on patient care and the training of doctors and nurses.
''The free market never gets things right,'' Dr. Kelch said. ''In this case, it has led to a more stratified health care system that may lead to a real crisis as the baby boomers age. My hope is that academic medical centers will help Americans come to a national consensus that will not only ensure the highest quality of health care and medical science but also universal access.''
As Dr. Kastor insists, these institutions are hardly endangered. ''If you read the newspapers, you can't imagine how they are going to survive,'' he said, ''and probably some of the weaker ones may close. But these institutions perform extremely important functions for society. You need to look at the functions they fulfill, not just the problems they have.''
COMMENTARY
