The Xerox Corporation's chief executive, Anne M. Mulcahy, is tired of defending Xerox's long-term viability. ''Our market share, our balance sheet, all show a strong company winning against competition, not one that's just coming back from the brink,'' she said.
Now, after four consecutive quarters of rising sales and profits and dropping costs and debt, investors, analysts, even competitors, are finally agreeing it is so.
''Their cost structure is good, their debt-to-capital ratio is down, they've got a plethora of new products -- they've clearly benefited from all their restructuring and operational change,'' said Jay Vleeschhouwer, an analyst at Merrill Lynch who put Xerox on his buy list in November.
Even holdouts are warming up. Ghriskey Capital Partners sold its Xerox stock several years ago, but Timothy M. Ghriskey said he is again considering buying shares. Why? ''They are finally showing momentum on sales,'' he said. Ulysses Yannas, an analyst with Buckman, Buckman &amp; Reid, thinks Xerox shares are overpriced at their current mid-teens level, but he is relenting a bit. ''Last year I said I'd only buy it under $8,'' he said. ''Now, I'd buy it up to $10.''
But all is not up, up and away for Xerox. It may be a vibrant competitor, but it is also up against the strongest competition it has ever faced.
Xerox has gained ground on Canon and Ricoh, but analysts say those two still rule much of the market for document processing equipment. Konica and Minolta, minor players on their own, have merged to form Konica Minolta, a more heavily muscled competitor.
And now Hewlett-Packard, as dominant in printers as Xerox once was in copiers, is using Konica Minolta's copier engines in a new set of multifunction devices -- products that serve as printers and copiers -- that will compete with a lot of Xerox offerings. Many dealers, including the distribution giant Ikon Office Solutions, have agreed to sell the products.
''This industry has changed radically since Xerox dominated it 10 years ago,'' the chairman of Ikon, Matthew J. Espe, said. ''Xerox will always be a player, but it will never again be the sole dominant player.''
The competition promises to get hotter. Hewlett does not yet have a super-high-speed production printer than can compete with Xerox's top-line models, but Konica Minolta is poised to introduce one soon, and most analysts expect that Hewlett will also draw on that technology.
''The deal with Konica gives Hewlett the product portfolio to compete, and the deal with Ikon gives it a channel to the market,'' said Charles M. Corr, group director of the market research firm CAP Ventures.
The whole industry, in fact, is in the throes of change. The days when copiers or printers were stand-alone pieces of equipment are pretty much gone. Today, they are hooked into computers and integrated into companywide information systems.
Xerox remains the market leader in managing document-processing operations for large companies. But more such companies are hiring computer companies like I.B.M. to run their information technology networks, and trusting them to choose document processing equipment. Ikon, which carries a broad line of products, or Hewlett, which makes computers, can more easily tout themselves as able to set up and manage full information structures.
''Sure, we're the new kid on the block in terms of devices,'' said Rob Wait, commercial marketing director for Hewlett's Imaging and Printing Group. ''But printers and scanners, they're just the on and off ramps to the whole information system, and we bring skills to all of it.''
Xerox is up for the fight, though. Its accounting scandals, brush with bankruptcy and sales force turmoil are safely behind it. It earned $360 million on revenues of $15.7 billion in 2003 -- its most profitable year since 1999. The company is stepping up use of independent distributors. And, it has plugged the holes in its product line, introducing 43 new products in the last two years, five of them just last week.
''Xerox's product portfolio and infrastructure is finally deep and wide enough to offer full solutions to customers,'' said Angele Boyd, vice president of the research firm IDC.
Xerox's color printers -- an area that is the company's forte -- already are selling well. That is particularly important in that profits from consumables like inks and paper are five times higher from color printers than from black and white.
Xerox has wooed many commercial printers away from offset printing presses to high-speed Xerox machines. Heidelberg, an offset printing giant, has a joint venture with Eastman Kodak to sell high-speed production printers, but both Heidelberg and Kodak have been distracted by their own financial ills of late.
Xerox's extensive job cuts -- it eliminated 31,500 jobs in the last three years -- are in the past, and Xerox executives say the aura of doom and despair that pervaded its corporate halls has dissipated.
''You can't be in a competitive frame of mind when you're in restructuring mode,'' Xerox's chief financial officer, Larry Zimmerman, said. ''Now we've got cash, we can even make acquisitions if we want to, and there's a renewed feeling of being able to beat anyone.''
Moreover, Xerox is growing deft at using alliances to provide the computer component of its offerings. Electronic Data Systems now specifies Xerox document processing equipment to its information systems management customers, and Dell Computer bundles Xerox machines in with some of its systems offerings.
Investors are looking at Xerox with renewed respect. Its shares, which were mired in single digits for more than two years, rose above $15 last Tuesday, when it reported fourth-quarter earnings of 22 cents a share -- a full 7 cents higher than analysts had predicted. The stock has since slipped a bit, closing yesterday at $14.73, up 9 cents.
Xerox executives acknowledge that the road remains bumpy. ''You don't come through what we've come through and not be cautious about challenges,'' Ms. Mulcahy said. But finally, Mr. Zimmerman said, ''we don't have to focus on survival, but on ways to do things better.''
