At least until the playing started, the recital scheduled for Saturday evening at Carnegie Hall seemed decidedly star-crossed. The performer was to have been the young Russian firebrand Arcadi Volodos. His program -- the explosive Romanticism of Liszt, Rachmaninoff, Saint-Saëns and Scriabin, set against the architectural grandeur of a Schubert Sonata -- was to have played to some of his strengths and tested others. But late last week Mr. Volodos caught the flu and canceled his performance.
Vladimir Feltsman, who was pitched as a firebrand when he immigrated to the United States in 1987 but has recast himself as a deeper musical thinker, took over the concert, offering a very different program: Bach on the first half, Chopin after the intermission. Then, on Friday evening, the hall's executive and artistic director, Robert J. Harth, was found dead in his apartment. That didn't affect the atmosphere at the concert greatly since much of the audience had not heard of his death. But Carnegie Hall's staff seemed dazed, and Mr. Feltsman, after a few curtain calls, ended the performance by describing Mr. Harth as ''a dear friend'' and playing Chopin's wistful Waltz in C sharp minor (Op. 64, No. 2) in his memory.
Bach and Chopin make an odd couple, but by tweaking their compositional approach slightly -- nudging Bach forward and Chopin backward toward a modified Classicism, for example -- a pianist can find links between them. The Brazilian pianists João Carlos Martins and Arthur Moreira Lima took that approach in a 1981 concert by alternating Bach and Chopin preludes as a kind of panhistorical dialogue, and others have pointed up some not entirely obvious connections as well.
To a great degree Mr. Feltsman let the two composers inhabit their own universes, but where it made sense to find their common Classicism he took the opportunity. This was a comparatively easy job in two Bach Partitas, No. 1 in B flat (BWV 825) and No. 2 in C minor (BWV 826). Mr. Feltsman used the piano's dynamic flexibility and crisp articulation to highlight the sleekness of the architectural lines within these collections of dance movements. The best moments were in the exquisite dynamic shaping of the Second Partita's Sinfonia, and in the Gigue of the First Partita, where Bach's chromaticism, pointed up by the piano's timbre, sounds for a moment like a preview of 20th-century thorniness.
Mr. Feltsman's readings of Chopin's Four Ballades were pictures of structural clarity as well, but that precision did not come at a cost in the music's overt emotionalism. It was in Chopin's music that Mr. Feltsman was first heard in this country, by way of a pirated concert recording that was spirited out of the Soviet Union and released on disc. His musical associations have been elsewhere in recent years, but these performances were reminders of his passion for this music. The Ballade No. 3 in A flat (Op. 47), which touched extremes of introspection and turbulence, was probably the best example of his fluidity in this music.
MUSIC REVIEW
