Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said yesterday that he was ''100 percent'' behind his fire commissioner's decision to demote and dismiss a New York City Fire Department captain accused of covering up a New Year's Eve firehouse brawl, and he denounced a union official's comments about the matter as ''scurrilous.''
The tension between the mayor and the fire union stems from an incident in which one firefighter threw a metal chair at another, severely injuring his face and sending him into a coma.
The captain of the Staten Island firehouse where the fight occurred, Terrence M. Sweeney, was forced out because of his response to the incident. Investigators found that, among other things, hospital officials were told that the injured officer, Robert Walsh, had fallen down a flight of stairs, a claim also recorded in a fire station logbook. Further, Fire Department superiors were not immediately notified of the incident, which is a violation of the department's policies.
In response, the fire commissioner, Nicholas Scoppetta, forced Mr. Sweeney to retire this month after 26 years with the department, and to accept demotion to the rank of firefighter, which reduces his pension because it is based on his last three years' pay. In addition, Mr. Sweeney must pay a $90,883 fine, equal to a year's salary. Mr. Sweeney also agreed not to appeal any aspect of the deal and to continue cooperating with investigators. In return, he will avoid a departmental trial.
On Saturday, the president of the Uniformed Fire Officers Association, Peter L. Gorman, accused Mr. Scoppetta of caving in to pressure from City Hall and strong-arming Mr. Sweeney into his deal. The demotion ''amounts to nothing more than a public humiliation, a public flogging,'' Mr. Gorman said.
At a news conference yesterday in Harlem, Mr. Bloomberg denounced the remarks. ''It's a scurrilous charge,'' the mayor said. ''I think labor leaders should worry about making sure they get the best work and the best compensation for their members. Nick Scoppetta is running the Fire Department. I have complete confidence in him.''
Mr. Bloomberg also denied there had been a deal between Mr. Sweeney and the Fire Department that would have given him a fine of only six months' pay, not a year's, and full retirement benefits in exchange for his cooperation.
''Mr. Gorman was erroneously informed,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''There is nobody that has the ability to make a quote, deal, other than the commissioner. The commissioner at his sole discretion decides what is going to be done, and the commissioner made his decision. He talked to a lot of people, including me, but make no mistake about it. The law is clear. This is a decision that the fire commissioner at his sole discretion has to make, and he made it independently.
''Most people I know support him in his decision,'' Mr. Bloomberg went on. ''But regardless, it was his decision, and there was no previous decision whatsoever.''
Yesterday, Steve Carbone, vice president of the officers' union, said, ''Pete Gorman stands 100 percent by his comments at his press conference.'' He added that Mr. Gorman believed that Mr. Scoppetta should resign.
Correction:  February 10, 2004, Tuesday  An article last Tuesday about Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's explanation of the forced retirement and symbolic demotion of a Fire Department captain accused of covering up a firehouse brawl misstated the effect on his pension. It will still be based on his captain's salary, not reduced.
