The police seized more than a dozen computers as well as numerous videotapes, letters, business records and a digital camera during a November search of Michael Jackson's Neverland ranch, according to court documents unsealed Monday.
The computers' hard disks were copied and the machines returned to Mr. Jackson in December, the papers released by the Santa Barbara County Superior Court said.
The Santa Barbara authorities raided Mr. Jackson's ranch on Nov. 18. Two days later, the singer was arrested and booked on multiple counts of child molesting. He pleaded not guilty at his arraignment on Jan. 16 on seven charges of lewd acts with a child under the age of 14 and two counts of administering an intoxicant to a minor to facilitate abuse.
In January, a Santa Barbara Superior Court judge ordered the search warrant and the supporting affidavit to remain sealed because they could reveal the identities of the boy who claims Mr. Jackson molested him and other potential witnesses. The judge also imposed a strict gag order on all the parties in the case.
The judge, Rodney S. Melville, agreed to release a heavily edited version of the search warrant and the inventory of items seized in response to a news media petition. The search warrant lists 12 categories of items that were sought at Neverland, but 11 were whited out. The only category left intact referred to computer equipment and records.
The documents reveal little about the contents of the items seized.
They said investigators had found a laptop in a locked closet in the master bathroom after a locksmith opened the door. They also found a digital camera by the master bathroom sink, the documents said.
It is clear from the papers that agents seized hundreds of items from Neverland and from a storage locker, but virtually all of the descriptions were edited out.
The documents also include the transcript of a discussion involving a prosecutor, a sheriff's deputy and the judge who signed the search warrant. The officials asked for additional authority to search for business records, letters and computers in a storage locker in Los Angeles County, which the judge granted. It was not clear what they took from the locker.
Mark Geragos, one of Mr. Jackson's lawyers, said that he had not seen the edited court papers and that he was barred from commenting on them because of the gag order.
