President Jacques Chirac passionately defended on Monday his former prime minister and longtime political partner, Alain Juppé, convicted last Friday in a corruption scandal dating from the days when the two served together in the City Hall of Paris.
Ignoring the potential political damage to him and his ruling party and immune from prosecution himself, Mr. Chirac paid tribute to his political protégé, telling reporters during a visit to Marseille that his feelings for him were of ''friendship, esteem and respect.''
He added: ''He is a politician of exceptional quality, of competence, of humanism, of honesty. And France needs men of this quality.''
Mr. Chirac's embrace of the man he once called ''the best one among us'' followed a shower of praise from others in his cabinet, from Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin to Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin.
But the powerful Magistrates' Union, whose members include judges and prosecutors, on Monday criticized Mr. Chirac's decision to take sides.
Agnès Herzog, vice president of the Union of Magistrates and a judge from Bobigny, a Paris suburb, said in a telephone interview that Mr. Chirac himself is ''indirectly implicated'' in the case because, as mayor of Paris, he was Mr. Juppé's boss at the time. Rather than signaling independence, she added, ''The comments by the president today on the judicial verdict and by the prime minister the other day are a direct threat to the separation of powers.''
Meanwhile, the French government was struggling to deal with charges that there had been obstruction of justice in the Juppé case.
Judge Catherine Pierce, the head of the three-judge panel that sentenced Mr. Juppé, said over the weekend that her office had been broken into and that she believed her telephones and work computers had been monitored. The left-of-center newspaper Libération said the police were investigating a death threat against her.
''We don't know who was behind all this,'' she said in an interview on Saturday with the newspaper Le Parisien. ''We simply came to the conclusion that a lot of people wanted to know what would be our decision.''
The government has begun three separate investigations into her claims -- one by Parliament, one by the Justice Ministry and one by the president himself. That Mr. Chirac would launch his own investigation was immediately seized on by his critics as lacking independence.
''What better way out of this accusation than to cloak himself in his official role as guarantor of the magistrature's independence?'' Libération said in an editorial on Monday about Mr. Chirac's inquiry.
The mayor of Paris, Bertrand Delanöe, a Socialist, said, ''If the facts are verified, it would be a huge state scandal because it would mean there had been an attempt to lean on the judges.''
Mr. Juppé, 58, is head of Mr. Chirac's Union for a Popular Movement Party, the mayor of Bordeaux and a member of Parliament. He has refused to say whether he will quit public life, as he had pledged to do if he was convicted. He said today that he would announce Tuesday evening on television whether he would leave or stay in political life.
''I have thought a lot,'' Mr. Juppé told about 1,200 supporters on the steps of the Bordeaux City Hall.
Mr. Juppé received an 18-month suspended prison sentence and was barred from political office for 10 years for participating in a party funding scheme to create phony jobs while he served as finance director during Mr. Chirac's 18-year tenure as mayor. But his lawyer vowed to appeal, a process that would allow Mr. Juppé to keep his political jobs until the appeal is over.
Whatever his decision, the party is damaged just seven weeks before important regional elections. If Mr. Juppé stays as party leader, he is open to relentless criticism from his political foes about his integrity and honesty. If he resigns, it leaves the party open to fierce infighting about its leadership and direction.
Mr. Juppé has been Mr. Chirac's chosen successor for president in 2007 should Mr. Chirac himself decide not to run for a third term. His spirited defense of Mr. Juppé underscored extraordinary loyalty, the same loyalty Mr. Juppé showed by never implicating Mr. Chirac in the City Hall scandal.
In 2001, for example, Mr. Chirac fended off charges from judges seeking to question him about hundreds of thousands of dollars in cash allegedly used to pay for travel for himself and his family between 1992 and 1995 during his mayoralty. But Mr. Chirac enjoys immunity from prosecution until he leaves the presidency, a fact that has come under renewed criticism in light of the Juppé verdict.
''There can be no doubt at all that when Jacques Chirac has completed his term in office, at some time or other -- by some manner or another -- he will face judicial proceedings,'' said François Hollande, a Socialist leader.
