Canada's new prime minister, Paul Martin, announced on Monday that he would help the country's financially strained cities to chart a new course by granting up to $5 billion in the next decade for building housing and mass transportation and providing clean water.
The promise represented a potential turning point for Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver and other cities that have been suffering growing homelessness and gang violence as well as deteriorating finances as a result of reductions in federal aid since the mid-1990's.
The government is committed to a new deal for municipalities that ''targets the infrastructure needed to support quality of life and sustainable growth,'' Governor General Adrienne Clarkson told Parliament in a speech written by Mr. Martin's aides as his policy blueprint.
As a down payment for the help, Mr. Martin pledged a full rebate to the cities of the national sales tax for goods and services paid by city residents, amounting to an estimated $400 million annually.
The speech offered few details, but promised that new aid would be focused on better integrating immigrants into urban centers, providing urban Native Canadians with better economic opportunities, tackling homelessness and improving preparedness to respond to emergencies like storms and epidemics.
City services deteriorated over the last decade as the federal government tried to come to grips with a ballooning fiscal deficit, which stood at more than $20 billion in 1994. To reduce that deficit and create surpluses in recent years, the federal government cut aid to cities, forcing them to become increasingly dependent on rising property taxes.
Meanwhile, urban populations are growing, with an influx of immigrants from around the developing world.
Promises of more aid to the cities will help Mr. Martin's Liberals to defend their left flank from challenges by Jack Layton, a former Toronto City Council member who is revitalizing the social democratic New Democratic Party for parliamentary elections expected in the spring. It may also help protect Liberal seats in the House of Commons from Ontario, where the newly united Conservative Party hopes to make gains. Currently, polls indicate that the Liberals are likely to win in a landslide against several opposition parties.
When Mr. Martin replaced Jean Chrétien as prime minister in December, he took over a government with deteriorating finances. The recent rise in the value of the Canadian dollar and outbreaks of mad cow disease and severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, have cut export earnings, economic growth and tax receipts.
Despite the promise of aid to the cities, in the speech read before Parliament, Mr. Martin signaled that he would not depart from the conservative fiscal policy he had pursued in recent years as finance minister, when he reduced the deficit to strengthen the government's finances and cut interest rates to a current overnight rate of 2.5 percent.
''The government of Canada is unalterably committed to fiscal prudence, as evidenced by annual balanced budgets and steady reduction in the debt relative to the size of the economy,'' the speech said. ''The government will not spend itself into deficit.''
