Credit Suisse First Boston has agreed to pay fines of $170,000 and restitution of $606,537 in connection with the way it handled the hectic first-day trading of a hot new offering in 1999, when the bull market was approaching its height.
The total cost of less than $1 million, announced by NASD yesterday, is a small price compared with the penalties of $100 million First Boston paid two years ago in settlements with the Securities and Exchange Commission concerning its charging of high commissions to customers who were allowed to buy shares of hot initial public offerings. In that case, regulators said, the firm effectively forced its customers to share their profits to obtain allocations of shares.
The new settlement highlights another aspect of the trading in hot new issues during the days of the bull market. One way underwriters could increase their profits was to sell shares short at very high prices in the minutes after the shares began trading. Short sellers borrow shares to sell in the hope of buying them back later at a lower price. In this case, First Boston appears to have sold for itself while delaying execution of sale orders sent in by its customers.
The offering in question was Mp3.com, which enjoyed a meteoric first day of trading when it went public on July 21, 1999, but soon fell back. In 2001, the company was acquired by Vivendi Universal in a cash and stock transaction valued at $5 a share, a fraction of the $28 price at which Mp3.com went public.
On that first day, Credit Suisse First Boston as lead underwriter had both large sell and buy orders of Mp3.com to execute, as some investors tried to get in on the hot offering and others tried to take their profits and run.
When trading opened in the stock shortly after noon, First Boston sold for its own account 331,190 shares of Mp3.com at $100.50 each. In doing so, it ignored sell orders it had received from some customers. Their sell orders were filled later in the day, as the price declined, at prices of $64.50 to $95 a share.
''They received market orders,'' said Stephen Luparello, executive vice president for market regulation at NASD. ''Their obligation was to fill them as rapidly as possible. They put themselves in line ahead of their customers.''
As part of the agreement yesterday, in which First Boston agreed to the penalties without admitting or denying wrongdoing, the customers who got lower prices will receive reimbursement for the price difference.
''We are pleased to have this matter behind us,'' Victoria Harmon, a spokeswoman for First Boston, said.
It soon became clear that selling Mp3.com short was a good decision for First Boston. By the end of the first day of trading, the price of Mp3.com was down to $63.31. Within a month, Mp3.com was trading below the $28 offering price.
It is not clear when First Boston covered its short position. But if it closed it out at that day's closing price, its profit on the sale of stock at 12:01 would have exceeded $12 million.
In addition to paying a fine of $150,000 for trading ahead of its customers, First Boston also agreed to pay a fine of $20,000 for not honoring its bid price when other traders tried to sell stock to it during the first minutes of trading in Mp3.com.
