Toni Nhleko has been on South Africa's bench during the African Cup of Nations tournament in Tunisia, but he does not expect to see or feel much pine when he returns to the United States and the Dallas Burn for his first full season in Major League Soccer.
''I feel like I left something undone in Dallas,'' Nhleko (pronounced Klecko) said in a telephone interview from Tunisia, where South Africa is preparing for its final first-round match against Morocco tomorrow. ''Last year was very hard for me because I was lacking fitness.''
Nhleko is a 24-year-old, 6-foot, 180-pound striker who played for Jomo Cosmos in South Africa before spending a season in Norway with S.K. Brann. He played in 11 games (starting nine) last season for the Burn after joining the club in June. He scored only two goals and had four assists as he struggled with his fitness and the summer heat in Texas. After finishing with the worst record (6-19-5) in M.L.S. last season, Dallas fired Mike Jeffries as coach and hired Colin Clarke.
''The new coach called me in November and told me he wants me back,'' said Nhleko, who signed a four-year contract with M.L.S. ''It made me feel good, and I believe that my team has some quality players. Dallas gave me a new contract, and now I want to deliver and I know I can. I have something to prove in Dallas. I believe I can be one of the top scorers in M.L.S. this season. I will be there as soon as the tournament ends for South Africa.''
That could be soon.
Nhleko was a late addition to South Africa's troubled squad for the Cup of Nations tournament. Ephraim Mashaba was dismissed as coach the day before the team was to leave for the tournament and was replaced by April Phumo, who quickly added Nhleko to the squad. South Africa is playing in its fifth straight tournament in a country that is also among the African bidders to play host to the 2010 World Cup.
''I am a player, not a politician,'' said Nhleko, who has seven international caps. ''I was drafted into the team even though the other coaches did not think I was deserving.''
Nhleko did not play in South Africa's two first-round matches (a 2-0 victory over Benin and a 4-0 loss to Nigeria), and probably will not be in the lineup for tomorrow's pivotal game. Bafana Bafana, as the South African team is known, will have to defeat Morocco to have a chance to advance from Group D. Two nations from each four-team group go to the quarterfinals. South Africa won the competition when it played host to the tournament in 1996 and finished second to Egypt in 1998.
In Tunisia yesterday, Mali held Senegal to a 1-1 draw as both nations advanced to the quarterfinals. Senegal will play Tunisia and Mali will face Guinea on Saturday. In today's games, Egypt needs a victory against Cameroon to advance from Group C, and Algeria is expected to beat Zimbabwe. Both Egypt and Cameroon have won the tournament four times since it began in 1957; Cameroon has won the last two.
YANKS ABROAD  Strong Performances in Europe
American soccer players were clearly popular in bargain-hunting European leagues as the winter transfer period ended yesterday.
Brian McBride (Fulham) and Clint Mathis (Hannover 96) each scored a goal in their debuts for their new teams. Goalkeeper Tim Howard (Manchester United) made an incredible diving save of what would have been an equalizing goal against Southampton. And Zach Thornton left Chicago to sign with Benfica in Portugal.
McBride, a late substitute for Fulham, was playing with a United States national team teammate, defender Carlos Bocanegra, and against a national team goalkeeper, Kasey Keller of Tottenham.
''Sure, it's an ideal start,'' McBride told The Associated Press. ''The real ideal part is winning the game, and the goal is an added bonus.''
Mathis joined Steve Cherundolo, another American, in Germany a couple of weeks ago and drew raves for his play in a 3-2 victory over Hamburg as the Bundesliga returned to action after its six-week winter break.
''I think he couldn't ask for a better debut; he showed the things he can do,'' Hannover Coach Ralf Rangnick told The Associated Press. ''With Clint Mathis you could see we have more possibilities.''
COMING HOME -- Defender Cory Gibbs, who has played in Germany since graduating from Brown, is expected to sign with M.L.S. and be assigned to Dallas, the league said. Also, striker Jovan Kirovski, most recently with Birmingham City in England, could return home to play for Los Angeles. Kirovski is a native Californian.
Corner Kicks
FAST AND FASTER -- In Germany, Bayern Munich's Roy Makaay stunned Eintracht Frankfurt 39 seconds into the match, which ended in a 1-1 draw. Bolton's Henrik Pedersen scored a goal 23 seconds into the Wanderers' 2-1 victory over Charlton in the English Premier League.
OLYMPIC QUALIFYING -- After a month of training and 10 days in Guadalajara, Mexico, the United States will play Panama tonight in its first match of the regional Olympic qualifying tournament. The United States will also play Canada (Thursday) and Honduras (Saturday) in first-round matches. Two nations from the eight in Guadalajara will qualify for this summer's Olympics in Athens.
THE FASHION POLICE -- FIFA has barred Cameroon from wearing its new one-piece UniQT uniform, made by Puma, in the African Cup of Nations. The sport's world governing body said last week that its laws required players to wear separate shirts and shorts.
SOCCER REPORT
