President Bush submitted a $2.4 trillion budget on Monday that would substantially increase spending next year for national security and give the administration a claim to reducing the deficit but would also cut or strictly limit money for most domestic programs.
The release of Mr. Bush's budget for the fiscal year starting Oct. 1 amounted to a statement of his election-year priorities, and it underscored the degree to which the administration's policy and political focus are on fighting terrorism and building up the military.
The budget immediately drew fire from Democrats, who said that its deficit reduction claims were illusory and that it would shortchange a broad range of national priorities to pay for the tax cuts Mr. Bush has pushed through Congress over the past three years.
The plan called for an increase in military spending of 7 percent, or $26.5 billion, to $401.7 billion. But that figure did not include money, which the administration said could be as much as $50 billion, for continued military operations next year in Iraq and Afghanistan. The administration said it would specify and seek financing for the expense only after the presidential election. [Page A15.]
For domestic security programs, the White House said it wanted a budget increase of 9.7 percent, or $2.7 billion, to $30.5 billion.
By contrast, the budget proposed that the overall growth in spending on other government operations outside of Social Security and Medicare -- a category that encompasses everything from the national parks to the National Institutes of Health -- be held to one-half of 1 percent, or $2 billion, to $386 billion. Seven of the 16 cabinet-level departments would see their budgets reduced.
Mr. Bush's stringent spending plan would make exceptions for some politically important issues like education, but it would generally require his own party, as the majority in Congress, to cut, freeze or kill many programs in the months leading up to Election Day. It asked Congress to hold spending on new and improved highways to $256 billion over the next six years, $119 billion less than authorized by legislation proposed by Republicans in the House. It called for the elimination of 65 government programs, including grants to companies pursuing new technologies and an initiative to tear down dilapidated public housing, and outright cuts in 63 more.
The budget showed Mr. Bush making good on his pledge to cut the deficit in half within five years from its projected level this year of $521 billion to $364 billion next year and $237 billion in 2009.
But the White House did not provide figures on what would happen to the deficit in the years beyond the next half-decade, when the president's call to make permanent the 10-year tax cuts he pushed through Congress in 2001 and 2003 would show up in the budget. And to show he could meet the deficit reduction target in the next five years, the president left out of his calculations any money for some needs both parties say will have to be met.
Democrats pointed in particular to Mr. Bush's decision to delay requesting additional money to pay for the occupation of Iraq and continued military operations in Afghanistan, saying that was one example of fiscal gimmickry in the budget.
The current well of money being used for military needs in Iraq and Afghanistan -- $62 billion out of the $87 billion supplemental spending bill passed by Congress last fall -- is likely to run dry at some point in the 2005 fiscal year.
Joshua B. Bolten, the director of the White House's Office of Management and Budget, said the United States was currently spending at a rate of less than $50 billion a year on its military forces in Iraq and Afghanistan. He suggested that $50 billion was the upper limit of what the administration would ultimately seek from Congress and said the White House would not make the request until next year, when it would have a clearer idea of the military's needs.
For an election-year budget, Mr. Bush's plan was a bit of an oddity. It included almost no new programs beyond his call for manned exploration of Mars. Other than calling for making the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts permanent, it offered his conservative base no substantial new tax reductions beyond a previously proposed set of tax breaks for a new form of savings and investment accounts. And while his call for additional restraint in some spending categories was welcomed by fiscal conservatives, it was largely offset by new administration figures showing that the Medicare prescription drug benefit will cost far more than Congress had projected.
Speaking to reporters at the White House after meeting with his cabinet Monday morning, Mr. Bush said the budget reflected the progress the country was making in dealing with terrorism, war and recession.
The budget ''sets clear priorities: winning the war on terror, protecting our homeland, making sure our children get educated, making sure the seniors get a modern Medicare system,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And at the same time we're calling upon Congress to be wise with the taxpayers' money.''
Congressional Democrats sharply criticized the plan as a continuation of fiscally irresponsible policies that have led to a swing from huge projected surpluses to big and persistent deficits during Mr. Bush's presidency. They said blame for the deficits rested far more with the tax cuts than on the spending programs he now wants to rein in or cut. And, they said, the Bush tax cuts have failed to live up to their billing of creating millions of new jobs.
The Democratic presidential candidates also attacked the budget, emphasizing a theme that Mr. Bush had rewarded the affluent while shortchanging the programs most needed by the middle class.
''The new Bush budget is more of the same: record deficits, tax cuts for the wealthy and special interests, and cuts in areas that matter to families -- such as health care and education,'' Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts said in a statement. ''This is the same failed Republican prescription that has caused Bush to lose 2.5 million jobs in the last three years.''
Republicans on Capitol Hill said they supported the president's goals, but many of them made it clear that the proposals would be changed, probably substantially, as Congress goes through the process of developing a budget resolution and passing the annual spending bills.
Representative Jim Nussle, the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the House Budget Committee, called the president's budget ''a great starting point from which to begin our work.''
The chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, Representative C. W. Bill Young, Republican of Florida, suggested that it would be possible to meet Mr. Bush's overall spending targets, but not without allocating the money differently from the way the White House would want it allocated, and not without trimming back some of the administration's few spending increases.
''We will be carefully scrutinizing the administration's new initiatives and proposed funding increases to see if we can afford them in a lean budget year,'' Mr. Young said in a statement. ''They will have to be reconciled with proven programs and traditional Congressional priorities.''
Mr. Bolten was asked about the political pressures on the budget this year and the lack of provision in the proposal for other bipartisan goals like dealing with the aspect in the tax code that will subject many more middle-income people to a tax increase because of the alternative minimum tax. ''The numbers are highly realistic,'' he replied.
When Mr. Bush took office, the Congressional Budget Office was forecasting $5.6 trillion in budget surpluses over the next decade.
The $521 billion deficit Mr. Bush is forecasting for the current fiscal year would be a record in dollar terms, though not in comparison to the size of the economy. Mr. Bush regularly blames the terrorist attacks, war and recession for the swing in the nation's fiscal fortunes. Democrats have made a case that the tax cuts are the main culprit.
Mr. Bush's budget projects deficits only up through 2009, with most of the improvement coming between this year and 2006, when the deficit would drop to $268 billion. But if Mr. Bush's tax cuts were made permanent, the budget would come under new stresses early in the next decade.
The Democratic staff of the House Budget Committee said making the Bush tax cuts permanent would reduce federal revenues by more than $200 billion in 2011 and by more than $300 billion in 2012, with the price tag rising each year thereafter.
THE PRESIDENT'S BUDGET PROPOSAL: THE OVERVIEW  Correction:  February 4, 2004, Wednesday  Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about domestic spending in President Bush's 2005 budget referred incorrectly to the status of 38 programs administered by the Department of Education. The administration has recommended eliminating them, not shrinking their budgets.
