Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz, on a mission to highlight successes in Iraq, heard firsthand of the ethnic and religious tensions that are vastly complicating American efforts for an orderly turnover of sovereignty to a new government by July 1.
At a session with Kirkuk's town council, Mr. Wolfowitz sat through heartfelt complaints and long lectures from people who contend that Arabs here are mistreated by Kurds; that Shiite Muslims, the long disenfranchised majority group, will settle for nothing less than direct elections; and that local militias with no allegiance to the central government are frightening people.
Undeterred, Mr. Wolfowitz, the intellectual architect of the Bush administration's policy on Iraq, said that ''all Iraq was the victim'' of Saddam Hussein and that all Iraqis had an equal stake in cooperating to build a new and democratic country.
Maj. Gen. Raymond T. Odierno, commander of the Fourth Infantry Division, which is responsible for northern Iraq, addressed the objections of some groups, especially the Shiites, to a caucus system planned by the United States to select the initial new Iraqi government. He pointed out that those very town council members were selected by a caucus managed by his troops, rather than by direct election.
''As an interim government, it has worked extremely well,'' General Odierno said.
A member of the town council who identified himself as an Arab and a Sunni Muslim, Ghassan al-Assi, said Kurdish political groups that predominate in parts of northern Iraq are ''enforcing their ideas'' and had ''voided'' Arab news organizations and economic opportunity in the region.
Ismail Oboutti, Kirkuk's director of employment, who identified himself as an Arab and Shiite Muslim, said, ''Everyone on the street wants direct elections.''
On the delicate topic of scheduling elections, Mr. Wolfowitz vowed ''maximum participation'' but said elections themselves would not settle the concerns expressed here.
Earlier on Monday, he went on patrol in Mosul with troops driving the Army's newest fighting vehicle, called Stryker, a lightly armored, wheeled infantry transport. One Stryker received the ultimate test even as Mr. Wolfowitz was touring Mosul, when it was struck by a rocket-propelled grenade on the other side of the city in an ambush that senior officers said appeared to have nothing to do with his visit. Brig. Gen. Carter Ham, the new commander of occupation forces in northern Iraq, said armor on the vehicle had forced the grenade to detonate 18 inches away from the Stryker's skin, diffusing the blast. None of the troops inside the vehicle were hurt, he said.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: VISIT TO KIRKUK
