''What I do ain't exactly comedy, so if you laugh, you're as twisted as me,'' Stew rhymed to introduce ''Stew's Travelogue of Demonically Energized Souls,'' his performance at the Thalia at Symphony Space on Friday night.
Stew appeared as part of the theater's American Comic Vision series, but he is a songwriter, not a comedian. His travelogue reshuffled his songs into an itinerary, starting in his hometown, Los Angeles, and heading to Aspen, Kansas City, New York and Berlin before circling back to California. Along the way he sang about heroin addicts, artists, poseurs and polymorphous lovers, tracing a bohemian picaresque with a clear but forgiving eye. His final destination was ''L.A. Arteest Cafe,'' a place he described as an ''unemployment line with espresso.''
Stew, who is African-American, leads a rock band called the Negro Problem, but on his own he's closer to cabaret. Backed by Charlie Zyleskie on piano, Marty Beller on drums and Heidi Rodewald on bass and backup vocals, and sometimes fingerpicking an acoustic guitar, Stew set his tales to ballads, bossa novas and hints of Tin Pan Alley and Kurt Weill. Most of the time he sang straightforward stories about twisted lives: a couple trying kinky sex in a parent's home, a slumming heiress with ''the scar and the switchblade mind,'' or ''The Naked Dutch Painter'' who has an ambivalent fling with the narrator. The character in ''Re-Hab'' goes back to drug rehabilitation two dozen times and never kicks her habit, as the song moves from gentle mockery of therapeutic clichés to desperate moments and an unexpected resolution.
Stew is not a detached observer. His characters' lives get tangled with his, making for uneasy laughs and shifting sympathies. He understands the attraction of drugs and alcohol: ''These magic liquids change the way you think,'' he sang in ''Kingdom of Drink.'' He also touches on the odd behavior induced by racism: evasions, reflexive stereotyping, overcompensation.
Onstage Stew was as much an actor as a singer. His voice is genial and adequate, but he had the rubber-faced presence to make each song vivid. He set up songs with droll introductions and turned himself into a secular preacher, a befuddled tripping teenager and a frustrated gay Ken doll who would prefer G.I. Joe to Barbie. Without cynicism or naïve optimism, he understands human weaknesses and all the fascinating trouble they can cause.
POP REVIEW
