Despite all the star vocalists gathered at Carnegie Hall on Sunday for Marilyn Horne's 70th birthday celebration, the concert opened on a somber note as Ms. Horne acknowledged the death of Carnegie's executive and artistic director, Robert Harth, 47, just two days earlier.
Ms. Horne briefly praised his leadership from the stage before adding that Mr. Harth would have wanted the show to go on, and so it did. The mood quickly lightened as prominent singers began appearing one by one to perform two songs each and to help Ms. Horne raise money for her foundation, which supports vocal recitals and educational programs.
The array of singers present was impressive: Stephanie Blythe, Olga Borodina, Barbara Cook, David Daniels, Denyce Graves, Ben Heppner, Audra McDonald, Thomas Quasthoff and Frederica von Stade, among others. They were a testament to Ms. Horne's status as a venerated figure in the opera world she helped define for over four decades. The parade of brief performances left little time to appreciate the offerings of any particular vocalist, but there were still notable moments.
Ms. Graves was in fine form for the song ''Jota'' by Falla, and Mr. Quasthoff combined depth of tone, precise diction and effortless musicality in two contrasting Schubert lieder. Ms. Borodina lent her dark powerful mezzo to songs by Tchaikovsky and Rachmaninoff, and Ms. Blythe gave an impressively supple and well-supported performance of two selections from Elgar's ''Sea Pictures.''
The young Canadian-Armenian Isabel Bayrakdarian, who was a fresh face among these veterans, showed an alluring and silken soprano in works by Fernando J. Obradors and Léo Delibes, though the castanets with which she tried to liven things up never quite synched with the playing of her pianist, Martin Katz. Mr. Katz also accompanied Ms. von Stade, who almost stole the show with a wonderfully theatrical rendition of ''Je cherche un millionaire'' by Nacio Herb Brown.
The other pianists were Warren Jones, Marvin Hamlisch and Lang Lang, who accompanied Bejun Mehta in the premiere of an attractive newly commissioned song by Tobias Picker.
After intermission came Broadway-style contributions from Ms. McDonald and Brian Stokes Mitchell as well as tribute films and a steady stream of hagiographic praise from the performers who had gathered. The admiration marathon stretched over three hours, testing the endurance of this listener but seemingly delighting Ms. Horne's fans. It came as a relief when Ms. Horne undercut some of the reverence by telling the story of how she and Ms. Cook first met to their mutual embarrassment at an Overeaters Anonymous meeting at Lenox Hill Hospital.
The legendary divas then sang two duos, including the highlight of the afternoon: ''The Grass Is Always Greener'' from Kander and Ebb's ''Woman of the Year.'' Ms. Horne joked about having lost her once brilliant technique, but her tone, as much as one could discern through the amplification, still sounded steady and pure. More to the point, she has clearly lost none of her enthusiasm for the art of the song, and the fans present were responding to that passion as much as to the history behind it.
MUSIC REVIEW  Correction:  February 4, 2004, Wednesday  A review yesterday about a concert at Carnegie Hall in honor of Marilyn Horne's 70th birthday misidentified a song peformed by Denyce Graves. ''Au pays où se fait la guerre'' by Henri Duparc replaced ''Jota'' by Manuel de Falla on the program.
