More than 600 students were evacuated yesterday from a Harlem school building after a fire broke out in a coat closet, leaving a classroom ruined and jackets destroyed, but injuring no one.
Fire officials said they were still investigating the cause of the fire, which started around 10:45 a.m. in a third-floor social studies classroom and was brought under control within a half-hour. For once, tardiness may have paid off for David de los Santes, 12, who proudly displayed his unscathed down parka as he stood in front of Intermediate School 275. ''The others are wearing Red Cross blankets,'' David said with a grin. ''I was late heading to that class, but look at me now.''
The building, at 175 West 134th Street, houses two schools -- I.S. 275 and Public School 175 -- with a total enrollment of more than 600 students. They were evacuated to Public Schools 92 and 197, and to St. Philip's Church, all within a block.
Tatiana Sampson, parent coordinator for P.S. 175, said that for the most part the evacuation went smoothly. When the alarm sounded, those students closest to a front exit were marched to P.S. 92, while anyone near the back exits was ushered to P.S. 197. The only glitch, she said, was an overflow of students at P.S. 92, who were taken next door to St. Philip's.
Paul Rose, a spokesman for the Department of Education, said that classes at the school would return to normal today.
''You look at these kids and you would think nothing happened here today,'' said Salle Yunusi, a third-grade teacher who was standing in front of the school building yesterday afternoon, watching students engaged in an intense snowball fight. Fire officials also kept their heads down as they walked in front of the building, shielding themselves using the sheets of wood meant for boarding up the damaged classroom.
Ms. Yunusi said that she was proud of her students' behavior throughout what could have been a chaotic event. ''Still, emotions did run high,'' she said, explaining that no sooner had she let out a sigh of relief, having safely escorted all her students down the block, then a wave of tears swept across the class. ''You've never heard noise until you've heard third graders cry like that,'' she said.
