A few years ago, I was on an Iranian Air flight from Isfahan, Iran, to Dubai in the United Arab Emirates. The man sitting next to me had a straggly beard and wore tribal attire -- flowing gray robes, a thin wool turban and sandals.
At one point he took his cloth bundle down from the overhead rack, unfolded it, removed a nine-inch brazier and made preparations to brew tea on it.
A flight attendant rushed up and calmly told him that he couldn't brew tea in the aisle of a plane. As the man was discussing the situation with his friends, who were going with him on the hajj, the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, she brought them tea in plastic cups.
They were from the same country, but what a culture clash! She was wearing Chanel perfume and dressed impeccably.
I could tell by the way he handled his cup, fooled with the seat adjustment and peered into the pocket of the seatback in front of him that he had never been on a plane before.
I found myself next to the same man at the baggage carousel when we landed. His baggage turned out to be a cardboard box tied with a rope. He had also checked a dead goat, neither wrapped nor skinned, which bumped around on the baggage carousel next to my Samsonite.
Years ago I worked for a Scottish firm that provides services to the oil and gas industry.
On one of my trips, I flew to Tromso, Norway, in the dead of winter to look at a ship for servicing an offshore oil rig. The runway was a sheet of ice; I couldn't even see the tarmac through it. The plane was the kind that had its own steps.
I had been all over the country, which was very scenic, but I wasn't prepared for the airport taxi that would take me to my hotel: a horse-drawn sleigh.
In the 1970's I had the impression that the pilots with the now-defunct Eastern Airlines had all just gotten out of the Navy. You could be on a 727 with a flight plan directing the pilot to take a 45-degree right turn after takeoff. You'd be expecting a gentle curve, and all of a sudden the plane would veer to the right with no warning.
Once we were flying happily along over Texas when a passenger fell ill. I think he was having a heart attack. The pilot asked if a doctor was aboard, and then the control tower must have told him to land as quickly as possible.
I know the pilot was ex-Navy because the plane suddenly nose-dived. The compartments holding the oxygen masks fell open, and the masks dropped out. That's the first time that happened to me.
The plane filled with fog for a couple of minutes as we dropped from cruising altitude. I should ask one of our meteorologists to explain that phenomenon.
I carry a black canvas briefcase that has the Weather Channel logo embroidered on it. It's astounding how many people stop me to talk when they notice it.
I can practically script what they say. Everyone has a universal response, irrespective of age, gender or anything else. First is the ''wow'' factor. Then they say that their uncle, brother, sister, mother, cousin, or perhaps girlfriend, is a fanatic and watches the channel for hours and hours.
Finally, they ask if the company gives tours. (We do not -- we're not set up for it.) And they're always so polite.
I've only had one guy who had a go at me. He said he switched from cable to satellite and could no longer get the local weather.
I told him that we're working on that.
Frequent Flier
