Carolina sculptured its season around these types of games: close, tough, stomach-churning games. At one point in many of them, the Panthers would look outclassed, as if they would finally be exposed as pretenders, before bouncing back to rewrite that impression.
Nine times this season, the Panthers won games in the final two minutes. But their gutsiest game of all, against New England in the Super Bowl on Sunday, was derailed by an atypical series of events.
The Panthers made it a game by chucking their ball-control plan and turning quarterback Jake Delhomme loose. But their normally fierce defense was overrun on two huge fourth-quarter drives by the Patriots.
And while the coaching of John Fox had been the bedrock of the Panthers, he made the debatable decision to go for a 2-point conversion early in their comeback. Then he looked cursed by the same ghosts that took down his former Giants boss, Jim Fassel, when the special teams crumbled under a flurry of penalties and a kickoff that rolled out of bounds.
When the game had taken its final wild swing, and New England's Adam Vinatieri had won it with four seconds left, 32-29, the Panthers could hardly digest what had happened.
''It was quiet,'' receiver Muhsin Muhammad said of the locker room after the game. ''I think a lot of guys understand where we were. It's a hurtful feeling, but I think we can take something positive away from this.''
That was the main theme circulating among the Panthers, who felt they proved that being here was not a fluke and that they would return to this level. But the trend of the N.F.L. could work against them. Neither of last year's Super Bowl combatants, Tampa Bay and Oakland, could avoid the tug of parity, and neither team made the playoffs. The Patriots won the Super Bowl in 2002 but did not make the playoffs last year.
''I'm not big on predictions,'' Fox said. ''I like our football team. We have some youth. And we have a good core of players.''
Aside from losing, the Panthers can draw a parallel between themselves and the Patriots of two years ago. Both won even quicker than they expected. Two seasons ago, the Panthers were 1-15. When Fox was hired after that season, even his most optimistic projections did not include a Super Bowl appearance in two seasons' time.
But Fox also hit a bump in this game. The offense, orchestrated by the coordinator Dan Henning, made good adjustments to start moving the ball after a tough start, but the defense -- Fox's specialty -- went in the other direction.
Granted, the offense's early struggles meant the defense spent huge chunks of time on the field, and fatigue was the natural byproduct. Still, the Patriots' two fourth-quarter drives showed how much the Panthers' defense relies on its pass rush. It could not get enough pressure on Tom Brady, and Brady found every weakness in the secondary.
But Fox had even bigger questions to answer about the 2-point conversions.
He decided to go for the first one when the Panthers scored a touchdown with 12 minutes 39 seconds left to cut the Patriots' lead to 21-16. Two points would have cut Carolina's deficit to a field goal, but with that much time left, too many variables remained.
Fox did not explain his choice after the game, saying simply that he never considered going for 1 point instead of 2.
Because the Panthers missed it, they were forced to try again after they scored again to take a 22-21 lead with 6:53 left. They failed again. The Patriots then scored and made a 2-point conversion with 2:51 left to make it 29-22, so Carolina's last touchdown and 1-point conversion tied it. But had the Panthers kicked for extra points instead of going for 2-point conversions, the Patriots probably would not have gone for 2, and would have instead been driving for a game-tying field goal at the end, not a game-winning one.
Whatever questions lingered afterward, none of them involved the quality of the quarterback the Panthers unearthed this season. Delhomme, a bargain free-agent pickup, was the main force behind the comeback. He passed for 323 yards and 3 touchdowns, and he set a Super Bowl record with his 85-yard scoring throw to Muhammad.
''He never ceases to amaze me as far as being on a big stage and coming through with some big plays,'' Fox said. ''He's just going to get better and better. He has a bright, bright future in this league.''
In the N.F.L., though, the future is rarely as clear as it seems.
PRO FOOTBALL
