Work stoppages at a large Canadian nickel producer and at a copper mine in Chile helped push prices of several important industrial metals higher on Monday, intensifying a recent upward spiral in raw material costs that could lead to higher prices for finished goods like automotive parts and domestic appliances.
The Canadian nickel producer Falconbridge said that it had shut its nickel mines and most of its smelting operations in Sudbury, Ontario, after reaching an impasse in talks on a new labor contract. The Sudbury operations account for about 5 percent of the world's output of nickel, used chiefly to make stainless steel.
In Chile, workers at the Cerro Colorado copper mine, owned by BHP Billiton of Australia, went on strike Friday after rejecting a wage offer. The mine accounts for slightly less than 1 percent of the world's production of copper, which has a variety of uses in electric cables and motors, pipes and plumbing, construction, industrial equipment and other applications.
On Monday, copper prices for March delivery reached their highest level since mid-1997, exceeding $1.15 a pound in early trading on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange, before closing at $1.14. The price has climbed more than 15 percent since mid-December.
The three-month contract for nickel, which is priced by the metric ton (about 2,205 pounds), closed at $14,900 on the London Metal Exchange, after earlier breaking through $16,000.
Nickel reached a 15-year peak of $17,100 a metric ton in early January, with the price having more than doubled last year.
Lead and zinc prices also rose on Monday, adding to recent increases.
Patricia Mohr, a commodities market specialist at the Bank of Nova Scotia in Toronto, said that so far many manufacturers have been able to absorb rising raw material prices by improving productivity. But the potential for doing so may soon be exhausted, Ms. Mohr said, meaning that ''the higher prices are going to have to be passed along into finished goods prices.''
Steel prices have already risen significantly. Citing rising raw material and transportation costs, Arcelor, the world's biggest steel maker, said on Monday that it would raise prices for flat-rolled steel by at least 8 percent in the second quarter. Arcelor is based in Luxembourg.
Markus A. Moll, senior analyst at SMR Steel and Metals, a research group based near Innsbruck, Austria, said that the jump in nickel prices was encouraging many makers of stainless-steel, especially in Asia, to reduce their reliance on nickel in favor of alternatives like chromium and manganese that are now cheaper to use.
The recent rally in metal prices is partly tied to surging consumption in China, and to concerns that supplies from existing mines will not be able to keep pace with growing demand. Because the prices of internationally traded metals are almost always set in American dollars, the weakening of the dollar against other currencies has also contributed to rising metal prices.
Stephen Briggs, a commodities economist at Société Générale in London, wrote in a report last week that he expected sizable shortfalls in both nickel and copper output this year, compared with projected demand. Regarding nickel, Mr. Briggs said that ''the bull market is probably not over, and prices could easily rocket back up to new highs.''
But Mr. Moll takes a different view. He said that much of the recent run-up in nickel prices could be attributed to speculative purchases by hedge funds and other short-term investors.
As industrial users of nickel switch to substitutes and a growing amount of stainless steel scrap becomes available as a raw material, Mr. Moll said, ''suddenly, the nickel producers will see as early as next year that, whoops, our market is not growing anymore.''
