Children are fail-safe theatrical tools when it comes to exposing adult folly. Whether it's a bad marriage or corrupt politics, there is nothing a child cannot wonder at or question. And few things have more drama than the pull between innocence and experience.
Childish innocence has its dangers for a playwright, though. The balance between instinct and knowledge is hard to maintain. The audience doesn't want to feel the child is just the author's beguiling little stand-in.
When writers overidentify with their child characters, both innocence and experience get cloying. Dramatically, the adults are oversimplified, too. After all, there's a lot children can't see or choose not to.
Three much-praised works that filter politics through a child's consciousness got me thinking about this. They are Tony Kushner's ''Caroline, or Change,'' which is to move to Broadway in March; Wallace Shawn's ''Aunt Dan and Lemon,'' which has been revived Off Broadway; and Dan Hurlin's ''Hiroshima Maiden,'' which just ended a run at St. Ann's Warehouse in Brooklyn.
Mr. Shawn and Mr. Kushner are experienced, charismatic writers. Few American playwrights, at least those being produced regularly, take on a world beyond the home or the office. They do.
When ''Aunt Dan and Lemon'' opened in 1985, it dealt a double shock. There was Aunt Dan, the brilliant American and Oxford don, holding forth ecstatically on the genius and allure of Henry A. Kissinger. That still works. With her short skirts, long hair and cocky glibness, Kristen Johnston is right out of the Ann Coulter school of killer-babe punditry.
Aunt Dan cuddles on the bed with young Lemon, confiding the fine points of right-wing philosophy and the details of swinging sex parties. Lemon, who has withdrawn from her parents and pretty much stopped eating, listens rapturously. The grown-up Lemon, ill and confined to her apartment, talks directly to the audience. She likes to read books about the Nazis, she says. The real shock comes -- or should come -- when she explains calmly that whatever we might think of the Nazis, if we (as a society) felt threatened by some group, we would probably do what the Nazis did. People like her make it possible for us to indulge our easy humanism. She has never felt compassion for one human being, she declares.
It is ugly; how could it not be? But Lemon has been set up as such a special case: the ill child with unhappy ineffectual parents; the child who lives vicariously through adults and has memories, not feelings; the child who is angry and isolated. (Lili Taylor's portrayal works so well because she shows just how ruthless a wounded child can be.)
This is Mr. Shawn's shadow play. It's not that his political intentions aren't real; he wanted to shock us into thinking more deeply. The child's consciousness runs away with the play though. We can psychoanalyze her and reiterate our loathing of her ideas, and then we are off the hook.
Noah Gellman, the 8-year-old at the center of the musical ''Caroline, or Change,'' is unhappy but not fatally damaged. His mother has died, and his father has remarried. He is dependent on the kindness -- at least the tolerance -- of Caroline, the family's maid. But despite a certain kind of intimacy, Caroline is a stranger in the Gellman house. And she has four children of her own to worry about.
It is 1963 in Louisiana. The larger world presses in on both families; the civil rights movement, the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, the war in Vietnam. Money, too, of course, for when Noah's stepmother orders Caroline to take the pocket change he handles so carelessly, the stress becomes critical.
Mr. Kushner uses the two families to illustrate political dilemmas and crises. His tone is consistent, down to the touches of fantasy. After all, the washer and dryer that talk to (and for) Caroline as she works are tools of labor, and the radio is her only instrument of leisure.
''Caroline'' has ambition, good intentions and stagecraft. But it is not a great leap forward in musical or political theater. Jeanine Tesori's score is all pastiche; the music comes at us as a series of quotations. The big political issues come the same way: a few lines about the president being shot, a reference to Vietnam, an invocation of old socialist principles.
None of the adult characters are fully realized, for one thing. They are types: shallow dramatic types. The actors who play Caroline's children and Noah's parents and grandparents work hard for more specificity. They are working against what they have been given. Caroline is a lead role, so Tonya Pinkins has an advantage. She is a strong performer, too.
But Caroline is a descendant, and not a very distinguished one, of the women Ethel Waters played in the 1940's and 50's, most memorably Bernice in Carson McCullers's ''Member of the Wedding.''
In crucial ways McCullers did it better. She gave Bernice a fuller, richer self. I believe Caroline's angry stoicism and pride. What I can't believe is her lack of a real inner life. The lack is brought home by the care Mr. Kushner lavishes on little Noah. His thoughts always reveal another dimension of his character. Caroline's never do. Whether she is talking to herself or others, nothing really changes. What matters most at the end is her relationship to the growing, changing Noah. Only a child can be so single-minded and self-absorbed.
An amazingly self-centered child usurps ''Hiroshima Maiden.'' Ostensibly it tells the story, a true one with a few embellishments, of how, 10 years after the bombing of Hiroshima, a maimed Japanese woman came to the United States for reconstructive surgery and found herself on the television show ''This Is Your Life'' being introduced to the co-pilot of the airplane that dropped the bomb.
Japanese Bunraku puppet theater techniques are used to narrate these events. Juxtaposed with them are the dreamy recollections of a young American boy. They are meant to show the dangerous naïveté -- about power, morality and history -- that characterized the United States in those years. As written, they are nothing but sweet memory miniatures showing how sensitive the boy was.
Mr. Hurlin is a sophisticated visual artist. But he writes generic performance-art prose, flat third-person recitative that puts physical details and deadpan ironies above all else. I don't say this to put down performance art. Every genre has its bottom-line clichés. But more performance artists need to start working with experienced writers. Some stories need all the resources language has to offer. The story of ''Hiroshima Maiden'' was enacted by puppets, and though Robert Een's score was moving, I found the absence of language disturbing. It was as if an experience we still know little about had been denied speech. Pictures do not tell everything.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK  Correction:  February 6, 2004, Friday  A picture caption on Tuesday with a Critic's Notebook article about three plays in which children are characters misidentified an actor and his role in ''Caroline, or Change.'' The man at the right was Larry Keith, not David Costabile; he plays Mr. Stopnick, not a member of the Gellman family.
Correction:  February 21, 2004, Saturday  A Critic's Notebook article on Feb. 3 about three plays in which characters are children misspelled the name of a character in ''The Member of the Wedding,'' who was cited as a theatrical ancestor of the title role in ''Caroline, or Change.'' She is Berenice, not Bernice.
