Over a decade, Alexander Salvagno and his father, Raul, operated one of the state's largest asbestos removal firms, working on 2,000 projects from Buffalo to Long Island, often with a specific lab that vouched for their results.
Now, federal prosecutors say their work was the heart of a conspiracy in which they ordered crews to crudely rip asbestos from walls while the lab faked air tests, putting potentially thousands of people at risk of disease and death.
In what prosecutors say is the largest federal prosecution of its kind, the Salvagnos are charged with racketeering -- including running a criminal enterprise -- and conspiracy to violate the federal Clean Air Act and the Toxic Substances Control Act. An indictment alleges that the Salvagnos, who owned AAR Contractors of Latham, N.Y., in Albany County, did not bother with even minimal precautions that would keep toxic asbestos fibers out of the air.
The indictment charges that Alexander Salvagno was the secret and illegal owner of the lab it often worked with, and that it faked tens of thousands of air samples and test results. The buildings included elementary schools and private homes. Large manufacturers, a hospital, bank, convent and even the New York State Department of Labor Building -- which houses the Office of Asbestos Control -- are among the 39 buildings specified in the indictment.
According to testimony by former employees and investigators in the trial, which began in November, as many as 1,555 buildings from that 10-year period are suspect, because the asbestos removal firm and the laboratory collaborated. The Salvagnos, who could face lengthy prison terms, earned millions in the scheme, according to the court documents.
''To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest, most significant asbestos prosecution in U.S. history,'' Jane M. Kenny, an administrator for the federal Environmental Protection Agency regional office that covers New York, wrote in an e-mail message.
Since the trial began, numerous former employees have testified against the Salvagnos, some as part of their own plea agreements. During their testimony they said Raul Salvagno, 71, often supervised the site, demanding that employees work at a breakneck pace only possible when safeguards were not taken.
Workers -- Raul Salvagno included -- regularly did not wet the asbestos to prevent asbestos dust from becoming airborne, according to testimony from several former employees. Nor did workers regularly wear respirators or personal asbestos-detection devices, or fully encase their projects in plastic, according to testimony. Because of this, the company's greatest expense -- labor -- could be drastically reduced.
Often work was done behind barricaded doors or on weekends and other off-hours, according to testimony. ''No clients knew what we were up to,'' Philippe Goyeau, a former project manager of the air-monitoring laboratory, Analytical Laboratories, testified in December. Mr. Goyeau pleaded guilty to conspiracy to violate the Clean Air Act. ''I mean, working with Raul was dangerous.'' Workers who agreed to do weekend or after-hour jobs were paid with checks made out to Home Depot, according to the testimony of Gary A. Alvord Jr., a former employee and friend of the younger Salvagno, 37, since the sixth grade. The workers would buy tools, give the receipts to the company for a tax write-off, and then return the goods for cash, testified Mr. Alvord, who pleaded guilty to four felonies.
When the asbestos-removal company thought it might be in danger of being caught, it would perform a job legally, several workers testified. The prosecutor, Craig A. Benedict, an assistant United States attorney, asked a former worker how many of the jobs he worked on were done correctly. The former worker, Anthony Mongato, replied, ''Less than 1 percent.''
Mr. Mongato also testified that on some projects, asbestos dust would be so thick in the air, ''it was snowing.''
To fake air-quality results, laboratory workers would sometimes drive down Interstate 890 near Schenectady holding an air monitor out the window, according to the testimony of Mr. Alvord. For other projects, such as at a state trooper barracks, no air samples were taken, and the results were made up, he testified. At Siena College in Loudonville, workers removed some asbestos, then painted over the rest, he testified.
At one point, an independent project monitor at the Ford Motor plant at Green Island, near Troy, became suspicious when he found doors to the work area locked. ''Finally when he entered the premises, he found AAR workers ripping asbestos down and there was a huge mess inside the plant,'' testified Mr. Goyeau, who said he resigned after AAR and Analytical pretended to fire their site supervisors to appease Ford. ''I was at the end of my rope,'' he said.
The Environmental Protection Agency began an investigation in 1999, after someone complained that Analytical Laboratories was providing false asbestos training certificates, according to testimony of Justus Derx, a special agent for the E.P.A. By then, the companies had been operating together for nearly 10 years, according to testimony.
When company officials began to suspect that they were the target of an investigation, they ordered the bookkeeper for Analytical, Katherine Phelan, to destroy records, Ms. Phelan testified. When she refused, she said, Alexander Salvagno came to see her and took her for a ride. He drove around the block to a gas station, she said. ''He told me it was very important for me to deny everything,'' she testified. ''I just took the courage and I just said, Alex, I'm not going to lie; if questioned, I'm not going to lie.''
Ms. Phelan, who was not charged, said, ''He was visibly angry.'' Other workers destroyed records, she and others testified. Ms. Phelan had some copies of records at her home, which she turned over to investigators.
In opening arguments, David Bernfeld, a Manhattan lawyer who is representing Alexander Salvagno, told the jurors that the prosecution's witnesses would lie, and that the Salvagnos did not know their workers were cutting corners and should not be punished.
''It's as if you told your children to clean their room and they tossed their socks under the bed,'' he said in his opening statement. ''Then someone looked under the bed, found the socks and the government hauled you into court and charged you with being a bad parent.''
Mr. Bernfeld and the Salvagnos said they could not comment while the case is in court.
Emil Rossi, a Syracuse lawyer who is representing Raul Salvagno, also declined to comment.
The Salvagnos are free during the trial and stay in an apartment around the corner from the federal courthouse.
Despite the breadth of the case, the courtroom is mostly empty of observers. News coverage is sporadic. ''This is not something that's very actively being discussed,'' said Steve Karon, the executive director of the Milton J. Rubenstein Museum of Science and Technology in Syracuse. It wasn't until Mr. Karon read an article, he said, that he realized AAR's work at the museum might be a problem. He said that he had called EPA inspectors, who found asbestos still in the basement some nine years after AAR had been paid $36,000 to clean it up.
Mr. Karon is now tracking down 11 maintenance workers from years past to tell them they have been exposed. Fortunately, he said, the asbestos was on pipes very high up, and he believed the workers wouldn't be at much risk.
Dr. Jerold Abraham, a professor of pathology at Upstate Medical University in Syracuse who has been following the case, said asbestos-related illnesses are rare, but the risk increases with exposure. Breathing asbestos fibers can lead to lung scarring, and a cancer in the lining of the chest wall which appears decades later.
The cancer is particularly lethal because its location makes it hard to detect and treat. ''The worst risk is for the people doing the cleanup without proper equipment,'' Dr. Abraham said. Because asbestos is so light, it can stay in the air long after it is released, then be carried home on clothing, leading to secondary exposure. Even minimal exposure increases the risk for illness, he said.
