Kris Kim, my daughter-in-law, was working hard and seven months pregnant with twins when a routine checkup showed that her cervix was stretched nearly to its maximum and that her uterus was contracting at frequent intervals.
The diagnosis was premature labor.
The treatment was complete bed rest in the hospital, plus a host of drugs to try to halt the contractions and, at the same time, stimulate maturation of the babies' lungs in case they arrived 10 weeks early.
Complete bed rest meant just that. No bathroom privileges, no sitting, standing or even raising her head for a week. Week 2, she was allowed to sit inclined for part of the day and work on her laptop computer. The third week she could use a commode instead of a bedpan, and finally, the fourth week she was granted five minutes a day to shower.
At 34 weeks of gestation, the critical point for fetal lung development, Kris was sent home for more bed rest. Then, as fate would have it, after all that, Kris's labor had to be induced at 38 weeks. Her reward was two healthy 7-pound boys.
At least one pregnant woman in five is assigned to a week of bed rest or more in an effort to avoid complications and preterm births. The cost -- which may include lost wages, hospitalization, home health aides, child care and transportation -- can be extraordinary. The emotional and social costs are inestimable.
Yet, for all the trauma it can cause, bed rest has never been shown in good clinical studies to achieve its desired goals.
''Some benefits may be there, but they haven't been documented,'' said Dr. Judith A. Maloni of the Bolton School of Nursing at Case Western Reserve University, who just completed a $1.7 million study of bed rest supported by the National Institutes of Health. In fact, as Dr. Maloni's study showed, there is good evidence that bed rest in pregnancy can cause harm, resulting in more than a dozen consequences, including babies who are smaller than normal and mothers who are too weak and tired to care for them.
Dr. Robert L. Goldenberg, an expert in maternal-fetal medicine at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, said in an interview: ''Most obstetricians believe bed rest will reduce the risk of preterm births and other pregnancy complications like preeclampsia, incompetent cervix and intrauterine growth retardation. But the data are mostly nonexistent. Medicine has a lot of folk myths. This is just one of them.''
Dr. Goldenberg noted, for example, that in two of four clinical trials of preventive bed rest in twin pregnancies, the women randomly assigned to hospital bed rest experienced a greater rate of preterm births than those who weren't. The other two studies showed no difference.
So why do doctors persist in prescribing bed rest, not only when prematurity threatens but often preventively, especially in pregnancies involving two or more babies? In Dr. Goldenberg's view, ''physicians don't have any real tools to prevent preterm birth, but they want to do something so they choose one they think is innocuous.''
A List of Hazards
Dr. Maloni said aerospace scientists had demonstrated adverse effects of bed rest, like muscle atrophy, bone loss and blood clots. She said the women in her study averaged 17 physical problems directly related to bed rest, including aches in backs, hips and muscles; headaches; nasal congestion; dry skin and lips; high levels of depression; muscle atrophy; increased fatigue; weight loss or failure to gain normally; abnormal carbohydrate metabolism; reduced blood volume; and lower red blood cell count.
Their babies also tended to weigh less than normal, perhaps because there were fewer blood cells to carry oxygen and nutrients to the womb.
After giving birth, many of the women found themselves so out of shape that they had trouble getting out of a car or using their legs to stand up, and they were so fatigued that their ability to care for their newborns was compromised.
Dr. Maloni suggested that after childbirth, women who have been on bed rest should undergo cardiovascular and physical assessments and receive a rehabilitation program.
Physical problems aside, women who have endured enforced bed rest describe themselves as bored, frustrated, depressed, irritable, guilty and scared. Many mention increased family and spousal tensions and angry young children at home. Fathers, meanwhile, have to take over all the household responsibilities while continuing to work and wait on their wives or visit them.
The economic burdens can be great, as well, especially if the women have jobs that they can't perform in bed and young children who need care. One study estimated the cost of bed rest per woman at $1,400.
''The Future of Children,'' from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation, assessed the research on ''preventive'' bed rest in twin pregnancies and said, ''In the absence of proof of the effectiveness of bed rest, its use should be curtailed sharply, and randomized trials should be conducted to see whether bed rest at home or in the hospital actually does prevent the wide array of conditions for which it is currently used.''
So why do so many women follow prescriptions of bed rest? Mostly because they are afraid not to. As Kris explained: ''I was told that there were no concrete studies. But fear plays a big part. You've got to play it conservatively. After all, it's not just about you. It's about one or more other beings. You have to rely a lot on the experience of your providers who believe that if a woman is put on bed rest, the pregnancy will last a little longer.''
Heidi Zarou of Brooklyn said she believed that her five weeks on home bed rest -- she started having contractions at 32 weeks -- enabled her to carry her twins for 37 weeks, resulting in two healthy babies, a 5-pound boy and a 6-pound girl, who were able to go home with her a few days later.
Weathering It
Advice abounds on weathering bed rest: Shift positions often, moving from side to side. But avoid lying on the back, because that can decrease blood flow to the placenta. Use pillows to support the abdomen, upper leg, shoulders and back. Do simple exercises to enhance circulation and minimize loss of muscle tone. Point and flex toes, rotate hands and feet, roll the head, and tense and relax the arm and leg muscles.
Find ways to pass the time. Read, knit or crochet. Do needlework, draw, write letters, watch educational videos, volunteer to make phone calls or address envelopes for a local charity. You may, like Kris , be able to continue working using a laptop, telephone or dictation machine.
Have the room arranged to maximize comfort and convenience. Hobby or work items, tissues, water pitcher, telephone and address book, radio, remote control and, if necessary, a cooler stocked with lunch and snacks should be at bedside. Be sure to eat regular healthy meals and drink lots of fluids. Foster well-being by arranging for an at-home massage, manicure or haircut.
If friends and relatives offer help, accept it graciously -- and if they do not offer, ask them. Give practical assignments like vacuuming; going to the post office, dry cleaner or supermarket; or taking a youngster for a play date or sleepover. If you have children, invite them to join you in bed to cuddle, read or watch television, and find tasks they can do to help, however simple.
PERSONAL HEALTH
