As the senior Democrat on the Senate Budget Committee, Senator Kent Conrad of North Dakota arrived at a news conference on Monday with a stack of blue, green and yellow charts offering a critique, in numbers and graphs, of President Bush's budget for 2005. Then, in case reporters did not get the point, he unveiled his final poster: a picture of a giant red elephant with wings.
''This elephant,'' the caption declared, ''won't fly.''
Coming from a Democrat, in an election year, the assertion that Mr. Bush's $2.4 trillion budget would face rough sledding on Capitol Hill was hardly surprising.
Yet as the White House unveiled its spending plan for 2005 on Monday, even Republicans were wondering whether they would be able to meet the president's goals of beefing up the military budget, limiting growth in other discretionary programs to less than 1 percent and making last year's tax cuts permanent, all while halving the deficit in five years.
''This is going to be a big challenge,'' said Senator Don Nickles, the Oklahoma Republican and chairman of the Senate Budget Committee. ''A lot of people around here are used to spending a lot more than 1 percent in growth.''
Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican who has railed against pork-barrel spending, simply laughed when asked his view of the budget. ''I think it makes for very entertaining reading,'' he said.
The annual unveiling of the White House budget is always an occasion for Democrats and Republicans to maneuver to gain the political upper hand and this year, with the elections looming, is no exception. Democrats, seeking to turn the increasing deficit into an election year issue, called the White House plan reckless.
''This is not a serious plan for getting the country out of trouble,'' Mr. Conrad said. ''This president is the most fiscally irresponsible in the history of the United States.''
At the same time, Democrats attacked the president's proposal to hold the line on spending in a number of areas. Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, called the document ''the most antifamily, antiworker, anti-health-care, anti-education budget in modern times.'' Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, said the budget ''is built on a house of cards.''
Republicans tried to paint Democrats as wanting to have it both ways, complaining about the deficit without offering a clear plan for reducing spending. ''My guess is that the Democrats will continue to beat their chests about the deficit but will not put forth a plan'' for bringing it under control, said Representative Jim Nussle of Iowa, chairman of the House Budget Committee.
On the presidential campaign trail, the Democratic candidates lambasted Mr. Bush as a president willing to slash programs that help ordinary people while promoting tax cuts that benefit corporations and the wealthy.
''Today's budget proposal makes it clear what President Bush's priorities are: tax cuts for the rich and tough luck for everyone else,'' said Gen. Wesley K. Clark.
Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts said: ''The new Bush budget is more of the same: record deficits, tax cuts for the wealthy and special interests and cuts in areas that matter to families -- such as health care and education.''
Perhaps the most contentious issue in the budget proposal is Mr. Bush's call to make his tax cuts permanent. Republicans said they were optimistic that Congress would, at the very least, extend three popular tax provisions that are set to expire this year: the elimination of the so-called marriage tax penalty, the creation of a new 10 percent tax bracket for low-income people and the $1,000 child tax credit for some middle-income families.
''I don't think the Democrats want to be vulnerable to a charge of balancing the budget on the backs of the poor,'' said Stuart Roy, a spokesman for Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the House majority leader.
But Mr. Roy and other Republicans, including Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, said the leadership would most likely delay consideration of extending or making permanent the most contentious tax provision -- the reductions in the tax on corporate dividends -- until after the November election. When asked if all Mr. Bush's tax cuts could be extended, or made permanent, this year, Mr. Grassley, the Finance Committee chairman, said: ''The whole package? Little chance of that.''
With concern about the size of the deficit rising among party members, some Republicans said on Monday that Mr. Bush's budget proposal did not go far enough. Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin was among several who suggested a freeze on discretionary spending outside the defense budget.
Others, including Representative C. W. Bill Young of Florida, who is chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, openly questioned just how far Mr. Bush's proposed cuts would go toward reducing the $521 billion deficit.
Noting that discretionary spending outside the defense budget represents less than one-fifth of the federal budget, Mr. Young said, ''No one should expect significant deficit reduction as a result of austere non-defense discretionary spending limits. The numbers simply do not add up.''
As lawmakers waded through the president's proposals, Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, summed up the sentiment.
''I'm always comforted,'' Mr. Specter said, ''by Churchill, who said, 'We'll muddle through.' ''
THE PRESIDENT'S BUDGET PROPOSAL: CONGRESS
