Few roles have been deemed worthy of the efforts of Sir Ben Kingsley, now 60, who for three decades has marked the screen indelibly as Gandhi, as a Jewish accountant during the Holocaust, a Latin American torturer and a terrifying British gangster.
But he quickly agreed to slip into the skin of Col. Massoud Behrani, the penniless Iranian immigrant who, with tragic results, invests the future of his family, his manhood and his very identity in the purchase of a modest, state-auctioned bungalow in ''House of Sand and Fog.'' To no one's surprise, Sir Ben was nominated for the Academy Award for best actor last week for the performance.
He explains his choice to play the role as part of a yearning to portray larger-than-life characters who convey outsize emotions, an instinct that he traces to his earliest work on the British stage.
Performing from the age of 23 with the Royal Shakespeare Company, appearing night after night with titans of British theater -- John Gielgud, Peggy Ashcroft -- forced Sir Ben to deliver to demanding audiences and critics, he says.
''It leaves you with an appetite, a rod with which to beat your own back,'' he said carefully, seated straight-spined before a flickering fireplace in a hotel here. He wore a loose, button-down tan shirt over blue jeans with loafers, his frame sinewy and strong, the curve of his shaved head clean.
''It's imperative that you're honest and clear, and really reach the audience with something urgent and important,'' he said. ''They were my first steps, and they left me with an appetite for those kinds of roles -- archetypes rather than stereotypes.''
Hamlet. Othello. Behrani.
''I read Behrani as an archetype,'' he continued, ''as a character in dramatic terms who would stand shoulder to shoulder with King Lear in terms of what he says to the audience, in suffering and failure.
''When I look at him, digging the earth, selling gas and Snickers bars with the 'Massoud' on his uniform where his medals used to be, there is a complete distance between who he was, how he sees himself, and how he must reinvent himself,'' Sir Ben said.
In the film, based on the book by Andre Dubus III, Behrani clings to the shreds of his past glory. He works at a menial job building highways but carefully changes into a suit at a hotel before returning home. He saves every penny, logging each tiny purchase in a book as he works at a second job at a gas station. Behrani is a reflection of immigrants laboring to build the American dream in a land of minimum-wage opportunity.
With few words Sir Ben embodies the fallen dignity of this former air force colonel. With his stiff, military bearing, his harsh machismo toward his wife (played by Shohreh Aghdashloo, also nominated for an Oscar), his insistent teaching to his son, Sir Ben conveys the man's desperation to salvage what he can of the family honor.
But there is a price, because ''Sand and Fog'' is a tragedy. Behrani's dreams directly counter those of Kathy Nicolo, played by Jennifer Connelly, a young American struggling to hold onto her house, mistakenly auctioned by the state. Both Behrani and Kathy feel they deserve the house -- they believe they need it to survive -- and the story spirals with a Shakespearean inevitability toward doom. Perhaps because of the dark theme, the movie has done poorly at the box office, so far taking in only $11 million.
The classical element is what Sir Ben says he seeks when looking for a part. His last major role, as the British gangster Don Logan in ''Sexy Beast'' in 2000, appealed to him for that very reason. It was another archetypal character, this time a villain. In Logan, a ferocious figure storming into the sun-kissed calm of Spain to settle old scores, ''I saw Iago's corrosion in a modern setting,'' he explained. ''He intercedes between a man and his wife to bend that man to his will. He's related to the English Jacobean revenge villains.'' Sir Ben received an Oscar nomination for that role, too.
His high British accent is a reminder of how far either Don Logan or Massoud Behrani is from Sir Ben Kingsley, the man. Born Krishna Bhanji, he grew up in England, his father a Kenyan-born doctor of Indian heritage, his mother a British-born fashion model. He quickly found a home on the London stage and worked there intensely for 15 years.
Not until 1982 did he burst into the movies as the title character in Richard Attenborough's ''Gandhi.'' The performance won him the best-actor Oscar and catapulted him into the ranks of the best of his generation. Yet Sir Ben -- he was knighted in 2001 -- worked selectively after ''Gandhi,'' mostly taking small character roles in television and film.
When he did accept a major film role, it was hard not to notice. Whether as Meyer Lansky in ''Bugsy''; Itzhak Stern, Oskar Schindler's accountant, in ''Schindler's List''; or the torturer Roberto Miranda in Roman Polanski's ''Death and the Maiden,'' he has created a cinematic menagerie of unforgettable heroes, victims and villains.
The first-time filmmaker Vadim Perelman has said that when he got the rights to adapt ''Sand and Fog,'' he immediately thought of Sir Ben for Behrani. But the actor had already been sent the book by Mr. Dubus's wife, Fontaine. In a cover letter, she told him that her husband had loosely based the Behrani character on him. Sir Ben loved the book and later the screenplay.
But he arrived in Los Angeles for the $16 million production with just a few days to rehearse. He immersed himself in the cadences of Mrs. Aghdashloo and picked up what he could from the parents of Jonathan Ahdout, who plays his son. He had a bit of accent training, but mostly it was ''osmosis,'' he said, ''and generosity on the set -- they were almost imperceptibly guiding me.''
His main preparation, he said, was learning all his lines. ''I had the symphonic sweep in my head,'' he said. Of learning lines cold, he said: ''It's lonely. It's hard. But it's a very, very vital part of preparation, to fully comprehend his journey. You get a path.''
It helped when the costume designer presented him with an actual uniform from the pre-revolutionary Iranian air force, a loan from a local immigrant. ''Seeing him in uniform gave me a glimpse of the Persian warrior I wanted to play, a man who has lost his battlefield, lost the battle, and then loses his prince,'' Sir Ben said. ''His conception of maleness and patriarchy, it all became very tangible for me.''
Three days into the shooting he found himself having to deliver a wedding toast in front of 200 local Iranian-Americans, who filled a ballroom for an early scene in the movie.
''My heart was pounding,'' he recalled. ''I'm always surprised when actors say, 'I wouldn't do this.' I want to interject: 'Well it's not you. It's your character.' I try to create a portrait of someone else. I'm not interested in self-portraits. I want to make what he does inevitable.'' In a scene where Behrani argues with his wife, she calls him a liar -- ''kassif'' in Farsi -- and he hits her. In acting the scene, ''the only way to end the conversation is for him to hit her,'' he said. ''She knows it. I know it.''
The movie reaches its tragic crescendo with Behrani's suicide, one of the hardest scenes Sir Ben said he had ever filmed. To make the moment appear as real as possible, he actually wrapped his head in plastic and sealed it with duct tape.
He said: ''We made a pact I'd keep it on, and go as far as I could. The first take I did I was right on the edge of fainting. I was able to give a very clear signal to the medics and the prop men in the room. A clear hand signal, like when you're scuba diving. I was able to do it, and they came in and had a cutter that they opened the back with a razor cutter. I think we did nine takes.''
He paused. ''It makes me feel slightly faint to talk about it.'' Another pause. ''The only way to film it properly is to really asphyxiate.''
But then, Sir Ben said, it's only acting. ''Then you get off the bed, and you go home.''
