Four years ago, the music impresario Clive Davis was ousted from Arista, the company he founded in 1974, by BMG, the music division of the German conglomerate Bertelsmann. Yesterday Mr. Davis was back in control, as BMG named him chief executive of nearly all its North American music business, which includes the labels RCA, J, Jive -- and Arista.
Mr. Davis, 70, adds Arista to his portfolio several weeks after Antonio Reid, who had been hired to succeed him in 2000, resigned in the wake of financial losses and lackluster sales. After BMG pushed out Mr. Davis in 2000, it financed a new label for him, J Records, and put $150 million into the venture.
With artists like Alicia Keys, J became successful enough that BMG lured Mr. Davis back in 2002 to become chairman and chief executive of RCA Music Group, which was created in the merger of RCA Records with J. Mr. Davis's president and chief operating officer at RCA, Charles Goldstuck, will join him as president and chief operating officer of BMG North America, which will not include RCA Label Group-Nashville and BMG Classics.
Mr. Davis spoke in a jubilant rush about his double reversal of fortune. ''It is a milestone,'' he said. ''A big, gratifying day.''
Rolf Schmidt-Holtz, chairman and chief executive of BMG, said in a statement, ''I couldn't be happier that Clive has agreed to assume this greatly expanded responsibility at BMG.''
At a time when major labels make as many headlines from mergers as from hits, and questions of illicit music file sharing have the industry in a panic, Mr. Davis has run a company that has produced both hits and profits. ''It's a triumph of what the basics of the business is,'' he said in a telephone interview.
Mr. Goldstuck added, ''We can take the best from the creative side of the business, but with a very strong approach to being prudent.''
In a music industry career spanning more than four decades, Mr. Davis has represented artists including Bruce Springsteen, Barry Manilow, Patti Smith and Sean (Puffy) Combs.
Bertelsmann and Sony are seeking approval from European regulators to merge their music operations. A BMG spokesman, Nathaniel Brown, said that the company could not comment about how yesterday's moves might play out within the merged companies. ''Any discussion of post-merger structure is premature,'' he said, ''because we're in the regulatory approval process now.''
