White House officials said Monday that the commission being created to investigate intelligence shortcomings would decide for itself if it would examine a highly charged political issue: whether President Bush and other senior administration officials exaggerated the evidence that Iraq possessed large stockpiles of illicit weapons.
A draft of the executive order Mr. Bush is preparing to sign this week to create the commission makes no explicit reference to a study of how the intelligence assessments were used. Instead, it only directs the panel to compare intelligence findings about Iraq produced before the war with the absence of stockpiles of unconventional weapons found by American inspection teams on the ground.
On Monday, Democratic leaders in Congress sent a letter to Mr. Bush urging that the scope of the inquiry include ''the collection, analysis, dissemination and use by policymakers of intelligence on Iraq.'' The Democrats, including the minority leader, Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, also said members of the commission should be appointed ''on a bipartisan basis by the Congressional leadership'' rather than by the president himself.
Mr. Bush, the White House said, plans to appoint the members himself, though Vice President Cheney has been calling around Capitol Hill sounding out ideas.
Among the names being mentioned by members of Congress and administration officials as candidates are Robert M. Gates, the director of central intelligence under President Bush's father; Warren B. Rudman, a former senator from New Hampshire and an intelligence expert; Richard J. Kerr, a former deputy director of central intelligence who has been leading the C.I.A.'s internal review of Iraq intelligence; and David A. Kay, until recently the chief American weapons inspector in Iraq. William Perry, who has extensive experience in intelligence matters and was defense secretary under President Clinton, and Gary Hart, a former Democratic senator from Colorado who is a national security expert, have also been mentioned.
Mr. Bush had lunch at the White House on Monday with Mr. Kay, whose acknowledgments in the last 10 days that American intelligence agencies overestimated Iraq's capabilities forced the president to order the bipartisan inquiry, a step he had long resisted. Neither the president nor Mr. Kay spoke publicly.
But earlier in the day, speaking to reporters after a cabinet meeting, Mr. Bush sidestepped a question about whether Americans deserved answers before the presidential election in November to questions about the yawning gap between prewar allegations that Iraq possessed stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons and the later failure of American inspectors to discover any such weapons.
''I don't know all the facts,'' Mr. Bush said in response to the question. ''What we don't know yet is what we thought and what the Iraqi Survey Group has found, and we want to look at that. But we also want to look at our war against proliferation and weapons of mass destruction, kind of in a broader context. And so I'm putting together an independent, bipartisan commission to analyze where we stand, what we can do better as we fight this war against terror.''
Congressional Democrats said they wanted a voice in who was chosen. ''For President Bush to say he is going to do this on his own, going at it unilaterally again, which is his wont, that is not going to fly,'' said Senator Carl Levin, the Democrat of Michigan who is a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee. ''It has to be independent of him, as well as independent of Congress.''
At a briefing on Monday, the White House had little more to say about who would be appointed to the commission, what its exact mandate might be and when it would be expected to report back to Mr. Bush.
The question of whether inquiries into apparent intelligence failures on Iraq should extend to the use of intelligence by administration officials has divided Republicans and Democrats for months.
To date, Republicans have used their political control over both houses of Congress to focus inquiries by the Senate and House Intelligence Committees almost solely on the judgments reached by intelligence agencies rather than on the public statements issued by the White House or the administration itself.
But as Democrats have argued at length, it was in statements by Mr. Bush, Mr. Cheney, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and others that the allegations about Iraq's weapons were presented with the fewest qualifications.
In his presentation to the United Nations Security Council last Feb. 5, for example, Mr. Powell described the evidence that Iraq possessed illicit stockpiles as reflecting facts and not allegations.
In an interview published in the Monday issue of The Washington Post, Mr. Powell said he did not know if he would have recommended invading Iraq based on what is now known about the weapons, saying ''it was the stockpile that presented the final little piece that made it more of a real and present danger and threat to the region and to the world.'' Nonetheless, he said he believed the invasion was ''the right thing to do, and I think history will demonstrate that.''
Senator Levin said any further inquiry ''can't just stop at the water's edge; we need to ask, did the user stretch the intelligence or misuse it in some way?''
By contrast, Representative Porter J. Goss, the Florida Republican who is chairman of the House intelligence committee, said in a separate interview on Monday that the commission should have a broad, forward-looking mandate.
''This is an opportunity to realign our intelligence capabilities to address the threats that exist in the world today, not as they did in 1947 when the intelligence community was set up,'' Mr. Goss said.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: INTELLIGENCE  Correction:  February 4, 2004, Wednesday  Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the creation of a commission to investigate intelligence shortcomings related to the Iraq war misstated the day that The Washington Post published an interview with Secretary of State Colin L. Powell in which he said that he did not know whether he would have recommended invading Iraq based on the intelligence now available. It was yesterday, not Monday.
