Thousands of mourners flooded the streets here on Monday for the scores of people killed in two suicide bombings the day before. Kurdish and other Iraqi officials said the attacks would complicate the political struggles over the future of Iraq and the Kurdish region in the north.
The bombings, which killed several top Kurdish officials, will resonate during the debates on the two most contentious political issues in Iraq: the drive for Kurdish autonomy and the process for handing over sovereignty to a new Iraqi government by June 30.
The attacks came just as Kurdish leaders were embroiled in negotiations over how much independence the Kurdish region would be allowed and how the two leading Kurdish parties, whose offices were bombed during holiday receptions, would share power. The deaths of key officials could change the balance of political viewpoints in each party.
The attacks scarred a part of the country that had been relatively unscathed by violence during the American occupation, underscoring the argument that Iraq might be too unstable to hold direct elections, officials and experts said.
On Monday in this northern city, two lines of men, hundreds of grim faces long, stood in front of the grand mosque holding pictures of their slain leaders. Mourners filed between them, saluting the photographs. Then they stepped into the mosque to pray. Thousands of people waited in the streets behind them.
If this region were a state, this would have been a state funeral.
American officials said at least 67 people had been killed and 247 wounded in the nearly simultaneous bombings at the two political parties' offices, where well-wishers had gone to mark a Muslim holiday. The dead included the deputy prime minister of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, the mayor of Erbil, a military commander and a police chief.
The loss of some of those leaders could bring a shift in political attitudes with wide-reaching consequences for the future of Iraq, experts said.
Within each of the two main parties, the Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, there is tension between factions that advocate a radical break from Iraq and ones that take a more moderate stance.
The highest-ranking Kurdish official killed, Sami Abdul Rahman, deputy prime minister of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, was a ''reasonable pragmatist'' who was willing to back off of demands for control of the oil-rich city of Kirkuk and any immediate push for independence, said Joost R. Hiltermann, a Middle East expert with the International Crisis Group, a conflict prevention organization.
''He was well ahead of most of the Kurdish people who were talking about independence and about Kirkuk,'' Mr. Hiltermann said.
Another senior official killed was Akrem Mantik, the mayor of Erbil, known for an especially good rapport with Americans. His absence could mean less leverage for the Coalition Provisional Authority.
If the voices within the parties change, so can the shape of the new Iraq as the transfer of sovereignty planned for June 30 approaches. American officials and Iraqi Governing Council members have been engaged in delicate negotiations with Kurdish leaders over the definition of federalism.
The northern Kurdish region has existed as a virtually independent state since 1991, when the American and British governments declared the area a no-flight zone. Each of the two main parties controls half the region, and insist on keeping their broad governing powers under a projected united administration.
The attacks also showed how fragile the security situation is in Iraq at a time when some political groups are clamoring for swift elections. Others say such elections should be postponed until the country is more secure and reliable voter rolls are set up.
''The situation has deteriorated if even the Kurdish places aren't safe anymore,'' Mr. Hiltermann said.
It is not clear who was behind the attacks on Sunday, each of which was carried out by a man walking into a crowded reception hall and detonating explosives strapped to his body. But many security officials blame Ansar al-Islam, a terrorist group that was driven out of the eastern part of the Iraqi Kurdish region last spring.
According to an Iraqi security agent, as many as 200 members of Ansar al-Islam have congregated in Erbil, where they receive support from guerrilla cells in other parts of the country.
An occupation official said the group, which follows an extremist Islamic ideology similar to the Taliban's in Afghanistan, was still operating in northern Iraq, though it had been weakened. Asked about the bombing, many Kurds here instinctively blamed ''the Islamists.''
This morning, one after another, pickup trucks loaded with wooden coffins rumbled into Erbil's main cemetery.
At the Erbil Emergency Hospital, shirtless men lay on narrow mattresses. Many had bad burns and shiny burn salve on their faces.
''Their attitude is amazing,'' said Mario Ninno, an Italian nurse and the medical coordinator for the hospital. ''Their leaders come in here to say they are sorry, and the people say: 'No, we are your troops. As long as you are alive, don't feel sorry.' ''
Investigators were still picking through the wreckage on Monday, putting money, jewelry and pens in one bag and pieces of flesh in others.
''Look at this,'' Ako Koyee, an office worker for the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, said as he bent down in the rubble of party headquarters. ''Children's teeth.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: ATROCITY'S AFTERMATH
