President Bush's statement yesterday that he will appoint an independent commission to examine American intelligence gathering was a welcome change of heart. But the way the inquiry is emerging so far suggests that Mr. Bush may be merely trying to change the subject until after the election. The question of whether top officials exaggerated intelligence on Iraq or, worse, pressured analysts to hype the threat from Iraqi weapons programs deserves to be a central issue this fall. Mr. Bush should not be able to deflect debate by saying he is not at liberty to discuss the failures in Iraq because he appointed a panel to look into American intelligence.
The White House has been under intense pressure to start an investigation into why no one has found chemical, biological or nuclear weapons in Iraq when the administration made the immediate threat of such weapons the central justification for rushing this country into war without most of its important allies. There are broader questions, too, about the quality of American intelligence gathering and analysis worldwide. After initial resistance, the president said yesterday that he was on the verge of appointing an independent, bipartisan commission. That's good. But the president then drew its mandate so vaguely -- ''to look at our war against proliferation and weapons of mass destruction, kind of in a broader context'' -- that it raises concern.
The first and most urgent task of the new commission should be to give a public accounting on Iraq. It is now clear that Washington's intelligence reports on Iraq's programs to build weapons of mass destruction were breathtakingly wrong. To move forward, the nation needs to know whether that was a matter of poor collection of information, including a lack of reliable spies in a closed society, or a failure of those who are charged with analyzing intelligence -- or, more likely, both. The panel also should look into whether intelligence analysts tailored their reports on Iraq to please their political bosses or were under pressure from above to suit the administration's policy needs.
Once it has thoroughly investigated these questions, the commission should look beyond Iraq to the failure of American intelligence to understand the weapons programs of North Korea, Iran, Libya, Pakistan and even India. It should make recommendations about how to improve intelligence on the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, even if that means challenging the current structure of the intelligence community.
While the panel cannot be used as a shield to deflect controversy over the Iraq intelligence failures, it also cannot become a pawn of election-year politics. Bush is right in saying the panel must be independent and bipartisan. And to ensure both, the public will probably need to wait until after the election to get its report. Voters will have to decide on their own how to weigh allegations that administration officials pressured intelligence analysts to modify their findings to increase public support for the war.
We have yet to see the final shape of this panel or its mandate, and there is time for Mr. Bush to set it up correctly. But Mr. Bush's record is discouraging. This will be the second big commission on intelligence under his presidency. The work of the first, on the 9/11 attacks, has been severely hampered by the White House's stonewalling on documents and the refusal of major figures to testify. We hope that this new investigation is not given similar treatment.
