YOU need a head coach, and you have a choice of two two-time Super Bowl champions: Big Bill or Little Bill. Bluster Bill or Button-Down Bill. Parcells or Belichick, you make the call.
Parcells has not won a Super Bowl since the 1990 season, but he has eradicated losing cultures everywhere he has been. Belichick has reached head-coaching heights only in his present location, but he has set himself apart from his peers, Parcells included, in the much-publicized age of parity.
Dynasty is a forbidding word in N.F.L.-speak, but there can be no denying the lofty perch Belichick stands on today after his Patriots drove in the final 1 minute 8 seconds Sunday night at Reliant Stadium for Adam Vinatieri's 41-yard field goal and a 32-29 victory over John Fox's Carolina Panthers in Super Bowl XXXVIII.
Belichick had the most resourceful quarterback in the game in Tom Brady. He received a huge break when John Kasay botched a kickoff the way that Jim Fassel's Giants did against Parcells's Cowboys all those weeks ago in New Jersey. Fox sure did not help himself by committing to the 2-point conversion too early, setting off a chain of events that probably cost Carolina the game.
Fox was outcoached by Belichick, but he is in good company. It is one game. Strange stuff happens at the Super Bowl. A streaker slips through security designed to stop terrorists. Janet Jackson experiences what is called ''wardrobe malfunction.'' At the end of the day, the naked truth was that Belichick's team had its 15th straight victory and its second Super Bowl victory in three years. The organization he built with Scott Pioli, his handpicked front-office man, has been cohesively managed, is rich in future draft picks and is poised to expand on its success.
Belichick or Parcells? Consider that Parcells has never won the Super Bowl without Belichick by his side, minding his defense. Since orchestrating his awkward escape from Parcells's shadow with the Jets, Belichick has cast his own over the rest of the league.
Belichick was characterized then as rambling and incoherent, but I always believed the messy divorce revealed more about Parcells. There he was, with all the organizational control Robert K. Kraft would not hand him in New England, and he had not a clue that his longtime lieutenant did not wish to replace him as head coach.
Parcells was not the first successful man to become infatuated with the sound of his own voice. Others continue to grow by listening. Which brings me to my next question: Dinner with a two-time Super Bowl champion coach, Belichick or Parcells? You make the date.
All week in Houston, there was talk of how dull Belichick was, how unquotable, as if Fox and all the rest of them are coaching Al Sharptons. I found Belichick more relaxed than I remembered him, more accommodating. Bombastic Bill or Bon Jovi Bill? Parcells, whose A-list of friends includes Bob Knight, or Belichick, who takes calls from the aforementioned rocker and Charles Barkley.
Interviews with Belichick may not be a laugh-in, but he is not Jon Gruden or Brian Billick. He operates in a windbag-free zone. There is an aura about him suggesting he is more than a jock who has spent 99 percent of his life insulated from life.
This is pure speculation, but Belichick strikes me as a man who, given a choice, would have preferred Bono singing for AIDS funding to the halftime glitz that left league officials red-faced and exposed. Bono offered, was told no thanks, the Super Bowl is not the stage for social commentary that is not red, white, blue and green.
It is all about Patriot Games these days, and when the whistle blows, it is a Bill Belichick production. He played it conservative in the first half, repeatedly pinning the Panthers deep in their own end. The critics grumbled: where was the Belichick who gambled on fourth-and-1 in his own territory against the Colts early in the American Football Conference title game? Where? In the Super Bowl, against a defense he respected. By forcing the Panthers' offense into a cautious shell, the Panthers' defense logged double the minutes of New England's over the first three quarters. By the end, it was putty in Brady's hands.
Of course it is so much easier when your quarterback is the creative force of nature Brady is. Belichick is blessed to have him but then, Brady was not playoff tested when Belichick went with him in the playoffs two years ago over Drew Bledsoe, who played in a Super Bowl for Parcells.
Belichick has his man and Parcells has Quincy Carter in Dallas. Life is not fair. Parity is an imperfect proposition. It seems to currently exist for 31 teams while Belichick's Patriots have ascended, at least temporarily, to a league of their own.
Sports of The Times
