This 30-second advertisement for Senator John Edwards of North Carolina began running Friday in South Carolina and Oklahoma:
PRODUCER: John Edwards for President.
ON THE SCREEN: The camera focuses on Mr. Edwards's face, set against a wood-paneled wall and an American flag. The screen splits to show a present-day Mr. Edwards alongside black and white photographs: a production line in a textile mill; Mr. Edwards as a baby in his mother's arms, wearing a cap and minisuspenders; a fence with a painted sign that says ''closed.'' The spot closes with the focus back on Mr. Edwards.
THE SCRIPT: Mr. Edwards: ''It's easy for candidates to talk about manufacturing and jobs, but I've lived it, and I have not forgotten it. My dad worked in textile mills to put food on our table and clothes on our backs. Today, the mills are gone. And so are the jobs. That's why I opposed Nafta and why I'll end tax breaks for companies that send jobs overseas. I'm John Edwards, and I approve this message because no one will do more than I will to keep American jobs right here in America. That's something you can count on.''
ACCURACY: Mr. Edwards did not vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement because he was not yet in the Senate at the time. He has said that he would have voted against it if he had been. Mr. Edwards did, however, support the Clinton administration-backed bill granting permanent trade benefits to China in 2000, despite warnings from labor groups that it would cost American jobs and would not go far enough to raise China's working conditions.
SCORECARD: Mr. Edwards's strategists believe this spot will have deep resonance in South Carolina and Oklahoma, states that have suffered considerable job losses. Then again, the message is not unique. Mr. Kerry is also running advertisements promising to protect jobs. Though Mr. Edwards on Monday raised questions about such promises, pointing out Mr. Kerry's votes for free trade pacts, his own support for the China deal could undercut his position. Mr. Edwards takes a subtle swipe at Mr. Kerry in this spot by saying, ''It's easy for candidates to talk about manufacturing and jobs, but I've lived it.'' Mr. Kerry is the son of privilege; Mr. Edwards came up poor. But the swipe is so subtle as to easily go unnoticed.
JIM RUTENBERG
THE AD CAMPAIGN
