Senator John Kerry had just taken the stage on Saturday at a packed rally at the Oklahoma State Firefighters Memorial in Oklahoma City, and he was fired up. ''George Bush thought he could play dress-up on an aircraft carrier and you wouldn't notice,'' he thundered. ''Ask yourself, whose mission is accomplished?''
As if on cue, the audience roared back, ''His mission!'' Mr. Kerry just smiled and deadpanned, ''Nobody briefed me that I was going to have a real interactive crowd here.''
For so long, of course, Mr. Kerry did not, and to see him on the stump these days is to conduct an unscientific but revealing study in candidate development and crowd psychology. Mr. Kerry says most of the same things he has been saying for weeks or even months, but he says them better and now that he is the Democratic front-runner the crowds respond in kind.
''How about those New England Patriots?'' he asked a cheering rally at the University of New Mexico here on Monday, celebrating his home team's Super Bowl victory. ''It's great to see New Englanders go to Texas and win! It sets a great precedent.''
Then he added, ''I predict today that, like father, like son: one term!''
When Mr. Kerry was a boy his favorite movie was ''Scaramouche,'' the story of the French Revolution swashbuckler who was ''born with a gift of laughter and a sense that the world was mad.'' As a lonely 11-year-old in a Swiss boarding school, or a Navy lieutenant in the Mekong Delta of Vietnam, or a senator from Massachusetts and a presidential contender, Mr. Kerry has seldom lacked a sense that the world is mad. The gift of laughter has come harder.
He will still never be cuddly. He is too tall, too gaunt, too lantern-jawed, too serious for that. His Iowa caucuses victory speech was solemn and windy, and he sat watching the Super Bowl on Sunday night with a band of firefighters from Fargo, N.D., whose union has endorsed him, tapping his right thumb and forefinger nervously against his teeth without making much effort to converse or connect.
Two years ago, Mr. Kerry's advisers tried to get him to loosen up by showing him tapes of Senator John Edwards's easygoing style. Even now, he lacks Bill Clinton's innate, empathetic artistry with individuals and crowds. But as his campaign moves onto a national stage, where television advertisements and sound bites are more important than one-on-one encounters, Mr. Kerry seems comfortable with a kind of paint-by-numbers Clintonism that is effective in its own way. He asks people their names, and their stories. After his brush with political near-death, he is smiling, even laughing, more -- and the results are infectious.
''There is nothing I like better than a good, bipartisan audience like this,'' he told a crowd that was the polar opposite on Saturday morning in Kansas City, Mo.
In tones conjuring up memories of the famous talking horse, he went on to mock ''Mr. Ed Gillespie,'' the Republican national chairman, who has taken to painting Mr. Kerry as ''out of sync'' with most Americans.
At every stop, it seems, Mr. Kerry announces a new endorsement. Here it was Attorney General Eliot L. Spitzer of New York. On Saturday in Oklahoma, as Mr. Kerry ran through the litany of his latest supporters, an interrupting voice rang out from the hall, ''Senator, I am the mayor of Watonga, Okla., and I endorse you!''
Without hesitating, Mr. Kerry did something that would have been all but unthinkable in his awkward months of campaigning in New Hampshire last fall: He scrambled down into the crowd, wrapped an arm around Mayor Richard Hightower, chief magistrate of the nearby town of 3,200, and swept him back onto the stage, holding his hand aloft and declaring, ''Ladies and gentlemen, my latest endorsement.''
He is not all fun and games. In North Dakota on Sunday, as Mr. Kerry addressed a rally of 600 people in the stuffy Fargo Air Museum, relaxed in a tattersall shirt and brown corduroys, an older man near the front fell to the floor.
''I think we have somebody who's fainted there,'' Mr. Kerry said, hopping off the stage to check on the man as the murmuring crowd made way for him. Moments later, he reclaimed the stage and said calmly: ''Ladies and gentleman, he's all right. He's all right. He's a World War II vet, and he's been standing for a while on his legs and he needs a little air and a little water.''
''You should be president!'' a woman in the crowd called out.
Jan Blinsky, a social worker in Fargo who had been an undecided voter until she saw Mr. Kerry on Sunday, said: ''I think he's fantastic. Every time I hear of someone getting killed in Iraq, I just think, he's a vet, he's been there; he knows what war is. We've got to get back to working with the U.N. and other people. We can't do it ourselves.''
At a rally on Friday at an International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers union hall in New Castle, Del., Mr. Kerry was more formal, in a navy suit and tie. But he stayed for 45 minutes after his speech, signing campaign hats, photographs, American flags, and by the time he left, his fingers were ink-stained.
''I've never come to a political event before, never seen one in the flesh,'' said Jamie Freeman, a retired marketing consultant from Wilmington, Del. ''And my impression was that he comes off as stiff, kind of like Bob Dole. But he was very impressive. He came across as sincere, not like a politician just espousing. I think that if people just come out and see him in person, his sincerity will come across.''
Ms. Freeman's husband, Mark, added: ''I've been on the fence. Mostly just focused on finding someone who can beat Bush. But I'm really sold on Kerry after seeing him. His charisma is the quality that has been lacking among the Democratic candidates.''
In fact, it is all but impossible to tell how much of Mr. Kerry's improved standing and greater ease is attributable to his own performance, and how much is owed to the sudden conviction among so many Democrats that he is now the most electable option. Over and over, his listeners cite that quality as helping to drive their support. What is indisputable is that he now comes off better with his crowds.
For months, Mr. Kerry has told audiences how he recovered from prostate cancer last year, with first-rate medical treatment, because he could afford it, and because he had generous health insurance benefits as a member of Congress. He always ends the story with some version of the assertion that ''every family's health care in America is as important as any politician's.'' In New Hampshire last fall, he would pause expectantly for applause that seldom came. Now the line wins cheers.
Mr. Kerry is still capable of old-fashioned oratorical prefaces like, ''May I say?'' or ''I say to you'' He is still fond of Kennedyesque oratorical inversions like, ''Americans should not just be working for the economy; the economy should be working for Americans.'' He has some verbal tics, saying ''literally'' when he means ''figuratively,'' adding the diffident qualifier ''sort of'' in ways that drain punch from his sentences.
But he speaks with unshakable assurance, and he is winning converts.
''I have been a Dean supporter up until today,'' said Charles Brittain, a retired industrial engineer for the Air Force who came to see Mr. Kerry in Oklahoma City. ''I liked what he was saying, but what I saw was a vulnerability at the slightest sign of pressure. I believe I see in Kerry a man who can withstand the hurricane that I'm positive the Republicans are planning.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
