It was getting-to-know-you day at Thurgood Marshall Academy in Harlem yesterday, as the school's 400 students got acquainted with their new building, a six-story structure with festively painted lockers, spacious science labs and bleachers in the gym instead of just folding chairs.
''Coming here was kind of a shock,'' said Phoebe-Sade Arnold, 17, the student body president, her nameplate necklace gleaming. ''To see it like this, it's like, wow. We can't believe this is for us.''
The building, on the corner of 135th Street and Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard, is the fruit of a partnership between the city's Department of Education and the Abyssinian Development Corporation, an arm of the Abyssinian Baptist Church. The renovated and expanded building for the academy, which serves grades 7 through 12, is the first new construction benefiting public high school students in Harlem in 50 years.
The building, which once housed the legendary jazz club Smalls' Paradise, is now the permanent home for a school that has moved several times since it opened in 1993, and as recently as last week occupied two floors in a building at 135th Street and Edgecombe Avenue that it shared with another small school.
James E. Bramble, 76, remembers dressing up in a shirt and tie and heading for Smalls' Paradise, where he would sip Scotch on the rocks and do the jitterbug as Cab Calloway or Count Basie performed.
''It was the place to go,'' Mr. Bramble said. ''If you didn't go to Smalls' you didn't go anyplace.''
Yesterday, Mr. Bramble, a retired medical technician and minister, returned to his old haunt. His grandson, Isaiah Walker, is president of the junior class and will eat lunch in a cafeteria painted with images of Louis Armstrong and Billie Holiday and named Smalls' cafe. ''To see this place closed up all these years, walking by and wondering what's happening -- to see it now is really, really remarkable,'' Mr. Bramble said. ''I didn't believe that something like this could be done here.''
Most students had toured the new school while it was being built, but yesterday it was theirs, and that somehow made things different.
Isaiah Walker was impressed by the six basketball hoops and plentiful science labs. ''How could you not want to be here?'' he wondered.
Students gathered in the gym for addresses by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein and others.
Later, the music teacher, Terri A. Davis, sat in her classroom as a group of students gathered around a shiny baby grand piano. Twelve keyboards and equipment for a recording studio were on the way, said Ms. Davis, who used to teach music in the school library.
In the old building, the principal, Dr. Sandye Poitier-Johnson, found it easy to be in constant contact with students. There were only two floors to patrol, and space was so tight that classes met in her office. Her office is no longer a classroom and, she said with a laugh, ''It's kind of strange.''
