Opposition parties, political and military experts and relatives of detained officials on Monday questioned Pakistan's assertion that the founder of the country's nuclear program had shared technology with Iran, Libya and North Korea for more than a decade without the knowledge of his superiors.
''This is a cock-and-bull story,'' said Dr. Muhammad Shafiq, 39, the son of Brig. Sajawal Khan, a retired Pakistani army officer accused of taking part in the scheme. ''If you want to believe it, believe it. The truth is nowhere near this story.''
In a background briefing to 20 Pakistani journalists on Sunday night, a senior Pakistani official said that the scientist, Dr. Abdul Qadeer Khan, had confessed to covertly sharing nuclear secrets with Iran, Libya and North Korea from 1989 to 2000. American officials said parts of the government's account matched events tracked by American intelligence and that nuclear aid from Pakistan had flowed to North Korea in 2002 and to Libya last fall.
The senior Pakistani official said Sunday that former army and intelligence chiefs had been questioned. Senior army officials were guilty of ''omissions,'' he said, but did not take part in Dr. Khan's scheme.
Dr. Khan and his close relatives could not be reached for comment on Monday. A man who answered the telephone at Dr. Khan's home, now surrounded by security officials, said the scientist was not present. Dr. Shafiq, son of the detained brigadier said to have aided Dr. Khan, said he did not expect Dr. Khan's family to comment until the government announced whether it would prosecute.
Political and military experts predicted that Pakistan's leader, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, would not risk prosecuting Dr. Khan, until recently a national hero. A trial could set off a public outcry, and Dr. Khan could identify army officials who approved of his activities, the experts said. General Musharraf seized power in 1999, and the country's army is his core base of support.
A senior government official who spoke on condition of anonymity on Monday confirmed that Dr. Khan had signed a detailed confession several days ago, but he said no decision had been made on whether to charge the scientist. He said General Musharraf would make a ''policy statement'' to the nation early next week after the end of a series of Pakistani national holidays .
The senior official declined to give further details about what the government had said was a sprawling smuggling network that involved German and Dutch middlemen, chartered planes and covert meetings between Dr. Khan and Iranian and Libyan scientists. If the government account is true, Dr. Khan and the middlemen carried out one of the most complex schemes ever to evade international efforts to control nuclear weapons.
In a telephone interview on Monday, Zahid Malik, Dr. Khan's official biographer, said he had not spoken to the scientist for 10 days. Government officials ordered him on Sunday night to stop publicly commenting on the case, he said. ''I cannot say anything categorical,'' he said when asked about the confession. ''I have not met the gentleman I still have so much regard for.''
Those who questioned the government's account said Monday that they were skeptical that Dr. Khan had acted without the approval of the country's powerful military leadership. Some suggested that Dr. Khan had agreed to confess to a version of events that put the army in a good light in exchange for a promise that the military-dominated government would not prosecute him.
On Sunday, the government also altered its descriptions of what motivated those who they said might have exported nuclear technology. Ten days ago, General Musharraf said ''some individuals'' had sold nuclear technology for personal gain. On Sunday, the senior official did not mention greed as a factor. Instead, he said Dr. Khan had transferred the technology to divert attention from Pakistan's nuclear program and to aid other Islamic countries.
Hasan Askari Rizvi, a leading military analyst, said it would have been possible for Dr. Khan and his aides to covertly divulge nuclear designs and the names of nuclear component suppliers with other countries without the military knowing.
But he said it would have been impossible to move equipment or parts out of the country's tightly guarded top nuclear facility, the Khan Research Laboratories, without the army's tacit support. Dr. Khan served as director of the laboratory, which is named for him, until 2001. ''If hardware is moved out of the country, then the army is directly involved,'' Mr. Rizvi said.
The senior Pakistani official who briefed Pakistani journalists on Sunday said that centrifuge machines were shipped from Pakistan to North Korea and that centrifuge parts from Pakistan were shipped to Iran.
He said the head of security at the Khan Research Laboratories, Brig. Muhammad Iqbal Tajwar, took part in the scheme, allowing the nuclear hardware to be shipped. Relatives of the brigadier could not be reached for comment.
The account of events given by the senior government official on Sunday also raised questions about Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg, the chief of the Pakistani Army from 1988 to 1991. The senior official said Dr. Khan had told investigators that General Beg urged him to share nuclear technology with Iran.
General Beg has acknowledged that in 1991 he proposed that Pakistan form a military alliance with Iran and Afghanistan to thwart what he thought was an impending American invasion of all three countries. But he said he never approved the transfer of nuclear technology.
''I would not be stupid enough to do such a thing,'' General Beg said in a telephone interview on Monday. ''I know what my responsibility is.''
General Beg said the security of the nuclear program had not been his responsibility. The nuclear laboratories were under the control of the president and the prime minister at the time, he said.
Some political and military experts accused General Beg of making false statements. They said the country's army has maintained tight control over the nuclear program since its inception in 1974. The army has ruled the country for most of its modern history.
''He is lying,'' said Ayesha Siddiqa, a defense analyst, referring to General Beg. ''They are trying to protect a lot of names.''
The senior government official also told journalists that Dr. Khan told investigators that a military adviser and close friend of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto also urged him to share nuclear technology with Iran. Both men are dead.
A spokesman for Mrs. Bhutto said that the allegations were false and that she had opposed the spread of nuclear weapons during her two terms in office.
The holiday week here made it difficult to determine the nature of political repercussions, although there was some initial response.
Spokesmen for the country's two main secular opposition political parties, Mrs. Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party and the Pakistan Muslim League Nawaz, called for a parliamentary inquiry.
In a telephone interview, a spokesman for a coalition of hard-line Islamist political parties, the Mutahida Majlis-e-Amal, or United Action Front, called for Dr. Khan to be allowed to speak publicly. He also reiterated the coalition's call for a nationwide strike on Friday to protest the government's treatment of nuclear scientists.
