Air Traffic Increases Despite Stored Planes
Though air traffic continues to rise, the number of commercial airliners in storage in December reached record levels, according to estimates by SpeedNews, the weekly aviation industry newsletter.
A total of 1,622 big jets (475 wide-body and 1,147 narrow-body) were in storage as of last month, chiefly at sites in the Mojave desert near Los Angeles and the Sonoran desert near Tucson. Another 173 smaller regional jets and 848 turboprop aircraft were also in mothballs, according to SpeedNews estimates. In December 2002, there were 1,610 big jets in storage -- 408 wide-bodies and 1,202 narrow-bodies, plus 165 regional jets and 762 turboprops.
For domestic travelers in 2003, those mothballed planes represented twin air travel realities: tighter space and less service.
Last year, according to data from the Federal Aviation Administration, regional jets, which typically have 50 or fewer seats and no first-class cabins, accounted for one in 4 domestic flights, up from one in 10 in 2000.
That may be changing somewhat this year, as airline revenues improve while customers express dissatisfaction with the cramped spaces of regional jets, especially on long flights. On those flights, ''riding an R.J. can be a physical experience not seen since the Inquisition,'' Michael Boyd, an airline consultant, notes in his report, Aviation Outlook 2004.
Mr. Boyd is among the industry analysts who think there is a quickly emerging market for new roomier, but fuel-efficient, jets with capacity in the 70-to-120 seat range.
Rebound Is Seen For Business Travel
Most corporate travel managers think that business travel will rebound significantly this year and next, according to a National Business Travel Association survey.
Other findings in the survey of 220 managers, which was completed Jan. 13: Nearly half report their travel budgets increased this year from last. About two-thirds say they will use midpriced hotels and discount airfares at least as much, or more frequently, this year as in 2003. Most believe hotel rates and average air fares will remain flat this year, though 11 percent anticipate a slight decrease in air fares.
Longest Flight To Start Today
Singapore Airlines will claim the record for the longest scheduled nonstop flight today when it starts service between Singapore and Los Angeles. Flight time from Los Angeles to Singapore is 18 1/2 hours.
Delta Takes Aim At JetBlue Airways
In the latest indication that network carriers intend to compete more aggressively against low-cost airlines that have been taking their market share, Delta Air Lines said it would invest $300 million over six years to improve its terminal at Kennedy International Airport in New York, also home base for JetBlue Airways. Delta also said it would add eight new destinations and increase its daily departures from J.F.K.
Delta said it was adding or expanding service later this year from J.F.K. to Denver, Las Vegas, Los Angeles, San Diego, San Francisco and Seattle. JetBlue has flights to airports in or near each of those cities.
JOE SHARKEY
BUSINESS TRAVEL
