Basketball, Larry Bird says, ''is a simple game  when everyone on the team is on the same page.'' Perhaps it was simpler for Bird than for others, who may have been less talented, less dedicated, less astute. But as a player, as a coach, and now, in his first year running a team, he retains an eye to keeping the game as uncomplicated as possible.
That was Bird's approach when he took over the Indiana Pacers in July as president of basketball operations, a team that had, the previous season, one of the best records in the N.B.A. for the first half of the campaign, only to falter and lose in the first round of the playoffs for the third straight year.
The coach of the Pacers in those three seasons was Isiah Thomas. And Bird, when he took over the Pacers, saw a team that ''just wasn't working.'' That is, he concluded there were different pages for different players, a judgment he arrived at after watching tapes of the games and talking individually to the players. So in one of his first acts in his new position, he fired Thomas, who has resurfaced as president of basketball operations of the Knicks and is making headlines.
''I think Isiah's done a terrific job so far with the Knicks,'' Bird, in his office at Conseco Fieldhouse here, said Monday, a day before his team was to play the Knicks at Madison Square Garden in what will be the first game between the teams since Thomas became Bird's front-office rival.
They battled each other on the court for over a decade and are forever linked by an errant pass that Thomas threw and Bird stole in the final seconds of Game 5 of the 1987 Eastern Conference finals. Their relationship took on an edge with Thomas's subsequent comment that Bird would be considered just a good N.B.A. player if he were black instead of white.
So Tuesday's game begins a new chapter, one being played out in suits and ties -- and for now, on Bird's part, with kind words.
''Trading for Stephon Marbury was a great move for the franchise,'' Bird said of the Knicks. ''They gave up a lot in regard to future draft picks to get him, but he scores, he passes, I think he knows how to lead a team. Sure, Isiah gave up some of their future, but in New York, in Boston and Los Angeles, you have to win now. That's the nature of the beast.
''And hiring Lenny Wilkens was also a very good move, too. Lenny's proved himself in this league. He's won a lot of games, and, of course, he's lost a lot of games. But before Lenny and Marbury came to New York, the Knicks were hoping to make the playoffs. I think they could be a two, three or four seed now.''
Meanwhile, the Pacers, with one of the best records in the N.B.A., could end up being the top-seeded team in the East. Not bad for a team that seemed ''to be in disarray'' at the end of last season, said Donnie Walsh, the Pacers' chief executive, who cited reasons that ranged from deaths in players' families to the deficiencies that accrue to a young team.
''It was hardly all of Isiah's fault,'' said Bird, backing up Walsh's assessment. Bird himself coached the Pacers for three seasons, departed on his own volition and was succeeded by Thomas.
''I think 80 percent of the time a coach in the N.B.A. should be there three years max,'' said Bird, who noted that every coach but one in the Eastern Conference has resigned or been fired since the end of last season. ''The other 20 percent can handle the pressure, the players and have a good relationship with the owners in a different way. Those are people like Phil Jackson and Jerry Sloan and Flip Saunders.''
Bird, upon his leaving the Pacers as coach, had backed the hiring of Rick Carlisle, a former teammate of Bird's with the Celtics and one of Bird's assistants in his three seasons on the sidelines. But Walsh hired Thomas instead, and Carlisle wound up as coach of the Detroit Pistons, where he was named coach of the year two seasons ago before being fired at the end of last season.
''Whenever a general manager takes over a team, he usually wants his own coach in place,'' Walsh said. ''So he makes a change. Isiah did it himself with the Knicks.''
Carlisle said that when Bird hired him, ''There were no wasted words -- he was very direct.'' What Bird told him was: ''We have to win, to do better in the playoffs, and the way to do it is with fundamentals. Play good defense -- it all starts with defense -- and move the ball to the open man.''
Bird said: ''It sounds simple, but it amazes me how many guys don't see or won't see the open man, who don't know how to pass out of the double team. I don't think they'd see him if he was standing on the rim. They don't see the rotation of defenses, they don't know where their teammates are supposed to go on offense. It's mind-boggling. Those are not the kinds of guys who win championships.''
Bird said he watched ''loads of tapes'' of games, scouted high school and college and European players in person, and was looking for players who play the game, perhaps not with his particular skills, but in his fashion, with his competitive zeal.
''I wasn't the quickest guy on the court, but I had a knack for getting to the basket with the ball and I was always the first guy back on defense to stop a fast break, because I ran back, didn't jog, and I was always running to lead our fast break,'' he said.
''And you see guys today who don't have the fundamentals. Like if they're right-handed, they can't use their left. I worked and worked to develop my left hand.''
But can a pro today have time to develop his left hand, for example?
''He's got all summer,'' Bird said.
As head coach, Carlisle has made changes, Bird said. ''We have a defensive system in place. It works like an offensive system -- keep the ball out of the middle and rotate on every possession -- and if a guy makes a mistake and is in the wrong place on defense, everybody knows it. There is a level of accepting responsibility. And we have many fewer technicals and suspensions,'' he said, referring primarily to Ron Artest, the volatile and talented forward.
Walsh said: ''Ronnie must be given a lot of credit for getting himself under control -- and he was told that if he keeps up the harmful behavior he just might not have a contract in this league. But, yes, a change in atmosphere has also helped.''
It's a change that led to Thomas ending up in New York, where he is plotting how to move his team past Bird's Pacers.
So did Bird have any other thoughts on the Knicks? ''Nah, I don't worry about the Knicks,'' he said. ''I don't care about 'em.''
PRO BASKETBALL
