Tom Brady, the New England Patriots quarterback, said he slept only an hour Sunday night after his team defeated the Carolina Panthers in a memorable 32-29 victory in Super Bowl XXXVIII at Reliant Stadium.
He arrived at the foyer of a hotel ballroom looking spry nevertheless, a second Super Bowl most valuable player trophy in his midst, a new silver Cadillac Escalade in the offing, and his place as the centerpiece of a budding dynasty secure.
He talked about how much he loved football and why he believed the future of the Patriots was as big and boundless as the Texas sky.
''When I was at Michigan,'' Brady said, ''we had this equipment manager who had been there for like 40 years, and you can imagine how many rings he had. We always used to say, 'Hey, what's your favorite ring?' And he always used to say, 'The next one.'
''That's kind of the way it is.''
With Brady, a forward-thinking front office and a tireless coach in Bill Belichick, the Patriots appear poised to contend for more Super Bowl titles after winning their second in three seasons on Sunday.
Despite the parity and unpredictability of the National Football League, the Patriots are built to last, for many reasons.
Brady, at 26, a former sixth-round pick, has the makings of a legendary player, a leader who is already drawing comparisons to Joe Montana, the former San Francisco 49ers quarterback who won four Super Bowls while Brady was growing up in San Mateo, Calif.
With savvy deals, including the blockbuster trade that sent quarterback Drew Bledsoe to the Buffalo Bills before the 2002 season, the Patriots possess two picks in each of the first two rounds in the N.F.L. draft in April.
The front office, with Scott Pioli, the vice president for player personnel, has been able to shed the large contracts for star players that hamper some teams.
The Patriots, quite simply, have become a team to envy and learn from.
''I think when you look down the road, this is a team that can hold it together,'' Ron Jaworski, the former Philadelphia Eagles quarterback and current television commentator, said here Monday.
''Every year, when you usually look at the end of the Super Bowl, coaches leave. This staff has stayed intact. I think there are 14 assistants, and most of them have now won two Super Bowls. They're all on the same page.''
This season, five days before the opener, the Patriots cut safety Lawyer Milloy when he refused to renegotiate his contract, which was not guaranteed and accounted for $5.8 million of the Patriots' salary cap.
But the Patriots had planned for Milloy's possible departure, signing the free-agent veteran Rodney Harrison last March. Harrison, who had never won a Super Bowl in nine seasons in San Diego, was the perfect fit: hungry, talented and less-expensive, at $3.2 million.
New England will next have to decide whether to keep cornerback Ty Law, who is scheduled to make $9.5 million in 2004.
''It's going to be a treadmill,'' Belichick said of the decisions ahead during his news conference here Monday. ''The combine is in a few weeks, and Scott Pioli told me we were five weeks behind in preparation. You just go from one thing to another: combine, the draft, free agency, minicamps and, before you know it, you're into the next season.''
Of that treadmill, he said: ''We were on it a couple of years ago, and it's good to be on it again. I'm not complaining, but the '04 season has started for most of the teams in this league, and I know they are further ahead than we are.''
If the Patriots decide to part with Law, they may beef up the secondary through the draft.
New England is also starting to show some age at linebacker, the position that contributed to the Patriots' allowing just one 100-yard rusher during the season. Other than Mike Vrabel, who is 28, Tedy Bruschi, Willie McGinest, Roman Phifer and Ted Johnson are all in their 30's.
But this is a Patriots team that showed all season that it can mix and match, whether because of injury or because of the demands of a new scheme. New England started 42 different players this season.
''Just an amazing mix of different players -- offensive players, defensive layers and special teams,'' Belichick said. ''With injuries, people stepped in and played, players that a lot of people, the media and fans, had never heard of. They stepped in and had significant roles on our team.''
Brady, though, is the glue, the player who stepped in when Bledsoe was injured in the second game of the 2001 season and has remained the starter since.
Jaworski said he believed Brady would only improve.
''I think if he gets that game-breaking, explosive back, he can get even better,'' Jaworski said. ''You rank a quarterback by championships. The quarterback is a position of leadership and tempo-setting for a football team.
''The fact that, at his age, he already has won two world championships, where he's going to be, the sky is the limit.''
After winning their first Super Bowl, after the 2001 season, the Patriots finished 9-7 last season and just missed the playoffs.
Next season, expect New England, led by a coach of details and a quarterback of determination, to return to the playoffs and, perhaps, to this large stage again.
''I just like playing football,'' Brady said. ''I like lifting weights, I like practice, and I like training camp, I do.''
Belichick smiled.
''I can't wait to remind Tom, starting in August, how much he loves training camp,'' he said.
PRO FOOTBALL
