Carnegie Hall, stunned by the death of its director, Robert J. Harth, is facing the unwelcome task of seeking his replacement, its third executive search in five years.
Klaus Jacobs, the vice chairman and treasurer of Carnegie's board, said yesterday that he would serve in an acting capacity, as he did the last time the hall's leadership changed hands. Mr. Harth's predecessor, Franz Xaver Ohnesorg, assumed the position in September 1999, resigned in December 2000 and left the following April. His predecessor, Judith Arron, served for 12 years before dying of cancer in December 1998. Mr. Jacobs served until Mr. Harth started in September 2001.
Mr. Harth, 47, died on Friday, apparently of a heart attack, at his Carnegie Hall apartment.
It was Mr. Klaus who lead the search committee that selected Mr. Harth; Mr. Klaus said he would do so again, although not right away. ''Of course we go forward,'' he said. ''And with due speed we will begin to look for a successor.'' He said he did not yet have a list of candidates.
''I would like to find somebody just like him,'' he said of Mr. Harth, ''somebody of his age, his creativity, his vision and his business acumen. Where do you find someone like that?'' Carnegie Hall staff members returned to work yesterday in a state of mourning, assembling in Zankel Hall, where the chairman, Sanford I. Weill, addressed them.
A private funeral is to take place today, with a memorial service to be scheduled later, Carnegie Hall said. It also postponed until next Wednesday a news conference, scheduled for today, to announce its new season.
In addition to sadness, there was a sense of frustration yesterday that the institution was now in flux again. Mr. Ohnesorg's brief tenure was stormy and prompted several staff defections.
''When he was coming into Carnegie Hall, there was a lot of upset,'' Mr. Weill said. ''He just reached out to everybody, from the stagehands to the staff to the board to the artists and got us all to coalesce.''
Staff members expressed some nervousness about the future. ''Who's going to take his place?'' asked Gino Francesconi, the director of Carnegie Hall's museum and its archivist, who has been at the hall for 30 years. ''What's that person going to be like?''
John Adams, who holds the composer's chair at Carnegie Hall, cautioned the hall against choosing someone more conventional. ''Especially in the extremely conservative and pathologically timid world of classical music, Robert was a brave and unique soul,'' Mr. Adams said. ''I just hope that the board understands what in Robert's philosophy was so new and won't fall back on the classical music industry.''
Mr. Harth brought his own eclectic musical tastes to his position, particularly in overseeing Zankel Hall, a new underground stage aimed at reaching new audiences with nontraditional programming.
Ernest Fleischmann, the former managing director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic who had hired a 23-year-old Mr. Harth as his executive director, yesterday predicted that his former protégé's death ''would have a very detrimental effect on New York musical life.'' Mr. Fleischmann said Mr. Harth had set a less adversarial tone between Carnegie Hall and Lincoln Center. ''That's Robert's nature,'' he said. ''He's tough but he's caring. Even when he was a mere kid, I often used him as the heavy with unions and so on. Somehow they liked and respected him.''
A new director will also have to be able to balance the budget, board members said yesterday, something Mr. Harth was able to do.
At a recent retreat of the hall's executive committee, Mr. Harth presented a plan for the next five years, including stepped up education efforts through the newly created Carnegie Hall Institute. ''It was a creative and inspiring road map,'' Kenneth J. Bialkin, the board's secretary, recalled yesterday. ''We were all really anticipating that he would be there to drive the bus.
''I thought we wouldn't have to worry about anything as long as Robert was around,'' he continued. ''It's a lousy thing when a good guy goes.''
It may be impossible, however, to find someone with Mr. Harth's round-the-clock commitment to his job; his colleagues say he seemed to never leave the hall.
George Steel, the executive director of the Miller Theater at Columbia University, which presents traditional and contemporary classical music, recalled seeing Mr. Harth at a recent preconcert discussion at Carnegie Hall. ''There were things going on on all three stages, and there he was, hopping up and down the back stairs,'' Mr. Steel said. ''Yet he had an easygoing happiness about being there. He had an incredible workload, yet he didn't seem to wear it.''
''It's a party that he planned that's just beginning,'' Mr. Steel continued. ''And it seems crazy that he won't be there as the genial host.''
Correction:  March 3, 2004, Wednesday  An article in The Arts on Feb. 3 about Carnegie Hall's plans to look for a director to replace Robert J. Harth, who died on Jan. 30, misstated his title when he was at the Los Angeles Philharmonic. (The error also appeared in an obituary on Feb. 1.) Mr. Harth was vice president and general manager, not executive director.
The article also misstated the name of the hall's education arm. It is the Weill Music Institute, not the Carnegie Hall Institute. The article also gave an incorrect surname at two points for the vice chairman and treasurer of Carnegie Hall's board. He is Klaus Jacobs.
