Because of collapsing sales in recent weeks, the producers of the Broadway revival of ''Gypsy'' said yesterday that they would close the show on Feb. 28.
The production, starring Bernadette Peters as the legendary stage mother Momma Rose, will have lost a little less than half of its $8 million capitalization.
Robert Fox, one of the show's producers, said that the production had taken several austerity measures in recent weeks, including deferred royalty payments, but that the downturn had been particularly sharp and sudden.
''We had made plans for this,'' Mr. Fox said. ''But this was worse than anyone expected.''
The show was the second musical to announce a closing yesterday. The producers of ''Never Gonna Dance,'' a dance musical which opened to mixed reviews in December, also said they would shutter; its last performance will be on Feb. 15.
The fall of ''Gypsy,'' however, is more surprising and could leave one of Broadway's most famous theaters, the Shubert, vacant during the often-lucrative springtime.
''Gypsy'' was one of the most highly anticipated entries in the 2002-3 season. The director, Sam Mendes, had directed the widely successful version of ''Cabaret'' (with Rob Marshall) for the Roundabout Theater Company in the late 1990's and approached ''Gypsy'' with a similar taste for minimalism and an emphasis on the show's book, written by Arthur Laurents. Both Mr. Laurents and to a lesser degree Stephen Sondheim, the show's lyricist, were involved in rehearsals; Jule Styne, the show's composer, is dead.
The show received good reviews after opening on May 1 but was almost immediately dogged by bad press after Ms. Peters missed some performances because of illness. The production was nominated for four Tony Awards, including one for Ms. Peters, but received none.
Still, ''Gypsy'' sold well for most of 2003. But by early January, with tourists gone and local theatergoers staying inside during a brutal stretch of weather, the production's sales grew increasingly weak.
More important, the show's advance sale, the main indicator of a production's staying power, began to shrink rapidly. It stood at less than $2 million yesterday.
''Gypsy'' will have played 347 performances and 33 previews when it closes.
