The White House called on Monday for a 10 percent increase in spending for the year-old Department of Homeland Security, a sizable jump by the standards of the administration's overall budget for 2005. But the proposal drew immediate criticism from Democrats for sharp cuts in grants to state and local law enforcement agencies.
The budget for the department, which consolidated 22 federal agencies last year into a single superdepartment responsible for pre-empting terrorist attacks on American soil, was set at $40.2 billion, up from $36.5 billion this year.
''We have made measurable, visible progress during our first year of work,'' said Tom Ridge, the secretary of homeland security. ''The president's budget maintains the momentum we have established.''
By the administration's calculation, overall federal spending for programs within the department will have more than doubled since 2001, a legacy of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
But while most agencies in the department can expect increases next year, there was an $800 million cut in the budget for the Office for Domestic Preparedness, which is responsible for distributing antiterrorism grants to state and local governments.
Aides to Mr. Ridge said the reduction, an 18 percent cut in the office's budget, would not hinder the work of so-called first responders in local governments, like police and fire departments, given the amount of federal antiterrorism aid they have received since the Sept. 11 attacks.
At a news conference on Monday, Mr. Ridge said that ''there are still literally billions and billions of dollars to be distributed'' to state and local governments under previous federal budgets for antiterrorism programs. He said the new budget reflected a reformulation intended to send antiterrorism grants to large cities and other population areas that were the likeliest targets for terrorists.
A large share of the department's overall budget increase for next year was dedicated to Project Bioshield, the administration's program to stockpile vaccines and antidotes to counteract an attack with chemical or biological weapons. The department said $2.5 billion would be available for the program next year, compared with $900 million this year.
The Transportation Security Administration would also receive a sizable increase, to $5.3 billion, a rise of $900 million, or about 20 percent, from this year.
The department's budget proposals drew a mixed response from Congressional Democrats, with lawmakers from large urban areas praising the decision to pump more money into their communities and other lawmakers criticizing cuts that might affect the ability of state and local governments to prepare for attacks.
''There's good news and bad news,'' said Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, Democrat of New York, who represents much of the East Side of Manhattan. ''The good news is that the president finally wants to send money to where the threat is. The bad news is that he proposes to cut overall funding for first responders.''
Representative Jim Turner of Texas, the ranking Democrat on the House Select Committee on Homeland Security, said the overall budget ''provides some additional dollars to help close security gaps our country faces, but I am concerned that we are not spending our tax dollars as effectively and as widely as we need to.''
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, the Senate Democrat who was a crucial proponent of the department's creation and is now seeking his party's presidential nomination, was far sharper in his criticism of the budget, especially the proposal to cut from the Office for Domestic Preparedness.
''The administration still refuses to learn, despite all independent evidence, what it will take to protect the American people from terrorist attack,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''At most, this request moves baby steps towards securing the homeland.''
THE PRESIDENT'S BUDGET PROPOSAL: DOMESTIC SECURITY
