Wouldn't It Clash With the Oranges Over Our Couch?
Astonishing though it may seem, there are actually several irony-free spots in this town.
Were it up to us, we would install yellow metallic warning signs: a caricature of DENNIS MILLER, perhaps, with a bold diagonal slash running through it. That way, one would not have to stumble unknowingly into a situation like the one we found in SoHo on Friday night.
An earlier event, at the SEAN KELLY Gallery in Chelsea, had been billed as a major exhibition by ILYA and EMILIA KABAKOV, an artist couple in their 70's who left the Soviet Union in 1988. The installation in the main gallery, ''20 Ways to Get an Apple Listening to the Music of MOZART,'' was an enormous dining table taking up most of a large room and covered in a white cloth with an apple in the center. There were 20 place settings, and to either side were ways of obtaining the out-of-reach apple that used a range of human endeavors: intellectual, ascetic, magical, traitorous.
Tell us about the apple, we asked the Kabakovs, knowing as serious students of conceptual, avant-garde work it would be wrong to ask about a banana, since the piece did not have one.
''The apple is a kind of thing that we can't reach,'' said Ms. Kabakov, who wore a tight ski band around choppy gray hair. ''We're trying to, but we can't. It is something in this case which is beautiful, difficult. It's there. We don't know how to get it. We have to get it.''
Hey, we're down with that. With us, it would have been a six-episode deal with HBO, but you're the artist.
At the party after the event, at Mr. Kelly's home in SoHo, there was a bowl of apples in the center of a large white marble table -- a perfect echo of the exhibition, until a red-wine spill. But that, too, reflects longing, does it not?
A spill resulting, no doubt, from overreaching, desperation, carelessness and finally the wine bloodstain of the unsung, undervalued writer. We mean artist.
The host, Mr. Kelly, is a tall, warm man who speaks with an English accent. In attendance: the artist JAMES CASEBERE; a former curator of the Museum of Modern Art, ROBERT STORR; a former director of the Whitney, DAVID ROSS; and a director of the New Museum of Contemporary Art, LISA PHILLIPS. Among the works of art: a DUCHAMP, a LOUISE BOURGEOIS; a MAN RAY; a GERHARD RICHTER in the bedroom.
''Just here is MARINA ABRAMOVIC,'' Mr. Kelly says, pointing out a voluptuous, robust woman, first in the shower in a photograph on the wall, then on the sofa, where she is engaged in conversation. The photograph was taken during another installation at the Sean Kelly gallery last November. Ms. Abramovic lived there for 12 days, existing on water. The installation was a backdrop to the season's opening episode of ''Sex and the City,'' where SARAH JESSICA PARKER meets her new boyfriend, played by MIKHAIL BARYSHNIKOV.
We sat down next to Ms. Abramovic on the mossy gray velour sofa. She is powerful, as tall as a pillar and robust. She looks like a breathing figure in a sculpture garden. She spoke of her work, her artist boyfriend from Rome and the sake party they had had the evening before, pushing back strands of her lush brown mane. Next to each ear was a square of white medical tape. She had two acupuncture needles inserted for appetite suppression, she told us.
LOU REED and his partner, the performance artist LAURIE ANDERSON, arrived as the party was winding down. Mr. Reed, who was wearing black leather pants and black suede coat, has a well-wrinkled face, like a copper engraving. They spotted SALMAN RUSHDIE and began discussing having dinner at what Mr. Rushdie called ''that new sushi place in TriBeCa.''
We politely introduced ourselves.
''The CINDY ADAMS of The Times,'' Mr. Reed told his companions. ''Think of it that way. Anyway, wait a minute, we've been distracted. Excuse us a minute.''
Then he made a 180-degree turn and continued with dinner plans.
We're thinking that this town could use signs warning of social potholes in your path, black holes that take the joy out of otherwise lovely evenings.
We see something in yellow metal, with a sketch of Lou Reed.
with Lily Koppel
Boldface Names
