Eddie Griffin was held without bond in a Houston jail Monday after prosecutors accused him of violating conditions of his bail and attempted assault.
A bond hearing set for Tuesday will most likely determine whether Griffin remains in jail or is allowed to enter the Betty Ford Center in Rancho Mirage, Calif., on Wednesday, as he had planned, for six weeks of treatment for alcohol abuse.
Griffin was in court Monday to arrange the terms of his inpatient stay at the center when prosecutors said that he violated his 6 p.m.-to-6 a.m. curfew in December. The curfew is in effect whenever he is not with the Nets, who beat the New Orleans Hornets on Monday night, 91-70. Griffin, who signed with the Nets on Jan. 8 and left the team last week to receive therapy, had been admonished twice by Harris County (Tex.) Judge Mike Anderson for violating curfew.
Jennifer L. Devine, a Harris County assistant district attorney, said a witness had come forward and would testify Tuesday that he had an altercation with Griffin at a convenience store in Houston early Dec. 23. The witness told prosecutors that he had left his car running outside the store when a man with Griffin got into the car and drove it away. The witness said that when he tried to run after his car, Griffin drove his truck at him.
The police were called, but the car was recovered and no arrests were made. Griffin's name was not included in the report and the man with him was not identified. Prosecutors said they were still deciding whether to file charges against Griffin for aggravated assault.
Griffin's lawyer, Rusty Hardin, declined to comment on the specific accusations. ''All I know is that the state is repeating some accusations from a guy we've learned has multiple arrests himself,'' Hardin said.
Griffin has a Feb. 13 hearing on an unrelated felony assault charge, when he will also be sentenced for a marijuana conviction. It appears unlikely that he will play for the Nets this season.
Prosecutors are also investigating another potential curfew violation that took place late Jan. 24 and early Jan. 25 at the Renaissance Meadowlands Hotel in Rutherford, N.J., where Griffin was staying.
PRO BASKETBALL
