Larry Bird will not be on the court Tuesday to intercept Isiah Thomas's inbounds pass as he did in that famous moment of the 1987 Eastern Conference finals between Boston and Detroit. Thomas will not be on the court to correct what he calls the biggest mistake of his N.B.A. career.
But as the Knicks prepared for Tuesday night's game against Bird's Indiana Pacers, Thomas felt compelled to address his relationship with Bird, and with the Pacers, the team he coached for three seasons before Bird fired him last August.
''I have a great deal of respect for him, I really have no hard feelings,'' Thomas said Monday of Bird, even if he did let a little bit of bitterness leak into some of his comments about a man who now carries he same title he does -- president of basketball operations.
Within seven weeks of joining the Pacers last July, Bird fired Thomas and hired his former assistant and teammate, Rick Carlisle. Carlisle has led the Pacers to the best record in the Eastern Conference, but Thomas was not about to call Indiana the team to beat in the conference.
That honor goes to the defending-champion Nets, Thomas said.
And Thomas had other points to make as he defended his stint with a young Pacers team that was ousted in the first round of the playoffs all three seasons he was there.
In each of those seasons, according to Thomas, the Pacers lost for reasons that had little to do with his coaching abilities.
''When history goes back and retells the story and sees it for what is really is, when you look at the facts, and forget the rumor and innuendo, people will see the job that we did there,'' Thomas said.
Thomas clearly harbors resentment toward those in Indiana who criticized him for not leading the Pacers, a higher-seeded team, past the Boston Celtics in the first round last season.
''I thought people were totally insensitive to the emotional things that were going on with our players,'' Thomas said.
He was referring to the gruesome suicide of Jermaine O'Neal's stepfather, who shot himself in the head in O'Neal's presence, as well as the deaths of Jamaal Tinsley's mother and Austin Croshere's father-in-law.
''I would say the one thing I was guilty of, we probably should have had a grief counselor to talk to the young men about what they were going through,'' Thomas said.
Donnie Walsh, the Pacers' chief executive, said: ''It was such an usual time, I don't know if there was anything you could do to make it better. I thought Isiah did a good job of getting us into the playoffs the first two years.'' But after last spring's playoff loss to Boston, Walsh said, the team was ''fragmented'' and needed a change.
Thomas had a different perspective. ''We all were led to believe that everything was O.K. and that we would be given a chance to complete what we started,'' he said, stating that Walsh and Bird told him that.
Thomas, who still has a house in Indianapolis with his wife and two children, seems to have a bitter taste that stems not only from his firing, but also from what he feels were unduly negative comments from fans during his three years in Indiana. He said that he had received letters and e-mails from people in Indiana that had words so unspeakable, he said he ''would have to lie'' if he were to disclose them. At least some had racist comments, said a person close to Thomas who lives in Indiana.
Thomas said he felt people in Indiana, over all, never embraced him as they did Bird.
''Even though I went to Indiana University and won the championship and he lost, I just think that the hometown guy will always get the nod,'' Thomas said. ''And I was still seen as a person from Chicago and not necessarily home grown in Indiana.''
In the seven weeks it took for Bird to dismiss Thomas, the two men barely talked to each other, Walsh said. He acknowledged that there is ''a little difference between those guys,'' and said it stemmed from their playing days.
''They competed so hard against each other that when those guys meet, there is something between them,'' Walsh said. ''Isiah had it with Jordan and Larry, no matter how much hand-slapping they did.''
Thomas knows that the Indiana game could be a yardstick for his club. He said he loved the way his team is playing and singled out Keith Van Horn's performance.
Asked how important beating Bird's Pacers was to him, Thomas smiled and said: ''I always want to win. I want to beat anybody.''
PRO BASKETBALL
