''Wardrobe malfunction'' was the term Justin Timberlake used to explain why he bared Janet Jackson's breast at the end of their Super Bowl duet. Like ''erectile dysfunction,'' a term used in halftime advertisements for Cialis, it was a somewhat startling euphemism.
If Monday morning quarterbacks are any guide, few people thought it was by accident that Mr. Timberlake's hand snaked across Ms. Jackson's torso as he reached the lyric, ''I'll have you naked by the end of this song,'' and tore off one bustier cup, releasing a breast partly obscured by a sunburst-shaped nipple broach. The gesture seemed timed to more than the music: the very next commercial was a close-up of Ms. Jackson's cleavage in a gaudy promotion for next week's Grammy Awards on CBS. (Ms. Jackson denies that the nudity was deliberate, saying that Mr. Timberlake was supposed to rip away only the top layer and leave a bit of red lace behind.)
And nobody really has any reason to believe CBS when the network insists that it did not know the bodice ripping was in the works. That is not just because MTV produced the halftime show for CBS and both companies are owned by Viacom. One does not have to subscribe to conglomerate conspiracy theory to be suspicious. CBS has told so many howlers over the past 18 months that any claim to dignity -- and righteous indignation -- by this network is now open to snickering.
CBS insisted there was no quid pro quo when it sent Pfc. Jessica Lynch a letter suggesting that an exclusive interview with CBS News would be rewarded with other lucrative contracts within the Viacom empire.
CBS contended that its decision to cancel the mini-series ''The Reagans'' had nothing to do with the right-wing lobbying campaign that threatened a boycott of advertisers' products.
And the network insisted that it did not sweeten a deal with Michael Jackson to secure a ''60 Minutes'' interview with him after his arrest last November as the network was preparing a Michael Jackson entertainment special.
Implausible deniability and the fungible walls between news and entertainment, and between art and commerce, exist at every major network. But like a high school student caught smoking pot by the principal, CBS can hardly wriggle free by arguing that everybody does it.
The beauty of the Janet Jackson to-do is that it could well be the one case in which CBS is telling the truth, and like the little network that cried wolf, nobody is listening. The chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, Michael Powell, was watching, however. He called the incident a ''classless, crass and deplorable stunt'' and called for a ''thorough and swift'' F.C.C. investigation. The National Football League also took umbrage, huffily announcing it was unlikely to invite MTV to produce a halftime show anytime soon. Perhaps the league will turn to MTV's rival cable music station, VH1. (That should work. VH1 is also owned by Viacom.)
Even trussed as she was in a shiny ''Matrix''/dominatrix outfit, Janet Jackson, 37, has never had much luck being taken seriously as a sex symbol, and it is unlikely that her Super Bowl surprise will be of much help there. But if her aim was to grab all the attention, as Madonna did when she kissed Britney Spears at the MTV Video Music Awards, then she did herself proud. And if she wanted to distract attention from her older, more famous and now more infamous brother Michael, then she achieved even that for a moment.
Her sudden flare of pre-Grammy attention and publicity came at a slight cost. Perhaps the one moment of honesty in that coldly choreographed tableau was when the cup came off and out tumbled what looked like a normal middle-aged woman's breast instead of an idealized Playboy bunny implant.
The N.F.L. was apparently put off by much of the MTV halftime show, not just Ms. Jackson's uninvited breast. And one can understand the league's confusion. Does anyone who loves the CBS hit ''Everybody Loves Raymond'' enjoy watching the hip-hop singer Nelly repeatedly grab his crotch, as he did in the halftime show? (Viacom, like Gaul, is divided into at least three very different parts).
But if the N.F.L. was really so shocked and appalled, why didn't it flinch at the Cialis advertisement that promised men 36 hours of relief from impotence, then warned that if they should experience an erection for four hours straight, they should seek ''immediate medical care''?
On television sincerity can be measured only by sacrifice. If the N.F.L. really found the halftime show so objectionable, perhaps it should reconsider giving Super Bowl rights to the highest bidder and instead select the network that promises to adhere to the N.F.L.'s self-image of wholesome good fun.
CBS could decide it cannot risk another such risqué assault on what it deliciously still refers to as its ''broadcast standards'' and recuse itself from carrying the Grammy Awards. A network's regret and remorse can be best judged by its willingness to lose ratings, and CBS so far has shown none.
THE TV WATCH
