Prime Minister Ariel Sharon said Monday that he might seek to evacuate almost all Israeli settlers from the Gaza Strip, outraging members of the settlement movement he helped create.
''I am working on the assumption that in the future there will be no Jews in Gaza,'' Mr. Sharon told the liberal daily Haaretz. He made similar comments in a very tense meeting of legislators from his Likud Party, said people who took part.
It was Mr. Sharon's most specific disclosure to date about what he calls ''unilateral disengagement'' from the Palestinians, a step he has said he will take if he judges that the Bush administration's peace initiative, known as the road map, has failed.
Mr. Sharon said he had given orders to plan for the evacuation of 17 of at least 20 settlements in Gaza. But his spokesman, Ranaan Gissin, cautioned that that was the most far-reaching of three options that Mr. Sharon was preparing to submit for the approval of his cabinet.
''It may be less settlements that have to be evacuated,'' Mr. Gissin said. ''We have to prepare for an interim plan that will maximize security for our citizens and minimize friction with the Palestinians.''
Mr. Sharon set no timeline for a withdrawal, though his allies said it could begin by summer. His opponents on the right and skeptics on the left were quick to accuse him of posturing to divert public attention from a bribery investigation. Mr. Sharon has not been charged in the scandal.
Settlers warned of political action to bring down Mr. Sharon's government, but far-right parties did not immediately bolt from his governing coalition, an indication that they did not consider action against settlements to be imminent or inevitable.
Palestinian officials suggested that the announcement might be nothing more than a public relations maneuver.
Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, reacted with scorn, saying Mr. Sharon was referring only to removing 17 trailers. ''What, so they can replace them with another 170?'' he asked.
Mr. Sharon astonished even some of his own ministers with his comments on Monday. Told by an Israeli reporter of the Haaretz interview, Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom said, ''I don't know of this decision.'' He added, ''My view is clear and has not changed, that unilateral steps will not bring less conflict and friction. They might even increase it.''
In the last 18 months, Mr. Sharon has made a series of statements that have alarmed longtime allies on the right. He has endorsed the idea of an eventual Palestinian state, criticized Israel's ''occupation'' of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and, most recently, said he intended to remove some isolated settlements. During that period, settlements continued to expand.
But even among rightist Likud politicians, there is new support for relinquishing territory, for fear that Arabs will soon outnumber Jews in Israel, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
In the Likud meeting, Mr. Sharon warned that Israel must now prepare to act should the Bush administration's peace initiative fail. ''He spoke about a situation in which it will become evident that the road map is dying,'' said Yuval Steinitz, a Likud member of Parliament.
Mr. Steinitz said Mr. Sharon would seek the support of the United States and major European countries. Mr. Gissin said Mr. Sharon would discuss his plans ''in detail'' with President Bush.
Likud politicians said Mr. Sharon also intended to evacuate a smaller number of West Bank settlements.
Mr. Sharon told Haaretz, ''It is my intention to carry out an evacuation -- sorry, a relocation -- of settlements that cause us problems and of places that we will not hold onto anyway in a final settlement, like the Gaza settlements.''
Eran Sternberg, a spokesman for the Gush Qatif settlement bloc in Gaza, said, ''We are quite sorry for these miserable declarations of Sharon, which probably come from the pressure of the investigations.''
He promised a ''tough struggle'' against Mr. Sharon, and like other settler leaders warned that a unilateral Israeli withdrawal would embolden terrorists.
''Today Gush Qatif is the finger in the dike that blocks terrorists from flooding the world,'' he said.
Israel captured the West Bank from Jordan and the Gaza Strip from Egypt in the Arab-Israeli war of June 1967. Gaza, which is bracketed against the Mediterranean Sea by a closely guarded Israeli fence, is about 7 miles wide and 25 miles long. It is home to 7,500 Israeli settlers and more than 1.2 million Palestinians.
In the West Bank, which is slightly smaller than Delaware, about 230,000 settlers live in 125 settlements, among more than two million Palestinians.
Within Israel there is broad support for evacuating the Gaza settlements, which are widely seen as extremist redoubts that drain Israel's resources and needlessly endanger its soldiers.
Mr. Sharon said Monday that he would evacuate Gaza settlements only after reaching an agreement with their residents.
Gaza settlers argue that the territory is part of Jews' biblical birthright. But though Mr. Sharon has long made common cause with religious settlers, he came to the settlement movement from a different perspective, focusing on Israel's modern security needs more than its ancient claims.
In April 2002, referring to Netzarim, one of the most isolated Gaza settlements, he said, ''The fate of Netzarim is the fate of Tel Aviv.'' But his remarks to Haaretz suggest that he now views the Gaza settlements as creating ''problems.'' Haaretz published only excerpts of its interview on its Web site on Monday.
Mr. Gissin said Mr. Sharon was concerned about growing chaos in the Palestinian Authority. He said Mr. Sharon wanted to ''seize the initiative'' rather than risk having a settlement imposed on Israel that might force it to return to its pre-1967 borders. Mr. Sharon calls those borders impossible to defend.
Mr. Gissin said that if the Palestinian Authority collapsed, the Palestinians might ''shout to the Security Council, 'Send an international force to the territories' '' and '' 'push Israel back to the '67 borders.' ''
Palestinian officials say Mr. Sharon has deliberately undermined the Palestinian Authority, sowing chaos to avoid political negotiations and impose his own preferred borders.
Israeli politicians are increasingly preoccupied with what they call the demographic threat, the danger that within a few years more Arabs than Jews will live in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza. The fear is that Israel would then have to sacrifice either its Jewish identity or its democratic character. Ehud Olmert, the deputy prime minister, has raised the concern that Israel may come to be regarded as an apartheid state.
To avoid that, some members of Likud argue that Israel must draw borders in a way to part with as many Arabs -- but as little land -- as possible. But many hard-line settlers argue that to give up one settlement is to start down a slippery slope.
In the Gaza Strip on Monday, Israeli forces killed four Palestinian gunmen during a raid that the Israeli Army said had been intended to arrest one of them.
