'I'm the only moderate Democrat in the race.'
It was the last full day of campaigning before what Senator Joseph I. Lieberman calls the Super Bowl of the Democratic nominating contest, and, after conducting seven radio interviews, he took his case to a fidgeting crowd of about 200 elementary school students here.
He had shaken hands with dozens of voters the day before at a boat show in Tulsa, Okla., and had delighted a crowd of youngsters by introducing Twiggy, the water-skiing squirrel. Now Mr. Lieberman was defending his stance on Iraq to a fourth grader.
''In Iraq they had the worst dictator in the world and he invaded other countries,'' Mr. Lieberman said at the East San Jose Elementary School. ''I always worried that if we didn't stop him he'd really hurt a lot of Americans.''
Outside the school, he told reporters, ''I'm the only moderate Democrat in the race.''
He then jetted to Arizona, where he conducted a town-hall-style session in Tucson and spoke at the League of Latin American Citizens Candidates Forum. He scuttled a trip to Oklahoma, where he lags in polls, in favor of returning to Delaware on Monday night.
Since the New Hampshire primary, Mr. Lieberman's schedule has been in flux as he has chased his best chances to win votes on Tuesday, focusing his energies on Delaware, Oklahoma and now Arizona, where he was endorsed by the state's largest newspaper, The Arizona Republic.
Even as some within the campaign sound a drumbeat of doom, Mr. Lieberman has remained upbeat, calling the primary ''wide open'' and ''undecided.'' But the campaign has been sending mixed signals, releasing a detailed schedule for stops in Virginia on Wednesday, a day that campaign aides refer to with ''ifs'' as some make plans to move on.
At the elementary school, in remarks heavy with references to his own immigrant heritage and that of his wife, Hadassah, Mr. Lieberman told a favorite tale from his 2000 campaign as the first Jewish candidate for vice president. At a rally in Santa Fe, he said, a Hispanic woman held up a sign emblazoned with the words ''Viva Chutzpah.''
''And that's the spirit of the campaign,'' he said. ''In America we all go up together; that's the great thing.''
DIANE CARDWELL
