Tiny St. Joseph's had attained college basketball celebrity, if not yet royalty, ascending in black tie to a No. 3 ranking in the Associated Press poll, winning its first 18 games in a red-carpet season that brought the flashbulbs of possibility and national attention.
And there was Villanova, its chief Philadelphia rival, awaiting Monday night for a mischievous pie-in-the-face interruption of this basketball coronation.
The Wildcats did expose a weak St. Joseph's frontcourt, which delivered only three baskets, and held the all-American point guard Jameer Nelson without an assist until the second half. Still, the resilient Hawks prevailed on the perimeter with a 74-67 victory as Nelson scored 23 points and guard Delonte West contributed 21 points, 11 rebounds and 6 assists. Now only Dayton at home and Rhode Island on the road seem to pose threats to a perfect regular season for the Hawks (19-0).
Philadelphia is in some ways the world's biggest small town, and, in such an insular place, St. Joseph's-Villanova offers the classic parochial antagonism. The universities are only seven miles apart, but the gulf between these ambitious Catholic institutions might be best described in terms of class instead of distance.
In the stilted terms in which such rivalries are often distilled, fans of St. Joseph's find Villanova supporters haughty and condescending, while Wildcats supporters find the St. Joseph's faithful jealous and insecure.
Villanova (12-8) is situated on the affluent Main Line, St. Joseph's on Philadelphia's grittier western border. Villanova belongs to the upscale Big East, St. Joseph's the second-tier Atlantic 10. Villanova is a Division I-AA football power and a longtime track power, and it won the 1985 N.C.A.A. basketball championship, while St. Joseph's lone appearance in the Final Four, in 1961, was later annulled by a point-shaving scandal.
Villanova is affiliated with the Augustinian Order, St. Joseph's the Jesuits. Both aspire to be the pre-eminent Catholic university in the Northeast. Both have grand basketball traditions.
Many fans and officials have ties to both universities, which perhaps are more alike than either cares to admit. Each considers itself sufficiently elite to charge about $35,000 annually for tuition and room and board.
But in sporting terms, the two agree on little beyond shared disdain. They cannot even agree if they have played each other 61 or 62 times in a heated rivalry that is known widely, if bombastically, as the Holy War.
''What used to be a local, intrafamily thing has now been perceived as some kind of class warfare,'' said Joe Lunardi, assistant vice president for communications at St. Joseph's and a radio broadcaster for basketball games.
''I don't know how accurate that is,'' he said, ''but I don't remember a more anticipated game and I've done more than 600 St. Joseph's games, including the N.C.A.A. Sweet 16. There are still people at St. Joe's, if given the choice, would rather go 1-26, as long as this is the one.''
Even the site of Monday's game -- an arena with ski-lodge ambience at Villanova called the Pavilion -- caused St. Joseph's considerable chafing.
Originally scheduled for Dec. 6 at the storied Palestra, a neutral site, the date was moved at the request of ESPN. As the designated home team, Villanova wanted the rescheduled match to be played on campus. That left St. Joseph's fans with access to only 250 tickets in a 6,500-seat arena, so the university set up big-screen television viewing in its own basketball arena, Alumni Fieldhouse.
If the Hawks felt shortchanged, they were hardly intimidated by the boos and taunting in a hostile arena. They had already won 11 times away from home this season, a school with an enrollment of 3,850 bucking the trend of college basketball being dominated by big-time football schools and the leverage that football money brings. The Philadelphia Inquirer reported last month that every other Top 10 school at the time had outspent St. Joseph's $1.4 million basketball budget by $600,000 to $3.3 million.
Monday night, the Hawks hit five of their first seven attempts from 3-point distance and took a 27-8 lead. Coach Phil Martelli believes his team pressures the ball and shares it as well as anyone. But St. Joseph's is hardly perfect. It lacks production from the frontcourt and is prone to fits of turnovers. The Hawks hit 20 3-pointers against Temple on Saturday, but a team that lives by the jump shot is vulnerable to die by the jump shot.
Villanova cut its deficit to 4 points, at 54-50, with 6 minutes 46 seconds remaining, but Nelson seemed unfazed. He gave the choke sign, apparently signaling to someone on the scorer's table that the Wildcats would collapse. Then he hit a pair of free throws, stole a pass and dropped in a layup to bring St. Joseph's lead to 65-55. For one more night, the winning streak was safe. If there is any envy in this rivalry at the moment, it belongs to Villanova.
''This is Army-Navy of basketball,'' said Don DiJulia, St. Joseph's athletic director. ''It would be nice to be recognized that you can't get any better than this.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
