'I'm not going to name the states, but I'm going to win.'
''I'm going to win.''
That vow, from Gen. Wesley K. Clark on the eve of only his second electoral contest, underlined his confidence as he traveled to Arizona, New Mexico and Oklahoma.
Since Friday, he has spent all of his time on the stump in those three states, forgoing South Carolina, and skipping Missouri, North Dakota and Delaware.
General Clark's aides say their strategy is to focus on the states with generally conservative populations and large proportions of military families who may be attracted by his Army career. His Arkansas roots also give him an edge in those states, aides say.
But those are the same factors that the campaign previously said would make General Clark a strong competitor in South Carolina, where he is now running a distant third in the polls.
In Albuquerque on Monday, he visited the Hispanic Cultural Center, where he talked about his childhood in Arkansas, saying, as he often does, ''I knew the difference between what I wanted and what I needed, and I didn't get what I wanted.''
While in New Mexico and Arizona, General Clark has sprinkled his stump speech with greetings and exhortations in Spanish that is usually grammatically correct and spoken with a Southern accent. And he has worked references to religion into his speeches as well, in Arizona mentioning his conversion to Catholicism and in Oklahoma mentioning his acceptance of Jesus Christ as his Savior.
But to a large degree his confidence appears to be based on the enthusiastic crowds he has attracted. ''I'm looking at people's faces and I'm listening to what they tell me,'' he told reporters on his campaign plane on Monday as he prepared to leave Tucson for a Hispanic conference in Phoenix. ''I'm going to win. I'm not going to name the states, but I'm going to win.''
His rallies in the Southwest appear to attract fewer undecided voters than similar events in New Hampshire, according to random interviews conducted with people at events in both places. That means the enthusiasm is coming to some degree from the converted. Nevertheless, General Clark remains confident.
''There's very, very strong support here and determination,'' he said. ''Not only do they want to get rid of George W. Bush but they don't want a Washington insider. They want someone who's part of the solution, not part of the problem.''
EDWARD WYATT
