High school seniors who missed their Regents examinations last week because school was canceled for snow will not have to retake the tests if all they seek is a local diploma, state education officials announced yesterday. Instead, those students will be able to substitute a passing course grade.
But if students seek the more prestigious Regents diploma, they will have to wait to take the tests in June, when they are next offered. Non-seniors will also have to take the tests in June. No makeup tests will be given, officials said.
The decision, which was outlined in a memorandum dated yesterday and sent to superintendents and administrators, stems from a predicament created last Wednesday, when schools in New York City, on Long Island and in much of the Hudson Valley were closed for snow, while schools elsewhere in the state remained open. The schools that stayed open administered the Regents exams scheduled for that day, in chemistry, physics, global history and geography and United States history and government. Reading and writing tests for special-education students were also given.
But once the tests were given in some schools, they could not be given elsewhere, lest the questions be leaked by way of Internet postings or whispers.
State officials said last week that it would be difficult to schedule makeup examinations, as they could cost roughly $3 million to put together and, more to the point, take more than a year to create.
State Senator Carl Kruger, a Brooklyn Democrat, criticized the state's decision, saying he feared it would encourage some students to simply seek a local diploma instead of a Regents diploma. ''If they take the local diploma, they're barring themselves from admission to most colleges, accredited universities,'' he said. ''They would be doing that because of the inadequacies of the test preparers and the test givers.''
Mr. Kruger favored a retest, saying that it should not take education officials so long to assemble a new test, and that the situation was unfair to students who had studied hard for their January exams but still wanted Regents diplomas.
In New York, Regents tests are given three times a year, and the busiest time is in June. Students who take tests in August and January have often failed the tests previously, just completed a semester-length course in the subject or are trying to lighten their loads for June. Last week, officials said they decided not to call off the tests statewide because they were unsure everyone would get the message.
William Johnson, the school superintendent in Rockville Centre, on Long Island, called yesterday's decision was fair but said he would have favored a statewide cancellation.
