After it was over, his Syracuse team having been demolished Monday night at the Hartford Civic Center, all Jim Boeheim could do was sit back and admire the might and precision of UConn. Even a losing coach can appreciate a virtuoso performance from a very good team.
Connecticut trounced Syracuse, 84-56, convincing Boeheim, the coach of the defending national champions, that the Huskies will be the team to beat in the N.C.A.A. tournament this season.
''They have the best team in the country, by far,'' Boeheim said. ''I don't think it's even close, talent-wise. They've got some new guys, and fitting guys in like that takes time. I never expected them to be undefeated. At the end of the year, they've got all the ingredients that you need to have.''
It can be argued that one game in early February may not wind up meaning that much later on, or that there will be far tougher opponents this season for Connecticut (18-3, 6-1 Big East) than Syracuse. But when a team plays this well against a quality, high-profile opponent, it has to mean something. Is Connecticut, which has experienced a few bumps in the road this season, losing three times and dropping out of the top spot in the polls, putting it all together at a good time?
''We are starting to jell,'' said UConn forward Denham Brown, who scored 15 points. ''We are playing together. Yes, we can go on a run.''
This was a night when just about everything worked for No. 5 Connecticut. Center Emeka Okafor was dominant, scoring 25 points and shooting 9 of 11. He also had 11 rebounds and 4 blocked shots. Defensively, the Huskies seemed to have all the answers. They held No. 18 Syracuse (14-4, 4-3) to its second-lowest total of the season and 31.3 percent shooting.
''Tonight, we played good defense, we ran, we were aggressive and we rebounded well,'' UConn guard Ben Gordon said. ''When we do all those things, its going to be tough to beat us.''
Thanks to Hakim Warrick, who finished with 26 points, Syracuse managed to stay close through much of the first half. A junior forward, Warrick scored on a driving layup with 7 minutes 43 seconds left in the half. That gave him 16 points and tied the score at 24-24.
But Warrick did not score again in the half, and the Orangemen struggled to find another offensive option. Meanwhile, Okafor hit two straight perimeter jumpers, igniting a 9-0 run that gave the Huskies a 33-24 lead.
Syracuse edged closer on a 3-pointer and an 18-foot jumper by Demetris Nichols and trailed by 5 points with 3:10 to go in the half. But the Huskies' defense responded, limiting the Orangemen to one more basket until intermission. UConn did it without Okafor, who sat out the final 5:11 of the half after picking up his second foul.
The Huskies were not content to sit on a 41-31 halftime lead. They came out with even more spark in the second half. After Nichols hit a 3-pointer 1:16 into the second half, Connecticut took over. Rashad Anderson's 3-pointer gave the Huskies a 60-41 lead.
''I couldn't be happier with the way we played,'' Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun said. ''I was particularly pleased with how we played defensively and how we ran.''
Orangemen guard Gerry McNamara struggled; he had 9 points and shot 2 for 17.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
