'Join us in this campaign, this cause, to change America.'
The hair was just right, as usual. Suit crisp, grin wide.
But when Senator John Edwards of North Carolina opened his mouth, it was clear something was different.
''You will notice my voice is not what it normally is,'' Mr. Edwards said with a rasping, cracking voice as he began his remarks at Voorhees College in Denmark, S.C., on Monday. ''I've been talking too much lately.''
That may be so -- he has crisscrossed the country the last week, campaigning here and in New Mexico, Oklahoma and Missouri -- but the official diagnosis is bronchitis.
He has seen a doctor, is taking antibiotics and gave up his beloved Diet Coke for spring water. During an interview on Sunday he turned away several times to hack.
Mr. Edwards's health slowed his campaigning the day before a primary that his campaign is banking on winning to keep his candidacy going.
Mr. Edwards pressed on, traveling in his customized bus from Charleston to Seneca, his birthplace, where his father worked in a textile mill. The mills are now closed, and Seneca, a town of about 7,600, markets itself as a retirement community.
Mr. Edwards delivered a short version of his stump speech to a crowd of a couple hundred chanting his name. ''I came here tonight to ask you to join us in this campaign, this cause, to change America,'' he said.
Everywhere he went, Mr. Edwards stuck to his standard remarks -- he promised to help the middle class and to bridge the ''two Americas'' divided by class -- and, of course, played up his roots. He lived in Seneca for 10 years and then moved to Robbins, N.C., which, when not in South Carolina, he claims as his hometown.
At each of four stops on Monday, Mr. Edwards faced crowds of no more than 200 people, but seemed encouraged by their enthusiasm. All of the stops except for Seneca were at colleges, and the students, with a little instruction from campaign aides, were quick to hoot and holler for the native son.
Within his camp, aides turned nervous at opinion polls showing Mr. Kerry gaining here. That did not seem to matter to Mr. Edwards, who told the crowd in Massachusetts Hall at Voorhees College, ''When I am sworn in as your president, we are going to come back to South Carolina and have one heck of a celebration.''
RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLD
