The Democratic-controlled State Assembly passed a bill on Monday that would allow an oral ''morning-after'' contraceptive to be sold without a prescription.
The Assembly, which passed a similar bill last year only to see it go nowhere in the Republican-controlled Senate, is watching carefully as the federal Food and Drug Administration also considers whether to allow the drug, known as Plan B, to be sold without a prescription.
If the federal agency decides to allow the drug's over-the-counter sale, state lawmakers would not have to act further. But Assemblywoman Amy Paulin, a Democrat from Westchester who proposed the legislation, emphasized, ''If they won't do it, we will do it in New York.''
For that to happen, however, the Republicans in the Senate would have to drop their previous opposition and pass a similar bill in their chamber. Yesterday, a spokesman for the Republican majority leader of the Senate said they would reserve judgment.
''With the federal government expecting a decision within a month or so, it is premature to act,'' said John McArdle, a spokesman for the Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno.
The language of the bill, which passed in a 120-to-25 vote in the Assembly, was very careful, saying it would ''create a simple structure for approximating over-the-counter availability.'' The goal would be to put Plan B into the same category as something like insulin, which normally requires a prescription but can be given out on an emergency basis. In that way, if the federal agency ultimately banned over-the-counter sale of Plan B, New York would be able to get around it, lawmakers said.
By pressing ahead, the Assembly Democrats and advocates for the drug's availability are hoping to put pressure on the F.D.A. and Republicans in New York.
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, at a news conference, said the Assembly's action ensured ''women's access to quality wide-ranging health care services.'' He accused the Bush administration and supporters in Congress of continuing to ''wage war on women.''
