Gov. George E. Pataki on Monday used the capture of a career criminal, charged in a recent string of sexual assaults and robberies on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, to attack Democrats in the State Assembly for ignoring his bill to put those convicted of repeat misdemeanors in jail as felons.
The governor, a Republican, noted the multiple arrests and convictions that the suspect, Kevin White, 34, had amassed over the past decade to make a point about the legislation Mr. Pataki proposed in 2000, which never passed in the Democratic-controlled Assembly.
Since Oct. 17, 1989, Mr. White had been arrested 27 times and faced 57 different charges, a police official said, from disorderly conduct to possession of a weapon and selling marijuana. Of those charges, 43 were for misdemeanors and nine were for felonies, the official said, and Mr. White was eventually convicted of 24 misdemeanors and one felony.
''If that had been voted on, if they had passed the law, in all likelihood he would have been in jail a year ago or two years ago or three years ago and not engaged in these serial rapes,'' said Mr. Pataki, speaking at a news conference in Troy, N.Y., to announce the rehabilitation of a center for the elderly.
''And that's the point that we have to get across to those who would block this legislation,'' the governor said. ''They are not just blocking a bill; they are blocking efforts to save people's lives and to protect people's lives and to make us safe.''
In response, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Democrat from Manhattan, said that while he did not know Mr. White's criminal record, political finger-pointing over such a serious matter was not the solution.
In pointing out that Mr. White could have faced lengthier sentences, Mr. Silver noted the problems with allowing chronic misdemeanor offenders, like Mr. White, to face reduced sentences through plea bargains. And he criticized the process by which judges have come to the bench under Republicans.
''The governor didn't propose a bill banning plea bargains, did he?'' Mr. Silver asked rhetorically. ''I mean, that's what's really at the root of what happened here.''
The arrest of Mr. White has raised a welter of emotions about the criminal justice system. In New York City, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg expressed anger on Monday at what he called a revolving-door system for criminals, made easier by plea bargains.
''You cannot continue to let people plea bargain their way out of serious crimes, go back out on the street and continue to destroy our society,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''I'm glad they caught this guy. Shame on us for ever getting ourselves in this position, but that's history. Let's take a look, learn from it, and make sure it doesn't happen again.''
Under the governor's bill, a person convicted of a fourth misdemeanor, within 10 years, would be sentenced under an E-felony conviction instead, and would therefore face a mandatory 11/3.-to-4-year sentence in state prison, said Lynn Rasic, a spokeswoman for the governor. If that law had been passed, Mr. White could have become a predicate felon or a multiple predicate felon, she said.
