State Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky has asked the head of the State Power Authority to review the hiring of Gov. George E. Pataki's chief security officer to a prominent post, in light of the officer's decision to invoke his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination before a federal grand jury in the late 1990's.
The State Constitution says public officers who invoke a Fifth Amendment right when asked in a grand jury about the performance of their duties must ''be disqualified from holding any other public office or public employment for a period of five years.'' Nonetheless, the security officer, Col. Daniel Wiese of the state police, continued to work for Governor Pataki after his testimony, was promoted twice and then last year was appointed to a lucrative position at the state power authority.
At a public event on Monday, Governor Pataki refused to answer questions about whether he was aware that Mr. Wiese had not only monitored a federal investigation into fund-raising in his 1994 campaign but had also later refused to answer questions before a grand jury investigating the matter.
''I'm not going to comment on those things,'' said Mr. Pataki, cutting short a news conference in Troy, N.Y., and walking out of the room. ''That's ridiculous.''
Assembly Democrats have raised questions about Mr. Wiese's appointment to a $160,000-a-year position as the director of security at the Power Authority, which Mr. Pataki controls, and about a state waiver the colonel received that allows him to collect his police pension at the same time. Mr. Brodsky, a Westchester County Democrat, heads the committee that oversees state authorities.
The grand jury was investigating reports that fund-raisers for Mr. Pataki had promised the families of inmates paroles in return for large contributions. Three parole officials were eventually charged and convicted of perjury and of misleading prosecutors in the case, and a Republican fund-raiser, Yung Soo Yoo, was convicted on an obstruction of justice charge in July 2000. No one was convicted of bribery stemming from the selling of paroles, and Mr. Pataki was not implicated at Mr. Yoo's trial.
But Colonel Wiese went to unusual lengths to involve himself in the investigation after campaign officials informed him of a visit from New York City detectives in September 1997, law enforcement officials said. The colonel insisted that one of his aides in the governor's body-guard unit be placed on the team looking into the allegations, an arrangement federal prosecutors put an end to once they took over the case. Later, Colonel Wiese refused to answer questions from prosecutors before a grand jury, citing his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination, a lawyer familiar with the investigation said.
Officials at the power authority, responding to Mr. Brodsky's request, said judges in New York State had eroded and qualified that provision over the years. In addition, the United States Supreme Court has struck down a similar provision in the New York City Charter.
''We have no knowledge of what may or may not have occurred before a secret grand jury, since it's sealed under federal law,'' said Peter Barden, a spokesman for the Power Authority. ''However, a preliminary and general review of federal and state law by our lawyers indicates a state employee can't be sanctioned for evoking their Fifth Amendment constitutional rights.''
Lisa Dewald Stoll, the governor's chief spokeswoman, said in an e-mail message: ''As usual, Brodsky is playing politics and he is wrong." She declined to answer whether Mr. Pataki knew Colonel Wiese had tried to insinuate himself into the investigation and keep tabs on its progress.
Colonel Wiese did not return a call from a reporter.
