Thomas Trantino, the paroled killer of two New Jersey police officers, pleaded not guilty in criminal court on Monday to five counts of aggravated assault and one count of criminal restraint in a case in which prosecutors say he beat a former girlfriend.
If found guilty, Mr. Trantino, 65, who was paroled in 2002 after serving 38 years for the 1963 murders of two Lodi police officers, Sgt. Peter Voto, 40, and Gary Tedesco, 22, could be found in violation of his parole and sent back to prison for the rest of his life.
An official of the State Parole Board has already found ''probable cause'' to believe that he violated the terms of his parole by being arrested. A hearing by the entire board to determine whether to revoke his parole has been postponed at the request of his lawyers until his criminal trial is over.
William H. Buckman, a lawyer for Mr. Trantino, said on Monday that he intended to ask that the assault case be dismissed on the ground that the former girlfriend, Carmen Gonzalez, had recanted her story that Mr. Trantino had beaten her. Judge Linda G. Baxter of Camden County Criminal Court set April 2 for the defense to present a motion to dismiss the case, and April 19 for a pretrial hearing.
On Nov. 6, Mr. Trantino was arrested after a heated argument with Ms. Gonzalez in the downtown Camden office where he counseled former convicts and troubled youths. The police said Ms. Gonzalez told them that Mr. Trantino had tried to prevent her from leaving his office, at one point choking her and then dragging her into a stairwell, and that he had beaten her on other occasions.
The prosecutor's office, which is pressing on with the case even though Ms. Gonzalez recanted, would not discuss strategy on Monday, but the Camden County prosecutor, Vincent P. Sarubbi, has said in the past that it is not unheard of for victims of domestic abuse to withdraw their charges out of fear.
Outside the courtroom on Monday, lawyers for Mr. Trantino attacked the prosecution's case, citing Ms. Gonzalez's reversal. ''I guess they are trying to find an expert to say what no one else will say,'' Justin Loughry said.
A tape recording of the 911 call to the police, released on Monday by the prosecutor's office, seems to support the account Mr. Trantino gave to the authorities: that he was preventing Ms. Gonzalez from committing suicide, not assaulting her.
''Could you send a car or somebody out to 417 Cooper Street,'' says the unidentified woman who made the call. ''There's a big situation with a lady who's trying to threaten to throw herself off the roof.''
