New York's hospitals have pledged to stop charging their highest prices to the uninsured patients who are often least able to pay and to end collection tactics like foreclosing on people's homes, under a new policy adopted by a hospital trade group.
Consumer advocates have been calling for state and federal legislation requiring hospitals to treat their poorest uninsured patients more gently. Hospital industry officials conceded that the new policies were, in part, intended to head off such laws.
What the policy, adopted by the Healthcare Association of New York State, will mean in practice, though, remains unclear. Hospitals have long claimed that if they treated the uninsured more generously, they would run afoul of federal and state regulations and risk billions of dollars in government payments, primarily through Medicaid and Medicare. Hospital trade groups said yesterday that they were not entirely sure that government regulators would accept the new policy.
Government officials and consumer groups, however, have disputed the arguments hospitals have made in their defense. The real reason for skepticism over the new policy, consumer advocates say, is that there is no way to force hospitals to follow it.
A hospital sets a fee for each service it provides, but in the case of insured patients, no one pays the retail price. Instead, commercial health insurers, and government plans like Medicare and Medicaid, are charged those prices on paper but pay much lower rates, negotiated in advance, which the hospitals accept as payment in full.
The only patients who are truly charged the full prices are the uninsured, who are usually poor. That practice has attracted intense criticism in the last year from advocates for consumers and the poor. The new policy by the Healthcare Association, which represents the state's 220 hospitals, was adopted two weeks ago and first reported yesterday in The Wall Street Journal.
Hospitals do provide charity care, to varying degrees; the industry estimates that statewide it swallows about $1.7 billion a year in unpaid bills, mostly for indigent patients. But a recent report by Citizen Action, a liberal advocacy group, said that hospitals often fail to inform patients of the availability of financial aid.
In a separate study, the Legal Aid Society concluded that some hospitals simply refuse to make aid available, pursuing repayment even from patients who have no ability to pay.
In their defense, hospital officials have long argued that under federal regulations, because Medicare rates are discounted based on the full, or ''customary,'' prices, hospitals are required to charge those high retail prices to uninsured patients.
But the new policy would appear to contradict that understanding of federal policy, stating that hospitals should give discounts to uninsured patients with family incomes of less than double the federal poverty level, so that their bills are no higher than what insurers pay.
Daniel Sisto, president of the Healthcare Association of New York State, said he could not be sure that the policy would be accepted by Washington. ''We are basically proceeding on the presumption that the government's intent cannot be to mandate us to gouge uninsured patients,'' he said. ''But that's a real concern. We hope we're right.''
However, Elisabeth R. Benjamin, director of the Health Law Unit at the Legal Aid Society in New York, said: ''It never was illegal in the first place. The 'government made me do it' argument was just an excuse. The Medicare provider manual has always had an explicit provision that hospitals could determine that someone was medically indigent and discount their bill.''
In the past few months, officials at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the federal agency that oversees the programs, have suggested that the hospitals were wrong on this question and that consumer advocates were right. Yesterday, officials at the agency declined to comment specifically on the Healthcare Association policy.
But in a letter sent last year to HCA, a major hospital company, the federal agency reacted favorably to discounts HCA proposed for the poor that were similar to the new Healthcare Association policy.
The letter said it was permissible ''if a provider offers free care or care at reduced rate on the basis of ability to pay to patients determined to be financially indigent, and meets specific conditions listed.''
Federal officials have said that such discounts could be allowed if they were determined on a case-by-case basis and if hospitals documented the patients' finances -- elements that are included in the Healthcare Association policy.
In response to complaints about aggressive collection practices, hospitals have argued that New York State and federal regulators require them to show they are making serious efforts to collect on bad debts. But the new policy prohibits some practices, like foreclosing on a home or ''body attachment'' -- having someone jailed for missing a court appearance in a lawsuit over payment. It also requires hospitals to ensure that all patients are aware of the availability of financial aid.
Under the policy, hospitals ''could run afoul of either federal regulation or state regulation,'' said Kenneth E. Raske, president of the Greater New York Hospital Association, which encompasses the metropolitan area. ''That's a reality. A hospital, in its attempt to do the right thing, could end up getting hurt financially.''
Hospital officials say the new policy will require a big investment of personnel and time, to review patients' financial records. But consumer advocates say that hospitals already collect and process similar information in hopes of enrolling patients in programs for the poor, like Medicaid or Child Health Plus.
Both sides agree that giving discounts to the poor will cost hospitals money, though they say it is impossible to predict how much. That loss of revenue would come at a time when New York hospitals are struggling.
''In the long run, if we lose the support of the public and the legislators, we will lose far more,'' Mr. Sisto, the Healthcare Association's president, said. ''It's better to get back on the high ground where we belong.''
