'If we win delegates, we will be a factor.'
The day started with eggs and grits at a Waffle House, followed by a stump speech at a former slave market here and a six-city bus tour, as the Rev. Al Sharpton made a final push on Monday in a state where he has staked his political credibility.
In Mr. Sharpton's presidential campaign, and again on his bus tour, he has tried to win over black voters, even though he has virtually no chance of winning the Democratic presidential nomination. His argument is that if he gets votes, he gets delegates, which then will empower him to force the Democratic Party to consider issues important to blacks.
''Like a man told Martin Luther King in Birmingham, Ala., in 1963,'' Mr. Sharpton said as he began an appeal to black voters at the former slave market. ''We ain't where we want to be, we ain't where we ought to be, we ain't where we going to be -- but thank God we ain't where we was.''
As he said those words, Mr. Sharpton stood in the spot where slaves where once sold, symbolism not lost on his listeners.
''He's standing up against everyone,'' said Jameon Cavil, 23, a college student living in Columbia who is supporting Mr. Sharpton. ''They all say he can't win because of the color of his skin.''
It is the reaction that Mr. Sharpton hoped for as he made his way from city to city on a battered bus. But even as he was thinking about primary day, he was looking to the future.
''It is possible I run in 2008,'' Mr. Sharpton said, sitting in the back of the bus. ''I may be in a position to leverage not running in 2008 with some of the prospective candidates. This is a lot about the future.''
For two decades, Mr. Sharpton has been a presence in New York City politics. Now he is trying to recreate that success on the national level. Many people have said he is trying to be the next Jesse Jackson. Mr. Sharpton says he wants to do better.
His test comes in South Carolina, a state where as many as half of registered Democrats are black. If he can get 15 percent of the vote in any of the state's six Congressional districts, he will win delegates and with that will probably declare a victory.
''Not only am I not going anywhere,'' Mr. Sharpton said, ''but if we win delegates, we will be a factor that they have to consider into the future.''
MICHAEL SLACKMAN
