'Win or lose, as long as we get as many delegates as we can.'
When Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts challenged Howard Dean to a one-on-one debate back in the fall, Dr. Dean laughed it off, saying it would hardly be fair to the others in the Democratic presidential field. When Mr. Kerry renewed the invitation a few weeks ago, Dr. Dean did not even respond.
Now, hungry for such a face-off, Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, noticed in the newspaper that Mr. Kerry planned to campaign in Seattle on Tuesday. As did he.
''Since we're both going to be there, maybe we should have a little election-eve debate,'' Dr. Dean said through a grin as he flew here from Santa Fe, N.M. ''John's excuse was that he was too busy, but I now find that we're both in the same city on the same night. What an opportunity!''
What a difference two defeats makes.
Once hoping to clinch the nomination with a good showing Tuesday after a sweep of Iowa and New Hampshire, Dr. Dean said Monday he had no expectations of winning even one of the seven states that vote Tuesday, though he is holding out hope for New Mexico. In South Carolina, he said, he would be lucky to get 15 percent.
Speaking to volunteers making calls on his behalf Monday, he said, ''Win or lose, as long as we get as many delegates as we can.''
On the flight here, Dr. Dean sat with reporters to be sure they caught his latest Kerry criticism: that the senator missed most votes on the Medicare prescription-drug benefit bill that he now criticizes.
He fielded questions about whether he might run as an independent (''absolutely not'') and whether any supporters had suggested he quit (''nope''). Then he was asked about the Federal Communications Commission's investigation into Janet Jackson's breast-baring performance in the Super Bowl halftime show. He called the investigation ''silly,'' adding that there are far worse things on cable, not to mention media conglomerates, for the government to look into.
''I'm a doctor,'' he said, ''so it's not exactly an unusual phenomenon for me.''
Dr. Dean said he was taking the reversal of roles with Mr. Kerry in stride.
''It's just the same as it was a year ago,'' he said, ''just put one foot in front of the other and keep going.''
JODI WILGOREN
