SUPER Bowl Sunday ran a familiar pattern (if you don't count one famously exposed breast and the emergence of erectile dysfunction commercials on the most testosterone-fueled evening of the year).
In New York, however, there was a conspicuous break from the past. A pregame tradition of well-publicized police raids on bookie joints went, at least for now, the way of the leather football helmet.
For the first time in recent memory -- that's what we journalists say when we haven't a clue exactly how many years we are talking about -- Super Bowl Sunday came and went with no announcements here about gambling arrests and confiscated betting slips. That yearly rite was a particular favorite of the Brooklyn district attorney, Charles J. Hynes.
What gives?
''We've driven them out of Brooklyn,'' Mr. Hynes said through a spokesman, Jerry Schmetterer. He offered some elaboration. ''Basically, we don't have any places to raid anymore,'' he said. ''The reason is the Internet. We just don't have those big wire rooms, with betting slips and everything, to hit anymore.''
Maybe not at the moment. It is hard to believe, though, that New York's bookies have all packed up and hightailed it for good, Internet or no Internet. There is simply too much money to be made. As if to underline that thought, Mr. Schmetterer said that just a few weeks ago ''we hit five places in Queens and one in Brooklyn.'' Those raids led to 14 arrests and the seizure of $30,000 in cash, he said.
Actually, $30,000 is small potatoes when it comes to the Super Bowl, which exists, or so it sometimes seems, to encourage heavy betting as much as to showcase top-flight football.
If you toted up the playing time on Sunday, you couldn't have squeezed much more than 16 minutes of genuine action out of a broadcast that lasted nearly 4 hours. Far more time and energy went into wagers, legal or otherwise, that came to hundreds upon hundreds of millions of dollars across the country.
Why bother even trying to buck so overwhelming a tide?
''D.A. Hynes's position,'' Mr. Schmetterer said, ''is that gambling money is the money that fuels the engine that drives organized crime.''
Goodness knows that most government leaders hate it when gambling money goes to the mob. They much prefer that it go to them.
In New York, the state government's addiction to gambling revenue is indisputable. That became clearer than ever two weeks ago, when Gov. George E. Pataki announced his desire to install many more video lottery terminals around the state to raise cash for education.
V.L.T.'s, as these devices are called, are nothing more than slot machines souped up for the cyber-age. Stripped to its basics, the idea is to help schools that are pedagogic losers with money pried from gambling losers, people who tend to be poor.
There is nothing new in this. For decades, the New York Lottery has marketed itself as the educator's friend. Buy a lottery ticket and, even if you lose, the kiddies win because the money -- $1.8 billion in 2003 -- goes to schools. So runs the sales pitch.
BUT that is ''just a myth,'' the former state comptroller, H. Carl McCall, concluded in a 1998 report. Nothing has changed, said a spokesman for the current comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi.
In fact, each lottery dollar that goes to schools is one less dollar that the governor and the Legislature have to spend from the regular budget. You could just as accurately say that lottery money helps pay for drug programs or new televisions at Attica state prison. You just might not sell as many Pick 10 tickets that way.
Mr. Pataki's plan to lean more heavily than ever on gambling revenue has run into skepticism from some influential lawmakers and from Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. New Yorkers are not alone in beginning to say ''no dice,'' said Tom Grey, executive director of the National Coalition Against Legalized Gambling.
''Greedlock'' has materialized in state after state, he said, as attempts to expand lotteries, build casinos and install slot machines meet new resistance in legislatures and at the polls. ''In the early 90's, gambling was seen as the wave of the future,'' Mr. Grey said. ''But the bloom is off the rose, and the thorns are starting to be felt.''
He may be on to something. Still, it seems early for bold predictions. Chasing away a few bookies before the Super Bowl may prove to be a snap compared with getting some politicians to kick their own gambling habit.
NYC
