First as a congressman and then as governor, John G. Rowland has elicited the occasional chuckle by referring to his hometown, only half-jokingly, as the ''center of the universe.''
For residents proud of Mr. Rowland and loyal to this faded mill city in the Naugatuck Valley of Connecticut, his quip carries a delicious conceit: while Waterbury's halcyon age as a leading manufacturer of brass may be long dead, it retains its outsize reputation for producing politicians infused with the same alloy.
But if the city occupies the center of Mr. Rowland's universe, it has also long been regarded as a sort of quasar of corruption, spewing it forth into the political galaxy of this small state. This reputation is so solidified that Senator Joseph I. Lieberman once felt comfortable joking that upon his death, he hoped to be buried in Waterbury so he could remain politically active.
Now, even some of the governor's closest allies are asking whether his unabashed attachment to Waterbury, once viewed as endearing, could be partly to blame for his current ethical troubles.
''The names that keep coming up, most of them are buddies from Waterbury,'' said an aide to Mr. Rowland in Hartford, 30 miles away, referring to people involved in financial dealings with the governor that are under scrutiny. ''He's never gotten away from the whole Waterbury thing, his friends from down there.''
It is an impression reinforced by Mr. Rowland himself. Asked in December about disclosures that he had joined an investment partnership with a state paving contractor, a lawyer and a developer all from the Waterbury area, he shrugged off any possibility of a conflict, replying: ''When I look at these three individuals, I look at them as friends.''
No evidence has surfaced that the governor or his friends have done anything illegal. But enough questions have been raised about his financial affairs, including improvements made to his weekend cottage, that both a federal grand jury and a legislative impeachment committee are investigating.
As they do, the observation has been made more than once that this is hardly the first time F.B.I. agents, journalists or other investigators have found themselves making a pilgrimage to the Brass City in search of answers to some sort of scandal.
Before Mr. Rowland, the highest-ranking state official to be subjected to a criminal inquiry was Lt. Gov. T. Frank Hayes, a Democrat who doubled as the mayor of Waterbury and who was convicted of looting the city's coffers in 1939. It was Mr. Rowland's grandfather Sherwood L. Rowland, the Republican city comptroller, who blew the whistle on Mayor Hayes.
The city's reputation for political shenanigans was reinforced in 1986, when the statewide Democratic primary for governor was thrown into turmoil because of an absentee ballot scandal in Waterbury. Among other problems, dead people were found to have voted.
Then there is the uncomfortable fact that for more than 20 years, including the entire decades of the 1980's and 1990's, Waterbury was governed by three mayors who faced criminal charges at one time or another.
Edward D. Bergin Jr., a Democrat whose father had been mayor, was charged in 1988 with accepting a bribe from a towing contractor. He was acquitted three years later, and promptly announced his intention to retake the mayor's office from the Republican who had succeeded him, Joseph J. Santopietro.
By then, Mr. Santopietro had been indicted in a sweeping corruption investigation of his administration, and was seeking re-election. One of his supporters drove around the city in a truck festooned with balloons and huge placards that read, ''Santopietro: Innocent Until Proven Guilty!''
Prosecutors portrayed a greedy clique of Republicans, led by Mayor Santopietro, plotting within months of his election to take what they viewed as rightfully theirs after years of Democratic rule. In his defense, Mr. Santopietro insisted that his money-making deals were harmless transactions among friends and family.
The trial provided a rare window into what some observers believe is at the root of much of Waterbury's troubles: a ''spoils of victory'' mentality that seems to permeate the political culture, abetted by an inability to separate bare-knuckle campaigning from the more nuanced requirements of office.
''Politics in Waterbury is the No. 1 contact sport, and some of that did carry over into the administration of government,'' said Gary Reardon, the chairman of the city Democratic Party, who lost a bruising primary battle with Mr. Bergin in 1991.
''For a long time,'' said Mr. Reardon, ''it was in the fabric of Waterbury politics, this problem of a lack of separation between the campaign and the office.''
Mr. Bergin won handily against Mr. Santopietro, who was convicted and sentenced to a federal prison in 1992.
After serving a few terms, Mr. Bergin was defeated by Philip A. Giordano, a Republican lawyer and former marine who charmed voters with promises of a Waterbury renaissance. But in 2001, Mr. Giordano took City Hall's shaky reputation to new depths with his arrest on child sex charges.
Mr. Giordano, whose tenure as mayor also remains the subject of a political corruption investigation, was convicted last year in the sex case and sent to prison.
The unexpected convergence of sex and corruption is not without precedent in Waterbury's colorful, if checkered, history. A 1954 cover story in Stag, a popular men's magazine of the day, was devoted to tales of graft, underage sex and other debauchery in what it called ''the brassiest, blowsiest, bawdiest town this side of Butte, Montana.''
''Let's face it,'' the writer concluded after a lengthy romp on the city's dark side, ''Waterbury is a triple-plated, grade-A sin pit.''
The seemingly endless cycle of corruption investigations, each sparking a renewed round of what's-wrong-with-Waterbury introspection, has grown tiresome for many in this fiercely proud blue-collar city, which dominates the state's western valley communities.
''I don't even want to talk about, it's too depressing,'' said Joe Alvarez, walking past vacant Main Street storefronts on a recent weekday. ''Look around this place -- we've got enough problems without politicians giving us a bad name.''
Once known as the brass capital of the world, home to the Chase, Scovill and Anaconda companies, Waterbury began a long, painful descent into economic decline after World War II. The old factories, engines of growth and jobs for thousands of immigrants for more than a century, gradually closed up or left town.
The influence of the long-dead brass barons is still felt in the faded grandeur of Waterbury's municipal offices, which occupy two granite and marble buildings designed about 85 years ago by Cass Gilbert. The larger of the two buildings, which face each other across Grand Street, was originally the headquarters of Chase Brass, and it loomed above what was then City Hall -- a testament to where political power resided in that industrial era.
Since becoming governor in 1995, Mr. Rowland, a Republican, has steered more than $100 million in economic aid to his hometown, giving a lift to an otherwise struggling local economy. He moved some state offices there, and his administration has helped finance numerous projects, including renovation of the Palace Theater, a popular landmark.
Until his recent ethical troubles, Mr. Rowland was viewed in Connecticut political circles as something of an anomaly, loyal to Waterbury and his friends there, yet free of the taint that has clung to some other politicians who came up through the city's wards. He proudly invoked his family's reputation as defenders of clean government -- his father also was Waterbury's comptroller -- and he hung a photo of his grandfather in his Capitol office.
The reputation served him well. During Mr. Rowland's first, unsuccessful run for governor in 1990, the first President Bush did not hesitate to come campaign for him, telling cheering supporters that Mr. Rowland was following in his grandfather's footsteps ''of fighting and battling and rooting out corruption.''
Last week, Mr. Rowland was noticeably absent when the younger President Bush came to the state for a fund-raiser attended by virtually every other Connecticut Republican of prominence. Mr. Bush left without mentioning Mr. Rowland's name.
