IF anyone knows about second chances, or third or fourth ones, it is Julio Medina. He is a convicted drug dealer turned counselor and, recently, an invited guest in the gallery at President Bush's State of the Union address. As he talks about this latest episode in his life, Mr. Medina sits not so very still in the empty chapel of the Church of the Living Hope in East Harlem.
The chapel is the only place in which this ebullient man, who speaks with hands slicing the air, can find some quiet, away from the busy hum of the floors above, where former inmates are learning about anger management and preparing résumés at his Exodus Transitional Community, a nonprofit organization that helps them get back on their feet. A professional media consultant in a tweed blazer waits discreetly in an upstairs office in case Mr. Medina, the group's executive director, should need him.
But Mr. Medina, who is 43 and maintains an athletic build from morning runs in his Bronx neighborhood near Yankee Stadium, needs no coaching.
Having something to say has never been his problem.
''It's been overwhelming, to say the least,'' he says with a gap-toothed grin. He goes on, recalling shaking the president's hand, meeting Laura Bush, being whisked to the speech from a White House reception. ''It's definitely like you've got to pinch yourself. I just happen to be the poster child, but definitely this is bigger than me. It's definitely God's hand doing this, opening these paths.''
Mr. Medina found himself in the national spotlight when the president proposed a four-year, $300 million prisoner re-entry initiative in his Jan. 20 speech. The white-hot television lights homed in on Mr. Medina, making him break out in a sweat, as Mr. Bush outlined the initiative, mentioning faith-based groups.
On a recent day, Mr. Medina -- whose group is interdenominational, though he is affiliated with the United Church of Christ -- still seems star-struck about his encounter with the president.
''I don't know if this is, like, rehearsed, but he came to me and said, 'I was truly moved by your story and the work you're doing in East Harlem.' He knew details of what I was doing. He said, 'It's programs like yours we want to help push.'''
''This guy came across to me like this is the most important thing he wanted to do, elected or not elected, that there's a need here, and he wants to make sure that need is filled,'' he says.
So, is it enough to turn him into a Republican? ''I never voted for the guy,'' Mr. Medina says, shrugging. He adds that he has always voted for Democrats, including Al Gore in the last presidential election. But the experience has made him reconsider his automatic Democratic vote.
And, yes, it has crossed his mind that he might have allowed himself to be used as an election-year symbol.
He breaks into a knowing smile, musing aloud on the possible rationale. '''Yo, he's Puerto Rican. He's in New York. He's broad-based. Let's make him a national poster boy here.' But I do know he is seriously compassionate about this issue.''
It is easy to see what made Mr. Medina a success on the streets. ''I'm a good salesman,'' he says slyly. ''I transferred some of those skills over to the legitimate world.''
He attends conferences and sits on panels to network with other people in his field, even though the events are not his sort of thing.
''So many times, I don't want to be there because it's so boring,'' he says. ''They're talking policy, and I know 10 people who are hungry and need a MetroCard, and they just don't get it! So in the conferences, I am usually the voice of dissent.''
Upstairs, the media consultant is still on call. He was retained by Public/Private Ventures, a Philadelphia-based nonprofit institution that already has a $25 million federal grant to work at 20 prisoner re-entry sites nationwide, including Exodus, to which it is offering technical assistance. Exodus has 12 employees and an annual budget of a half-million dollars.
It was Public/Private Ventures that put Exodus on the radar screen of the Bush administration.
THERE was a time when Mr. Medina could not get on anyone's radar. Except for the police's. He grew up in the South Bronx. His mother was a laborer in a toy factory, and his stepfather was a cab driver. As a teenager, he saw drug dealers as neighborhood celebrities, the ones who drove Mercedes-Benzes, while he was so poor that he competed in track meets in cut-off jeans and sneakers with holes. At age 14, he began selling marijuana and progressed to cocaine dealing. He spent 12 years in four maximum-security prisons.
While in Sing Sing, he earned a master's of professional studies from the New York Theological Seminary. But when he was released in 1996, he says, he was rejected in more than a dozen job interviews. He was finally hired as a substance abuse counselor. By then, he already knew what he wanted to do. He formed Exodus in 1999.
Mr. Medina, who has a girlfriend in Albany, says he spends most of his time raising money or overseeing programs at his office on East 104 Street. On this day, he seems eager to return to unfinished business upstairs, doing the work he does every day.
''This is where I belong. God has given me an opportunity to give someone a second chance, to let people inside know, yo, man, I was there.''
PUBLIC LIVES
