The budget submitted on Monday by President Bush was good news for some departments and agencies and not-so-good news for others.
The Bush administration is again proposing new tax credits to help the uninsured buy health coverage, with a $70 billion plan over 10 years that would cover an estimated 4.5 million Americans.
The budget would also give a significant increase to the Food and Drug Administration to secure the safety of the food supply, part of what Tommy G. Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, described as an effort to strengthen the public health system.
''These investments not only will better prepare our nation for and protect us from a bioterror attack, they will also better prepare us for any public health emergency,'' Mr. Thompson said.
He said the budget presented an ''aggressive agenda'' while ''remaining fiscally responsible to the American taxpayer.''
Not counting the entitlement programs like Medicare and Medicaid, Mr. Thompson said, the spending authority for his department would rise by 1.2 percent. Budget analysts say that is not enough to take into account inflation and the increase in population.
In general, President Bush's budget underscored his administration's reliance on tax breaks to encourage the private sector to expand health insurance coverage to the 43 million uninsured Americans. Mr. Bush would also provide more incentives for people to use tax-free health savings accounts, in conjunction with high-deductible insurance plans, and make it easier for small businesses to band together to buy coverage.
The cost of health insurance is a hot issue in this election year, and Mr. Bush's plan was quickly denounced by Democrats and liberal advocates.
At the budget briefing yesterday, Mr. Thompson also addressed the dispute over the cost of the new Medicare law: the Congressional Budget Office put it at $395 billion over 10 years, the administration at $534 billion.
''It's an impossibility to say at this point in time which one is correct,'' Mr. Thompson said.
Much of the discrepancy, he added, stemmed from different assumptions on how many of the elderly would sign up for the new voluntary prescription drug benefit.
ROBIN TONER
