The budget submitted on Monday by President Bush was good news for some departments and agencies and not-so-good news for others.
The Bush administration's budget for transportation is $58.7 billion, up $4.4 billion from its request for the current fiscal year. Transportation Secretary Norman Y. Mineta called the proposal an employment bill, with each $1 billion spent on highways generating 47,500 jobs. Mr. Minetta also said the request would enhance safety, although the administration has shied from a federal law on failing to use seat belts, which Mr. Mineta identified as the single largest transportation problem.
The bill provides $14 billion for the Federal Aviation Administration. That includes a $393 million reduction in the budget for facilities and equipment. The aviation agency said it would defer several programs, including one to improve the accuracy of the Global Positioning System so it can be used to land planes in low visibility and another to let controllers and pilots communicate via e-mail instead of voice, which was supposed to improve the capacity of the air traffic system.
Mr. Mineta said last week that the F.A.A. should triple the capacity of the nation's air traffic system in the next few years, and he said yesterday that that should still happen, despite the cuts.
The administrator of the agency, Marion C. Blakey, said the F.A.A. was studying whether to change the rule that requires air traffic controllers to retire at 56 and how much money would be saved through such a change. Many controllers were hired in 1981 as replacements for strikers and are now nearing the mandatory-retirement age.
The budget request for Amtrak is for $900 million. For the current year, the administration also sought $900 million, but Congress approved $1.2 billion.
Mr. Mineta said the administration would be willing to support $1.4 billion for Amtrak but only if some of it went to new entities, partly financed by the states, that took over some Amtrak functions.
MATTHEW L. WALD
