The stately Georgian Colonial house at 990 Prospect Avenue in Hartford had been the home to Connecticut's governors for 50 years before John G. Rowland arrived. And, partly because its condition was never a priority for Mr. Rowland's immediate predecessors, it had suffered from neglect. Ella T. Grasso, governor from 1975 to 1980, cared so little for frippery, she once famously said she would even sell the state's silver tea service to balance the budget.
But when Mr. Rowland came to office in 1995, that changed. Newly released documents show that he and his wife were beneficiaries of an energetic spending spree by the state and various well-wishers eager to restore the house to its former grandeur and make it a worthy backdrop for entertaining.
The restoration campaign spared no expense. Much of the capital improvements were handled by the Department of Public Works, which spent at least $959,000, from $20,992 to repair the sidewalks to $453,230 for hydraulic security gates.
Work on the interior was mostly paid for by a private foundation known as the Governor's Residence Conservancy. Though it existed, with modest contributions, before the Rowland administration, it ramped up its efforts with Mr. Rowland's swearing-in, raising more than $1 million from corporations and individuals to finance the purchase of antiques, lighting and other decorating projects, according to Henry Nozko Jr., the businessman who keeps the books for the conservancy.
Jo McKenzie, the state employee who oversees the mansion, said the overhaul had the state's best interests in mind, pointing out that the furnishings were not the Rowlands' personal property. ''This isn't for the pleasure of just this governor,'' she said. ''When this governor moves out, the house is furnished.''
Documents released by the conservancy on Friday, however, show that many of its donors are some of the same people who are caught up in the federal investigation into Mr. Rowland.
On the list of people who have given $500 to $9,999 are Mark and Allicia Wertheim, Anthony Cocchiola, Brian Baker, O&amp;G Industries and various members of the Tomasso family including William A. Tomasso.
The Wertheims threw a fund-raiser for Mr. Rowland in 1998, two months before closing a deal to lease property they owned to the state for $838,000 a year. The state attorney general, Richard Blumenthal, has called the lease a ''sweetheart deal,'' and four state employees who participated in the selection process were disciplined in 2002 after Mr. Blumenthal's critical report.
Mr. Cocchiola was a partner in a real estate deal that made $60,000 for the governor on a $7,200 investment. Mr. Cocchiola has won more than $1 million in paving contracts from the Rowland administration; his daughter got a state job in 1998.
The Tomassos are at the heart of the federal investigation, because of the number of major state contracts they have won since Mr. Rowland took office. They and people associated with them have given nearly $440,000 to the governor's re-election campaigns, and Mr. Tomasso allowed Mr. Rowland to vacation at his homes in Florida and Vermont in deals that resulted in fines and restitution requirements from the state's ethics commission.
Mr. Cocchiola, Mr. Tomasso, Mr. Baker and O&amp;G Industries all worked on the governor's cottage as well.
Mr. Nozko, whose company also gave $20,000 toward the restoration effort, said it was unfortunate that what started as a civic campaign was now being perceived as yet another way that the governor's associates sought to ingratiate themselves with him. The house, he said, ''is very, very nice.''
''Honestly, it's the way it should be,'' Mr. Nozko said. ''I had been there before this renovation had been done, and it was bordering on uninhabitable, paint falling off walls, sinks and toilets crumbling. It was deplorable. It shouldn't have been that way, and it's unfortunate that a real good deed has been almost criticized.''
Invoices and other documents sent to federal investigators in compliance with recent subpoenas show that redoing the interior cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. Antiques came from top dealers like Yale R. Burge in New York, and fabrics from Scalamandre, Old World Weavers and Kravet. Machine-made Oriental carpets were traded in for rugs costing tens of thousands of dollars. A $25,500 mid-19th-century chandelier was installed in the foyer, while a pair of $2,300 brass urn lamps --lampshades extra -- were bought for the library. Linens from Ireland were hemstitched at extra cost.
The documents also show that the Rowlands ran afoul of one nonprofit group that had lent fine arts to the mansion, the Connecticut Historical Society. A January 1997 letter from a society official to Ms. McKenzie complains about damage to several antiques and notes that two pieces were not in the public areas of the mansion, contrary to the understanding the society had with the state. Minutes from a conservancy meeting in September 1999 also show that there was some talk of creating a ''wish list'' of items still wanted for potential donors. Mr. Nozko said the list was never drafted because most of the obvious donors had already written checks.
