Years ago a friend who was turning 30 announced glumly, ''I can't be precocious anymore.'' She was right; 30 can turn wunderkinder into underachievers overnight. The people in Melissa James Gibson's plays know this all too well, and talk is their shield. Clever talk proves they are still special. It can replace action that might prove they are not.
In ''[sic],'' her much-admired play of 2001, three such people were mired in talk. The four people in ''Suitcase,'' now at the SoHo Rep, are also stranded. But they're a little more desperate, so they're struggling a little bit harder.
Sallie (Christina Kirk) and Jen (Colleen Werthmann) have been working on their dissertations for quite some time. They both sit high above the stage at tables that are like work stations on stilts. They talk to each other on the telephone. They talk to their boyfriends on the telephone, or through the intercom systems of their apartment buildings.
Their conversations are word games with a stop-start rhythm; part showing off, part self-deprecation. How is ''It'' (the dissertation) going, asks Jen with her serious bun and dark-rimmed glasses. Sallie, whose bangs peek out from beneath a woolen cap with earflaps replies, ''It is um not It/Is not going/It is un-going''
Then Jen says: ''It is ongoing/It is ongoing''
And Sallie says:
It is Un-going
It is UN-going
Though you might say its un-going
Is ongoing/you might
say that Jen
And Jen finishes with, ''Its un-going is ongoing.''
We first see their boyfriends gesturing frantically through a center-stage glass door. They are outside Jen's apartment. Karl (Jeremy Shamos) is nervous about Jen's feelings; Jen isn't always in the mood for feelings, and she hates the words ''boyfriend'' and ''couple.'' So Karl asks Sallie's boyfriend, Lyle (Thomas Jay Ryan), to propose for him through the intercom. But Jen is also talking to Sallie just then, and Sallie is working her way through a lament about ''My Stupid Life.'' A mismatched verbal quartet follows, as everyone hears and mishears everyone else. This keeps recurring in ''Suitcase.''
Carl and Lyle grow more and more frustrated. In one of the play's best scenes they swap complaints about ''my girlfriend's dissertation.'' Their tones go from schoolyard boasts to boys'-night-out cynicism.
Jen and Sallie are anxious and discontented. They drift into winsome songs whenever their longings can't be rationalized. Sallie sings mournfully about all the men she will never get to sleep with; Jen sings longingly about a man she's never met, ''a tragedy for us/both I suspect.'' There is an aural-visual subplot (subtext, really) that involves tape recordings and home movies. Where does it all end, or lead to or drift toward? Ms. Gibson uses puns, allusions, repetition, overlapping dialogue and poetry-derived rhythms. Her work so far has left me impatient and frustrated. Why expend all that technique on such pale, wan material? Comedy needn't be about important people. It does needs to suggest, however obliquely, that they belong to a larger world. This world is precious and solipsistic.
Like her characters, Ms. Gibson works nonstop to impress us with her linguistic skills. In this she is too much like her characters. She shows how they block emotion with words. Then, as the play heads for an emotional crisis, she blocks it; she chooses a word or phrase so blatantly odd that one thinks: ''No, this isn't the character's tic. This is the writer's trick.''
''Suitcase'' is artfully designed and directed. Louisa Thompson's set makes the tools of graduate school life -- books, file boxes, papers, architect's lamps -- look like both detritus and fetish objects. Daniel Aukin (who also directed ''[sic]'') and the four actors are at ease with the play's tone and rhythm. The two women sat at their tables throughout, but the men had a body language that matched their speech.
The subtitle of ''Suitcase'' is ''Or, those that resemble flies from a distance.'' The phrase comes from a tale by Jorge Luis Borges. The passage refers to ''ambiguities, redundancies and deficiencies,'' a clear enough reference to her characters. Then it describes a Chinese encyclopedia that divides animals into categories. One category contains ''those that resemble flies from a distance.''
In a Katherine Mansfield story a man pours ink on a fly then watches it die. Part of me felt exactly that way about these characters.
Why don't ambitious dramatists start writing history plays again?
SUITCASE  OR, THOSE THAT RESEMBLE FLIES FROM A DISTANCE
By Melissa James Gibson; directed by Daniel Aukin; stage manager, Evan Cabnet; lighting by Matt Frey; composer, Michael Friedman; costumes by Maiko Matsushimo; projection design, Elaine J. McCarthy; sound by Shane Rettig; sets by Louisa Thompson; props master, Ainat Telem. Presented by SoHo Rep and True Love Productions. At 46 Walker Street, TriBeCa.
WITH: Christina Kirk (Sallie), Thomas Jay Ryan (Lyle), Jeremy Shamos (Karl) and Colleen Werthmann (Jen).
THEATER REVIEW
