To a hairless, thin-skinned tropical primate, the grim winter morning at the Baltimore Zoo had all the appeal of a pair of wet pajamas.
Yet for Magnet and Alaska, two fine, floppy polar bears with a new $7 million, sensorially enriched ''Arctic habitat'' at their disposal, the hypodermic cold, the pistol-gray skies and the tap-dancing sleet were obviously a treat, an ursine month of sundaes with a cherry on top.
Magnet, a 15-year-old, half-ton male, gamboled clumsily across the boulders before diving into his beloved Nordic watering hole, where he breast stroked and backstroked and otherwise revealed why the polar bear, or Ursus maritimus, is considered a marine mammal. Alaska, a 10-year-old, 578-pound deaf female only recently rescued from a Mexican circus, continued her project, an effort to dig out an acceptable den where she might someday have cubs.
''They're in seventh polar-bear heaven today,'' said Dr. Chris Bartos, the assistant mammal curator. ''Alaska spent most of her life in a small cage, with very little experience of things. The first time she saw snow, she was ecstatic.''
Of course, polar bears are built to bear much worse than any Baltimore cold snap. ''They are exquisitely adapted for life in one of the harshest environments on earth,'' Dr. Bartos said. ''They are super-specialized members of the bear family, a magnificent example of natural selection at work.''
Scientists have long appreciated a number of the polar bear's adaptations, which allow it to survive two decades or more on the glacial ice of the Arctic Circle, where temperatures reach minus 50 degrees Fahrenheit, all the while defying standard bear omnivorousness to subsist almost exclusively on seal. The polar bear comes specially equipped with a double layer of fur, undergirded by four inches of blubber, that almost completely prevents heat loss; broad, fluffy paws that act as snowshoes, and short, solid claws that grip the ice; an elongated snout for poking into ice holes and pulling out seals; and the ability of that snout to smell prey from a distance of 20 miles.
''It's just incredible,'' said Dr. Scott L. Schliebe, head of the Polar Bear Project at the federal Fish and Wildlife Service in Anchorage. ''If a carcass washes up on the beach, it's like a dinner bell was rung, and polar bears seem to materialize out of thin air.''
Yet as a handful of hardy researchers continue to study the biology and behavior of the polar bear, they are unearthing ever more impressive and sometimes mystifying details about the great blanched beast. They have discovered that full-grown male bears play with each other for hours on end, an extremely rare behavior among adult animals. Moreover, they play at the most improbable time of year: after the long summer fast, when they are gaunt and famished and by any ordinary calculation should be conserving calories rather than frittering them away on sports.
Researchers have also learned that the bears can switch back and forth rapidly between a normal physiological state and one akin to hibernation. During the summer months, when the Arctic ice retreats and polar bears have no base for hunting seals, they migrate onto land, eat almost nothing, and lapse into a state of what is called ''walking hibernation'': the heart rate slows, the body temperature falls, they cease urinating or defecating, and they recycle nitrogen.
But whereas a black bear adheres to a strict seasonal schedule and requires weeks to switch between the distinctive physiologies of denning versus dining, a polar bear needs little more than happy happenstance to radically adjust its internal rheostat. ''A polar bear can be in a state of walking hibernation, but if it finds a carcass, the bear's metabolism flips right back into high gear,'' said Dr. Ian Stirling, a research scientist with the Canadian Wildlife Service in Edmonton and the author of ''Polar Bears'' (1998). ''That's a brilliant adaptation, to be able to switch your physiology, depending on need and luck, rather than to be at the mercy of an annual cycle.''
The supple metabolism, he said, offers more proof that extreme circumstances demand extraordinary aptitudes, both physical and mental. Dr. Stirling, who has studied polar bears for more than 30 years, never fails to be amazed at the bear's curiosity and intelligence. ''If you're looking at caribou, they're like a bunch of sheep, and you can't pick out their personalities,'' he said. ''But every polar bear is an individual. They're investigative and continuously trying to solve problems.''
Dr. Kathryn A. Foat, curator of education at the Baltimore Zoo, recalls watching polar bears from inside an all-terrain vehicle in Churchill, Manitoba. A gust of wind blew the cap of a camera lens out of the vehicle, and the bears immediately came over to investigate. One animal swatted the cap across the ground with its paw, and soon all the bears were pouncing on the disk and thwacking it around like a hockey puck.
As Dr. Stirling observes, it takes keen intelligence to stalk seals, fish-eating mammals that are themselves pretty clever. And even with their cunning and attentiveness and willingness to sit in ambush by a seal breathing hole for many hours at a stretch, polar bears are successful in their hunts only about 5 percent of the time. Hence, they are awfully good at conserving calories even during prime hunting season. A polar bear can fall asleep anywhere, in the most comical positions, using a block of ice as a pillow, snoozing as a snowstorm covers all but its black-tipped snout.
In view of the polar bear's inherently precarious profession, biologists are disturbed by recent evidence that it may be getting harder still to survive as a result of global warming. Dr. Stirling and his colleagues have determined that polar bears in the western Hudson Bay, off the coast of Manitoba, are being forced by the precipitously early thawing of Arctic ice in the spring to come on land and begin fasting two and a half to three weeks earlier than they did 25 years ago. He and other researchers fear that while the worldwide population of polar bears, estimated at 30,000, is not imminently threatened, subgroups like that of the western Hudson Bay may well be wiped out if the climate continues to heat up.
''It would be a sad day,'' said Dr. Schliebe, ''if polar bears weren't around for future generations to enjoy.''
Especially considering that the polar bear has barely begun to live. Genetic and biochemical analyses reveal that polar bears diverged from brown bears -- the group that includes grizzly and kodiak bears -- a mere 150,000 or so years ago, making the polar bear one of the most recently evolved mammals on earth and roughly as youthful as modern Homo sapiens. The bears are believed to have become isolated from other brown bears during a glacial period, said Dr. David Paetkau, president of Wildlife Genetics International in Nelson, British Columbia, and to have quickly adapted to a glacially based life.
Today the bears are found throughout the circumpolar north, around Alaska, Canada, Greenland, Norway and Russia. They do not live in the Antarctic, and any depictions of polar bears with penguins is a Santa Claus fantasy.
Polar bears are renowned, and beloved, for their bright white fur, although the fur in fact has no pigment. Each hair is a clear tube that reflects all wavelengths of light and so appears white. Scientists have a variety of theories to explain the coat's cast. By the most familiar one, white fur evolved because it allowed the bears to blend in with the snow and more easily sneak up on prey.
But as Dr. James D. Roth, a research assistant professor in biology at the University of Central Florida in Orlando, points out, during the winter when polar bears are hunting, it is almost always dark. Dr. Roth says some experts have proposed that the white fur is instead a way of minimizing heat intake, when the places where the bears summer can reach 90 degrees. ''Heat stress is such a problem for the animals,'' he said, ''and being white could help.''
Polar bears share with all bears an extreme disparity between the size of the mother, in the quarter-ton range, and that of a newborn cub -- about a pound. ''It's dramatic trait in the bear family,'' Dr. Paetkau said. ''They're off the chart among placental mammals, and closer to marsupials like the kangaroo.''
An expectant mother comes ashore in the summer, digs herself a den in October, and two months later gives birth to one to three cubs. She then nurses the larval-like offspring on milk that is among the fattiest in mammaldom, until they are plump and fluffy and the darlings of calendar photographers everywhere.
By the time a mother emerges with her young in April, she will not have eaten for nine months and may have lost 75 percent of her body weight. But at least she diets with aplomb, shedding blubber alone. When humans fast, they begin metabolizing their own muscle tissue; polar bears get rid of the adipose stores and leave their prized muscles in tact. The cubs stay with the mother for up to three years, as she teaches them to hunt and protects them against adult males, which have been known to cannibalize cubs.
Yet young bears are not pussycats. ''I have seen a number of times when two little bears, on being approached by a much bigger bear, will stand shoulder-to-shoulder and make the big bear back off,'' said Dr. Jane Waterman of the University of Central Florida.
Dr. Waterman and her husband, Dr. Roth, together study play behavior among male polar bears. They have observed bears congregating in Churchill in the fall, waiting for the sea ice to form, allowing them to get back to the main glacial plain and begin hunting for seals and, later in the season, mating. The females tend to keep quiet and off by themselves, but not the males. Instead, the males play, in pairs. They rear up on their hind legs and wrestle with each other. They lock mouths. They embrace. They seem to dance. They flop down next to each other for breaks, get up and start horsing around again. All the play is frisky, but gentle, amicable, and in stark contrast to the violent clashes among males during mating season, six months later.
''The big question is, Why are they doing it?'' said Dr. Roth. ''It takes a lot of energy for large animals to play, and they've just been fasting for months.''
The researchers are now testing several hypotheses: that the males are establishing a dominance hierarchy; that they are measuring their personal prowess to see how well they will be able to defend their hard-caught seals against thieves; that they are practicing for the mating season; that they are getting in shape after months of indolence; or that they are building alliances, and making friends. Hard times lie ahead. Why not grin and bear it together?
