Ever since open-heart surgery was first performed more than 50 years ago, people with diabetes have not only made up an abnormally large portion of the patient pool, but their rates of postoperative complication and mortality have been much higher than those of nondiabetics.
But with a simple change in the way insulin is administered before and after surgery, the outcome for many people with diabetes can be improved, said Dr. Anthony Furnary of Providence St. Vincent Medical Center in Portland, Ore.
Dr. Furnary has developed what he calls the Portland Protocol, an intravenous insulin drip given to diabetics for three days before and after open-heart surgery. The drip reduces their levels of blood sugar, or glucose.
Diabetics awaiting open-heart surgery have traditionally been given injections of insulin only as needed to maintain acceptable blood sugar levels of 250 to 300 milligrams per deciliter. This compares with a range of 60 to 110 for nondiabetics.
People with diabetes make up about 29 percent of coronary bypass patients, according to the Society of Thoracic Surgeons. It has generally been assumed that the disadvantage diabetics face in heart surgery was unavoidable because the disease itself has no cure.
''Diabetes has effects on all kinds of things: kidneys, eyes, peripheral vessels, arteries in your legs, high blood pressures,'' Dr. Furnary said. ''People thought that because of all these things diabetes does, that's why we have higher complication rates in cardiac surgery.''
Dr. Etie Moghissi, a spokeswoman for the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, said there had not been uniform standards for care of patients with diabetes while in the hospital, which her organization is trying to change. ''If you do not control blood sugar to an appropriate level,'' she said, ''it will unquestionably increase death and other complications.''
Of the 970 hospitals performing open-heart surgery in the United States, from 5 to 10 percent are using Dr. Furnary's insulin drip, he estimates. It has not caught on completely, in part because Dr. Furnary's findings did not result from a randomized study, as is usually the case with most other medical discoveries.
''It's very difficult in surgery to randomize,'' said Dr. Albert Starr, who directs the cardiac surgery center at St. Vincent and is also credited with being a co-inventor of the world's first artificial heart valve in 1960. ''It's much easier when you're dealing with a pharmaceutical medication. But here you don't have tens of thousands of patients to put on one pill and the others to put on a placebo. Surgery is not that kind of treatment.''
Its acceptance as a treatment has come about slowly at some hospitals. ''Everybody was a little skeptical at first,'' said Dr. Lawrence Cohn, director of the cardiac surgery division at Brigham &amp; Women's Hospital in Boston, where the insulin drip was introduced two years ago. ''But I think there's enough data that it's really incontrovertible. The diabetic people really just sail through now, where they used to have all kinds of problems. They'd either get too much or too little. It was an ad hoc management. Now these protocols have really helped.''
After studying nearly 4,000 heart surgery patients since 1987, Dr. Furnary said he could show that it was instead the underlying metabolic state created by high glucose levels that was the cause of the complication rates that patients with diabetes experienced after surgery.
''High glucose levels are an indication that the metabolism of the heart is in overdrive using fatty acids solely as an energy source and not using glucose,'' Dr. Furnary said. ''When we use intravenous insulin, it directly stimulates the use of glucose as an energy source and turns off the over- utilization of fatty acids, which has been shown to be detrimental to heart function.''
According to the Society of Thoracic Surgeons, the death rate for diabetics who are cardiac surgery patients is 4.5 percent, compared with 2.7 percent for nondiabetics. Dr. Furnary's study using the Portland Protocol has consistently shown a mortality of 2.5 percent for diabetics -- effectively ending the disparity for these higher-risk patients.
Some physicians are not entirely convinced of Dr. Furnary's explanation regarding the way glucose affects the heart muscle, but even his detractors do not dispute the results.
According to Dr. Robert Rizza, vice president of the American Diabetes Association and a professor of medicine at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota, it is not fully understood whether it is the insulin entering the heart or the blood sugar level it prompts that actually improves heart function. ''But regardless,'' Dr. Rizza said, ''it improves survival, and that's obviously very important.''
Working first with intensive care patients and eventually incorporating the rest of his hospital's open-heart surgery pool, Dr. Furnary lowered diabetic patients' glucose levels closer to normal. First glucose levels were kept just under 200 millgrams per deciliter, but eventually those levels were lowered to a range of 80 to 120, a highly irregular practice.
''The paradigm has always been that the danger is in too low a glucose, and that there's safety in high glucoses,'' said Dr. William Nugent of Dartmouth Medical School, who led the effort to put the Portland Protocol in place at his hospital last year. ''So the fear of inducing hypoglycemia has put various roadblocks in front of individuals' attempts to attack this head on.''
The Portland Protocol is administered by nurses, not surgeons. It was a nurse, Jeannie Zerr of St. Vincent, who performed early research in the late 1980's relating glucose levels to mortality and infection rates.
Ms. Zerr said her fellow nurses initially were ''very nervous'' about administering the insulin drip because of the added labor involved and concerns about its effect. And, she says, ''If you're giving insulin IV, the effect can be quite fast and quite dramatic. It's not like you could have somebody watch it all the time.'' But ultimately Ms. Zerr says that nurses' direct role is a source of pride and that it makes more intuitive sense. ''You're not chasing glucose, you're maintaining it, and that's so much better,'' she said.
''I think that if you were to poll heart surgeons and cardiac anesthesiologists and critical care specialists around the country and the world, most people are now being much more aggressive about maintaining tight glycemic control in our patients,'' said Dr. Timothy Gardner, spokesman for the American Heart Association and a professor of heart surgery at the University of Pennsylvania. ''It's a very important insight.''
To that end, Dr. Furnary now says his efforts at ''proselytizing'' for the Portland Protocol are even more important than his work as a surgeon. ''This will save 2,600 lives a year, whereas I operate on about 240 or 250 patients a year,'' Dr. Furnary said. ''So I can save more lives per year with the protocol than I can save in 10 years of cardiac surgery practice by myself. That's why I love it.''
