Albums full of improvisation rarely signal a complete arrival at any particular sound or idea; they just point in a certain musical direction. They create trails for listeners: you can follow one sensibility to another until you are far from Point A, but you've still walked a logical path.
There is a long aesthetic distance from the top of this column (a perfectly contemporary jazz record) to the bottom (an unusual, original, nonidiomatic record of electronics and acoustic instruments), but the path makes sense.
'Strange Liberation'  Dave Douglas
''Strange Liberation'' is the best album in several years by Dave Douglas, a prolific trumpeter and bandleader. It doesn't take long for each of his new bands to sound good, but a lot depends on the material these bands are working on. Mr. Douglas is project minded, not just writing to the strengths of his players but often composing with specific goals, homages or sound combinations in mind.
This album, on Bluebird/Arista, is by his three-year-old quintet (Chris Potter on tenor saxophone and bass clarinet, Uri Caine on piano, James Genus on bass, Clarence Penn on drums) with the guitarist Bill Frisell as a sixth member. There is no stated theme, but there is Mr. Frisell, and that can quickly become a theme in itself. His sound is so distinct and enveloping that he can be a dangerous presence on another person's album: if the inviter doesn't have a strong enough group concept or leaves Mr. Frisell lots of room, the album quickly becomes dominated by the guest. That doesn't happen here. Mr. Frisell is folded into the group more or less as an equal, and Mr. Douglas heads him off at the pass by writing some pieces that are tributes in the best sense. They do not imitate Mr. Frisell's music; they suggest many facets of it, and in Mr. Douglas's voice.
Mr. Douglas also grasps that Mr. Frisell is not just one kind of musician; he is about 30 kinds at once. So the record pulls in various directions: Wayne Shorteresque songs containing mysterious melodic lines countered by strong harmonic motion (the tracks ''Strange Liberation'' and ''The Frisell Dream''), a quiet, repetitive lullaby with a guitar drunk on electronic looping and effects (''Mountains From the Train''), rugged rhythm-and-blues that changes into 4/4 swing (''Rock of Billy'').
Meanwhile the band has the rhythmic drive and timbral originality -- especially with Mr. Caine's Fender Rhodes electric piano and Mr. Potter's bass clarinet -- to go up against Mr. Frisell properly.
'Slon'  Chicago Underground Trio
You might put in ''Slon,'' the Chicago Underground Trio's new album (Thrill Jockey Records), listen to it for 30 seconds or so, and say, ''O.K., I get it.'' You don't, though -- not yet.
That beginning is a bass vamp by Noel Kupersmith, a hard-grooving jazz drum cycle by Chad Taylor and a dire cornet line by Rob Mazurek that starts to lunge around in a single minor mode. It is loud, strident jazz, and the quality of the recording, smudgy and hot, puts you in mind of the cheap but urgent albums made in New York during the 1970's loft scene. (The track is called ''Protest'': perfect.)
But gradually other sounds push in. There has been some conspicuous editing here; that is a rarity in jazz records, which tend toward capturing the highest-possible performance of a group playing live in the studio. Bowed bass comes in over the plucked line, and a trumpet counterline emerges underneath Mr. Mazurek's color effects, his sputtering and buzzing. The next track begins with computer percussion, blips and dots; it is a cheap, agreeable, small-gesture funk, a kind of dime-store Dr. Dre groove, with trumpet and bass over it. Then on the third track, you hear dim, compressed atmospheric noise -- from a night street? from an empty office building? -- and the high, faint rings of bells. After two minutes, with that whooshing in the background, a short ballad with muted trumpet begins. The fourth track goes back to hard-nosed jazz improvising again. And so forth. A group like this, half creditable jazz and half creditable abstract electronics, is rare in America.
Mr. Mazurek, the cornetist, has a few things in common with Dave Douglas, the trumpeter: a dogged style influenced by Freddie Hubbard and an interest in electronics, among them. But with its instrumental tracks that explode within the walls of one chord or wander into free improvisation, the Chicago Underground Trio sticks to a rawer and older model of jazz.
'Too Beautiful to Burn'  Martin Siewert/Martin Brandlmayr
If you follow the electronic rhythmscapes out of the Chicago Underground Trio and the floating sounds of Mr. Frisell's guitar when he is in his abstract, no-melody mode, you move toward ''Too Beautiful to Burn,'' by two Viennese improvisers on the Erstwhile label.
Martin Siewert plays guitars and synthesizers, and Martin Brandlmayr plays drums; neither one use these instruments in the familiar way. Mr. Siewert plays one ghostly harmonic note at a time, massaging the sounds electronically through colors and shapes and timbres. And Mr. Brandlmayr plays the drums with precision, but often it is just a brush or a knuckle rustling on the snare or the merest suggestion of a rhythm made by barely touching drums with sticks.
For music that sounds so ascetic in description, ''Too Beautiful to Burn'' is an almost physical pleasure. This is a very warm kind of abstraction, and the tones -- even the overtones and electronic buzzes -- create euphony.
New CD's
