On the cover of the DVD version of Andrew Jarecki's ''Capturing the Friedmans,'' released today by HBO, is the question ''Who do you believe?''
When Mr. Jarecki's acclaimed documentary about the Friedman child molestation case of 1988 opened in theaters last May, it provided plenty of information for viewers to make their own judgments on the merits of the charges brought by prosecutors on Long Island against Arnold Friedman and his son Jesse, who both pleaded guilty and went to prison. Now the DVD, loaded with extras, comes along to reinforce or perhaps challenge previous opinions.
DVD's routinely expand on films and their making of course, but here the DVD has a chance to step into current developments and play a part in a continuing judicial process. On Jan. 7, citing disclosures in Mr. Jarecki's documentary, a motion was filed in Nassau County Court to vacate the conviction of Jesse Friedman, who was paroled in 2001 after serving 13 years in prison. (His father died in prison in 1995.) Serving as an addendum, the DVD, with its more than 30 short segments about the original investigation and the Friedman family, has been submitted to bolster Mr. Friedman's case.
''A lot of that didn't fit into the film, but it's interesting in a legal action,'' Mr. Jarecki said in an interview last week. In case Nassau County doesn't have a DVD player, some extras were transferred to tape for inclusion in Mr. Friedman's motion.
Whom to believe? On one side are the police of Great Neck, N.Y., who brought charges after interviewing scores of children who took computer classes in Arnold Friedman's basement, where the assaults were said to have taken place. On the other are Arnold and especially Jesse Friedman, who in a fresh interview that is on the DVD but not in the movie further explains his guilty plea and professes his innocence.
Many other questions came up when the movie opened. ''We heard from theater managers that there was a problem,'' Mr. Jarecki said. ''People weren't leaving after the film. They were sitting in their seats, arguing about things, so they couldn't clean the theater.''
Mr. Jarecki and his fellow filmmakers began interviewing those who lingered. ''People had strong reactions, they wanted to know more, talk more, and we realized this could be a starting point for the DVD,'' he said. One segment on the second disc answers frequently asked questions about the case and the members of the Friedman family. What are their relationships today? Why did they record their lives and troubles in such detail on videotape, an extraordinary part of the movie?
Another DVD segment goes into the investigation and the methods used by the sex crimes unit of the Great Neck police. It is here that most of the contention rested and still lies. Did the police coerce fictitious stories of abuse from children?
In a commentary with the film, Mr. Jarecki and Richard Hankin, the movie's editor and co-producer, say they worked to maintain a balance between the sides and tested that impartiality with audiences in preview screenings. Nevertheless it is hard to avoid the feeling that from the movie's standpoint the charges of violent sexual assault were badly flawed.
The extras on the DVD's second disc emphasize the film's doubts. Detectives directly contradict each other on the methods of questioning, with one saying that it was important to have a child say what happened without prompting and the other holding that the child must be told that the questioner knows what happened and the child had better go along with it. One segment of the DVD includes the transcript of a tape recording, secretly made by a parent, of a detective being abusive and threatening when a child denies he was molested in the Friedmans' basement.
''The film tries to be balanced, but by the end of the day you have a group of police officers, a judge, a district attorney who took a lot of bows for prosecuting the Friedman case, and on the other side you have a decimated family and an 18-year-old kid who went to jail for 13 years,'' Mr. Jarecki said. ''So we have to come out with some sympathetic reaction to them.''
Both the film and DVD imply an assembly-line investigation that went from the discovery of pornographic publications in the Friedman house to the assumption by investigators that the Friedmans must be generating such materials themselves by filming molestations of Arnold Friedman's computer students. A journalist who has examined this and other child-molestation cases describes what she calls a national hysteria about so-called sex rings in the late 1980's and, in Great Neck's case, an inclination to jump to conclusions because the investigation needed to produce what the community wanted to believe.
By any standard the DVD extras heighten the drama. One segment has the detectives and the journalist in a face-to-face confrontation during a question-and-answer session after a screening of the film at the TriBeCa Film Festival last year. Another segment has an exchange between the judge who tried the case, Abbey Boklan, and Mr. Jarecki at the premiere of the movie in Great Neck.
Many segments are devoted to the Friedmans and their chaotic relations with one another. More home videos catch a family in turmoil but always given to a certain amount of showmanship in front of the camera. Jesse is a likable young man, direct and optimistic even as he contemplates life as a sex offender. His older brother, David, described as New York City's leading birthday clown, is the angriest Friedman, introspective and sympathetic in his own way.
''It's clear that the family has been beaten so far beyond recognition, even people who appreciate the balance of the film can say, 'Well, I don't know really what happened, but at least I can agree I don't think these guys had a chance,' '' Mr. Jarecki said.
In a segment made in September, 22 months after his release from prison, Jesse Friedman shows us the locater device he wears around his ankle. ''The whole purpose of this movie for David and I was to try to get my conviction overturned,'' he says, ''set up an environment where people in the computer class would come forward and say, 'I know I said certain things to the grand jury, but those things weren't true.' ''
Mr. Jarecki said that he went back and filmed nine such people for the current court motion but didn't include them on the DVD.
NEW DVD'S  Correction:  February 3, 2004, Tuesday  The New DVD's column last Tuesday, about the documentary ''Capturing the Friedmans,'' misidentified the Long Island police department in the child molesting case in which Arnold Friedman and his son Jesse were convicted. It was the Nassau County police, not the Great Neck police.
