Combined exposure to secondhand smoke and urban air pollutants at levels encountered in New York City can hurt fetal development, a study by the Columbia Center for Children's Environmental Health says.
While previous research has explored the effect of secondhand smoke and urban air pollution independently on fetuses, the study is the first to find a significant combined effect of both pollutants on birth weight and head circumference, two standard measures of fetal growth. Babies exposed in the womb to both secondhand smoke and high levels of urban air pollutants had a 7 percent reduction in birth weight and a 3 percent reduction in head circumference, scientists found, compared with babies exposed only to low levels of urban air pollution in utero.
The study is to be published in Environmental Health Perspectives in April.
''The effects we see, reduced fetal growth and lower birth weight, have been linked to later problems in learning and school performance in childhood,'' said Dr. Frederica P. Perera, the senior author of the study and director of the center. ''These are warning signs that we should take seriously.''
The findings are noteworthy because pollutants affect the human body simultaneously, rather than separately, as they are frequently studied, the researchers say. The scientists also used a new approach to measure the effects of pollutants on individual babies, by tracking the pollutants in DNA, Dr. Perera said.
The researchers conducted the study on 214 infants of nonsmoking African-American and Dominican women in Washington Heights, Central Harlem and the South Bronx, the communities the center serves. Members of urban minority groups are also at high-risk for problem births and are more likely to be exposed to environmental contaminants. But the findings can be generalized across race and ethnicity, the researchers say.
The researchers examined the effect of prenatal exposure to two common urban pollutants on fetal growth -- environmental tobacco smoke and combustion-related pollutants, which enter the air from car, truck or bus engines, residential heating and power generation.
Interviewers administered a 45-minute questionnaire to the participants during the last trimester of pregnancy to track demographic information, travel away from their homes in the past year, number of household members who smoke and alcohol use in each trimester.
When the women gave birth, the researchers compared those infants whose mothers had lived in households where a smoker was present to those whose mothers did not by measuring DNA damage caused by the pollutants in the umbilical cord blood of the newborns.
The findings show the combined effect of these two exposures can damage the developing fetus, Dr. Perera said. Babies exposed to second-hand smoke and air pollutants were, on average, half a pound (or 233 grams) lighter and their heads were almost half an inch (10 millimeters) smaller in circumference.
Dr. Perera said the results showed the need to improve air quality. ''My advice to pregnant women,'' he added, ''is don't let people in your household smoke.''
Correction:  February 11, 2004, Wednesday  Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times on Jan. 27 about research on the effects of air pollution and smoking on fetuses referred incorrectly to the lead author of the study. Dr. Frederica P. Perera, director of the Columbia Center for Children's Environmental Health in New York, is a woman.
