Schumann's four symphonies have long had their ''fixers'' and detractors, and even those of us who love the works just as they are, taken one at a time, may fear too much of a good thing. So there was room for skepticism when Daniel Barenboim began a four-concert Schumann festival with the Staatskapelle Berlin at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday.
For one thing, Wolfgang Sawallisch and the Philadelphia Orchestra gave acclaimed performances of all the symphonies at Carnegie only last season. True, Mr. Barenboim was adding perspective by presenting all the symphonies together and going beyond them with the piano, violin and cello concertos, and even two lesser-known works with piano.
But didn't that very concentration stand to make a certain uniformity in rhetoric and orchestration still more problematic? One thing sure: the performances would have to be good. And by and large they were.
The Staatskapelle, which serves as the pit band of the Berlin State Opera, is an easy orchestra to like. It responds to Mr. Barenboim, its chief conductor for life, with spirit and energy if not always great subtlety.
And Mr. Barenboim has known and obviously loved these works for decades. He revels in their surprises, sometimes to a fault. (Does ''animato,'' at the end of the first movement of the ''Spring'' Symphony and elsewhere, really translate as ''like a bat out of hell''?) These were attractive and often exciting performances, as anyone who refers to the new Teldec recording of the symphonies by Mr. Barenboim and the Staatskapelle may well imagine.
Certainly the audiences reacted enthusiastically. The clamorous response of well-filled houses to the works of an unglamorous master was as touching as Mr. Barenboim's evident faith in the music.
Yet the question remained whether, for compleatists like Mr. Barenboim himself, this was the best way to hear that much Schumann. Above all, these symphonies thrive on freshness and clarity, qualities hard to achieve in a minimarathon.
In the matter of freshness, I think back several years to a performance of the Third Symphony, the ''Rhenish,'' by Riccardo Muti and the Philadelphia Orchestra. With a touch of showmanship that suited the occasion perfectly, Mr. Muti signaled the opening outburst before reaching the podium, unexpectedly filling the stifling old Academy of Music with a vibrant wash of sound. This is hardly the sort of thing you can do often, nor is it the only way to achieve the purpose. But the gesture has since come to define the work -- and the element of Schumannian surprise -- in my memory.
As for clarity, I hark back a few more years to performances of the Second Symphony, and especially its Scherzo, by Christoph von Dohnanyi and the Cleveland Orchestra. Mendelssohnian lightness, grace and precision, they showed, can be ideal complements to the occasional density of Schumann's scoring.
For me Schumann hovers somewhere between Mendelssohn and (with all those string tremolos) Bruckner. Brahms doesn't necessarily figure in -- or didn't, until I saw Mr. Barenboim quoted in The New York Times on Friday: ''If you conduct Schumann's symphonies to sound like Brahms, they don't sound good. It's not meant to sound like Brahms.''
Agreed. But once raised, the comparison persisted through the remaining performances, which at times did sound precisely Brahmsian in texture. A telling moment came with an encore on Saturday, the third movement of Brahms's Third Symphony: it took an instant to realize that this was the real Brahms, not more Schumann.
Perhaps more enlightening than hearing the symphonies together was hearing the concertos in quick succession. The piano and cello concertos are well known, for reasons made abundantly clear in sensitive readings by Radu Lupu on Wednesday and Yo-Yo Ma on Friday.
Few would claim that the Violin Concerto is a greater work than either of those. But Gidon Kremer made a persuasive case for it on Saturday, with a compelling reading not only of the highly charged opening movement but also of the meandering finale. And if the young pianist Jonathan Biss might have seemed out of place in such august company, his vivid accounts of the Introduction and Allegro Appassionato (Op. 92) and the Introduction and Concert-Allegro (Op. 134) on Sunday dispelled any such notion.
Several orchestral players also delivered excellent solos: Claudius Popp, a cellist, in the Cello Concerto (in exquisite duet with Mr. Ma) and the Fourth Symphony; Kyril Zlotnikov, another cellist, in the Violin Concerto; and Lothar Strauss, the concertmaster in the Fourth. The timpanists, Torsten Schönfeld and Willi Hilgers, contributed mightily throughout.
In general the Staatskapelle strings, though hard put to keep pace with Mr. Barenboim's more impetuous tempos, played beautifully. But despite a pleasing individuality of sound, the woodwinds proved uneven and seemed at times to resist a blend. The brasses, too, were a bit untamed and, in chorus, unbalanced.
Some would say that a certain rough-and-readiness is just what the tempestuous Schumann needs. But rough-and-readiness wears thin in quantity, and Schumann also needs perhaps more of that elegance and grace than came through here.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
