The question might have come from a caller on a consumer-advice program like ''Car Talk'': how much should a driver spend to keep a used car running after deciding to buy a much newer, far more expensive and thrilling model that has not rolled out of the factory yet?
When President Bush outlined a sensational new mission for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on Jan. 14 -- flying humans to the Moon in a brand-new spacefaring vehicle, then fishtailing toward Mars -- the agency had to face almost the same question on its balky, 1970's-vintage fleet of space shuttles.
In the end, NASA and the Bush administration decided to keep spending several billion dollars a year to put the remaining three shuttles back into space before retiring the entire fleet by 2010, once it has finished ferrying parts into low-Earth orbit for the construction of the International Space Station.
The decision has caught the attention of both supporters and critics of the human space flight program, who worry that not enough money will be available for both the grand vision and the unexciting chore of keeping the shuttles in working order, and that top technical talent could abandon a dying program. Others are deeply concerned that money will be taken from space science to pay for both efforts.
And no one is forgetting that just under a year ago, on Feb. 1, the space shuttle Columbia broke up in the skies over Texas, killing the seven astronauts aboard, the program's second calamity. The Challenger exploded soon after liftoff in 1986, killing all aboard. Before NASA returns its shuttles to flight, the agency has agreed to comply with a set of rigorous recommendations formulated by the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, an independent team led by Harold W. Gehman Jr., the retired admiral.
As the agency's engineers work to resolve those issues -- none of the board's recommendations has been met to date -- it seems clear that how NASA balances its new dual role will do much to determine the nation's future in space. Proponents say the new arrangement is a good one.
''The president's a businessman,'' said Dr. John H. Marburger III, Mr. Bush's science adviser and director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy at the White House. ''He wants to know how much this is going to cost.''
He added, ''It's a very practical approach; it's what you would do if you were serious about space exploration.''
Dr. Marburger argued that because preparations for traveling to the Moon would gradually ramp up as the shuttle program ended, Mr. Bush's vision would remain fiscally sound. But until the president's proposed 2005 budget reaches Capitol Hill next Monday, some lawmakers are wary.
''I strongly support human space flight, but not at all cost,'' said Representative Sherwood L. Boehlert, the Republican of New York who is chairman of the House Science Committee. ''I would not put all our eggs in that basket at the expense of denying -- to space science and earth science and other areas of science -- resources.''
Depending on who is doing the talking, the case for staying with the shuttle can seem like an argument patched together by Rube Goldberg or a relentless chain of logic.
The centerpiece of NASA's reasoning is that the space station is needed as a laboratory for testing the effects of long-duration space flight on humans. Only on the station, NASA argues, can the effects of radiation exposure in space and the loss of muscle and bone mass in a microgravity environment be properly studied and conquered. The only way to keep building the space station, NASA says, is the shuttle.
Sean O'Keefe, the NASA administrator, said the scientific mission of the United States' portion of the station (16 countries are participating) will now become exclusively the study of the effects of space on humans. About 25 shuttle missions will be needed to deliver modules built in Japan, the European Union and the United States to complete the space station.
''The way they see it,'' said David Goldston, chief of staff at the House Science Committee, ''you need the space shuttle to get the station fixed; you need the station working to do the research to learn how to survive long periods in space; you need that to stay on the Moon; and you need the Moon to get to Mars.''
There is no shortage of critics who find the argument flawed. ''My opinion is that it was put together as a political statement -- a rather brilliant political statement,'' said Arthur Zygielbaum, a former member of NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel and formerly an engineer and manager at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
Mr. Zygielbaum, who recently testified before the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee on the space station and supports the research that could be done there, points out that Mr. Bush's plan lets the United States fulfill commitments to its international partners on the station -- one element of what he sees as a political compromise.
Others offer a similar critique. ''It's politics, huge politics,'' said Dr. Robert Park, a physicist at the University of Maryland and an official at the American Physical Society, which has long opposed the space station as needless.
Dr. Marburger -- who said his office was closely involved in planning the Jan. 14 announcement -- dismissed the contention that political calculus was at work in forming Mr. Bush's vision. He defended the need for the shuttle and station on scientific grounds. ''If we had all the answers to the questions of the hazards of space for human space travel, then maybe we wouldn't need the space shuttle or the space station,'' he said.
Because those answers are not known, said Mr. O'Keefe, those low-orbit platforms are crucial for studying that environment. ''You can simulate it, you can do all that, but there ain't nothing like the real deal,'' he said.
But Dr. Park said the station environment was not comparable to that of a Mars flight. He pointed out that because the station is situated within a sort of magnetic cocoon that surrounds Earth called the magnetosphere, astronauts receive much less radiation of various kinds than they would, say, on a trip to Mars. ''So it's not a good platform for studying that,'' Dr. Park said.
And Dr. Park endorsed recent comments by Robert Zubrin, president of the Mars Society, who believes that producing artificial gravity -- by spinning a spacecraft and relying on centrifugal force -- is the best solution for defeating the health effects of weightlessness on long flights. The space station is not outfitted to study artificial gravity.
The costs of the station and the shuttle are reminders of the make-or-break role that money has played in the history of human space flight in the United States.
In 1961, before President John F. Kennedy gave his speech calling for the nation to land a man on the Moon before the end of the decade, NASA prepared an overall cost estimate for the program. The agency came up with $20 billion, but on the way to present the numbers at the White House, the NASA administrator, James Webb, decided that he did not want to be accused of lowballing the estimate if costs rose later.
''He told them it could cost as much as $40 billion,'' said Dr. Roger Launius, chairman of space history at the National Air and Space Museum. ''Everybody gulped.'' But the United States was engaged in the cold war and the Soviet Union had just put an astronaut into space. The president accepted the costs, and he gave his speech.
In a very different world, the first President George Bush stood on the steps of the Air and Space Museum in 1989, on the 20th anniversary of the Apollo 11 lunar landing, and announced that the United States would return to the Moon and go to Mars. But then NASA came up with an estimate of $400 billion to $700 billion to carry out the program. ''In the space of about a year, it was dead,'' Dr. Launius said.
Somewhere along the line, NASA developed a different problem with money, said Admiral Gehman, the leader of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board. Ever-tightening budget constraints pushed NASA into some very bad fiscal habits -- which, Admiral Gehman said, he hopes do not continue as the agency gets the shuttle ready to fly again.
After the Apollo program, Admiral Gehman said: ''NASA has had to overstate its capabilities and understate the cost of doing business. I hope that the Congress and the White House don't put them in that position again.''
As long as those pressures do not revisit the agency, Admiral Gehman said, ''I don't think they're taking on more than they can handle from a technical point of view.''
But other experts said NASA's technical capabilities faced a separate hazard: a risky exodus of talent. In the 1980's unmanned rockets were scheduled for termination because their payloads were shifting to the winged spaceships. The result was a string of disasters and groundings from 1985 to 1987, including the failure of virtually every type of major unmanned rocket in the American inventory, including the Atlas, the Delta and the Titan.
''As people see it coming to an end, they'll begin to bail out,'' Albert D. Wheelon, a former aerospace executive and Central Intelligence Agency official who helped shape the nation's early spy-satellite program, said of the shuttle effort.
A task group charged with monitoring NASA's progress in satisfying the Gehman commission's recommendations issued an interim report on Jan. 20. It said that NASA's progress was uneven, with substantial progress in some areas but none that had been completed.
But it may be the very problems with the plodding old shuttles that have had the greatest effect on the new direction of the space program. The report issued by the Gehman commission pointed out that NASA no longer had an overarching vision to guide it. The report also said that flying the shuttles beyond 2010 would require an expensive ''recertification,'' or technical shakedown, which would be likely to soak up major resources on its own.
Officials inside the administration say it is no accident that Mr. Bush quickly came up with just such a vision -- or that he decided to let the shuttles fly until 2010, then ground them.
''We're certainly gratified that that was listened to,'' Admiral Gehman said, ''and that NASA now knows exactly how long the shuttle is supposed to last.''
