Sudden heart-pounding panic attacks are most likely caused by abnormalities in the brain, new evidence suggests, reinforcing earlier research on animals.
People with panic disorder, according to scientists at the National Institutes of Health, have drastic reductions of a type of serotonin receptor, called 5-HT1A, in three areas of the brain. The findings, reported last week in The Journal of Neuroscience, lend credence to the suspicion that serotonin dysfunction plays a role in the disorder.
''This provides evidence for what we've been telling patients all along,'' said Dr. Dennis S. Charney, chief of the mood and anxiety disorders research program at the institutes and an author of the paper. ''Panic disorder is due to a specific abnormality in the brain, not a weakness in character.''
About 2.4 million Americans have the disease, which can leave its victims living in constant fear of attacks that might plunge them into outbursts of worry and thoughts of impending death. Experts have compared it to being stalked by a lion. The episodes, often resembling a heart attack and known to strike at any time, can be so terrifying that some associate them with the place that they occurred -- the subway or the grocery store, for example -- and will refuse to go there again.
Traditionally, the biological basis of the disease has been poorly understood. But some of the best drug treatments are serotonin enhancers, which have hinted at the chemical messenger's involvement for some time. Also supporting that theory is research on mice. When a gene for serotonin receptors is eliminated, the animals have a greater risk of anxiety.
In the latest study, scientists used brain images to peer at serotonin receptors in humans. The subjects, 16 people with panic disorder and 15 who did not have the disorder were injected with small quantities of a benign radioactive tracer that latched onto the receptors, allowing the researchers to count them and pinpoint their locations.
The disparity was marked. Subjects in the panic group averaged a third fewer receptors in areas known as the anterior and posterior cingulates. The group members were also deficient in the the raphe, which has connections to a region that processes emotion.
Dr. Alexander Neumeister, a research psychiatrist at the National Institute of Mental Health and an author of the study, said there was a strong likelihood that the receptor deficiencies were genetic. But he also cautioned that he could not rule out the possibility that the depletions were actually a result, rather than a cause, of the disorder.
''We don't know if this was there before these people were ill,'' he said. ''The next step is to study people who have a history of panic disorder in their families but are asymptomatic. Then we can determine which comes first.''
The illness, which most commonly begins between late adolescence and the mid-30's, is just one in a group of anxiety-inducing ailments that are relatively widespread. About 19 million Americans are afflicted by one of the diseases; obsessive-compulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder and specific phobias are among the more well known.
One expert, Dr. Michael Liebowitz, a professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia, who did not participate in the study, said the findings were significant but needed to be replicated.
''There are still a few issues, like whether this is something that is specific to panic disorder or something in anxiety disorder in general,'' Dr. Liebowitz said.
Still, said Jerilyn Ross, president of the Anxiety Disorders Association of America, the research sheds some light on the biological underpinnings of the disorder and may lift some of its stigma. Almost 75 percent of people with panic disorder do not receive treatment, she said. Some, she added, are dismissed by doctors who think they are hypochondriacs.
''Anxiety, even in the mental health system is often overlooked,'' Ms. Ross said. ''So a study like this reinforces the fact that it is real and should be taken seriously.''
