A yellow bulldozer rumbles over a snow-covered valley at the base of the cloud-shrouded Teton Mountains, the blade scraping a furrow in the deep snow. A large wagon pulled by the dozer drops a steady stream of green alfalfa pellets.
This is what thousands of elk and hundreds of bison here on the National Elk Refuge have been waiting for, and as the chow wagon approaches they get rambunctious. They charge toward the wagon, the bison snorting steam as they gallop. The dun-colored elk cry and mew as they stand back and wait for the bison to eat.
The feeding of elk and bison helps them to live through long, harsh winters, but it has long been controversial. In many places, including Montana, feeding ungulates is illegal in part because of potential diseases.
In recent weeks, criticism of the feeding program at the refuge and at 22 other sites where Wyoming conducts feeding programs has intensified because of an outbreak of a bovine disease called brucellosis.
Brucellosis is a bacterial disease that can spread through a cattle herd, causing cows to abort young spontaneously.
It also occurs in elk, and by concentrating the animals, the feedings enhance the mechanism for transmitting the disease, said Dr. Thomas Roffe, a veterinarian and the regional chief of wildlife health for the federal Fish and Wildlife Service. Among groups of elk in the area that do not receive the feedings, brucellosis occurs at a rate of 1 to 4 percent, said Dr. Roffe, whose agency oversees the elk refuge. Rates of infection among the fed animals average nearly 20 percent and rise as high as 50 percent. Primarily, brucellosis is transmitted when animals come in contact with fetuses aborted by the disease. A single fetus can spread the disease to dozens of other elk.
Last month, 31 head of cattle in a herd of 391 near Boulder, Wyo., tested positive for the disease. Last week, it was found in another herd. These are two of only three herds in the nation known to have the disease. Its origin not known, but the cattle were grazing adjacent to land where the state fed the elk. The state declared an emergency that requires all cows to be tested and restricts exporting out of state.
One Wyoming man, who was not identified, also came down with the disease, though it appears unrelated to the outbreak here. In humans the disease is called undulant fever and causes fever, joint pain and other flulike symptoms. It can be caught by drinking unpasteurized milk from an infected animal or by eating poorly cooked beef. If diagnosed early it can be treated with antibiotics.
The Yellowstone area is the United States' last reservoir of bovine brucellosis, which also occurs in bison, Dr. Roffe said. His agency and park officials are experimenting with vaccines shot by rifle. Wildlife experts also suspect that brucellosis is killing bighorn sheep.
Despite the outbreak, Dr. Jim Logan, the Wyoming state veterinarian, said that if the feedings were abruptly halted, the elk would go to cattle feeding grounds and mingle with cattle, exposing them to greater risk of contracting the disease. He said he favored a careful phasing out of the feedings over several years.
''We may be better off as a state if we didn't feed animals'' on the feeding grounds, said Jim Magagna, executive vice president of the Wyoming Stock Growers Association. ''But given the elk population, we have to have them.''
Other experts, including Dr. Roffe, warn that if feeding is not ended, brucellosis may be only the beginning. A bigger fear is chronic wasting disease, which has been found in wild animals less than 200 miles away. If it hits the feeding grounds it could spread rapidly and is 100 percent fatal.
Dr. Roffe said feeding any wildlife, including birds, was poor policy and could threaten human health. The concentration of birds in Asia, for example, is behind the spread of avian flu there, he said.
Critics say the elk continue to be fed, against the advice of experts, only because of the power of the livestock industry. ''Ranchers are king of the West,'' said Meredith Taylor, who works with an environmental group called the Wyoming Outdoor Council to restore natural wildlife migration patterns. ''They oppose free-ranging wildlife because of competition for feed.''
But this huge herd of elk is a cash crop for this tourist town next to the refuge of nearly 25,000 acres. Elk images adorn mugs, T-shirts and motel signs. Each spring, local Boy Scouts pick up tons of dropped antlers and auction them to aphrodisiac manufacturers and artists. More than 15,000 people take sleigh rides each winter to see the refuge's animals. The well-fed elk, now numbering 6,000 to 7,000, also draw hunters.
''Without feeding, what habitat we have would limit the herd to 1,200 to 1,500 head,'' said Charlie Petersen, a hunting outfitter in Jackson who has guided hunters for nearly 50 years. ''That wouldn't sustain the hunting industry.''
