The first hint was the silence. No sonic boom reverberating through the Florida marsh, no scared herons and egrets lifting off.
Minutes passed. The countdown clock beside the runway ticked away the time left before landing. Now it was touchdown time -- 9:15:50 on the morning of Feb. 1, 2003 -- and still the Columbia was nowhere in sight.
''Do you see anything?'' I asked no one in particular. A couple of fellow reporters standing nearby in the viewing area, a grassy patch with some bleachers a couple of hundred yards from the runway's midpoint, muttered no. They sounded as worried as I felt.
''What is NASA saying?'' I asked, scanning the sky, still thinking I would see the white spaceship suddenly poke through the dark clouds.
I got my answer as I looked again at the countdown clock, which now said we were seven seconds past touchdown time. Over a barely intelligible audio hookup from Mission Control in Houston came a dreadful phrase: ''Contingency procedures.'' Those were the words NASA had used 17 years earlier, shortly after the accident that doomed the shuttle Challenger and its crew.
Over more than a decade, I had witnessed dozens of shuttle landings. But even as the public and the news media became blasé about these ''routine'' re-entries, I always made it a point to be at the runway, waiting and watching.
Half an hour before the scheduled landing time, I had watched the astronauts' families and top NASA officials and employees gather inside the fenced area for V.I.P.'s. The atmosphere was one of anticipation -- no trace of anxiety.
Air-to-ground communications and the beat-by-beat commentary from the NASA spokesman in Houston were barely audible. The noise of electrical generators and idling engines of rescue trucks drowned out all but a few words here and there.
But then the silence from the sky, broken by the phrase ''contingency procedures,'' ended any doubts. I called The Times, and a national desk editor, aware that NASA had lost contact with the shuttle 15 minutes earlier, told me to write whatever I could, as fast as I could.
I threw my equipment into a bag and ran down the bleachers and toward the bus that was to take reporters back to the press site.
Aboard the bus nobody was talking, but I'll never forget the somber faces. Ten minutes later I was running toward the press site building. As soon as I entered, I saw a cluster of reporters and NASA employees, all transfixed in front of a TV set. The all-news channels were already showing the tragic streaks of smoke in the sky over Texas.
Clearing my mind, I put together a 200-word brief that included this paragraph:
''During the shuttle launching, at least one tracking camera had spotted debris falling off the shuttle external tank. The pieces hit Columbia's left wing. NASA officials said they did not think the problem was serious enough to endanger the astronauts during re-entry.''
Seven months later, the Columbia Accident Investigation Board reported how and why everything happened. The errant debris, of course, proved to be the cause of the accident -- that and a ''broken safety culture'' at NASA that paid no heed to the chance that falling foam could have fatally damaged the shuttle.
Waking up that Saturday morning, I would never have dreamed that America's human spaceflight program would be so nebulous and uncertain a year later.
FIRST PERSON
