HOLLYWOOD ANIMAL  By Joe Eszterhas  736 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $26.95.
Joe Eszterhas has never exactly been known for his good taste. This is the guy who wrote the screenplays for ''Showgirls'' and ''Basic Instinct'' and ''Jade.'' This is the guy who wrote a script about a politician who is caught having sex with a cow. This is the guy whose last book, ''American Rhapsody,'' featured a talking incarnation of Bill Clinton's penis.
So it's little surprise that the opening pages of Mr. Eszterhas's new book, ''Hollywood Animal,'' get off to a thoroughly obnoxious start. Deliberately obnoxious, no doubt, as Mr. Eszterhas seems to pride himself on being rude, crude and insufferable, a Hells Angels hellion sort of guy. And he or his publisher seem to hope that such an opening might hook the reader and justify the silly, hype-inducing embargo of this book.
But anyone hoping for some new telling glimpses of Hollywood -- as in Robert Altman's movie ''The Player'' or Bruce Wagner's novels -- will be sorely disappointed. Instead this book delivers large heapings of egomania run egregiously amok.
In the first chapter alone, Mr. Eszterhas boasts about how much money he's been paid. He boasts about the vulgar insults he has hurled at Hollywood colleagues. He boasts that he ''was the only screenwriter in the history of Hollywood who had groupies.'' He boasts about his artistic ''vision,'' this from a man most famous for the lurid sex scenes and numbing car chases in his movies.
He boasts about a one-night stand with Sharon Stone, whom he boasts he created with ''Basic Instinct.'' (''I felt I deserved her.'') And he disses other screenwriters from Ben Hecht (''He ground them out one after the other, sometimes working on three or four at a time'') to William Goldman, whom he says he once described as ''a hooker from Connecticut.''
There is a lot more of this sort of thing throughout this humongously bloated book, but buried beneath all the bragging and bluster, beneath all the smarmy (and not very interesting) gossip, there is a moving story about Mr. Eszterhas and his father, a Hungarian writer who brought his family to the United States after months in a refugee camp during World War II.
It is a story about growing up foreign in Cleveland (the inspiration, clearly, for Mr. Eszterhas's script for his well received if little known 1997 film, ''Telling Lies in America'') and a story about a father trying to bring up his only child in the shadow of his wife's mental illness. It is also a story about guilt and betrayal and forgiveness, a tale that would uncannily come to echo Mr. Eszterhas's 1989 courtroom drama, ''Music Box,'' about an American lawyer's defense of her Hungarian-born father, who has been accused of war crimes.
Although Mr. Eszterhas says that he was ignorant of his father's secret history when he wrote that movie, he was confronted, not long after its release, with the news that his father was being investigated for war crimes by the Justice Department. In time, he writes, he would learn that his father had lied about his past in Hungary, that he had worked for the Propaganda Ministry, and that he'd written hundreds of vicious anti-Semitic editorials, knowledge that would force the author to re-examine all his own memories about his father and their shared past.
Mr. Eszterhas relates this story in the direct, forceful terms that animated his early journalism for Rolling Stone and his book ''Charlie Simpson's Apocalypse.'' By intercutting chapters about his childhood and his father with chapters about his life in Hollywood, he presumably means to compare and contrast his impoverished youth with his spoiled, hedonistic show business life and to examine (as he tried to do in ''Flashdance'') the bright and dark sides of the American dream.
Unfortunately Mr. Eszterhas's heartfelt accounts of his youth, his conflicted relationship with his father and his own recent battle with throat cancer are swamped by all the solipsistic, self-dramatizing garbage in the rest of the book: reams and reams and reams of chatter about his sex life, other peoples's sex lives, fights with directors, fights with studios, fights with agents, catty asides about how certain actresses are aging poorly, cattier asides about how certain male colleagues' careers are slipping, and lots of revelations -- we're shocked, shocked -- that hypocrisy and cynicism and schadenfreude are alive and well in Hollywood.
Although some of Mr. Eszterhas's riffs about his dealings with, say, Paul Verhoeven, director of ''Basic Instinct'' and ''Showgirls,'' and with Paramount's chief, Sherry Lansing, may make for a moment or two of idle chatter at the Ivy, little in this overstuffed book is entertaining or new.
Mr. Eszterhas relives, blow by blow, the famous story of how he faced down the former superagent Michael Ovitz. And he provides a blow by blow account of how his friend Bill Macdonald left his wife, Naomi, for Sharon Stone (during the filming of ''Sliver'') and how Mr. Eszterhas fell in love with Naomi and ended his first marriage.
Who really wants to read pages and pages about the author's creative differences with William Friedkin over ''Jade,'' a 1995 bomb about a high-profile psychologist who has a secret life as a high-priced hooker? And who really cares about his analysis of what might have gone wrong with the abominable ''Showgirls'' or his problems with a script called ''Male Pattern Baldness''?
The story about Mr. Eszterhas and his father, buried at the heart of ''Hollywood Animal,'' is a powerful and affecting one. As for the rest of this ridiculously padded, absurdly self-indulgent book, the reader can only cry: T.M.I.! Too Much Information! And: Get an editor A.S.A.P.!
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
