'Thirteen'
Listening to the director Catherine Hardwicke and her two stars, Evan Rachel Wood and Nikki Reed, chatter away during a commentary, it pays to remember that the movie under discussion involves self-mutilation, sex, drugs, drinking, smoking, intense parent-child alienation and two adolescents who slap each other bloody.
Before making the movie, director and actors got to know one another at a slumber party at Ms. Hardwicke's. Later they established the rules of kissing and touching bodies for 13-year-olds in an R-rated film. It is noted that Ms. Wood (Tracy in the film) and Ms. Reed (Evie) weren't old enough to attend ''Thirteen'' without adult accompaniment. Would their mothers nix the sex scenes?
On screen Tracy's ''ferocious appetite gives this story of a 13-year-old girl's extended period of debauchery and misery a magnetic volatility,'' Elvis Mitchell wrote in The New York Times. 2003. Fox. $27.98. 95 minutes.
'The Secret Lives Of Dentists'
In Alan Rudolph's film Dana Hurst (Hope Davis) says that she always thought ''marriage would be like Cinerama, just get wider and wider; instead it just gets smaller and smaller.'' Dana, a dentist in her 30's, has been married for 10 years to another dentist, Dave Hurst (Campbell Scott), who is pretty well convinced that she is having an affair.
An imaginary trumpet-playing demon (Denis Leary) keeps popping up to fan Dave's suspicions. Craig Lucas wrote the screenplay based on Jane Smiley's novella ''The Age of Grief,'' and in a commentary Mr. Rudolph says that if viewers want to see a model of screen adaptation, they should read the book and then see the movie.
As for the director, ''Mr. Rudolph employs a lightness of touch that's gracious in its generosity,'' Mr. Mitchell wrote in The Times. ''Generally this director's affection for his actors is apparent.'' 2003. Columbia TriStar. $26.96. 104 minutes. R.
'Madame Satã'
A making-of documentary asks current residents of Rio de Janeiro what they know about Madame Satã, a figure in Rio's impoverished bohemian Lapa neighborhood in the early 1930's. Respondents vaguely recall a homosexual and transvestite performer, a street brawler, a troublemaker: quite a combination in any one person.
Lázaro Ramos makes a fiery and fascinating João Francisco, later known as Madame Satã, in Karim Aïnouz's film. ''Mr. Ramos's incendiary performance burns like a fuse, lighted from deep inside his skin, that explodes with devastating emotional fireworks,'' Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. 2003. Wellspring. $24.98. 105 minutes. Portuguese with English subtitles. No rating.
