The Democratic presidential contenders wrapped up their New Hampshire campaigns Monday with upbeat appeals to undecided voters and a last round of sharp recriminations over who was right on the war in Iraq, who has the credentials and capacity to change Washington and who has the ability to beat President Bush in November.
Campaigning by bus, van and helicopter, the candidates crisscrossed the state that each hopes will propel him into the seven primaries and caucuses next week, stumping from the southern population centers near the Massachusetts line to tiny Dixville Notch in the far northwoods, where the nation's first primary voters of 2004 cast ballots just after midnight today.
Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, who has led in all the recent polls, ignored his rivals entirely, played down the polls, glad-handed his way through an icy business district in Rochester and rallied the faithful to get out the vote on Tuesday. He told a midday town-hall-style meeting in Keene that he would stay and answer questions from every undecided voter.
''I am not here just to count down the hours until tomorrow, or while them away,'' he said, ''because we are fighting for every single vote in this state. And I have come here to mark with you the beginning of the end of the Bush presidency.''
Howard Dean of Vermont, striving to energize supporters who might be wavering after his third-place finish in the Iowa caucuses, blamed the news media for overplaying his raucous Iowa concession speech and once again criticized Mr. Kerry and his other main rivals for voting to authorize Mr. Bush to use force in Iraq.
''What kind of foreign policy do you want in the White House?'' he demanded at a packed rally here.
Appearing for the second day in a row with his wife, Judith Steinberg Dean, Dr. Dean made vague accusations about Democratic opponents using ''dirty tricks'' to derail his campaign, and later, in a brief interview with The New York Times, reflected on his fall from the front-runner's slot in pre-Iowa polls.
''Once we got way out in front,'' he said, ''our strategy was to try to blow open the race. And everybody else worked really hard in concert to make sure that didn't happen, and they succeeded. So now it's a long marathon.''
Dr. Dean added: ''I think this is going to go awhile, unless Kerry wins tomorrow, in which case there will really be a shake-out in a hurry.'' But he also said he did not expect to bow out in any case, noting, ''We're set up pretty well right through Super Tuesday,'' on March 2.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, hoping for another lift here after his second-place finish in Iowa, said that unlike Mr. Kerry he had never taken contributions from ''Washington lobbyists'' and told reporters traveling on his bus, ''If we want real change in America, real change in Washington, it's my belief that it takes somebody that's not a Washington insider to do that.''
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who needs a strong finish here to keep his campaign going, appealed in a new television advertisement to independent voters to ''choose experience and independence.'' On the stump, he said that only he had the moderate credentials to take on Mr. Bush in November, declaring: ''I'm the Democrat who has been the most mainstream. You win elections in the mainstream.''
And Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who has seen his standing in New Hampshire fall as Mr. Kerry's has risen, claimed that he was the only one of the candidates to have been born poor, unable to afford the Yale education that Mr. Kerry, Dr. Dean and Mr. Lieberman all share with Mr. Bush. Reminded later that Mr. Edwards was the son of a Carolina millworker and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio once lived in his car, General Clark retreated a bit, saying he was thinking of ''the top two candidates.''
In sum, it was a day in which all of Mr. Kerry's rivals scrambled to inspire New Hampshire voters' historic contrarian streak. They were trying to upend the latest conventional wisdom, drawn from Iowa, that Mr. Kerry has the momentum, before the campaign moves onto a much wider national stage next Tuesday, with primaries Arizona, Delaware, Missouri, Oklahoma, and South Carolina and caucuses in New Mexico and North Dakota.
Two New Hampshire tracking polls released Monday showed Mr. Kerry maintaining his lead among those considered likely to vote in Tuesday's Democratic primary, with Dr. Dean second and Mr. Edwards, General Clark and Mr. Lieberman trailing. But primaries are notoriously hard to survey accurately, because of the difficulty in identifying likely voters and because of rapid shifts in voter sentiment.
''Is there enough time?'' Mr. Edwards's wife, Elizabeth, asked reporters this morning, before answering herself by saying that just a week ago, no one would have thought Mr. Edwards had even a chance of a strong finish here.
Clearly afraid to offend voters with confrontational advertisements, the candidates stuck with genial messages. A spot for Mr. Kerry highlighted his recent endorsements; a spot for Mr. Lieberman called attention to his support for the Iraq war; a spot for Dr. Dean featured a prolonged shot of him smiling widely and a spot for Mr. Edwards essentially thanked New Hampshire voters for the memories.
On the stump, most of the candidates were less restrained. After Mr. Kerry claimed that he was the only candidate who had not ''played games'' on the issue of abortion rights and judicial appointments, Dr. Dean hit back. In an interview with the New England Cable News Network, he declared: ''Senator Kerry just last spring couldn't give a straight answer on where he was on parental notification. He appeared to support it in The Boston Globe, and then he came up and denied he supported it in New Hampshire.''
If Mr. Kerry himself unswervingly took the high road, his spokeswoman, Stephanie Cutter, did not hesitate to rebut the criticisms by Dr. Dean and Mr. Edwards in the sharpest tones. Of Mr. Edwards, Ms. Cutter said: ''If his intent is to remove special interests from Washington, why has he, as a member of the Judiciary Committee, taken more than $11 million from lawyers and law firms?''
And after Dr. Dean questioned Mr. Kerry's judgment for having opposed the 1991 war in the Persian Gulf while voting to authorize President Bush to use force to oust Saddam Hussein, Ms. Cutter responded: ''We're surprised that he would raise the issue of judgment on foreign policy given his erratic comments throughout this campaign.'' She added, ''The American people deserve leadership that offers a steady hand, not a clenched fist. ''
At a breakfast in Nashua, Dr. Dean told a voter who asked about possible Republican ''dirty tricks'' in the general election, ''I think we are seeing some of those in the primaries.''
A Dean spokesman, Jay Carson, later said that Dean supporters in New Hampshire had received pestering late-night and early-morning phone calls, including some that consisted only of a screaming voice. He also complained about messages posted on pro-Dean Internet sites offering paid campaign internships that do not exist but warning that gay men, lesbians and non-Christians need not apply.
The Dean campaign supplied reporters with telephone numbers of some supporters it claimed had been harassed. One of them, Frances Gehling, a volunteer in Londonderry, said she received a phone call last week from a woman who identified herself as a volunteer for Mr. Kerry.
''She tried to persuade me not to vote for Dean,'' Ms. Gehling said. ''She asked me if I was concerned that he was hypocritical for talking during campaign events about Christian values while he's married to a Jewish woman.''
But Ms. Gehling said she thought that the call was ''kind of silly'' and that the caller was ''probably just an overzealous volunteer.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FIELD
