''We have a power problem,'' said Dr. C., the chief of our general research unit. It was the fall of 2000, shortly after I started work as clinical director of a psychiatric institute in New York. At our weekly meeting of unit chiefs, we had been discussing the usual issues -- how many beds were full, who was ready for discharge -- when Dr. C. brought up a new topic, one I had never encountered in my 20 years as a psychiatrist.
''A power problem?'' I echoed. Was this some sort of psychological shorthand, perhaps, or a reference to hospital politics?
''Yes,'' said Dr. C. ''There aren't enough sockets up at the nursing station to plug in everyone's chargers.''
''Chargers for what?'' I asked, even more confused.
''For batteries. For the patients' cellphones and computers,'' Dr. C. said. ''It's a real problem for the nurses. After they charge up, the patients go into their rooms to talk, but they can only stay there until their batteries run out, and they're always rushing up to the nurses' station to recharge.''
When I had last worked on an inpatient psychiatric unit, in the early 1980's, such devices were in the realm of science fiction. In the interim, I had toiled in outpatient settings. So it had been a bit of an adjustment to get settled into my new job at the institute, where I was overseeing three patient units, a total of about 60 beds. Every week there was something new.
''I didn't even know that we let patients have cellphones here,'' I said.
''Only on the general research unit,'' Dr. C. said. ''Our patients aren't in as much of a crisis as the patients on the other floors, and some of them stay for several months. They want to stay in touch. Cellphones and laptops -- well, they're just used to having them.''
''Why can't they just plug them in?''
''Because they could use the cords to hang themselves.''
Of course. In my experience, each inpatient psychiatric unit had perhaps one or two pay phones secured to the wall near the nursing station. When a call came in, the receiver would be left dangling while the patient was summoned. Suffice it to say no one had privacy, whether to family, friends or doctors. Hence my surprise that, at least on one of our patient psychiatric units, patients could talk wirelessly to anyone.
We said O.K. to the cellphones and the other wireless devices on the research unit. Dr. C. even got some power strips to allow more chargers to be plugged in. We were proud. Here, as in so many other areas, our institute was on the leading edge -- with Internet access in occupational therapy, and with all these devices on the floor. And the devices multiplied. Besides cellphones and laptops, we now had an influx of Palm Pilots and BlackBerries and pagers as well.
And soon, perhaps predictably, problems arose. Some were practical. What if a device disappeared, or if one patient broke another's device? Nurses complained that they spent an inordinate amount of time untangling cords and baby-sitting delicate gizmos.
Other issues were clinical. What if patients spent all their time on the phone and refused to go to therapy? What if substance abusers used their phones to ''order in'' their drugs of abuse (not a far-fetched idea in Manhattan)? Clearly, limits had to be set. On the other hand, we wanted some patients to talk on the phone: the ability to reach out to others might speed a patient's recovery from depression, or hasten the emergence from psychosis.
We marveled at another change, in stigma. Traditionally, the last thing patients want is for their friends and neighbors to know they had checked into the ''nuthouse.'' Now, when the phone rang, and a friend asked, ''Where are you?'' the answer could be, ''In the psych hospital.'' From that perspective, bringing your cellphone seemed like a brash vote of confidence for the New Psychiatry.
While our psychiatric institute was getting wired, in my own private practice I had gone unplugged. A few evenings a week I see patients at an office in a grand old building on Central Park West in Manhattan. After years of practicing in a busy clinic -- with a computer on my desk, and instant access to e-mail, Internet and lab results, and with fax and copy machines down the hall, I found myself in a high-ceilinged room with several comfortable chairs, a desk and little else. No computer, no copier, no scanner, no fax machine. Though I did have a phone, I kept the ringer turned off; and my beeper rarely bothered me.
After a period of anxious adjustment (What if I needed to copy someone's insurance card or lab results? What if an urgent fax must get through?), I became blissfully happy. It was just the patient and I. Instead of worrying about e-mail messages popping up on my screen or faxes down the hall, I could focus entirely on what my patient was telling me. For a brief time, for both my patient and me, the external world could disappear.
So that is why I continued to wonder about the wireless world's entry into the psychiatric hospital, and whether we were losing the little that remained of asylum. The concept of asylum is a much-diminished one -- that people in psychic distress may want and need to escape from the outside world, to seek a kind of isolation and quietude.
It is fair to say that the modern psychiatric ward may offer little of the serenity that Sylvia Plath or Robert Lowell sought 50 years ago in their stays on the leafy and bucolic grounds of McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass., or at the old Payne Whitney Clinic on a bluff overlooking the East River. But until the advent of cellphones and wireless computers, it was fairly easy to get unplugged from the world, to find at least a few days of peace.
Now, on our research unit, there was no escape. Once, the world was ''here'' and the asylum was ''there.'' Now everywhere was ''here.'' In some ways this was reassuring, but in other ways creepy. After all, if you have serious depression or a life-threatening eating disorder, maybe you do need some time away from your friends, co-workers and family.
But I accepted this change as the price of progress.
And so things went for the first three years of my work as clinical director. Until one recent meeting of unit leaders, when Dr. C. announced: ''We've come to a decision. Enough is enough. No more cellphones!''
I was shocked. As far as I knew, our wireless experiment had been going reasonably well. ''Why?''
''Because they were too disruptive.'' Dr. C. was uncharacteristically irate. ''There was a constant ringing on the unit. All these different ring tones. Some people would put them on vibrate mode and sneak them into group and then want to walk out to answer their calls. Or they would be talking to their friends and would ignore the nurses.
''Plus, patients would arrive on the unit without a cellphone and when they found out that everyone else had cellphones, they would get them.''
Internet access, e-mail, instant messaging -- that was one thing, in Dr. C.'s eyes. But cellphones brought in the world in real time. They were too ''now,'' too intrusive. The final straw was the new camera phones: how could you ensure anyone's privacy? Clearly these devices brought in the outside world with startling and unwelcome immediacy.
What about patients' rights to communicate? The other unit chiefs besieged her with questions. What about their autonomy?
Dr. C. countered: patients with cellphones interfered with the other patients' rights to peace and quiet. She would not be swayed.
''There's only one exception,'' she said. ''Patients who are looking for jobs need to have voice mail, something that doesn't indicate that they are in a psych ward. So we keep their cellphones in the nurses' station and they can retrieve them once a day to answer their calls.''
And so our experiment ended. Laptops and Palm Pilots, yes. Internet connections and e-mail, fine. But no cellphones.
Two months later, things are much quieter on the unit, Dr. C. reports. Much more asylum-like again. After a certain amount of grumbling, patients are again participating in activities.
Is it over? I don't know. Here at the institute, our enthusiasm for wireless connectivity has been tempered by reality. We have reclaimed a fragment of asylum. But my guess is that we will face a next challenge by the wireless world, and that we will continually have to work to define our relation to it. My guess is that the battle has just begun.
A DOCTOR'S JOURNAL Dr. David Hellerstein is clinical director of the New York State Psychiatric Institute.
