Lawrence Frank did not get much sleep Sunday night, but that is really nothing new.
He usually stays up late, studying film, making notes, thinking and rethinking each game, each play.
Frank, the Nets' new coach, crams like a prep school valedictorian -- and looks like one, too. He is 33, generously lists himself at 5 feet 8 inches and must acknowledge the distinct possibility that he will be mistaken for a ball boy at some point this season. ''I may get lifts to make me 5-8 1/2,'' Frank said.
His height, or lack thereof, is not the only reason he is being compared to Jeff Van Gundy, the former Knicks coach now with the Houston Rockets. Frank is the quintessential gym rat, who once responded to the question, ''Did you have a good Thanksgiving?'' with, ''Yeah, we won.''
So when Frank's lawyer called him Sunday night and told him that Byron Scott was going to be fired and that he was going to become the Nets' new head coach, Frank immediately started poring over notes for his first meeting with the team and his first game Tuesday night in Philadelphia.
He has been overcompensating since he was growing up in Teaneck, N.J. His family was friendly with N.B.A. Commissioner David Stern, who is also from Teaneck, and Frank's father worked as a consultant in the league office. Every year, Frank went out for his high school basketball team, and he was cut each time. ''I got cut, they cut me, cut me, cut me,'' he said. ''I was told I had a lot of courage.''
He enrolled at Indiana University, not to play for Bob Knight, but to work for him. It might have been the toughest student job ever created, but after four years as a manager for the basketball team, Frank latched on as an assistant with Kevin O'Neill. He went with him from Marquette to Tennessee.
By the time Frank conducted his first practice with the Nets on Monday, he had already placed two calls to O'Neill, asking for advice.
''Lawrence Frank is one of the hardest workers you'll ever be around,'' said O'Neill, now the coach of the Toronto Raptors. ''He is relentless is in his approach to the game. Players judge you based on knowledge and passion, and he has both. He is able to relate to anybody.''
On the rare occasions O'Neill became upset with Frank, he would ban him from the basketball office, knowing that was the one punishment that would affect Frank the most. In the past year, the Nets often grumbled that Scott did not prepare properly or played too much golf. They do not figure to say that about Frank.
''Coach Scott had the experience of being a player, being in the finals, winning championships,'' Nets forward Richard Jefferson said. ''Coach Frank doesn't have that experience to fall back on. He has more attention to detail. We respect Coach Frank because we know how much time and effort he puts in. You can see it on his face. He doesn't get much sleep.''
Although Frank is officially the interim coach, the Nets' president, Rod Thorn, expects him to finish this season and head into the next one. Frank has already picked an assistant coach, Brian Hill. Frank had been Hill's assistant for three seasons with the Vancouver Grizzlies.
''I don't think there are many people who know more about basketball than Lawrence,'' Thorn said. ''In those areas, he really is a lot like Jeff Van Gundy, who I think is one of the best coaches in basketball.''
In his raspy New Jersey accent, Frank held court Monday for the first time. He came off as animated and energetic, and when asked about Van Gundy, he said: ''I think the comparisons are because we are both folically challenged and we didn't play in the N.B.A.''
The self-deprecating sense of humor could help him. Frank's baby-faced looks, his proximity to the hardwood, and his less-than-distinguished playing career that ended around age 12 could make him the butt of N.B.A. jokes. The more significant issue is whether the players take him seriously.
''With Coach Frank, he's a workaholic,'' Nets guard Jason Kidd said. ''He's going to give you everything. He's going to put you in a position to be successful. He's going to fight, and at the same time, the players will fight for him.''
REBOUNDS
The Nets signed shooting guard HUBERT DAVIS to a 10-day contract and waived point guard ROBERT PACK. Davis has averaged 8.3 points in stops with the Knicks, Toronto, Dallas, Washington and Detroit.
PRO BASKETBALL
