The talk at the World Economic Forum was of globalization and an enlarged European economic union. But nationalism may turn out to be the most important factor in determining the outcome of the largest corporate deal discussed in the halls of the forum.
Aventis, the large French pharmaceutical company, prepared last week to defend itself against reported plans by a smaller French drug company, Sanofi-Synthélabo, to make a bid for it. But days before Monday, when Sanofi formally made its offer, the French finance minister backed it publicly.
''The movements that are currently envisioned aren't wrong movements,'' the minister, Francis Mer, told Bloomberg News after making similar comments to a French radio station. ''It's important for our corporations in France and in Europe to reorganize themselves in such a way that they can be as competitive as necessary in their market, which is the world market.''
Mr. Mer referred to Europe, but the deal would combine two companies based in France, creating the world's third-largest pharmaceutical company.
Having the government endorse a deal before an offer is made and after news reports indicated that Aventis was preparing to resist, as it did Monday, must not have gone down well in Strasbourg, where Aventis is based. But it appears that France wants to have a giant French drug company rather than risk having either company swallowed by a larger competitor from elsewhere in Europe, or even from the United States.
Such blatant government involvement in a takeover deal seemed less surprising in Europe than it would in the United States. ''What would you expect of France?'' responded Daniel Vasella, chief executive of the Swiss pharmaceutical company, Novartis, when asked about Mr. Mer's statements. ''They support the French company.''
Mr. Vasella added that he saw good reasons for more mergers in the industry, which faces pressures on profit margins from rising costs and pressures to hold down prices. ''It's not a surprise that consolidation is picking up again,'' he said. ''It has been the history of maturing industries.'' He declined to say whether Novartis might be interested in a deal with Aventis if it sought an alternative partner.
Aventis and Sanofi have followed somewhat similar paths in recent years. The companies were created by mergers announced a day apart in late 1998, and both their stocks have outperformed competitors in Europe and the United States since then. But each is down from its high.
Sanofi, based in Paris, is much smaller in terms of sales, but it was better loved by investors and had a slightly larger market value last week, before the first reports of its takeover plan. Since then, Sanofi shares have fallen while Aventis shares have climbed.
Aventis was formed by the merger of Rhône-Poulenc, a French company, with Hoechst, a German company. It has offices in both countries, but its headquarters are in France. Plans for that merger were announced on Dec. 1, 1998, and investors reacted negatively, sending down shares of Rhône-Poulenc, the acquirer.
A day later, Sanofi and Synthélabo announced plans to join, and investors sent down shares of Sanofi, the acquirer.
In each case, the initial market verdict was later reversed. Since those deals were announced, both stocks have gained substantially, although Sanofi has been the better performer, and both have outperformed indexes of pharmaceutical stocks. But neither stock is anywhere near its high. Aventis peaked in late 2000 at 95.4 euros ($119) a share. It closed Monday at 59.25 euros, having risen 10.1 percent since Wednesday. Sanofi's peak came in late 2001, at 86.50 euros a share. After losing 9.2 percent since Wednesday, it closed Monday at 54.5 euros.
In the five years since their last big combinations, both companies have shown that shareholders can do well after a merger.
But the endorsement by a French minister of a takeover proposal that had not even been announced and that one French company appeared to want to resist serves as a reminder that in many ways there is not yet a real European financial market.
For Aventis, that is a warning that it may not face a level playing field on which the company and its shareholders could search the world for a buyer willing to give them a better deal than Sanofi. France wants a national champion in the pharmaceutical business, and it may get one.
