Lasagna, lasagna, lasagna. And not so much as a jog or a bike ride to work it off.
For Senator John Kerry -- snowboarder, windsurfer, mountain climber, long-distance biker -- the hockey game he wheezed his way through for the cameras on Saturday was his first exercise in weeks. He rarely gets more than four hours' sleep.
And for days on end he has been eating the same wretched, starchy meal for lunch.
So much for life at the top of the polls.
As his helicopter buzzed toward Keene, N.H., before noon on Monday, Mr. Kerry, 60, dug into his takeout bag like a raptor tearing into its prey -- only to slump at the sight of yet another heaping portion of lasagna.
''About three weeks ago this was my favorite,'' he said, digging in resignedly out of sheer hunger. ''Now I'm so tired of it.''
''You're not going to be a very good candidate if you're frazzled,'' he mused in an interview, two-thirds through another 20-plus-hour day of bus rides, helicopter rides, speeches, Q.-and-A. sessions, packed gyms and restaurants, autographs and snapshots, glad-handing with shopkeepers and firefighters, talking into microphones and lenses, ducking questions about polls, and snatching snippets of conversation with his wife, daughters and campaign manager.
Mr. Kerry, who meandered through his remarks in an appearance after the fiery Senator Edward M. Kennedy on Sunday, says he knows he has not been at the top of his game the last few days, certainly not the way he was as he headed into the Iowa caucuses. ''I think I've been a little bit, you know, just blehhh,'' he said.
But come Wednesday, he said, he will be intent on raising his game. He is heading to Missouri, and then to South Carolina, and then only-he-knows-where among the seven states with Feb. 3 primaries. And he says he knows he will have little margin for error, or erratic speaking, or for overstuffing his sound bites into six-course meals.
''Now we go to a different thing,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''Short and sweet. Tight.
''I'm looking forward to it,'' he said, his penetrating stare a bit unconvincing nonetheless. ''It's a different form of communication, and I understand that. It's going to be more of the shorter, tighter sound bite -- stay on the game, competitive. It's fine. Because it's a different phase.''
He added: ''It'll be very repetitive, it'll be very disciplined -- has to be -- shorter, and that's what it'll be. It won't be putting all the message in. I mean, it's not going to be everything, every time.''
On this extended primary eve, with polls showing him in the lead, Mr. Kerry was dressed, fed, briefed, and interviewed for the first time by shortly after 7 a.m.
Riding from Portsmouth to Rochester, N.H., he spent nearly 40 minutes wooing and winning over four undecided voters, who peppered him like professionals on everything from tax shelters and civil aviation to his vote against the 1991 Iraq war and his pets and hobbies.
While Mr. Kerry owns two canaries, he said that he missed his German shepherd, Kim, most. And that he once enjoyed building model ships, but left one incomplete back in 1981, when he first ran for lieutenant governor of Massachusetts.
''It's sitting there,'' he told Peter MacLellan of Manchester, who had asked on behalf of his son. ''I think that'll be my retirement.''
Mr. Kerry professes not to mind the growing press corps and crammed schedule that make it virtually impossible for him to have a moment's peace. But he says he is appreciating more the ''enormity of the challenge'' before him, and hints that he is finding that the glare of the spotlight can be hot on one's neck.
''You know, the responsibility to be accurate, and the weight of the words you're uttering grows; you've got to choose them carefully,'' Mr. Kerry said.
''There's just less room for shrill or for forgive,'' he said. ''You've just got to be a little bit more presidential.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
