Tucked among broad-leafed banana groves and emerald rice paddies in west-central Thailand, the bird sanctuary here is one of the few jungled oases where migratory ducks, storks and other wildfowl can spend their winters in safety. They come from as far as India and Siberia.
As the sun began to set Monday evening, dozens of yard-high white storks with black-bordered wings roosted in the palm trees at one edge of the park.
But the sanctuary is a quieter place these days. Many of the birds have been dying of what Thai scientists suspect is bird flu, as the disease races across Asia.
''Migratory birds are what carry the disease'' said Bob Dietz, a spokesman for the World Health Organization. ''If they're dying, it's an awfully strong disease.''
As they try to track the disease to try to stem its spread to humans, officials of the health organization say migratory birds like the ones here have probably played a central role in spreading the disease. Their infected droppings dry up, turn to dust and are inhaled by other birds.
While chickens and other domesticated fowl succumb easily to avian influenza, migratory birds are hardier and can be infected for long periods and travel great distances while showing few ill effects. The wildfowl deaths here appear to be another ominous sign of the virulence of the epidemic that scientists now fear.
Pakistan announced Monday that chickens there had been infected with a mild strain of bird flu. [An official from Laos said Tuesday that an unknown strain had killed chickens there, news agencies reported.] Chickens have reportedly been dying from a mysterious illness in Myanmar -- formerly Burma -- Bangladesh and Saudi Arabia.
South Korea, Japan, Vietnam, Cambodia, Thailand and Indonesia have previously confirmed cases of the deadly type A influenza virus strain H5N1, while Taiwan and Pakistan have reported different, milder strains.
Thailand announced Monday that it had a third confirmed human case of bird flu, and that it suspected that 10 more people, five of whom have already died, had avian influenza. Cambodia said two children were suspected to have the disease, while Vietnam is investigating more than a dozen possible human cases and there have been reports of a mysterious viral outbreak in Bangladesh.
The medically documented cases so far appear to have resulted from birds infecting people, but the real fear is that the disease might evolve into a form that can pass easily from person to person, said Dr. Bjorn Melgaard, the W.H.O.'s chief representative here.
Workers in most of the countries with confirmed outbreaks are culling millions of chickens in the hope of stopping the outbreak. But with so many countries reporting cases, and with migratory birds and possibly chicken traders carrying the disease ever farther, United Nations officials have been warning that it will not be easy to curb.
Dr. Yeoh Eng-kiong, Hong Kong's secretary of health, welfare and food, said he had asked officials to step up their testing of migratory birds there.
Environmentalists here warned against trying to cull wild birds or eliminate their habitats, saying that it would not be possible to cull enough wild birds to stamp out the disease, but that a cull could endanger populations of rare species.
The outbreak scares health officials because if a person with human influenza becomes infected with the avian version, the viruses may swap genetic material, possibly producing a virus that could be easily transmitted from person to person, with few having a natural immunity.
The big mystery remains where the migratory birds became infected. Although China denies having had any bird flu cases, many signs point to southern China, where there have been periodic reports in recent weeks of large-scale deaths of ducks.
Two Hong Kong residents who visited their ancestral hometown in southern China early last year fell ill with avian influenza on their return, and six of the 14 countries bordering China or just off its shores have reported bird flu. Farmers in Thailand and Vietnam have described seeing the first cases in late October and in November, consistent with the arrival of migratory birds.
