Gladys Parra wants to know if her daughter, Helen Oyervide, can see.
Helen, 4, has other, more apparent disabilities. She is unable to speak or walk. She takes nourishment from a bottle, and she still wears diapers. But as Helen delicately touches her eyelid with her small hand, Ms. Parra wonders what her little girl's brown eyes take in.
Even if Helen does not have sight -- and doctors disagree about whether she does -- she knows her mother and responds to Ms. Parra's soothing call of ''señorita'' as she cycles through motions like kicking, clapping and grabbing her fingers with her arms outstretched.
Doctors do not know the cause of Helen's disabilities, but they have ruled out Rett syndrome, a neurological and muscular disorder. They have said that it is most likely cerebral palsy.
Helen's birth is one of many medical complications that Ms. Parra has faced since she left her job as an accountant in Ecuador in 1995 to join a brother in Port Chester, N.Y., in Westchester County. In addition to the many doctors Ms. Parra has seen in search of a diagnosis for her daughter's condition, Ms. Parra was told in September that she herself has cervical cancer, for which she will have surgery next week. Fortunately, the tuberculosis she was found to have in December proved to be inactive, although she still takes medication to treat it.
While looking for an apartment, and some help, last fall, Ms. Parra, 46, went to the Port Chester office of the Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York, one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. There she met Eliveth Prado-Lichtbraun, a social worker who she said has been invaluable in addressing the tangle of shelter, food and health needs.
''I came with a lot of dreams in my mind,'' Ms. Parra said through Mrs. Prado-Lichtbraun, who translated from Spanish. ''I'm a professional person, and I thought I would be somebody here. But my whole life changed since the baby.''
Ms. Parra, who has a bachelor's degree in business administration, found a job as a cook in a restaurant soon after she arrived in New York, but she said she had to quit to care for Helen. With her cancer and recurring bronchial problems, she is unable to work. The mother and child live with Ms. Parra's brother in one room, with a bathroom and kitchen down the hall, and they pay $600 a month in rent. While her brother has a job in a factory, the monthly $561 that Helen is granted in Supplemental Security Income is the only money Ms. Parra has to support herself and her daughter.
When Helen was born, in September 1999, her condition was not immediately apparent, and she was discharged as healthy. But the December after her birth, Ms. Parra recalled: ''I put her in her crib; she would go completely red and scream like she was falling from a great height. She was screaming like she was in a lot of pain.''
Ms. Parra took Helen to a hospital, where she began to have seizures. Helen is now enrolled in an early childhood intervention program for the disabled that she attends daily at St. Agnes Hospital in White Plains. It is covered by Medicaid, the federal-state health program for the poor.
Just as Ms. Parra began to develop a routine of caring for Helen, she herself was found to have cancer. She said she felt ''desperate and sad because I have Helen and I have no one to take care of her.'' Ms. Parra's doctors believe the cancer can be treated with the procedure she will undergo next week to remove the cancer cells.
But the costs weigh on her. Except for temporary Medicaid during her pregnancy and emergency Medicaid for the surgery that will cover her for three months, Ms. Parra has no insurance and relies largely on free clinics and low-cost treatments.
Catholic Charities assisted Ms. Parra with her continuing needs, Mrs. Prado-Lichtbraun said. ''Financially we helped her with medical bills, medication and co-payments,'' she said. ''We help her with rent, with transportation to appointments.'' Of the $2,600 Catholic Charities has used to assist Ms. Parra, Mrs. Prado-Lichtbraun used Neediest Cases money for $300 toward medical bills, including $90 for medication, $60 for a visit to an oncologist and $150 for Ms. Parra's initial biopsy.
Also included in Catholic Charities' aid was a jogging-stroller large enough for Helen, as well as diapers and baby wipes. In addition, Mrs. Prado-Lichtbraun explained, ''The food pantry is always there for her.''
Next month, Ms. Parra, her brother and Helen will move into a new apartment in Port Chester, where there will be enough room. Again Catholic Charities will help, providing $1,000 for a security deposit.
When Ms. Parra tries to put together words for her appreciation of Catholic Charities, and particularly of Mrs. Prado-Lichtbraun, both Spanish and English fail her.
''It is difficult for me to explain because I feel that Eliveth has been like a member of my family,'' she begins in halting Spanish, her voice low and quiet. ''I don't feel like she is just a social worker. Eliveth is the only person I have found who has helped me. After God is Eliveth, and I don't know how to repay all that she has provided for me.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,502,876.03  Recorded Friday: 13,918.00
Total: $7,516,794.03  Last year to date: $7,750,935.43
