The rap on Martha Stewart -- not in the courtroom, but in the court of public opinion -- has been that she is just too perfect, that the average woman cannot hope to measure up to her standard of all-around domestic excellence.
So one fundamental question in her criminal trial on charges of obstruction of justice and securities fraud has been just who will be seated on a jury of Ms. Stewart's ''peers.''
At least the outlines of the answer became clear yesterday, when a jury of eight women and four men was seated in Federal District Court in Lower Manhattan, setting the stage for opening arguments in the case to begin this morning.
The jury is weighted toward working women -- a pharmacist, a woman who belongs to an organization of art directors, one who travels a lot for business, another whose best friend used to work at Merrill Lynch, and a fifth who works at a law firm.
Biographical details of the jury are scant, because the judge, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum, barred the news media from attending the interviews known as voir dire, where she questioned members of the original jury pool. News organizations, including The New York Times, have filed an appeal; the Second Circuit Court of Appeals heard arguments in the case yesterday morning but did not issue a decision.
What little is known about the jurors has been culled from transcripts of those interview sessions, which were held in a robing room behind the big courtroom at 40 Centre Street.
But some trial watchers said the jury's composition could tilt in favor of Ms. Stewart, whose lawyers, according to experts, hoped to seat a jury that would not be put off by Ms. Stewart's business success, stock market experience, or by the exacting Stewart persona itself.
While the jury members may not be as successful as Ms. Stewart, said Robert B. Hirschhorn, a jury consultant based in Dallas, ''they may feel they have kind of walked in Martha Stewart's shoes.''
Usually, he said, women jurors tend to be more judgmental of women defendants than men are, which suggests that the jury might favor the prosecution. But, he added, ''an educated jury, virtually all employed, a lot in positions where they are required to make quick and important decisions -- that all bodes well for Martha Stewart.''
At least three of the four men in the pool also seem savvy about financial matters. One owns shares in Merrill Lynch, for example. Another complained that the Enron scandal hurt the value of his mutual funds (and said that he plays poker with people who work on Wall Street). A third used to work for a brokerage firm as a computer technician.
How much such details matter is always guesswork in court cases, where juries are supposed to base their decisions on the evidence and the law. But everyone involved in this case has paid careful attention to the atmospherics, and to the sexual politics of putting a powerful woman on trial for a corporate crime.
It is unlikely to be an accident that both the judge and the chief prosecutor, Karen Patton Seymour, are women. All of the defense lawyers are men, as is Ms. Stewart's co-defendant and former stockbroker, Peter E. Bacanovic.
The case stems from Ms. Stewart's sale of 3,928 shares of ImClone Systems in December 2001, just before the company reported bad news and about the same time that its chief executive, also a client of Mr. Bacanovic, was trying to dump a lot of his stock.
At least one member of the jury, the pharmacist, is there over the initial objections of Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Robert Morvillo. The juror, who has lived in India and Uganda, at home speaks Gujarati, an Indian language.
''I think she is a very nice lady, but I think she just doesn't understand what is going on sufficiently to understand the issues and the presentations that are going to be made at this trial,'' Mr. Morvillo said, according to the transcript. ''I don't think she is fluent enough in English.'' The judge disagreed.
The prosecution also failed in its initial effort to knock off a juror, the oft-traveled lady, whose husband used to work as a reporter at The Wall Street Journal covering venture capital, according to the transcript. Through him, she met one of the stars of the stock market bubble, Mary Meeker, the Morgan Stanley analyst; Ms. Meeker may be called as a witness.
But the prosecution did score a victory when the judge ruled that Ms. Stewart's lawyers may not raise certain issues in their opening arguments. These include questioning the government's motives for prosecuting Ms. Stewart, or suggesting that because she has not been charged with insider trading, that means the government does not believe she committed it.
Mr. Morvillo is also barred from suggesting that Ms. Stewart is being prosecuted for asserting her innocence, and from pointing out the unusual nature of the securities fraud charge, in which Ms. Stewart is accused of pumping up the stock of her own company by proclaiming that her sale of ImClone Systems stock was proper.
The judge ruled that all of these are matters of law, rather than of fact, and, therefore, are for her to decide, rather than for the jury.
Judge Cedarbaum's opinion does not prevent the defense lawyers from raising these issues in court, said specialists in white-collar defense.
''I think we will see these issues revisited, either through cross-examination or direct testimony,'' said Robert A. Mintz, a former prosecutor now at the law firm of McCarter &amp; English in Newark. ''I'm certain Mr. Morvillo will not relent in trying to bring those issues'' to the jury's attention.
One new aspect of the case may have been revealed during a drawn-out dispute over subpoenas to the government's chief witness, Douglas Faneuil. Mr. Faneuil was Mr. Bacanovic's assistant at Merrill Lynch, and he is expected to testify that Ms. Stewart sold her shares after he told her that ImClone's founder, Samuel D. Waksal, was trying to sell.
That was not the story he told at first, when he had backed up Mr. Bacanovic's and Ms. Stewart's contention that they had agreed to sell the shares once the stock price fell below $60.
Mr. Morvillo, Ms. Stewart's lawyer, contended yesterday that Mr. Faneuil said he had been told that at one point Merrill Lynch was prepared to give the government ''Sam Waksal's head on a silver platter'' and that prosecutors would then look the other way when it came to Ms. Stewart.
One of Mr. Faneuil's lawyers, Marc D. Powers, said in court that he would not acknowledge that Mr. Morvillo's assertions were correct.
That drama should begin to play out shortly; Mr. Faneuil is the government's third witness, and prosecutors said he could begin testifying as early as this afternoon.
Correction:  January 30, 2004, Friday  An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the jury in the Martha Stewart trial referred imprecisely to the selection of the judge and the chief prosecutor, who are both women. The judge was picked at random; the article was intended to suggest that it was unlikely that the choice of the lead prosecutor (not of both women) was an accident.
