An American congressman who led the battle to keep tight sanctions on Libya said Monday night that he believed that Libya's leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, had ''turned the corner'' in abandoning terrorism and illicit weapons and should be rewarded with improved relations.
Representative Tom Lantos, a California Democrat and the first of several members of Congress to meet with Colonel Qaddafi, called on the Bush administration to lift the ban on American travel to Libya as a first step in normalizing relations with Tripoli.
''My recommendation is that we proceed step by step to move toward normalization of relations,'' Mr. Lantos said, adding that another goal should be to allow Libyan students to return to American universities.
Mr. Lantos, speaking by telephone from Amsterdam, said he pressed the Libyan leader in a personal meeting on Saturday to issue an apology to the families of the 270 people who died when a Libyan terrorist operation downed Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
A strong supporter of Israel and a Holocaust survivor, Mr. Lantos said it was not enough that Libya should admit responsibility for the Lockerbie bombing, as it did in September. Colonel Qaddafi himself, he said, should extend ''an apology to the families.''
He said he did not get such a commitment, but he added that Colonel Qaddafi, along with British and American officials now working on dismantling Libya's once secret nuclear and chemical weapons programs, convinced him that the Libyan leader had made an irreversible decision that would allow normal relations with the West.
Libya has agreed to a settlement package for each of the Lockerbie victims. Separately, it reached a settlement this month to pay $1 million each to the families of victims of a French UTA airliner that exploded in 1989 over Niger, killing all 170 aboard. Libya has never accepted responsibility for the UTA bombing.
Though there have been rumors that Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain is considering meeting with Colonel Qaddafi, Mr. Lantos said he would not recommend that President Bush do so. ''That is not on the agenda,'' he said. ''It is not on my agenda, and I am sure it is not on the White House agenda.''
Mr. Lantos said he had met with members of the American and British team preparing to dismantle Libya's unconventional weapons programs.
''The process is moving ahead to our satisfaction at a reasonable speed,'' he said.
On Monday, a Congressional delegation met with Colonel Qaddafi and toured a Libyan nuclear reactor. The delegation's leader, Representative Curt Weldon, Republican of Pennsylvania, described the meeting as ''extremely positive,'' The Associated Press reported.
