WorldCom could be sued for hundreds of millions of dollars in back taxes by the states in which it had operated since the late 1990's, according to a final report filed yesterday by the court-appointed examiner in WorldCom's bankruptcy proceedings.
If WorldCom, which will change its name to MCI when it emerges from bankruptcy protection next month, is forced to make payments to the states, it has a strong case for seeking compensation from KPMG, WorldCom's tax consultant in 1997 and 1998, for its advice that the accounting practices that gave rise to the liability were legal, according to the report.
Richard L. Thornburgh, the former United States attorney general whom Judge Arthur J. Gonzalez appointed in August of 2002 to lead the analysis, also concluded that WorldCom had grounds to sue both Bernard J. Ebbers, its former chief executive, and Salomon Brothers (and its successor, Salomon Smith Barney) for damages to the company from their dealings with each other. The report outlines the argument, which is also being investigated by state and federal regulators, that Mr. Ebbers received lucrative investment opportunities from Salomon in return for retaining the bank as WorldCom's adviser in its acquisitions and bond sales.
Other potential defendants in possible lawsuits that WorldCom could pursue, according to Mr. Thornburgh's report, are the company's former directors; Scott D. Sullivan, its former chief financial officer; and various other former financial executives.
The report also concluded that WorldCom could file an accounting malpractice, negligence or breach of contract action against Arthur Andersen, which was its outside auditor in the years 1999 to 2002, the years that were central to the accounting fraud that engulfed the company, and various former employees at Andersen.
The 450-page report -- plus nearly 100 pages of appendices -- is the third by lawyers at Kirkpatrick &amp; Lockhart led by Mr. Thornburgh. WorldCom was billed more than $90 million for the work. As in the previous reports, many central figures, including Mr. Ebbers and Mr. Sullivan, did not cooperate.
The final report was intended to outline possible legal action rather than advocate that the company pursue them. The report noted that some suits against individuals or defendants like Arthur Andersen, which collapsed in 2002, might not be worthwhile even if they had merit because the likelihood of collecting substantial judgments would be low.
Mr. Thornburgh's team, which involved as many as 30 lawyers at some points, ran into resistance from WorldCom and KPMG on the issue of the state taxes, according to the report. It said that both the company and KPMG had been slow to provide evidence requested for that part of the investigation, which concluded that WorldCom had adopted accounting practices that were probably illegal because of royalty payments to the parent company.
In addition to collecting royalty payments for licensing intellectual property like trademarks to its operating subsidiaries, WorldCom appears to have charged them billions of dollars in royalties from 1998 through 2001 for strategic plans that it called ''management foresight,'' according to the investigators. WorldCom may have shifted more than $20 billion from states that would have collected taxes on the revenue to Washington, D.C., and Mississippi, where the money was treated as untaxed royalties, the report said.
''The way they designed, it is very, very aggressive and, we think, improper,'' said Michael J. Missal, a lawyer who worked with Mr. Thornburgh. The report said WorldCom papers indicated the company might have saved as much as $350 million in state taxes.
WorldCom, based in Ashburn, Va., said yesterday in a written statement that it welcomed the report and had already been reviewing many of the potential claims described in it. But the company said that the state tax accounting had already been examined and endorsed by its new audit committee and both inside and outside tax lawyers.
The company said it did not plan to pursue any action against KPMG, which was appointed as the company's outside auditor in 2002 after the company fired Arthur Andersen.
KPMG said that the report's conclusion about the tax strategy legality was wrong and that similar strategies were widely used in corporate America to legally minimize state tax payments.
Timothy Connolly, a spokesman for the Massachusetts Department of Revenue, which led eight states in raising the tax issue in bankruptcy court last summer, declined to comment. He said the states could not proceed with any tax claims until WorldCom had settled what it earned during those years in revised filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
A lawyer for Mr. Sullivan, Irvin Nathan, also declined to comment on the report. In an unrelated development, a federal court said yesterday that Mr. Sullivan's criminal trial, which had been scheduled to start next week, had been postponed until April 7.
Mr. Sullivan is accused of being the mastermind behind most of the $11 billion in accounting irregularities that drove WorldCom into bankruptcy in 2002. He has pleaded not guilty.
Mr. Ebbers and Reid Weingarten, his lawyer, could not be reached for comment. Mr. Ebbers has been charged with fraud in a state court in Oklahoma but has not been formally accused in any federal charges. Mr. Weingarten has said frequently that his client has done nothing wrong.
Mr. Thornburgh's report said that Mr. Ebbers violated his obligations to WorldCom both in his dealings with Salomon and in his arrangements with WorldCom's former board for personal loans and loan guarantees. His debts were converted in 2002 into a single $408 million loan from WorldCom on which he defaulted.
The report said that Salomon received more than $100 million in fees from WorldCom starting in 1996for various services. The report said that one reason it received that business might have been that Salomon allowed Mr. Ebbers to buy large stakes in the public offerings of stock in other companies that it managed. During the period, prices for such offerings typically rose substantially on the first day, allowing favored investors who had been allocated shares to immediately receive millions of dollars in profits with little risk.
Mr. Ebbers netted profits of $12.8 million from 1996 to 2000 in such sales, according to the report.
Later, when Mr. Ebbers ran into financial trouble, Salomon and Citibank, another subsidiary of its parent, Citigroup, gave Mr. Ebbers financial support several times, according to the report.
A spokesman for Citigroup, Christina Pretto, said, ''The services that Citigroup provided to WorldCom and its executives were executed in good faith.''
Since the WorldCom scandal, Ms. Pretto added, Citigroup had changed its policies to prevent stock allocations like those in Mr. Ebbers's case and other practices that might have created appearance of conflicts.
TECHNOLOGY  Correction:  January 28, 2004, Wednesday  An article in Business Day yesterday about a report from Richard Thornburgh, the court-appointed examiner in WorldCom's bankruptcy proceedings, misstated the amount that he and other lawyers have charged the company for the work. It is $10 million, not $90 million or more.
