In better times, the public-address announcer at Madison Square Garden would put extra emphasis on the player's name, so it would come out sounding like Ch-h-aaar-lee Ward! And the Garden denizens would yell and hoot during the playoffs for their much-maligned point guard.
Until the off-season, then everybody wanted him gone.
That was Charlie Ward's existence for 10 years in New York, where he competed in 67 playoff games, two Eastern Conference finals and an N.B.A. championship series. He was deemed good, but never good enough. Even Stephon Marbury, the Knicks' new point guard, once declared that Ward would never lead the Knicks to a title.
Of course, Marbury said this while alienating much of his Nets teammates and helping them into the lottery. And though Marbury was prophetic, he is further away from a ring than the subject of his past criticism.
Ward returns to the Garden on Tuesday, putting his body on the line for the defending champion San Antonio Spurs. He was acquired by the Spurs after the Phoenix Suns traded for and then released Ward in the deal that brought Marbury to the Knicks on Jan. 5.
The argument was that Ward would have made a tremendous backup point guard on a championship team rather than a starter on a playoff team. If Ward was too proud to admit that during his prime, he can probably now acknowledge the fact. He is averaging 5.9 points and 2 assists in 16.2 minutes for the Spurs. He has also made 11 of 30 3-pointers and provided all the intangibles he used to with the Knicks.
''You don't see too many guys that will say, 'I'll do whatever the team wants me to do,' '' said Allan Houston, whom Ward befriended in 1996 and became close friends with over the past eight years. ''Charlie took a starter's role, a reserve role, even last year -- when we had three point guards -- he at times would say, 'Give these guys experience.' He was really humble about the whole thing. I know guys out in San Antonio are finding out what kind of teammate he is.''
It will be interesting to see what kind of ovation Ward receives at the Garden. He was viewed as the Little Underdog Who Could during the Knicks' playoff runs of the 1990's, but legions of fans never forgot the comments he made in 2001 that some considered anti-Semitic.
Rumored to be headed elsewhere for much of his career, Ward fended off every point guard who wanted his job over the years -- including Chris Childs, Mark Jackson and recently Howard Eisley. He was backing up Frank Williams at the end of his Knicks career and was clearly showing his 33-year-old legs. He played through debilitating injuries year after year, including an arthritic knee.
He also knocked down some of the biggest 3-pointers in recent Knicks playoff history.
''I've seen people come back who have given all their heart and soul to New York: Oakley, John Starks, even a coach,'' Houston said, referring -- in addition to Starks -- to the former Knicks coach Jeff Van Gundy and forward Charles Oakley. ''And Charlie is no different. I've seen the reception they've had. He's given every ounce of his blood, sweat and tears to New York.''
PRO BASKETBALL
