The premiere of the third season of ''The Osbournes,'' tonight on MTV, begins with Sharon Osbourne's inventory of her family's dogs: ''Ben, Mag, Bully, Peggy Sue, Colin, Martini, Pip, Chips, Crazy Baby, and the two news.'' Prompted by her husband, Ozzy, Ms. Osbourne recalls a 13th. ''Oh, I missed out Ruby, you're right.''
As devoted viewers of the documentary series know, ''The Osbournes'' is more than a portrait of a madcap family whose status comes from the father's exorbitant talent for rock music and ghoulish self-display. It's also a show about lap dogs, how they're cute and how they try to have sex with one another and with cats. Also how they defecate.
Someone at MTV must think these dog sequences are surpassingly rich, as one camera on the ''Osbournes'' team appears always to be trained on them. Tonight's episode features close-ups of each kennel member, as well as a sequence in which one of them befouls an office. Hee hee.
As for the humans in the house, rumors that they had become boring appear to have been exaggerated. In the first episode, which was shot last fall, Ms. Osbourne, who had cancer last season (and in life), chirps along, musing amusingly about where or whether to steer the rudderless ''Sharon Osbourne Show,'' which is still on daily. With his not-quite-kicked habits and his inexplicably good-natured contempt, Mr. Osbourne paces through fame and fatherhood. Their son, Jack, who seems to have conquered in rehab the demon OxyContin, works out with a trainer while drinking a pink shake. And their daughter, Kelly, the vain one who, unlike the others, seems out of reach of tragedy, still preens and back-talks.
So the series still features scenes (like the excruciating haul-by-hand of a 980-pound golden Buddha to the back of the Osbournes' property) and epigrams (Ozzy to workmen: ''I wanted it out the front'') that highlight the mighty absurdity of family and professional life. These bodies -- Ozzy's, which contains an incalculable alchemy of drugs and bat DNA, and Sharon's, which was made by surgeons -- can simulate the human condition, which is still wrenching and funny at once.
So how will the season go? It seems safe to say the family will not go straight. One of the weirdest parts of a reality sitcom like this one is that no producer can stop plot leaks; the family makes news even while it's shooting a reality show. Fans, therefore, know at least some of what's in the cards, and it's not good. In December, the real December on the calendar, Mr. Osbourne broke his neck in an all-terrain vehicle accident in Britain. That will surely merit time on the show, which has not whitewashed the experiences of the careworn family so far.
At least there are the dogs, however silly and playful. Right? Maybe not. An MTV publicist demurred when asked for the names of the ''two news'' Sharon Osbourne cited in the season premiere. ''Right now,'' he said, ''they could be dead. Dogs drop like flies around that house. So they have 13. Tomorrow they might have like four.''
THE OSBOURNES  MTV, tonight at 10:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 9:30, Central time
Lois Curren, executive vice president, series and movie development, and executive producer for MTV; R. Greg Johnston, executive producer for MTV; Rod Aissa, executive producer and vice president, talent development for MTV.
TELEVISION REVIEW
