Environmentalists and elected officials who have expressed alarm with an Army plan to dispose of neutralized VX nerve gas in the Delaware River in South Jersey will be able to question military officials about the process.
Officials and residents of the area, including United States Senator Jon S. Corzine, complained earlier this month that the Army planned to bring partially treated VX gas to Pennsville Township in Salem County, near the Delaware Memorial Bridge, without notifying the public. In response, Army officials said last week they were planning to hold one public meeting and possibly two by Feb. 18.
VX was manufactured for military use as a nerve agent and is considered among the deadliest of all chemicals, causing paralysis and death within minutes when it is in its active stage. After the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the federal government accelerated disposal of chemical warfare stockpiles to prevent them from becoming targets.
The DuPont Company, which is expected to get the contract to neutralize the VX, is conducting a ''treatability'' study to determine whether it can be safely disposed of in the Delaware. Officials said they hoped to have the results of that study in time for the public meetings.
Environmentalists and elected officials have objected to the ways the project was proceeding. ''There's been a real lack of information here,'' said Maya Van Rossum of the Delaware Riverkeeper Network, an environmental group. ''What in fact are they going to be doing? What are the possible threats to the river and to people? It's not DuPont's river. It's not the Army's river. It's our river. It's nature's river.''
Army officials said they followed requirements about public notification by placing an advertisement in Today's Sunbeam, a Salem County newspaper, and posting information at a public library in Pennsville Township, where the DuPont Chambers Works, the plant that would handle the treated nerve agent, is situated. Residents and elected officials say the first they heard of the Army's project was in news articles in local newspapers, when it was almost too late to meet the Army's deadline for public comment.
After their complaints, Army officials decided to extend the period for public comment by 60 days and to hold informational meetings by Feb. 18, said Col. Jesse Barber, the projects manager for alternative technology for the Army, who is in charge of getting rid of the stockpile of the VX nerve agent.
''I will personally conduct the public information sessions,'' Colonel Barber said. ''This contract is not a done deal yet. If there are significant problems, as a responsible government official, I have to address those or look at what the problems are.'' He said the Army can decide on awarding the contract, but the treatability study would determine what additional permits they would have to seek.
Colonel Barber said that he was unsure of the dates and places of the meetings, but that there would probably be one in New Jersey and possibly one in Delaware, across the river from the DuPont plant, if there appears to be a call for one there.
Army and DuPont officials will try to assure the public that the treated effluent treatment would be harmless.
The DuPont plant is one of the world's largest commercial and industrial wastewater treatment facilities and is already treating another neutralized agent for the military at its Secure Environmental Treatment, a biodegradation facility. That agent, a byproduct of mustard gas, is being shipped from Aberdeen Proving Ground. So far, the Chambers Works has handled more than 400,000 gallons without any problems, said David Strait, the plant manager.
The VX nerve agent is now stockpiled at the Newport Chemical Depot in Newport, Ind. If the contract is approved, the VX will be made nonlethal in Newport by mixing it with hot water and sodium hydroxide to form hydrolysate, a caustic compound scientists liken to household drain cleaner.
From 2 million to 4 million gallons of the VX hydrolysate would then be transported to DuPont's Chambers Works over a period of a year or so, where any remaining harmful chemicals will be removed before the liquid, by then almost pure water, is discharged into the Delaware, company and Army officials said.
The hydrolysate would be transported either by truck, or by truck and rail, and the route would take it through Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and possibly Maryland and West Virginia. Those details are yet to be determined, Colonel Barber said.
''The lack of communication makes me intensely skeptical about this proposal,'' said United States Representative Rob Andrews, a Haddon Heights Democrat. ''I'm very concerned that no one who is credible and objective is looking at this proposal. DuPont has a vested interest in saying, 'Yeah, this is fine.' The Army has a responsibility of getting rid of the residue. They want to solve their problem. They also say it's fine.
''At the very minimum I'm going to insist that some objective person or organization look at this proposal if the Army approves it,'' he said. ''There are lots of unanswered questions.''
Mr. Strait, the plant manager, said DuPont and the Army would be as open to public inquiry about the VX byproduct process as they have been with the mustard gas project.
''We've been very open throughout this process with Aberdeen and Newport as well,'' Mr. Strait said. ''We've been open with employees, and we have a community advisory panel that meets every other month that includes local politicians and others. We think it's going very well.''
Correction:  January 29, 2004, Thursday  Because of an editing error, an article and a picture caption on Tuesday about the Army's proposal to dispose of the nerve agent VX misidentified the substance that the DuPont Company would treat in southern New Jersey under an Army contract. It is hydrolysate, a nonlethal byproduct that will result when VX is neutralized at a depot in Indiana -- not the nerve agent itself.
