A ranking Nassau County legislator said Monday that an executive assistant to a former deputy county executive had accused her boss of sexual assaults.
The legislator also said that the aide was fired when she refused further advances, but that she complained and was promoted to a higher-paying job in exchange for not pursuing her case.
The charge was made by the Legislature's Republican minority leader, Peter Schmitt, at a late-night hearing here into mismanagement of the county's economic development agencies.
Those agencies were headed by the accused deputy county executive, Peter Sylver, until last month, when he resigned under fire. He came under scrutiny for questionable charges he had made on a county credit card that officials now say he obtained with a falsified application. Other problems of mismanagement emerged, but until now there was no hint of a harassment issue.
Mr. Schmitt said he was forwarding to county prosecutors the aide's story, which he said she had willingly told two of his assistants earlier in the day. If her accusations are true, Mr. Schmitt said, the acts she described could be crimes as well as violations of county policy.
Further, Mr. Schmitt said that firing the aide, then promoting her and demanding that she drop her complaint and sign a confidentiality agreement amounted to a cover-up to ''buy her silence'' and ''shield'' Mr. Sylver. Mr. Sylver's lawyer, Steven Worth, declined to comment.
Mr. Schmitt said the episode was ''disgraceful.'' He said the chief deputy county executive, Anthony Cancellieri, had helped arrange the promotion agreement. Mr. Cancellieri was not immediately available for comment late last night.
Mr. Schmitt also said he believed that the county executive, Thomas R. Suozzi, must have known about the incident. ''I don't think anybody gets a $7,000 raise without the county executive's say-so,'' he said.
A spokeswoman for the Suozzi administration, Arda Nazerian, did not respond directly to a question about what, if any, role Mr. Cancellieri and Mr. Suozzi had played. She said, ''The human resources department followed all appropriate procedures and processes in this matter.'' As for referring the matter to the district attorney, she said, ''That is the appropriate forum, not the political forum.''
When Mr. Sylver's former assistant, a 23-year-old woman from Long Beach, was called to the witness stand, the legislative chamber fell silent. She answered preliminary questioning tracing her rise from a clerk hired in 2002 at $26,000 a year, to her promotion to housing specialist at $35,000, then to executive assistant to Mr. Sylver at $45,000, and finally to her current job in the Parks Department as an assistant to the vehicle fleet manager at $50,000.
Then Mr. Schmitt asked if Mr. Sylver had engaged in improper conduct. The legislature's presiding officer, Judith A. Jacobs, a Democrat, ruled: ''That entire line of questioning is out of order.'' Another Democratic legislator, David Denenberg, accused the Republicans of intimidating the witness earlier in the day.
Mr. Schmitt denied that and accused the Democrats of trying to sway the witness.
Angry shouts from legislators filled the air as Ms. Jacobs banged the gavel. Eventually the witness said, ''I'll speak for myself, and I'm not answering any more questions.''
Mr. Schmitt started to put his two assistants on the stand to testify about what the woman had told them but decided against it and said he would instead send a summary to the district attorney.
At a news conference, Mr. Schmitt said the accusation involved ''sexual assault'' and said there were multiple ''incidents.'' He said, ''One day she refused his advances, and that's the day he ordered her fired.''
The woman complained to a county worker who she expected would get word to Mr. Suozzi, and the next day she was called and asked to consider another job, Mr. Schmitt recounted her as saying.
