Secretary of State Colin L. Powell criticized curbs on free elections and the news media, as well as the Russian military campaign in Chechnya, in meetings with the Russian president on Monday and in an essay in a Russian newspaper. His words were the toughest public stance to date by a Bush administration official.
''Certain developments in Russian politics and foreign policy in recent months have given us pause,'' Mr. Powell said in his essay, published Monday in the newspaper Izvestia. Mr. Powell said he raised those concerns in seven hours of meetings with the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, and other officials at the Kremlin.
Administration officials said Mr. Powell's concerns included the arrest of a businessman and political rival of Mr. Putin, Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, and the seizure of his assets. Mr. Powell also commented on parliamentary elections in which several parties complained about a lack of access to the news media.
The Bush administration has been reluctant to criticize Russia publicly, saying Russian officials' sensitivity to such remarks could make them less likely to cooperate on a variety of issues, from nuclear proliferation to Iraq's reconstruction.
But growing concern about Russian actions -- along with rising criticism in Congress and among Democratic presidential candidates about American passivity -- have contributed to an adjustment in the administration's stance.
Publishing Mr. Powell's article markedly increases the pressure, but it also avoids putting Mr. Bush and Mr. Putin directly at loggerheads. One senior official said earlier this month that the strategy was to ''avoid making this a leader-to-leader confrontation,'' using surrogates to send the messages.
Indeed, Mr. Powell declined to repeat his criticisms during a news conference with the Russian foreign minister after the meetings. The state-controlled television coverage of the meetings emphasized the cooperation between the United States and Russia, and there appeared to be little public concern here.
In the Izvestia essay, Mr. Powell said Russia had yet to achieve an ''essential balance'' between the executive and other branches of government. ''Political power is not yet fully tethered to law,'' Mr. Powell asserted in the essay. ''Key aspects of civil society -- free media and political party development, for example -- have not yet sustained an independent presence.''
The secretary also criticized ''certain aspects'' of the war against Chechen rebels and asserted that neighboring countries were entitled to ''their rights to peaceful and respectful relations across their borders.''
He mentioned no names of any countries, but his comments echoed complaints that Mr. Powell had heard in Georgia on Sunday about the Russian refusal to withdraw troops stationed there since the days of the Soviet Union.
Mr. Powell told reporters at the news conference with Igor S. Ivanov, the foreign minister, that he was not trying ''to interfere in the internal dynamics of Russian political life,'' and that ''it was one friend speaking to another.''
Asked whether he regarded Mr. Powell's criticisms as interference, Mr. Ivanov was circumspect, saying dismissively that the secretary of state got ''a good opportunity to get a full and clear understanding of Russia's position on many issues,'' and that ''many doubts that might have risen with respect to some of these issues will be dispersed as a result.''
On the issue of Georgia, however, the foreign minister was a bit more forthcoming, asserting that as soon as that nation's new president, Mikhail Saakashvili, forms his new government, Russia will work with him to find ''solutions'' on the problem of Russian troop presence.
Mr. Powell then thanked Mr. Ivanov for showing flexibility, although what the minister said lacked details and echoed Russian comments over many years surrounding the refusal to withdraw troops.
On the flight to Georgia on Saturday night, Mr. Powell declined to criticize Mr. Putin's government, saying only that it was important to have a dialogue about certain Russian actions.
He noted, for example, that Mr. Putin enjoyed 80 percent approval ratings, that his party had just swept parliamentary elections and that the Russian economy was growing at a fast clip. All those factors, he suggested, might make Russian leaders impatient with American carping.
The debate over how tough to be with the Russians on human rights and other matters has echoed through Russian-American relations for decades. Aides to Mr. Bush criticized President Clinton in the 2000 campaign for being too soft on President Boris N. Yeltsin, and now many experts on Russia make the same criticism of Mr. Bush.
What few criticisms there have been have not been well received in Moscow. The American ambassador to Russia, Alexander Vershbow, who has spoken of growing concerns about Russian political values, has himself been singled out for attack in the Russian news media.
American concerns about recent Russian actions peaked in the summer and fall, especially after the arrest of Mr. Khodorkovsky, the Russian businessman and critic of the government, and the seizure of his energy company's assets. Mr. Khodorkovsky had begun saying that he would challenge Mr. Putin in the presidential election in 2004.
Mr. Khodorkovsky's jailing, in turn, galvanized the international business world, and American officials said they had transmitted the worries of businesspeople to the Russians during the past several months.
In addition, American officials said the United States energy secretary, Spencer Abraham, and the commerce secretary, Donald L. Evans, had spoken to their Russian counterparts about Mr. Khodorkovsky's fate.
