Parmalat, the bankrupt Italian food conglomerate, released figures on Monday that showed its debt to be eight times the amount reported in its financial statements, placing the company's accounting discrepancy at more than 12 billion euros ($15.1 billion).
Parmalat announced the findings of its new auditor, PricewaterhouseCoopers, in a statement. The company said that its net debt minus liquid assets was 14.3 billion euros, or $18 billion, at the end of September, far more than the 1.8 billion euros reported earlier. Former Parmalat executives, many of whom are in jail, also overstated earnings by five times and sales by 35 percent in the company's statement for the first nine months of 2003.
The results released on Monday were the first look into the actual state of the company, which has been enmeshed in a financial scandal for more than a month. Over the last six weeks, investors and regulators have had to guess at the true state of Parmalat's finances.
The investigation has thus far landed 11 people in jail, among them two former chief financial officers and the company's founder, Calisto Tanzi. Prosecutors on Monday continued their interrogation of Mr. Tanzi, who was moved back to Milan's San Vittore prison on Sunday after three days of tests at a local hospital. Police arrested Mr. Tanzi, 65, on Dec. 27, though he has not been charged with any crime.
Also under arrest are two employees of the former Italian arm of Grant Thornton, the auditing firm. Investigators have said in transcripts of their interrogations of former executives that they suspected the former Grant Thornton affiliate and Parmalat's other auditor, Deloitte &amp; Touche, of helping the company conceal its fraud.
While Italian law required Parmalat in 1999 to change its principal auditing firm, at that time Grant Thornton, the company was able to dodge the requirement by having Grant Thornton audit its offshore affiliates where most of the fraud reportedly occurred. In 1999, Deloitte &amp; Touche began auditing Parmalat's main business.
The former Grant Thornton affiliate, which has been dropped from the auditor's worldwide network, and Deloitte &amp; Touche have denied any wrongdoing. Both firms have said that they were victims of Parmalat's machinations.
The accounting entanglements at Parmalat, which went on for at least a decade, have led to calls in Europe and the United States for better regulation. William H. Donaldson, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, on Monday made an appeal in Brussels for tighter cooperation between regulators on both sides of the Atlantic.
The Italian government later this week will consider proposals to strengthen the country's stock market regulator.
Enrico Bondi, who was appointed by the Italian government as administrator of Parmalat, hired PricewaterhouseCoopers to review its accounts. Mr. Bondi also brought on Lazard and Mediobanca, an investment bank based in Milan, to help devise a restructuring plan.
PricewaterhouseCoopers' findings, Parmalat said, would be the basis for that plan, which would be made public in the coming weeks. Parmalat said it was able to pay employees and suppliers of its units around the world, with the exception of some businesses in the United States and Brazil.
Mr. Bondi is looking to reach agreements with banks in the United States and Brazil to get financing for units there.
In the first nine months of last year, Parmalat's earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization were 121 million euros instead of the reported 651 million euros, PricewaterhouseCoopers found.
Sales were 4 billion euros, instead of the 5.4 billion euros reported. The liquid assets of Parmalat, which has operations in 30 countries and about 36,000 employees, are negligible, PricewaterhouseCoopers said.
The auditing firm also restated Parmalat's sales from 2002 to 6.2 billion euros from the reported 7.7 billion euros.
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization for 2002 were 286 million euros instead of the 931 million euros that Parmalat had claimed.
The PricewaterhouseCoopers review of Parmalat's financial statements is continuing, and the numbers released on Monday are still subject to change, Parmalat said.
