Weather Causes Delays at 2 Big Hubs
Snow, ice and wind were causing departure delays of four to nine hours last night at Chicago and Atlanta airports, two of the country's major air traffic hubs.
With worsening conditions expected to affect the air traffic system today, air travelers are advised to check with individual airlines before leaving for the airport. A real-time map showing current conditions at domestic airports can be found at the Federal Aviation Administration Web site (www.faa.gov). Under ''News and Updates'' and ''Check Airport Status,'' click on ''More.''
Hilton Posts Rise In Profit and Rates
Hilton Hotels yesterday reported a sharp rise in fourth-quarter profit and a moderate rise in average daily room rates, citing improved domestic and international business travel, increased meetings business and a surge in holiday leisure travel. Hilton said its hotels in New York, Washington, Honolulu, San Diego, Phoenix and Portland, Ore., posted particularly impressive gains in the fourth quarter. But hotels in the San Francisco-San Jose area and in Boston and Chicago were sluggish, the company said.
The results showed evidence that domestic business travelers were back on the road in growing numbers. Among the company's brands, the midprice Hilton Garden Inns, which promote business-travel amenities like high-speed Internet service, business centers and oversize desks, reported the strongest gains in revenue per available room.
Fewer Are Combining Business and Leisure
Being able to combine a business trip with leisure activities is ''one of the few perks traditionally associated with business travel,'' said Peter Yesawich, the president of the travel marketing research company Yesawich, Pepperdine, Brown &amp; Russell.
But that pleasure is retreating as company travel policies stress cost-cutting, the company's most recent National Business Travel Monitor suggests.
In a survey, 57 percent of business travelers in 2003, a decline from the 62 percent of the year before, said that they took one or more trips on which they combined business with pleasure.
In the survey, 51 percent of business travelers said that they did not get enough sleep on trips, a third said that they ate too much when they were on the road, a third classified airport security as a ''big hassle'' and a third said that they would avoid airplane travel altogether if they could find a way to do so.
Perhaps reflecting the stress, 8 percent said they drank too much on the road.
United Cuts Flights To South America
United Airlines, part of the UAL Corporation, said that it was abandoning service between Miami and South America effective May 1, when it will eliminate daily flights to Buenos Aires and São Paulo, Brazil.
The airline will continue to fly to those cities from its hubs at Washington/Dulles and Chicago.
As part of the retrenchment, United said that it would close its flight attendant base in Miami, leaving 481 flight attendants to bid for transfers to home bases elsewhere and that it was in discussions with its pilots' union to close the pilot base there as well, affecting 99 pilots.
United also said that starting June 10 it would offer new daily nonstop service between Chicago O'Hare and Osaka, Japan, and between Washington/Dulles and Zurich.
More Hotel Bookings Are Being Made Online
Hotel chains made a major push to encourage online booking last year, and the move seems to have paid off.
Among travelers who used the Internet for making airline, hotel and car reservations in 2003, the percentage who booked hotels online grew to 71 percent from 57 percent the year before, according to the Travel Industry Association of America.
Passenger Loyalty Is Showing Strains
As fare-war melees continue while in-flight service generally declines, a lot of domestic airline customers have become brand disloyal, according to a survey by the Innovation Analysis Group, a San Diego market research company.
Nearly a third (31 percent) of travelers said they switched their preferred airline last year. Most (61 percent) cited lower fares. But 24 percent said that poor customer service was the main reason they switched.
JOE SHARKEY
BUSINESS TRAVEL
