John Wayne Fox, co-chairman of the committee charged with finding whether articles of impeachment should be drafted against Gov. John G. Rowland, is the only member to have served on an impeachment inquiry before. But his familiarity with the task, he said, makes it no less daunting.
Mr. Fox, a Stamford Democrat, was one of eight legislators who weighed grounds for impeachment against a Hartford probate judge in 1983. ''There's no question that the two are vastly different,'' Mr. Fox said, a few hours after the House vote on Monday that authorized the creation of the committee. ''The fact that we're dealing with the governor makes this much more momentous and serious.''
In May 1984, an impeachment inquiry committee recommended that the probate judge, James H. Kinsella, be impeached for his handling of the $38 million estate of an elderly woman. Judge Kinsella, who had served in probate court since 1960 and was a prominent Democrat, was charged by the committee with abusing his office by making false statements about his handling of the estate and by refusing to cooperate with investigations of his court. But five hours before the House was to consider articles of impeachment against him, Judge Kinsella resigned, avoiding what would have been the first impeachment of a judge in the state's history.
Mr. Fox said the most significant difference between the two cases is that the Mr. Rowland is entwined with the business of the legislature, while Judge Kinsella was not.
''Gov. Rowland is right in the heart of it, day to day'' Mr. Fox said. ''If there are adjustments to the budget, we'll be brought in, for example. It's much more likely to slow down government.''
Although there are marked differences between the two cases, the Kinsella impeachment will function as something of a road map for the committee, said Richard Tulisano, chief of staff to House Speaker Moira K. Lyons, and a former state representative who served on the Kinsella committee.
Such a map could prove useful to the committee since the State Constitution, written in 1818, three decades after its federal counterpart, does not define an impeachable offense.
Akhil Amar, who teaches constitutional law at Yale, described impeachment as a political punishment. ''It's a morality play,'' he said. ''It's about misbehavior, not criminal behavior.''
At the time of the Kinsella inquiry, Mr. Fox, a lawyer, was in his second term in the General Assembly. He is now in his 24th year.
By the time the Kinsella inquiry committee was established, the judge had already been censured by the Council on Probate Judicial Conduct. There is no equivalent finding with Mr. Rowland, increasing the difficulty of the committee's task, Mr. Fox said. Yet unlike Judge Kinsella, Mr. Rowland admitted he had made a mistake, in his case accepting gifts and free work on his Litchfield cottage from people doing business with the state. In addition, the office of the United States attorney has confirmed it is investigating Mr. Rowland.
Then there are the fines from the State Ethics Commission. In 1997 and 2003, Mr. Rowland was ordered to pay fines that totaled more than $10,000 for accepting free concert tickets and for vacations he took, the first time a Connecticut governor was fined. ''The question is, Are we going to consider that?'' Mr. Fox asked of the ethics commission's fines. ''Is it too far back? Or does it show a pattern? These are questions we'll be considering.''
The committee has subpoena power. But if the past is a barometer, the power was not fully exercised. It did not, for instance, force Judge Kinsella to comply with a subpoena when he refused. Instead, the case proceeded based largely on documented evidence, Mr. Fox recalled.
On Monday, reporters asked what the committee would do if Governor Rowland refused to comply with the subpoenas. At the time, Mr. Fox said the matter was being researched. Later said he doubted that the governor, who has said he welcomed a fair and just impeachment inquiry, would ignore a subpoena.
The Kinsella inquiry was not without theatrics. Christopher Shays, then a state representative and now a Republican congressman, was jailed for two days when he refused to limit his remarks on the stand during a grievance hearing against two lawyers associated with the Kinsella investigation. Mr. Fox does not expect such drama this time, he said.
''Everyone wants us to tip our hand,'' he said, referring to a voluble press corps that questioned him and his co-chairman and fellow judiciary committee member, Arthur O'Neill. ''But we're not going to.''
