Wesley K. Clark  'Unlike all the rest of the people in this race, I did grow up poor.'
Gen. Wesley K. Clark overwhelmingly won the majority of votes in the Democratic primary here early today, securing 8 of 15 votes by registered independents.
Senator John Kerry came in second with three votes, followed by Senator John Edwards with two. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman and Howard Dean each received one vote. There are no registered Democrats.
''It feels very good, and I'm very happy,'' General Clark said. ''This is the first election I've had since home-room student council representative in the 12th grade,'' which he lost.
He finished the day in Dixville Notch after traveling to each of the state's 10 counties.
On Monday, he sought to draw a sharp contrast with his rivals, saying, ''Unlike all the rest of the people in this race, I did grow up poor.''
Standing on a chair at Timoleon's restaurant in Keene, N.H., he said, ''I didn't go to Yale. My parents couldn't have afforded to send me there. I went to West Point. I paid my own way through college. I worked my way through. I worked for this country, and I'm running in this race because I want to help Americans like me.''
Three Democratic opponents -- Senator Kerry, Governor Dean and Senator Lieberman -- graduated from Yale, as did President Bush. The remarks were part of a new campaign message, created, aides say, with an eye toward the primaries in the South and Southwest on Feb. 3 and being tested on Monday in a tour of all 10 New Hampshire counties.
But General Clark, who attended the United States Military Academy at West Point, soon had to admit that some of the other Democratic contenders also came from working-class families. Reminded that Representative Dennis J. Kucinich lived in a car for a time when he was a boy and that Senator Edwards was the son of a millworker, General Clark said, ''I was thinking of the major candidates who are up there, the top two candidates.''
He declined to say who those were, though an aide made clear that he was referring to Dr. Dean and Mr. Kerry. Previously on the campaign trail, General Clark said he did not grow up poor but knew the difference ''between what I wanted and what I needed.''
General Clark has repeatedly characterized himself as ''an outsider'' in recent days, seeking to use his biography as a military commander to contrast himself with his main rivals, who he implies are captive to ''special interests.'' But General Clark also spoke on Monday to reporters about his ''experience on the inside'' of the executive branch and in planning the war in Kosovo with NATO allies.
That did not make him an insider, he said. That label belong to legislators, who ''bear responsibility for the lack of jobs, the lack of health policy, the lack of energy policy, the failure to move forward on the environment,'' he said. ''Those issues are issues that are inside failures.''
EDWARD WYATT
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CANDIDATES
