A Muse in Dietrich
Wearing a boa and a bowler hat, Ute Lemper, the German cabaret singer, welcomed her audience at the Cafe Carlyle in Manhattan last week, introducing them into the Brechtian world of Mahagonny, a sinister city where, Ms. Lemper rasped, ''for a little dollar you can get youth, beauty, identity.''
Ms. Lemper has carved out a distinctive identity herself by channeling the Weimar-era femme fatale, a sultry, world-weary creature embodied by Marlene Dietrich and other tart-tongued songstresses of the 1920's and 30's. Variations on Ms. Dietrich's vamp, all blackened lips and thinly penciled brows, have insinuated themselves into the popular consciousness of late, informing cabaret acts like Ms. Lemper's, a revival at the Film Forum in Manhattan recently of ''The Blue Angel,'' the notorious Dietrich vehicle, and even the art of John Currin, some of whose chalk-pale, vaguely debauched subjects, on view at the Whitney Museum, evoke the lurid portraits of Otto Dix.
The decadent legacy of Berlin between the World Wars, and that of the American speak-easy era, have left their marks on fashion, of course. At the Golden Globes on Sunday night, Nicole Kidman incarnated the steamy eroticism of the Weimar years in a clingy 20's-style gold-spangled dress by Tom Ford for YSL Rive Gauche. Ms. Kidman's illusion top, with its suggestion of nudity, set tongues wagging well into the next day. Maggie Gyllenhaal's spit curls and drop-waisted Lanvin dress hinted at a similar sultriness.
The inspiration for these stars' get-ups first materialized on Paris runways last fall, when John Galliano, in his spring 2004 fashions, resurrected Dietrich's chilly look on models sheathed in silver satin. The period vamp was personified at other shows by Nadja Auermann, the model who is much admired for her hollow-cheeked ice maiden look.
A warmer 20's-style seductress lounges on the cover of the February issue of Vogue. There, the actress Natalie Portman has been styled to evoke the innocent eroticism of Louise Brooks. A portrait inside shows her reclining on a sofa, every hair in place in her coffee-tone bob.
The femme fatale's return does not surprise Ms. Lemper. In an interview, she pointed out that unlike contemporary celebrities, whose every misdeed and foible is chronicled, the stars of that earlier era kept their public at bay. ''In Dietrich's day you were able to keep your secrets and your mysteries,'' Ms. Lemper said. ''Did Dietrich like men? Did she like women? Was she lonely? Did she drink? Those things she kept to herself.''
Editor's Pet
Supporting up-and-coming fashion designers with editorial attention and hard cash is becoming a tradition at Vogue. In the last two years the magazine has helped to pay for runway shows by Behnaz Sarafpour, Rick Owens and Proenza Schouler. For the coming fall 2004 collections, Anna Wintour, Vogue's editor in chief, has offered financial support to another young designer. He is Derek Lam, who will stage his Feb. 8 show, his third, at the National Arts Club in Gramercy Park. Vogue will pay $5,000, or about half the cost, to rent the club for the show. ''Derek is certainly talented and we're watching him,'' Ms. Wintour said.
Few eyebrows are raised in the fashion industry when magazines like Vogue underwrite the people they cover. This year Ms. Wintour helped establish the C.F.D.A./Vogue Fashion Fund to aid young American designers. Her underwriting of Mr. Lam is apt to be viewed as an endorsement. Is he feeling pressured? ''Not really,'' he said. ''I tell myself, just enjoy what you're doing. If not, find another line of work.''
Front Row
