Members of the federal commission investigating the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, said on Monday that a Saudi man who was deported from the United States in August 2001 was probably involved in the conspiracy and might have been the so-called 20th hijacker.
Their comments came after the panel heard testimony from the federal immigration inspector who refused entry to the Saudi, identified by the commission as Mohamed al-Kahtani, when Mr. al-Kahtani arrived on Aug. 4, 2001, at Orlando's international airport on a flight from London.
''It's extremely possible if not probable that Mohamed al-Kahtani was to be the 20th hijacker,'' said Richard Ben-Veniste, a Washington lawyer and a Democratic member of the independent commission.
Timothy J. Roemer, another Democrat and a former member of the House from Indiana, said that ''I certainly think that he had something to do with the plot -- whether he was a pilot or the muscle.''
The commission said in a statement that intelligence gathered after the attacks showed that the hijacking ringleader, Mohamed Atta, was at the Orlando airport that day and probably waiting to meet Mr. al-Kahtani. The panel said Mr. al-Kahtani was an ''al Qaeda operative.''
Administration officials said Monday that Mr. al-Kahtani was now in custody at the American military base at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, and was being questioned about the Sept. 11 attacks. They would not say how or where he was captured.
Federal law enforcement officials have long suspected that Al Qaeda planned to have another hijacker aboard United Airlines Flight 93, the plane that crashed into a Pennsylvania field on Sept. 11, because the three other commandeered flights each had five hijackers; there were just four hijackers on Flight 93.
Shortly after the attacks, administration officials suggested that Zacarias Moussaoui, a confessed Qaeda member arrested after arousing suspicion at a flight school in Minnesota in August 2001, had intended to be the 20th hijacker. But officials later dropped that assertion.
Members of the independent panel, the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, said on Monday that the reports about Mr. al-Kahtani's deportation, coupled with classified intelligence about the attacks, suggested that he may well have been the intended 20th hijacker.
In its first detailed hearing on the Sept. 11 conspiracy, the 10-member commission also released a staff report on Monday on the intelligence blunders that allowed two hijackers, Nawaf al-Hazmi and Khalid al-Midhar, to enter the United States in early 2000 despite evidence suggesting they had ties to Al Qaeda.
The report said that ''the top officials in the U.S. government'' -- it did not identify exactly who -- were advised in early 2000 about a terrorist summit meeting the two men had attended in Malaysia.
In testimony to the panel about Mr. al-Kahtani, the immigration inspector from Orlando, Jose E. Melendez-Perez, said the Saudi visitor raised suspicion when he presented his passport at the immigration checkpoint at the airport and was unable to communicate in English; he was later found to have no return air ticket or hotel reservations.
When challenged through an Arabic-language interpreter, Mr. al-Kahtani ''became visibly upset and in an arrogant and threatening manner, which included pointing his finger at my face, stated that he did not know where he was going when he departed the United States,'' Mr. Melendez-Perez said. ''The subject then continued, stating that a friend of his was to arrive in the United States on a later date and that his friend knew where he was going.''
Mr. Melendez-Perez said Mr. al-Kahtani's account made no sense, especially since he said he was to remain in the United States for only six days and was carrying $2,800 in cash and no credit cards.
''This amount did not appear sufficient for a six-day vacation plus a hotel room and return ticket,'' he said. Asked how he intended to pay for a return ticket, he said, Mr. al-Kahtani claimed his friend would provide the money.
''I then asked, 'How long have you known this person?' '' Mr. Melendez-Perez recalled. ''He answered, 'Not too long.' ''
Mr. Melendez-Perez said that after consulting with his supervisors, he placed Mr. al-Kahtani on a flight that day back to London, with a connecting flight to Dubai.
Members of the panel saluted Mr. Melendez-Perez for actions that, they said, may have prevented United Flight 93 from reaching its intended target.
''It is entirely plausible to suggest that your actions in doing your job efficiently and competently may well have contributed to saving the Capitol or the White House and all the people who were in those businesses,'' Mr. Ben-Veniste, a comment that prompted applause for the immigration inspector from the audience in the hearing room.
