A strong fall 2004 men's season ended tonight with that ultimate symbol of French grooming: a pair of poodles being marched down the Cognac-carpeted runway by two boulevard types at Tom Ford's Yves Saint Laurent show. But it was Hedi Slimane, in his finest show to date for Dior, who created the model for how young men want to dress now.
Mr. Ford can't be faulted in any way for his last Saint Laurent men's collection, with its ripe blend of 70's chic and the flourish of a boutonniere. Mr. Ford gave the house a refined look, based on the trim, broad-shouldered suit (this season in mellow browns and houndstooth checks with the spike of cherry red), and he stuck to it. His Saint Laurent man was always ultragroomed, like those fancy poodles, and in many ways also a reflection of himself. As the opening song went, ''Superstar, that's what you are.''
The difference at Dior is that Mr. Slimane seems more expansive in his message, and more at ease in the house, having won concessions to design in the future under his own name, whether that means women's clothes or even a line of furniture. Wherever his unstrung mind leads him, Mr. Slimane has loosened up, mixing sharp tailoring with pieces that have the nice, cheap feel of the street. Skinny suits had a more boyish look, with soft shirts over striped T-shirts, and there were more separates, like a white quilted leather jacket and turtlenecks with leather elbow patches. Halfway through the show, rows of hot lights descended from the ceiling and out came half a dozen guys in maxi-kilts and tough leather -- proof that Mr. Slimane is feeling more free.
With the women's season around the corner, there has been speculation about who will replace Michael Kors, who is leaving Celine. The latest name to surface is that of Martin Grant, an Australian designer with an atelier here. Before the Dior show, Yves Carcelle, the chief executive of Louis Vuitton, Celine's sister label, said, ''He's a possibility among many.''
The picture that Rei Kawakubo conjured up with her superb Comme des Garçons show was part J. M. Barrie, part Charles Dickens -- a world, in other words, of lost boys. Showing at La Coupole, the Montparnasse brasserie, she masterfully combined periods and cultures for a sense of romance, a theme of the collections. To dhoti pants in velvet that dipped low in the crotch and struck a narrow line, she added ruffled shirts and cardigan jackets borrowed from Chanel, some with fizzy pink trim. These were woven in nylon and wool and then washed, creating a shrunken look, as if her strange orphans had rummaged through their parents' trunks.
Men, as they are portrayed on the runway, seem to be encouraged to play more roles than women, and maybe in real life, too. The old divide between gay and straight has been bridged by a hideous new contraption -- metrosexual -- but that term, like the show ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy,'' is little more than a croaky device for old people to understand, and snigger at, the changes among males. The truth is that many young men no longer recognize the divides. They have grown up watching rappers brandish their ice as well as their underwear. They see more readily the links between fashion and the world of art. (Look no further than the work of Tom Sachs and Lisa Yuskavage.) And if you really want to know how far things have come, consider that it was a snowboarder who coined the phrase ''pink is the new punk.''
In fact, the only source of embarrassment on a men's runway is the moment when designer blunders into a cliché without the sense to know it. The cold slate runway and classical columns at Marc Jacobs's Louis Vuitton show on Saturday night squared with the chiseled features of the models, whose hair looked as unmussable as concrete. With their shadow-plaid coats and executive briefcases, they appeared headed for the promised land of fat bonuses and fancy penthouses, followed inevitably (it seems nowadays) by a short stay at a minimum security prison. The power look that Mr. Jacobs struck was just too easy.
In the 20 years between Jean Paul Gaultier's men in skirts and P. Diddy's outré fox and diamonds, men's fashion has tested one boundary after another. You could say, then, that John Galliano's first men's collection in nearly two decades -- staged on Friday in a circus tent with his name ablaze in the night sky -- amounted to a belated spree of outrage, with the models swaggering out in Beatonesque hats and gigolo pinstripes, and the odd hot-pink garter belt dangling from the waist of their jeans.
Yet Mr. Galliano's ability to present shows on a theatrical scale (on a sawdust floor with bedsteads and crates that suggested a blend of flophouse and waterfront dive) embodies a need to give clothes emotion. In a way, the hardboiled masculinity in the show owed more to the stage work of Joe Orton than to Mr. Galliano's predecessors in men's fashion. The news media keep harping on the softer side of men while ignoring the fact that virility now manifests itself in shockingly different ways -- street Casanovas in long johns, hustlers in garter-suspended jeans, bookies in pony skin coats. Mr. Galliano got all those characters as he relentlessly crossed the divides.
Reality television has elevated the ordinary Joe, making the loser a masculine type, too. Junya Watanabe's many shrunken suits, over flashy shirts with French cuffs, gave his models an endearingly concave look: poor shattered lads. And Yohji Yamamoto seemed in sympathy with the rebel at paunchy middle age, bringing in the British band Madness to clomp and mince in cropped trousers, loose coats and porkpie hats. Despite the funny riff on youth and glamour, the clothes looked off the pace.
At Hermès, turtleneck sweaters and waistcoats in eggplant and graphite blended nicely with town coats and jackets in shadow-plaid and herringbone patterns. With their subtle shadings of color and texture, particularly ribbed velvet, the clothes gave an uncomplicated elegance that was Parisian and modern.
Raf Simons is fashion's underground river. He was the first to show the skinny suit, and to project the idea of the urban guerrilla. This season he used a surfer's wet suit as a base for oversize knits and an inventive Barbour-like jacket that morphed into a cape. He also showed some of the coolest jeans -- wide, soft and worn with baby-blue hooded tops. It all seemed to say to his confreres, ''Catch me if you can.''
Review
