What does a coach have to do to keep a job in the Eastern Conference? Scale tall buildings in a single bound? Outrun a speeding bullet?
Byron Scott took the Nets as far as they should have gone the last two years before losing twice to superior teams in the N.B.A. finals, yet he is unemployed today.
Rick Carlisle, the N.B.A. coach of the year in 2002, led the Detroit Pistons to consecutive 50-victory campaigns before being dismissed after last season.
''Those are two coaches that did well, and both of them were let go,'' Donnie Walsh, the president of the Indiana Pacers, said. ''So nobody's safe.''
Isiah Thomas was not safe in Indiana despite leading one of the youngest teams in league history to three consecutive playoff appearances. Last summer, Larry Bird fired him (then hired Carlisle) without even a hint of notice. The Hornets parted with Paul Silas after he kept them successful through the death of guard Bobby Phills, frequent injuries and a transition to New Orleans that alienated their fans in Charlotte.
Oddly enough, in the East, where the level of play is incredibly lower than in the West, the standards for coaches are incredibly high.
''We all know it's a tough business heading into it,'' Carlisle said. ''Right now, the cycle has been one of a lot of change in the East.''
Of the conference's 15 teams, 13 have different coaches than they had at the end of last season. Jim O'Brien is the senior member of the group with three seasons in Boston. Terry Stotts is next with 13 months of service in Atlanta.
''I think there's such a pressure to win, there's such a pressure if you're a good team to get to be a better team,'' said Rod Thorn, the Nets' president, who fired Scott on Monday. ''Maybe there is not as much patience today as there was 10 years ago.''
After commenting on the job security of coaches, Walsh, who has handed most of his basketball duties over to Bird, amended his statement. ''I think Phil Jackson's safe,'' he said.
Jackson, of course, has Shaquille O'Neal, Kobe Bryant, Gary Payton and Karl Malone leading his Los Angeles Lakers. Jackson is also in the Western Conference, where patience rules.
Contrary to their Eastern counterparts, teams in the West give their coaches a bit of leeway. Timberwolves Coach Flip Saunders has survived seven straight first-round playoff defeats, Jeff Bzdelik was retained in Denver after winning only 17 games last season, and rather than fire Coach Maurice Cheeks, Portland is instead trying to rid its locker room of knucklehead players.
Of the West's 14 teams, only 3 have new coaches this season. The West has better big men, but could its coaching consistency also contribute to its dominance?
''If you can have a long-term coach, it's better,'' Walsh said. ''When you have the same coach for a while, everybody knows what style and what system you're going to play. It's good for players and good for everyone.''
In the absence of such utopia, clubs in the East often appear to be grasping at straws when searching for coaches, a practice that leads to all kinds of strange contradictions.
Silas was not good enough to coach Baron Davis in New Orleans, but he is being entrusted with the young career of LeBron James in Cleveland. Tim Floyd was 49-190 in Chicago, but New Orleans believed he could lift the Hornets to the next level. Carlisle was fired by the Pistons, in part, for his refusal to use the young players Tayshaun Prince and Mehmet Okur, yet he replaced Thomas in Indiana.
''I just think that most teams are trying to find the right fit for their team,'' Joe Dumars, the Pistons' president, said in an e-mail message.
There seems to be the feeling in the East that the talent gap among this mediocre lot is so slim that the right coach can be the difference between a trip to the finals and a first-round exit. Hence, the coaching carousel.
''I think that's a possibility,'' Thorn said. ''I think a coach is a critical part of any formula. A lot of people think it's all players. You have to have good players, but I think the right coach for the right team can make a major difference.''
All of this madness will sort itself out in the spring, when the playoffs will turn saviors into sitting ducks.
Can the firing of Scott possibly be the right move if Lawrence Frank doesn't get the Nets back to the finals? Can the hiring of Floyd be justified if the Hornets bow out in the first or second round again? Can Carlisle, who for all his regular-season magic was ousted by 4-1 and by 4-0 in the playoffs the last two years, extend his success to the postseason?
''Today, in the Eastern Conference, Indiana and Detroit stand out because of what they've done,'' Thorn said. ''So unless we start playing a lot better, I think we'd have a difficult time today beating either one of those teams in a playoff. But by the end of the season a lot of things happen, and I think that we will be very competitive.''
But under Scott, the Nets were more than competitive in the East, where apparently a coach's grip must be more powerful than a locomotive to hold on to a job.
N.B.A. Analysis
