New York politicians in both parties say they are troubled that federal antiterrorism money specifically intended for the nation's most vulnerable cities is being spent in parts of the country that do not have urgent security needs.
The politicians argue that the way the federal government is doling out the money -- apportioning it, they say, to a growing list of cities that face no apparent threat -- is shortchanging New York City and other obvious targets for terrorists.
Early last year, President Bush and Congress established a fund for urban areas believed to be at high risk of attack. The fund was created in response to concerns that millions of dollars in federal homeland security money was being given to every state, regardless of its vulnerability.
Initially, the money for high-risk areas was distributed among 7 cities, and then, in May, among 30 cities, including New York, Washington, Los Angeles and Chicago. But in recent months, the number of eligible cities has grown to 50, reducing the share of money New York and other major cities had been counting on.
In May, for example, New York City was awarded about $125 million out of a total of $500 million in grants that Washington provided to vulnerable cities, according to the Department of Homeland Security. But in November, after more cities were added, New York's share was cut to $47 million of an additional $675 million that was disbursed.
President Bush is set to propose a new federal budget this week, and he said on Thursday that he would ask Congress to add more money for homeland security. Leading New York officials said they would urge Congress to limit the number of cities entitled to money intended for places most at risk of attack.
''The mayor fought hard to get money allocated for high-threat areas, but the funds are being diluted as more cities are added,'' said a spokesman for Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, Edward Skyler. ''The vast majority of homeland security funds are already being distributed like political pork, and now what little there was for high-threat areas is meeting the same fate.''
Last week, Representative Anthony D. Weiner, Democrat of Brooklyn, proposed legislation that would limit the number of cities entitled to such funding to no more than 15. Cities now eligible for so-called high-threat money include Louisville, Ky., Fresno, Calif., and St. Paul -- ''places that no one in their right mind would think of as a terror target,'' Mr. Weiner said.
Members of New York's Congressional delegation are also urging lawmakers from Washington, Los Angeles and other major cities to sign a letter, written by Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, Democrat of Manhattan, urging President Bush to assure that federal security dollars are directed to localities where the threat of a terrorist attack is perceived to be greatest.
''The need for increased assistance in high-threat cities was once again made clear over the holidays, when the terror threat level was raised to Code Orange,'' the letter says. ''All reports suggested that cities such as New York, Washington and Los Angeles are in Al Qaeda's bull's eye.''
And on Friday, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton proposed providing $1.5 billion for high-threat urban areas, more than double the amount previously allotted. She also expressed support for limiting the number of cities eligible for such money, though she acknowledged that such a goal might be politically difficult to attain.
Mrs. Clinton, a Democrat, said ''there are clearly certain places in our country'' that are widely regarded as vulnerable to attack. ''New York City is always on any list that anybody puts out.''
It is unclear whether the efforts of New York's largely Democratic Congressional delegation will be successful, particularly since Republicans from other regions hold the top leadership positions in Congress. But in the past, President Bush and Congressional leaders have acquiesced to some of New York's arguments, possibly because they did not want to appear to be shortchanging the city hardest hit by terrorists.
A Department of Homeland Security spokesman, Brian Roehrkasse, said the department did not believe the federal government should limit the number of cities eligible for the pool of money designated for high-risk areas. Instead, he said, more money should be placed in that pool.
Meanwhile, Gov. George E. Pataki of New York, who tends to avoid putting his Republican allies in Washington on the spot publicly, is pressing the case. ''Given that we know New York has been a target in the past and remains a potential target of terrorism, we will continue to push for a funding formula that fully recognizes the risks to New York,'' said a spokeswoman for Mr. Pataki, Lynn Rasic.
