Days after Pakistan's president acknowledged that scientists from his country had most likely sold nuclear secrets to other nations, the army commander formerly in overall charge of the program declared Monday that he had never approved a transfer of atomic information.
''I was never confronted with any such situation,'' said the retired general, Mirza Aslam Beg, who was the army commander from 1988 to 1991.
Last week, a senior intelligence official said that senior nuclear scientists had told investigators that any transfer of technology to Iran would have been approved by General Beg. The general's comments contradicted those assertions.
At a news conference on Monday, Information Minister Sheikh Rashid Ahmed said that a meeting of senior government leaders chaired by Gen. Pervez Musharraf had decided to take stern action against any scientists found guilty of proliferation. Pakistani officials have insisted that the government never approved any transfer.
As head of the army, which tightly controlled the nuclear program, General Beg was believed to have had the clearest knowledge of what happened. But while 11 scientists and military staff officers have been questioned, Pakistani investigators have not spoken to the general.
He confirmed that he had not been questioned, adding: ''They would not dare. They would not dare.''
In a 90-minute interview, the general, at times combative, asserted that any scientists who sold Pakistan's nuclear technology should not be punished. He also said Muslim countries should not be asked to give up the pursuit of nuclear weapons until India and Israel destroyed their nuclear arsenals.
''Why don't you start from there?'' General Beg asked. ''This is the discrimination and duplicity which gives heartburn and humiliation to the Muslim world.''
Asked if he had looked the other way when technology or information might have been transferred, he replied, ''Nothing came to our knowledge.''
General Beg's comments reflect the view in some corners of Pakistan that the United States maintains a double standard when it comes to Muslim countries and nuclear weapons. The general said it was natural for countries to want nuclear weapons to counter nuclear-armed rivals. He also said it was natural for nuclear scientists to want to collect ''gold dust,'' a reference to profit from their work.
He expressed deep antipathy toward American foreign policy, saying it was blocking the spread of democracy in the Muslim world, not aiding it. He described himself as an Islamic nationalist, not an Islamic fundamentalist, and called criticism of efforts by Muslim countries to obtain nuclear weapons, as well as his portrayal in the Western news media, unfair. ''It's the Jewish lobby, a particular lobby, which tries to portray me that way,'' he said.
Pakistani government officials said they completely disagreed with General Beg's views, particularly regarding proliferation of nuclear weapons. ''He's wrong about that,'' a close aide to General Musharraf said in an interview on Monday. ''This is dangerous technology.''
In the last few weeks, General Beg has abruptly emerged as a pivotal figure again in Pakistan's history.
In 1988, he gained a reputation as a selfless hero, the army chief who chose to restore democracy instead of seizing power himself after the death of the country's military dictator, Gen. Mohammad Zia ul-Haq. Today, he sits near the center of the inquiry into whether Pakistan's nuclear secrets were transferred to Libya and Iran in the late 1980's.
The sense of a double standard for Pakistan has also been mentioned by senior Pakistani government officials, including General Musharraf. Pakistani officials pointed out again on Monday that Europeans were also said to have aided Iran's nuclear program, but that there had been far less Western media coverage of the European smugglers.
Since retiring from the army, General Beg has run an organization called the Foundation for Research on International Environment, National Development and Security, or Friends. The general writes analyses of world politics regularly published in Pakistani newspapers.
While dismissed by liberal Pakistanis as extreme, he has a sizable following among hard-line nationalists and Islamists, who believe that the United States is systematically subjugating the Muslim world.
