The American Express Company said yesterday that its earnings rose 12 percent in the fourth quarter and the year, driven by greater spending and borrowing on its payment cards as well as more investment activity.
''We delivered record results for the full year as well as the fourth quarter and are in an excellent position to capitalize on an improving economy as we enter 2004,'' Kenneth I. Chenault, American Express's chairman and chief executive, said in a statement.
American Express, the country's fourth-largest issuer of credit cards, predicted that card use would rise among consumers eager to earn rewards points. The company said that recent acquisitions should broaden its access to investors, while a court ruling might help it take market share from Visa and MasterCard.
''We are also benefiting from stronger equity markets,'' Mr. Chenault said, ''as well as an improvement in the travel sector.''
In 2003, American Express earned $2.99 billion, or $2.30 a share. The fourth quarter contributed $763 million to those earnings, a 12 percent increase from the fourth quarter of 2002, translating into 59 cents a share.
If not for an accounting change in its asset management unit, the earnings would have been 60 cents a share. Analysts polled by Thomson First Call had predicted 59 cents a share.
The accounting change reduced earnings at American Express Financial Advisers by $20 million, or $13 million after taxes.
Revenue for the year climbed 9 percent, to $25.87 billion, which included a 14 percent improvement in the fourth quarter.
American Express, based in New York, attributed much of its gains to the lure of its rewards programs, which keep cardholders charging and retailers paying transaction fees. The company has often said that it is more interested in that fee income than it is in finance charges paid by cardholders carrying balances.
''We're really focused more on spending than on lending,'' Gary L. Crittenden, the company's chief financial officer, said yesterday during a conference call with analysts. ''Lending is really a byproduct.''
Spending on American Express's cards rose 13 percent last year. The fee income on that spending increased 10.7 percent for the year to $8.78 billion, which included a 14.6 percent rise in the fourth quarter.
At the same time, the company increased its own spending to drive those gains: expenses were up 8 percent, to $21.6 billion, which the company said was primarily a reflection of a 25 percent increase in things like member rewards, marketing and promotions.
Counting stock options as expenses, meanwhile, contributed to an 11 percent rise in human resources costs.
Travel Related Services, which includes the company's cards and is its largest unit, earned $2.43 billion last year, a 14 percent increase.
American Express Financial Services, the asset management business, reported a 6 percent increase in net income, to $669 million, which includes the $20 million pretax charge caused by the accounting change. The company attributed the unit's gains to an increase in its clients' assets, better returns on its investments and an improving stock market.
American Express repeated that it planned to grow this year by pursuing partnerships with banks that now issue only MasterCard- or Visa-branded cards.
A court ruling now under appeal would open access to those banks both for American Express and for the Discover unit of Morgan Stanley.
''We are engaged in talks with a number of bank partners about network opportunities,'' Mr. Crittenden said. ''We are confident that we will do a deal this year.''
Shares of American Express closed up 99 cents, or 2 percent, yesterday at $50.95.
