Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, deadpanning the day after he married his companion of nearly 16 years, Bonnie S. Englebardt, said simply, ''You know it takes a long time for us politicians to make up our minds.''
Mr. Lautenberg, who is 81, and Ms. Englebardt, who is in her 50's, were married on Sunday in a small ceremony in the bride's Manhattan apartment, attended by close relatives and friends.
It is the second marriage for New Jersey's junior senator, whose 31-year first marriage ended in divorce in 1988. Mr. Lautenberg came out of political retirement in 2002 to run again for the Senate. It is also the second marriage for Ms. Englebardt, who was widowed in the mid-1980's.
Mr. Lautenberg, back at work in his Newark office on Monday, recalled in an interview that he and Ms. Englebardt first met in the late 80's when she traveled to Washington with a citizens group to lobby members of the Senate for support for Israel. She followed up that visit with a thank-you card and a note telling the senator that she was recently widowed and asking if he knew of any ''interesting'' men who might be nice dinner dates.
''I put that card in my pocket, and about five months later, I called her,'' he recalled. ''We went out, and I don't know whether she found me interesting, but here we are 16 years later.''
Mr. Lautenberg's son, Joshua, was his best man. The bride's mother, Jean Steinberg, was the matron of honor, and her two daughters, Danielle and Lara, were maids of honor. Also attending the wedding were two of the senator's daughters and the bride's three sisters.
Mr. Lautenberg said that his new wife, who is an executive in her family's real estate business, would keep her apartment in Manhattan and that they would divide their time between there and his homes in Cliffside, N.J., and Washington.
The senator, who grudgingly acknowledged that he turned 81 on Friday, called getting married to his longtime friend ''a birthday present of sorts.''
''And it is amazing how different one can feel after a change of this magnitude,'' he said with evident delight. ''The attachment to a spouse is very different from the attachment to a friend.''
