Even though the fans at Madison Square Garden have been calling for the ouster of Glen Sather -- the Rangers' president, general manager and coach -- James L. Dolan, the Garden chairman, said last night that it was not going to happen.
''I am not going to fire Glen Sather,'' Dolan said during the first intermission of last night's game, a 5-2 Rangers victory over the Florida Panthers.
In responding to Dolan's endorsement, Sather said: ''Certainly it is nice to have the support of the person who owns the organization and runs it. Absolutely, it's nice to know that somebody thinks you are still capable of doing something.''
Dolan said he understood the frustration of the fans. The Rangers have missed the playoffs for a franchise-record six consecutive seasons, and they are in peril of missing them again.
''But you can't make your decisions that way,'' Dolan said. ''The fans are not in the locker room, they're not at the practice facility, they're not in the office with us. They want wins; we understand that. But we think this is the best way to get there as quickly as possible.
''We don't think 10 days' worth of bad results is worth making a change over. We ask the fans to be patient. It's not over. We're not out of this.''
Dolan said that when he left for a vacation in Mexico on Jan. 16, things were looking up for the Rangers. He returned Saturday. That evening, the Rangers lost their fourth straight game, a 9-1 rout in Ottawa, their most lopsided loss since March 6, 1993.
''There seems to be some question in some people's minds about our coach and general manager,'' Dolan told reporters last night. ''Glen is going to be our coach and general manager for the balance of this season. We're sticking with him. It's not time to make a change.''
Dolan said he had spoken with Sather yesterday about whether he should remain the Rangers' coach.
''I want Glen to make that decision,'' Dolan said. ''I expressed to him my confidence in him. He expressed his confidence in his ability to do it. I believe he believes he can do the job -- finish the job -- this year.''
Dolan added that ''whether he wants to do it next year'' would be up to Sather.
Dolan said he was not comfortable equating the Rangers' struggles with those of the Knicks. Dolan fired Scott Layden as the Knicks' general manager last month.
HOCKEY
