Ted Danson, the former ''Cheers'' star, bounded onto the stage of a packed music hall near here the other day to introduce his wife, Mary Steenburgen, the actress, who was to introduce Gen. Wesley K. Clark.
''Oh, my God, I can't believe this,'' Mr. Danson said in distress, briefly forgetting the name of Ms. Steenburgen's new television show before recovering and saying, '' 'Joan of Arcadia,' CBS, Friday nights!''
Some people in the crowd gasped.
''Tell me he just didn't plug his wife's show,'' a man standing in the balcony said to nobody in particular.
It was but one weird moment in what political experts call one odd endorsement season. In states like Iowa and New Hampshire that decide on convention delegates early, the endorsements have gone well beyond the litany of newspapers, unions and politicians to include singers, filmmakers and movie stars. Whether the entertainers' support will prove more beneficial than traditional endorsements remains an open question.
That has not stopped a parade of big names in politics and entertainment from giving nods to the presidential hopefuls. There are Danny Glover (Representative Dennis J. Kucinich); Al Gore and Martin Sheen (Howard Dean); Senators Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Jon S. Corzine of New Jersey (Senator John Kerry); and, yes, don't forget Madonna (General Clark).
''We even have a song being written for Dennis Kucinich,'' marveled Michael Dupre, a sociology professor at St. Anselm College here, referring to Willie Nelson's endorsement tune for Mr. Kucinich. ''How many degrees are we from Kevin Bacon?''
The exceptionally long roster of endorsers, celebrity and otherwise, is a result of such a large field of presumably viable candidates, all of whom hope that endorsements will provide increased visibility and credibility.
But it is hard to figure what all that work has wrought. The endorsements have influenced the race, or failed to, in ways that have surprised even the most seasoned election experts.
In some cases, endorsements have lent the campaigns what they were seeking. In others they seemed to have done nothing at all.
In some cases, they have seemed just strange, as when Mr. Sheen, who plays President Josiah Bartlet on ''The West Wing,'' stumped for Dr. Dean in Bartlett, N.H.
In other cases, there has been speculation that the endorsement actually backfired.
It is hard to say what ultimately influences voters' sentiment. But consider that in the late fall, Mr. Gore's endorsement of Dr. Dean was widely hailed as a major coup, bringing Dr. Dean's maverick campaign a huge degree of legitimacy from the last winner of the national popular vote.
Now, some experts speculate that the endorsement seems to have been more of a hindrance than a help to a campaign that Dr. Dean's strategists had positioned as being that of a maverick.
''In an odd way, Al Gore's endorsements may have helped to undermine Dean's outsider message,'' Dan Schnur, a Republican strategist, said, echoing a sentiment that several Democrats voiced. ''What sort of outsider gets endorsed by Al Gore?''
Dr. Dean's campaign manager, Joe Trippi, disagreed with that but said the endorsement did have a down side.
''The bad part of it,'' Mr. Trippi said, ''was that every campaign and the White House and most of the press corps decided that the target on our back got a lot bigger and they were going to take every whack they could. Gore's endorsement made all of these guys decide: 'We've got to stop him right now, at all costs. Kill this guy.' ''
Another endorsement that some strategists said might have backfired was by Michael Moore, the left-leaning filmmaker, for General Clark. In the last week, General Clark has repeatedly been asked to comment on Mr. Moore's calling President Bush a ''deserter,'' a reference to Mr. Bush's attendance record in the Air National Guard. Some critics have faulted General Clark for failing to condemn the statement.
A spokesman for the general, Matt Bennett, said the situation was more of a news media creation than a real issue for voters. But, Mr. Bennett added, it had hurt the campaign to some degree, ''as far as it's been more dominant in the national news coverage than, say, our proposal to cut taxes for the working class.''
When big unions split their support between Dr. Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt in the fall, political experts said on television and in newspapers that they expected the two hopefuls to split the labor vote in Iowa. But, according to an entrance poll of Iowa caucusgoers by major television news divisions and The Associated Press, Mr. Kerry received the highest percentage of voters from union households.
William G. Mayer, a professor of political science at Northeastern University, in Boston, said labor votes might not be as transferable as some people might have believed, especially when choosing among Democrats.
''It's typically the case that all of the major Democratic contenders are guys with pretty good voting records,'' Professor Mayer said. ''Can they swing the vote simply by endorsing one candidate rather than the other? I think the evidence says no, they can't.''
For all of the endorsements that did not do what experts and strategists believed that they would do, some have proved to be crucial, if only in subtle ways.
Senator Tom Harkin's endorsement of Dr. Dean in Iowa may not have bestowed Dr. Dean with anywhere near the support that Mr. Harkin enjoys in his home state. But Dr. Dean was able to announce it the same day he was under heavy fire for criticizing the Iowa caucus system years earlier. News of the endorsement overwhelmed the coverage of his past remarks.
Then there is The Des Moines Register. The newspaper is not considered a kingmaker, having, for instance, endorsed Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey in 2000. He lost to Mr. Gore. But this year, when it endorsed Senator John Edwards, people inside and outside his campaign said the paper had given him a new level of credibility as opponents raised questions about his depth of experience.
Mr. Edwards's media adviser, David Axelrod, said, ''When you're a John Edwards and the question was, 'Are you real, can you win, are you ready?' this editorial was a certification.''
Even Mr. Danson and Ms. Steenburgen's endorsements of General Clark have apparently had benefits here. A campaign volunteer, Peter Lane, said the actors' appearance at the music hall, on Saturday in Portsmouth, had helped him persuade people to attend the event when he was calling undecided voters.
''I can tell you it definitely piqued the interest of 20 percent of the people I called,'' Mr. Lane said.
Then again, Mr. Danson's appearance did not go over so well with everybody, especially Diana Gonzalez, 20, who said later that she was disappointed that General Clark did not speak about the global AIDS crisis.
''If he's president,'' Ms. Gonzalez asked, ''is he going to bring a celebrity on stage every time he's not going to do something we need?''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO
