INTERNATIONAL
A3-11
Powell Takes Tough Stance In Criticism of Russia  Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, making the toughest public criticism of Russian policy to date by a Bush administration official, raised concerns with the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, about the Russian military campaign against rebels in Chechnya and recent actions against the news media, political parties and neighboring countries.
A1
White House Revises Position  The White House began to back away from its assertions that Iraq had illegal weapons, saying it now wants to compare prewar intelligence assessments with what may be actually found there.
A1
Book Details Chirac-Blair Rift  A new book asserts that opposition to the war in Iraq by President Jacques Chirac of France was perceived by Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain as an attempt to undermine him.
A3
Rocket Fired at U.S. Post in Iraq  A rocket attack in Baghdad came just a few hours after a police official said that the continuing violence was one reason not to hold elections this year.
A8
Denial on Pakistani Atom Data  The army commander formerly in charge of Pakistan's nuclear program declared that he had never approved a transfer of atomic information to other countries.
A6
Flu Infects Millions of Chickens  Pakistan announced that millions of chickens there had been infected with what officials described as a mild strain of the influenza virus. Additional reports of large-scale chicken deaths from a mysterious illness have come from Myanmar, Laos, Bangladesh and Saudi Arabia.
A11
Paris Supports China on Arms  France pushed the European Union to lift a 14-year ban on weapons sales to China.
A10
NATIONAL
A12-21
Court to Hear Arguments On Juvenile Death Penalty  The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether the Constitution prohibits the death penalty for crimes committed at the age of 16 or 17.
A1
Florida Youth Released Early  Lionel Tate, the teenager sentenced to life in prison for killing a playmate when he was 12, was released to his mother, four days short of his 17th birthday.
A12
Voters Seek Bush Defeat  Democratic and independent voters in New Hampshire said in interview after interview, that beating President Bush was their No. 1 priority, confirming polls in Iowa, where voters said electability in November was one of their most important considerations.
A1
U.S. Deficit Nears $477 Billion  The Congressional Budget Office predicted that the federal budget deficit would hit a record of $477 billion this year and that accumulated deficits over the next decade would total $1.9 trillion.
A21
McCain Campaigning for Bush  Senator John McCain, during a four-hour visit to New Hampshire, said that Vice President Dick Cheney had asked him to campaign for the Republican ticket, and he complied.
A20
Schools Fall Short of Bush Plan  President Bush's signature education law has already put more than a quarter of the nation's public schools on academic probation, and thousands more are likely to face federal sanctions in the coming years, according to a comprehensive study to date of the law's impact.
A21
Possible 20th Hijacker Named  Members of the federal commission investigating the Sept. 11 attacks said that a Saudi man who was deported from the United States in August 2001 was probably involved in the conspiracy and may have been the so-called 20th hijacker.
A16
NEW YORK/REGION
B1-6
Officer Faces Indictment In Brooklyn Killing  A spokesman for the Brooklyn District Attorney said the office would seek an indictment of the police officer who fatally shot an unarmed teenager on the roof of a Brooklyn housing project over the weekend.
A1
Resolution on Impeachment  Members of the Connecticut House of Representatives voted unanimously to adopt a resolution creating the 10-member bipartisan committee that will decide whether to recommend the impeachment of Gov. John G. Rowland.
B5
Sanitation Worker Is Killed  A New York City sanitation worker, Eva Barrientos, died in Brooklyn after she was pinned on top of a garbage collection truck by a mechanical lever in what city officials said was a freak accident.
B1
Neediest Cases
B4
FASHION
B8
ARTS
E1-10
SPORTS
D1-7
OBITUARIES
B7
SCIENCE TIMES
F1-8
Panic Attacks  Sudden heart-pounding panic attacks are most likely caused by abnormalities in the brain, new evidence suggests, lending credence to the suspicion that serotonin dysfunction plays a role in the disorder.
F5
Health &amp; Fitness
F5
BUSINESS DAY
C1-16
Fertilizer Makers Seen in Deal  Cargill, the privately held agriculture products giant, is expected to merge its fertilizer business with IMC Global, executives close to the negotiations said.
C1
Google Closer to Going Public  Google has cleared one of the last remaining hurdles in its effort to sell hares to the public, people close to the company said.
C1
Battle of French Drug Makers  Sanofi-Synthélabo, the French pharmaceutical company, made a $60 billion unsolicited bid for its national rival, Aventis, igniting a hostile takeover battle. Aventis immediately rejected the offer.
C1
Business Digest
C1
World Business
W1
EDITORIAL
A22-23
Editorials: Mr. Cheney, meet Mr. Kay; the politics of security; leaving some children behind; a wrongful death in Brooklyn.
Columns: Paul Krugman, David Brooks.
Crossword
E8  TV Listings
E9  Public Lives
B2  Weather
D8
