Arsenal will play at Middlesbrough tomorrow in the second leg of their Carling Cup semifinal series, the fourth time the clubs have met since Jan. 10. The other semifinal, Bolton at Aston Villa, will be played today, but the Villans will probably be missing their rejuvenated striker, Juan Pablo Ángel.
Ángel, a native of Colombia who joined Villa three years ago after a club-record $17 million transfer from River Plate of Argentina, scored two goals in his team's 5-2 loss in the first leg.
''It is not going to be easy for us,'' Ángel said in a telephone interview from Birmingham, England, where Villa will play Bolton in the second leg of the total-goals series. ''We will need to score four goals.''
Ángel, 28, hurt a calf muscle against Bolton last week after he scored an eye-popping goal. He gathered the ball along the right touchline, slipped it between a defender's legs and sent a lofted ball into the Bolton penalty area.
''I saw the goalkeeper on the near post,'' he said. ''I really was trying to cross the ball, but it just went in. It wasn't a shot on goal.''
Ángel, a high-scoring striker with River Plate (43 goals in 82 games), was ready to leave Villa, which is tied for 11th place in the English Premier League. He was benched last season in January by Manager Graham Taylor, and that cost him a spot on Colombia's national team for the FIFA Confederations Cup last summer in France.
''Taylor just left me out of the squad, and I was intending on leaving the squad because I didn't think I had a future here,'' Ángel said.
But Taylor resigned at the end of last season, and Ángel turned down an offer from Real Betis in Spain, staying instead with the Midlands club when David O'Leary became the manager. Ángel has responded by scoring eight goals in league play and another seven in leading Villa to the Carling Cup semifinals. Villa eliminated Chelsea in the quarterfinals.
''David O'Leary is the right manager for this club,'' Ángel said. ''He can move us forward. I will admit that I had been underachieving in my three years here. It was a difficult situation coming to England from South America. It was a different culture. I didn't speak the language. It took me time to settle.''
Ángel has another 18 months left on his contract and said he would like to stay in England. That, of course, depends on the club's willingness and ability to spend on players, while also hanging on to the likes of Darius Vassell, Lee Hendrie and its captain, Dion Dublin.
MAJOR LEAGUE SOCCER  A Cloudy Transfer Window
Major League Soccer was notified last week by FIFA, the world governing body, and the United States Soccer Federation that it would have to abide by an internationally recognized period for player transfers. For the first time in its nine-year history, the league will be restricted to acquiring players from overseas from Jan. 1 to March 31 and from Aug. 15 to Sept. 15.
The imposition of the rule means that M.L.S. teams, like the MetroStars, who plan to add up to two players from overseas, must act quickly. It will also freeze out M.L.S. clubs in the spring, when European seasons end and players who are out of contract might be looking for new deals.
The transfer window, as it is called in soccer circles, could have an immediate impact on Landon Donovan. Donovan's rights are owned by Bayer Leverkusen of Germany, and he has played on loan with San Jose. M.L.S. and Leverkusen have agreed to a deal that would send Donovan to Portsmouth of the English Premier League. If he should go on loan, he might not be able to return to M.L.S. until the summer transfer period.
METROSTARS  Meet Jeff Parke: Mr. Irrelevant
Jeff Parke was at the gym on Jan. 16 when his cellphone began to chirp.
''It was a couple of my buddies making fun of me,'' Parke said last week after a training session with the MetroStars at the bubble outside Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J. ''When I got home, there were messages on my answering machine.''
Parke is this year's Mr. Irrelevant in Major League Soccer's SuperDraft, the 60th and last selection. He is a shaggy-haired 6-foot-1 defender from Drexel University in Philadelphia.
''No one expects much from me,'' Parke said. ''I'd like to stay here, and if I made the team I would want to be No. 60 since I was the 60th draft selection.''
Corner Kicks
HENRY AND HOOPS -- Thierry Henry, Arsenal's French striker who is also a close friend of Spurs guard Tony Parker in the N.B.A., was at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night to watch the Knicks. Henry was given the weekend off when the Gunners played in the English F.A. Cup. Arsenal, which is seeking its third straight Cup title, was drawn yesterday to play its London rival Chelsea in the fifth round. Henry was spotted chatting with Spike Lee, who was wearing a yellow Arsenal jersey. Henry sat next to the rap star Jay-Z.
SOCCER SATURDAY? -- M.L.S. has delayed release of its 2004 schedule because of a possible switch of nationally televised games on ESPN from Saturday afternoons. While discussions are continuing, a change to Sunday or Friday night does not appear to be likely for this season.
SOCCER REPORT
