Sue Sternberg is ordering at the McDonald's drive-through. ''Six-piece McNuggets, no sauce, and a medium Coke,'' she says, and declines fries. It's not much of a meal, but only the Coke is for her. The rest is a last meal for a dog she has decided has to be killed. McDonald's is the last stop on the way to the veterinarian's office.
The dog is not sick, or old, or even unfriendly at first glance. But it attacked another dog and was brought to Rondout Valley Animals for Adoption, a shelter that Ms. Sternberg runs in the Catskills. She decided that the dog was too likely to bite someone to be put up for adoption, and it faced two possible fates, life in a shelter or euthanasia.
Ms. Sternberg, the subject of ''Shelter Dogs,'' a documentary being shown tonight on HBO as part of the ''America Undercover'' series, says she does not believe dogs should be confined for life. So she decided on euthanasia.
It is a hard choice to make, and the dog's death, though peaceful, is hard to watch. What makes one want to keep watching is Ms. Sternberg's unflinching willingness to confront the problem of unwanted dogs, and the unflinching eye of Cynthia Wade, the film's director.
About five million dogs are brought to shelters each year, and about four million are not adopted, the documentary says. Some are killed. Others live for years, sometimes their whole lives, in shelters.
At worst, Ms. Sternberg says, these dogs are confined in chain-link concrete-floored cages, where they leap, chew the fence, spin compulsively and gradually go crazy.
''We're a country that's going no-kill,'' she says. ''Shelters are abandoning animal control, giving it to the government, saying: 'We don't want to euthanize. Euthanasia is our enemy.' '' But, she says, a result is that uncounted dogs are ''living in hell.'' Her solution is simple in principle, hard in practice. ''It's much more humane to euthanize them than to see them suffer daily.''
The documentary follows Ms. Sternberg, her staff and the dogs themselves as they all struggle with issues of life and death. At the heart of the film is a painful fact: the attempt to be kind, by preserving lives, can turn into unwitting cruelty.
This is not to say that the film is without its joys. Ms. Sternberg's sense of humor and palpable delight in dogs is a pleasure to see. When two hounds arrive, she names one Bill, because he's sweet and a lover. The other, who she says is a bit more confident and sure of herself, she calls Hillary.
Then there are the dogs that shouldn't be adopted. Anyone who works in shelters, she says, learns quickly that ''not all animals are friendly, not all animals are safe.''
According to an analysis of 2001 hospital data by the federal Centers for Disease Control, almost 370,000 people sought medical attention for dog bites that year. Forty-two percent of those people were under 14. About a dozen people a year are killed by dogs in the United States, one study found. Ms. Sternberg's worries about aggressive dogs are not trivial.
Since the camera stays with Ms. Sternberg, her dogs and her staff, the film inevitably raises questions that it doesn't answer. It is noted at the beginning that Ms. Sternberg's approach is controversial, and the film makes no claim to present other points of view.
It does not question whether the dangerous dogs are born dangerous or become that way because of their owners. Many problems, human and canine, would be best solved at the source, in the family, or by early education. Nonetheless they are not. And someone has to deal with the results. Ms. Sternberg does this day after day. It's worth noting that the deaths in this film are less disturbing than some of the caged dogs whose lives are being saved.
One of Ms. Sternberg's most appealing traits is that she combines conviction with very human doubt. At one point she imagines arriving in purgatory where a decision has to be made about where she will end her journey: heaven or hell.
''What if all the dogs were there that I made decisions on?'' she asks. ''Where would they want me to go?''
AMERICA UNDERCOVER  Shelter Dogs  HBO, tonight at 7:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 6:30, Central time
Directed by Cynthia Wade; produced by Ms. Wade and Heide Reinburg. Music by Mark Suozzo.
TELEVISION REVIEW
