Strong opposition by the French president, Jacques Chirac, to the war in Iraq last spring was in part motivated by a desire to undermine Prime Minister Tony Blair in a struggle for leadership of Europe, a new book asserts.
The book is based in part on reports from British intelligence in which Mr. Blair was said to have concluded and to have told close aides in confidence that Mr. Chirac was ''out to get him'' by opposing the American- and British-led military campaign and thus seeking to isolate Mr. Blair in Europe. Mr. Blair came to believe that ''the dispute over Iraq was in fact a proxy for a much more serious contest,'' the account states.
The book, ''Tony Blair,'' by Philip Stephens, will be published next month by Viking, a division of Penguin Group in the United States. Excerpts were printed Monday in The Financial Times, for which Mr. Stephens is a political columnist with access to Mr. Blair and his senior aides. The assertions excerpted from the book are not attributed, however, either to Mr. Blair or his aides.
The intelligence reports informed the prime minister that Mr. Chirac had decided that ''Blair had usurped'' Mr. Chirac's position ''as the natural leader of Europe,'' the book states.
Reacting to the publication on Monday, the prime minister's official spokesman declined to address the specific assertions in the book and said instead that it was ''not the government's policy to do book reviews.'' The spokesman said Mr. Blair and Mr. Chirac had a ''very good relationship'' and would be meeting in February with Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany.
In Paris, Mr. Chirac's spokeswoman, Catherine Colonna, said in an e-mail message: ''There will be no comment on our side.''
Mr. Stephens's biography of Mr. Blair reports on the intricate nature of the triangle of power among Britain, France and Germany. It also characterizes the role of Vice President Dick Cheney as ''implacably opposed'' to British efforts to persuade President Bush to work through the United Nations in confronting Iraq.
Mr. Cheney scorned the notion that the United States needed international approval to remove Mr. Hussein. ''Once we have victory in Baghdad, all the critics will look like fools,'' Mr. Cheney told a high ranking British official in mid-2002, the book says.
When Mr. Chirac appeared to favor Mr. Schröder's opponent in German elections in 2002, Mr. Schröder traveled to London in his first postelection trip, snubbing Mr. Chirac.
''The slight was not missed by Chirac,'' Mr. Stephens wrote. Mr. Blair ''enraged'' the French leader by assaulting protectionist farm policies on the Continent at the European summit meeting in October 2002.
But Mr. Stephens reported that Mr. Blair missed the signals of Mr. Chirac's gathering anger. In December 2002, as the United Nations was giving Iraq a final opportunity to declare its illicit weapons, Mr. Blair met with one of Mr. Chirac's ministers in London and told him that the ''good cop, bad cop'' cooperation of the United States and Europe had succeeded at the United Nations in getting inspectors back into Iraq.
''The hawks in Washington had been obliged to compromise, and Bush had been kept in the multilateral game,'' Mr. Stephens wrote, adding that Mr. Blair urged the French to ''more closely'' coordinate with Britain as the war debate advanced.
But Mr. Chirac chose a path of strong opposition. Mr. Blair regarded the French leader's strategy as an attempt to re-cement German-French cooperation and isolate Mr. Blair, Mr. Stephens wrote.
