The Yankees want their players to play baseball and nothing else. The standard Yankees contract prohibits participation in even the tamest activities, including bowling, bocce, table tennis, billiards, fishing, croquet and shuffleboard. More adventurous pursuits -- log-rolling, luge and steeplechase -- are also banned.
Throughout baseball, however, it is all but standard that players are not allowed to play basketball. That is what Aaron Boone was doing on Jan. 16, when he seriously injured his left knee. Now, Boone's season and contract may be in jeopardy, and the Yankees are left scrambling for a starting third baseman.
Boone told the Yankees last Monday that he had injured himself playing basketball, and the Yankees flinched at the news, even as they appreciated the admission. The injury came at the worst possible time for the Yankees, with virtually every third baseman already signed for the coming season.
''We are currently evaluating the extent of the injury and expect to solicit multiple opinions before providing a complete diagnosis,'' Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman said in a statement. ''Concerning his contract, I can confirm that there are certain prohibited activities which include basketball.''
Although the Yankees have reached no conclusions, Sports Illustrated, which first reported the story, said that doctors believed Boone tore an anterior cruciate ligament, which could cause him to miss the season.
The Yankees believe they have three options: do nothing and pay Boone his $5.75 million salary, which seems unlikely; void the contract and release him; or adjust the contract and keep Boone in hopes that he can come back later in the season.
Boone's agent, Adam Katz, said he had not discussed those possibilities with the Yankees. Though Katz acknowledged ''it doesn't look good,'' he said it was too early to tell the severity of the injury. Boone was injured in a gym near his home in Newport Beach, Calif.
''He was just looking for an alternative to the treadmill and to his aerobic workout,'' Katz said.
The Yankees traded their top pitching prospect, Brandon Claussen, to the Reds for Boone last July 31. He hit .254 with six home runs with the Yankees in the regular season, and -- besides his Game 7 pennant-clinching homer against Boston -- he played poorly in October.
But the Yankees moved quickly to re-sign Boone after the season, avoiding salary arbitration with a player they thought could thrive. Boone's range in the field and speed on the bases excited the Yankees, who have no reserves with experience as a regular third baseman.
For now, the Yankees' best options are two veteran utility players: Miguel Cairo, a free-agent signee who played 12 games at third for the Cardinals last season, and Enrique Wilson, who played 17 games there for the Yankees.
Erick Almonte, who played shortstop while Derek Jeter was injured last season, is another option. The organization has all but given up on Drew Henson, the former top third-base prospect.
With spring training just three weeks away, the Yankees may have to wait to evaluate other teams' third basemen during the exhibition season. They have few top prospects in their farm system to trade.
The Dodgers' Adrian Beltre is often mentioned in trade rumors, but a baseball official said Beltre was not available. The former All-Star Jose Hernandez is unsigned, but he played terribly last season.
For Boone, who did not return a telephone call, the bigger question is how much he will be paid. If Boone caused the contract to become nonguaranteed by playing basketball -- a claim the Yankees could easily make -- the Yankees could release him during spring training and pay him 30 days' termination pay, about $942,000. Boone is a free agent after the 2004 season.
Starter Mike Mussina is the only Yankee contractually allowed to play basketball, and he has restrictions. Mussina is allowed to play for only a three-week period before Jan. 1, and only on the indoor court at his home in Montoursville, Pa.
''You give up a normal lifestyle, but you agree to it when you sign it,'' said an agent who has negotiated contracts with the Yankees. ''Playing basketball, that's just lethal. You might think it's a harmless game, but sometimes you get a little bit too competitive, and that's all it takes -- one drive to the basket, one jump shot where you land on another guy.''
There is precedent for voiding a contract because of a player's off-field activity. In 1994, Atlanta saved about $4.6 million by releasing outfielder Ron Gant in spring training after he broke his leg in a dirt-bike accident.
BASEBALL
