As the corruption trial of the deposed Brookhaven Town highway superintendent opened Monday morning, two distinct pictures emerged: one of a greedy town official and one of a repentant daughter of a chicken farmer.
The former superintendent, Patricia Strebel, is charged with funneling lucrative paving work to a construction company in exchange for $12,000 in campaign contributions, in one of a series of recent cases that have tarnished the Suffolk County Republican stronghold of Brookhaven.
According to prosecutors, Ms. Strebel and her co-defendant, Stephen Milvid, who owns Debut Construction, bilked taxpayers out of at least $88,000.
Ms. Strebel's lawyers say she made an innocent billing mistake, and they say her indictment and trial are politically motivated.
Monday afternoon in Suffolk County Court in Riverhead, Ms. Strebel sat as still as ice while her lawyer described her long history in public service, her years owning and working at a dry cleaning shop and even her childhood growing up on the Davy Crockett Chicken Farm in Manorville, N.Y.
''She's related to Davy Crockett,'' Ms. Strebel's lawyer, William Keahon, said during his opening statement. ''All she's done her whole life is work and work and work.''
As he spoke, a few of Ms. Strebel's friends who had come to support her began to chuckle softly. ''I love him,'' one of them whispered, to no one in particular.
Ms. Strebel faces 15 years in prison if she is convicted of the charges, which include grand larceny, perjury, conspiracy and falsifying business records.
But though the personal stakes are high for Ms. Strebel and Mr. Milvid, Suffolk political experts said the outcome of the trial would have few wide-reaching effects on the political landscape in the Town of Brookhaven and Suffolk County.
Despite winning a Republican primary election this fall, Ms. Strebel lost her job as highway superintendent to John Rouse, a Democrat, in November.
The case has further hurt the reputation of the powerful Republican bastion of Brookhaven, which has recently been shaken by other corruption and extortion scandals. But Stanley Klein, a political science professor at the C.W. Post campus of Long Island University, said the outcome of Ms. Strebel's trial would do little to change Brookhaven.
''Brookhaven has been labeled Crookhaven,'' Dr. Klein said in a telephone interview. ''They have nothing to gain or lose at this point. They've been blackwashed. Once those things get attached, they do not leave easily.''
What Ms. Strebel's monthlong trial seems likely to generate is the high drama of local politics. Mr. Keahon said he planned to subpoena the Brookhaven town supervisor, John J. Lavalle, to testify, and in court on Monday, Mr. Keahon mentioned that Mr. Lavalle had received $8,000 in campaign contributions from the construction company implicated in Ms. Strebel's case.
Ms. Strebel has said that Mr. Lavalle engineered the investigation to oust her from office.
Much of Ms. Strebel's trial will focus on Debut Construction and her relationship with the company. According to prosecutors, Ms. Strebel allowed the company to overbill the town and gave it $120,000 in vouchers to dump debris in Brookhaven's landfill.
Prosecutors said that Mr. Milvid became Ms. Strebel's largest campaign contributor and received preferential treatment while other contractors were denied business.
The actions that drew criticism were uncovered by Kroll Associates, a private monitoring firm that had been investigating various aspects of Brookhaven's government.
Ms. Strebel and her lawyers have said that the charges were the result of an innocent mistake. After taking office in 2001, Ms. Strebel authorized Debut Construction to perform paving and sidewalk repair work beyond the terms of its approved contract with the town, Mr. Keahon said Monday in court.
''She didn't hide it,'' Mr. Keahon said. ''This was not some under-the-table deal.''
With more than 40 witnesses scheduled to testify and reams of documents to be presented, the trial promises to be intricate and methodical. On Monday, lawyers spent half an hour discussing a post office construction project in Brookhaven, until Judge Gary J. Weber of Suffolk County Criminal Court stepped in.
''By the way,'' the judge asked, ''is this post office project at issue in this case?''
''No, it's not,'' said Paul Gianelli, Mr. Milvid's attorney, and he quickly wrapped it up.
