Members of the state House of Representatives voted unanimously on Monday to adopt a resolution creating the 10-member bipartisan committee that will decide whether to recommend the impeachment of Gov. John G. Rowland.
''We are about to embark on a solemn and unprecedented journey of historic significance,'' said House Speaker Moira K. Lyons, just before the legislators voted 140-to-0 to create the committee. Eleven members were absent.
The high-ceilinged House chamber came to an unaccustomed silence as Ms. Lyons introduced the resolution, which formed the first impeachment inquiry of a sitting governor in state history.
After the vote, Mr. Rowland released a statement saying he was pleased with the decision. ''I have a great deal of respect for the members of the committee and I look forward to a fair inquiry,'' he said. ''I understand how difficult the work will be.''
Although the committee's members were named last week, state law requires both the House and the Senate to jointly convene a special session before the House members can formally create the committee, a process that involved numerous procedural votes and took almost three hours.
After Ms. Lyons spoke, the House majority leader, James A. Amann, and the minority leader, Robert M. Ward, offered their own somber remarks about impeachment to the quiet chamber.
''There have been serious allegations about the governor's misconduct in office,'' said Mr. Ward, a Republican. ''The public has a right to know all the facts.''
A clerk then read the text of House Resolution No. 702, which calls for a committee to ''conduct a comprehensive investigation relating to misconduct by Governor John G. Rowland'' and decide by April 14 whether there are sufficient grounds for Mr. Rowland to be impeached under the State Constitution.
It was another anxious step in the political crucible that began last month when Mr. Rowland, a Republican who was elected to a third term in 2002, admitted to having lied about receiving free gifts and work on his private cottage in Litchfield. Some of the work was performed by state aides and contractors who are the subject of a federal investigation. On Jan. 7, Mr. Rowland became the first sitting governor in state history to be served with a subpoena for records, as part of that federal investigation.
Mr. Rowland spent the morning in meetings at his Capitol office, a spokesman said, including one with the Hartford activist Cornell Lewis, the director of the organization Men of Color. Mr. Rowland left the building at 3:30 p.m., just before the final vote authorizing the impeachment committee.
Although Mr. Rowland has apologized, he has said he broke no laws and will not resign. On Monday, the two co-chairmen of the new impeachment committee, speaking to reporters before the vote, said it was ''theoretically possible'' that the committee could recommend impeachment even if Mr. Rowland was not indicted. The criteria for impeachment are not clearly spelled out in the State Constitution.
But the history of gubernatorial impeachments in other states suggests that it is ''very unlikely'' Mr. Rowland will be impeached if he is not accused of any crimes, said Arthur J. O'Neill, the Republican co-chairman.
If a majority of the committee recommended impeachment, they would then send articles of impeachment for a vote by the full House. It is still not clear what would happen if the committee, which is evenly divided between Republicans and Democrats, were to split evenly.
If a simple majority in the House were to vote for impeachment, the case would go to the Senate for trial. There, it would require a two-thirds majority, 24 votes, to convict Mr. Rowland and remove him from office. The Democrats have majorities in both chambers -- 95 to 56 in the House and 21 to 15 in the Senate.
As Ms. Lyons noted in her comments to the House, the one previous impeachment inquiry in Connecticut history was in 1983, when the House appointed a committee to investigate misconduct by Probate Judge James H. Kinsella. The Select Committee of Inquiry, as the new committee is formally known, is in some ways modeled on that earlier effort, but committee members say its criteria for impeachment are likely to be different. Judge Kinsella resigned before the matter came to a vote by the full House.
The committee had planned to hold its first meeting on Tuesday, but may not meet until later in the week because heavy snows have been forecast that could make driving difficult, said John Wayne Fox, the committee's Democratic co-chairman and the sole House veteran of the Kinsella inquiry.
After the vote on Monday, the committee members met briefly with Ms. Lyons, who handed them their official letters of appointment.
Both Mr. Fox and Mr. O'Neill said before the vote that they thought April 14 was a somewhat optimistic deadline, and that they thought it was likely they would ask Ms. Lyons for an extension.
The committee's 10 members have begun reading background material on impeachment efforts in other states since they were named last week, said Ruth C. Fahrbach, a Republican member.
