Every season, Carolina Panthers linebacker Dan Morgan keeps a notebook and writes down all the goals he wants to reach.
Some are impossible, some are laughable.
In 2000, his senior season at the University of Miami, Morgan wrote that he wanted to win the Butkus, Nagurski, Bednarik and Maxwell awards, and the Heisman Trophy. As if linebackers win the Heisman. Still, Morgan went three for five, becoming the first player to win all three defensive awards in one season: the Butkus for best linebacker, and the Nagurski and Bednarik for top defensive player.
So what did he write in his little notebook this season? Super Bowl.
Morgan was not prescient. He wrote the same thing after he was drafted in the first round by the Panthers in 2001, his rookie season. The Panthers set a record for the longest losing streak in one season (15 games) and finished 1-15.
The Super Bowl seemed almost equally unattainable this season after the Panthers finished 7-9 in 2002 and out of the playoffs for the sixth season in a row. Yet there they are, preparing to face the New England Patriots on Sunday in Super Bowl XXXVIII at Reliant Stadium in Houston.
Morgan has plenty to do with that. He leads the Panthers with 27 tackles in the postseason and had a crucial interception against Philadelphia on Jan. 18 to seal a 14-3 victory in the National Football Conference championship game.
''This defense was built around the middle linebackers,'' Panthers safety Mike Minter said. ''That's why he's so important. And he can play. It's not like he's a guy we just stuck in there. He's fast, he's strong, he's physical, he's smart. He can make plays on the run and the pass. That's what makes him so important to us.''
That is also what makes his frequent injuries so frustrating to Morgan and the Panthers.
Morgan has been in and out of the lineup in his three years with the Panthers, playing 30 out of 48 games. This season, he missed five starts and parts of three other games because of various injuries, including a pulled hamstring and a concussion.
Morgan has often been his own worst enemy. He sometimes practices too hard for his own good.
''He was hurting himself,'' defensive lineman Brentson Buckner said. ''He was hitting people, hurting himself, hurting other people.''
Morgan's toughness comes from his father, Dan Sr., who was a semipro football player in Pennsylvania, a commercial roofer in Philadelphia and later a bodyguard for Dan Marino when he was the Dolphins' quarterback.
''I used to go up on the roof with him probably every weekend,'' Morgan said. ''I had Little League games on Saturdays and I would go up on the roof with him on Saturday afternoon before our games and do roofing with him and then play that same day.
''He just taught me to be a tough guy, work hard for what you've got to do. It paid off.''
When Morgan's father hurt his back and could no longer work as a roofer, he moved the family to Miami and met quarterback Don Majkowski during physical rehabilitation. That is how Dan Sr. eventually was introduced to Marino. The two worked together for eight years, Dan Jr. learning all about the N.F.L. years before he would join the league.
''As a kid you sit back and you never got to see the bad part of football with injuries and stuff like that,'' Morgan said. ''But as I got to know Dan Marino and Don Majkowski, you can see the negative side of football. I think that's the big thing that you see.''
That was not going to happen to Morgan, though. He missed one game in high school, none in four years at Miami. When the Panthers drafted him in 2001, no one figured he would become injury prone.
''We just had to talk to him,'' said Buckner of Morgan's penchant for physical practices. ''He knows it. It was upsetting him he was getting hurt all the time. The game is played on Sunday. You've just got to calm down. It's almost to the point where you have to make him leave the practice field. The other coaches get him off because he's going to go 100 miles an hour. It was a part of him growing. Now he understands that.''
With Morgan in the lineup, the Panthers allowed an average of 271.5 yards a game and 80.4 rushing yards a game during the regular season. Without Morgan, the Panthers gave up 325.6 yards a game over all and 143.4 on the ground.
Morgan has been healthy for five games in a row now, and it is no coincidence the Panthers' defense is playing as well as it has all year. Against Philadelphia, Morgan had 13 tackles, 3 passes defended and an interception of Koy Detmer in the fourth quarter that sealed the Panthers' victory and their first trip to the Super Bowl.
''You just want to go out there,'' Morgan said. ''I missed a lot this year. You want to go out there and you want to play hard and you just want to kill people out there.''
PRO FOOTBALL
