When I was in Shanghai on business, about the only thing to do on a free night, after having made the required stroll down the Bund by the river, was to visit the Shanghai Circus in a vast Communist-style People's Auditorium. Being a Westerner, I was able to buy the most expensive $5 seat: right on the aisle, down front. Suddenly, I was ''chosen'' by the circus master and escorted onto the stage. A large board was wheeled out and an acrobat stood in front of it. His partner across the stage suddenly threw a knife at him, and in a lightning moment it thrust into the board just below his elbow. The audience burst into thunderous applause. I stopped smiling.
A blindfold was wrapped around my eyes as I was walked toward the board, my hands were strapped behind my back, and a drum roll began. I held my breath. I heard a rush of air past my left ear and a thud. Then a rush of air against my right ear, and a thud. Knives were being thrown at me! After an eternity, the blindfold was removed, my hands were untied, and the audience was on its feet. Knives within inches of where my body was were sticking out of the board. I was given a souvenir knife and program, took a deep bow, and returned to my seat.
One time in Cairo, I was asking directions on the street, and a guy in the souk, or market, stepped out, took my hand and began leading me around. It became clear to me he had no clue where we were going, but he didn't want to lose face and admit it. So for the next half-hour, we walked around as he held my hand tightly and asked others in Arabic where to go.
In Arab culture, holding hands is just a sign of friendship. As I was sitting in a meeting in Lagos, Nigeria, the guy sitting next to me, the leader of the group I was training, suddenly took my hand and held it for a long time. It was a sign of trust, and meant we were business partners. It was very nice, once you understood the meaning.
Gift-giving has its own protocol in many cultures. In Asia, you are supposed to give a gift at the end of the first meeting, and this helps make the second meeting happen. In Japan, you accept the gift from your host with both hands but don't open it in front of him, and the host does the same with your gift. In India, you want to avoid leather, since it comes from cows, which are sacred. For Muslims, I've found a good gift is a little silver compass, so they always know where to face Mecca.
I was training a group of Slovakians in 1990. They were eager to learn everything they could about Western business ways after so many years under Communism, and it seemed every word I had to say was revelatory. At night, I was escorted on a tour of Bratislava, and we were standing in the town square, renamed Freedom Square. There were speeches and bonfires everywhere and the ringing of tiny bells from the crowd.
On the last day of the training, my host stepped in front of the class and presented me with a tiny bell, the kind rung each night at the square. He explained: ''For centuries, our people were like sheep, and we ring these bells to celebrate that we are no longer sheep, that we are free. You have helped us to live our freedom, and we will always be grateful.'' He pressed a tiny sheep bell into my palm. It was one of the finest gifts I could have ever received.
Frequent Flier
