I hate my own clock radio and trust it about as much as I'd trust the former Enron executive suite with my 401(k). Even more, I hate the clock radios they have in hotel rooms -- and I'm not alone there.
After the topic of hotel clock radios that defy all reasonable attempts to program them came up in a recent column, there was an outpouring of reader response. It turned out that I wasn't the only one being routinely roused from sleep by a hotel clock radio unaccountably snapping on with a blast of the ''Lonny 'n' Scooter Show,'' or whatever they call the zany morning guys on whatever local radio station some previous occupant of your room managed to set the alarm to.
Even more than my clock radio, though, I hate my cellphone and I'm not alone there, either. I refer you to the annual Lemelson-M.I.T. Invention Index, a survey published each January at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which says that nearly a third of adults identify the cellphone as the invention they hate most but cannot live without.
I recently switched my cellphone service from AT&amp;T Wireless to Verizon Wireless. I now have a cellphone that's compact and easy to use -- and my calls actually go through dependably, which is a plus.
But I'm still unhappy with it. That's partly because, like most Americans who occasionally travel overseas, I am unable to use my cellphone once I am out of the country. And on two recent trips abroad, I've had nothing but frustration trying to arrange for adequate cellphone service.
The first experience was in late November, when I rented a cellphone from a company called TripTel at a booth at Kennedy International Airport in New York as I departed for a short trip to London and France. The phone, a Motorola model operating on the G.S.M. system that enables foreigners, mostly Europeans, to use their phones anywhere, cost $10 a day or $50 a week, with a per-minute charge of $2.25. During the five-day trip, I made seven outgoing phone calls, though for some unfathomable reason no one was able to call me from the United States. The total bill: $165.22.
The next experience was on a five-day trip to Berlin a few weeks ago. This time I rented a phone from WorldCell International; it was sent to me by FedEx the day before departure. Unfortunately, I couldn't use the phone in Germany because it locked up on the first try, after demanding a PIN code. None of the material that came with the phone provided information on how to deal with this, and a call on a regular phone from my hotel to the WorldCell customer service number in the United States merely led me on a costly trans-Atlantic trip through the automated-voice-answering Everglades. Total rental cost: $84.95, which would have been a good deal if the phone had actually made calls.
Now it is hereby stipulated that I am not a technologically advanced person, and that others I know have reported satisfactory experiences with both TripTel and WorldCell. But still, in Arizona not long ago, I watched an 11-year-old British girl use her European cellphone to make a cheap call to a friend in England and she was on horseback at the time, at a brisk trot, in the desert. Why is it so difficult for us Americans to make a simple, cheap call from a hotel in, say, London?
I asked Peter S. Greenberg, who is the travel editor for the ''Today Show'' on NBC, as well as the chief correspondent for the Travel Channel and the host of a weekly travel program on KABC radio in Los Angeles.
''The Europeans have been ahead of us in cellphone technology for as long as I can remember; they laugh at us,'' said Mr. Greenberg, who flies more than 420,000 miles a year.
Mr. Greenberg is the busiest business traveler I know. For example, I'd seen him in Berlin on Jan. 14, and then I met him for lunch in New York last Wednesday. Since then, he's been to Frankfurt, Singapore and Bangkok, from where he did his radio program live on Sunday. Yesterday, he headed to Tahiti. Later this week, he's off to Chile and Peru. And he's always on the phone.
Keeping multiple cellphone accounts is one solution. He has one cellphone service for domestic use and another -- equipped with a G.S.M. chip that allows it to be used in 59 countries, at $1.99 to $2.99 a minute -- strictly for use abroad. He doesn't worry about the costs.
''I think nothing of making calls, because it's not how much it costs, it's how much it's worth,'' Mr. Greenberg said. ''With what I do in the news business and my TV production stuff, if I miss a call it's going to be a whole lot more expensive than if I make one.''
Some domestic phones, like the Nextel model he uses abroad, come with interchangeable chips that modify them for use with the domestic networks and with the G.S.M. network abroad, but the process is cumbersome and expensive.
Mr. Greenberg said he had a separate phone for foreign use because switching chips is tricky and ''it's just something else to lose'' on the road.
As to costs, domestic wireless companies have no real incentive to join much of the rest of the world in providing easy, cheap international cellphone service, he says.
''Right now in this country, with the cut-throat competition in the cellphone market, you and I can basically cut any deal we want -- domestically, that is,'' he said. ''But internationally, no way. That's because the cellphone companies are smart enough to know that the only people who are going to want cellphones internationally are going to be the ones who'll spend whatever it costs to make the call.''
On the Road appears each Tuesday.
BUSINESS TRAVEL: ON THE ROAD E-mail: jsharkey@nytimes.com.
