HIGHLIGHTS
INDIA: PAUL SIMON AND THE DALAI LAMA -- Words, not music, occupied Paul Simon, left, yesterday when he interviewed the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, in Dharamsala, India, for a documentary about Nobel Peace Prize winners, Agence France-Presse reported. ''So far we have Nobel laureates like former Russian president Mikhail Gorbachev interviewed by singer Bono of U2 and Jewish physicist Joseph Rothblatt interviewed by actor Michael Douglas,'' said Ines Stephan, the director of the production. The Dalai Lama, who won the prize in 1989, has lived in exile in India since a failed uprising in 1959 against Chinese rule.
STOCKHOLM: CONFLICT OVER ''MEIN KAMPF'' -- Sweden and Germany are at odds again over Hitler's ''Mein Kampf.'' In Stockholm yesterday Ansgar Firsching, a lawyer acting for the state of Bavaria, said that it was ''not unlikely'' that its copyright was being violated by a 2002 edition of ''Mein Kampf'' (''My Struggle'') issued by Hagglund, a Swedish publishing house. Bavaria and Hagglund were previously in dispute in 1992 when Sweden's Supreme Court upheld Hagglund's right to publish the book, which expresses racism and anti-Semitism, Agence France-Presse reported. Bavaria was given the rights to the book by the Allied Control Commission after World War II; the book is banned throughout Germany in any case under a law banning Nazi propaganda. In a 1998 decision the Swedish court found that neither Bavaria nor Hagglund owned the copyright, meaning that Hagglund could continue to publish until the rightful owner asserted a claim. Mr. Firsching said yesterday that Hagglund's decision to issue a new edition in 2002 opened the door to a fresh attempt by Bavaria to have the book withdrawn from circulation. Hagglund, calling ''Mein Kampf'' perhaps ''the world's most controversial book,'' said its decision to publish was ''not unproblematic.'' Hagglund said, however, that ''finally there was a consensus that this book has an absolute historical value and ought to be studied, which is marked by the fact that a number of libraries bought the book.''
DAMASCUS: AWARD REJECTED -- A Syrian cartoonist rejected a United Nations Correspondents Association award yesterday because it is named for an Israeli, Reuters reported. ''As a matter of principle, I refuse to accept an award linked to a Zionist Israeli no matter under whose patronage it was,'' the Syrian cartoonist, Raed Khalil, said. ''There is no honor in it for me. Most of my cartoons are against Israel and Israeli policies.'' The award is named for Ranan Lurie, a much-honored cartoonist who served as a combat major in Israel's armed forces before immigrating to the United States in 1968 and becoming a citizen. Mr. Khalil said his prize was for a cartoon about ''peace and love in the world.'' The cartoon showed two men on either bank of a river, watering a plant that linked the two sides. ''It is not about peace between Syria and Israel,'' he said. Syria is officially at war with Israel.
HONORS AT CANNES -- The British rocker Peter Gabriel, left, the Hungarian pianist Zoltan Kocsis and Misa Watanabe, a prominent figure in the Japanese music business, were honored yesterday by the French culture minister, Jean-Jacques Aillagon, for their contributions to the arts. In ceremonies in Cannes, France, at Midem, a music industry trade fair, Mr. Gabriel was made a Chevalier of Arts and Letters and praised as musician, poet, writer and producer. Mr. Kocsis was also made a Chevalier of Arts and Letters, and Mr. Watanabe was named an Officer of Arts and Letters.
DALÍ'S YEAR -- Having declared 2004 the Year of Dalí in honor of the 100th anniversary of the artist's birth, Spain is presenting exhibitions, film festivals, concerts, publications, symposiums and lectures beginning today with ''Salvador Dalí and Mass Culture,'' through May 23 at the CaixaForum in Barcelona. The exhibition of more than 300 works in film, fashion, advertising and photography will be seen in Madrid at the Reina Sofía National Museum Art Center from June 15 through Aug. 30; in St. Petersburg, Fla., at the Salvador Dalí Museum from Sept. 20, 2004 through Jan. 20, 2005, and in Rotterdam at the Boijmans Van Beuningen Museum, from Feb. 15, 2005, through April 15. A major exhibition, ''Dalí,'' intended to be the century's definitive retrospective, will be seen at the Philadelphia Museum of Art from Feb. 15, 2005, through April 15.
MUSIC: PLAYING IN THE STREETS -- Playing his violin in the streets of Shimla, an Indian town in the Himalayas, a professor of music from the University of Helsinki has been drawing huge crowds of ordinary people, Agence France-Presse reported. The professor, Finn Kupianen, said: ''I had been playing in concerts, but they lack punch and do not reach out to the common man who lends his ears so sincerely. I play music so that people forget the monotony and tensions of life.'' Each year, he said, with financing from the university, he travels to a new country to perform. He started 35 years ago.
FOOTNOTES
In the midst of seemingly unrelenting winter, the city gets a blast of heat beginning on Thursday when the 2004 New York Flamenco Festival brings more than 80 dancers, musicians, and singers to places like City Center, Town Hall, La Noche and the Beacon Theater in a series of performances through Feb. 27. The focus this week is City Center, where the festival opens at 8 p.m. Thursday with the Gala de Sevilla, a benefit for the World Music Institute, which stars the Compañía Manuela Carrasco and its special guests, as well as Israel Galván, Juan de Juan and Rocio Molina. At 8 p.m. Friday the attraction is the Ballet Flamenco Sara Baras; and on Saturday and Sunday, the Compañía Andaluza de Danza.
Correction:  January 30, 2004, Friday  A report in the Arts Briefing column on Tuesday about honors awarded by the French culture minister, Jean-Jacques Aillagon, referred incorrectly to one recipient, a prominent figure in the Japanese music business, who was named an Officer of Arts and Letters. The recipient, Misa Watanabe, is a woman.
