Soaring gold prices have sent mineral stocks surging, but in resource-rich South Africa there is one place that soft glow may not show up: the profit columns of companies that mine gold.
Analysts say that earnings at South African gold miners for the last quarter of 2003, which will be released this week, will rival the poor results of the third quarter. Both quarters were battered by the two-year advance in the rand.
Though the currency has weakened this month, its overall strength virtually canceled the benefits of high gold prices to miners in the last quarter, and the rand remains volatile.
Indeed, the 28 percent appreciation in the rand from 2002 to 2003 actually reduced by 15 percent the price in rand that South African producers received for their gold, said Roger Baxter, chief economist at the Chamber of Mines of South Africa. According to Mr. Baxter, the average dollar price of gold rose 17 percent, from $310 an ounce in 2002 to $364 in 2003. In that period, the rand price for an ounce of gold fell to 2,735 rand from 3,248.
''It's not so much a reduction of revenues, but a slashing of margins,'' says Nick Goodwin, a gold analyst for the South African financial services firm Tradek. ''Margins are on par with the lows of the past.''
Miners of precious metals, who sell their product in dollars but count costs in rand, have been hit by the strength of the currency, but none as hard as the gold miners, whose deep deposits have historically made South Africa a high-cost producer compared with other countries.
Profit margins at the gold miners were at their rosiest in the first quarter of 2002, when the industrywide margin was 40 percent, excluding capital spending, Mr. Goodwin said. At that time, the price of gold in dollars was just $290, well below the $406.60 price now, but the rand was trading at an average of 11.53 to the dollar, compared with 7.17 currently.
By the third quarter of last year, though, that profit margin had narrowed to 22 percent, a wan figure in the capital-intensive industry. Results from the most recent quarter are expected to be on a par or lower. Besides the punishing rand, labor and transportation costs also increased.
These overarching figures, however, mask the more severe impact to some of the country's higher-cost producers, like Durban Roodepoort Deep and South Africa's biggest domestic producer, the Harmony Gold Mining Company.
Ferdi Dippenaar, marketing director at Harmony Gold, said the company had margins of 10 percent in its most recent quarter. (Harmony Gold will announce its fourth-quarter results this week.) The recent rise in the price of gold, however, has pushed margins to around 25 percent, which Mr. Dippenaar said was an acceptable level.
With the weakening of the rand so far this year, miners may get some relief. The rand has fallen around 7 percent so far this year, but it is still far from 13.84, its weakest level ever, in December 2001. Gold companies and analysts are predicting a long-term decline in the currency, though some outside the industry dispute that. But the rand's volatility -- it was down as much as 10 percent earlier this month -- makes planning difficult.
''It's not so much that the rand-gold prices are low, it's more the uncertainly about where the rand is going,'' said Ilja Graulich, general manager for investor relations at Durban Roodepoort Deep, the gold producer. ''Certainly over the next six months or so, you're going to see huge volatility in the rand leading up to the elections.'' A presidential election, South Africa's third since the end of apartheid, will be held later this year.
Economists say the recent spike in mineral prices, especially gold, which hit a 15-year high earlier this month, is driven largely by the dollar's fall. But the rand outperformed other currencies as well, rising against the euro and sterling as well at the end of 2003.
In the wake of last quarter's poor results, producers have been re-evaluating their marginal mines, James Wellsted, an analyst at J.P. Morgan, said. In the last crop of quarterly results in October, Harmony said it would look at closing its Deelkraal mine in Carletonville, while Gold Fields said that it would close marginal offshoots of mines. Around the same time, Durban Roodepoort Deep overhauled its high-cost North West operations in the Klerksdorp gold field region of the Witwatersrand Basin near Johannesburg. The company shed 3,000 jobs.
Despite the poor reports expected this week, conditions are looking better and gold producers are more bullish. ''The results at the end of this month will be a shocker because it reports the December numbers,'' Mr. Wellsted said. ''It is going to be a bad quarter, but the outlook is better.''
Over the long run, however, South Africa's gold companies are looking to reduce their exposure to the country's volatile currency by expanding abroad. AngloGold Ltd., a unit of Anglo American with South African mines that hold the country's highest gold content per ton of ore and therefore make it the lowest-cost producer, already holds 40 percent of its assets offshore and recently struck a deal to merge with the Ghanaian miner, Ashanti Goldfields. Gold Fields Ltd. had also been in the running to acquire Ashanti.
At least one company, Durban Roodepoort Deep, even says that after its wrenching cutbacks, it now sees a positive side to the strong rand.
''We've committed ourselves to growing our offshore production to 400,000 ounces a year from 150,000 ounces,'' Mr. Graulich said. ''It's an opportune time to make acquisitions when dollar-based assets are cheap.''
