Cargill, which has become one of the world's giants in agriculture products even as it has remained privately held, family- run and largely secretive, is planning to take a small part of its business public for the first time in its 139-year-old history.
Cargill is expected to announce today that it has agreed to merge its fertilizer business with IMC Global, one of the nation's largest fertilizer companies, in a deal estimated at more than $5 billion, executives close to the negotiations said. Cargill will hold a two-thirds stake in the combined company, the executives said.
Cargill has done many acquisitions in the past, taking companies private, and fertilizer makes up only a tiny part of its overall business. But the deal to be announced today would give Cargill, the nation's largest privately held company, its first publicly traded vehicle to raise money in the capital markets. And by giving investors a chance to invest in one of its businesses, the deal would open a window into what has previously been little known: how Cargill runs its sprawling empire, which produces, transports and processes everything from grain, cotton, feed, salt and cocoa to beef, steel and rubber.
The company is little known to the public because it does not issue public shares and most of its products are not brand names. But Cargill has nearly 100,000 employees in 61 countries. Last year it had revenue of more than $59 billion, making it one of the world's biggest and most global corporations.
A spokesman for Cargill, which is based in Minnetonka, Minn., declined to comment late yesterday. Spokesmen for IMC Global, based in Lake Forest, Ill., could not be reached for comment.
The structure of the deal, which is contingent on approval by antitrust regulators, makes it difficult to value. Under the terms of the transaction, Cargill will merge IMC, which has a market value of about $1.2 billion and slightly more than $2 billion in debt, with its existing fertilizer assets, which executives estimated were worth slightly less than those of IMC.
The combined operations will be part of a new publicly traded company, the executives said. IMC shareholders could be disappointed because they are trading their shares for those of a larger company instead of receiving cash, as they might have expected in buyout.
For Cargill, the deal is an opportunity to explore the benefits of public ownership by committing only a small part of its business, analysts said. Cargill could use the new company to test the waters for future spinoffs, or use the shares of the new company to make acquisitions.
''This might be a first for Cargill,'' said Eric Larson, an analyst at U.S. Bancorp Piper Jaffray.
Cargill executives have long insisted, and still do, that members of the company's founding families, the Cargills and MacMillans, have no interest in taking the company public. The richest members of the two families had a combined net worth of about $8 billion in 2003, according to Forbes magazine.
Cargill, which was founded in 1865, prides itself on having a conservative balance sheet and little debt. The company has flourished for more than a century, steadily and quietly growing through acquisitions of little-known commodity companies that process or trade bulk food, animal feed or other agricultural or industrial products.
Yet in recent years Cargill has begun to share more of its finances with the public, by posting its earnings on its Web site, for example, even though it is not required to do so.
The company has also tried to move away from being a bulk commodity provider into creating, processing and trading higher-value, or value-added products, like ''heart healthy'' food ingredients.
Cargill has also moved aggressively into joint ventures that could make the company more profitable, making deals with companies like Monsanto, Dow, Samsung and Hormel, to sell everything from plastics made from corn to premium-price beef products.
Wall Street analysts say Cargill -- which reported profits of about $1.2 billion in 2002 -- still makes the bulk of its earnings from grain processing and trading. Cargill processes corn, for instance, into a variety of products, including ethanol, the gas additive, and high-fructose corn syrup, the sugar substitute that is used to sweeten soft drinks, candy and other food products.
An aggressive acquirer of companies, Cargill has made some of its biggest deals in recent years. It acquired the grain operations of its longtime rival, Continental Grain, in 1998; purchased Agribrands International, the giant animal feed and nutrition operation, for about $580 million in 2000; and, for about $428 million, acquired a majority stake in Cerestar, one of Europe's largest corn millers, in 2001.
Last September, Cargill tried to acquire the pork-processing assets of Farmland Industries, the giant farmer-owned cooperative that filed for bankruptcy protection, for $385 million. Cargill was later outbid by Smithfield Foods, the nation's biggest pork producer and processor.
Now, Cargill is moving to acquire IMC Global, a large fertilizer producer that had sales of about $2 billion in 2002. IMC, one of the nation's leading producers of phosphate and potassium fertilizers, competes head to head with Cargill. The two companies combined could have huge market share in phosphate fertilizers, according to industry analysts.
According to the International Fertilizer Development Center, a nonprofit organization that specializes in agricultural development, Cargill and IMC have about 50 to 60 percent market share in the United States phosphate fertilizer market.
''They'd have a big share of the pie,'' said Tom Blue, a fertilizer industry consultant at Blue, Johnson &amp; Associates, referring to the possibility of a combined company. ''You might get some opposition from some domestic buyers. But Cargill might argue it's an international business, and that's kind of true.''
IMC, which has corporate roots tracing back nearly 100 years, also has large potassium fertilizer operations; and Cargill has a stake in nitrogen fertilizer operations, but the companies have much smaller shares of those businesses. Both companies have huge phosphate operations in Florida.
