Jaromir Jagr's home debut with the Rangers went a little bit better than his first game with the team last Saturday. A lot better, actually.
Jagr assisted on Brian Leetch's go-ahead goal late in the second period, then scored what turned out to be the game-winning goal 33 seconds into the third, as the Rangers ended a four-game losing streak with a 5-2 victory over the Florida Panthers at Madison Square Garden last night.
Jagr capped his evening by assisting on Matthew Barnaby's empty-net goal with six seconds left. With a goal and two assists, Jagr was named the game's first star.
''It always feels good,'' he said of the honor. ''Even if I'm 14 years in the league, something like that, your first game at home, my first game in New York, I was kind of nervous. I was a little bit scared.''
Jagr, a 31-year-old All-Star right wing who was obtained from the Washington Capitals for Anson Carter last Friday, did not score a point and was held to a shot on goal in a 9-1 drubbing in Ottawa on Saturday, the Rangers' worst loss in nearly 11 years.
Last night's victory ended a streak of six games without a victory for the Rangers (0-4-2), who have now won 3 times in their last 12 games (3-6-2-1). At 19-20-7-4 for 49 points in 50 games, the Rangers were able to prevent the Panthers from leapfrogging them into 10th place in the Eastern Conference. Florida is 17-21-10-3 for 47 points in 51 games. The Islanders, with 53 points in 49 games, lead the Rangers by 4 points for the eighth and final playoff berth.
The Rangers had been outscored by 22-6 over their four-game losing streak. Last week, fans at the Garden chanted ''Fire Sather!'' During last night's first intermission, James L. Dolan, the Garden chairman, insisted that Sather was safe in all three of his jobs with the Rangers: team president, general manager and coach.
Dolan sounded as if Sather could keep his jobs as long as he wanted.
Last night, sporadic chants of ''Fire Sather!'' started 10 seconds into the game, but the Rangers were able to turn them into rare cheers.
Jussi Markkanen finished with 38 saves for the Rangers, who were outshot, 40-38.
With Markkanen starting in the Rangers' goal for the second consecutive game -- Mike Dunham is out with a mild concussion -- the Rangers fell behind, 1-0, on a goal by Kristian Huselius at 9:03 of the second period. Darcy Hordichuk knocked Jagr off the puck in the Panthers' zone to start the play.
Mark Messier, the Rangers' 43-year-old captain, tied the score at 1-1 just 1:19 later, at 10:22, with his 14th goal of the season.
The goal ended a 13-game drought for Messier, whose last goal came Dec. 30 in Los Angeles. Messier was set up by the rookie right wing Jed Ortmeyer, who had raced into the Florida zone to touch the puck and negate what would have been an icing call.
Ortmeyer then fed Messier, who had parked just off the right-wing post.
''Mess kind of saved me there,'' Jagr said.
Leetch gave the Rangers a 2-1 lead at 17:04 of the second. After taking a pass from Jagr, Leetch made a nifty inside-out move to get past Juraj Kolnik. From the right hash mark, Leetch picked the top right corner of the net to give the Rangers the lead for good.
When Jagr backhanded the rebound of an Eric Lindros shot past Florida's Roberto Luongo in the first minute of the third period, Jagr had his 17th goal of the season and his first as a member of the Rangers, and the Rangers had a 3-1 lead.
Jagr's 3 points were the most by a Ranger in a home debut since Ray Ferraro had 4 on Oct. 11, 1995.
''He found a way to produce three goals in one game,'' Messier said. ''That's what great hockey players do. He is, I don't know how else to say this, a beautiful player.''
SLAP SHOTS
PETR NEDVED scored his first goal since Jan. 3 at 16:34 of the third period to give the Rangers a 4-2 lead. Nedved had gone 11 games without a goal and 8 games without a point. . . . With JAMIE LUNDMARK back in the lineup for the first time since he sprained knee ligaments Dec. 4, Rangers Coach GLEN SATHER shuffled his forward lines. ERIC LINDROS centered MARTIN RUCINSKY and JAROMIR JAGR. BOBBY HOLIK centered CHRIS SIMON and Lundmark. Nedved centered JAN HLAVAC and ALEKSEI KOVALEV. MARK MESSIER centered MATTHEW BARNABY and JED ORTMEYER. . . . Sather said goaltender MIKE DUNHAM (concussion) and defenseman VLADIMIR MALAKHOV (wrist) could be available tomorrow, when the Rangers are host to Washington. Left wing DAN LaCOUTURE was placed on injured reserve retroactive to last Thursday. Despite playing in consecutive games last week, LaCouture is still experiencing problems from the concussion he sustained Jan. 5.
HOCKEY
