A city sanitation worker died in a freakish accident in Brooklyn yesterday after she was pinned on top of a garbage truck by a mechanical lever, city officials said.
The worker, Eva Barrientos, 41 and a mother of three, had climbed on top of the truck to pull free a trash bag that had jammed the compactor when one of the truck's metal garbage-lifting levers swept down and pinned her, said officials of the New York City Department of Sanitation. They are investigating the cause of the accident along with the police, they said.
The accident occurred around 8 a.m. in an alley behind an elementary school on Putnam Avenue in Bushwick. Ms. Barrientos and a co-worker were operating the truck, emptying Dumpsters on their regular collection route.
Paramedics treated Ms. Barrientos at the scene for severe chest injuries for half an hour before taking her to Wyckoff Heights Medical Center, where she was pronounced dead around 9 a.m., Sanitation officials said.
''The whole family of Sanitation is distraught,'' said Fred Grimaldi, general superintendent of the Brooklyn garage where Ms. Barrientos worked.
Shortly after her co-workers learned of Ms. Barrientos's death yesterday morning, about 40 employees gathered at the garage, removed their hats and prayed, several employees later said.
In her nine years as a sanitation worker, Ms. Barrientos was part of a slim minority in the department: there are 153 women among 6,000 employees. Her colleagues, neighbors and relatives expressed shock and grief at her death yesterday, remembering her as a good Samaritan who led toy drives and adorned her apartment hallway with Christmas decorations.
''She was young at heart and very sweet,'' said Yvette Rodriguez, 37, the daughter of a neighbor of Ms. Barrientos's in Red Hook, Brooklyn.
Sanitation Department officials said they could not confirm whether this was the first time that a sanitation worker had been killed in an accident involving equipment used routinely on the job. In 1996, Michael Hanly, a sanitation worker, died when he inhaled the fumes of an acid from a discarded container that burst in the compactor of his garbage truck. Last November, a homeless man was crushed to death in Brooklyn when he was lifted into the bucket of a front-end loader, a machine used by sanitation workers to spread salt or collect garbage.
Ms. Barrientos was killed on an EZ Pack, a truck that uses mechanical levers to lift Dumpsters and tip them through a chute inside the truck, where the garbage is compacted. Of the 1,200 trucks driven by city sanitation workers every day, only 60 are EZ Packs, said Kathy Dawkins, a spokeswoman for the Sanitation Department. They have been in use since the mid-1970's, she said.
The truck was standing behind Public School 106 at 1314 Putnam Avenue, though school officials said no children saw the accident. Many students were in the school cafeteria finishing breakfast, but the windows there are too high for them to see out, said Margie Feinberg, a spokeswoman for the New York City Department of Education.
Mr. Grimaldi, Ms. Barrientos's supervisor, who arrived at the scene of the accident after a school custodian called his office, said the problem began when the hydraulic compactor inside the truck's trash container jammed.
Ms. Barrientos and her co-worker, whose name the Sanitation Department would not release, peered inside the container through a metal door in the side of the truck and saw that several trash bags had jammed the compactor, Mr. Grimaldi said. When they could not move the bags, Ms. Barrientos climbed on top of the truck and then stepped down into the container, where she tried to remove the obstructing garbage bags, he said.
Ms. Dawkins, of the Sanitation Department, said that according to the investigation, Ms. Barrientos had never climbed into the container; she said Ms. Barrientos had been pinned on top of the truck by a mechanical lever after she tried to remove a trash bag that was preventing the container door from closing.
Mr. Grimaldi said Ms. Barrientos was either climbing out of the container or had already returned to the roof of the cab when she was struck by a metal bar about 10 feet wide that sits between two mechanical levers. He said he did not know what was said between Ms. Barrientos and her co-worker, or where the co-worker was when she was pinned, but he said the truck should have been turned off.
Ms. Barrientos is survived by three children, a 22-year-old son and two daughters, ages 15 and 13, as well as a boyfriend who is also a sanitation worker at her Brooklyn office. He was identified by Mr. Grimaldi as Darel Alford.
Half a dozen roses sat at the door of the Red Hook apartment Ms. Barrientos shared with her daughters. A candle bearing an illustration of St. Anthony burned.
Neighbors recalled Ms. Barrientos as a friendly, outgoing woman who paid attention to her appearance, never leaving home without doing her hair.
''She was the most stylish lady in the building,'' said Ms. Rodriguez.
Ms. Barrientos's uncle, Julio Sostre, said the challenge of raising Ms. Barrientos's daughters would now fall to her 77-year-old grandmother, Lydia Hernandez.
''Everybody is in shock right now,'' said Mr. Sostre, 54. ''You go to work. You don't know if you're coming back.''
