There was Senator John McCain on Monday, reveling in his native habitat: a cushy seat on a bus in New Hampshire on the eve of the presidential primaries, holding forth with revolving groups of reporters.
This time, it was not his Straight Talk Express, the bus that carried Mr. McCain, the insurgent Republican, to victory here over George W. Bush four years ago. Instead, Mr. McCain was kicking back on what is now President Bush's re-election campaign bus.
Mr. McCain said Vice President Dick Cheney had asked him to campaign for the Republican ticket, and he complied. But he was asked many times during his four-hour visit Monday, which concluded with a rally in Nashua, just how straight his talk was as he repeated his well-rehearsed line: ''I believe that the president of the United States, since Sept. 11, has led this nation with great strength and clarity, and I believe that he should be re-elected, and I'm confident that he will do so.''
Yes, the senator was asked, but didn't you say four years ago, right here, that you were the only candidate who ''understands the world'' and who is ''fully prepared to be president?'' And wasn't your crushing defeat of Mr. Bush here the inspiration for his ''push-polls'' against you in South Carolina, where his campaign suggested your wife was a drug addict?
Mr. McCain, now 67, his voice a bit weak, would have none of it. ''The worst thing that anyone, in life or in politics, can do is look back in anger,'' he said. ''You cannot do that. And Americans don't like a sore loser.''
He went on to say that running for president had been an uplifting experience. ''And I'm not going to mar that with some anger about some campaign tactic that was used against me,'' he said. ''If you really want to get into it, maybe I could have reacted a lot better. Maybe I could have handled it a lot better than I did.''
And he said, ''the best candidate won, in the judgment of the voters.''
He attracted a presidential-size press corps as he squeezed into the fabled Merrimack Restaurant here.
The first batch of people he stopped to talk with were supporters of John Kerry and Howard Dean, two of the rival Democrats in Tuesday's primary. One of them, Dan Calegari, 55, who works in a nearby window replacement business and supports Senator Kerry, said he was befuddled by Mr. McCain's appearance.
''I preferred your position on Bush four years ago,'' Mr. Calegari told him. As Mr. McCain moved on, Mr. Calegari told a reporter: ''It's got to be awkward. I couldn't believe he was coming up. He did such a good job telling the truth about Bush, so to act like nothing's changed is ridiculous.''
But Mr. McCain, surrounded by a moveable media mob, kept his eye on the positive, offering a cheerful face for the opposition party, which has been sniping at the Democrats through news releases and the Republican National Committee.
He said he was flattered that most of the Democrats were invoking his name, which is synonymous here with ''independent.'' But he would not handicap the race.
In the warmth of his bus, Mr. McCain said he thought all the Democrats were qualified to be president (though he hinted that the Rev. Al Sharpton was not) and that he was a friend of the three who are senators: Mr. Kerry, John Edwards and Joseph I. Lieberman.
His rehearsed lines seemed to thaw just a bit when he was asked to parse comments by Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who pointed out that Mr. Kerry had been only a lieutenant in Vietnam.
''You know what I really make of it -- a little straight talk -- it's very hard to make a transition from being a general to a politician, and so you make mistakes,'' he said. ''I saw early on that General Clark made what might be called his equivocal statements about his support or his nonsupport of the war. A good smart politician sits down with his advisers'' and works out his positions.
And what of the general's comment on the lieutenant?
''It just wasn't an intelligent comment,'' he said. ''The majority of people who have won our nation's highest award have been enlisted people.''
Did he hold Mr. Kerry's eventual opposition to the Vietnam War against him?
''I have never criticized anyone for protesting against the war,'' he said. But, he added, referring to an anti-war protest by Mr. Kerry, ''I did not approve of the throwing of medals, but I didn't condemn it, nor did I ever speak out against it.'' He said he was disappointed with Mr. Kerry for his vote against $87 billion for post-war Iraq and Afghanistan, but ''just because we don't vote the same way doesn't mean we're not friends.''
He chugged off in the bus, emblazoned with ''New Hampshire is Bush-Benson Country,'' a reference to the state's governor, Craig Benson, who is also seeking re-election.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE ARIZONA SENATOR
