The Nets have not packed their bags for Brooklyn yet, but in a sense, they joined the New York market Monday.
Five days after the franchise was sold to Bruce C. Ratner, the upheaval continued at the Meadowlands. Despite leading the Nets to the N.B.A. finals the past two seasons, Byron Scott became the fourth head coach to be fired in the metropolitan area in the last six weeks.
The Nets turned a disappointing yet first-place team over to Scott's top assistant, Lawrence Frank, who will coach the team for the remainder of the season and perhaps into the next one. In Scott, the Nets (22-20) fired a former All-Star player and the most accomplished coach in their history; in Frank, they promoted a 33-year-old assistant who never made his high school team and has never been a head coach.
From the outside, the Nets look like an organization in disarray, but the team's president, Rod Thorn, said he believed this could save a season that is still expected to end in a return to the finals.
Scott, who did not return phone calls yesterday, built a most impressive N.B.A. résumé in the past 20 years, but he could not build strong relationships with his star players, especially point guard Jason Kidd. According to one Eastern Conference executive, several Nets questioned Scott's preparation, in-game adjustments and work ethic.
''I would say I did a hell of a job,'' Scott said in an WFAN Radio interview yesterday. ''I helped turn around a franchise that won 26 games. I never really thought the other shoe would drop, but I was once told, 'Coaches were hired to be fired.' ''
Members of the team suggested that Frank might command more respect even though he does not have as many credentials as Scott and is about a foot shorter than most players. Frank is a tireless worker with an appetite for detail, prompting Thorn to compare him to Jeff Van Gundy, the former Knicks coach now with the Houston Rockets.
Thorn insisted that the move was not influenced by the sale and said that he had not consulted Kidd or any other player. He started considering a change after the Nets lost at Miami on Friday; one team official said the players had given up on Scott. While Scott wondered aloud if he was still getting across to his players, Thorn came to the conclusion that ''we needed a new voice.''
''It happens in different times to coaches that your message isn't received and taken on the court as you'd like,'' Thorn said. ''Any time you have not played as well as you thought you'd play, there's always some second-guessing.''
He added, ''If your top players believe in a coach, it's much easier to sell that to the others.''
Kidd was vehement in denying a report that he had called Thorn on Saturday night to persuade him to fire Scott.
''Why would I need to tell Rod anything?'' Kidd said. ''That's his job; I'm not doing his job. He's a smart man. Why would I need to question an intelligent man doing his job?''
Kidd and Scott seemed to get along well personally -- they played golf together in Miami on Friday -- but their professional relationship was fractured by reports that Kidd had tried to get Scott fired over the summer. And after a 47-point loss at Memphis in December, Kidd screamed at the coaching staff, and Kenyon Martin joined the shouting.
''When you're two games over .500 and we're expected to win more, I guess it was time for a change,'' Martin said Monday.
In the WFAN interview, Scott said, ''I kept hearing what Jason did here and there, but I have no proof he did anything to have this come to an end.''
Thorn did not take a serious look at outside candidates because the Nets are more than halfway into the season and run the intricate Princeton offense. Even though some veteran coaches are still on the market -- Doc Rivers, Mike Fratello and Doug Collins, among others -- Thorn is always searching for a new prospect. He hired Scott in 2000, after two seasons as an assistant in Sacramento, and watched him compile a 149-139 regular-season record, and a 25-15 record in the playoffs.
''He's been an all-star coach, been to the finals twice, was just coach of the month in December,'' said Scott's agent, Brian McInerney. ''It's a very bizarre situation.''
At Monday's news conference, Thorn wore a black suit and a black tie, as if he were dressing for a funeral. Frank will be flanked by a new assistant, the former Vancouver and Orlando coach Brian Hill. The assistant Don Newman and the advance scout Tom Barrise have also switched roles.
''I think players want to be challenged,'' Frank said. ''You have to push guys to do what they can't do on their own. If we are allowed to coast in life, we are going to coast.''
He added, ''All of us need to be more accountable.''
The Nets first showed signs of discontent with Scott during a losing streak last spring, then griped about his substitution pattern in the finals, when he benched Dikembe Mutombo and Kerry Kittles at what turned out to be inopportune times. Thorn could have fired Scott after the finals and pursued Van Gundy or promoted Eddie Jordan, then a Nets assistant who became the Washington Wizards' coach.
Thorn felt it was ''the right thing to do'' to let Scott defend his second conference title, but he sent him into the season in the final year of his contract without offering an extension, undermining Scott's authority from the opening tip. Thorn said he first thought about dismissing Scott last month, but, he said, ''I felt it would turn itself around, and it became evident to me it wouldn't turn itself around.''
Even though the Nets beat Boston on Sunday, Thorn made up his mind to oust Scott at 10 p.m. and called Frank's lawyer shortly afterward to draw up a contract that would take him through the end of the season. Thorn met with Scott on Monday morning, informed the team during a meeting and allowed Scott to say goodbye to his players.
''The way I'm going to look at this is, 'Nobody's safe,' from the coach to any player on this team,'' Kidd said. ''If that message didn't get across, then you've got to be stupid, because they're not going to sit around and be just mediocre. I'm sitting here wondering, they're not done wheeling and dealing. There could be more shake-ups.''
The Nets rebuilt themselves in the past few years with Kidd running the point and Scott standing on the sideline. Scott provided a moribund franchise with a well-known name, a distinguished look and the credibility the organization never had. He was open and honest, candid even when he probably should not have been. The Nets bristled when he said they had ''played scared,'' ''played awful,'' or ''played like women.'' Scott refused to coddle his team even if it might have helped his job security.
He could see the end coming. Earlier in the month, at the start of a five-game losing streak in Milwaukee, Scott sat amid a pile of duffel bags, staring blankly into the distance. In Miami on Friday, he lingered in the hallway, looking hurt and confused. Finally, against Boston, he was ejected for the second time in his coaching tenure, making his last act a defiant one.
Monday morning, he joined the list of New York area coaches fired since mid-December: Don Chaney from the Knicks, Jim Fassel from the Giants and Mike Jarvis from St. John's.
Scott remains close with Jerry West, the Memphis Grizzlies' general manager, who once called him about a position with the Lakers, and he has numerous other contacts in Los Angeles, his hometown.
Scott told WFAN that he wanted to coach again, and he added that he believed Frank would be successful with the Nets. Scott is sure to be a candidate for openings that come up after the season.
Less certain is the future of the Nets, a franchise that has a new owner and a new coach and that is not altogether sure where it will be playing in a few years. If the Nets do wind up on the other side of the Hudson River, with a handful of other turbulent teams, they should find themselves right at home.
PRO BASKETBALL
