AND the beat goes on. Emboldened by perceived success, the hockey crowd at Madison Square Garden has been yowling for the head of Glen Sather.
After all, yowling seemed to pay off recently for the head of Scott Layden and the head of Don Chaney, who were running the Knicks at this very same World's Most Famous Arena.
Save your larynxes, it's flu season. That might be the advice of James Dolan, the chairman of the Garden, who said last night, ''I am not going to fire Glen Sather,'' before his expensive Rangers whacked Florida, 5-2. That stopped the yowling, temporarily.
Sometimes, however, coaches go down without lusty chants against them. A bad month and a discontented superstar brought down Byron Scott yesterday, not because fans in the swamplands had much passion about Scott, or anything, but because the Nets are dragging along with a mere 22-20 record and Jason Kidd is not amused.
There are different ways for sports leaders to go, and New York is seeing them all. In a stunning wave, there have been six significant dismissals in New York in the past two months, and, totally against the odds, Sather has outlasted all six.
Even for a volatile and impatient region -- there are 45 seconds in a New York minute -- this is a lot of severance pay and a lot of officials being escorted to the front door with their security badge removed. Happens fast. Cold business. Maybe even a cold town.
Of course, sports are not all that different from other forms of mob entertainment. Take the political primaries. The blood lust from public and press toward a front-runner who had a goofy 15 seconds is instructive. (It happened to Howard Dean but probably could have happened to anybody.) People are out sharpening Marie Antoinette's guillotine blade for Martha Stewart.
Nobody is pure in this business -- certainly not sports fans and sports commentators, who can turn on failing athletes and slipping managers in a heartbeat. Nevertheless, the number of heads plopping in baskets around the New York area has been amazing.
After a season of ''Fire Fassel'' chants (two jeering syllables per word), Jim Fassel confronted his future with dignity with two games to go for the Giants. The Jets sacked their defensive coordinator, Ted Cottrell, after the season. The derisive chant spread out to Queens, until St. John's scuttled Mike Jarvis early in a basketball season going nowhere.
Meanwhile, the Knicks' fans mounted a furious ''Fire Layden'' chant after the beleaguered general manager seemed intent on serving up warmed-over Charlie Ward and Howard Eisley for years to come.
When the Dolans dumped Layden and brought in Isiah Thomas to conduct a revolution, Thomas cruelly kept his hapless coach in place long enough for the fans to retool a ''Fire Chaney'' chant.
How far the Garden has sunk under the Dolans. In the late spring of 1994, hockey fans chanted ''Let's go, Rangers'' to the beat of the organ, and on subsequent nights Knicks fans, involved in their own playoff dreams, would chant ''Let's go, Rangers.'' Anthony Mason and Charles Oakley of the Knicks rooted in person for Mark Messier. What synergy. What noise. What fun.
At least the Knicks are on the rebound, having upgraded with three point guards in Thomas, Lenny Wilkens and Stephon Marbury. You can improve a basketball team with a few swift strokes. Hockey is tougher to turn around because the squads are deeper and stars cannot carry a team as they do in basketball. Still, the star system worked last night for the Rangers as Jaromir Jagr, in his first home game as a Ranger, had a goal and two assists.
Sather alluded to the ''controversy'' surrounding the Rangers, who had lost, 9-1, in their previous game. Dolan's remarks to reporters during the game were obviously aimed at calming the yowling paying customers.
''Speaking from experience,'' said Mark Messier, the 43-year-old captain, ''the momentum and feeling in the arena and around town is important.''
''The fans waited 54 years for a Stanley Cup, and there were some rough years in between,'' Messier said, adding: ''There's no better place, or harder place. We've got to make it happen.''
The mood swung at the end of last night's game. For a moment, it was a good place, not a hard place. And at least the Rangers are not moving.
The Nets, on the other hand, are in all kinds of chaos. They are being sold to a builder who wants public subsidies for his dream palace, ostensibly for the good of downtown Brooklyn, or maybe for the good of himself. Now the Nets must try to keep a few fans in New Jersey until they move. Underachieving is not a good party trick.
Byron Scott is a victim of the Nets' unsettled state. Some of the players have been staging an unseemly temper tantrum and maybe even a subconscious letdown since their offensive guru, Eddie Jordan, got the head job in Washington. They should be ashamed, but probably are not.
Whoever is making decisions in ownership must have signaled Rod Thorn, the general manager, that Scott was expendable, despite leading the Nets to the finals the past two years. In this flux, 22-20 doesn't cut it.
The Rangers, who have only 49 points in 50 games, would love the Nets' record. Last night, at the end, they had a buzz the Nets may never know. But that can change in all 45 seconds of a New York minute.
Sports of The Times
