Massachusetts Financial Services is expected to agree to reduce fees on its mutual funds by more than $100 million over several years as part of a settlement with regulators over improper trading in its funds, according to people close to the talks.
MFS is the nation's oldest mutual fund company and has more than $75 billion in mutual fund assets. It is the second large fund company to reach a broad agreement with regulators over trading abuses.
Along with cutting its fees, MFS is expected to pay more than $200 million in restitution and penalties, the people close to the talks said. Though terms could still change, a settlement is expected next week and would include the Securities and Exchange Commission, the New York attorney general and the New Hampshire Bureau of Securities Regulation, these people said
The S.E.C. is not seeking fee reductions, but Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general, has said such cuts are a central element of fund settlement talks. Last month, in its settlement with his office, Alliance Capital Management agreed to cut its management fees on stock and bond funds by an average of 20 percent over five years, for an estimated $350 million.
Alliance also agreed to pay $250 million in penalties and restitution as part of its agreement with Mr. Spitzer and the S.E.C. Alliance managed nearly $40 billion in stock and bond funds as of November, according to the Financial Research Corporation.
Like Alliance, MFS would agree to certain governance changes, these people said.
Spokesmen for MFS, the S.E.C. and Mr. Spitzer's office declined to comment, as did a spokesman for Sun Life Financial, which owns 93 percent of MFS. A spokesman for regulators in New Hampshire could not be reached last night.
Sun Life said last month that the S.E.C. planned to recommend action against it for misleading disclosures in its fund prospectuses about market timing, or rapid trading in and out of mutual funds. In the settlement, the regulators are not expected to cite the illegal practice known as late-day trading, in which select investors were allowed to trade at the 4 p.m. closing price later in the day.
Regulators have been seeking information throughout the industry on both market timing and late-day trading, but the cases on market timing generally hinge on whether companies properly disclosed their policies on trading to investors.
MFS acknowledged that it ''did not monitor daily the trading activity'' in 11 of its stock and bond funds, in a statement released last month. The company said that it did not believe that frequent trading in these funds would be harmful to shareholders because the funds were large and held securities that were frequently traded, the statement said.
Regulators will maintain in their settlement that MFS officials ''looked the other way'' as certain investors traded in and out of these funds, one person briefed on the talks said, even though the fund prospectuses discouraged such activity.
Correction:  January 28, 2004, Wednesday  An article in Business Day yesterday about an expected agreement by Massachusetts Financial Services to reduce fees on its mutual funds as part of a settlement with regulators omitted credit for the publication that first reported the settlement talks. It was The Boston Globe.
