The paleontologists were driving across the scorched and trackless Ténéré Desert of Niger, following a low ridge of rock bearing dinosaur fossils. Suddenly, someone on the team, led by Dr. Paul Sereno of the University of Chicago, spotted something dark against the tawny dunes.
Getting out of their vehicles, they stepped into sand littered with the fossilized bones of modern crocodiles, hippos, camels and birds -- interesting creatures, to be sure, but not exactly the quarry of these paleontologists. ''But then things got really strange,'' recalls Gabrielle Lyon, a member of the expedition who is Dr. Sereno's wife and the director of Project Exploration, a science education group.
As members of the group stood around their vehicles comparing finds, Mike Hettwer, the expedition photographer, came loping up with news of human skeletons and stone tools eroding from a hillside.
In search of pieces of the 110-million-year-old Cretaceous puzzle, Dr. Sereno's team had found what archaeologists in Niger say is a large Neolithic, or Stone Age, burial and settlement site tentatively dated at 5,000 years old.
''It's a very important site,'' says Dr. Abdoulaye Maga, an archaeologist with the Institute of Research in the Human Sciences in Niamey, Niger, who visited it in 2000, shortly after the discovery. ''It's the largest site that has been found and not pillaged.'' Though he has discovered and excavated a few dozen new species of African dinosaurs, Dr. Sereno has no experience with prehistoric human sites like this. He said his team counted 130 skeletons, including one with the remains of a stone bead necklace and innumerable stone and bone tools. He suspects, he says, that much more lies buried.
''I'm not afraid of any kind of dinosaur, the uglier the better,'' he said. ''But here for the first time I got goose bumps because I was looking at my own skeleton, a modern human.''
Dr. Diane Gifford-Gonzalez, an archaeologist at the University of California at Santa Cruz who has discussed the site with Dr. Sereno, said the discovery was a ''big deal'' and merited ''serious, serious work.''
Fearing the site would be looted and ruined, Dr. Sereno initially told only Dr. Maga and his colleagues about its location. Because financing for archaeological work in Niger is scarce, no excavation was begun.
When Dr. Sereno returned to the site in November, he saw it had deteriorated so he and his team spent two days in their two-month expedition mapping it and then applying a polymer to the surface artifacts to protect them from further erosion. He is now trying to find financing and other archaeologists to assist Dr. Maga with the excavation.
No radiocarbon dating has been done yet; Dr. Maga based his dating on the presence of a thin, discoid knife made of green jasper that is characteristic of a little-known population, traditionally called the Ténérian culture, that lived in the area some 5,000 years ago.
Today the Ténéré Desert, a California-size part of the Sahara that blankets much of Niger and is famous for its 100-mile-long sand dunes, is one of the driest places on earth and practically uninhabited.
But five millennia ago the environment there was much wetter, and Dr. Sereno thinks the sediments suggest that the settlement may have been on the shore of a lake.
''I found some catfish skulls, a bunch of them, and there was a little tail, and I'm blowing the sand off and then I run into the edge of a ceramic bowl that was around them,'' Dr. Sereno said. ''I was looking at a bowl of fossilized catfish. Someone in the middle of a meal abandoned this bowl, and it got fossilized.''
Dr. Sereno's team identified five distinct areas at the site, including two large burial places of more than 100 yards in diameter. Besides the skeletons and the jasper knife, they found several large grinding stones, harpoons and fishhooks made of bone, fingernail-size arrowheads in many colors, and jewelry, including a round pendant made of the fluted tooth of the hippopotamus and a necklace made of ostrich egg shell and stone beads.
Scattered across the site were fish and animal bones, including those of domesticated cattle. With the exception of a few items they plucked off the surface and have brought back to show archaeologists, the team did not disturb anything.
While the history of the powerful Egyptian civilization of the same era has been widely studied, the culture of the vast interior of central Africa has begun to attract attention only in the last few decades.
''There was a very rich and fascinating cultural manifestation around what is now the Ténéré desert but then was grassland and marshes,'' said Dr. Gifford-Gonzalez. ''We're not thinking one culture. We're thinking a network of people who interacted from the Sudanese Nile all the way across the Sahara.''
Indeed, the greenish stone used in some of the arrowheads is probably amazonite, which comes from several hundred miles away in the Tibesti Mountains of northeastern Chad, said Dr. Augustin F. C. Holl, an archaeologist at the University of Michigan and curator of West African archaeology at the Museum of Anthropology there.
The people who made these tools maintained herds of domesticated cattle, goats and sheep. But they did not grow crops; they harvested the abundant wild grains that grew along lakes and streams.
Dr. Holl said the vastness of the cemeteries suggests they may have been used over many centuries, and perhaps only during the dry months, when small groups gathered at seasonal lakes. In the rainy season, they would have taken their herds into the highlands, such as the Aïr Mountains of Central Niger, where many rock carvings have been found.
But Dr. Maga in Niger and Dr. Susan McIntosh, an archaeologist at Rice University in Houston who works in Mali, believe the settlement was probably permanent.
''They were clearly fishing part of the time, they had their cattle, they had their cereals, so this is looking like a pretty comprehensive economy,'' Dr. McIntosh said.
