Representative Anthony D. Weiner said yesterday that he had formed an exploratory committee for a potential run for mayor in 2005, the clearest sign yet that he may join what could be a crowded field of candidates hoping to unseat Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg.
Mr. Weiner, a Democrat who represents parts of Queens and Brooklyn, registered the committee with the New York City Board of Elections. The act paves the way for him to participate in the city's Campaign Finance Program
Already, Mr. Weiner has raised more than $2.3 million, but he did so under federal campaign finance rules, which differ from the city's. Under the city's program, he would be eligible to receive public matching funds for any new money he raises, at a ratio of $4 to $1 contributed in amounts of $250 or less.
Mr. Weiner said he had not yet decided whether he will definitely be a candidate. ''For now,'' he said, ''my intentions are to run for re-election to Congress, to help ensure that a Democrat gets elected to the White House in 2004, and then I'll take a hard look at the possibility of running for mayor.''
Mr. Weiner, 39, was a member of the City Council from Queens before being elected to Congress in 1998. He is believed to have a political base among voters outside Manhattan.
In discussing mayoral politics, Mr. Weiner said that ''it is imperative that the Democrats win back City Hall,'' adding, ''We have suffered too much at the hands of Albany and Washington from the Republicans.''
Several other Democratic officials have expressed interest in opposing Mr. Bloomberg, though only Charles Barron, the councilman from Brooklyn, has officially announced his intention. Democrats have suggested that the administration's policies, particularly the 18.5 percent property tax increase, have made the mayor especially vulnerable.
Other potential mayoral candidates include Council Speaker Gifford Miller, who has raised about $2.5 million for a possible campaign. Unlike Mr. Weiner, however, Mr. Miller has raised his money under the city's Campaign Finance Program and in small amounts, making more of the total eligible for matching funds.
Another potential candidate, William C. Thompson, the city comptroller, has raised $1.53 million, which could be used for either a mayoral or a re-election campaign.
Fernando Ferrer, the former Bronx borough president and a former mayoral candidate, has raised about $745,000 for a possible mayoral campaign. Mr. Ferrer began raising money in November, shortly after he announced that he had formed an exploratory committee.
Also, C. Virginia Fields, the Manhattan borough president, reported recently that she had raised slightly less than $650,000. Ms. Fields, too, has said that she was considering a run for mayor next year.
Correction:  January 29, 2004, Thursday  An article on Tuesday about Representative Anthony D. Weiner's announcement that he was forming an exploratory campaign committee for the 2005 mayoral election in New York misstated the location of the 48th City Council District, which he once represented. It was in Brooklyn, not Queens.
