There was a time when the Super Bowl was not a mega-event, a symbol of American excess or celebrated as a national holiday.
HBO's new documentary, ''The Wild Ride to Super Bowl I,'' which had its premiere last night, recounts how humble it was. There were 31,000 empty seats at the Los Angeles Coliseum; the bus to Green Bay's training camp in Santa Barbara, Calif., on the first media day (to see a cranky Coach Vince Lombardi) carried one reporter and a league public relations man; the pregame hoop-de-do featured two men in space-age power packs that flew them to the 50-yard line; and the broadcast was blacked out in the Los Angeles area.
But perhaps the most peculiar aspect of Green Bay's 35-10 victory over Kansas City was that it was carried by two networks, CBS and NBC. CBS was the National Football League's broadcaster and NBC the American Football League's. Each lobbied to to be the sole network to televise the first championship game between the formerly warring leagues, which had announced their merger several months before.
N.F.L. Commissioner Pete Rozelle ignored their pleas, and both carried the game, with different announcing teams, CBS's led by Ray Scott, NBC's by Curt Gowdy, and separate sideline reporters (CBS's Pat Summerall and NBC's Charlie Jones).
''It was probably the best idea at the time,'' said Sean McManus, the president of CBS Sports, who was 11 when the game was played. ''No one had any idea that the Super Bowl would grow into what it is. I don't know if the N.F.L. knew if there would be a third or a fourth Super Bowl, so why alienate a network?''
The two network compounds were separated by a fence after engineers got into a fight, Chet Simmons, the former No. 2 executive at NBC Sports, said yesterday in an interview. But NBC was a decidedly junior partner. ''For all we were given to do, we could have phoned it in,'' Simmons said. ''The N.F.L. had to have us there but did everything possible to keep us under heel.''
And Jones said by telephone that with CBS in charge, NBC wanted to sneak in a camera that would provide isolated close-ups, but it did not want its rival to know about it until game day. In those days, cameras were hard-to-miss behemoths.
''Harry Coyle decided we ought to try the 'X camera,' '' Jones said, referring to the NBC director. ''So they took it apart, and brought it into the production truck by putting parts in different people's pockets, and the plan was to put it together again inside the truck. If CBS had a regular shot of Bart Starr, we'd have a tight one. CBS wouldn't know where it came from. We worked on it for two or three days, but it never did work.''
Jones confessed to being behind a faux pas that would be equaled only by the infamous ''Heidi'' game the next season. He was interviewing Bob Hope near the end of halftime and was too awed to cut him off.
''They're counting down in my ear, and I stretched, maybe 40 seconds long,'' he said. ''NBC goes to a commercial, and by then, they're kicking off. In the CBS truck, after the kickoff, they rolled commercials and saw that I was still on. They saw that I was going long.''
NBC had missed the kickoff, which, as incredible as it sounds now, was redone. ''I was just shocked,'' Simmons said.
Summerall was asked by the CBS truck to ask Lombardi to kick off again. He refused.
''Whoa, wait a minute, that's not part of my job,'' he said in the HBO documentary.
Relations between the networks were never tested as they were in 1967, because each Super Bowl since has been televised by one network.
Today, a two-network setup would be ''ridiculous,'' McManus said. ''The money we pay for the N.F.L. is so that once every three years, you get the Super Bowl, and the biggest rating of the year and all the attention focused on your network.''
There is so much more sophisticated equipment and so many more people involved in a Super Bowl broadcast now that a dual broadcaster setup sounds like an invitation to Armageddon.
''There'd be dueling sideline reporters, like medieval jousting,'' David Hill, chairman of the Fox Sports Television Group, said.
''With all the cameras now, there'd be so many radio signals whipping around the stadium, it would probably sterilize most of the male population.''
And if CBS misses the second-half kickoff on Sunday? ''We'd show it in replay from every possible angle, apologize and explain what happened,'' McManus said. ''As a practical matter, if it were a touchback or a 15-yard runback, it wouldn't have that much effect.'' And if it were run back for a touchdown, ''your telecast would be remembered for that forever.''
TV SPORTS
