Despite the bitter cold and biting wind, Bruce Wechsler was one of the flock of New Hampshire voters who spent the last two days racing among speeches by Democratic candidates. He said he was hoping that, at the last moment, someone would ''inspire him.''
''Anybody-but-Bush is who I'm voting for,'' said Mr. Wechsler, a probation officer, clutching Edwards pamphlets and running down an icy sidewalk to a nearby Kerry event, adding that he hoped to catch Gen. Wesley K. Clark later. ''I'm trying to figure out who is most electable, so I'm doing serious shopping still.''
Mr. Wechsler's refrain was familiar. In interview after interview, Democratic and independent voters around the state in the last two days said beating President Bush was their No. 1 priority. The random interviews seem to confirm polls in Iowa, where voters said electability in November was one of their most important considerations. ''Anyone but Bush'' has become something of a mantra here.
Just hours before the Tuesday primary, voters were still trying to figure out who would be their most potent nominee. Officials of the campaigns, as well as pollsters and scholars, said there was a significant and lingering corps here who remained undecided or were open to changing their minds. The candidates were well aware of this uncertainty in the electorate. As they made their closing pitches on Monday, they sought to top one another over who was best prepared to take on Mr. Bush.
The latest Gallup poll of potential primary voters found that 32 percent were either undecided or said they might change their minds, despite having a current preference. While some polls say the figure is not so high, campaign events have been jammed not only with supporters of particular candidates, but also with perplexed voters in search of a potential president.
In dozens of interviews, many voters said their decision about who could win in November was complicated because the Democratic hopefuls had platforms that overlapped on significant issues. They said the upset victory of Senator John Kerry and second-place finish of Senator John Edwards in the Iowa caucuses last week -- as well as Howard Dean's poor showing -- had left even previously committed voters wondering what they should do.
''My heart still belongs to Howard Dean because of his passion, but my head says Kerry is the one who can get elected,'' said Pradipto Bagchi, 30, a financial analyst from Nashua, at a Kerry event. ''It hurts to vote this way, but I think George Bush has been a disaster, and if my cat had the best chance of winning the election, then I'd vote for my cat.''
David Burbach, a political scientist at M.I.T., who is a New Hampshire voter and was in an overflow crowd at an Edwards rally in Nashua, said, ''Everyone is cycling around because they all want to vote for someone who can win, but no one knows who that will be.
''Do you want the guy who looks good on TV? Then you want Edwards. The one with political experience? Then it's Kerry. Passion? Then you go for Dean. They all have pluses and they all have warts, so it's hard to know who's going to play strongest against Bush.''
In recent polls, Mr. Kerry has been the main beneficiary of the reshuffling, and Dr. Dean the primary victim. Indeed, at a huge rally in Manchester on Monday, some formerly committed Dean supporters spoke of newfound ambivalence.
Steve Stoddard, a 43-year-old waiter wearing a Dean sticker, said he had been impressed with Mr. Kerry since the Iowa caucuses and would probably shift his allegiance there.
Vartkes Tamzarian, a land developer who still has a ''Dean for President'' sign planted in his yard, said that the Iowa caucuses had raised questions about Dean's ''temperament'' and he was likely to vote for Mr. Edwards instead.
''I'm here to give Howard Dean once last chance to win me back,'' Mr. Tamzarian said. ''I'm seeing Edwards this evening. Then I'll decide.''
Democrats and independents alike can vote in the primary, and voters can declare their party affiliation when they arrive at the polls.
''Anecdotally, there are a lot of voters deciding at the last minute who they are going to vote for,'' Tait Sye, a spokesman for the Edwards campaign in New Hampshire, said on Monday evening. ''There are still a good number of people who are 'soft' voters, not totally committed to their candidate.''
In the interviews, almost all Democrats said they were far more confused than in the 2000 presidential primary, which pitted only two candidates against each other.
With seven candidates, they confessed, it was hard to do the homework needed to cast a vote.
''It's crunch time on Tuesday and there are so many of them,'' said Karen Holmes, who works in advertising and was at a bar in Manchester on Sunday night. ''I'm going online to check out Howard Dean and Wesley Clark tomorrow.''
Some had even skipped work to sort through their confusion, like Susan Barnard, a choreographer and nurse, who was attending Dean, Kerry and Clark events on Monday. ''This year there's so much more choice and also a strong feeling that the world is not doing so well these days,'' Ms. Barnard said. ''That is exciting, but it is also very hard to know what to do.''
At a Clark campaign stop at Avandi's Restaurant here, Bob Reese, a retired corporate executive who confessed to being undecided, was surrounded in his wooden booth by a chorus of Clark volunteers. ''I've seen Dean, Edwards, and Clark and I wish I could vote for them all,'' Mr. Reese said. ''There are some really good choices this year.''
Like many other voters who flocked to meetings in the last few days, Mr. Reese said he had hoped to get an impression of each candidate as a person.
After all, with most of the candidates' last-minute campaign stops lasting at most an hour, it was not a day for absorbing policy speeches.
Andy Bowers, an insurance executive at a Kerry speech in Nashua, said he had been ''trying to figure out the foreign policy differences'' between General Clark and Mr. Kerry, the two candidates he was considering. He added that having ''a good feel about the candidate'' and the ''sense that he was genuine'' was also very important.
But in the end, most voters said that the inscrutable question of ''who can beat Bush?'' would hold sway. ''Usually people in New Hampshire have an emotional attachment to candidates, but this year they are being more pragmatic,'' said Paul Vonck, an engineer from Nashua who is supporting Mr. Kerry but was attending an Edwards speech just to make sure. ''Bush has such a strong machine and so much money, that the real question is who can beat him?''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: VOTERS
