THE nation's two biggest tax preparation services are brawling for customers again as the April 15 filing deadline looms.
Jackson Hewitt, No. 2 in the category, has prepared its most aggressive advertising to date, with a $15 million to $20 million campaign that uses humor intended to convey speed and expertise.
Executives there said their biggest target was the 50 million taxpayers who file on their own, with software like TurboTax, or use accountants. But its campaign inevitably is bumping up against new commercials from H&amp;R Block, the top tax preparation service.
And on Sunday, H&amp;R Block will step up its own campaign with a celebrity-driven spot during the Super Bowl.
The vigorous marketing reflects the short window of time when consumers are thinking about taxes, as H&amp;R Block seeks recognition as a year-round financial adviser and Jackson Hewitt tries to build on its growth. Jackson Hewitt, part of the Cendant Corporation, has expanded from 15 offices in 1986 to nearly 5,000 today. By comparison, H&amp;R Block has 9,946 offices in the United States, the company said.
Brand experts said both companies would benefit from recent changes to the tax code, since changes always intimidate some taxpayers, but they differed on the idea of associating humor with taxes.
As in the past, Jackson Hewitt is dividing the tax season in two to aim at filers with different priorities -- those who act early and generally expect a refund, and those who wait as long as possible and usually owe money.
The first round of commercials emphasizes speed. ''There is a group of people who literally want to get their tax refunds as fast as they can get them,'' said Michael Lister, chief executive and president at Jackson Hewitt, which is based in Parsippany, N.J.
One spot for that audience shows a man driving a woman in labor, presumably to the hospital, and urging her to breathe. ''Hold on,'' he tells her. ''We're almost there.'' When he stops, leaves his passenger in the car and returns moments later, it becomes clear he has stopped at Jackson Hewitt on the way. ''I got the check,'' he says. ''Told you they were fast.''
As April 15 approaches, the Jackson Hewitt campaign will segue into spots intended to drive home its expertise.
The second set of commercials emphasizes obscure deductions to make the point that Jackson Hewitt knows the code better than consumers. One spot opens on a man and a woman sharing martinis as he says, ''You are the most beautiful woman in the world.''
Then a door opens off-camera and the man's wife calls, ''Honey, I'm home!'' And the kicker is: alimony is tax deductible.
Even taxpayers who have filed without help for years will seek assistance sometimes, particularly after major revisions to the tax code, Mr. Lister said. ''While they may be comfortable doing their own return, once something changes they tend to seek out professional help,'' he said.
More than funny, the spots are direct, said Ellis Verdi, president at DeVito/Verdi in New York, which created the campaign. ''The bottom line is that there's a need to get your money now and not make a mistake,'' Mr. Verdi said. ''Those are the two truths in this business that consumers see.''
The humor drew mixed responses from branding consultants.
''I don't think taxes are too funny,'' said Alan Siegel, chairman and chief executive at Siegel &amp; Gale in New York. ''They play an important role in people's lives. The fact that you have to go to a tax preparer in the first place is a sad commentary that intelligent people don't have the confidence to prepare their own returns.''
Steven Gilliatt, president at G2 Worldwide in New York, said that humor can be successful but presents challenges as well, as in getting consumers to remember not just the punch line but the sponsor, too. Some consumers might not consider jokes relevant to ''a fairly serious problem for many people, which is filing their taxes on time and properly,'' he said.
But others said Jackson Hewitt, which cannot match the ad spending of H&amp;R Block, had to cut through the clutter somehow. While acknowledging the pitfalls of relying too heavily on humor, one added, joking about taxes is as old as taxes themselves.
''The number of jokes about taxes is probably second only to those on mothers-in-law,'' said Allen Adamson, managing director at Landor in New York.
The H&amp;R Block commercials that now seem to be saturating television hit funny notes but take a more subdued overall approach. ''We call it 'the advocate' campaign,'' said Karl Ploeger, vice president for creative and media services at H&amp;R Block in Kansas City, Mo. ''It features our tax professionals as spokespersons for the company and the brand.''
In the ads, which were created by Campbell Mithun in Minneapolis, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, actors speak to the camera about how they have helped clients, often going well beyond tax preparation. That reflects the expanding services and expectations at H&amp;R Block, which last year earned a profit in the second quarter -- that is, after the bulk of tax season has passed -- for the first time in its history.
''The stories range from talking about helping a client get into their first house or save for retirement to discussing the tax code changes,'' Mr. Ploeger said.
But there are flashes of humor. One spot shows a tax preparer who says he loves puzzles and views tax filings as such. As the spot concludes, he wonders if anyone knows a five-letter word for ''boomerang.'' (The answer is ''kylie,'' Mr. Ploeger said.)
And the company will take a turn mining for laughs during the first quarter of the Super Bowl, using a commercial starring Willie Nelson, the singer who racked up a sizable debt to the Internal Revenue Service. In the commercial, which will be shown for the first time Sunday, Mr. Nelson appears to be hawking a ''Willie Nelson Advice Doll,'' which gives decidedly uninformed tax advice.
One taxpayer says, ''401(k)? I thought a bass boat was a better investment -- and Willie agreed!''
The Willie doll adds, ''I'm down with it.''
Humor works for the Super Bowl, which many people watch for much broader entertainment than the football game itself, Mr. Ploeger said. ''That's like no other environment,'' he said.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
