Exit Carrie Fisher, Pursued by Furies
CARRIE FISHER -- daughter of DEBBIE REYNOLDS and EDDIE FISHER, Princess Leia of ''Star Wars'' and Hollywood author -- is nothing if not entertaining.
It was standing room only last week at the Barnes &amp; Noble near Lincoln Center for Ms. Fisher's only New York book signing for ''The Best Awful,'' the sequel to her best-selling ''Postcards From the Edge.''
It was a movie-premiere atmosphere. A clamor of paparazzi massed, and Ms. Fisher would twirl, lift the book, smile, twirl, lift the book, smile. Finally, Ms. Fisher declared, ''If I wasn't an alcoholic already, that would have done it.''
Ms. Fisher specializes in roman à clef. She had a child with BRYAN LOURD, a Hollywood agent, who later left her for a man. She read aloud from a chapter: ''The Man That Got The Man That Got Away.''
Suzanne Vale, the book's heroine, and the father of her child are fighting. He says he is leaving because Suzanne refused to take her ''bipolar medication'' and kept him up all night with talk. Besides, he says, Suzanne helped turn him gay by ''taking all that codeine again.'' To which Suzanne, wisecracking through her tears, replies: ''Oh, I'm sorry -- I hadn't read that part of the warning on the label! I thought it said heavy machinery, not homosexuality!''
There is much audience laughter, but Ms. Fisher ends the reading by wiping away tears.
Then someone in the audience asked what ALEC BALDWIN was like. Ms. Fisher, who had interviewed Mr. Baldwin on the Oxygen network, said he was adorable and someone else shouted that Ms. Fisher was adorable.
''But, you know, I turn men gay,'' she said. ''I don't think I turned Alec gay. But it is my super power.'' The audience roared.
Then Ms. Fisher signed books. MERYL STREEP, who played Suzanne Vale in the film version of ''Postcards from the Edge,'' was sitting in the back. As Ms. Fisher signed her last autograph, SALMAN RUSHDIE slipped into the room and greeted Ms. Fisher.
At last, Ms. Streep, Mr. Rushdie, and Ms. Fisher left the bookstore for Café des Artistes. But trailing them through the biting cold was a band of acolytes -- most for Ms. Fisher, a few for Ms. Streep. Through the restaurant's frosted windows the fans squinted while the trio ate.
Enter Tony Kushner, With a Gefilte Fish Joke
It was a capacity crowd the other night at the Jewish Community Center on the Upper West Side. Admirers gathered to hear WENDY WASSERSTEIN and TONY KUSHNER talk about Jewish culture.
On Sunday, the HBO series based on Mr. Kushner's ''Angels in America'' won the Golden Globe for best television mini-series.
Ms. Wasserstein said her parents met long ago at the lately departed Ratner's dairy restaurant on the Lower East Side. As a child, she went to the Yeshiva of Flatbush, but wasn't altogether observant. She would forgo Saturday services for dance lessons. Her parents were similarly inexact. Her mother served hamburgers, string beans and -- titters from the audience -- butter sauce, a kosher no-no.
''I want to borrow your family,'' said Mr. Kushner. He said the Wassersteins' rendezvous with destiny reminded him of a gefilte-fish-at-Ratner's joke. First, however, Mr. Kushner talked about Jewish allusions in ''Angels,'' and about feeling Jewish despite being agnostic. ''Jews are smart about death,'' Mr. Kushner said, ''about shivah and what it means. It's the best template. When I mourn, I say Kaddish.''
But the gefilte fish joke, our Boldface correspondent asked?
Oh, Mr. Kushner said, man goes to Ratner's and orders gefilte fish, but man is startled when the fish stands up and pleads, ''Please don't eat me!'' Man bolts from Ratner's and runs for blocks, shocked to his bones.
But man craves gefilte fish, Mr. Kushner continues. So weeks later, he returns to Ratner's, orders the fish. Fish stands up, man bolts from Ratner's.
Years pass, man still craves gefilte fish, only this time he avoids Ratner's and goes all the way to the Bronx, to a place on the Grand Concourse.
Man orders and fish stands up, again. But this time the fish says, ''So, I see you never stopped eating gefilte fish!''
with Paula Schwartz and Rosalie R. Radomsky
Boldface Names
