Lionel Tate, the teenager sentenced to life in prison for killing a playmate when he was 12, was released to his mother on Monday, four days short of his 17th birthday.
Judge Joel T. Lazarus of Broward County Circuit Court ordered Lionel freed without bail in a bond hearing at the county courthouse, after Lionel's lawyer said the teenager posed no risk of flight or danger.
The release of Lionel, whose case became a central issue in the debate over trying juveniles as adults, came after an appeals court panel threw out his conviction for first-degree murder last month, on grounds that his competency had not been properly evaluated before his trial in 2001.
Rather than go through another trial, state prosecutors last month offered Lionel a plea deal that would require him to serve just three years in a juvenile prison, then be placed under house arrest for a year and on probation for 10. Lionel, who rejected an identical offer before his trial, accepted it this time, having already served most of the prison time the deal required.
At Monday's bond hearing, Lionel, looking nervous and thin, stared at the floor until his mother, Kathleen Grossett-Tate, came to hug him afterward. Only then did he smile broadly, flinging his arms around her. Hours later, mother and son left the county jail together, pausing briefly while Lionel's appeals lawyer addressed reporters, and then heading home, where the lawyer, Richard Rosenbaum, said a party with family and friends awaited.
''Lionel is back in his mom's arms again,'' Mr. Rosenbaum said. ''For now, Lionel wants to go home, he wants to feel his pillow, he wants to sleep in his own bed, and his mom cooked to make him his favorite meal tonight.''
On Thursday, Lionel will appear in court to enter a formal plea of guilty to second-degree murder. In the meantime, Mr. Rosenbaum said, he will undergo a psychological evaluation to ensure he understands the proceedings.
In addition to the house arrest and probation, the plea deal requires Lionel to undergo counseling and volunteer 1,000 hours of community service. He has taken classes throughout his prison time, at the maximum-security Okeechobee juvenile jail, but his lawyers would not reveal his future education plans.
Lionel was 12 in July 1999, when Tiffany Eunick, a 6-year-old playmate, died of injuries sustained while she was visiting Lionel's home in Pembroke Park, a suburb of Fort Lauderdale. Two years later, a jury convicted him of kicking, slamming and stomping Tiffany to death that day as his mother slept upstairs.
The boy's original lawyers said he had accidentally killed Tiffany while play wrestling. His appeals lawyers later said he had mistakenly leaped on her while bounding down a staircase.
Experts on juvenile justice said at the time that they could not recall a younger American receiving a life sentence without parole. Lionel's case drew international attention to a section of Florida law that requires first-degree murder convictions to carry such a sentence regardless of the defendant's age.
In another highly publicized case involving a Florida juvenile, Nathaniel Brazill of West Palm Beach was convicted of second-degree murder and sentenced to 28 years in prison in 2001 for shooting his teacher when he was 13.
In a third prominent case, Derek and Alex King of Pensacola were convicted of second-degree murder in 2002 for bludgeoning their father to death with a baseball bat in 2001, when they were 13 and 12. The verdict was overturned when a judge found that their rights to a fair trial had been violated when the prosecutor separately tried a friend of their family for the same crime.
In a second trial, the King brothers pleaded guilty to third-degree murder. Alex King is serving seven years and Derek King is serving eight.
Tiffany Eunick's mother, Deweese Eunick-Paul, attended Lionel's hearing on Monday with Ken Padowitz, the original prosecutor in the case. Both said afterward that they never thought Lionel deserved a life sentence, but that they hoped he would accept full responsibility for Tiffany's death.
''This case is about a little 6-year-old first-grade girl who was brutally murdered,'' Mr. Padowitz said outside the courthouse. ''It is not about the celebration of freedom for Lionel Tate. Lionel Tate is given a second bite of the apple, a second chance that Tiffany never received.''
Ms. Eunick-Paul, who signed off on the new plea arrangement, said it bothered her that Lionel's supporters, including his mother, continue to maintain that Tiffany's death was an accident.
''For some reason they are still in a dreamland; they're calling it an accident,'' she said. ''We just wanted Lionel to step up and say, 'Look, I have done something wrong here.' ''
Outside the jail, Lionel stared impassively, smiling only when his lawyer mentioned the home-cooked meal awaiting him. Mr. Rosenbaum, who said Lionel could not speak publicly yet, said Lionel and his mother had apologized to Ms. Eunick-Paul.
In her only comments before taking Lionel home, Ms. Grossett-Tate thanked God and asked that Lionel's supporters ''continue praying for us because we're going to need it.''
