Medical experts warn that as hypothermia sets in, brain function deteriorates. Hence Ercia Martinez's explanation for why she was wandering the aisles of the Old Navy store on 33rd Street in Midtown yesterday sorting through shorts and light cotton tops.
''I'm trying to get ready for the winter,'' she said.
Researchers have also noted that in the final stages of hypothermia a phenomenon they call ''paradoxical undressing'' sets in, in which the victim irrationally sheds layers of clothing. But it turned out that Ms. Martinez, 20, a college student, was not at death's door. She had merely misspoken. ''I meant the summer,'' she said.
Still, as a drippy-nosed city endured its 13th consecutive day of freezing-or-below temperatures yesterday (the high in Central Park as of 7:30 p.m. was 22 degrees), signs of delirium were multiplying.
The lost-and-found manager at Grand Central Terminal, Mike Nolan, reported that commuters were losing their winter accessories in record numbers. ''We took 75 or 80 calls today about hats and gloves and scarves,'' he said, standing in front of overflowing boxes labeled ''December -- black fleece and leather gloves only'' and ''January -- hats.''
''On a normal day, we get 30 winter calls,'' he said.
Despite appearances, however, this did not seem to be a case of paradoxical undressing either. Linda Kogin, who came into the office in search of her hat, explained that she had simply fallen asleep on the 7:52 from Yonkers yesterday morning and did not realize the hat had slipped off till she left the train.
Ms. Kogin, 55, was, in fact, almost deliriously happy to find her hat in one of Mr. Nolan's boxes. ''It's my Land's End $29.98 fleece hat!'' she cried.
At Gonzalez y Gonzalez, a Mexican restaurant on lower Broadway, Ana Harris, the general manager, said that some ill-advised patrons tried to use hot sauce as a sort of topical antifreeze. ''These guys here ordered extra habanero sauce on their food,'' she said, pointing to a couple of businessmen. ''The thing they forget is that dry lips from the outside don't mix well with hot sauce.''
Of course, when the definition of sensible behavior expands to include walking around with baked potatoes in your pockets, thrusting your hands into the armpits of strangers and hanging out by dryer vents inhaling the warm Downy-scented air, it becomes hard to say what makes sense.
Wrapping yourself in an insulating layer of mud like a hibernating turtle definitely makes sense. And Michelle Weatherwax, a reservationist at the Azure Day Spa in Chelsea, said that there had been an increase in requests for the self-heating mud wrap involving thermal blankets. ''Generally we're doing a lot of scrubs and warm wraps right now,'' she said, ''and a lot of hot stone massages and massages in general.''
Donna Evans, 47, a visual artist who lives in Windsor Terrace, Brooklyn, said the extended cold has forced her to confront her excess of material possessions. ''When I see some clutter that bothers me, I can't run away outdoors,'' she said. ''I'm willing to spend the day sorting through papers.''
Deborah Ross's wildlife drawing class at the School of Visual Arts was taking advantage of the cold-suppressed turnout at the Prospect Park Wildlife Center in Brooklyn to enjoy quality time with their subjects.
''In the summer there's so many people around that the animals become numb to you,'' she said inside the ''Animals In Our Lives'' building as crickets chirped incongruously in the background. ''In the winter they're happy to see you. The tigers are very approachable in the cold -- they engage you, they'll look in your eyes. In the summer they're usually ignoring you.''
One of Ms. Ross's students, Nelson Diaz, 20, had a brilliant red lory, a parakeet-like bird, all to himself. As he drew, the bird followed the motion of his arm through the glass, feinting at him. ''I've never been to the zoo when it's this empty,'' Mr. Diaz said. ''It's almost like you're having an interview with them.''
While today is expected to bring half a foot of snow or more, there is a silver lining of sorts. The high temperature could hit 28 degrees, said Geoff Cornish, a forecaster at Pennsylvania State University, which means that, barring winds over 10 miles an hour, the Real Feel temperature could rocket into the double digits.
''It'll feel fairly mild after what we've been through,'' Mr. Cornish said.
Correction:  January 28, 2004, Wednesday  An article yesterday about the cold weather in the New York region misstated the number of days on which temperatures had been freezing or below. It was 7 of the previous 8 days, not 13 consecutive days.
