For an illustration of how difficult it is to distinguish between George W. Bush the president and George W. Bush the candidate for re-election, consider the trip that he, or they, made here on Monday.
President Bush, who says he will have time later in the year for politics, stopped in at the Baptist Health Medical Center to talk about an issue that he said was of national concern: the rising number of lawsuits filed against doctors and the negative effect the trend is having on the cost, quality and availability of health care.
''Rising health care costs affect all Americans,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Yet one of the main cost drivers, that has nothing to do with what happens in an operating room or a waiting room, happen in the courtroom. One of the reasons people are finding their premiums are up, and it's hard to find a doc these days, is because frivolous and junk lawsuits are threatening medicine across the country.''
Mr. Bush regularly mixes politics and official business by combining trips to spotlight issues that are high on his agenda with fund-raisers for his re-election campaign. But this trip was officially all about presidential business. There was no fund-raiser, no campaign-style rally, no mention of the Democratic candidates and their frenzied, last-minute electioneering in New Hampshire.
Candidate Bush, however, was no doubt aware he was in a state that he brought into the Republican column in the 2000 election, a state that was home to his Democratic predecessor, Bill Clinton, and is home to a potential Democratic challenger, Gen. Wesley K. Clark.
In discussing the lawsuits, he took a thinly veiled swipe at a group that provides considerable support to Democrats: trial lawyers. He did not name names, but another Democratic candidate, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, was a successful trial lawyer before going into politics.
''We're doing the right thing by telling people the truth, and that is the health care system looks like a giant lottery,'' Mr. Bush said. ''That's what it looks like these days because of these lawsuits. And somehow, the trial lawyers always hold the winning ticket. Lawyers walk away with up to 40 percent -- 40 percent -- of every settlement and verdict, which adds up to billions of costs, billions of unnecessary costs.''
Mr. Bush was in Arkansas for only a few hours, making it out of Washington despite a snowstorm and rushing to get back before the threat of icy conditions could disrupt his plans. In giving a speech on medical malpractice and liability costs, he highlighted one of the issues he mentions most frequently in his travels around the country. Along with his more general call for limits on lawsuit awards against businesses, it is an issue that regularly wins loud applause from his audiences, as it did Monday before doctors, nurses and other hospital employees.
Before the speech, Mr. Bush met with a group of seven doctors, nurses and patients to hear stories that, he said, would help him ''personalize'' the points he planned to make in his speeches, said the pool reporter who was let into the session.
Dr. John Wilson, an orthopedist, told the president that he had not been sued in three decades of caring for patients in the Arkansas Delta, a rural region he visited regularly from his main practice in Little Rock. Then, Dr. Wilson said, he was sued three times in the last four years. All of the suits, he said, were frivolous and were dropped or dismissed. But they resulted in a huge increase in his malpractice insurance premiums, leading him to give up practicing in the Delta, Dr. Wilson said. Now his patients have to drive more than two hours to see him.
''I love your story,'' Mr. Bush told him. ''I'll make sure I don't embellish it.''
