Toyota knocked the Ford Motor Company from its longtime position as the world's second-largest automaker last year, according to Toyota's final sales results, which were released on Monday. Now all that stands between Toyota and first place is General Motors, setting up a challenge to America's dominance over the global auto industry that has been years in the making.
Executives at Toyota have repeatedly protested that selling more vehicles than Ford or G.M. is not their goal, in and of itself.
''The company does not assign a whole lot of importance to this,'' said Mike Michaels, a spokesman for Toyota's North American affiliate. ''No parties, no Champagne corks.''
But Toyota also would not mind selling more vehicles. In fact, the company has said its goal is to have a global market share of 15 percent by the end of the decade, a level that G.M. maintained in 2002 and more than any single automaker held last year.
''One of the things that could shape the industry is a biaxial competition, where you see Toyota and General Motors really going head to head in the marketplace big time,'' said David Cole, president of the Center for Automotive Research, a consulting group in Ann Arbor, Mich.
''The question then is, what does the fallout of that create? Once you get two big guys really going at it, what happens in the space around them?''
Of late, G.M. has led a price war in Detroit because it appears better able than Ford or Chrysler to maintain profits while offering steep discounts. Toyota, by contrast, has been far more profitable despite lower incentives.
Earlier this month, at the North American International Auto Show here, the two companies appeared to be talking the loudest about entering each other's traditional areas of strength. Toyota introduced a big new prototype pickup truck that is comparable to the largest offerings of Detroit and also the new Nissan Titan pickup.
And G.M., which in the past has highlighted its sport utility vehicles, was showing off a new manufacturing system to efficiently build small cars, an area of strength for Asian manufacturers.
''Toyota has learned the mastery of using economies of scale well,'' said Mr. Cole, adding that G.M. -- which makes no secret of emulating Toyota's production system -- was catching up the fastest among the Big Three traditional domestic automakers.
''Part of it is having a world portfolio of all the stuff you've got and putting those together so you use high-volume parts in low-volume vehicles,'' he said.
To financial analysts, the number that really matters is not sales volume, but profit, because profitability drives growth. And on that score, Toyota is well ahead of G.M. and Ford. In fact, in earnings reports last week, neither G.M. nor Ford reported a net profit from their automotive operations. Both companies make their money by acting like banks, in large part by lending money to car buyers.
William Clay Ford Jr., the chairman of Ford, who took over more than two years ago as chief executive, said he was focused on returning a company that lost $5.5 billion in 2001 to financial health. Last week, the company reported its first annual profit since 2000, though a slim one.
''Size isn't necessarily an indication of success,'' said Mr. Ford, according to a transcript of remarks made at a press briefing last month. ''If we attend to the quality, the customer satisfaction and the product excellence, then I think size just starts to take care of itself.''
Toyota has outmaneuvered G.M. and Ford over the last couple decades for a variety of reasons. Pension and health care costs have sapped the domestic manufacturers, and a weak yen has helped Japanese companies. Then there is Toyota's manufacturing system, which is the envy of the industry. Linked to its manufacturing efficiencies is the high quality of its vehicles and its reputation.
Putting it simply, ''Toyota has done a better job than the rest of the industry of putting product on the road in all regions of the world that people want to buy,'' said Stephen Girsky, an auto analyst at Morgan Stanley.
By the numbers, last year, G.M., which includes brands like Chevrolet, Pontiac, Cadillac and Saab, sold 8.6 billion cars and trucks worldwide, down from 8.63 billion in 2002, and its market share fell to 14.7 percent from 15 percent.
Toyota, which includes Lexus in the United States, sold 6.78 million vehicles, up from 6.17 million in 2002. Ford sold 6.72 million vehicles, down from 6.97 million in 2002.
Of note, Toyota's numbers include Daihatsu and Hino, two subsidiaries more than half owned by Toyota. Ford's numbers do not include Mazda, which it effectively controls, though it owns about a third of the company. If Mazda were added in, Ford would still be on top.
This does not, it should be said, mean the end of the Big Three domestic automakers: G.M., Ford and the Chrysler Group division of DaimlerChrysler. They still exist as the three largest automakers in the United States. But another milestone remains, and is far closer, because Toyota is closing fast on Chrysler in the United States.
Correction:  January 28, 2004, Wednesday  An article in Business Day yesterday about Toyota's surpassing of Ford Motor to become the world's second-largest automaker, behind General Motors, misstated G.M.'s global vehicle sales. For 2003 they were 8.6 million, not billion. That compared with 8.63 million in 2002, not billion.
