He's a Hollywood star. Steven Spielberg requests him by name. But he is virtually unknown outside the film industry. He is Stefen Fangmeier, a 13-year visual-effects master at George Lucas's Industrial Light and Magic (ILM), and he was instrumental in creating the groundbreaking morphing cyborg in ''Terminator 2: Judgment Day,'' the dinosaurs in ''Jurassic Park,'' the tornado in ''Twister,'' the ghosts in ''Casper'' and the towering wall of water in ''The Perfect Storm.''
Now he is hoping for his third Oscar nomination as the leader of a special-effects team for his work in ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World.''
The competition includes other ILM favorites, ''Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl,'' ''The Hulk'' and ''Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines,'' as well as Weta Digital's ''Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' and films led, respectively, by the special-effects supervisors Mike Fink (''X-Men 2'') and Scott Farrar (''Peter Pan'').
Those were the films vying in a special-effects bake-off on Wednesday in which each showed a 15-minute reel to the 220 members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences' visual effects award committee, which had convened to narrow the nominating field. Curiously, at a time when big-budget effects movies dominate theaters around the world, Oscar rules dictate that only three films may vie for the visual-effects award, which will be given at the Academy Awards ceremony on Feb. 29.
In the last decade studio budgets for special effects have exploded. ''Effects budgets have gone from $5 million a movie to $50 million,'' said Jim Morris, president of Lucas Digital, ILM's parent company.
''It's now not uncommon for movies to cost $150 million, with effects accounting for a third of that budget. There's barely any movie made today that doesn't have digital clean-up, matte painting, wire removal or fixing something out of place, like bags under the eyes on a bad day.''
The cost increases result largely from the growing sophistication of special effects. What was state of the art only a few years ago has already been superseded, challenging effects houses to keep up and enticing earlier-generation directors to jump back in. One is James Cameron, who established a new standard for effects in 1997 with ''Titanic.'' He is now planning to direct a major feature for the first time in six years, saying his return was inspired by Peter Jackson's ''Lord of the Rings'' trilogy. His new project will be an effects-driven 3D high-definition digital film, about which he is saying no more.
Bob Hoffman, a vice president at Technicolor Entertainment Services, a leading postproduction company, also credits Mr. Jackson with throwing down the gauntlet to the next generation of special-effects wizards. ''History has shown that as the bar gets raised every three or four years, other filmmakers take the challenge and will pursue the goal of raising the bar yet again,'' Mr. Hoffman said.
For studios shopping for a special-effects partner, ILM is top of the line and expensive. Over 26 years it has worked on 200 movies, including 14 visual-effects Oscar winners. ILM commands a 40 percent to 50 percent share of the effects market, which Mr. Morris estimates at some $500 million a year. (Its biggest competitors are Digital Domain and Sony Imageworks.) The visual-effects business itself runs on slim profit margins.
''Visual-effects work is labor intensive and talent based,'' Mr. Fangmeier said. ''People come to us because we have a good reputation for pulling things off.''
Mr. Fangmeier has had a large hand in that reputation. ''A-list visual-effects guys are make or break for a big effects movie,'' said Lorenzo DiBoniventura, who oversaw production of ''The Perfect Storm'' for Warner Brothers. ''Some are good at executing, some are good at innovating. Stefen Fangmeier is that rare breed of creative talent who can innovate and execute. Sometimes they're delivering the lead of the movie. With 'The Perfect Storm,' if the wave doesn't work, the movie doesn't work. We sold 'Perfect Storm' on the wave and 'Twister' on the tornado.''
Mr. Fangmeier, 43, who was born in El Paso, the son of an officer in the German Air Force, studied computer technology at California State University at Dominguez Hills before entering the movie business as a computer systems programmer and image processor. He made his name in 2000 on ''The Perfect Storm'' by using particle theory to manipulate computer-graphic water molecules to form huge ocean swells -- complete with whitecaps, foam, spray, rain and lightning -- and a hapless fishing boat desperately trying to scale a mountain of water. Until then ''Waterworld'' and ''Titanic'' had deployed the most advanced digital water but never crashing waves.
''Stefen turned computer-graphic water into a tool the director could use to tell his story,'' Mr. Morris said.
Many less experienced effects houses are forced out of business or, like Sony Imageworks, run by a studio that can afford to absorb losses. On ''Master and Commander,'' 20th Century Fox initially chose not to hire ILM. But as often happens, ILM was brought in to perform what the industry calls ''a 911.'' Even with that emergency help, the film's release date was pushed back to November from June because of the special-effects delays.
Mr. Fangmeier arrived in midproduction to take over the lead from Asylum Visual Effects, a smaller house that had worked on Mr. Spielberg's ''A.I.'' and ''Minority Report,'' among other movies. Mr. Fangmeier said Asylum was overwhelmed by the scale of the production. ''It was my first experience with a 911 situation,'' he said. ''It was really stressful. Asylum didn't want anyone coming in and taking control away.''
Nathan McGuinness, who owns Asylum, said, ''We could have done the whole job, but the studio was being safe.''
ILM made sure that all the elements in the more than 700 effects shots -- miniatures, reproductions, rigging, water, clouds, sky, cannon fire, smoke, falling mast -- blended seamlessly and invisibly to give the appearance of reality. The harshest critic of photorealism is the human eye, which is trained to detect anything that looks wrong. The director Peter Weir's attention to detail and authenticity demanded that the invisible effects pass muster in the real world.
In one scene two ships are chasing each other and exchanging cannon fire on a storm-tossed sea. One ship, the Surprise, was a reproduction rotating in the same water tank in Baja, Mexico, that was used for the ship in ''Titanic.'' The other sailing vessel in ''Master and Commander,'' the French Acheron, existed only as a small-scale model and on computer screens in postproduction. For the final battle's hand-to-hand combat, only a bit of deck was built on the set.
''I tend to do more reality-based things like 'Saving Private Ryan,' '' Mr. Fangmeier said. '' 'Master and Commander' is about authenticity. Weir takes you to that time, puts you in that ship, with those people. The last thing you want the audience to think about is visual effects. You have to be restrained and stay in that reality. Your hands are tied.''
Though his livelihood depends on special-effects shots, Mr. Fangmeier worries about a trend toward cramming every movie with them, he said. (In 2003 at least nine movies boasted 450 or more such shots.) Less is more, he says.
''There's a lot of excess going on,'' he said. ''It puts too much burden on the films, makes them too expensive, puts more demand on them to make their money back and cater to the lowest common denominator.''
He may see that principled stand put to the test. Mr. Cameron hasn't yet announced who will create the special effects for his planned 3D movie. But people in the field say chances are awfully good that it will be ILM, and Stefen Fangmeier.
