It caused a diplomatic tiff. The leaders of Japan and South Korea growled at each other. Even North Korea's propaganda guns unleashed a salvo.
The issue was a first day of issue, for four South Korean stamps showing flowers and seagulls. The series, ''Nature of Tokdo,'' included a painting of a lonely rocky gray island, topped with vegetation like a green toupee.
The problem is that South Korea's Tokdo is Japan's Takeshima.
Just as that volcanic islet is the visible peak of an underwater mountain, this philatelic tempest hints at a mountain of old hostility between South Korea and Japan. These ancient antagonisms are submerged under the placid waters of visa-free travel, free-trade talks, World Cup soccer liaisons, and Toyotas cruising the streets of Seoul and Hyundais in Tokyo.
South Koreans started to line up outside post offices at dawn on Jan. 16 to buy their ration of one sheet of 16 stamps, of which 2.2 million were printed. The post offices' supplies sold out in three hours. Within days, sheets of the stamps, with a total face value of $2.56, were selling on Yahoo Korea's auction site for $39.
''Tokdo is the territory of Korea, and this was a good way to let that fact be known,'' said Kim Tae Kyun, a 31-year-old graduate student.
The stamps are priced to pay domestic postage rates but can be used on all letters, and while Japan Post said it would honor the stamps, Japanese officials said the issue violates the cooperative spirit of the Universal Postal Union.
For half a century, South Korea has maintained a wharf and a coast guard unit on the 56-acre island, one-fifteenth the size of Central Park. South Korea has about 3,400 islands.
But Japanese school children learn that Takeshima is Japanese. Taro Aso, Japan's minister who directs the post office, has proposed that Japan counterattack with a ''Takeshima stamp.''
The island, roughly midway between Japan and South Korea, represents the intersection of South Korea's deep sense of victimization at the hands of Japan, and Japan's equally deep attachment to its island extremities. This attachment also regularly strains relations with Russia and China.
''Contrary to popular opinion, Japan is actually a large country,'' Yoichi Funabashi, foreign affairs columnist for Asahi Shimbun, wrote on Jan. 14 in a series of articles on Japan's far flung islands. He noted that the islands give Japan territorial and economic rights over waters 12 times the area of its landmass.
The next day, Japanese Coast Guard patrol boats intercepted two Chinese boats that were within nine miles of Japan's southernmost islands, the Senkakus. The boats, carrying Chinese nationalists, displayed banners reading, ''Japanese get out!''
The Japanese Coast Guard shooed away the Chinese, blasting one boat with a water cannon and injuring one Chinese crew member. It was the third attempt in seven months by Chinese to land on this uninhabited island group, 90 miles northeast of Taiwan, which they call the Diaoyus.
''Japan is a very small country with a large population, so they are more greedy about territory,'' said Shin Yong Ha, a history professor at Seoul National University and leader of the Tokdo Academic Society. He said in an interview that South Korea should incorporate the rich squid, crab and mackerel fishing grounds around Tokdo into its exclusive economic zone.
Rich fisheries and dreams of offshore oil and gas discoveries strengthen Japan's resolve to defend the islands. Japan imports all its oil, and fish is a pillar of the national diet.
To the north, Japan has never signed a World War II peace treaty with Russia, because Russia occupies the four southernmost islands of the Kurile chain, which Japan claims. Although Japan desperately wants Siberian oil and gas, it does not drop its demands.
Last week, in a speech to Parliament, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi once again tied ''conclusion of a peace treaty'' with Russia to the return ''of the four Northern Islands, which are an integral part of Japan's sovereign territory.''
Quietly, Japan is reshaping its military, shifting from tanks and artillery to lighter, more mobile units. Some are being formed to operate off a new helicopter carrier ship.
''Japan's new self-defense vision is to protect its sea lanes, its islands, the Senkakus,'' an American diplomat in Tokyo said in an interview.
In South Korea's view, Japan's claim to Tokdo is simply the latest chapter in five centuries of military aggression.
On the surface, relations between the old adversaries have never been better. On Jan. 1, South Korea dropped its last restrictions on cultural imports from Japan, a hangover from the end of Japanese colonialism here in 1945. Now Japan is offering to allow some South Korean tourists to visit Japan next year without visas. Later this year, both countries are to start talks for a trade pact, and Honda and Nissan are to start selling cars here.
But the stamps have unleashed a flood of nationalist venom in South Korean Internet chat rooms. In one milder comment, one man referred to the Korean national dish, saying: ''The Japanese even say kimchi is theirs. Whatever they want, they would say is theirs. The Japanese are annoying people. Of course it's Korean territory!''
The anti-Japanese sentiment surfaced in a different way recently. After South Korea's National Assembly failed to finance research on Koreans who collaborated with Japanese colonial rule, an Internet campaign was started to raise $425,000 by Aug. 15, the day of Japan's defeat in World War II. With Tokdo stirring nationalist sentiments, the goal was met in 10 days.
The campaign to finance the so-called Traitor Project was organized by Oh Yeon Ho, president of Ohmynews, a liberal Internet news site popular among young South Koreans, who elected Roh Moo Hyun president one year ago.
Asked about Japan's claim to Tokdo, President Roh said there was nothing to discuss. ''Is there a need to constantly emphasize that my wife is my wife?'' he asked.
Seoul Journal
