The Metropolitan Opera is in the midst of a typically busy season, rehearsing and performing a roster of works simultaneously and coping with the bitter winter weather like everyone else. This may explain why Friday night's performance of Mussorgsky's ''Boris Godunov,'' in August Everding's 1974 production last seen six years ago, seemed about one rehearsal shy of being ready.
There was great anticipation over the Met debut of the acclaimed Russian-born conductor Semyon Bychkov, and also over the performance of the veteran bass James Morris, singing the title role for the first time with the company. Both artists won deserved ovations. Still, the sometimes strained singing of the chorus, an occasional lack of coordination between the choristers onstage and the orchestra, and some noisy trip-ups as Ming Cho Lee's grandly realistic sets were moved on and off the stage all suggested we were hearing a performance in progress.
Mr. Bychkov won enthusiastic reviews for his conducting of ''Boris Godunov'' this fall in London with the Royal Opera at Covent Garden. Despite some moments of tentativeness, there were impressive qualities to his work on Friday. Using clear cues and kinetic body language, he elicited a performance that conveyed the restless sweep and psychological ambiguity of the score, with its world-weary choruses for oppressed Russian peasants, its scenes of officially instigated public rejoicing as Boris ascends the throne thanks to maneuvering by the cunning Boyars. He drew dusky and resonant tone from the strings, mournfully colors from the winds and flourishes from the brass.
More than other roles he has been singing lately, like Wagner's Hans Sachs, Boris exposes some of the fraying that has occurred in Mr. Morris's splendid bass voice in recent years. Still, he sang around these trouble patches to give a vocally charismatic portrayal. Towering above the crowd, moving with a halting gait, and uncomfortably aware of the weight of his crown, Mr. Morris was every bit the guilt-ridden czar who has ascended to the throne in 1598 after ordering the murder of the rightful heir, a young boy.
In Boris's great death scene, when in a delirium of anguish he bequeaths his throne to his young son, Feodor, Mr. Morris summoned the full resources of his chillingly stentorian voice. And many a stage actor would admire the way he tumbled headlong down the stairs from his throne at the moment of Boris's death.
Though I'm not really qualified to say, Mr. Morris's Russian diction seemed adequate. Still, he was up against several Russian singers in leading roles whose comfort with the throaty idioms of the Russian tongue as set with wondrous naturalism by Mussorgsky was a pleasure to hear. The robust-voiced Russian bass Vladimir Matorin had a triumphant Met debut as the wizened monk Pimen, who knows too much of Boris's past for his own good. The Latvian tenor Sergej Larin brought a bright voice and hardy energy to the role of Grigory, the Pretender Dimitri, who deposes Boris.
The Russian mezzo-soprano Irina Mishura was a rich-voiced and impetuous Marina, the Polish princess who schemes with the priest Rangoni in a plan to marry Grigory and claim the Russian throne. The baritone Sergei Leiferkus, singing Rangoni, was said to be suffering with a bad cold, and he sounded it. One hopes his cold will pass. Surely the overall performance of ''Boris Godunov'' will improve as the Met presents Mussorgsky's stirring masterpiece six more times through Feb. 14.
MET OPERA REVIEW
