Just weeks ago, Antonio Reid was one of the biggest executives in the music business. The top three singles in the country were his: Outkast's ''Hey Ya!'' and ''The Way You Move'' and the R&amp;B singer Kelis's ''Milkshake.''
In nearly four years as the chief executive of Arista, Mr. Reid, known as L.A., sparked the careers of Avril Lavigne, Pink and Dido. This year alone he brought in 31 Grammy nominations, more than any other label. But he also had a reputation as a big spender on artists and marketing campaigns.
On Jan. 13 he unexpectedly resigned. Arista, which is owned by BMG, the music division of the German conglomerate Bertelsmann, would not elaborate on his departure. But an executive familiar with Mr. Reid and Arista said that during the last two years Arista had operating losses above $200 million.
In an industry desperate for some good news, Mr. Reid's reversal of fortune has done little for morale. His exodus sent a message to many: No one, not even a hitmaker, is safe.
''If he can get fired,'' said an entertainment lawyer who spoke on condition of anonymity, ''what does that say for people who haven't had the year that he has?''
It is not uncommon for top executives to jump from one record label to another. This week Warner Music Group announced that Lyor Cohen was leaving Universal's Island/Def Jam to lead its North American operations, which set off speculation that Mr. Reid would replace him.
Reached by phone, Mr. Reid refused to discuss his next move.
As the record business experiences record losses -- United States album sales were down in 2003 for the third year in a row -- the days of the Teflon executive, larger-than-life characters whose celebrity and lavish spending rivaled that of their artists, appear to be waning. Stand-alone labels are beginning to dwindle because of imminent mergers. A proposed merger of Sony, No. 2 in the world, and BMG, No. 5, is under review by European regulators. Warner Music Group was recently acquired from Time Warner by a private investors' group led by Edgar Bronfman Jr. Such mergers would make it harder to land a top job , said Richard Grabel, a veteran entertainment lawyer.
''Historically the major criterion for hiring an executive was if the person had experience in the business,'' Mr. Grabel said. ''It often seemed success or failure at previous posts was less relevant. That's going to change.
''It will be based less on where they worked previously,'' he said, ''and more on if they made a profit while they were there.''
An executive at a major label who demanded anonymity said: ''It's not about hits. It's about the bottom line. That's what L.A.'s departure means. It is the operators verses the creatives now. Chalk one up for the operators.''
Lenny Beer, editor in chief of Hits, an industry trade magazine, and several others interviewed for this article, said that Mr. Reid was just the first of many high-profile departures that were sure to happen in the next few months.
''He is not the Lone Ranger,'' Mr. Beer said.
Shortly after news of Mr. Reid's departure, a New York disc jockey, Wendy Williams of WBLS-FM, reported, incorrectly, that Sylvia Rhone, chairwoman and chief executive of Elektra, had been dismissed. (Ms. Williams was forced to issue a retraction.)
''It's pure speculation,'' said a spokeswoman for Ms. Rhone ''and it's entirely untrue.''
Mr. Grabel said that he suspected that if Sony and BMG merged, Arista would fold. Though he agreed that operating losses influenced Mr. Reid's departure, he said, ''It's easier to close down Arista once you've gotten rid of the well-liked public face, because it makes it less personalized.''
Patrick Reilly, a BMG spokesman, said, ''There are no plans at this time to fold Arista into another label.'' Mr. Reid's departure ''is unrelated to our proposed merger with Sony Music,'' Mr. Reilly said. ''This would've happened regardless of plans for a merger.''
Mr. Reid came to Arista as he left, in a cloud of controversy. In July 2000, when he succeeded Arista's founder, Clive Davis, who helped shape the careers of Aretha Franklin and Bruce Springsteen, questions about his qualifications swirled through the record world.
Although he had great success with his Atlanta-based boutique label LaFace, discovering acts like Outkast, TLC and Toni Braxton, people wondered how he would fare at a big label in a bigger city. Could he move beyond R&amp;B and hip-hop to cultivate rock and pop artists? And most important, could Mr. Reid make them into stars?
Soon he was widely regarded as one of the industry's leading executives. (His nickname L.A., as in Los Angeles, comes from his natty wardrobe.)
''Being able to balance the checkbook is a skill that many have mastered,'' said Jim Guerinot, who manages the rock act No Doubt. ''Being able to do what L.A. does is rare.''
The singer Pink said, ''I've been with him since I was 15, and if it wasn't for his artistic talents and open-mindedness, I would not have been allowed the opportunity to accomplish the things I've done.''
Mr. Reid has had his share of misses. Ms. Braxton, last seen in the Broadway musical ''Aida,'' has since left Arista. It appears that the girl trio TLC has not recovered from the loss of their most charismatic member, Lisa Lopes, who died in a car accident in Honduras in 2002.
And Pink's latest effort, ''Try This,'' released in November, has tempted few, though her previous album ''Missundaztood'' was a multiplatinum smash.
The biggest stain on Mr. Reid's report card, however, remains the Whitney Houston deal. In 2001 he re-signed Ms. Houston, who has been plagued by personal problems in recent years, for a reported $100 million.
''It was a ridiculous amount of money to give her at that stage in her life,'' a high-level person close to the negotiations said.
But to lay the entire blame on Mr. Reid is unfair, that person added. ''Even though he signed off on it, he was not the final authority. He had to get approval from BMG.''
Some have argued that Mr. Reid's spending should have been monitored more closely, a move that is not in keeping with the corporate culture of BMG, which allows its executives relatively free rein as long as they turn a profit.
Others in the music industry speculated that race may have played a part in Mr. Reid's departure, that if he were white he would have been granted more leeway.
''I knew they wouldn't leave a black man in that position forever,'' said the R&amp;B singer Usher, who is black.
Mr. Reilly dismissed such suggestions, saying, ''That is absurd.''
Mr. Reid, who declined to comment on any of the speculation, said, ''I'm going to take some time off. It will be the longest vacation I've had in 25 years.''
