Prions are proteins. Proteins are made by genes that determine how the molecules that make up proteins, called amino acids, are arranged. A newly synthesized protein is a floppy string of amino acids. Based on how it is strung, with positive and negative forces bumping into each other, each protein folds itself into a three-dimensional shape. A protein's shape determines its function, in the way that keys fit into locks.
But protein-folding is a haphazard process. Individual proteins do not follow a series of mandatory steps in assuming their final shape. Rather they fold by trial and error. A third of all proteins made by the body never make it to the final stage.
To deal with this problem, cells have evolved an elaborate machinery for tagging and moving misfolded proteins to a kind of garbage disposal system where chains of amino acids are chopped up and recycled. Quality control is so important that thousands of specialized proteins, some called chaperones, carry out the recycling task.
But as people age, their garbage disposal systems break down. The result is that misfolded proteins accumulate into gunk that can be benign or toxic.
At least 20 proteins -- prions are but one -- have been shown to accumulate into gunky deposits associated with disease, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Type 2 diabetes and a number of blood diseases. All can be traced to protein misfolding.
What makes misfolded proteins harm cells is not as well understood. One idea is that tiny strands of misfolded proteins are exceptionally toxic and able to poke holes in cells. Eventually the strands accumulate into bigger and bigger fibers. These form nontoxic clumps of crystalline material that cannot be broken down by enzymes or other agents that normally chop up proteins.
Prions, however, initiate a chain reaction in which misfolded prions force healthy prions to misfold also. They are infectious. If a person or animal eats misfolded prions, the disease is transmitted. Misfolded cow prions appear capable of commandeering prions in many different species, including humans.
