At around noon on Sunday, the ground beneath Mary Arda's feet began to buckle. The yellow tiles in her West Village bakery and cafe, Mary's Off Jane, ''began lifting up like little Post-it pads,'' she said. Then, water began flowing up from below, shorting out equipment and sending customers into the street.
A 12-inch water main on Eighth Avenue between Jane Street and West 12th Street had burst, leaving several buildings without services like heat, electricity, telephone and water through Sunday and much of yesterday.
About a dozen buildings were affected, many of them residential, said Natalie Millner, a spokeswoman for the city's Department of Environmental Protection. Gas or electric service to four buildings was cut off at the request of the city, said Michael Clendenin, a spokesman for Con Edison. The Red Cross found housing for four residents, said Leslie Gottlieb, a spokeswoman for the organization.
Others, like Danilo Romero, who lives on West Fourth Street, tried to wait it out. He bought two $69 space heaters, but by the middle of Sunday night when the electricity was turned off, he left for a hotel.
The buildings most affected were on the east side of Eighth Avenue. At one building, Federico Sammarone, the owner of La Cantina Cucina Italiana, was cleaning up from seven feet of water. At the Incentra Village House, an inn and historic landmark, water gushed for hours from a brick wall in the basement as officials flipped through city blueprints to locate the source of the break, said Jeff Pica, the manager.
Other business owners and residents had to cope without water and heat during the hours of repairs. Dorothy Petras, 68, who lives on Horatio Street, planned to make several trips to the store to buy bottled water and said she had spent Sunday evening ''curled up on the couch with sweats on, a blanket and my cat for warmth.''
At Tavern on Jane, at 31 Eighth Avenue, there was heat but no water, so the staff improvised, carrying water in buckets from Bonsignour, a cafe next door, and then boiling it to wash dishes.
The extreme cold weather over the last few weeks was a major contributing factor in the break, Ms. Millner said. The age of the main -- which dated to 1880 -- may have also been a cause, she said.
About half a dozen workers from the Department of Environmental Protection and its emergency contractor, Audax Construction, worked through the night on Sunday and into yesterday to repair the damage, cutting a big hole in the street and replacing the broken main.
By yesterday morning, the old pipe had been removed and lay on the street, revealing pustules of rust inside and out. ''Are we drinking from those pipes?'' one curious neighborhood resident asked.
By about 12:30 p.m., the new pipe was in place and the water was turned back on. But the reprieve was short-lived, as water began pouring out of the south end of the site, indicating a secondary leak.
When Mr. Sammarone saw the new leak, he said, ''I'm going to Florida for a week now.''
Workers began drilling south to find the break, racing against time, as word reached the site that a snowstorm was on its way.
