As the wrangling between the media company Hollinger International and its largest shareholder, Conrad M. Black, escalated yesterday, legal experts said the battle had become a test of two potentially contradictory provisions in the business laws of Delaware, where the company is incorporated.
The central conflict, which the Delaware Chancery Court may be forced to resolve, is the authority of a corporate board to act in a company's interests versus the rights of shareholders.
Lord Black -- who has voting control of Hollinger International and remains on the board, although he is at serious odds with most of the other board members -- has agreed to sell his controlling stake to a pair of British entrepreneurs, the Barclay brothers, for $178 million in cash. Hollinger's newspaper holdings include a big British paper, The Daily Telegraph.
On Friday, Lord Black sought to exercise his shareholder's rights by changing the company's bylaws to prevent Hollinger from being sold to any other party without his approval.
Yesterday, a special committee of Hollinger International's directors sought to exercise boardroom prerogative by filing suit in the Delaware court to block Lord Black's deal, and by adopting a poison-pill provision that could make it financially undesirable for the Barclays to proceed with their purchase. A lawyer for Lord Black responded with a public statement saying the board's suit and poison pill were illegal under Delaware law.
An expert in corporate law says that unless the parties settle their dispute, the Delaware Chancery Court may be forced to confront the inherently contradictory principles of the state's incorporation laws.
''The big open issue in Delaware law is the conflict between the authority of the board and the authority of the shareholders to amend the bylaws,'' said John C. Coffee, director of the Center on Corporate Governance at Columbia Law School. ''In the first, the board is given complete authority over the business and affairs of the corporation. But under the second, the shareholders are given authority to amend the bylaws for any purpose.''
If neither side backs down, it could be a rare instance of a court's being forced to address those seeming contradictions. ''In the past,'' Mr. Coffee said, ''the cases have gotten settled or the courts have avoided deciding them.''
A special committee of Hollinger International's board last week sued Lord Black and other top executives, seeking $200 million in what it describes as questionable payments they received from the company. The committee -- all the directors except Lord Black; his wife, Barbara Amiel Black; and the vice chairman, Daniel Colson -- has argued that Lord Black's planned sale of his controlling stake may not be in the best interests of the company's other shareholders.
The committee is proceeding with plans to auction off its newspapers, arguing that such a process could fetch more money for Hollinger International shareholders. It has also argued that Lord Black's efforts to sell his stake violate previous agreements he made with the company to act in the best interests of all shareholders.
In an attempt to block those plans, Lord Black moved to change the company's bylaws. Hollinger Inc. declared that any sales of assets exceeding $1 million had to be approved by the entire board.
''It's very unusual,'' said Joseph Grundfest, professor of law and business at Stanford Law School, and a former commissioner of the Securities and Exchange Commission. ''Usually you don't have a situation where the controlling shareholder winds up in this type of irreconcilable conflict with a board that the shareholder arguably has the authority to elect.''
And Professor Coffee, alluding to Lord Black's move to stop the board committee from selling anything over $1 million, said his guess was that ''the courts would find that you could not this completely sterilize the board and deny it authority to act.''
The battle was further complicated yesterday by Hollinger International's poison-pill efforts to dilute the Barclays' stake in Hollinger. Under the provision, if the deal were to go forward, minority investors could acquire enough additional shares to significantly dilute the Barclays' stake to only about 4 percent of the equity and 20 percent of the vote. The stake Lord Black wants to sell to the Barclays is now worth 30 percent of the equity and 73 percent of the vote.
In the Chancery Court lawsuit that contained the poison-pill provision, the company acknowledged that the legality of the poison pill was dependent on the court's ruling that the committee legally represents the board.
John Warden, a partner at Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, which is representing Lord Black, released a statement yesterday saying that Hollinger International's poison-pill move was ''a descent into the lawless conduct of corporate affairs.''
Professor Coffee described the poison pill as especially aggressive. Normally, he said, a poison pill is meant to limit the amount of stock an aggressive shareholder can accumulate. But in this case, the amount of controlling stock is not changing -- it is simply changing hands. But he added that simply because the poison pill was aggressive did not mean it was illegal.
