Igniting a rare hostile takeover battle, Sanofi-Synthélabo, the French pharmaceutical company, made a $60 billion unsolicited bid on Monday for its French rival, Aventis, which quickly issued a stinging rebuke and rejected the offer.
Aventis, the maker of the allergy drug Allegra, is being prodded by the French government to reach an agreement. But it called Sanofi's offer ''inferior'' to the company's value and suggested that it might seek another bidder, arguing that ''there are other scenarios with a stronger industrial and social rationale.''
The rejection came hours after Sanofi's chief executive, Jean-François Dehecq, outlined the takeover offer during a presentation to investors and journalists here, in which he stressed the need to create a French drug giant or risk being gobbled up by foreign rivals.
''We couldn't pass up the idea of building a European champion,'' Mr. Dehecq said animatedly. ''We are convinced that the offer is attractive and that we can convince Aventis.''
But Aventis showed no sign of being persuaded. Richard Markham, its chief operating officer, said his company's management team was united in opposition to Sanofi's offer. ''This bid isn't just a little low,'' he said. ''It's way low. We will oppose this.''
The offer and its rejection sets the stage for a drawn-out and public corporate brawl as each company tries to win over Aventis shareholders, as well as the possibility that a rival suitor could emerge.
The French government's encouragement of the takeover bid makes the dispute more unusual because if Sanofi succeeds, a merger is expected to result in a huge number of layoffs. Mr. Dehecq said the deal would create savings of 1.6 billion euros ($2 billion) a year, but he refused to talk about the number of job losses.
''We only discuss personnel situations with representatives of personnel,'' he said, referring to the company's trade unions. He tried to counteract fears of layoffs by arguing that the company's long-term growth would help job creation.
The French social affairs minister, François Fillon, said in a radio interview that French citizens should not worry about the possibility of job losses. Alluding to global drug industry competition, he said, ''What's dangerous for employment is to leave Europe's industry divided and fragmented, under the threat of the U.S.''
That also seemed to be the theme of Mr. Dehecq's presentation to investors. While noting that Sanofi expected the cost of integrating the two companies to be about 2 billion euros before taxes, he was short on specific details about the kind of growth the company was expecting from a merger.
At one point, Mr. Dehecq interrupted himself as he blurted out a sales figure. ''I'm not supposed to be giving figures,'' he said. ''That last figure is off the record.''
Instead, he focused on explaining why Sanofi was pursuing the hostile bid. ''I'd be a mediocre boss if we didn't do this,'' he said. ''If we didn't do this, we'd be the ones on the receiving end.'' He also contended that the takeover offer was not hostile. ''Everyone will say this is a hostile bid,'' he said. ''This offer is directed against no one. It is a bid for the future.''
Sanofi offered five of its shares and 69 euros in cash for every six shares of Aventis. The bid represented a premium of 3.6 percent over Friday's closing price of Aventis, 57.55 euros. It rose sharply after a report that Sanofi was preparing an offer.
Shares of Aventis closed up here on Monday, as well, gaining nearly 3 percent, to 59.25 euros. Its share price has risen nearly 14 percent in the last two weeks as speculation about a merger increased. Sanofi contends that the bid represented about a 15 percent premium, based on the stock price of Aventis before speculation of a bid emerged.
Sanofi's stock fell 5.6 percent on Monday, closing here at 54.5 euros.
While analysts suspect that Sanofi could increase its offer to reach a friendly deal, they were less confident on Monday about the possibility of another offer, from a so-called white knight. Indeed, executives close to GlaxoSmithKline and Novartis, the most likely other suitors for Aventis, said the companies were not yet prepared to make a move. Novartis, a Swiss company, may be more interested in acquiring Roche , of Basel, Switzerland, where it already has a 33.3 percent stake, some analysts speculated Monday.
''We continue to believe that Novartis is more interested in its Swiss neighbor and would not want to get embroiled in the uncertainty surrounding the patent-expiry exposure of Allegra,'' said Andrew Fellows and Richard Jarvis, analysts with a Swiss private bank, Pictet &amp; Company, in a note to investors. Allegra may lose patent protection next year.
Another hurdle for a potential white knight is the French government, which, in blessing a combination of Sanofi and Aventis, in effect acknowledged the prospect of layoffs. But the government could make it difficult for a foreign suitor to justify a similar deal by making the layoffs it would need prohibitively expensive, analysts said.
BNP Paribas and Merrill Lynch are advising Sanofi. Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs and Rothschild are advising Aventis, people close to the company said.
