Howard Dean  'To become presidential without abandoning your insurgent base.'
Surrounded by supporters stomping their feet and clapping in time, Howard Dean ticked off the people who, unlike Americans, have universal health insurance. The British. The French. The Irish, the Italians, the Israelis. The Norwegians. The Swedes.
''All right, wise guys, some of you have heard the speech before,'' he laughed, holding the microphone out, rock-star style, to the crowd crammed into a Nashua hotel ballroom for coffee and muffins on Monday morning. ''What's the next line?''
Costa Ricans! came the reply.
''Who says you can't have fun in the campaign for the presidency?'' he asked.
After the most tumultuous week in his yearlong roller-coaster ride to the Democratic nominating contests, Dr. Dean was doing his shtick again, the volume only slightly turned down. The kerfuffle over the Iowa Scream, he said he had decided, might actually help revive his outsider appeal.
If he laughed about the concession speech in Iowa, then, well, people would be laughing with him, not at him.
''I should talk about the 'I Have a Scream' speech; I love that name,'' he said in response to a student's question at Phillips Exeter Academy here on Monday night. ''There's a great techno-mix out tonight, on deangoesnuts.com.''
In a brief interview hours earlier, Dr. Dean said he thought the speech ''was a lot less damaging than the media does, because most people are like me. They're not like those politicians and they're not like you guys.''
''Part of what we're doing is what all insurgent campaigns end up struggling with,'' he added. ''How to become presidential without abandoning your insurgent base.''
With polls showing him scrambling for a second-place showing here in a state where he once enjoyed a seemingly insurmountable 30-point lead, Dr. Dean said he was exactly where he expected to be (although he insisted he is still fighting for first).
''That was my dream when I first started out,'' he said of a bronze in Iowa and a silver here. ''The turnaround didn't surprise me a bit. I just knew, voters do not like to be told by Time magazine and Newsweek who the front-runner is -- they get to choose that themselves. I said that repeatedly, and they did, and it wasn't me.''
On Monday, Dr. Dean kept his suit coat, a brand-new navy Paul Stuart one bought in the fall but left to ''ferment in the closet'' until now, on his back. After a week of cold remedies proffered on the rope line, including Slippery Elm, which he said ''tasted like, I imagine, chewing a shoe,'' his voice was almost back at full strength.
At the historic Palace Theatre in downtown Manchester at noon, he was just starting a story about a man he had met the night before, a dishwasher from Richmond, Vt., who used the state's health insurance benefit to get a cavity replaced for $3.
''That's me, that's me!'' came a cry from the balcony, and John Daly, 28, shouted out his own story.
''Some people heard Howard Dean scream and it made them run away,'' Mr. Daly continued. ''I heard Howard Dean scream and it made me wake up.''
JODI WILGOREN
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CANDIDATES
