It required a blend of mental strength, fancy footwork and inconsistency on the other side of the net, but Justine Henin-Hardenne reached the semifinals of the Australian Open on Tuesday with a 7-5, 6-3 victory over Lindsay Davenport.
A year ago, in the fourth round here, Henin-Hardenne punched through her reputation for fragility and set the tone for her phenomenal season by rallying from a 1-4 deficit in the final set to beat Davenport.
This year, Henin-Hardenne came into their rematch seeded first and quickly found herself down again. After just 10 minutes of play, she trailed by 0-4, as if she had been unprepared for Davenport's trademark mix of power and depth. But with the help of her most spectacular shot -- the one-handed backhand -- she ripped enough winners in Davenport's next service game to put herself back in the flow of the match.
''I understand then that if I kept fighting on every point, the match could turn,'' Henin-Hardenne said.
It was 4-3 before Davenport regained control by breaking Henin-Hardenne's serve to go up, 5-3. But Davenport, after two seasons of fighting injuries, is no longer the confident front-runner she was earlier in her career.
The last time she was in a Grand Slam final was in 2000, and both she and Henin-Hardenne knew that the winner of the match would be an overwhelming favorite to reach the final -- with 32nd-seeded Fabiola Zuluaga of Colombia the semifinal opponent.
Davenport could not close out the set, losing her serve at 5-3, then squandering three set points in the next game after taking a 0-40 lead on Henin-Hardenne's serve.
''I wanted to play like I was going for it on those points,'' Davenport, seeded fifth, said. ''It just didn't happen today.''
Henin-Hardenne, a Belgian, has not been at her best here, playing spectacular tennis only in bursts. But the quality of her court coverage has remained remarkable. Instead of spending the off-season celebrating her No. 1 ranking and two Grand Slam singles titles in 2003, she clearly spent it training hard.
Now, perhaps, comes the reward. She expected to face Amélie Mauresmo in the semifinals, but Mauresmo was forced to withdraw with a torn back muscle less than an hour before she was scheduled to play. The beneficiary was Zuluaga, a 25-year-old who trained at Nick Bollettieri's Tennis Academy in Florida for three years as a teenager but who, until this tournament, was well known only in her country.
Before she arrived in Melbourne, no Colombian had advanced past the third round of a Grand Slam tournament, but Colombia now has a semifinalist. ''It feels good, but I didn't want it to be for the first time this way,'' Zuluaga said.
Mauresmo, a finalist here in 1999, was seeded fourth here and was one of the favorites for the title. But in the fourth game of her 7-5, 7-5 victory over Alicia Molik on Sunday, she said she felt something go awry in her back as she hit a backhand. She finished the match with no apparent discomfort, but a magnetic resonance imaging scan later revealed that she had a half-inch tear in a muscle on the left side of her back.
She was still not prepared to default, and she went out on Rod Laver Arena to practice at 9:30 a.m. Tuesday with her coach, Loic Courteau. But she was soon slumped in a courtside chair in tears and later began crying again at a news conference, burying her face in her hands for an extended period before continuing to answer questions.
''There is the pain, and there is also the risk of making it worse,'' she said. ''It's a big disappointment and a huge frustration.''
It is hardly the first such setback of her career. A series of injuries has kept her off the circuit for extended periods, the most recent a strained rib muscle that forced her to withdraw from Wimbledon last year. In light of the injury-depleted field and her own form, her chances here were excellent.
''I think I had a great opportunity,'' said Mauresmo, who is uncertain how long her latest injury will keep her off the circuit. ''I know I will be able to get over this. I will do all I need to do to get back.''
MATCH POINTS
The Australia Day celebration Monday did not end happily for the last two Australians in the singles draw. The unseeded Moroccan HICHAM ARAZI was at his best against MARK PHILIPPOUSSIS, winning 6-2, 6-2, 6-4. ROGER FEDERER, seeded second, disposed of 15th-seeded LLEYTON HEWITT, 4-6, 6-3, 6-1, 6-4. Federer and Hewitt played on this court in the decisive match of last year's Davis Cup semifinal between Australia and Switzerland. Hewitt rallied from two sets and 3-5 down to win. ''I'm very, very happy to have taken my revenge,'' Federer said. ''It hurt me big-time that match.''
TENNIS
