Vice President Dick Cheney, on a five-day trip through Switzerland and Italy, is stepping out of his self-imposed seclusion and into what administration officials and political analysts say is a calculated election-year makeover to temper his hard-line image at home and abroad.
Mr. Cheney, who usually shuns the media, has given a spate of radio and newspaper interviews in the last month. This European trip is only his second overseas in the last three years, the first being a visit to the Persian Gulf in early 2002 to build support for toppling Saddam Hussein. He invited eight journalists to join him aboard Air Force Two, a military version of a 757 jetliner.
On Monday, he addressed a gathering of 200 Italian troops, political leaders, entrepreneurs and university students in Rome. He thanked top Italian officials, including Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, for their nation's contributions and sacrifices in Iraq and Afghanistan. And he paid homage at the American military cemetery here to the soldiers killed during the Allied landing in World War II at nearby Anzio 60 years ago this week. On Tuesday, he will meet with Pope John Paul II at the Vatican.
Mr. Cheney's advisers say that raising the vice president's public visibility and opening a public-relations offensive is aimed at mending fences with foreign critics of the Iraq war and countering Democrats' efforts at home to demonize him as a symbol of the Bush administration's close corporate connections and overreliance on dubious intelligence about Iraq's illicit weapons.
''This year's going to be a long slog, and it's imperative that we recount the accomplishments of the administration,'' said Mary Matalin, a longtime Cheney adviser. ''This is something he can do quite well. He's particularly adept at putting events in a historical context.''
Mr. Cheney has long been a favorite of conservatives, and in the 2000 campaign he also offered a reassuring presence on the ticket to many independents wary of Gov. George W. Bush's inexperience. But with Mr. Bush having to rely less on Mr. Cheney's stature after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, there are signs the vice president is becoming a more divisive figure.
A New York Times poll this month found that Mr. Cheney's favorable ratings had declined to 20 percent of the voters surveyed compared with 39 percent in a similar poll in January 2002. His unfavorable ratings increased to 24 percent, from 11 percent, in the same period. Many voters in both surveys said they were undecided or did not know enough to have an opinion.
''He's clearly at a point in his vice presidency to do more harm than good, except among the most intense Republican partisans who look to him for reassurance,'' said Paul Light, a vice-presidential scholar at the Wagner Graduate School of Public Service at New York University. ''Handling Dick Cheney is like handling nuclear material. It can be quite powerful, but it can be quite dangerous and has to be handled carefully.''
Mr. Cheney was a major architect of the administration's march to war with Iraq, and critics now say he oversold the intelligence about Baghdad's illicit arms.
Democrats who have been critical of the contracting process for rebuilding Iraq have singled out the Halliburton Company in particular, in part because Mr. Cheney was chairman of the Texas-based energy company until 2000. Halliburton agreed last week to repay the government $6.3 million for apparent overcharges.
In a new tell-all book, ''The Price of Loyalty'' by Ron Suskind, former Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill criticized Mr. Cheney, an old friend from the Ford administration who recruited him to serve in Mr. Bush's cabinet, for creating a ''Praetorian Guard'' around Mr. Bush that prevented dissenting views from reaching the president.
Over the weekend, Mr. Cheney sought to defuse that controversy with a joke, telling corporate and political leaders at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, ''I'm not the best personnel officer in the world.'' He added, ''I wouldn't believe everything I read in Paul O'Neill's book.''
Traveling with Mr. Cheney, who turns 63 on Friday, offers a rare glimpse into his daily life. His entourage of about 50 people includes his wife, Lynne V. Cheney, an author, and their daughter Liz Cheney, a former Middle East specialist at the State Department, now an informal adviser to the re-election campaign.
Mr. Cheney has suffered four heart attacks over the last two and half decades, but his doctors say his health is good. Aides say he works out most mornings, often on the stationary bicycle he brought on this trip. A former secretary of defense and avid military history buff, Mr. Cheney spent time talking to the crews of the Air Force MH-53 Special Operations helicopters that whisked his traveling party through the Alps.
Democrats acknowledge they are seeking to make Mr. Cheney a lightning rod for criticism of the administration. ''Cheney is reassuring to the hard right-wing base, but to the public at large, he has gone from a reassuring figure to a symbol of the many things that have gone wrong with this administration,'' said Jim Mulhall, a communications strategist with the Democratic National Committee in Washington.
But aides say none of this has shaken Mr. Bush's trust in Mr. Cheney, who still wields huge, though largely unseen, influence on issues from Iraq to tax policy. The two meet weekly for a private lunch in a small dining room off the Oval Office. Mr. Cheney has repeatedly said he has no presidential aspirations of his own, allowing him to focus solely on Mr. Bush's agenda.
At the gathering in Davos on Saturday, for instance, Mr. Cheney sought to soften the administration's unilateralist image and struck a conciliatory tone in seeking help from Europeans and other traditional allies to promote democratic trends in the Middle East as a way to fight the root causes of terrorism.
He repeated many of the same themes on Monday in his speech in the library of the Italian Senate, saving special praise for Italy, which has nearly 3,000 forces in Iraq, for being ''a steadfast partner on every front, from law enforcement to diplomacy to intelligence.''
