The last time they met on the racetrack, Empire Maker defeated Funny Cide in the Belmont Stakes, denying the popular New York-bred gelding a Triple Crown sweep. Yesterday, Funny Cide exacted a bit of revenge, beating out Empire Maker for the Eclipse Award as the nation's best 3-year-old in 2003, the National Thoroughbred Racing Association announced.
''I was never confident, but I didn't think anybody would have to be embarrassed to vote for him,'' said Funny Cide's trainer, Barclay Tagg. ''He was second in two major preps and won two classics. He showed up all year, stayed nice and sound and had a charismatic value even I couldn't comprehend.''
Empire Maker won more races (three) than Funny Cide (two) in 2003 and defeated him on two of the three occasions they met, with the Kentucky Derby being the notable exception.
Empire Maker's trainer, Bobby Frankel, figured his horse did not have much chance of winning the Eclipse Award against Funny Cide.
''I thought Empire Maker was a great horse, but Funny Cide won the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness,'' Frankel said.
''In my mind and in my heart, I knew he'd win it,'' Frankel said of Funny Cide's designation as best 3-year-old. ''I think he deserved it. Along with Empire Maker, I thought he was great, but you can only have one winner.''
Funny Cide not only won two-thirds of the Triple Crown, but he also created a stir rarely seen in recent years. That Empire Maker passed up the Preakness and was retired after his second-place finish in the Jim Dandy Stakes at Saratoga Race Course on Aug. 3 instead of returning for a 4-year-old campaign may have also worked against him.
Funny Cide -- who won two of eight starts during the year and earned $1,936,200 -- received 150 first-place votes among the 247 cast. Empire Maker was next, with 92.
The older-horse and the horse of the year titles went to Mineshaft, who had a standout 4-year-old campaign, winning seven of nine starts, including the Jockey Club Gold Cup, the Woodward and the Suburban, all run at Belmont Park.
Mineshaft missed the Breeders' Cup Classic with a minor injury and has since been retired. A son of the top sire A.P. Indy, he received 209 votes for the Horse of the Year award, easily outdistancing the runner-up, Congaree, who received 11 votes. Funny Cide, who won his 2004 debut in an allowance race at Gulfstream, received 4 votes, and Empire Maker got 1.
Bird Town, winner of the Acorn and the Kentucky Oaks, edged the Breeders' Cup Mile winner, Six Perfections, 96-94, to win the 3-year-old filly championship. Six Perfections also received 66 votes in the filly and mare turf category, but that was not enough to top Islington (90 votes). Azeri won her second straight title in the older-female category, defeating Sightseek, 123-107.
Other winners were Action This Day (2-year-old colt); Halfbridled (2-year-old filly); Aldebaran (sprinter); High Chaparral (turf); and McDynamo (steeplechase).
Jerry Bailey won a record fourth straight Eclipse and his seventh in the last nine years as the nation's top jockey. Bailey received 211 votes to 17 for the runner-up, Patrick Valenzuela.
The award for the nation's outstanding trainer went to Frankel, who set a record with $19,143,289 in earnings in 2003 but seemed to have hurt his chances with another poor showing on Breeders' Cup Day. He was 0 for 8, lowering his career Breeders' Cup record to 2 for 57. Richard Mandella won a record four Breeders' Cup races, including the Classic, with Pleasantly Perfect. That was not enough to sway voters, however, who gave Frankel the Eclipse by a 193-44 margin over Mandella.
Juddmonte Farm won for both outstanding owner and breeder, and Eddie Castro was named the nation's top apprentice.
HORSE RACING
