The notebooks and game plans are starting to pile up at Mike Vrabel's house, souvenirs of the hours of film study and coaching machinations he has observed and, perhaps, bits of a coaching résumé yet to be formed. Vrabel hopes to be a coach someday, and his will be a unique perspective.
He will be able to talk to a linebacker about dropping into coverage, to a defensive end about rushing the quarterback on passing downs, even to a nose tackle about the rare opportunity to drop into coverage -- all from his playing experience. Vrabel is the epitome of the Patriots' system of defense, one in which the versatility of a player is at least as prized as his speed or strength. Vrabel is as flexible as a rubber band, as cerebral as the New England coaches who concoct those game plans.
It is players like Vrabel -- not high profile or dominant, but able to perform a number of roles -- that allows the Patriots' system to function.
Vrabel thrives on the little tips and tendencies the Patriots' outside linebackers coach, Rob Ryan, unearths each week, and he had no mental errors in 2001.
But he is also athletically gifted enough that, against the Colts in the American Football Conference championship game, he rushed from the edge and lined up at nose tackle in place of the massive Ted Washington on passing downs in the second half, before dropping into coverage. Afterward, linebacker Tedy Bruschi called him a chameleon.
''He's very smart -- that's Vrabel's biggest asset,'' defensive end Willie McGinest said. ''He knows the defense inside out. That's a big advantage for him. He's a good athlete -- he can run, he can cover, he can rush when we need him to. He does what the defense needs him to do.''
This season, Vrabel was expected to be part of the linebacker rotation. But when Rosevelt Colvin sustained a season-ending injury in the second game, Vrabel was pressed into even more action. Despite missing three games with a broken arm, he led the Patriots with nine and a half sacks.
''I've had to be versatile in my career just to stick around,'' Vrabel said. ''The more you can do, it gives you a better chance to stay on the field. The league has become so specialized that you have to match personnel. If you can cover, if you can rush, if you can play the run, it gives you a chance to play in three-wide-receiver or two-tight-end sets. By having versatility and understanding what everyone's doing, it gives me an advantage of being able to line up in different places.''
When Vrabel began his career with the Steelers in 1997, there was no place for him in the starting lineup. He did not start a game in four seasons, and when Bill Belichick and the Patriots recruited him as a free agent, their sales pitch was simple. The Patriots offered a chance to earn a starting job, and at the time, they limited the role to the linebacker on the tight end side in a 3-4 alignment.
It was a similar position to what he played in Pittsburgh. So, Vrabel gave up being closer to home but also being limited to special teams. Vrabel grew up in Akron, Ohio, as a Browns fan and admits he still has a few things he would someday like to discuss with Belichick about his rocky stint as Cleveland's head coach. Vrabel throws sidearm because he imitated the Browns' beloved quarterback, Bernie Kosar. When asked if he hated Belichick when he was in Cleveland, Vrabel replied, laughing, ''Hate is such a strong, strong word.''
But Belichick offered the one thing that Pittsburgh could not -- a chance to play. Even he could not have imagined he would be playing so much in so many places. ''I don't think you ever want to label yourself, and I'm certainly not going to do it,'' Vrabel said. ''I was just looking for an opportunity to play.''
When that opportunity ends, Vrabel will begin to dig through the notes he has been keeping for a few years, ever since he heard a few coaches talking about the notes they used when they interviewed for jobs. When Vrabel was in Pittsburgh, he heard Mike Mularkey -- who recently became Buffalo's head coach -- say he still had notes and game plans from his collegiate playing days at Florida. The ones Vrabel saves now are the object of fascination in N.F.L. circles, prized for their intricacy and their ability to place somewhat anonymous players like Vrabel into a variety of positions. Vrabel marvels at Belichick's uncanny preparedness, that no play in an opponent's package is ever forgotten.
''Maybe 10 years from now, I'll pull it out and try to dial up some stuff we did now,'' Vrabel said. ''If I end up coaching, some of that stuff might help me down the road.''
PRO FOOTBALL
