Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said on Monday that he opposed Gov. George E. Pataki's proposal to use gambling money to comply with a court order requiring the state to come up with more aid for New York City schools, saying it would not provide a stable, predictable way of raising money.
In a soft-spoken, diplomatic way, Mr. Bloomberg also criticized the governor's budget proposals on several fronts during a trip here to press the city's needs. The mayor said that some of Mr. Pataki's proposed Medicaid cuts would end up costing the city money and complained that the city stood to lose some education aid under his plan.
Mayor Bloomberg even turned one of Mr. Pataki's stock phrases -- ''job-killing taxes'' -- against him in his effort to get the governor to reverse course and allow the city to end its sales tax on clothing under $110 in June, as originally planned. ''Like the governor, we oppose job-killing taxes, and we believe they should be phased out as promised,'' Mr. Bloomberg testified before a legislative committee.
Although there are real points of disagreement between Mr. Bloomberg and Mr. Pataki on the budget, the mayor's requests of Albany this year are far more modest than last year, and the two men confidently predicted that they would reach an agreement. The mayor wants $400 million in state aid -- less than a sixth of what he asked for last year.
The mayor got the state aid that he sought last year only after the Republican-controlled State Senate and the Democratic-controlled State Assembly rose up and passed a budget and an aid package for the city over the governor's vetoes. This year, though, all sides are predicting a negotiated solution that they can all live with.
Joseph L. Bruno, the leader of the Republican majority in the State Senate, expressed optimism after meeting with the mayor. ''Last year was a tough year, a challenging year,'' he said. ''This year, there are going to be opportunities.''
Governor Pataki, who said last week that his budget would give the city all it needed, said on Monday, ''I am confident that we will reach that goal if we haven't already.''
The long-term school financing debate could grow into a much bigger bone of contention between the mayor and the governor. The state's Court of Appeals ruled last year that city schoolchildren had been denied the ''sound, basic education'' that was their right under the State Constitution.
To fix that, the state must determine how much it should spend to improve their education and how to pay for it. In the governor's budget proposal, he called for using revenues from video lottery terminals, which are like computerized slot machines, to create a fund to improve education in the city and other high-need areas.
Although Mr. Bloomberg has long said that he is no fan of state-sponsored gambling, Monday was the first time that he explicitly came out against Mr. Pataki's proposal to use gambling money to comply with the court order.
''They won't provide the stable, predictable revenues we must have,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''If the state chooses to raise money that way, so be it. But New York City needs a guaranteed funding source for its schools, or it can't make long-term construction and labor commitments.''
Governor Pataki said that his office conservatively estimated that the video lottery terminals that had already been approved would raise $1.5 billion a year, and that with his proposal to add even more video gambling parlors the revenue would rise even higher.
Over and above the question of whether the state uses gambling to finance education, the case threatens to create other rifts between the two men. Governor Pataki, who fought the lawsuit that led to the order in court, now says that he sees the court ruling as a chance to change education financing across the state. Mayor Bloomberg sees it more narrowly: as an order to send more money to the city's schools.
Even as he was pressing the governor and state lawmakers to provide the city with $400 million in aid, Mayor Bloomberg was asking for their permission to return $250 million to city homeowners in the form of $400 property tax rebate checks.
''We will not stand by and let anybody deny them a rebate,'' Mr. Bloomberg said in his testimony. ''It's their money. They should be able to enjoy it and spend it as they see fit.''
Governor Pataki praised the property tax rebate proposal.
But the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, who has questioned several aspects of the rebate proposal, said that it would be hard to afford if the governor won his battle to block a plan for the state to pay back the city's remaining debts from the 1970's. ''There will be no rebates for anybody if that's allowed to stand,'' he said.
In his nuts-and-bolts analysis of Governor Pataki's budget proposal, Mayor Bloomberg said that the governor's plan to pay for the state's Graduate Medical Program with Medicaid would cost the city $25 million because the city would have to share in the cost, and that his proposed assessment fee on hospitals would cost the city $30 million because city hospitals would have to pay it. He said that the governor's proposals ''must be the beginning, not the end, of state action on Medicaid.''
And Mayor Bloomberg called on the governor to restore a $62 million education grant. The governor said that the grant was intended to pay debt service costs that did not even come due this year; aides to the mayor said that they had reached an agreement with the Legislature last year to use the grant for annual operating costs.
Medicaid was on the minds of many county executives, who also came to Albany to press the state to cut costs. Robert R. Gregory, the executive director of the New York State Association of Counties, said that counties were glad the issue of Medicaid mandate relief was finally being addressed in Albany but that more needed to be done.
They said they were particularly concerned that the governor's proposal for the state to take over the costs of long-term care for the poor would take 10 years to be fully phased in. Meanwhile, the base costs of Medicaid would continue to grow, they said, forcing large property tax increases next year. Instead, the county executives would like to cap the local costs, which reached $6 billion this year, immediately.
