John Edwards  'It feels very similar to what it felt in Iowa.'
He began the week in an aircraft hangar with enough excitement from his surprise second-place finish in the Iowa caucuses to shout out to supporters, ''Can you feel it?'' And as he sat in his campaign bus on Monday, Senator John Edwards said he still felt the energy rising, just as he did in Iowa.
But this time, Mr. Edwards did not dare proclaim, as he had there, that he was going to ''shock the world.''
The crowds were swelling after a week of events all over the state: a high school gym rally with the actress Glenn Close, a raucous rally in a bowling alley that the fire marshals threatened to close, a blues club with a spillover audience that forced him to speak again down the street.
But still, there was a sense of uncertainty about exactly where Mr. Edwards, from North Carolina, stood in this new political landscape.
''It's harder to tell here, but if you go to the events it feels very similar to what it felt in Iowa,'' Mr. Edwards said as his bus rumbled to Portsmouth, where several hundred people later gave him a standing ovation. ''On the ground it feels similar, but it's harder, because it's a bigger field here and the polls are kind of all over the place, to tell what's actually happening.''
So Mr. Edwards soldiered on, unsure, he said, what if anything the presence of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who both skipped Iowa, meant to the race.
Mr. Edwards kept to his usual stump speech about raising up the middle class, improving the lot of the 35 million Americans living in poverty and battling the corporate boogeymen and Washington insiders ''stealing your democracy.''
At a diner in Derry, where Doris Flaherty, 89, said she was concerned that ''older people can't pay for their prescription drugs,'' he promised her that he would do something.
''I think the starting place is we need a president who will stand up to the drug companies,'' Mr. Edwards said.
By the time he got to Portsmouth at midday, the crowds were too large and time too short -- he had a string of television interviews to do -- to take questions.
That bothered Cynthia Watkins of Durham, especially after Mr. Edwards made a few references in his speech to how much New Hampshire voters like to ask questions. Still, she listened to Mr. Edwards intently and came away charmed -- ''he was fine and fabulous'' -- though still not sure who would get her vote.
''It is terribly important to pick the candidate who can be elected,'' Ms. Watkins said.
Outside, Mr. Edwards stood in the single-digit chill answering questions from a mass of journalists. No, he would not make a prediction on the outcome of the primary Tuesday. Yes, he was different from John Kerry, who he suggested had been in Washington too long to shake it up.
A few more questions and then it was back on the bus, headed for more town halls, pep rallies really, in Manchester and finally here.
Not long after his bus pulled away, the campaign sent word that ''due to larger crowd size,'' his final event here was being moved.
RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLD
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CANDIDATES
