What a difference a mere century makes. On Jan. 21, 1904, Leos Janacek's Janacek Work, Humbly Born, Shines Brightly at 100 opera ''Jenufa'' received its first performance. The location was the little Czech Theater. (Fancy folk went to the grander German Theater.) The response was enthusiastic, but provincial Moravian enthusiasm did little for Janacek's career.
The Czech Theater was so little that there were only 29 musicians in the pit. (Their number shrank to 18 a few years later.) The city was Brno, southeast of Prague and north of Vienna, because Janacek lived in this capital of the Moravian part of the Czech lands. The premiere was fraught with sadness: Janacek's daughter had just died, and his only other child, a son, had died already.
Janacek was nearly 50 and showed no signs of establishing an important career. He did not do so until he was in his 60's, making him about the best example there is of a musical late bloomer.
Jump forward to Wednesday night, the 100th anniversary to the day of the ''Jenufa'' premiere. In this city's only opera house, the handsome Janacek Theater, presided over by a bust of that composer, came another ''Jenufa.'' A co-production with the Vienna State Opera, it was an altogether more imposing affair than the premiere. And it kicked off the city's annual Janacek Festival, devoted to its most famous citizen. The festival will extend through Feb. 5 and includes mostly local productions of most of his operas, including many rarities, as well as concerts, a symposium and notable guest artists.
Chief among the notables, though he had not arrived by Wednesday, was the conductor Charles Mackerras, who has done so much to champion Janacek's music. He was the the first, more than 20 years ago, to record the original Brno version of ''Jenufa'' (as revised by Janacek in 1908). Amazingly, this performance was the first Czech production of ''Jenufa,'' Janacek's most famous opera, to make use of that version, which Sir Charles and the musicologist John Tyrrell finally managed to get published only eight years ago. Therein lies a strange tale.
The opera, and the play play by Gabriela Preissova on which it is based, is still called ''Her Foster Daughter'' in the Czech Republic. It tells the story of passion among Moravian villagers, involving a beautiful young woman and two half brothers. It turns tragic when the woman's stepmother, trying to preserve Jenufa's respectability, drowns her daughter's illegitimate baby son. Yet in the end Jenufa and her new husband manage to look forward to a loving future.
The opera's Brno success wasn't enough to get him productions elsewhere. Finally Prague took it on in 1916, but in a trimmed and reorchestrated version that until recently had been the standard. Gradually now the Janacek-Mackerras-Tyrrell score is taking over. (The Metropolitan Opera did it last season.) But the Czechs, content with what they knew and love, resisted the original version until now.
They heard a performance that made a first-rate case for the original version. The production was done last season in Vienna, conducted by Seiji Ozawa, but in German. Ioan Holender, the director of the Vienna company, said that the evocative sets by Robert Israel, full of rough-hewn wood, had been largely built in Moravia, and on Wednesday the opera was of course sung in Czech (or its Moravian dialect).
Another Briton played an important role in the evening's success. The stage director David Pountney fashioned a powerfully intelligent yet plausibly faithful conception of the opera: no falling boulders, as at the Met. He did manage to elicit superb acting from his cast of nearly all Czech singers. [In the two repeats during the festival the singers were almost entirely different.] Just one example of how Mr. Pountney blended past and present sensibilities: there was ample folk costume and dance, yet the wedding, just preceding the discovery of Jenufa's drowned baby, was bathed in sickly green light, as if all this cheerful period folkishness was under water.
The exception to the Czech cast was a towering one. The German soprano Anja Silja, who has been dominating stages for 50 years, played the stepmother, or Kostelnicka. This is a famous portrayal, already seen at the Glyndebourne Festival and elsewhere. Ms. Silja's soprano, still potent, and her scary, almost Expressionist acting lifted this performance to an international level. But there was no weak link. Helena Kaupova's sorrowful Jenufa; Peter Straka's wild, then chastened Laca; Michal Lehotsky's preening, powerfully belted Steva and a host of acutely intelligent other singing actors made this a powerful ensemble statement. (All power again to Mr. Pountney, since this was a one-time assemblage.)
The conductor Jaroslav Kyzlink shaped a most persuasive performance. He faced two obstacles: the Brno orchestra sounded good but not great, and is presumably so used to the Prague bowdlerization that the original version does not flow idiomatically.
Yet the 1,100-seat Janacek Theater, more suitable by far than the 3,900-seat Met, is a good place to hear the 1908 version. It is relatively thin sounding (in Prague it had been pumped up to Straussian proportions), but that lends it a chamber intimacy, especially in the second act. And Mr. Kyzlink rose to Janacek's big moments, as in the haunting and finally triumphant ending, which lacks the familiar canonical echoes of the Prague edition, but on Wednesday didn't miss them.
A moving and symbolically important evening, then, and one that has been preserved for television and, one hopes, for DVD.
OPERA REVIEW
