IF you look hard at Peter C. Harvey, the first African-American to serve as attorney general of New Jersey, you can see his preacher father. Not the one who presided over long Baptist church meetings and services, not the one who made weekly visits to sick parishioners, not the one who thundered from the pulpit, but the one who believed that life was about struggle, about making the world a place where those who were different were not just tolerated, but respected.
''I don't like the word toleration,'' Mr. Harvey said. ''I don't want to be tolerated. Toleration implies that you are unwanted but we will put up with you. I want to be respected.''
It is the importance of respect that he says pushed him to support Gov. James E. McGreevey's gay domestic partnership law, one of the most liberal in the nation. The law gives gay couples a host of new rights, including financial benefits and hospital visiting privileges.
''The domestic partnership law provides a lot of benefits to people who are seeking human dignity and respect,'' Mr. Harvey said. ''If you set aside the sexual preference issue, there are a lot of elderly people who for economic reasons live together. This is very common in the South. People live together by necessity. This law will give all these people some legal protection.''
Mr. Harvey, 45, the youngest of three siblings, grew up in the largely black city of Tuskegee, Ala. He was in private practice in Morristown, N.J., before being appointed attorney general, and had worked in the United States attorney's office in Newark and in the attorney general's office as a special assistant. He keeps a book with photos from Tuskegee close to his desk, and as he flips through the pages he begins a tour of his hometown, including the nursing school named after his mother, who was its dean for years.
The Harvey family lived across the street from his father's church, and young Peter's bedroom looked out on the lighted cross built into its brick. ''Maybe it was an omen,'' he said. ''I was a bit of a knucklehead as a kid.''
As a preacher's son he had to spend hours every week in church, but he regularly slipped out the back on Sunday afternoons to watch football.
''As I grew I began to avoid church like the plague. Alabama was in the Central time zone, so when church was over at 12:30, the East Coast football games had already begun. I would race back across the street with my friends to watch the games.''
HE grew up in a world where African-Americans were a majority, making up about 80 percent of Tuskegee's population. It was, for him, a blessing.
''I could go for several days without seeing a white person,'' Mr. Harvey said. ''All the professionals were black, the doctors, the lawyers, the dentists, the accountants. Tuskegee produces a sense of self and confidence. You are evaluated based upon what you do. You have a chance to succeed or fail based upon talent, not color. When I came home from school with a bad grade, I couldn't tell my parents it was because the teacher did not like me because I was black.''
His house, like many in the South, was a beehive of activity during the civil rights movement. After all, he noted, ''ministers were about the only black people who could not be fired.''
''They had the freedom to lead the civil rights movement.'' he said. ''A businessman would be denied loans and work and be destroyed.''
The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. visited his home, although Mr. Harvey says he has no memory of meeting him. But as much as the church, Tuskegee and the civil rights movement left heavy imprints, so did a severe stroke his mother suffered when he was 13.
''It was terrifying,'' he said. ''I thought I would lose my mother. I suddenly had to learn to do things around the house, to cook and clean for myself, to do laundry. I wondered why me, why my mom, although it turned out she outlived my father.''
The stroke taught Mr. Harvey an important lesson, one he says he tries to apply at home with his wife, Tammy, and their three children.
''I realized that there were things in life I would never know or understand,'' he said. ''I realized that there was a higher power that decides certain things. This does not eliminate free will, but there are circumstances that free will cannot control. I also learned that we have to count the blessings we have -- the simple things we take for granted until they are lost. I do not do this as much as I should, but I try.''
He began to speak of Moses -- not the way a graduate of Morgan State University and Columbia Law School and the chief law enforcement official in the state might be expected to, but as a Baptist pastor would. It is Moses, he said, along with Paul Robeson, whom he most admires.
''Moses had the courage to listen to God,'' Mr. Harvey said. ''He trusted God. He did something extraordinary for his people even though he did not reap the benefits. The story of Moses is a story of someone who has a life of privilege but who casts his lot with the common man and woman. It is the story of someone who engages the powerful in a discussion of freedom and who ultimately achieves it.''
PUBLIC LIVES
