''It's tragic,'' said Wojciech Mazur, pacing nervously outside the American Embassy and peering through a fence at its blank facade. Every few seconds a side door opened to disgorge another Pole, another applicant for an American visa. The person's walk usually indicated whether one had been granted.
Malgorzata, the 19-year-old daughter of Mr. Mazur and his wife, Grazyna, wanted to visit her godmother in New York. So father and mother had risen at 3 a.m. and had driven 210 miles through a snowstorm to provide moral support during her all-important interview.
Nerve-racking perhaps, but tragic?
Mr. Mazur shrugged, and out poured a familiar litany of complaints: that the $100 fee is not refunded in the case of refusal, that Poles have to undergo the indignity of being fingerprinted on arrival in the United States. Why, he asked, do Poles need visas at all, when they are about to join the European Union?
Something about the whole procedure was demeaning, the couple suggested, with an air of Chekhovian world-weariness.
Complaints about visa requirements have become a prime irritant in Polish-American relations. The matter is on the agenda Tuesday, when President Aleksander Kwasniewski is to meet President Bush at the White House.
''It's a powerful issue,'' said Leszek Miller, the prime minister. ''The faster the U.S. authorities do away with the visa requirement, the better.''
What has given the complaint an edge is that Poland is a major supporter of the American occupation of Iraq and has sent 2,400 troops there.
''The situation is unjust because next to England, we're America's best ally in Europe,'' said Rafal Zielinski, a 28-year-old representative for a construction company.
The American answer to all this is that Poles have a history of traveling to the United States on three-month tourist visas and then staying to work illegally. The system is in place to try to weed out potential offenders.
Estimates of the number of Poles who violate their visas this way run as high as 30 percent. The unemployment rate here is about 18 percent, and the universities are bulging with 1.8 million students, four and a half times the number 14 years ago.
Christopher Hill, the American ambassador, has been blanketing the media to drive home the American view. ''It's one of the worst moments, when I go to the embassy and see the line of people waiting for visas,'' he told the daily Rzeczpospolita. ''But let's remember that our law explicitly states that people visiting the United States cannot work there.''
Michael Kirby, the consul general, pointed out that as an immigrant-receiving nation, the United States, unlike European countries, has promulgated laws ''that start with the presumption that everyone wants to become one of us.''
Poles view unfettered travel as a sacred right. During five decades of Communist rule, visits to the West were largely prohibited.
With Poland about to join the European Union, Poles can travel freely throughout Western Europe, but only a few member countries grant them work permits.
During the past five years, American consular officials have approved about 500,000 visas for Poles, Ambassador Hill said. Refusal figures are not given out, but a quick look at bins of accepted and rejected applications suggested that about one in 10 is turned down.
The procedure for a visa, however, has been streamlined, and the interviews are quick and to the point.
But for those who are refused, the experience acquires shades of humiliation.
''They treat you like animals,'' complained Arkadiusz Dmochowski, a 23-year-old student who was waiting outside for his fiancée to complete her interview. ''I tried twice and I didn't get it either time. They told me I had no strong links to Poland. But my family is here.''
Malgorzata, the Mazurs' daughter, emerged from the embassy, a big smile on her face. ''I can collect my visa in two hours,'' she said. ''It wasn't hard. He asked me why I wanted to go and if I would come back, and I told him I have to come back to graduate. That seemed to satisfy him.''
