As managers of Aventis plot their defense against a hostile bid from its national rival in round-the-clock meetings in Paris, they are spending little time worrying about wounding French pride.
Aventis, after all, is faced with a nationalistic surge. Sanofi-Synthélabo's chief executive, Jean-François Dehecq, suggested yesterday that French national pride should push Aventis executives into accepting his hostile embrace. The French finance minister publicly endorsed the idea of a merger. Some analysts suggest that the Frenchness of the offer makes a deal all but inevitable. [Page C2.]
But Aventis is barely French. A result of a 1999 merger involving Hoechst, a German company, and Rhône-Poulenc, a French concern, Aventis has a shareholder base that is scattered widely all over the world, with just 20 percent of them living in France. Group Kuwait Petroleum, one of the world's largest oil companies, owns nearly 13 percent of the company, according to an Aventis spokeswoman. An additional 22 percent of shareholders live in North America, 14 percent in Britain and 21 percent live in European nations other than France.
Few of these shareholders probably care much about French national pride, and the endorsement of the French finance minister may be of only mild interest to them.
''The end of this story will be written by what is in the best financial interests of Aventis shareholders,'' said Mara Goldstein, an analyst with CIBC World Markets.
And Aventis executives say that the Sanofi-Synthélabo proposal -- which offers a small premium over Aventis's recent closing price -- is not worth the risk that a combination brings them.
''No matter what you use as a basis for our shares, what's being offered is inferior compared to what we would achieve on a stand-alone basis for shareholders,'' Richard J. Markham, the chief operating officer of Aventis, said in an interview from Paris.
Mr. Markham said that the risks in Sanofi-Synthélabo's future were not well understood by most analysts. The biggest risk, Mr. Markham said, is the possibility that Sanofi-Synthélabo loses the patent on its biggest seller, the stroke drug Plavix. The Plavix case is expected to be heard later this year in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
At heart, the case revolves around double patenting. Apotex, Canada's largest generics company, contends that a patent that expired last year actually protects Plavix. A later patent that does not expire until 2011 is invalid, Apotex argues, because it overlaps the earlier patent.
The 2003 patent covers what is known as the Plavix ''racemate,'' or the original parent molecule. Plavix itself is an isomer, or one-half of a mirror image, of the original molecule. Isomers are commonly used in the drug industry. Nexium, for instance, is the isomer of AstraZeneca's original heartburn drug, Prilosec.
But in the case of Plavix, the original patent was unusually broad, covering not only the racemate but the isomers as well, Apotex argues. That means the later patent covered, or described, much of the same material as the earlier patent, making the later patent invalid.
But Plavix is not the only risk in this proposed deal, Mr. Markham said. Mergers themselves often throw drug companies off track, he said. It is a delicate argument for him to make because Aventis is the product of a huge merger that executives at the time said would yield great synergies. Not so, Mr. Markham now says.
''With a merger, you inevitably lose some sales momentum and you lose some momentum in your labs, and that creates delays in your pipeline,'' Mr. Markham said. ''You better be solving a big enough problem to warrant the inevitable losses, because it's going to happen.''
Whether Aventis will be able to persuade its shareholders that a combination with Sanofi-Synthélabo has more risks than Aventis does alone is uncertain. Most analysts expect Aventis to lose by next year its exclusive hold over its biggest seller, Allegra. And few think that its pipeline will be able to replace all of the lost sales.
Representatives from each company will have to travel the globe to make their cases. After Sanofi-Synthélabo registers its offer with securities regulators, the company will have a limited time, probably about a month, to persuade at least half of Aventis's shareholders to sell their shares.
Despite Mr. Markham's arguments, most analysts seem to be betting that a merger will take place.
''Once these things start, they develop a life of their own,'' said Barbara Ryan, an analyst with Deutsche Bank Securities. ''And shareholders are going to want to get paid today and not tomorrow.''
Market Place
