Joseph I. Lieberman  'Is America a great country or what?'
A blood vessel in his right eye has yet again burst. The voice occasionally catches in his throat. But Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut nonetheless spent his last full day of campaigning campaigning in full, traversing the state with Main Street walks, rallies and a town hall session, flat out refusing to be cowed by what has looked to be an uphill battle for even a decent finish.
''Whup, there's one more,'' he said, pivoting in the doorway of his campaign bus and rushing back into the bitter cold to meet another potential supporter here. Moments later, jubilant, he bounded back onto the bus, the so-called Integrity One, proclaiming, ''Three more votes.''
Mr. Lieberman, who spent much of his time between stops huddled in the back of the bus with family and advisers, seemed particularly feisty at times, whether going after the policies of President Bush or exhorting crowds to trust in the power of their individual votes.
Answering a question about cuts to veterans benefits at a town hall meeting in Laconia, he said: ''This is an outrage, you should be angry about it. I'm angry about it.''
And in Concord, he spoke of the power of a single vote so many times that even he finally acknowledged it. ''Let me just do this power of one one more time,'' he said, ''because it leads to one big place, to one Democrat who with the support of the people of New Hampshire, one by one tomorrow, will not only get elected but then make America again one nation united so that we can look to the future with the kind of confidence and hope that is characteristically American and that's been lost in recent times.''
At that stop, Mr. Lieberman rallied with independent voters who were supporting his campaign, including many who helped Senator John McCain of Arizona win the Republican primary here in 2000. Mr. McCain, a symbol of political independence, popped up so frequently in Mr. Lieberman's comments that at one point he asked, chuckling, ''Have I mentioned him too many times today?'' But Mr. McCain also popped up in the flesh, stumping across the state for Mr. Bush.
''You know I love John McCain,'' Mr. Lieberman said in an interview on the bus, adding that he did not think Mr. McCain would siphon those crucial independent votes away from him. ''He just happens to occasionally make a mistake in judgment, and he's supporting George W. Bush.''
But one stop, a pilgrimage of sorts, was personally symbolic. In the morning, flanked by his wife, Hadassah, and two of his children, Rebecca and Matt, he mounted the steps of Nashua City Hall, where John F. Kennedy began his presidential bid in January 1960.
''He was my first great national political hero,'' said Mr. Lieberman, who frequently says his career in public service was inspired by President Kennedy.
''He said to me that in America anything was possible,'' he continued. ''And here I am now running as a candidate for president,'' he said before reprising a famous line from the 2000 convention when he became the vice-presidential nominee. ''Hey,'' he said, ''is America a great country or what?''
DIANE CARDWELL
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CANDIDATES
