Guerrilla fighters fired a rocket on Monday night across the Tigris River and into a parking lot of the compound housing the headquarters of occupation forces in Iraq. The attack came just a few hours after the minister in charge of the police and security said at a news conference there that the continuing violence was one reason not to hold elections this year.
The thumping detonation across the river could be heard from the heavily fortified compound shortly after 9 p.m., followed a few seconds later by the much louder explosion of the incoming round.
A military official said the lot where the round exploded was empty at that hour, so the damage was light and nobody was hurt.
Immediately after the blast, sirens wailed from the compound, once set aside for the palaces and office buildings of the ousted government, and now the main headquarters of the Coalition Provisional Authority that runs Iraq under occupation.
''Take cover! Take cover!'' warned recorded messages in the compound, words that echoed across the city as if to remind citizens of the fragile security situation. Helicopters immediately arrived overhead and patrolled the area for some time, but there was no word of any counterstrike.
Rocket and mortar attacks on the compound are a fairly regular occurrence, as are similar attacks on bases around the country. So, too, are attacks on Iraqi police officers, seven of whom were killed in three separate incidents late Sunday and on Monday.
Elsewhere in Baghdad, a roadside bomb killed one Iraqi civilian and wounded two, Reuters reported. That, too, is a common event.
The attacks, running at more than 20 a day with targets of Iraqi civilians and security forces as well as the American military and its international occupation partners, present one of the thorniest problems confronting the allies' plan, worked out with the handpicked Iraqi Governing Council, for handing over sovereignty to Iraq.
The United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, was expected to make his decision known on Tuesday on whether to send a United Nations team to Iraq to examine that plan and to suggest refinements in the voting procedures to meet local objections. The Coalition Provisional Authority and the Iraqi Governing Council requested the move at a meeting with Mr. Annan in New York last Monday. While he indicated that he would agree to the request, he asked for time to assess the security situation for United Nations staff. A two-person United Nations security team arrived in Baghdad on Friday.
Though the Bush administration had kept the United Nations out of the transition planning, it reversed field after Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, a powerful Shiite Muslim cleric, dismissed the American-devised arrangements and insisted on direct elections instead.
When the United States protested that there was not enough time to organize direct elections and meet the June 30 target date for returning sovereignty to the Iraqis, Ayatollah Sistani said he would withdraw his objections only if the United Nations verified the claim and suggested changes in the present caucus-based selection procedures for an interim government.
United Nations diplomats in New York said they expected Mr. Annan to cooperate and an election team to be on its way to Iraq by next week.
The American authorities have said it would be impractical to hold direct elections this summer, but they usually cite practical considerations like the difficulty of building voter rolls, rather than security problems. The Iraqi interior minister, Nouri Badran, cited both factors at a news conference in the government compound on Monday when he spoke against quick elections.
''We ask for this matter to be postponed, even if it is for a short time, until all the political and security preparations can ensure that elections can run in a free and stable manner,'' he said.
