WHEN Jack Germond, the longtime political reporter for The Baltimore Sun, turned 72 in the midst of covering the 2000 New Hampshire primary, his wife, Alice, gave a surprise party in a hotel bar -- Quackers at the Wayfarer Inn -- that he had been known to frequent with clocklike regularity every four years.
''She and I had gone out to dinner and I was ready to call it a day,'' Mr. Germond recalled recently. ''But she said, 'Oh, let's go have a nightcap.' We went in there, and there was a camera crew from CNN and all my old cronies -- Tom Brokaw, Al Hunt. It was quite a mob.''
As the crowd of politicians, reporters and campaign operatives milled around, friends presented Mr. Germond with a token of the many years he had spent braving the New Hampshire winters: a barstool from the hotel, with a plaque engraved with the reporter's name. It now rests in a place of honor in the family room in Mr. Germond's home in Charles Town, W.Va.
For generations, there have been legendary hotels where the rich, the famous and the powerful have congregated: the George V in Paris, Claridge's in London, the Waldorf-Astoria in New York, Raffles in Singapore.
And then -- every four years -- there is the Wayfarer Inn, in the town of Bedford, N.H. (population 20,000).
As the longtime hub for politicians and the media during the New Hampshire presidential primary, the Wayfarer has long been an integral part of the electoral season -- its picturesque covered bridge and rushing waterfall the background for thousands of stand-up shots for the nightly news; its bar the common ground for rival journalists looking to escape the New Hampshire deep freeze.
''I used to say it was the political equivalent of the 'Star Wars' bar,'' said Tom Brokaw, the managing editor and anchor of the ''NBC Nightly News.'' ''You would see everybody there. You could do more business with every campaign in 10 minutes at the Wayfarer bar. And the candidates would wander in. You could stand in the corner and have a beer with Jerry Brown, for example, when he was running.''
Craig Crawford, a columnist for The Congressional Quarterly and a political analyst for ''The Early Show'' on CBS and for MSNBC, first visited the Wayfarer in 1976 when he was working for Jimmy Carter's campaign. ''I remember walking into that bar as a kid and seeing Jack Germond and Jules Witcover sitting there,'' he said. ''I really felt that I had arrived. Back then, it was a standard ritual to check out the Wayfarer and make sure that those two were standing guard. It was very exciting to see the Mount Rushmore of political journalists all assembled in one place.''
''At certain times, Jimmy Breslin, David Broder, Mike Barnacle, Mary McGrory, Judy Woodruff, Mark Shields, you name it, would be in that bar,'' reminisced Jerry Dunfey, whose family built the Wayfarer in 1962 and sold it to the Flatley Company in the early 1990's. ''In the old Cracker Barrel Lounge, there was a massive round of Cheddar cheese and a barrel of Westminster crackers greeting you at the door. And we would always have large wooden bowls of apples. I remember The Boston Globe taking a picture of Ed Muskie chomping into one of those apples in the lobby.''
It is not for nothing, however, that many of the Wayfarer's fans seem to be speaking largely of the hotel in the past tense. While the Wayfarer still draws a crowd every four years -- the CBS team is staying there this week, and the ubiquitous waterfall continues to make its nightly network appearance -- the hotel is no longer as prominent as it once was. In the same way that the New Hampshire primary itself no longer plays the singular role it did (with Iowa, South Carolina and even Michigan having crowded into the picture over the last few election seasons), the Wayfarer has begun to lose its place as the quadrennial social epicenter of the political world, as reporters have become more concerned with high-speed Internet access in their rooms (the Wayfarer has dial-up access only) and filing constant updates to their networks' 24-hour cable outlets than they are in having a cold beer waiting for them in the bar.
''We are all so much more boring now,'' explained Tucker Carlson, the co-host of ''Crossfire'' on CNN, who recalled being challenged to a late-night bar fight at the Wayfarer in the 1990's. ''At least I know I am. Everybody has been turned into a wire service reporter. Hardly anybody drinks anymore. Put it this way, it's hard to be drunk if you are always filing to the Web or appearing on TV.''
Emerging as a powerful rival to the Wayfarer in recent years is the Center of New Hampshire Holiday Inn in downtown Manchester, about three miles away. If the Wayfarer is famous for its covered bridge, ducks and waterfall -- its very New Hampshireness -- the Holiday Inn is heralded for its convenience and size. With 250 rooms and 65,000 square feet of meeting space (accommodating roughly 2,500 people), the Holiday Inn is the largest convention center and hotel in New England north of Boston, eclipsing the Wayfarer with its 194 rooms and convention space for 1,000 people. (This year, the Holiday Inn will provide work space for NBC, ABC and C-Span, as well as for several local stations from Maine.)
''During the primary I now call the Holiday Inn at the Center of New Hampshire the Holiday Inn at the Center of the Universe,'' said Mark Halperin, the political director for ABC News. ''It is within four to five blocks from all the campaign headquarters. It simply can't be beat for location.''
So these days the Wayfarer fulfills a largely nostalgic role, as a vestige of a time when covering presidential campaigns had a touch of glamour about it.
''The Wayfarer is absolutely emblematic of a time when reporters had to file once a day at Western Union,'' observed Karen Tumulty, the national political correspondent at Time magazine, who remembers first stepping into the Wayfarer in 1984 on the evening of Gary Hart's New Hampshire upset. ''We're all now so tied to our laptops, cellphones and BlackBerries. Once-a-day filing with a lot of time on our hands just doesn't happen anymore. And it used to be that the campaigns actually had to talk to you. Now, you just get inundated with their e-mails all day long.''
''I'm an absolute embodiment of the way things have changed,'' said Ellen Warren, a senior correspondent at The Chicago Tribune who has been covering presidential campaigns for more than 20 years. ''Now the deadlines are around the clock. In the 2000 race, I filed one report for the paper. This year, I am doing that, plus writing a blog and going on television. The only thing that I am going to be missing is a satellite dish hanging from my head.''
''In the good old days,'' Ms. Warren said, ''reporters used to swap tips about the best bars and restaurants. Now, it is all about which hotels have gone wireless or have the best hours in their business center.''
''WHAT technology has brought us is more reporters and more competition,'' said Chuck Todd, editor in chief of The Hotline, a political newsletter. ''And more competition means less time for alcohol. God only knows what this has done to campaign road sex. You used to be able to keep an eye on your competition just by sitting at the bar. There were enough bar stools at the Wayfarer to go around for all the top reporters. That's not the case anymore.''
''Everybody used to hang out, waiting to see who would show up,'' said Nance Carrier, who has been a bartender at the Wayfarer for 23 years. Over the years, Ms. Carrier observed, ''The Boys on the Bus'' have become a bit tamer. ''For the most part, I would say that they are now more sippers,'' she said. ''They just sit there and sip their drink slowly, and you almost want to tell them that it is a five dollar cover charge just to sit at the bar.''
''I was in my early 20's when I started doing this, and I was in awe,'' added Ms. Carrier, who recalls juggling drinks during her first primary in 1984 and trying desperately not to spill them on the likes of Tom Brokaw and Jack Germond. ''It was so exciting to be behind the bar, listening to all of the conversations that were going on.''
For his part, Mr. Germond, who retired in 2000 from The Baltimore Sun after publishing ''Fat Man in a Middle Seat: Forty Years of Covering Politics'' in 1999, laughed heartily when remembering his Wayfarer days, and the gift of the barstool. ''You couldn't have the rooms that they called Waterside, because the ducks in the pond would wake you up at 6 in the morning. You wanted to be housed in the Upper Falls building.''
Mr. Brokaw acknowledged that some of the fun is now missing from campaign coverage, recalling again that birthday party in 2000. ''I remember Jack came up to me at that party we had at the Wayfarer for him,'' Mr. Brokaw said. ''We had a whole corner reserved. We were watching the Super Bowl on the one hand, talking politics on the other and celebrating Jack. Jack threw his arm around me and said, 'Brokaw, these kids today are going to the gym and drinking Perrier water at the end of the day. I've got to get out of this business.' ''
RITUALS  Correction:  January 30, 2004, Friday  An article last Friday about the Wayfarer Inn in Bedford, N.H., a longtime hub for politicians and news people during the state's primary, misspelled the surname of a journalist who was spotted there. He is Mike Barnicle, not Barnacle.
