Phil Roy, a singer and songwriter, obtained two bookings about the same time last autumn. One, his New Year's Eve performance, was set in the basement-level community hall of an apartment building in West New York, N.J., north of Weehawken. The other takes place tomorrow almost directly across the Hudson River, where he will be the featured performer for Lincoln Center's American Songbook series, in the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse.
''This is my life right now,'' explained Mr. Roy in a gentle voice that carried shades of humor, a little ache but no self-pity. ''I drive six hours to open for somebody to make 50 bucks and sell a CD, and I'm playing at Lincoln Center. Can you figure it out?''
The last few months have been exhilarating and perplexing for Mr. Roy. Having left a successful Hollywood songwriting career of 20 years to begin performing his own music four years ago, he has achieved both recognition and the humility that often comes with brave artistry outside the mainstream. In October Stephen Holden of The New York Times declared ''Issues and Options,'' Mr. Roy's latest album, which is rooted in pop, soul and folk, ''one of the year's two or three most satisfying albums by an American singer/songwriter.'' But when Mr. Roy tried to locate a copy of his CD recently at a store near Radio City Music Hall, he recalled, ''The manager said he'd never heard of me.''
Yet his Lincoln Center debut is not significant just for him. Mr. Roy's appearance also puts the American Songbook audience on official notice that the series, now in its sixth season, has changed from its original sole purpose of promoting American popular standards -- the songs of composers like Richard Rodgers, Jerome Kern and their descendants, Stephen Sondheim and Cy Coleman.
''Having Phil Roy in our series makes a statement about what the series is about,'' said Jane Moss, Lincoln Center's vice president for programming. ''We are looking at the whole universe of American popular song from the founding of our country to our own time. Part of our mission is to introduce classic popular standards but also other kinds of American popular song to a younger audience and a new audience.''
Ms. Moss said she believed there was a connection between the unguarded emotionality of Mr. Roy and the urbane sophistication of, say, Cole Porter. ''It has to do with intelligence and complexity,'' Ms. Moss said. ''Not style, but the depth of meaning.''
Mr. Roy's solo career had a mundane catalyst: a midlife crisis. He had been making a nice living writing music for other people -- formidable people -- to perform. They include Ray Charles, the Neville Brothers, Joe Cocker and Pops Staples. Nicolas Cage recorded one of Mr. Roy's songs for the ''Leaving Las Vegas'' soundtrack. But in show business, especially in Los Angeles, Mr. Roy found it easy to feel like a fringe element as friends achieved Hollywood-style success and became multi-millionaires.
''I believe prosperity is a beautiful thing, but then it goes into another level of opulence,'' said Mr. Roy, who may have the rumpled aura of a soulful teddy bear but still wears Oliver Peoples sunglasses and Versace slacks. ''I had a lot of fun but also found it very, very empty in the end because I felt I was hanging out in a life that wasn't mine.''
He grew up as Philip Roy Lipshutz, in north Philadelphia, where his family operated a shoe store passed down from his grandmother to his father to his brother. He didn't have to rebel to become a musician; his father happily paid the tuition for him to attend the Berkelee College of Music in Boston. Mr. Roy (who dropped the family name at age 17) left school after two years to write songs and to make records.
He moved to Los Angeles, cooking at a falafel place on Melrose Avenue to support himself -- until his father visited him and told him to quit and focus on his music. When Mr. Roy objected, he recalled, ''My father got choked up and said, 'What have I worked so hard for my whole life if I can't share it with my sons?' ''
But not even manifest parental pride and love could temper the outsize expectations created by the world in which Mr. Roy eventually traveled. At 40 he felt his career was at an impasse because he had never achieved a No. 1 hit. ''Great people were singing my songs, but I lived in a world where what mattered was how many records do they sell,'' he said. ''One day, I realized that it took me 17 1/2 years to reach No. 59 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, the highest I had ever charted. Suddenly it occurred to me that I was writing songs to get on commercial radio when I wasn't even listening to commercial radio. I was making music for everyone but myself.''
Mr. Roy was unhappy for another reason, too. ''I'd been writing love songs my whole life and had never had a relationship that lasted three years,'' he said. ''My heart was aching because that's what I wanted. It drove me nuts.'' That yearning would be echoed in a haunting ballad called ''Hope in a Hopeless World'' in which Mr. Roy sings:
You gotta listen to the voice inside you
That speaks of love
Don't compromise
Realize
That time is passing by.
It didn't help his despairing frame of mind that a big movie deal fell through. Mr. Roy considered a complete career change. Though he gave up the falafel job, he continued to cook for fun. That talent, he said, he acquired from his mother, who made a perfect roast chicken. Preparing meals for friends was his way of socializing. He began collecting catalogs from culinary academies, thinking he might become a professional chef.
Instead, in 2000, he turned his life upside-down another way. He sold his motorcycle, his car and a piece of art to pay for studio time and recorded his own album, which he then distributed himself. The album, ''grouchyfriendly,'' got radio play and notice from other musicians, including Tom Waits and Leonard Cohen. He sold 8,000 copies -- and found a wife named Abby.
She had sent him an e-mail message after hearing ''Melt,'' which he wrote with Mr. Cage, a song whose lyrics describe a fierce, heartbroken love. ''She told me she'd been driving down the road in suburban Philadelphia and pulled to the side of the road and was weeping,'' he said. Then he clarified: ''She'd never e-mailed anybody before. She didn't even have an e-mail account but used somebody else's.'' They met on Nov. 29, 2000, a moment Mr. Roy memorialized in a short song called ''The 29th Day.'' Four months later Mr. Roy packed his belongings and headed East with his dog and his cat.
He and his wife married exactly one year after they met and settled in a small town not far from Philadelphia, where his landlord is his mother-in-law. ''I'm a little late to the game,'' said Mr. Roy, who was wearing an orange scarf his mother-in-law gave him. ''At 41 I got married. At 44 I'm looking to buy my first house. I want us to have a baby.''
Mr. Roy produced his second album, ''Issues and Options,'' on his own again, but this time the CD was picked up by a small distributor called Or Music. He began playing the club circuit, sometimes in obscure spots, but also in New York at influential places: Makor, the Bottom Line, Joe's Pub.
The man who booked him to play the community room in West New York on New Year's Eve was a fan who had come to several of Mr. Roy's New York shows. When Mr. Roy arrived that evening, seven people, whose ages ranged from 40 to 82, were waiting in the room, which was decorated with a few Happy New Year banners. ''I was disillusioned,'' said Mr. Roy. ''The New York Times had just recommended my album, I was booked in Lincoln Center and here I was in a basement with seven people.'' As he began his first song his nose began to bleed, which had never happened to him before. ''I was so upset I was having a physical reaction,'' he said. He composed himself in the bathroom and then returned to try again.
At first, he said, he closed his eyes and pretended he was already singing at Lincoln Center. But then he looked at his audience. There was an Iranian woman in her 40's wearing a diamond bracelet and necklace and an 82-year-old woman who ran upstairs to her apartment to get Mr. Roy a battery for his microphone. He stepped down from the makeshift stage and walked over to sing next to their table. A few more people wandered in, bringing the crowd to about a dozen. After Mr. Roy finished, there was food and conversation. He met a woman whose mother was a friend of Rosa Parks, and talked to people from Somalia, and the Iranian woman, who said her grandmother had been a princess under one of the shahs.
''I was so sad when I first got there,'' Mr. Roy said. ''But as I went through the night and sang my songs and got to know this group of people, it was like: You now what? New Year's Eve, 2004? Cool.''
The next day Mr. Roy called Heitor Pereira, the accomplished Brazilian guitarist, a friend and collaborator, who had toured with the popular band Simply Red. After listening to Mr. Roy's story, Mr. Pereira told him, ''I used to play in front of thousands of people, and I met no one. You had the chance to connect with people.''
Mr. Roy said he had come to appreciate the strange poetry of his current life, epitomized by these very different bookings on separate sides of the Hudson. Otherwise, he said, ''It's like writing for Ray Charles and Pop Staples and these American treasures and it not being good enough. But it has to be.''
On His Own
The singer and songwriter Phil Roy will appear tomorrow night at 8 at the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse, Lincoln Center.
Tickets are $45 and available at the Alice Tully Hall box office through CenterCharge, (212) 721-6500, or online at www.lincolncenter.org.
Mr. Roy's CD's ''grouchyfriendly'' and ''Issues and Options'' (Or Music) are available in music stores, through Internet outlets and at www.philroy.com.
