Congress finally finished last year's spending business on Thursday, sending the president an overdue, $820 billion measure that finances most of the federal government as well as thousands of home-state projects sought by lawmakers.
The approval came despite serious disputes over provisions on food labeling, media ownership, school vouchers, overtime rules and other issues. But Democrats, unwilling to engage in a showdown that could cause a government shutdown, signaled that they were ready to let the measure become law after stalling it earlier this week. It was approved 65 to 28 immediately after the Senate voted 61 to 32 to cut off a filibuster.
''It is time to move on,'' said the Senate majority leader, Bill Frist of Tennessee, who indicated that he had his own reservations about elements of the bill. ''You do the best you can.''
As Congress completed work on this year's spending bills, the White House disclosed details of President Bush's budget proposal for next year. In an appearance in New Mexico on Thursday, Mr. Bush said he would seek a 9.7 percent increase in spending on domestic security, to about $30 billion.
Administration officials said Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld would call on Friday for a 7 percent increase in military spending, representing a rise of about $26 billion, to $395 billion. The administration is also expected to make a supplemental request later in the year for additional money to pay for continued military operations in Iraq.
Though Democrats allowed the spending package to advance, they promised to return to the Senate floor to try to undo some new policies and restore a Congressional ban on overtime pay rules being put in place by the Bush administration.
''We will be back again and again and again,'' said the Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota. ''These issues will not go away. We will continue to fight.''
Since Oct. 1, much of the government has been operating at last year's spending levels, under a stopgap measure. It expires at the end of the month and lawmakers faced the choice of passing this bill, extending the interim spending measure or trying to force changes in the legislation through the threat of a government shutdown -- a politically risky move.
Members of Congress were also reluctant to let the spending proposal die because it contained what one group said were more than 7,900 ''earmarks'' for individual local projects valued at nearly $11 billion. ''The thousands of earmarks in this bill provided enough political grease to squeeze this porker out of the Capitol doors,'' said Jill Lancelot, president of the group, Taxpayers for Common Sense.
The Senate action on the catch-all measure, which incorporated seven separate spending bills, clears the Congressional decks for what are likely to be difficult negotiations over the coming year's budget plan. The White House, under pressure from conservatives, is already signaling that it will try to slow spending increases in programs like national parks, law enforcement and education. Many lawmakers are unlikely to support such an approach in an election year.
Though the cost for the omnibus measure passed on Thursday was put at $820 billion, much of that was automatic Medicare and Medicaid spending, with Congress controlling about $328 billion of the total.
Coupled with earlier House approval, the Senate vote concluded a process that was supposed to be done by the start of the fiscal year on Oct. 1. But Mr. Bush's emergency spending request for operations in Iraq and Afghanistan diverted Congress's attention and the spending bills bogged down in partisan disputes as well as policy fights between Republicans in the House and Senate.
The overtime rules were a major sticking point. As part of one of the individual spending measures, the Senate last year voted to block a Labor Department proposal that unions had said would restrict the ability of thousands of workers to qualify for overtime pay. The House took the same position in a nonbinding vote. But the White House insisted that the ban be dropped and threatened a veto; it was eliminated. Democrats say they will try to put it back through other legislation.
''The president nullified the clear will of both houses of Congress and the American people today, but this issue will not be brushed aside,'' said Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa.
Despite Congressional resistance, the spending measure also expands the ability of large media companies to acquire more television outlets. The Federal Communications Commission had agreed to let companies own stations that reach as much as 45 percent of viewers. Congress, backed by some consumer groups, balked, trying to keep the current level of 35 percent. But in the final legislation, the administration, aided by Congressional leaders, won an increase to 39 percent, a benefit to some media conglomerates.
Over the objections of farm-state lawmakers, the measure also delays for two years a requirement approved by Congress that supermarkets label meat, fish and other food by country of origin, a rule its backers said was increasingly important in light of the case of mad cow disease. And the bill will create the first federally financed school voucher program for about 2,000 low-income students in the District of Columbia, though that plan was never able to clear the Senate on its own.
Democrats said the White House and House and Senate Republican leaders violated the spirit of Congressional rules by riding roughshod over the sentiments expressed by both chambers on many issues included in the spending bill.
Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska and chairman of the Appropriations Committee, said it was hardly the first time that items approved by the House and Senate had been stripped from final bills to win approval. ''All in all, this bill is a good consensus,'' he said.
The spending measure includes new money for AIDS prevention, veterans' health care, election system improvements and scores of other initiatives. It also contains a provision that requires federal officials to destroy records on gun purchases within 24 hours instead of waiting 90 days. And it would restrict public access to data on gun dealers tied to illegal gun transfers.
The failure to finish the spending work on time was something of an embarrassment to Republican leaders who had chastised Democrats for the same inefficiency in 2002 and had promised to stick to the timetable after they won control of Congress.
