Thousands of opponents of abortion who gathered on the Mall here on Thursday for the annual ''March for Life'' rally cheered vigorously as President Bush thanked them for their ''devotion to such a noble cause'' and vowed to press ahead with efforts to protect life at all stages.
''Above all, we must continue with civility and respect to remind our fellow citizens that all life is sacred and worthy of protection,'' Mr. Bush said by telephone from Roswell, N.M., his voice amplified through large speakers. ''I know as you return to your communities, you will redouble your efforts to change hearts and minds, one person at a time. And this is the way we will build a lasting culture of life, a compassionate society in which every child is born into a loving family and protected by law.''
The rally, followed by a march to the Capitol and the Supreme Court, came on the 31st anniversary of Roe v. Wade, the Supreme Court ruling that declared a constitutional right to abortion.
Mr. Bush did not explicitly mention any new efforts to overturn the decision, the stated goal of the rally's organizers, the March for Life Education and Defense Fund. But he enumerated steps he had taken to restrict abortions, including his signing into law last November of a measure outlawing a procedure that the law calls partial-birth abortion.
The law, which opponents say includes language that could ban more common abortion procedures as well, was blocked almost immediately by federal judges in New York, California and Nebraska, with appellate reviews in each case scheduled to start March 29. But Mr. Bush promised the crowd that his administration would vigorously defend this law, adding, ''We all know there is still more to do.''
Even as the president was cheered on by the crowd at the Mall, advocates of abortion rights were also digging in. After a morning rush-hour rally along Connecticut Avenue to commemorate the Roe decision, one of a dozen sponsored by Planned Parenthood around the country on Thursday, Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California, introduced a measure to prohibit the government from interfering with reproductive rights. Identical to a House bill introduced by Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York, it would protect women from discrimination on the basis of reproductive decisions and would invalidate current restrictions on abortion and family planning services.
The views reflected by the opposing sides framed what is certain to become a major issue in the November elections. Several of the 15 lawmakers, all Republicans, who addressed the rally on the Mall urged people to support only antiabortion candidates.
''Ten years ago, there were only two from Kansas,'' said Representative Todd Tiahrt, Republican of Kansas, referring to members of the state's Congressional delegation who opposed abortion rights. ''Now there are all but one. Help pro-lifers in your state.''
Another speaker, Representative Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, is staking much of his campaign for the Senate this year on conservative views that include staunch opposition to abortion rights. He is opposing Senator Arlen Specter, a moderate who is seeking a fifth term. Mr. Specter is one of the few Republicans to face a primary challenge from the right.
Mr. Toomey implored the crowd to re-elect ''our pro-life president'' and referred obliquely to his own campaign by reminding the crowd that the Senate determines which judges sit on the federal bench.
''We have to reclaim our courts,'' he said, ''and to reclaim our courts we have to reclaim our Senate.''
As the host for the rally, Nellie J. Gray, president of the March for Life fund, rarely let a moment pass without emphasizing the overarching goal of the antiabortion movement. In her opening remarks, Ms. Gray said, ''We are here to say to Washington officialdom and to the whole world that Roe v. Wade must be overturned.''
The urgency of the message and the animation of the messengers were not lost on Gloria Feldt, president of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, who said she recognized the difficulties of passing any legislation at a time when so many of the Republicans controlling Congress and the White House oppose abortion.
''We're not likely to get a hearing on this bill,'' Ms. Feldt said of the Boxer-Nadler measure. ''But that shouldn't stop anyone. The early suffragists waited a long time to get the vote. We're in it for the long haul, too.''
