Charles A. Duelfer, the former No. 2 United Nations weapons inspector for Iraq, is likely to be named soon to succeed David Kay as the leader of the American team searching in that country for evidence of illicit weapons, according to senior American officials.
Mr. Duelfer recently expressed deep public skepticism that any chemical or biological weapons would be found in Iraq, and he has suggested that the task ahead for American inspectors may be understanding Iraq's intentions on illicit weapons rather than any actual arsenal.
For that reason, Mr. Duelfer's choice could be disputed among those in the Bush administration who have stuck to the view that illicit weapons -- cited by the administration as a principal reason for going to war -- will eventually be discovered.
No final decision has been made, the senior officials said, but they said that Dr. Kay, who signaled in December that he might step down, has since made clear he will not stay on, and they described Mr. Duelfer as the leading candidate to succeed him. Mr. Duelfer's likely nomination was first reported on Wednesday night by NBC News.
The decision rests primarily in the hands of George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, to whom Dr. Kay reported as a senior adviser. Dr. Kay's successor would almost certainly hold the same title, administration officials said.
A C.I.A. spokesman declined to comment, and Mr. Duelfer and Dr. Kay did not return phone messages.
After nearly eight months of searching, the 1,400-person team headed by Dr. Kay in Iraq has not yet turned up any of the biological or chemical weapons that Bush administration officials said before the American invasion in Iraq were in Iraq's stockpiles. Nor have the inspectors found evidence of an active program to build nuclear weapons, which administration officials cited as another reason for war.
In a Jan. 9 interview on ''Newshour'' on PBS, Mr. Duelfer said, ''The prospect of finding chemical weapons, biological weapons is close to nil at this point.'' He said the inspectors had been ''talking to a lot of Iraqi scientists, anyone who has known where they are, they've spoken to. They've had every incentive to show them where they are, and they have come up with nothing.''
Those statements are much more pessimistic than those offered publicly to date by Bush administration officials. Instead, they have sought to emphasize what President Bush described in his State of the Union address this week as evidence unearthed by Dr. Kay that Iraq was pursuing ''weapons of mass destruction program-related activities,'' like its importation as late as December 2002 of prohibited rocket engines.
Some senior intelligence officials have said it is far too early to rule out the prospect that banned weapons might be found.
In the PBS interview, Mr. Duelfer said: ''There has been every incentive in the world for the Iraqi people and the Iraqi scientists to come forward and say this is where the weapons are. That hasn't happened. So I think the problem right now is what is the extent of the problem and where was it headed? What were the intentions of the regime?''
A former State Department official, Mr. Duelfer served at the United Nations as deputy executive chairman of the United Nations' special commission on Iraq from 1993 until its termination in 2000. In that post, he was the top American official among the United Nations inspectors and served as a link between that team and American intelligence agencies, according to senior government officials.
Near the end of his tenure, the disclosure of a covert American effort to install listening devices and otherwise gather intelligence in Iraq under cover of the inspections effort strained relations between Washington and the United Nations.
Senator John W. Warner, the Virginia Republican who is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, met during the holiday recess with Dr. Kay. On Friday, he said publicly that Dr. Kay had told him that ''a good portion of the work has been done'' but that ''there is a remaining portion that he feels strongly should be completed.''
Dr. Kay issued his last public report on the search in October, and he said he would issue another early this year. A senior American official said Thursday that the new report was still being planned, but that it was unlikely that Dr. Kay would draft it.
