How to exploit the compulsive, florid behavior of groupies? Many television programmers have wondered. Should producers arrange introductions, so viewers can see fans tremble and stars condescend? Should they televise a look-alike contest or a tour of signed guitars?
Maybe they should skip the contrivances and just hang out in parking lots. People who pay to see Cher, Yanni and Motörhead -- the dodo acts, especially -- have got to be weird, right? They probably dress up, get drunk and posture, or even fight by their cars. Someone should be there with a camera.
Driven by this logic or something like it, the documentary series ''Parking Lot'' came into being. Inspired by a 1986 short film, ''Heavy Metal Parking Lot,'' it's a production of Trio, NBC's thrifty and intelligent digital-cable network. ''Parking Lot,'' which will have its premiere on Sunday, is a vérité survey of mad fans around the United States. (''Heavy Metal Parking Lot'' will also appear on Trio.)
The show is free-spirited, loose and fresh in its simplicity. It's straight M.O.S., or man-on-the-street, interviews. It's also founded on a revelation that defeats its conceit: with the exception of Phish fans, people don't congregate in those huge, street-festival parking lots anymore. They don't howl at cameras, sell magic brownies for gas money or create ad hoc cities of cars. Instead they stand in courteous lines on sidewalks, where crowds look disappointingly skimpy.
Another revelation comes at the level of the individual fans: they're not very crazy. They like their big events, to be sure; after concerts they feel empowered (Cher), soothed (Yanni), purified (Motörhead) or happy (Dolly Parton). But except for the odd boozer, meth burnout or professional eccentric, they seem unable to evince much pure lunacy. When one woman is pressed about why she admires Ms. Parton, she replies, somewhat at a loss: ''I love her singing. I really do.''
There are drag queens among the Cher fans, but precious few, and to whom will they be new? The Yanni fans are couples, Greeks and women in their 40's. The Dixie Chicks have peevish detractors. Christina Aguilera's fans dress like her; they are very smiley.
In the context of this prosaic Americana, the zealous Civil War re-enactors and pain-seeking tattoo fanatics may appear to be overdoing it. But then, at a sci-fi gathering, reference is made to the legendary and elusive ''furries'' (or ''plushies''), sought-after weirdos for whom animal costumes and stuffed animals are a fetish. No one actually cops to being a furry, but the search for one is suspenseful.
Phish followers, the archetypal crowd for a show like this, are talkative and organized, with an exalted conception of themselves. About 15 years ago they took over from Deadheads as the country's most ostentatious band-following nomads, and they definitely have a parking-lot tailgating scene. They're also partisan. One guy explains that Phish fans prey on rich kids in Dave Matthews T-shirts and sell them drugs.
Finally, ''Parking Lot'' presents so many groups of fans with so many different styles that you can't help but try to decide whose fans are most appealing. To my mind, the Daytime Emmy Awards crowd outside Radio City was the best; a sequence with various soap-opera fans reciting the plots from their favorite shows worked well and moved faster than the rest of the series. You could almost imagine becoming a fans' fan. Oh, also, the Yanni people were likable. They just wanted to relax.
PARKING LOT  Trio, Sunday-Friday at 9 p.m., Eastern and Pacific times; 8 p.m. Central time.
Liz Mermin, producer; Jack Lechner, Jon Kamen, Frank Scherma and Greg Schultz, executive producers. Andrew Cohen, executive producer for Trio; David Serwatka, supervising producer for Trio. Produced by Radical Media.
HEAVY METAL PARKING LOT  Trio, Sunday at 9:30 p.m., Eastern and Pacific times; 8:30 p.m. Central time.
Created, directed and produced by Jeff Krulik and John Heyn.
TELEVISION REVIEW  Correction:  January 27, 2004, Tuesday  A television review of the Trio channel documentary series ''Parking Lot'' in Weekend on Friday misidentified the owner of that channel. It is Vivendi Universal, not NBC. A deal in which NBC's parent, General Electric, would acquire the entertainment assets of Vivendi Universal still awaits government approval.
