Another Kind Of Sculpture
Like every other museum in the country, the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston looks for inventive ways to increase the size and breadth of its audience. That is the motivation behind ''Speed, Style and Beauty: Cars From the Ralph Lauren Collection,'' to be shown in 2005. The exhibition will present 15 cars by makers like Bugatti, Ferrari, Porsche, Mercedes-Benz, Jaguar and Alfa Romeo.
''I not only want to bring in a broader audience, I want to bring in a more male audience,'' said Malcolm Rogers, director of the museum. ''About every five exhibitions I'm trying to do something that pushes the envelope. If a museum can show a kitchen chair, why can't it show a car?'' Comparing the cars to beautiful sculptures, Mr. Rogers said he hoped they would ''make people look at things more carefully.''
The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum made a similar and very successful effort in 1998, filling its entire rotunda with motorcycles. ''The Art of the Motorcycle'' not only brought in people who had never entered the Guggenheim, it also brought in $2.5 million in ticket sales to about 300,000 visitors.
Mr. Rogers also remembers an exhibition of automobiles at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts in 1995 called ''Moving Beauty,'' which he called spectacular. Knowing that Boston has many car enthusiasts, he approached Paul Russell, a Massachusetts-based vintage car restorer, to find out who were among the great car collectors. That's how he learned about Mr. Lauren's collection.
He both drives the cars and makes them available as props in his advertisements and commercials, his company says.
Among the highlights of the show will be a 1938 Bugatti Type 57SC Atlanta Coupe and a rare 1930 Mercedes-Benz SSK with an Art Nouveau exterior and an interior of wood, brushed metal and leather. For context, the display will include automotive imagery like design drawings, period advertising and vintage photographs.
Because ''Speed, Style and Beauty'' is still being planned, Mr. Rogers said, it is too soon to know whether it will go to other museums.
Golf Course Gallery
One of the most secret parts of the auction business is what insiders call ''private treaty sales,'' in which auction house experts, like dealers, sell works privately rather than at auction.
Sotheby's, a public company, does not break out these transactions in its financial reports or disclose how many private sales it makes. Christie's, a privately owned company, does not talk about this side of its business either.
So it comes as something of a surprise that Sotheby's wants people to know about a group of 11 monumental sculptures by artists like Dubuffet, Rodin, Dalí and Henry Moore that were recently installed around an 18-hole golf course in Florida, all available for private sale by collectors eager to capitalize on the strong sculpture market right now.
The course is in Isleworth, a gated community and country club in Windermere, Fla. Residents include the golfer Tiger Woods, the basketball player Shaquille O'Neal and the baseball star Ken Griffey Jr. Perhaps equally surprising: one of Isleworth's owners is Joseph Lewis, a foreign exchange trader who at one time was among Christie's largest shareholders.
''The owner of this development called and said he wanted to put a few sculptures around the golf course and that he'd pay for the transport of the pieces,'' said Stephane Connery of Sotheby's Impressionist and modern art department.
So now a Dubuffet stands behind the 18th green and there is a Henry Moore between the 1st and 10th tees. Members of the country club, collectors and dealers have received a full-color catalog of the works, produced by Sotheby's. Just as dealers don't include prices in their catalogs, neither has Sotheby's. (Prices range from $400,000 to $5.5 million.)
''It's nice to be able to engage people,'' Mr. Connery said, ''to see who's looking for what.''
While Mr. Connery would not comment, experts in the field said three of the sculptures, all by Henry Moore, belong to Mr. Lewis. Mr. Connery said the owners come from all over the world.
The most important sculpture is Rodin's seminal figure of Balzac, nearly 10 feet tall. Mr. Connery said he considered it among the greatest works by Rodin, adding, ''Balzac is quoted saying it was the sum of his whole life.'' The asking price is $3.5 million.
If you're not a member of the country club but are interested in the sculptures, Mr. Connery added, ''We can accommodate people who want to see them.''
For Future Warhols
The charter of the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts allows it to support only museums, arts organizations and cultural institutions in the area of visual arts. But it has found a way to give money to individual artists. This week it committed $10 million -- $1 million a year for nine years and $1 million for cash reserves -- to Creative Capital, a foundation established in 1999 to support individual artists.
''This is a way to complement our other funding and make sure a substantial amount goes to artists,'' said Joel Wachs, the Warhol Foundation's president. ''It's a way of helping future Andys.''
Creative Capital was formed to help counter the decline in support from the National Endowment for the Arts in 1995. The Warhol Foundation was one of its initial supporters and gives it office space in its headquarters on Bleecker Street. The gift is by far the largest made by the Warhol Foundation, Mr. Wachs said. ''Most of our grants are under $100,000.''
Since its inception Creative Capital has financed 158 projects in film, photography, painting, sculpture and performance art. It also helps artists with things like career development and financial planning.
Inside Art  Correction:  January 29, 2004, Thursday  A brief report in the Inside Art column of Weekend on Friday about a coming exhibition of Ralph Lauren's vintage cars at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston misstated the model of his 1938 Bugatti. It is a Type 57SC Atlantic Coupe, not Atlanta Coupe.
