NOBODY better understands how long and potentially painful the Nets' road from New Jersey to Brooklyn might be than a man who has taken many a labored step with them, from that night in 1967 when they opened the doors to the Teaneck Armory.
The Nets were called the New Jersey Americans and the opponents in that now-ancient American Basketball Association debut were the Pittsburgh Pipers. ''Pittsburgh had Connie Hawkins and our star was Tony Jackson, the best pure jump shooter I've ever seen,'' Herb Turetzky said.
Hoisting a colorful ball in a renegade league, it was Hawkins against Jackson, both tainted by college basketball scandal and shunned by the N.B.A. They were a couple of Kings County guys in a game officially scored by Turetzky, himself out of Brownsville and Jefferson High School and Long Island University in the downtown Brooklyn area the Nets are apparently headed to.
''Looks like it's happening, but who knows how long it will take?'' Turetzky, still scoring after all these years, said yesterday, the morning after Bruce C. Ratner made a deal to purchase the Nets for $300 million. ''I just wish I was a younger man so I'd have a better chance to go back with them.''
Turetzky is 58, and his entire adult life has been tied to this peripatetic franchise that has just done a 180-degree spin in midair, hoping to land in a $435 million arena whose proposal has already pitted the forces of development against the protectors of small-business and residential rights.
What could take years to untangle is not his struggle, though give him a vote and he will point east. ''How can I be sad about New Jersey?'' he asked. ''I've enjoyed the people there, but they never embraced the team.''
Understandably, Turetzky's definition of a true believer is hopelessly romantic, nurtured at a time when the pro game was no billion-dollar industry, no digitized picture of high definition. When the Nets-nee-Americans left Teaneck for Commack on Long Island after one season, it was the pursuit of an arena in which the heat and hot water worked.
An educator by trade, Turetzky continued his courtside moonlighting, following Max Zaslofsky, the team's general manager and coach, who was a Brownsville connection. Working for the Nets, Turetzky said, was ''never a job, always a passion,'' and he gladly accompanied them from New Jersey to New York and back to New Jersey, to their eclectic and humble homes. It was on the way to the Commack arena along the Long Island Expressway one evening that Turetzky took his own life-altering and near-tragic turn.
''Somehow I lost control and crashed into a westbound car,'' he said. ''That's all I really remember.'' That, and the fact that it was Nov. 3, 1968, the day the Nets traded Tony Jackson.
For six weeks after the accident, Turetzky remained in a coma. For six months he was laid up, his left leg shattered. From then on, he would be saddled with neuromuscular damage to both legs, requiring great effort to walk.
Through the years, Turetzky has been a most gracious courtside figure, turning stiffly to greet the familiar voice saying hello from behind. So many people have come and gone through the Nets' revolving door. Turetzky, outlasting them all, could tell you the strangest tales about a franchise far from storied.
More recently, retirement had been on his mind, the drive from his home in Bayside, Queens, getting no easier and walking being increasingly difficult. But now comes the news that his beloved Nets may someday move in down the street from where he made adolescent visits to the orthodontist, to the borough that long ago was to him the center of the basketball universe.
His wife, Jane, is advising him to hang in there, to see if Ratner can pull this Brooklyn deal off. ''It's got to be three, four years at least,'' Turetzky said. At this stage, who could be accused of being too skeptical by adding ''if ever''?
Ratner's $300 million was obviously greener than Charles Kushner's late matching bid because Lewis Katz, one of the current Nets owners, saw a better opportunity to partner up in Brooklyn and because the N.B.A. clearly preferred New York City to New Jersey, the radical move to the status quo.
On the New Jersey side, the bitterness is profound, all the more reason for Ratner to consider exercising his right to terminate the Nets' lease before the end of this year and flee the Meadowlands the season after next. Maybe David Stern, the N.B.A. commissioner, can twist a Dolan arm at Madison Square Garden and bring about temporary coexistence with the Knicks.
More likely is a multiyear stay at an old Nets encampment, the Nassau Coliseum, so the team can begin marketing preferred seating locations to fans in the Brooklyn-Queens corridor and begin construction of a practice facility near the gated, golf-friendly suburban community Jason Kidd is bound to settle in. N.B.A. stars, Ratner will soon learn, don't do brownstone walkups.
Much sooner than later, Herb Turetzky could find himself navigating those harrowing and haunting Long Island roadways. Which would be fine, he said, as long as they eventually come full circle, bringing him all the way home.
Sports of The Times
