The Bush administration said Thursday that it had teamed up with Saudi Arabia to freeze the assets of four branches of a major Islamic charitable foundation that they accused of providing financial support to terrorist groups.
The two governments singled out branches in Kenya, Tanzania, Pakistan and Indonesia of the Al-Haramain Charitable Foundation, one of Saudi Arabia's largest charities.
The first step to freezing the assets is seeking a United Nations designation that an organization is a conduit for terrorist financing. Once the designation is made, countries are expected to freeze the money.
Saudi officials said that they had taken many steps to rein in charities that funnel money to Islamic terrorist groups and that they had ordered Al-Haramain to close all overseas branches. But they said they were not prepared to act against the parent organization, which they said had raised as much as $50 million a year and financed legitimate charitable projects.
Treasury Secretary John W. Snow announced the move alongside Adel al-Jubeir, a foreign policy adviser to Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia. The main point of the announcement seemed to be to emphasize the cooperation of the Saudi government, which has come under criticism in the past year for tacitly condoning organizations inside Saudi Arabia that funneled money and support to terrorist groups.
The United States has had Al-Haramain in its sights for years, and it has already asked the United Nations to designate the charity's branches in Somalia and Bosnia-Herzegovina part of a terrorist network.
Since early 2002, the United States has worked with Saudi officials to seek a United Nations designation that would allow the assets of several other groups to be frozen. American officials also set up a joint task force with their counterparts in Riyadh to investigate terrorist financing. The results so far have been modest. After freezing more than $100 million in the first six months after Sept. 11, 2001, American officials have been able to block relatively little since. The Treasury Department said it has blocked $139 million, about the same as it had blocked a year ago, despite adding many groups to its list of suspected terrorist support networks.
