COME the dead of winter, tens of thousands of parents nationwide embark upon the Great Family Ski Vacation. This is monumental considering the gear alone: skis, boots, poles, helmets, gloves, parkas, ski pants, neck gaiters -- never mind diapers and an Xbox. There are also the logistics of transportation (fly or drive? fly and drive?) and the organizational challenges of lift tickets, lodging and lessons. Planning a family ski trip can be as daunting as laying the groundwork for a Himalayan expedition.
And truth be told, for parents, the dirty secret to a successful family ski vacation is being able to ditch the children. That means finding a resort with reliable day care for the baby, a top ski school for the 5-year-old and, perhaps the most elusive yet, programs that will keep teenagers from utter boredom. Add in a place with good weather (Whistler, British Columbia, can be soggy; Sunday River, Me., can be bone chilling) and moderate altitude (scratch Breckenridge and Arapahoe Basin in Colorado). And if there are snowboarders in the group, forget skier-only resorts like Taos in New Mexico and Deer Valley in Utah.
For Monique and Jamie Cohen, parents of three from Austin, Tex., the solution is Vail in Colorado. ''We look for a wide range of terrain. I like skiing bumps; my wife likes the long, slow burners,'' Mr. Cohen said. ''To be honest, we don't ski together.'' The Cohens also look for a place that provides enough off-slope activities to keep the troops entertained. ''We don't ski every day we're up there. We'll take a day off to go sledding or kick around town,'' he said. ''The nicest thing for us is to see the kids roll around in the snow. It's a blast.''
These days, any major destination ski resort -- for example, Jackson Hole in Wyoming, Aspen-Snowmass in Colorado and Whistler-Blackcomb -- have all the family-friendly amenities: specialized children's ski schools, an array of lodging and an exhaustive list of off-slope activities. For a price, of course. At Aspen-Snowmass, a day in a group lesson for a 4-year-old can run $105, rentals extra.
And when it comes to family skiing, bigger isn't always better. Because 12-year-old Lauren Stanford has diabetes, her blood sugar must be monitored every two hours. When she was younger, her parents, Moira McCarthy and Sean Stanford had to be able to reach her in minutes. ''We've had to make decisions about skiing based on that,'' said Ms. McCarthy, of Plymouth, Mass., who has another daughter. ''Vail wasn't a good choice for us. In fact, being in Vail and not being able to ski back in Blue Sky Basin would be depressing. We needed to be at a resort where we could swing by and check in on her.''
In Colorado, the compact 1,625-acre Beaver Creek fit the family's special needs. Ms. McCarthy's top choice in the East is Sugarloaf in Maine. At both areas, she said, she can reach the best terrain yet always be a short ski away from the base area.
Fortunately, for most skiers, choosing a destination involves working an algorithm of less-than-life-threatening factors: price, weather, off-slope amenities -- even whether there is bungee-trampoline jumping (try Northstar-at-Tahoe in California) or a two-story slide from the ski school building to the slopes (Copper Mountain in Colorado). Here are seven resorts around the country -- big, little and in-between -- that go extra lengths for families:
SMUGGLERS' NOTCH  Smugglers' Notch, Vt.  (800) 451-8752  www.smuggs.com
DAY AT SKI SCHOOL -- Adventure Rangers (ages 6 to 10) ski or snowboard from 9 a.m. to 2:15 p.m., with breaks for lunch and cocoa, followed by après-ski playtime until 4 p.m; $95 a day, less as part of a package.
FAMILY-FRIENDLY TOUCH -- Smuggs' FunZone has a jousting area where children can make like Lancelot by battering one another with large padded poles.
With two children, Susan and Philip Lefebvre of Farmington, Conn., couldn't face the ordeal of flying. Besides, ''last year, there were 300 inches at Killington,'' said Mrs. Lefebvre, who has been taking her family to Smugglers' since 1990. ''Our attitude has been 'Why go west?' ''
Indeed, this resort of more than 1,000 acres in northern Vermont promotes itself as ''America's Family Resort'' and for nearly two decades has backed up the claim with innovative child-oriented amenities. The most recent: Treasures, a 5,400-square-foot slopeside children's center with heated tile floors, giant fish tanks and one-way mirrors that allow parents to surreptitiously check in on toddlers. On the bunny slope there is even a slow-moving low-to-the-snow chairlift and a cuddly 6-foot rodent named Mogul Mouse to cheer on the youngsters.
But it's not just small children that Smugglers' is trying to please. The mountain has two centers for teenagers (the secret: 18-year-olds and 13-year-olds don't mix) along with an ice rink, indoor heated pool, hot tubs and an inflatable obstacle course.
The Lefebvres' children, now 17 and 20, insist on returning to Smuggs. ''They love it,'' Mrs. Lefebvre said. ''At night they go to the sledding hill or the pool. They also have a bingo night. It sounds strange, but what's old is new. The room is full of teenagers.''
OKEMO  Ludlow, Vt.  (800) 786-5366  www.okemo.com
DAY AT SKI SCHOOL -- The Snow Stars program (ages 4 to 7) runs $85 for a full day (9:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.) with lessons on a dedicated teaching slope.
FAMILY-FRIENDLY TOUCH -- Okemo was the first resort to offer teenagers a break. This season, young people 13 to 18 get a special lift-ticket that is $10 less than the price of a weekend adult pass.
Just 19 miles from the megamountain Killington, Okemo long ago carved out a niche as southern Vermont's family-friendly resort. Condominiums sit alongside beginner trails, so in the morning, it's a quick glide down to ski school. Okie, a large, fluffy penguin character, dispenses hugs at the base, while little skiers hone their skills in a mini-halfpipe on Hot Dog Hill, one of six terrain parks.
''The thing we like about Okemo is that you can count on decent skiing,'' said Pam Lavrich, a pediatric anesthesiologist and mother of three from Allendale, N.J. ''If they don't get the snowfall, they can make it.'' Dr. Lavriche and her husband, Rick, have skied in the West and all over Vermont, but they head to Ludlow every weekend all season.
''The level of the terrain is not as difficult as Killington, but that's not what they emphasize,'' Dr. Lavrich said. ''Okemo is personable. My daughter knows all the instructors on the mountain.''
Okemo's day care center is state-licensed and takes babies as young as six months (some resorts don't take children younger than 2). And though it doesn't have its own facility for teenagers, the Rampage center, a half mile away in Ludlow, draws in older children with an indoor skate rink, weekend D.J.'s and an arcade.
CRESTED BUTTE  Mount Crested Butte, Colo.  (800) 810-7669  www.skicb.com
DAY AT SKI SCHOOL -- The Polar Bears (ages 5 to 7) group lesson costs $92, including lunch and instruction from 9:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. A-types can check in junior as early as 8:30.
FAMILY-FRIENDLY TOUCH -- A torchlight parade guided by instructors in which children ski down a gentle slope with glow sticks in hand, then gorge on pizza ($45). Parents get the evening to themselves.
Crested Butte has long been known as a hard-to-get-to haven for extreme skiers; its North Face area is riddled with double-black-diamond cliffs, steeps and chutes. But these days, as ski areas nationwide are tapping into the family market, a gentler Crested Butte is emerging.
In the last year, airlines have increased flight capacity to Crested Butte by 30 percent. That includes nonstops every Saturday on Continental from Newark to Gunnison, 31 miles from the mountain, making the need for a five-hour drive from the Denver airport (and that was in good weather) a thing of the past. The layout has always been a plus for families. The mountain is a manageable 1,058 acres (compared with nearly 7,100 at Whistler-Blackcomb, for instance), and there is just one base area, making it easy to rendezvous for lunch.
In the last year, Crested Butte has added a new children's terrain park with mini-halfpipe, low rails and easy table-top jump, as well as a free tubing park that opens when the rest of the mountain closes (it will ''make sure the youngsters really sleep well,'' the resort promises).
Children 4 and under ski free, while those 5 to 12 pay their age. For accomplished skiers from 8 to 16, the resort offers all-day ''Rip sessions'' ($175). Specially trained instructors take the capable young skiers on the double-black-diamond Headwall and the North Face, so parents don't have to. ''The kids think it's cool. They have to cross goat trails and cat walks to get to some of the trails,'' said Ellen Osterling, head of the resort's Kid's World. ''It's an adventure.''
At the beginning of January, the resort's owners agreed to sell the mountain to Tim and Diane Mueller, owners of Okemo. ''What drew us to Crested Butte is the potential,'' Mrs. Mueller said. ''They've already been catering more to families. That's evident. But it needs to be marketed. We can bring it to a new level.''
STEAMBOAT  Steamboat Springs, Colo.  (800) 922-2722  www.steamboat.com
DAY AT SKI SCHOOL -- The Rough Riders program is for skiers from first-grade age through 15. A full day (9:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.) runs $89. Depending on the day, there may be a treasure hunt or a vertical challenge race.
FAMILY-FRIENDLY TOUCH -- The sign at the entrance to Rough Rider Basin, an area with tepees and a log cabin playhouse, reads: ''Adults Must Be Accompanied by a Child.''
Steamboat, in northwest Colorado, has had free skiing for children ever since the days of Pac-Man. Today, children 6 to 12 not only ski free, they rent and even fly free with a paying parent. ''Two of mine didn't have to pay last year. That's definitely a bonus,'' said Cheryl Mooney, a mother of four from Princeton, N.J. She likes Steamboat for the variety, on slope and off. ''There's tubing at night, and hot springs in town. And you can take a sleigh ride to a tepee for dinner,'' she said. ''Most kids are tired after skiing, but ours seem to always want to do stuff.''
The Kids' Adventure Club at Night was set up to meeet the needs of people like Mrs. Mooney and her husband, Rob. The camp-like program includes games, movies, tubing, swimming and snacks. The downside to such action-packed après-ski: It can be tough to drag children from their bunks to boot up in time for the first chair.
Like Crested Butte, Steamboat is now easier to reach. Nonstop flights land daily in Hayden, 22 miles from the resort, and Continental makes a trip from Newark every Saturday. ''With four kids, it's huge to get direct flights,'' Mrs. Mooney said.
GRAND TARGHEE  Alta, Wyo.  (800) 827-4433  www.grandtarghee.com
DAY AT SKI SCHOOL -- A full day with lunch in the Powder Scouts program (ages 6 to 14) is $69 and runs from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. For an additional $8 an hour, parents can drop off early or pick up their children later.
FAMILY-FRIENDLY TOUCH -- The resort prints a special childrens' trail map to help tots find places like the humpback forest, a glade filled with moguls.
An hour's drive over Teton Pass from Jackson Hole, Grand Targhee has long lived in the shadow of that bigger, burlier resort. But with some 500 inches of snow annually, Targhee is one of the snowiest ski areas in any state. And while it can't match Jackson's 4,139-foot vertical drop, it does have the Eyeball Forest -- a 350-acre fun zone for children with a bat cave, giant ant hills, and a bobsled-style ski run.
Despite the fact that Alta, population 400, is a less-then-happening town, Targhee has a long list of nonski activities, from snowmobiling to snowshoe tours for teenagers.
And with little nightlife to distract, on-mountain events like Targhee's casino night are popular, even for families. ''You wouldn't think that parents would be wild about little Johnny learning to play craps, but they go nuts over this thing,'' said Susie Barnett-Bushong, director of marketing for Targhee. Dealers are known to bend the rules: Go Fish is an acceptable substitute for blackjack.
Targhee is also easy on the wallet. Children 14 and under ski free with a paying adult, a day at the day care center costs as little as $44 and a one-hour private lesson for a 4-year-old is $49 (it would be upward of $90 an hour at many other resorts).
PARK CITY RESORT  Park City, Utah  (800) 222-7275  www.parkcitymountain.com
DAY AT SKI SCHOOL -- For young skiers who aspire to fly high above the lip of the halfpipe, Park City has added a new school program for the 6-to-13 set. The terrain park and halfpipe serve as the classroom for the $122 six-hour lesson, which includes lift ticket and lunch.
FAMILY-FRIENDLY TOUCH -- At nearby Gorgoza Park, children can gun around on miniature snowmobiles designed for children ages 5 to 12 (110-pound maximum) or go snow tubing down a seven-lane hill.
While the remote resorts are becoming more accessible, the Utah ski resorts remain the ultimate in convenience. Park City Mountain Resort is just 36 miles from Salt Lake International Airport, where more than 350 flights arrive daily. ''It's a big plus in my book to be able to catch an early flight, be in Park City by 11:30, and maybe get some skiing in,'' said Kathy Rubio, a mother of five from Miami Shores, Fla.
For Mrs. Rubio and her husband, Frank, Park City's low elevation is also a big draw. ''When we went to Keystone, three of us got altitude sickness,'' Mrs. Rubio said. (Keystone, in Colorado, has a base elevation of 9,300 feet). The Rubios, whose children range from 8 to 18, also like the diversity of terrain at a big mountain like the 3,300-acre Park City.
''The older ones will take off with their walkie-talkies, and go down the difficult trails. I'll take the little ones and tear up the blues,'' she said. ''There's something to suit everybody.'' And as self-described ''restaurant people,'' the Rubios also like Park City for its bustling Main Street, which is packed with restaurants, shops and galleries.
But the mountain may be better for families with older children. There is no on-slope day care (parents with children younger than 3 can use the Guardian Angels baby-sitting service or the Danville Clubhouse, a drop-in day care center in town). There are plans, however, to build a childcare center at the base of the mountain.
An all-day group lesson starts at $122, with so-called VIP lessons for first-timers running $160 and up, including lunch, lift and rentals.
NORTHSTAR-AT-TAHOE  Truckee, Calif.  (800) 466-6784  www.skinorthstar.com
DAY AT SKI SCHOOL -- The full-day in the Starkids program for ages 7 to 12 includes a lesson, alternative snow recreation (like snow tubing), lift ticket and rentals for $89.
FAMILY-FRIENDLY TOUCH -- A Pizza Phone is situated midmountain near the gondola so families can call in an order for a house-made pie at Cippolini's in the village and pick it up on the way back to the condo.
Northstar may have a milquetoast reputation among locals used to the steeps of Squaw Valley -- some call it Flatstar -- but it does have its own superhero, Captain Safety, who roams the mountain in a yellow cape, quizzing children (and even adults) on how to ski safely.
And while this 2,420-acre resort six miles north of Lake Tahoe serves up primarily intermediate fare, it recently added 200 acres of advanced terrain on Lookout Mountain. The ski school offers ''Mommy (or Daddy) and Me'' lessons, in which instructors spend an hour or two with parent and child, dispensing tips on how to teach toddlers. These clinics carry no extra cost.
The ski area doesn't have a day care center for infants, but it does offer a $58 ''Parent's Predicament'' ticket, which lets couples share one lift ticket. That means moms and dads don't have to swap one ticketed jacket so one can ski while the other babysits.
An illustrated trail map for small skiers helps them find the mountain's Paw Parks, which are filled with small bumps, jumps and hideouts. For older children, Northstar offers the Gravity Garage, which has equipment like snowbikes and snowscooters. ''The kids go absolutely crazy over them.'' said Kevin Bowling, manager of the Gravity Garage. ''They'll do the same run over and over again and have a huge blast.''
JOURNEYS
