LET me say right from the start that I am writing this article with more than a little trepidation.
Six months ago, you see, I moved into a new apartment on Grand Street, on the Lower East Side, after spending the better part of the previous decade in the East Village. One of the reasons for the move -- besides marriage, low interest rates and marriage -- was that the East Village, in my none-too-snooty opinion, had become terrifically, horrifically overrun and overexposed.
Every block was a party block, packed with trendy bars, trendy restaurants and often untrendy people. Avenue A was a constant pub crawl, Avenue B was a cooler version of Avenue A, and Avenue C was starting to become Avenue B. (Don't even get me started on Avenue D.)
So it was that I fled south in search of something a little less popular, a little less celebrity-friendly and, most important, a little quieter on weekends. I went looking for the ancient arrival point of immigrants, a district of pickle shops and dumpling stands, a place of tenement houses and warehouse lofts. I went looking for the Lower East Side, and boy, did I find it.
As always, it is an area in flux. During the 1800's, it was home to hundreds of thousands of Irish, Italian, German and Jewish immigrants fleeing famine, political oppression and economic desolation. Later came waves of Latino and Chinese settlers. They all added their own traditional houses of worship, restaurants and other gathering places.
Now, as the East Village overflows, the neighborhood is once again flooded by newcomers, though the ''immigrants'' this time around are less likely to come from abroad than from more expensive, more gentrified areas of the city. Like generations before them, they are bringing the trappings of their own tastes: new bars, cafes, shops, restaurants (and yep, luxury apartments) are peppering the already dense patchwork of ethnic cultures.
The resulting hybrids are fascinating. There are bars like Barrio Chino, an elegant six-month-old cubbyhole on Broome Street, which serves auténtico Mexican tapas and 50 varieties of tequila, as well as a roster of designer cocktails (raspberry mojitos and red wine caipirinhas); and new restaurants like Les Enfants Terribles, which opened on Canal Street in October and serves Afro-French cuisine and almost always has a D.J. spinning.
Tourists drawn to the Lower East Side Tenement Museum -- which celebrates the courage and harsh living conditions of early residents -- take their lunch at bright, tasty cafes like 88 Orchard, and Brown (part of a nifty little stretch of specialty shops on Hester Street). And artists, always looking for a good deal, have come here, too; rock 'n' roll and readings are held in bar basements, while the Mazer Theater, on East Broadway, has a hit musical on its hands, ''A Stoop on Orchard Street,'' which pays homage to this bargain bazaar street's pushcart and poverty-stricken past (and charges $45 a ticket, $25 for children).
And while I don't want to make it seem too hip for fear of encouraging any more of the teeming masses to come down below Delancey Street, I must say that the neighborhood's unique mix of old and new seems far more interesting than those $5 lattes on Avenue B.
Marking Off Territory
First, let's define our terms. Most experts would argue that the Lower East Side begins at Houston Street and includes everything south to the Manhattan Bridge. But the East Village -- like slacker wildfire -- jumped Houston Street years ago, blazing down Ludlow and Orchard Streets, leaving techno bars, velvet-roped lounges and $9 cosmos in its wake.
In the last five years, that inferno of cool has also torched once-sketchy stretches of Clinton Street (now lined with a half-dozen starry restaurants), Norfolk Street (on the corner of which Keith McNally's Schiller's Liquor Bar now resides), and Attorney Street (the home of Sin-e, the respected music club). So it was that the freewheeling weekend crowds that roam the East Village slowly co-opted the northern parts of the Lower East Side -- from Houston to Delancey Streets -- and turned it into the East Village South.
Those crowds, however, have seemed less eager to cross Delancey Street, a wide red-light-be-damned boulevard that feeds a constant stream of heavy traffic across the Williamsburg Bridge. So for the current survey, the concentration will be on the roads less traveled: those south of Delancey, east of the Bowery, and north of the Manhattan Bridge. Call it the lower Lower East Side, or LoLES for short.
A Glance to the Past
The starting point of any tour is the starting point for many tours: the Tenement Museum, which was established in 1988 and now draws more than 100,000 visitors a year. The museum's ticket office and visitors' center sit at the corner of Broome and Orchard Streets, where the asphalt gives way to brick; the museum itself is at 97 Orchard, as is a small theater.
The theater is one of several in the neighborhood, a list that includes the Abrons Arts Center (part of the Henry Street Settlement) and the Mazer, both of which can handle large Off Broadway-size crowds. But judging from the number of storefronts opening up -- ''For Rent'' signs are common -- it seems just a matter of time before more Off Off Broadway companies migrate south.
Ditto for galleries. Broome Street has one -- the Lower East Side Artisan Exchange -- as does Canal, the Michelle Maccarone Gallery. A new art space, Sky High, is due to open soon in a former dress shop at 371 Grand Street.
When the weather is warm (remember that?), the Tenement Museum offers walking tours that stroll past the neighborhood's synagogues, its settlement houses and, of course, the Doughnut Plant, the specialty doughnut shop (including pumpkin, cranberry and, this week, pomegranate) on Grand Street, which has been destroying people's attempts at the Atkins Diet since 2000. Kossar's, the venerable bialy and bagel joint down the block, has been doing the same type of sabotage for decades, minus the frosting.
The walking tours -- which will start up again in April -- also include some spinach with the sugar, with educational stops at Seward Park (home to the first municipal playground in the city), Straus Square, and the Forward building, where the Jewish socialist daily newspaper used to have its offices. In a sign of the times, the building is being converted into high-end apartments.
'Oh, Wow' Moments
While Grand Street is the main drag, with Chinese vegetable and fish shops to the west of Allen Street and pharmacies, banks and shops to the east, the side streets can offer more intriguing avenues of inquiry. Indeed, one of the joys of the neighborhood is its ''Oh, wow'' effect, the sensation of suddenly finding a new spot in the last place you'd expect.
Walk along Hester Street, for example, between Allen and Essex, and you'll find a stretch populated by a gorgeous sweet shop (the Sweet Life), a brand new gourmet grocery (Orange), an arty cafe (Brown) and an old-time Jewish bakery (Gertel's). Or stroll on Forsyth Street, just north of Grand, where a casual visitor might suddenly find a new subterranean Italian restaurant (Grotto) with an outdoor garden, a Chinese comic and video game shop (Yang Fai Sports and Trading Corporation), a florist (Love Flowers) and two cafes (Monterone and Whisk Et Al.).
Though the predominant cuisine of the Lower East Side remains Chinese -- with a handful of Vietnamese and Malaysian variations -- Grotto, which opened in October, isn't the only new restaurant to try a different ethnic mix. Les Enfants Terribles, new on Canal and Ludlow Streets, mixes French and West African (the chef is from Ivory Coast), while the older Good World Bar and Grill, around the corner on Orchard, has Scandinavian food, of all things. (You know: herring, Swedish meatballs, more herring.) Both places attract the type of good-looking young crowd that likes to eat with Mary J. Blige or Outkast playing in the background and vodka drinks playing in the foreground. Those with sweeter teeth -- or no ID -- head for Il Laboratorio del Gelato, a tony joint next to the Tenement Museum.
When the Sun Goes Down
There are also still some Jewish delicacies to be found in the neighborhood, though such fare has faded somewhat in recent years, especially after Ratner's, on Delancey Street, closed in 2002. The neighborhood can still claim two pickle shops (the Pickle Guys on Essex and Guss's Pickles on Orchard), a kosher catering business on Essex, as well as a kosher bakery and pizza parlor on Grand between Essex and Norfolk. (It's the same block as the Doughnut Plant and Kossar's Bialys, thereby making it the most diet-destroying stretch of road in the neighborhood.)
Then there's Noam Sokolow, who bucked the trend by opening a new kosher delicatessen, Noah's Ark Original Delicatessen, on Grand Street last summer. The deli, which serves everything from French fries to matzo-ball soup in hefty portions, is actually the second ark; the original opened in 1988 in Teaneck, N.J.
Kasha varnishkas notwithstanding (try saying that five times fast), what seems to be bringing the most newbies into the neighborhood, at least to visit, is what happens after most of the shops close. Since 1999, at least a half-dozen new bars have opened below Delancey, with two -- Barrio Chino and Les Enfants -- dating back to the fall, and one as-yet-unnamed spot said to be coming soon to Essex Street.
Two of the pioneers in the neighborhood opened in 2001 on Broome Street: Lolita, a two-level rock 'n' roll hangout with exposed brick walls, big art and an occasional reading or rock show in the basement; and Happy Ending, a swanker lounge with dance music and a regular shoulder-to-shoulder crowd that likes to stay up late. A former massage parlor, the bar has two levels, with downstairs generally more crazed than up; in more sedate moments, the bar also offers readings.
One of the owners of Lolita, Clyde Rennie, 30, said that while some night crawlers are hesitant to cross Delancey, those that do feel rewarded.
''There's a sense of finding something down here, of discovering a spot,'' Mr. Rennie said, slinging beer in his bar's basement. ''And I think that's part of its appeal.''
And Yes, a Velvet Rope
Indeed, true adventurers might also be able to find the mysterious Milk and Honey, a semi-private lounge that also opened several years ago just below Delancey on Eldridge Street. Famed for its handmade cocktails and picky management, the catch with Milk and Honey is that you have to know its address -- and its phone number -- to get in.
The new establishments joined a couple of older joints, including the giant Chinese restaurant and bar, Congee Village (which has -- no kidding -- pretty decent and very cheap cosmopolitans), and 169 Bar, a dressed-up dive on East Broadway that has dressed itself up in recent years with a back garden and very large bouncers.
There was no such thing in front of Barrio Chino last Friday night when I approached with two friends, Zack and Anthony. The brick-walled bar, decorated with Chinese lanterns and those little drink umbrellas, was opened last fall by Dylan Dodd, a soft-spoken young man who makes all kinds of drinks but has a true passion for tequila. Mr. Dodd spent six months in Mexico researching the drink and recently came back with dozens of varieties, going up to $25 a shot.
Barrio Chino serves its tequila straight, with a chaser of sangrita, a tomato concoction that tastes a little like Bloody Mary mix. My friends and I tried out a few and suddenly it didn't seem so cold outside.
Which was good, because we walked to the next spot, Les Enfants Terribles. Despite a name that makes it sound like a bad Victor Hugo novel, this new place is already attracting in-the-know crowds; several large parties were there when we arrived, around 11.
Luckily, we were only concerned with the bar, which serves a variety of rum drinks (the menu spells it ''rhum''), including a Jericoacoara ($7), a Brazilian drink that has rum, ginger, lemon and honey. ''You like this one?'' said Mehdi Mokhnachi, a manager, with a note of mischief in his voice. ''Me, too.''
Stamina Pays Off
After that drink with the really long J-something name, we moved around the corner to Good World, a former Chinese barber shop that attracts a packed -- and thirsty -- group of patrons during the weekend.
This Friday was no exception; couples necked in the front, girls danced in the back and smokers caught colds out front. It was all too much.
The next stop was 169 Bar, which on this particular evening was featuring a D.J. with a taste for salsa, along with a live percussionist. The bar attracts a varied clientele; a pool table in the back is usually busy, as is a video-game machine in the front. (The bar also has an ATM -- inside.)
This night, the vibe was slightly retro; a clutch of men were break dancing, while separately, a clutch of women shook their tail feathers. It all felt like an extremely cool prom.
By the time my compatriots and I stumbled to Lolita, it was almost 1 a.m. and the crossing-Delancey set was out in force. The basement bar was packed, while upstairs two women were D.J.'ing rock 'n' roll and old-school hip-hop.
The scene was flirty and fun and the bar was popular enough on this night to need a doorman, a bulky fellow named Gerard who was able to spare a moment for commentary.
''This area is interesting because what gives it its character is the grittiness,'' he said. ''That's what makes people want to come. But the more who come, the less grit and less character. So it's tough.''
He paused and added: ''I guess I like it just as it is.''
And walking back to my new home, so close to the bar, so far from the masses, I couldn't have agreed more.
Where and When
The attractions and other sites in the article on the Lower East Side.
Attractions
L.E.S.X. GALLERY (Lower East Side Artisan Exchange, 248 1/2 Broome Street, near Ludlow Street, (212) 995-5379.
HENRY STREET SETTLEMENT/ABRONS ARTS CENTER, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, (212) 598-0400.
LOWER EAST SIDE TENEMENT MUSEUM, 90 Orchard Street, at Broome Street, (212) 431-0233 or www.tenement.org. The museum includes a partly restored tenement at 97 Orchard Street. Several guided tours of the tenement begin daily at 11 a.m.; fees are $10, $8 for students, children and 65+. Beginning April 3, there will also be walking tours of the Lower East Side every Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 2:30 p.m. Beginning Jan. 30 and running through Feb. 16, the museum will feature ''Shirtwaist: A Musical Ghost Story,'' based on the 1911 fire at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory; tickets, $15, $12 for students and 65+, $9 for members. Tour and theater tickets available at (800) 965-4827.
THE MAZER THEATER, at the Educational Alliance, 197 East Broadway, near Clinton Street, (212) 780-2300. Home of ''A Stoop on Orchard Street.'' Performances Wednesdays at 2 p.m.; Thursdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m.; Fridays at 8 p.m.; and Sundays at 1 and 5 p.m.; tickets, $45, $25 for those under 13; for tickets, (212) 239-6200; more information available at www.astooponorchardstreet.net.
MICHELLE MACCARONE GALLERY, 45 Canal Street, near Ludlow Street, (212) 431-4977.
SEWARD PARK, intersection of East Broadway, Canal and Essex Streets.
STRAUS SQUARE AND THE FORWARD BUILDING, East Broadway, between Rutgers and Jefferson Street.
Bars
BARRIO CHINO, 253 Broome Street, near Orchard Street, (212) 228-6710.
HAPPY ENDING, 302 Broome Street, near Forsythe Street, (212) 334-9676.
LOLITA, 266 Broome Street, at Allen Street, (212) 966-7223.
169 BAR, 169 East Broadway, near Rutgers Street, (212) 473-8866.
Dining
BROWN, 61 Hester Street, near Ludlow Street, (212) 254-9825.
CONGEE VILLAGE, 100 Allen Street, near Delancey Street, (212) 941-1818.
88 ORCHARD, 88 Orchard Street, at Broome Street, (212) 228-8880.
GOOD WORLD BAR AND GRILL, 3 Orchard Street, near Canal Street, (212) 925-9975.
GROTTO, 100C Forsyth Street, near Grand Street, (212) 625-3444.
LES ENFANTS TERRIBLES, 37 Canal Street, at Ludlow Street, (212) 777-7518.
NOAH'S ARK ORIGINAL DELICATESSEN, 399 Grand Street, near Suffolk Street, (212) 674-2200.
MONTERONE, 100B Forsyth Street, near Grand Street, (212) 625-3444.
WHISK ET AL., 106 Forsyth Street, near Grand Street, (212) 966-8782.
Food Shops
GUSS'S PICKLES, 85 Orchard Street, near Broome Street, (917) 701-4000.
DOUGHNUT PLANT, 379 Grand Street, at Norfolk Street, (212) 505-3700.
GERTEL'S BAKE SHOP, 53 Hester Street, near Essex Street, (212) 982-3250.
IL LABORATORIO DEL GELATO, 95 Orchard Street, near Broome Street, (212) 343-9922.
KOSSAR'S BIALYS, 367 Grand Street, near Essex Street, (212) 473-4810.
ORANGE, 61 Hester Street, near Ludlow Street, (212) 254-9825.
THE PICKLE GUYS, 49 Essex Street, near Grand Street, (212) 656-9739.
THE SWEET LIFE, 63 Hester Street, at Ludlow Street, (212) 598-0092.
Specialty Shops
LOVE FLOWERS, 100 Forsyth Street, near Grand Street, (212) 226-2396.
YANG FAI SPORTS AND TRADING CORPORATION, 102 Forsyth Street, near Grand Street, (212) 226-3666.
Correction:  February 6, 2004, Friday  A map in Weekend on Jan. 23 with an article about a cultural resurgence on the Lower East Side of Manhattan misspelled the name of an area along the East River. It is Corlears Hook, not Corleans Hook.
