From Paper To Potatoes
The Paper Bag Players don't have to worry about building elaborate sets, then taking them down, then putting them up again. Most of the time, they just wear them.
True to their name, the players use brown paper, grocery sacks and cardboard -- all artfully transformed -- to envelop themselves and frequently the stage. But if their scenery is sometimes paper-thin, their productions are not. Each vignette in their musical revues for 3- to 9-year-olds has some appealing treat within, like the chocolate cookie a young fan might be delighted to find at the bottom of his lunchbox.
This season, their 45th, the players are presenting ''Where Is That Bear?,'' a retrospective that opens tomorrow in Manhattan. The skits, written, directed and designed by Judith Martin, the company's artistic director, range from brief, wordless gems like ''Shoes,'' in which the players cavort with cardboard boxes on their feet, to pieces in which the humor is as much verbal as visual.
For instance, in ''Plumber, Plumber, Fix My Leak!'' Amy T. Kuebel plays Mrs. Miller, and Ted Brackett, the company's associate writer and director, portrays the kind of plumber who really would throw a baby out with the bath water. They chase a leak in Mrs. Miller's pipes until the leak chases them, while enraptured children are asked to call out the title phrase repeatedly.
The audience and the other actors, Kevin Richard Woodall and Shelby Braxton-Brooks, also participate in my own favorite number, ''Potato.'' When Ms. Kuebel is suddenly transformed into a spud, her friends try to help her by following the instructions in a book of spells. But they find that they need ''500 brave, strong, smart people'' to assist, who must dance and sing ever more loudly. The message is clear: You can be a potato at a Paper Bag Players performance, but a couch potato is never allowed.
''Where Is That Bear?,'' through March 7 at the Kaye Playhouse, 68th Street and Lexington Avenue, Manhattan, (212) 772-4448. Saturdays at 2 p.m. and Sundays at 1 and 3 p.m. Tickets: $10, $20 and $25.
An Idea Takes Off
The Wright brothers had to overcome many obstacles before their triumphal flight in 1903: inadequate materials, poor technology, bad weather. But Theaterworks/USA highlights one that most people are probably unaware of: sibling rivalry.
''First in Flight: The Wright Brothers,'' which opens tomorrow in Manhattan, portrays Wilbur and Orville as fierce competitors for almost everything, especially their father's love. Although Ruth E. Kramer, the director, acknowledged at a dress rehearsal that the script had taken some liberties with history, she said that the brothers' fraught relationship was real.
In this new musical, adapted from Arthur Giron's play ''Flight'' by a pair of contemporary brothers, David and Joseph Zellnik, the rancor even extends to inflicting physical injury. But David Zellnik's book does not reduce a great partnership to a tale of family dysfunction. This show is clearly about something bigger -- the dream of flight -- and it communicates it thrillingly.
Wilbur (Matthew Erickson), the older son, is intelligent and imperious, expected by their father (Justin R. G. Holcomb), an itinerant preacher, to follow him into the ministry. Orville (John F. Hebert), sunnier and more mechanically inclined, has practical skills that Wilbur needs. In the show their eventual reconciliation is partly fostered by their mother, Susan (Terri Ann Glynn). The emphasis on her encouragement and independence helps give the boys' story a heroine.
Joseph Zellnik's richly complex score ranges from ringing hymns to soaring evocations of flight. It parallels the journey of Wilbur, who explains to his father that he has a calling, too: he has just chosen to lift men up in a different way.
''First in Flight: The Wright Brothers,'' tomorrow and Sunday and Feb. 7 and 8 at 2 p.m. at the Auditorium at Equitable Tower, 787 Seventh Avenue, near 52nd Street, Manhattan, (212) 627-7373. Tickets: $25; $18 for a subscription of 10 or more throughout the season.
Party Time
All storytellers try to draw children in. But on Sunday afternoon at the Jewish Museum, Jeff Hopkins will do it literally.
Mr. Hopkins not only tells tales, he also illustrates them. While he gives a fictionalized history of the museum's founding, he will simultaneously sketch it out on mural-size paper. He plans to talk about the Warburg family, who once lived in the mansion that is now the museum. The Warburgs had children, and ''he will most likely have an older character who used to play with them, going through the galleries,'' said Rachel Katz, the museum's manager of family programs.
''When he performs,'' she added, ''he also asks children to come up and draw onto the story with him.''
Mr. Hopkins's fanciful journey (at 12:30 and 2:30 p.m.) is just part of a big birthday party to celebrate the museum's centennial. Other entertainers will include Jonathan Bayer, a musician who specializes in a ''moving, grooving, shimmying, shaking kind of gig,'' Ms. Katz said, and Rob Lock, a circus performer. Each young visitor will also decorate a hat in the shape of the building. ''It has pop-up windows that children can draw in,'' Ms. Katz said. So while the museum can't wear a party hat, youngsters can wear the museum.
Family Birthday Bash, Sunday from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. at the Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, (212) 423-3200. Free.
Family Fare
