If the art world had something like a No Artist Left Behind Act, Joe Zucker might be as famous as Chuck Close. He is not. At the moment Mr. Close's name adorns a big gold banner on the Metropolitan Museum of Art, heralding an exhibition of prints within. In contrast Mr. Zucker, who has a highly respected but relatively underground reputation, is the subject of twin gallery shows that could give his profile a welcome lift.
The Paul Kasmin Gallery in Chelsea is displaying brilliantly colored, eccentrically built new paintings that are among the best of Mr. Zucker's career. The Nolan/Eckman Gallery in SoHo has mounted a mini-survey of his deft, cartoonish drawings; the newest are worthy of The New Yorker, although this is not entirely a compliment.
In the late 1960's and early 70's Mr. Zucker and Mr. Close were intimate cohorts, drinking and painting buddies of the first order. (They remain good friends.) They had studios in a SoHo loft building at 96 Prince Street; exhibited at Bykert Gallery, one of the leading showcases for new art then; and taught at the School of Visual Arts.
At a time when the only good painting was usually an abstract one, they stuck resolutely to images; along with a few other artists, including Jennifer Bartlett, they were trying to bring Pop and Minimalism into closer alignment. Toward this goal they developed a similarly self-evident method of painting, in keeping with the process-oriented installations of artists like Richard Serra, Alan Saret and Keith Sonnier.
But while Mr. Close made monumental photo-based portraits of heads that have earned him increasing fame and fortune, Mr. Zucker developed into one of the more prickly presences in the art world cactus patch, known for making paintings with goofy materials, especially cotton balls, but eventually including rubber bands and pegboard.
With subjects like pirates, knights and the genetics pioneer Gregor Mendel, Mr. Zucker cultivated a combination of ironic down-home narrative and powerful visual wackiness. The work revealed an all but oxymoronic sensibility (regionalist-formalist, you could say), prone to a cantankerousness that sometimes seemed endemic in his personality. (Mr. Zucker spends a month each year fishing in the northern lakes of his home state, Minnesota.)
His goal has always been an outlandish if not off-putting unity of method, meaning and material. For example, in the magnified Pointillism of the cotton balls -- which also represented a very raw form of canvas -- he rendered images of Mississippi paddle boats loaded with bales of cotton, and scenes from the life of Eli Whitney, inventor of the cotton gin. His additive method of painting brought to mind lowly crafts like weaving, bricklaying and mosaics, resulting, in the mid-1970's, in works based on Byzantine mosaics; some were shown at Gavin Brown Modern in December.
Yet with their subtle pastel colors and crusty surfaces, the paintings could always be weirdly beautiful. And when he started stretching the cotton balls into gummy strands, laying them on the canvas like rice-paddy dams and pouring colored resin between them, he created stained-glass effects.
Helpfully, Mr. Zucker's shows separate the formalist and regionalist sides of his sensibility, allowing them to conspire openly with and against each other. It's a friendly kind of war.
At Nolan/Eckman Mr. Zucker's sardonic, flat-footed sense of humor abounds in rollicking captioned drawings of structurally detailed pirate ships and galleons. More recent efforts take aim at the art world, charting the fate of immense quantities of unwanted art. Affinities for Saul Steinberg, William Wegman and Raymond Pettibon, as well as Will Rogers, are evident.
Dark, dense, seemingly abstract pen-and-ink grids turn out to be vast underground storage racks set in abandoned coal mines. A colorful watercolor shows the Robo Crate Flagship, which is made of packing crates, with unfurled paintings for sails. My favorite is a ballooning inverted pyramid of crates, ''The Robo Crate Museum of Contemporary Art.''
The paintings at Kasmin add a magnified, carpentered version of cloisonné to Mr. Zucker's list of pirated craft techniques. Titled the ''Unhinged'' series, they are diptychs made by pouring thick paint onto boards edged with delicate wood dowels. One square is a classic Modernist monochrome (but also a box lid). The other is subdivided with additional dowels into triangulated geometries that recycle banal motifs -- a Matissean interior, a volcano and especially sailing ships that conflate sea with paint and sails with canvas.
The paint is delicious, simultaneously visceral, tactile and radiant. Mr. Zucker tilted in different directions with each pour, so that each color floods its zone in a particular way. Corners can be bared, or roundly filled; surfaces bubble and crack, like sediment or glaze. The colors vary with equal subtlety: neighboring grays may turn progressively violet, and an image of a house marches through red, magenta and hot pink. The diptychs' monochrome halves function like enlarged details; the eye dives into them unencumbered.
These impressively satisfying paintings are part Mondrian, part Ellsworth Kelly, part Americana and, briefly, part hobby kit -- until their elegance and idiosyncratic bravura sink in. They show Mr. Zucker cruising in the center lane between Pop and Minimalism, waving as he passes and inviting a reassessment.
At the very least, Mr. Zucker occupies an important cusp between modern and postmodern, between Roy Lichtenstein and Jeff Koons. In the catalog to the earlier Gavin Brown show the writer Klaus Kertess aptly links him to Robert Ryman and Sigmar Polke.
Mr. Close may concur. In an interview with Mr. Zucker in the book ''The Portraits Speak: Chuck Close in Conversation With 27 of His Subjects,'' Mr. Close says: ''I'd like to say on the record that probably more than anybody to whom I talked, especially in those first 10 or 12 years or so, you changed my mind about the way paintings could be made. You had an influence on the notion of building the painting rather than painting; about working incrementally; about making things out of building blocks and slowly arriving at something, finding it rather than preconceptualizing; giving yourself over to the process and letting it go wherever it was going to go. It was very important to me.''
''Joe Zucker Unhinged: New Paintings'' is at the Paul Kasmin Gallery, 293 10th Avenue, at 27th Street, Chelsea, (212) 563-4474, through Feb. 7. ''Joe Zucker Drawings: 1977-2003'' is at Nolan/Eckman Gallery, 560 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo, (212) 925-6190, through Feb. 7.
ART REVIEW
