Early Neil Simon, Broadway Bound
Just when it appeared as if the long romance between Neil Simon and the Broadway theater was on the rocks, producers have begun plans to bring one and perhaps two of Mr. Simon's classic early comedies to the Great White Way.
Robyn Goodman and Roy Gabay have announced that they will be lead producers for a revival of Mr. Simon's 1963 solo debut, ''Barefoot in the Park,'' which is to arrive in the spring of next season in a production to be directed by Scott Elliott. This comes on the heels of reports about a future production of Mr. Simon's 1965 follow-up, ''The Odd Couple,'' which Mr. Simon hopes will star Nathan Lane and Matthew Broderick. Both actors are said to be interested, but scheduling remains a problem. Mr. Lane is booked at least through Oct. 3, currently in ''The Producers'' and then in Stephen Sondheim's musical adaptation of the Aristophanes comedy ''The Frogs'' at Lincoln Center. Complicating matters, he and Mr. Broderick are to begin shooting a film version of ''The Producers'' early next year.
''Barefoot'' and ''Odd Couple'' together represent something of a watershed moment in American theater, an introduction to the most influential and profitable writer of Broadway comedies of the second half of the 20th century. ''Neil redefined comedy,'' said Emanuel Azenberg, who produced many of Mr. Simon's plays. ''Along with Lucy and Desi and a few others, it's the beginning of the sitcom.''
''Barefoot,'' a romantic story of opposites attracting in New York, remains one of the theater's biggest hits, running for more than 1,500 performances on Broadway, making it the 10th-longest-running straight play in Broadway history. Over the past eight months, Ms. Goodman negotiated to obtain the rights for the play from Paramount Pictures, which bought them from Mr. Simon in 1965 for $150,000, a huge amount for a struggling writer at that time but a measly sum if you consider that the comedy has been produced countless times over the past four decades. ''My business manager told me that I should take the money because I may never write another play again,'' Mr. Simon said by phone on Tuesday.
Mr. Simon has gone on to write 34 plays and musicals. His track record lately has been spotty. ''The Dinner Party'' (2000) made money but received mixed reviews. ''45 Seconds From Broadway'' (2001) bombed. And ''Rose's Dilemma'' (2003), which was only Mr. Simon's second play to open Off Broadway, closes on Feb. 1 after a tumultuous Manhattan Theater Club run in which the star, Mary Tyler Moore, walked out during previews after receiving a letter from Mr. Simon reproaching her for not knowing her lines.
After weeks of silence, Mr. Simon has begun to speak out about the contretemps. As reported in Variety earlier this week, he said that his problem was more with the director, Lynne Meadow, than with Ms. Moore. And subsequently he said he would never work at Manhattan Theater Club again. ''I didn't like what the director did with the play, but I got the brunt of the bad publicity.'' Mr. Simon said. ''I got along with Mary real well.''
Ms. Moore had no comment, but Ms. Meadow offered a prepared statement yesterday. ''I can only surmise that this is Neil Simon's belated response to the negative critical reaction,'' she wrote. ''First he blamed Mary Tyler Moore, now me. The night before the play opened to the critics in New York he told me backstage, 'This is the production I wanted.' Mr. Simon is legendary for creating drama both off stage and on. I think he should just get on to writing his next play.''
P. Diddy's Helpers
In his hip-hop career Sean Combs (that's P. Diddy to you) surrounded himself with performers like Biggie Smalls and Mace who were as talented as he was, if not more. In the Broadway revival of ''A Raisin in the Sun,'' in which Mr. Combs is making his theatrical debut playing the lead, Walter Lee, the producers have adopted a similar strategy, filling the cast with theater veterans like Audra McDonald and Phylicia Rashad.
Ms. McDonald, who starred in ''Marie Christine'' and more recently appeared in ''Henry IV,'' is to play Ruth Younger, Walter Lee's wife. Playing her mother, Lena, will be Ms. Rashad, who just finished a run at the Public Theater in ''The Story.''
''I think this play is incredibly important,'' Ms. McDonald said. ''It's an African-American classic. It's part of our canon.'' Speaking by phone from the Sundance Film Festival, she said she was surprised to discover that the lead would be played by Mr. Combs, whose acting résumé is limited to a few supporting roles in films. After she was approached to play the part, she asked to read scenes with him.
''I know a lot of people have their opinions about him, but he has worked incredibly hard on this show,'' Ms. McDonald said. ''He's real and emotionally accessible and completely up to the task.''
Linked by a Director
Do ''Fiddler on the Roof,'' which starts performances tonight at the Minskoff, and Tom Stoppard's heady drama ''Jumpers,'' which begins its run at the Brooks Atkinson Theater on April 5, have anything in common besides the director David Leveaux? An interest in faith and a lead character ''engaged in a sense of wonder,'' said Mr. Leveaux, Broadway's current go-to director, who staged ''Nine'' as well as the 2000 revival of Mr. Stoppard's ''Real Thing.''
Mr. Leveaux also believes that neither show should get stuck in naturalism. ''In a musical, you can't go there for too long,'' he said in a phone conversation. As for ''Jumpers,'' which stars Simon Russell Beale as a philosopher, he says the show connects so many disparate, often fantastical parts that it reminds him of ''The Real Thing'' as envisioned by the avant-garde Wooster Group.
Along the Way
* Harvey Fierstein, who originated the role of Edna Turnblad in ''Hairspray,'' winning a Tony Award, will play his last performance on May 2.
* Raúl Esparza is to star as Ned Weeks in the Worth Street Theater's production of Larry Kramer's ''Normal Heart,'' which begins performances April 6 at the Public Theater.
On Stage and Off  Correction:  January 26, 2004, Monday  A brief report in the On Stage and Off column of Weekend on Friday about a coming Broadway revival of ''A Raisin in the Sun'' referred incorrectly to the role of Lena, to be played by Phylicia Rashad. In the play, Lena is the mother of Walter Lee (to be played by Sean Combs) -- not of his wife, Ruth Younger (to be played by Audra McDonald).
Correction:  January 31, 2004, Saturday  A brief report in the On Stage and Off column of Weekend on Jan. 23 about a coming revival of Neil Simon's 1963 comedy ''Barefoot in the Park'' misstated its place in the sequence of his Broadway plays. It was the second; the first was ''Come Blow Your Horn,'' in 1961.
