On ''Dave the Barbarian,'' which starts tonight on the Disney Channel, cartoon lugs in cartoon Uggs thrash around against backgrounds that appear to be sponge-painted, like a suburban bathroom. It's ugly. To be sure, the show's writing is sharp, the vaudeville voices are decent and the themes timely (steroids, carbs, food allergies, quack psychologists). But its look is generic and uncontrolled; you almost wish it were a radio show.
Like other undistinctive television cartoons, the figures on ''Dave the Barbarian'' have mismatched parts: some round, some ragged. With beaky noses, big eyes and spiky hair, they don't look squeezable and they don't look sleek. In the introductory sequence, the image of a plump sorcerer running, his round knees visible under his purple cloak, is very cute. But then the drawing becomes spikier, and the creatures look harsh.
The characters -- insecure medieval warriors in a land called Udrogoth, whose tale is told in mock-heroic tones -- have neither full faces nor profiles. They talk with their features twisted so that they are only three-quarters visible, their noses smashed sideways. Their mouths are smirks, whatever their temperaments.
Adding to the visual unpleasantness is too much unkind caricature. Teeth define the faces. Heroes have boxy racks with brilliant veneers; bad guys have stragglers, fangs or overbites. Eyebrows slant steeply to indicate sorrow and anger. Hairstyles are formed of flamelike tufts.
Are these styleless forms just easy to draw and easy to animate?
Judged by the show's audio track alone, Doug Langdale, who created ''Dave the Barbarian,'' which is aimed at 8-year-olds, deserves real credit for inventing its combination of dense grandiosity and withering adolescent sarcasm. The members of Mr. Langdale's ruling Barbarian family -- well-meaning Dave and his shrewder sisters, Candy and Fang -- are hung up on looks and possessions.
Candy does a stint as an artificially enhanced musclewoman that's hilarious. And Dave's decree to his kingdom about Saturday attire, shouted by a town crier, is very funny: ''All subjects will wear the kingdom's official colors. Red, a slightly darker red and another red a lot like the first red, but more sort of salmony!''
If only you didn't have to watch. There are far too many jags and scribbles in ''Dave the Barbarian'' for it to be sweet and to promote giggles. Why doesn't Disney redraw Dave and Candy for the children, and get these prickly, satirical images into political cartoons, where their rough edges would be appreciated?
DAVE THE BARBARIAN  Disney Channel, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays at 5:30 p.m., Eastern and Pacific times; 4:30, Central time.
Director and supervising producer, Howy Parkins; creator and executive producer, Doug Langdale. Produced by Walt Disney Television Animation.
WITH THE VOICES OF: Danny Cooksey (Dave), Tress MacNeille (Fang), Erica Luttrell (Candy), Kevin Michael Richardson (Uncle Oswidge), Estelle Harris (Lula) and Frank Welker (Faffy).
TELEVISION REVIEW
