The word on Schumann is that he was a poor orchestrator. He was certainly an unusual one. His four symphonies are somehow elusive. Even as they grow familiar, the ear glides off them. A certain sameness of texture, perhaps. A sustained density of sound.
Daniel Barenboim rejects the stereotype. In a recent telephone interview, he said: ''I think Schumann's symphonies have suffered for many years from the cliché that they are badly orchestrated, don't sound, are not Schumann's best music, and I don't think that this is so. If you conduct Schumann's symphonies to sound like Brahms, they don't sound good. It's not meant to sound like Brahms.
''There is a particular Schumann world of music -- I won't say a world of sound. It has to do with music, with form, with sometimes abrupt transitions from one theme to another. In many ways it gives you a foretaste of what is to come with Wagner. If you come in as a conductor and are not acquainted with that world and try to make it sound in a good 19th-century way which might apply to Brahms, you don't get all you can and should out of the music.''
Mr. Barenboim was speaking from Chicago, where he and the Berlin Staatskapelle, an orchestra he has led since 1992, were performing a series of all-Schumann concerts that they are now presenting at Carnegie Hall. The series started on Wednesday and continues this weekend. Mr. Barenboim and his orchestra will do their best to pin down the elusive composer by presenting a comprehensive overview of his symphonies along with his violin and cello concertos and two works for piano and orchestra. ''Since my childhood I've always thought and worked very much in and with cycles,'' Mr. Barenboim said. ''I find it very interesting, for the orchestra and for me, not to play just one Schumann symphony but a whole cycle of them, because then your world of associations is much wider. You see so many things about a composer and about certain compositions by having them back to back with other creations of the same composer.''
Past cycles of Mr. Barenboim's have included the complete Beethoven piano sonatas, which he played last season at Carnegie Hall for the 13th time in his career, and in 2002 the 10 major operas of Richard Wagner at the Deutsche Staatsoper in Berlin, where he was artistic director for 10 years. He left that post in 2002 but retained his association with the Staatskapelle, which elected him its lifetime chief conductor in 2000.
The Staatskapelle, the orchestra of the Staatsoper, is one of the oldest in Germany. Its official name first appears in a 1570 document, but in its function as court orchestra it actually began as early as 1542. Of course, the definition of orchestra varied over the years. For instance, strings didn't become part of the ensemble until 1582.
Its size was also subject to the whims of politics. Down to seven members after the 30 Years' War, it had a great flowering under Frederick the Great (who had the Staatsoper house built). It remained the city's leading orchestra at least until the founding of the Berlin Philharmonic in 1882, and was a strong presence through World War II. Its music directors included the composers Felix Mendelssohn and Richard Strauss as well as Wilhelm Furtwängler, Erich Kleiber and Herbert von Karajan.
None of which is to say that the Staatskapelle is necessarily the best orchestra in Germany. But it has a definite stamp of its own, and Mr. Barenboim has turned that into something of a virtue, as he demonstrated with the last cycle he played with the the group in New York, the Beethoven symphonies in the 2000-1 season.
Mr. Barenboim and the Staatskapelle have just released the complete Schumann symphonies on Teldec, making the current concerts a kind of album tour. The recording demonstrates that this German orchestra, at least, does indeed have a different feeling for German music: there's a certain elasticity, a mellow color and a sense of a more intimate scale (one of the things that sets Schumann's symphonies apart from Brahms's).
Mr. Barenboim, who is also music director of the Chicago Symphony, is reluctant to say German sound is exclusively the provenance of a German orchestra. But he does also characterize what constitutes that German sound and some of the Berlin orchestra's distinctiveness.
''When the strings attack a note, they play with less attack than one hears often today from other orchestras, and sustain it much more,'' he said. ''It's the difference between someone punching you in the nose and someone putting his fist on your nose and applying pressure to it. This kind of impact has very much to do with German sound.''
The reason for this, he says, is partly mechanical. ''If you compare German instruments with non-German instruments -- a German clarinet as opposed to a French clarinet; a German Steinway from Hamburg as opposed to an American Steinway -- the instruments themselves have much more resistance,'' he said. ''They resist the player trying to play them: in the flow of air, or the weight of the key, you feel a kind of resistance of the instrument, which makes the sound less harsh and less direct. It's a little bit like the sound of the German language; you go through the whole process of the consonants, and the weight of the consonants, until you get to the bloody vowel.
''Schwer,'' he added, the German word for heavy, emphasizing the opening consonants, to demonstrate.
The idea of orchestras retaining a national stamp is largely outdated in an age of international music-making, when top-flight orchestras routinely recruit players from around the globe. Yet the Staatskapelle has retained a predominantly German membership. In a sense, the orchestra's limitations have helped it maintain its character, for better or worse. As an opera orchestra, it has a relatively small concert repertory. After the partition of the city, the ensemble, the flagship orchestra of East Berlin, was further restricted. Its choice of works was limited by the proscriptions on certain composers under the East German regime, and it was led by beloved but second-tier music directors like Franz Konwitschny and Otmar Suitner. And since Berlin's reunification, financial hardship has kept salaries down, particularly in orchestras of the former East Germany.
For the last decade the debate has raged about whether one city can really afford three opera houses. It has already proved it can't afford the eight orchestras it was trying to maintain; the Berliner Symphoniker, the smallest of them, is about to be dissolved.
Mr. Barenboim has often said that when he arrived in 1992, the orchestra was like a battered antique that he had to dust off and repair. Now that he has attended to what he terms its musical hygiene, the orchestra is playing better but has kept a distinctive quality that, warts and all, suits Schumann's quirkiness. You could say that Brahms is the ideal composer for a sleek, well-oiled machine like the Berlin Philharmonic (or, indeed, the Chicago Symphony), while Schumann has something a little gauche about him, a sense of the openly experimental.
Schumann's home base was the piano; when he finally decided to be a musician (after deliberating whether to follow a literary life), he trained as a piano soloist, initially with Friedrich Wieck, whose daughter and prize student, the noted virtuoso Clara, later became his wife.
Piano compositions were Schumann's first and still best-known opuses. And there's a pianistic quality to the symphonies, at least in the sense that you feel the composer is ranging over a single instrument with a certain kind of sound rather than, as some composers do, focusing on exploring different ones.
''I don't think the Schumann symphonies represent his intimate diary,'' Mr. Barenboim said. ''Every great composer has left a diary. With Beethoven, it is the string quartets and piano sonatas; with Mozart, the piano concertos and Da Ponte operas.'' (That is, ''Don Giovanni,'' ''Così Fan Tutte'' and ''Le Nozze di Figaro.'')
''The intimate diary of Schumann is in piano music and lieder,'' he said. ''There's something about the freedom of form in the big piano works -- 'Humoreske,' even 'Carnaval' -- that's transposed into the symphonies, even within sonata form: a freedom and abruptness that's day and night from Brahms. And there is a certain awkwardness in the sense of something other than the expected, other than the known. It's like somebody who walks into a room and is dressed differently and looks different and is ill at ease in society, where everyone else is the same.''
On Mr. Barenboim's Schumann recording with the Staatskapelle, you can hear what he means, in part because the orchestra has its own awkwardness, which becomes a strength in this music. Mr. Barenboim goes a step further in these concerts by offering pieces that aren't often played, like the violin concerto, which Gidon Kremer (the soloist with Mr. Barenboim) has begun to champion, with the conviction that the final movement should be played at a much slower tempo than soloists have routinely taken it. Mr. Barenboim is also conducting the Concertstück (Op. 92) and the Introduction and Concert-Allegro (Op. 134), both for solo piano and orchestra (with Jonathan Biss as soloist). Opus 134 has become a particular favorite.
''It's not unlike the violin concerto, another late work: also with very, very strange writing,'' he said. ''It doesn't flow in the same way that the piano concerto does. The awkwardness of Schumann is even more obvious. And there's something arid about it; it's not so well lubricated, if you know what I mean. This awkwardness gives the music a very special dimension; it's not quite of the correct musical world. I have really fallen in love with the piece.''
Schumann's work is paradoxical. Eminently German, it has historically resonated best in the hands of non-German players, Mr. Barenboim pointed out, like the pianists Alfred Cortot or Yves Nat. Less mainstream than that of contemporaries like Mendelssohn or Brahms, it's also more essential, the conductor feels, to the history of music.
''Let's face it: if Brahms had not existed, we would be much the poorer, but the history of music would have gone on more or less the same way,'' Mr. Barenboim said, excepting Schoenberg, who was influenced by Brahms.
But he doesn't feel that's true of Schumann. ''Beethoven and Schumann made Wagner possible, and Mahler. Schumann was historically one of the most important composers of the 19th century.'' This weekend, Mr. Barenboim will try to make a case for his argument.
The Concerts
Three all-Schumann concerts are scheduled this weekend at Carnegie Hall featuring the Staatskapelle Berlin, conducted by Daniel Barenboim. Tickets: $29 to $137; Carnegie Hall information: (212) 247-7800. The orchestra has also recorded the Schumann symphonies under Mr. Barenboim's direction.
Concerts
TODAY: Schumann's ''Manfred'' Overture; the Cello Concerto; and the Symphony No. 1; Yo-Yo Ma, cellist, 8 p.m.
TOMORROW: Schumann's Violin Concerto, with Gidon Kremer as soloist, and Symphony No. 4 in D minor, 8 p.m. A preconcert talk at 7 p.m.
SUNDAY: Schumann's Symphony No. 3; Introduction and Allegro Appassionato in G major and Introduction and Concert-Allegro in D minor and D major, with Jonathan Biss as pianist, 2 p.m.
On Disc
''Schumann: The Symphonies'' with Daniel Barenboim and the Staatskapelle Berlin, on Teldec, 2564 61179-2, 2 CD's; $33.99.
