THE Burger King Corporation unexpectedly fired Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising in New York yesterday as its lead creative agency, and named a well-regarded independent, Crispin Porter &amp; Bogusky in Miami, to take over the account, which has billings estimated at $350 million.
Burger King executives said in a conference call with the news media that they hoped the change would reverse disappointing results in November and December. The recent poor performance has come as McDonald's and others continue to make gains begun earlier last year.
But industry analysts were unsure that another switch -- Crispin Porter is Burger King's fifth lead agency since 2000 -- would substantially improve Burger King's sales.
''In fast food, it's more than just advertising,'' said Andrew Barish, a restaurant analyst at Banc of America Securities. ''You need good operations and new product offerings to bring the customers in. They have a lot of work to do on a lot of fronts.''
Instability has plagued Burger King, the country's No. 2 hamburger chain, after McDonald's. Since 2000 it has changed agencies more frequently than most marketers, naming as creative agencies of record Lowe Lintas &amp; Partners, now Lowe &amp; Partners Worldwide, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies; McCann-Erickson Worldwide Advertising, an Interpublic sibling; Amoeba, a creative boutique; and Y.&amp;R., part of the Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. division of the WPP Group.
Turnover has also afflicted the executive suite, with nine chief executives in the last 13 years and eight marketing leaders in the last 8 years.
When the company was sold last year by its longtime parent, Diageo, to a consortium led by the Texas Pacific Group, the new owners set about trying to revive it under a new parent company, Burger King Holdings. They installed a new chief executive, Bradley D. Blum, who in turn hired Y.&amp;R. and the latest chief marketing officer, Russ Klein.
Mr. Blum and his team assembled a strategy of offering healthier menu items, improving customer service and rechristening its ''flame broiled'' burgers as ''fire grilled,'' although the cooking method was not significantly changed. The agency developed campaigns last year that carried the theme ''The Fire's Ready.'' Just this month, a national television and print campaign created by Y.&amp;R. to promote the Whopper sandwich began.
But, Mr. Blum said yesterday in a conference call to reporters, ''We're not happy with the performance we're seeing in the marketplace.'' He declined to be more specific; analysts could not quantify Burger King sales because the company does not release those figures.
In contrast, McDonald's sales grew in each of the last nine months of 2003 at stores that have been open for at least a year, including a 12.2 percent rise in sales in December, according to McDonald's. And such sales at another resurgent competitor, Wendy's, grew in the final five months of the year.
Ron Paul, president at Technomic in Chicago, a food service consulting company, said, ''Their competitors are doing better than they have in months or in some cases years.'' Winning the account could open a new chapter for Crispin Porter, a boutique agency which has won admiration for its innovative campaigns for Ikea, the Truth antitobacco account and the introduction of the Mini Cooper in the United States. In one day yesterday, the agency more than doubled its estimated annual billings, to about $600 million.
While executives at Burger King and Crispin Porter declined to discuss exactly how yesterday's shift developed, Mr. Blum said the decision, which came without a review, was inspired in part by the agency's successes of the last few years.
Its campaign for the Mini Cooper car, for instance, won acclaim for its unusual approach, which included driving a sport utility vehicle around with a Mini on the roof. ''One of the real defining characteristics of Crispin Porter that we feel is so central to our brand is their ability to do ground-up brand building,'' he said.
While sparing with details, agency executives said they would re-evaluate every aspect of the company's interactions with consumers to rebuild Burger King sales.
''When we look at something like Burger King, what we start salivating over right away is all the touch points,'' said Alex Bogusky, partner and executive creative director at Crispin Porter, which is 49 percent owned by MDC Partners in Toronto. The touch points -- everything from the restaurants' signs that say ''push'' or ''pull'' to employee uniforms -- will be reconsidered, he said. ''Within the drive-through, the signage of the drive-through, how you tell them to go, stop and confirm their order -- all those things are branded experiences.''
Capturing the Burger King account continues an extraordinary ride for Crispin Porter, a boutique with just $48 million in billings in 1996 but $103 million in billings by 1998. The Miami office has grown to 160 employees from 38 employees in 1998, and the agency opened an office in Venice, Calif., in 2001 with a staff of 15. Annual billings, not including those to be poured in by Burger King, lately totaled $250 million.
For Y.&amp;R. New York, a much larger agency with annual billings estimated above $1 billion and a staff of more than 500, losing Burger King may have less effect than winning the account has on Crispin Porter. But it is the first major blow to the agency since the arrival last May of Ann M. Fudge as chairwoman and chief executive of both Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. and Y.&amp;R. Advertising.
Liz Reilly, a spokeswoman at Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., said, ''We wish them the best going forward and will continue to help them on our other assignments.'' The reference is to duties still handled by two units of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., Wunderman and Landor Associates, and by another WPP unit, MindShare, which loses media planning duties but continues to handle media buying.
Although past agencies have not seemed to win the Burger King account as much as borrow it, Mr. Bogusky of Crispin Porter said he would not dwell on such matters. ''When you get an account, that's the day you start losing it,'' he said. ''I want a long-term relationship and they seem to value them, too. The main thing is to concentrate on the turnaround.''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
