''Made-Up,'' which opens today in the New York metropolitan region, announces itself as ''A Vanity Production.'' This is a clever double-entendre, since the movie is very much a homemade family project as well as a clever, intricate comedy whose subject is vanity.
Adapted by Lynne Adams from her one-woman play, it stars Ms. Adams and her sister, Brooke, and was directed by Brooke's husband, the actor Tony Shalhoub, who also has a supporting role. Most of the action takes place in a rambling, wood-frame Victorian somewhere in greater Boston, a house that is too quirkily lived in to be mistaken for a movie set.
It is, in real life, Lynne Adams's house, but in ''Made-Up'' it belongs to her sister, who plays a former actress named Elizabeth. Elizabeth does, somewhat reluctantly, allow her home to be used as a movie set, since her sister, Kate (played, of course, by Lynne herself), has decided to make a documentary about beauty, self-image, mother-daughter relations and a whole lot of other things she hasn't quite figured out. Elizabeth, whose husband (Gary Sinise) has recently left her for the much younger Molly (played by an actress with the remarkable name of Light Eternity), agrees to be made over by her daughter, Sara (Eva Amurri), an aspiring cosmetologist.
Kate, in the course of filming her sister's transformation, winds up recording a great deal more, thanks to mischievous members of her crew who are fond of hiding cameras all over the place. Their antics help the film sustain what might have been an unwieldy conceit and also enrich what might have been a schematic examination of the conundrums that face middle-aged women. Elizabeth, who favors shapeless flannel shirts and drab, practical haircuts, is disdainful of Sara's career ambitions and reluctant to be her guinea pig.
Brooke Adams, who lighted up the screen in the 1970's in movies like ''Days of Heaven'' and ''Invasion of the Body Snatchers,'' looks convincingly ordinary in the early scenes but ultimately proves that beauty is more a matter of bone structure than presentation. She has been away from movies for more than a decade, and in this performance -- a deceptively modest demonstration of her breathtaking range -- she makes up for lost time.
And ''Made-Up'' similarly disguises its ambitions in a cloak of scruffy modesty. Pretending to dwell on the surface of the characters, the film gets under their skin -- and the audience's -- in some surprising ways. Mr. Shalhoub currently plays the obsessive-compulsive title character in ''Monk'' on the USA network and was the furiously perfectionist chef in Stanley Tucci's ''Big Night,'' suggesting that he may have some of the temperamental qualities needed to direct a movie. Although his meticulousness is evident in this, his first directing job, the movie has an improvised, slightly anarchic feel reminiscent of Christopher Guest's mockumentaries.
Mr. Shalhoub often seems content to wander among the characters, and Ms. Adams's script is in no special hurry to force them to reveal themselves. What is most remarkable about ''Made-Up'' is how stubbornly its inhabitants resist turning into types. In a bigger, slicker production, everybody -- the divorced mother, her flaky sister, the headstrong daughter, the dad's buxom new girlfriend -- would most likely be played with broad sitcom familiarity. These characters, in contrast, seem like people you might know, whose curious comings and goings you might observe from the house across the street and then gossip about with your other neighbors.
This unassuming intimacy does not make for a very shapely narrative; the picture changes directions more than once and does not conclude so much as stop. But its structural eccentricities are also part of this deceptively modest movie's charm. Its warm, occasionally off-putting individuality is more like what you look for in a friend than in a movie, and like a friend it invites you to see the unique beauty that lies under its superficial flaws.
MADE-UP
Directed by Tony Shalhoub; written by Lynne Adams, based on her play ''Two Faced''; director of photography, Gary Henoch; edited by Michael Matzdorff; music by Michael Wolff; production designer, Miriam Feldman; produced by Lynne Adams, Brooke Adams and Mark Donadio; released by Sister Films. At the Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets, Greenwich Village. Running time: 96 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Brooke Adams (Elizabeth James Tivey), Lynne Adams (Kate James), Eva Amurri (Sara Tivey), Kalen Conover (Chris), Light Eternity (Molly Avrums), Jim Issa (Eli), Lance Krall (Simon), Tony Shalhoub (Max Hires) and Gary Sinise (Duncan Tivey).
FILM REVIEW
