On Jan. 11, Billy Kluver died in Berkeley Heights, N.J., at the age of 76. I didn't know him. Yet his death meant something important to me -- personally, historically and symbolically.
Personally, most everyone who comes to New York City from somewhere in the outback has a tale to tell -- a memory of the reason, in some cases the burning need, they felt to get here from there. I can't say that Kluver alone was my burning need, but he was part of it. I wanted to come to New York for the bright buzz of the big city, for its national newspapers and magazines, for the glamour of its cultural life in general.
But I was particularly drawn to the thriving SoHo arts scene, wherein bold, young experimental composers, rock musicians, choreographers (those three were the most exciting for me then), painters, filmmakers, poets and performers were making a neighborhood and a new kind of art. In 1972 I rented a loft in nearby Little Italy; I later bought one in SoHo itself (just before it became the shoe capital of the universe) and am there to this day.
But one of the main lures for me to finally come to New York was something called Experiments in Art and Technology, better known as E.A.T., which had been started in 1966 by two artists (Robert Rauschenberg and Bob Whitman) and two engineers, Fred Waldhauer and Kluver. Of these, the most constant was Kluver, who was still doing what E.A.T. set out to do right up to his death.
Historically, what E.A.T. did was bring artists together with engineers. What the artists got from the exchange was clear: technical help in all areas of science to realize their ideas or to spark new ideas. But what the engineers got was equally important, if more nebulous: new ways of thinking about scientific problems, inspired by the artists.
''The engineer expands his vision and gets involved with problems which are not the kind of rational problems that come up in his daily routine,'' Kluver said in a recent Internet interview.
Kluver was a physicist and electrical engineer who became fascinated by film. In 1960 he got involved with the sculptor Jean Tinguely, whom he helped design a ''self-destroying machine'' that spectacularly deconstructed itself in the garden of the Museum of Modern Art.
The immediate inspiration for the founding of E.A.T. was a series of performances at the 69th Regiment Armory in 1966 called ''Nine Evenings: Theater and Engineering.'' Organized by Mr. Rauschenberg and Kluver and enlisting a host of employees of the Bell Telephone Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J., where Kluver then worked, it attracted 14,000 people and put the whole idea of large-scale, flamboyant marriages of art and technology into the public consciousness. The happenings of every sort that followed couldn't help being inspired by the series.
E.A.T. didn't so much formalize the art-science interchange in some elaborate bureaucratic institution as serve to facilitate person-to-person contacts between artists and engineers. People, usually artists, would call up Kluver. Having ascertained their seriousness of intent (but not concerning himself with aesthetic judgments on the quality of their work), he would put them in contact with an appropriate engineer and then leave them to their own devices. Over the years -- and he was making such connections right up to the end -- he worked with artists as diverse as Jasper Johns, Yvonne Rainer, John Cage, Bill Viola and Andy Warhol (the famous floating ''Silver Clouds'' in Merce Cunningham's dance ''RainForest'').
Later his projects took him further afield, including to Ahmedabad, India; Osaka and Tokyo; Stockholm; the Georges Pompidou Center in Paris; and northern Greenland. The Sonnabend Gallery (in Chelsea, the new SoHo, if it hasn't been surpassed by still-newer reclaimed neighborhoods) presented a show documenting E.A.T.'s accomplishments two years ago.
I said above that Kluver meant something to me symbolically as well as personally and historically. What he symbolized was the age-old struggle of art and science (or, as he preferred, technology) to unite in the service of humanity. Somehow the two sides did not seem so widely disjunct in the days of the Greeks, when philosopher-scientist-artists like Pythagoras addressed themselves happily to all areas of human accomplishment. Or in the Renaissance, with Leonardo da Vinci; the phrase ''Renaissance man'' came later to mean more than a mere designation of a historical period.
But as knowledge became more voluminous and specialized, the two sides seemed to split apart; today we even believe them to be generated from different sides of the brain. In the 20th century, either full of self-confident optimism or pessimistically envious of the tangible achievements of science, artists sought to claim for art the seeming verities of science or even its ''rules'': Vladimir Tatlin with Constructivism, or Arnold Schoenberg with his 12-tone system of musical composition.
By now, more or less institutionalized laboratories for art-science interchange have sprung up everywhere. Pierre Boulez's Ircam (Institut de Recherche et Coordination Acoustique/Musique) in Paris, the Media Lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and innumerable other artistic and academic centers have carried on the tradition with vigor and imagination. Some arts can't escape evolving technology even if they wish to. By its very nature, architecture is a particularly obvious blend of art and technology (and commerce and politics, too). So are the myriad forms of computer art and graphics that have sprung up in recent decades. And film in our new digital era.
Kluver and E.A.T. and his collaborations with an inspired group of downtown New York artists in the 1960's and 70's represented a particularly exciting manifestation of such interchanges. His death will hardly mean an end to them. As he himself said, E.A.T. would be a success when it was no longer needed, when artists and engineers felt it perfectly natural to know one another and to reach across the divide for help and inspiration.
Back in the early 70's, Kluver, Cage and Mr. Rauschenberg and their versions of this kind of joint inspiration looked especially exciting to a young man from afar (and from close-up, too). They were a beacon in the dark. Kluver's death brings his own personal contribution to an end, but the work goes on everywhere. The dark has long since been illuminated.
REVERBERATIONS
