It sounds so sweet -- the idea of bringing the New Jersey Nets to Brooklyn, a borough that still winces at the betrayal by the Dodgers nearly half a century ago. The baseball team went west after it was denied a new field at the corner of Flatbush and Atlantic Avenues. If he gets his way, that's exactly where the developer Bruce Ratner will move the Nets, into a gleaming new arena designed by Frank Gehry. Brooklyn should be allowed a moment of exuberance. And then it will need to come back to earth.
The team's move from the Meadowlands in New Jersey -- if indeed it ever happens -- won't occur overnight or without a fight. The $300 million deal to sell the Nets to Mr. Ratner (whose development company is a partner of The New York Times in building the newspaper's new headquarters) is just a first step. The deal must be approved by the National Basketball Association, and the $2.5 billion plan itself will require that land be condemned, rail tracks be moved and the financially strapped Metropolitan Transportation Authority give up air rights that it could otherwise sell. While opponents say hundreds of people would be displaced, the proposal includes the addition of 4,500 housing units and promises to create jobs, all welcome in Brooklyn.
The big question is how the arena will be financed. Public subsidies have come to be expected whenever a team moves in New York. The Bloomberg administration is aggressively working on a proposal to help the New York Jets build a new stadium on Manhattan's far West Side, part of a multibillion-dollar development that will require hundreds of millions in scarce city and state money. Mayor Michael Bloomberg has expressed support for the Brooklyn arena, but the city's role remains vague. With so many balls in the air, City Hall needs to allay fears that it may be overextending itself and, ultimately, the taxpayers.
There are far too many ifs right now to regard the Nets deal as more than an enticing thought -- even the part about another possible subway rivalry.
