Here's a bit of welcome bad news: airport congestion is making headlines again. Delays at O'Hare airport in Chicago have become so serious that the Federal Aviation Administration has pressed United and American to reduce by 5 percent the number of flights they schedule at peak hours.
The fact that the nation's aviation system is overwhelmed at crucial choke points is a source of tremendous frustration to travelers, and it poses safety challenges to a strained air traffic control system. Reducing flights is a short-term but ultimately unsatisfactory fix. Increased capacity (more runways, for starters), instead of arbitrary caps on flights, is the real solution.
On the bright side, however, the bad news about congestion means that the airline business has bounced back from its post-9/11 doldrums. Before the attack, airports were so overloaded that restrictions were imposed on new flights out of La Guardia in New York, and travelers were in a constant state of frustration. Then came 9/11, and with it far weightier concerns. Terrorism fears and a slowing economy forced struggling airlines to shrink their schedules drastically and, just like that, flights became eerily on time.
The industry's revival mirrors the overall economy and a general sense that life cannot be put on hold until Tom Ridge gives us an all-clear green signal. December was the first month that passenger demand was back at the levels before September 2001. And though it has not yet returned to profitability, American Airlines, the nation's largest carrier, has seen its stock price rise by 1,000 percent since it flirted with bankruptcy early last year.
The major carriers have all reduced costs and are smaller than they were before the attack. More nimble discount airlines, like JetBlue and AirTran, which are offering increasingly good products and reintroducing a bit of whimsy to the skies, account for much of the system's new capacity. As a result, passengers enjoy more choices and lower fares.
In the long term, demand for air travel should continue to grow. Airport operators and aviation officials who believed that they could put off capital projects aimed at expanding capacity must now readjust their thinking.
