The Senate's sergeant-at-arms said on Thursday that he was nearing an end to an investigation into how several confidential memorandums written by Democratic staff aides about dealing with judicial nominations ended up in the hands of Republican staff members.
The investigation by the office of the sergeant-at-arms, William Pickle, was undertaken last November after parts of the memorandums appeared in news accounts in The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Times and a column by Robert Novak.
Some of the memorandums from the offices of Senators Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, both Democrats, discussed strategy and tactics on dealing with President Bush's judicial nominees.
Democrats and Republicans in the Senate have been engaged in a bitter feud over Mr. Bush's judicial nominees and the issue of the memorandums has only added to the anger in the Judiciary Committee.
After the Democrats complained that their confidential memorandums were being stolen and distributed to conservative news outlets, Mr. Pickle began an investigation on Nov. 19. He had committee computers seized and used Secret Service agents and a computer expert from General Dynamics to determine whether and how the Democrats' computer files were hacked into as part of a possible improper political operation.
He said through a spokeswoman on Thursday that he expected to issue a report soon to the Judiciary Committee. The progress of Mr. Pickle's investigation was reported most recently by The Boston Globe on Thursday.
Manuel C. Miranda, a former Republican Judiciary Committee staff member, whose name appeared as a recipient of one of the Democratic e-mail messages and who has been questioned by Mr. Pickle's investigators, said in an interview Thursday that he knew how the documents were obtained by Republicans. He said that a junior member on the staff of Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah and chairman of the Judiciary Committee, had discovered a flaw in the computer system that allowed him to read some of the Democratic computer traffic.
Mr. Miranda, who is now a senior staff aide to Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, the Republican leader, said that the junior aide was reading the Democratic documents from about May 2002 until the early fall of 2002. The aide, who has since left the Senate, passed some of those memorandums to Mr. Miranda and other Hatch staff members, Mr. Miranda said.
''Those documents that I did read were, in my view, not obtained in any way that was improper, unlawful or unethical,'' he said. He described them as ''inadvertent disclosures that came to me as a result of some negligence on the part of the Democrats' technology staff.'' His only obligation, he said, was to see that the Democrats were told that the computer system had a flaw that allowed Republican aides to read some of their memorandums.
''I knew our people had told their people about it,'' Mr. Miranda said. ''Once I knew that, I had no further obligation.''
He described the junior staff aide as someone who had a great deal of time on his hands, and he said most of the documents the aide gave him were of little value.
''There was no systematic surveillance, no hacking, no stealing and no violation of any Senate rules,'' he said.
David Smith, a spokesman for Senator Kennedy, said, however, that what occurred ''was clearly an improper unethical and unacceptable breach of confidential files.'' He said that anybody who retrieved the documents or even had use of them later should be disciplined. Another senior Democratic aide on the Judiciary Committee said that while what occurred was objectionable, there was no need for any criminal investigation.
Senator Hatch has said at various times that he did not think the issue of the memorandums was a serious matter and at other times that he thought it was a great ethical violation. He declined to comment on Thursday, saying through a spokesman that the matter was under investigation by Mr. Pickle's office.
