Prime Minister Paul Martin sharply distanced himself on Thursday from the police raid of the home and office of a newspaper reporter who obtained secret government documents related to a suspected member of Al Qaeda, arguing that any investigation must be weighed against principles of freedom of the press.
In New York, meanwhile, lawyers acting on behalf of the suspected Qaeda member, Maher Arar, filed suit in federal court accusing Attorney General John Ashcroft and two other top American officials, of deporting Mr. Arar to Syria despite knowing that Syria practices torture. Mr. Arar, a Syrian-born software consultant who denies any involvement in Al Qaeda, was arrested in 2002 during a brief stopover in the United States on his way home to Canada. He was expelled to Syria, where he says he was tortured. He has since returned to Canada.
Mr. Martin, speaking in Davos, Switzerland, where he is attending the World Economic Forum, expressed distress about a police action that he said neither he nor his aides were aware of beforehand.
''Very clearly we are not a police state and we have no intention of being a police state,'' he said. ''There is a balance between how does one protect the nation's security and what are the steps taken. And certainly our bias is going to be constantly to review that balance.''
The issue appeared to be an early civil liberties test for the new prime minister, who campaigned for the Liberal Party leadership on the issue of empowering ordinary citizens. But it also gave the parliamentary opposition an opening to question whether Mr. Martin, who has been in office for five weeks, is fully in charge of his government.
On Wednesday, officers with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police raided the home and office of Juliet O'Neill, a reporter with The Ottawa Citizen, downloading her computer files and confiscating her notebooks, contact lists and other files. Their search warrants said she faced possible criminal charges of violating the Security of Information Act, a sweeping measure enacted after the Sept. 11, 2001, attcks on the United States to strengthen prohibitions on the possession of state secrets.
Ms. O'Neill is being investigated for an article she wrote last year outlining Canadian intelligence reports that Mr. Arar had trained in a terrorist camp in Afghanistan. She could face up to 14 years in jail for receiving and possessing secret documents. Her editors, however, say that Mr. Martin's remarks and comments by prosecutors suggested that imminent prosecution is unlikely.
Mr. Martin said Ms. O'Neill was ''clearly not'' a criminal and that the Security of Information Act must be reviewed. ''What should be of interest to everybody is who leaked that information, not the journalist who received it,'' he said.
Ms. O'Neill said in a telephone interview that she welcomed Mr. Martin's remarks.
''I heard he said I am not a criminal and that is very heartening,'' she said. She complained that the police had taken ''all the tools of my trade'' in their raids.
After Mr. Arar returned to Canada last October, he said he had been unfairly accused by the United States and had been tortured in Syria. He maintained that he had never been in Afghanistan.
The Center for Constitutional Rights filed the lawsuit on his behalf in New York, naming Mr. Ashcroft, Tom Ridge, the head of the Office of Homeland Security, and Robert Mueller III, the director of the F.B.I., seeking damages and an apology. The Justice Department released a statement saying it believed Mr. Arar was a member of Al Qaeda.
Mr. Arar's expulsion has been a point of contention between Canada and the Bush administration, although officials in both countries say they shared intelligence suggesting that Mr. Arar had ties to a Qaeda support cell operating in Ottawa.
Opposition leaders raised questions about who in the highest levels of the government were in command of the security forces. Peter MacKay, a conservative leader in the House of Commons, said of Mr. Martin, ''To think that he hadn't briefed himself is just unbelievable.''
But the deputy prime minister, Anne McLellan, one of the senior officials charged with public security, told reporters that it would not necessarily be appropriate for them to be given prior information about actions taken in a R.C.M.P. criminal investigation.
Richard G. Dearden, Ms. O'Neill's lawyer, said he hoped that Mr. Martin would make sure that his client got a copy of the sealed affidavit with the evidence the police used to obtain the search warrant. Under the Canada Evidence Act, passed in December 2001, the attorney general has 10 days to decide whether to release the affadavit.
''This becomes a test for the 'star chamber' procedures implemented after 9/11 and that are being used,'' Mr. Dearden said.
