New Niches for Icons Of a Catholic England
The English Reformation in the 1530's, which changed England's official religion from Roman Catholic to Protestant, also destroyed centuries of religious art.
When Henry VIII wasn't able to persuade the pope to annul his marriage to Catherine of Aragon so that he could remarry, he summoned the Reformation Parliament to enact laws requiring members of the clergy to submit to his self-imposed position as the head of the new Church of England, now Protestant. The bankrupt king then confiscated the monasteries and transferred their estates, as well as their silver and gold, to the crown. In 1540 the last of more than 500 monasteries was closed.
Henry VIII died in 1547 and was succeeded by Edward VI, a dedicated Protestant who ordered the removal of religious images from places of worship. These depictions included shrines, statues and wall paintings. Religious zealots heeded his call and desecrated churches, destroying shrines and textiles and smashing religious sculptures.
In Nottingham, the Nottingham School of Alabasterers had been carving alabaster religious figures since the 14th century. Most were reliefs of the Crucifixion or statues of individual saints that were placed on altars or set in wall niches. They were usually colorfully painted and gilded.
''There are a lot of alabaster quarries around Nottingham and the school was so successful that the sculptures were sent abroad,'' said Liz Mitchell, a specialist in European sculpture and works of art at Sotheby's in London. ''They were an early export, like Limoges enamels from France. Almost all of them were religious.''
Today it is hard to find Nottingham alabaster figures in Britain, especially undamaged ones. ''They are rare because they are very old; I get about one a year,'' Ms. Mitchell said. ''I find more whole ones outside of England.''
Richard Philp, a London dealer who has a booth at the Winter Antiques Show, through Sunday at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan, is offering a few Nottingham alabasters. ''I have a Virgin and Child, which is rare,'' he said. ''They were the first to be destroyed during the Reformation.''
Trained as a painter, Mr. Philp has been a dealer in antiquities, medieval and pre-Reformation art and old master drawings since 1965. He shows at fairs in Maastricht, the Netherlands, and in London (the Grosvenor House Arts and Antiques Fair); the San Francisco Fall Antiques Show; and at the Winter Antiques Show. This week he has a 12th-century stone corbel shaped like a wolf's head, a 15th-century beam carved in the shape of a harpy, and a large fragment of English Gothic tracery in oak, from a chancel rood screen, circa 1400.
He said he usually finds Nottingham alabasters in Catholic countries. ''I've found them in Portugal and as far away as Iceland,'' he said. ''English medieval art has an idiosyncratic quality that is quite different from art from the Continent. There is something more ethereal about English art.''
Another booth at the Winter Antiques Show selling art from the Middle Ages to the Renaissance is Les Enluminures, whose gallery is on the Place du Palais Royal in Paris. Sandra Hindman, the owner, is a professor emeritus of medieval art at Northwestern University in Chicago. She specializes in manuscripts, illuminations (the English translation of the French word enluminures), books, jewelry and art.
Her booth has sculptures from Europe, including one of St. Jude from Northern Italy made in about 1500 and a limewood statue of Jesus as the Man of Sorrows by Hans Multscher, a 15th-century sculptor who did some of the carvings at the Ulm Cathedral in Germany.
More unusual, perhaps, is an early 16th-century Spanish statue of St. Jerome, a translator of the Bible. Carved from hickory, the sculpture retains nearly all of its paint, from the red robe to the saint's 5 o'clock shadow. ''It's rare; sculpture doesn't leave Spain all that often,'' Ms. Hindman said. ''Its polychrome is original and almost 100 percent intact.''
Blumka and Böhler
This week the Blumka Gallery of Manhattan and the Julius Böhler Gallery of Munich opened their third joint biennial exhibition of new acquisitions at Blumka, 209 East 72nd Street. The show features medieval enamels; medieval, Renaissance and Baroque ivories; wood and stone sculpture; metalwork; paintings; and tapestries.
''They both sell things of fantastic quality,'' said Ms. Mitchell, the Sotheby's expert. ''I've found this is a solid market for the best things. When you get to the not-so-important things, there are not so many collectors.''
Many of their objects are of a religious nature. One spectacular piece is a 47-inch-tall wooden figure of a female saint from the area near Ulm, in Northern Bavaria, that was made around 1500. It is attributed to the sculptor Nicolaus Weckmann.
''She is one of the four princess saints, which is why she is crowned,'' said Anthony Blumka, the gallery owner. ''She is in mint condition.''
They are also showing a bronze aquamanile, or ceremonial ewer, in the form of a lion. Nearly 11 inches tall, it has a crown, a full mane, a puffed-out chest and bared teeth. ''It is from the early 13th century, a quintessentially Gothic form,'' Mr. Blumka said. ''It's made to hold water but can be secular or religious.''
Mr. Blumka said he had such bronzes tested for authenticity by metallurgists and academics in the Netherlands. ''There were a tremendous number of forgeries in the 19th century, so we take the bronzes to Maastricht and get reports on their metal content and age,'' he explained. ''They look for arsenic and silver and materials that never appeared before the 19th century.''
He is also selling a bronze ewer from the mid-14th century that has been on loan to the Metropolitan Museum of Art. It sits on three paw feet and has a dragon-head spout and another dragon head on the handle, but its lid is missing.
''It is the model of all the ewers that came after it,'' Mr. Blumka said. ''It has been on loan for 20 years, but was sitting on a bottom shelf where you could barely see it, so I decided to take it back. I've given the Met some other things, in my son's name, to replace it.''
Mr. Blumka is also selling a reliquary (circa 1190) in champlevé enamel on gilt copper. It once belonged to Max von Goldschmidt-Rothschild in Frankfurt. Made in Limoges, France, it retains its original rock crystal cabochons and sculptured copper saints. The enamelwork -- in bright red, green, yellow, turquoise and navy blue -- is untouched.
''They were made in vibrant colors like this until the 1300's, when the enamels began to be mass produced,'' Mr. Blumka said.
The exhibition, which is accompanied by a catalog, continues through Feb. 6.
Antiques
