IF I hear one more ode to the old Brooklyn Dodgers or to Ebbets Field or to Pee Wee and Jackie, I'll scream. I'm screaming now, but it's hard to hear because of the roar of misplaced celebration.
All the excited talk surrounding the agreement Wednesday to sell the Nets and eventually move the franchise to Brooklyn would have you think that the Dodgers were coming back, returning to the scene of the crime and atoning.
I don't want to step on anyone's dream, but anyone who fancies Brooklyn as the Nets' promised land had better wake up.
Bruce C. Ratner outbid Charles Kushner and Senator Jon S. Corzine for the right to own one of the N.B.A.'s most enigmatic and well-traveled franchises. With the $300 million sale all but completed, Ratner wants to put the team in one of the city's most colorful and enigmatic boroughs, Brooklyn.
Two mysterious moves: paying $300 million for the nomadic Nets and moving the wobbly team to a borough that lost a major league franchise, the Dodgers, 47 years ago. The sale has been met with a dancing-in-the-street quality that seems way out of proportion to the acquisition of a zany team with a history of erratic performance.
I realize that something is going on here that has nothing to do with logic and everything to do with emotion. We're talking dreams and nostalgia. A longing each of us has, in one way or another, for the good old days.
During the months of negotiations, talk of a Nets sale and an impending move to Brooklyn sparked fond recollections of going to that first ballgame with Mom and Dad and the whole Boys of Summer thing.
But this isn't baseball, these aren't the Dodgers, and we're in the dead of winter.
This is intended to be sobering, not harsh.
I respect nostalgia; I'm surrounded in Harlem by nostalgia. Every time I cross the Macombs Dam Bridge and look north to where the Polo Grounds once stood, I try to imagine Willie Mays making that fabulous over-the-shoulder catch in the 1954 World Series. Each morning I pass by the Renaissance Ballroom, where the Harlem Rens played championship-caliber basketball for more than two decades. I understand nostalgia.
History has its place: that's why we have museums. But we don't need an arena in downtown Brooklyn.
Ratner sees a dream. I see the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, snarled in knots of traffic. At best, I see the bridges into Brooklyn choked with cars waiting to get to the game, rocking gently up and down. I do not see Manhattan fans jumping on the subway to see Nets basketball.
''That's a concern of mine,'' said Herb Turetzky, the longtime Nets statistician. Turetzky started with the Nets when they were the New Jersey Americans and operated out of Teaneck. The Nets have moved from Teaneck to Commack, N.Y., to West Hempstead to Uniondale and back to New Jersey. Now they are apparently headed to Brooklyn.
There are lots of basketball fans in Brooklyn. But will they be paying N.B.A. customers? Will they be fans of the Nets?
Will Brooklyn support a team? Did Brooklyn support the Dodgers? Will Brooklyn pay N.B.A. prices to see the Nets?
Turetzky suggested that the Nets, in an effort to entice young people and attract a more energetic crowd, offer $10 seats to high school students.
Ten-dollar tickets? In your dreams.
This is the N.B.A., with bills to pay. David Stern's N.B.A. will not be having any Brooklyn discounts.
The logical move for the Nets is south, to Newark. As much as the move to Brooklyn is based on happy nostalgia of the 1950's, the move to Newark has been opposed, in part, because it conjured negative and misplaced images of ruin and destruction of the 1960's.
Newark is ready for a team, more than Brooklyn will ever be, because of northern New Jersey's more diverse fan base. But Ratner has his dream, and it's in Brooklyn.
He may also want a new team nickname as a way to erase all vestiges of the old franchise's blues.
Sorry, but you can't hide from fate.
The Nets are the N.B.A.'s Ancient Mariner, and once again the franchise is following its destiny -- this time in Brooklyn. Just when the Nets have gotten their act together, the franchise has to move out of its theater in the swamp.
And who will these Nets be in 2008, when the Nets' lease at Continental Arena runs out? Here's my guess: Jason Kidd? Gone. Kenyon Martin? Gone. Byron Scott? Long gone.
By the time the team moves to Brooklyn, old Dodgers fans may get back what they lost 47 years ago when their team was lovingly called Da Bums.
Now there's a name for you.
Sports of The Times
