Federal prosecutors, seeking a maximum 33-month prison sentence against the celebrity private investigator Anthony Pellicano for illegal possession of weapons, have introduced evidence from a related inquiry to bolster their argument.
Mr. Pellicano, who has worked for some of Hollywood's top lawyers and celebrities, is to be sentenced on Friday, having pleaded guilty to illegally possessing hand grenades and plastic explosives.
The authorities filed documents last week in the Federal District Court here offering ''corroborating evidence'' from the related inquiry. That evidence, they say, ties Mr. Pellicano to a death threat made against a reporter for The Los Angeles Times.
The reporter, Anita M. Busch, had been investigating a link between the actor Steven Seagal and a reputed Mafia associate when, in June 2002, she found a dead fish, a rose in its mouth, on her car, whose windshield had apparently been pierced by a bullet. A piece of cardboard with the fish bore the word ''stop.''
A convicted drug dealer, Alexander Proctor, subsequently told an F.B.I. informant in a secretly tape-recorded talk that Mr. Pellicano, working for Mr. Seagal, had hired him to engage in the intimidation of Ms. Busch.
A resulting search of Mr. Pellicano's office by federal agents looking for evidence in that case turned up not only the illegal weapons but also, the authorities say, evidence of unrelated instances of illicit wiretapping: the transcripts of phone conversations involving various Hollywood figures.
In its filing last week, the government said the court, in deciding how much time Mr. Pellicano should spend in prison for the weapons offenses, ought to ''properly consider'' his ''uncharged criminal conduct'' in the Busch case.
Both Mr. Pellicano and Mr. Seagal have denied involvement in any effort to intimidate Ms. Busch. Late Wednesday, Mr. Pellicano's lawyers filed a response to the government's accusations, describing as ''petty'' the desire to have him receive the maximum sentence in the weapons case. They added that the information from Mr. Proctor was ''unproven, unsworn, untested and untrue.''
Donald Re, one of the defendant's lawyers, said in a telephone interview that the government's effort to implicate Mr. Pellicano in the threat against Ms. Busch was ''complete nonsense.''
''It's garbage,'' Mr. Re said. ''First of all, they're relying on Alexander Proctor, someone sentenced to 10 years on a drug job. They wouldn't rely on anything Proctor said if it hurt them.''
Mr. Pellicano began serving his prison term last November at the federal Metropolitan Detention Center here, even before his formal sentencing this week. His punishment can range from 27 to 33 months.
In addition, government officials say they hope the wiretapping investigation that sprang from the search of his office will result in further charges against him in the next few months, a development that could extend his imprisonment. As part of that investigation, the authorities are trying to determine whether some of those who hired Mr. Pellicano over the years -- entertainment figures and powerful Hollywood and New York lawyers -- were complicit in any wiretapping efforts.
A transcript of the recorded conversation between Mr. Proctor and the F.B.I. informant accompanied the government's court filing last week. It reads like outtakes from ''The Sopranos.'' At one point, Mr. Proctor is quoted as talking about the threat against Ms. Busch.
''Yeah,'' he said, ''I put a sign pasted in the window. 'Stop.' I put a bullet hole so that bullet hole, shot the car up, you know, so that she sees the bullet right there. And then I put a dead fish with a rose in its mouth by the window. (laughs) Dead fish. Because I wanted her to think it was Italians. I don't know if it worked or didn't work.''
