Zimbabwe's only independent daily newspaper hit the streets Thursday for the first time in nearly four months. The Daily News, a fierce critic of Zimbabwe's authoritarian leader, Robert Mugabe, reopened late Wednesday after a high court judge ordered the police to stop interfering with its publication.
In another possible sign that Mr. Mugabe may want to ease his country's protracted crisis, South Africa's president, Thabo Mbeki, said Thursday that Mr. Mugabe's governing party had agreed to formal negotiations with the political opposition.
''I am quite certain they will negotiate and reach an agreement,'' Mr. Mbeki said at a news conference in Pretoria.
But in Zimbabwe, the prospect for talks seemed far less certain. Spokesmen for both Mr. Mugabe's ZANU-PF and the Movement for Democratic Change, which is seeking his ouster, denied there had been any progress. Many analysts say Mr. Mugabe's erratic behavior makes it hard to predict whether his conciliatory gestures presage real change.
Wednesday's judicial decree was the fourth time that a court has ordered that The Daily News should be allowed to publish since the government first shut down the newspaper Sept. 12. Gugulethu Moyo, the newspaper's lawyer, said she had no explanation as to why the government decided to heed the order Wednesday after ignoring the three previous ones.
''There appears to have been some kind of change of heart by the government,'' she said. ''We hope it is a permanent change. But I think it is too early to say.''
Earlier reprieves have proved temporary. After another favorable court ruling in October, The Daily News managed to publish just 100,000 copies of one edition before police ordered all the journalists out of the building in the nation's capital, Harare.
In The Daily News newsroom Thursday, there was a mix of jubilation and skepticism.
''This is too good to be true.'' said Luke Tamborinyoka, the chief news editor. ''So far the police have not harassed.'' If that is still true in three days, he said, then he might declare that ''we are back in business.''
At the very least, Ms. Moyo said, The Daily News has a momentary edge in its battle to publish. ''The judge was very emphatic that he would not tolerate defiance by the police any longer,'' she said. Even the government's lawyer conceded in court that there was no legal justification to keep The Daily News from publishing at this time, she said.
Over the past six months, Mr. Mugabe's government has forced Zimbabwe's independent press to its knees. Ms. Moyo said 74 Daily News employees face charges of practicing journalism without government accreditation. Four corporate directors of the paper have been charged with publishing without a license, an offense punishable by two years in prison. Ms. Moyo has been charged with inciting citizens to demonstrate against their government.
This month, four more journalists from a weekly newspaper, The Independent, were arrested for a Jan. 9 article that said Mr. Mugabe had commandeered an Air Zimbabwe plane for his holiday in eastern Asia, stranding many travelers.
Mr. Mbeki has been trying to persuade Mr. Mugabe to stop harassment of journalists and to negotiate with his political opponents. His success so far has been limited. A spokesman for Mr. Mbeki said that before the latest journalists were arrested, Mr. Mugabe had promised Mr. Mbeki that there would be no more such arrests.
After Mr. Mbeki flew to Harare to meet Mr. Mugabe in December, the ZANU-PF party supposedly agreed to come up with a timetable for negotiations. But Didymus Mutasa, a spokesman for ZANU-PF, told BBC News on Thursday, ''The only contact we have had is at Parliament, where we shout at each other.''
In the Pretoria news conference, Mr. Mbeki promised that the situation would change. The German chancellor, Gerhard Schröder, who is in South Africa on a state visit, joined Mr. Mbeki at the news conference. He said he told Mr. Mbeki that Germany finds Zimbabwe's current government unacceptable.
