The Young Black Stallion  Biana G. Tamimi, Richard Romanus, Patrick Elyas, Gerald Rudolf, Ali al Ameri, Andries Rossouw  Directed by Simon Wincer  G 50 minutes
An Imax film with an image six stories tall and a short running time imposed by the format restricts a narrative adapted from Walter and Steven Farley's book (made into a fine family film, ''The Black Stallion,'' in 1989 by Carroll Ballard). But in this case the spectacular 70-millimeter desertscapes make a simplified tale almost beside the point.
After World War II, an Arab girl named Neera (Biana G. Tamimi) is being taken across the desert by camel to her grandfather's house when the caravan is attacked by bandits and she becomes lost in the endless sands.
Never has such a stranding gone so painlessly. Water holes present themselves at just the right moments in a foreshortened trek that seems to be over before it starts and leads straight to the compound of her grandfather (Mr. Romanus), a renowned horse breeder who has lost everything but his large house in the war.
Along the way Neera meets and befriends a wild young stallion, but the horse takes off at the sight of her grandfather's place. No one believes her story about such a creature. Horse racing is the sport in these parts, but grandfather has lost his mares and has no horse to compete. Other breeders are derisive.
One night the stallion appears outside Neera's window. She will train the animal to race, but with the contest about to happen (and the film's 50-minute running time fast diminishing), they had better hurry. She will ride the horse herself, though her grandfather forbids it. As the other horses rear and prance along the starting line in a roiling desert encampment, up come the stallion and Neera. And they're off.
VIOLENCE -- Movie desert attacks are usually nasty, but this one is mainly bluster.  SEX -- None.  PROFANITY -- None.
For Which Children?  AGES 3-10 -- Fine for children of all ages.
Chasing Liberty  Mandy Moore, Matthew Goode, Jeremy Piven, Annabella Sciorra, Mark Harmon, Caroline Goodall  Directed by Andy Cadiff  PG-13 100 minutes
The president's wife (Ms. Goodall) has a question for him: how can someone with a 60 percent approval rating be so stupid about his daughter? Anna Foster (Ms. Moore), a demurely rambunctious 18-year-old, wants to go out with guys on real dates without a retinue of Secret Service agents in a procession of black sport utility vehicles. Her father, James Foster (Mr. Harmon), refuses.
Anna draws a crowd in public places and does need security. Even so, the president, a bloodless, dismissive fellow, is being a jerk. Finally he lets Anna attend a Roots concert with a girlfriend in Prague, where he has gone for a summit meeting. Anna makes a deal with her father: two accompanying agents, and only two. Of course on Dad's orders every fourth person in the crowd is Secret Service.
She bolts out of the concert and jumps on the back of the first motorbike she comes across, which is driven by the standard pop-up male in a teen and preteen movie as formulaic as this one. Dark and stubbly, Ben Calder (Mr. Goode) is good-looking, kindly and humorously self-effacing. He's British, of course, and speaks in tones so sonorously low it's as if he switches on a voice box.
And he's willing to take Anna anywhere she wants to go on his bike. (Only later are his ulterior motives revealed.) The Secret Service is hard to shake, and by dawn the two are hiding out on a rooftop. Trying to flee to Berlin, where Anna wants to attend the Love Parade event, they take the wrong train, to Venice. By now they have completed the getting-to-know-you process and are thoroughly attracted to each other. The president receives word that they may be married, but the report is in error.
Having no money, they are taken in by a kindly gondolier. In their room Anna wants to make love, but Ben doesn't. ''Romance is not a feasible option,'' he says.
VIOLENCE -- A gang of kids rough up Anna, but not seriously.  SEX -- As discussed above, a sexual situation is approached and averted with a flash of flesh but a minimum of sensuality.  PROFANITY -- Some slightly off-color talk.
For Which Children?  UNDER AGE 10 -- Not for the very young, perhaps, but this is a bubbly affair with comfy, familiar types doing and saying all the rote, sanitized things they should in an adolescent movie that gets out in the world but either avoids or quickly cleans up anything the least untoward.  AGES 10-13 -- Some will like running around with the president's daughter.
The Triplets of Belleville  An animated film directed by Sylvain Chomet  With the voices of Jean-Claude Donda, Michel Robin and Monica Viegas (characters) and M. Béatrice Bonifassi and Charles Prevost Linton (songs).  PG-13 80 minutes
It's hard to describe what happens in the traditional sense, but we begin in France after World War II in the tilting, wonderfully dilapidated house of the indefatigable Madame Souza, who has been given the care of her orphaned grandson. On television they watch the triplets, a trio of tall, stringy scat singers.
The grandson is a morose little fellow, but he likes to ride bikes and grows into a powerful racing cyclist with outsize thighs and calves who pedals Madame Souza around town and is rewarded with leg massages performed with a vacuum cleaner and egg beater.
He competes in the Tour de France, but bad people in black suits want top racers to pedal on a treadmill and power various enterprises. The grandson and two other riders are kidnapped and shipped off to the United States. Madame Souza and her big, sloppy dog try to find him and land in a huge, vertical New York called Belleville. There they are taken in by the triplets, who hunt frogs and are so full of rhythm they pick up a beat from any sound, even the rustling of a newspaper.
Obesity holds sway in Belleville (a salute to this country's weight problem?), and in this very Gallic view the city moves with a kind of clank and swagger. The grandson's trail leads to a ''French wine center.'' Yes, there is a rescue and the triplets help out. One of them tosses a grenade and the bad people turn into fireworks over the city.
VIOLENCE -- Some is implied, but none to speak of.  SEX -- None  PROFANITY -- None.
For Which Children?  UNDER AGE 10 -- The film could well be a disaster for kids expecting the standard type of animation.  AGES 10 AND UP -- Many children will remain turned off, but a whimsical and striking-looking film full of quirky turns, characters and sights will intrigue others.
TAKING THE CHILDREN
