In its first three months in office, the new government of Azerbaijan has conducted a campaign of repression marked by arbitrary arrests, beatings, torture and the dismissal of dissenters from government jobs, according to a report released on Friday by the international rights group Human Rights Watch.
The detailed 55-page report describes a wave of up to 1,000 arrests of opposition party leaders and members, democracy activists, journalists and election officials and observers who challenged widespread electoral fraud. It said that more than 100 detainees remained in custody and that the police were still harassing opposition supporters.
The crackdown may reflect the relatively weaker political position of the new president, Ilham Aliyev, who followed his ailing father, Heidar Aliyev, in a strong-arm election on Oct. 15, according to the author of the report, Peter Bouckaert.
It was the first dynastic succession in a former Soviet nation, and opponents of the government were harassed and repressed before, during and after the election.
The experience has left the opposition and pro-democracy groups broken and demoralized, Mr. Bouckaert said in a telephone interview from his office in Johannesburg.
The thorough manipulation of the election, the crushing of opposition protests that followed it, the current crackdown and the absence of strong condemnation from Washington have left opponents of the government with few options and little hope in the near future, he said.
''I think it will be difficult to motivate the people of Azerbaijan to participate in future elections,'' he said. ''Basically they have lost faith in the process. They now have all the evidence they need to show that there is no opportunity for them to peacefully change their government.''
He noted that the brief riots that followed the voting -- which were quickly crushed by the police and the military -- were the first major political violence in a decade.
The successful crushing of dissent and the muted response from Washington contrast with the situation in neighboring Georgia, where pro-democracy groups were fostered with American aid and where a flawed parliamentary election in November drew criticism from Washington.
On Sunday, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell will attend the inauguration of Georgia's new president, Mikhail Saakashvili, who was elected this month after driving Eduard A. Shevardnadze from office in a peaceful popular uprising.
