For years, Union Pacific carried around an air of defeat. The restaurant, which sits on a shadowy block of East 22nd Street, was like a cave with somber colors, a drippy waterfall and a humorless staff. Rocco DiSpirito, the chef, would sometimes skulk through, tense and mopey, his genius ignored. And each plate emerging from the kitchen seemed more lint collector than food, snagging every culinary influence that crossed its path.
Those days are over.
Mr. DiSpirito's new-found fame, with his reality television series ''The Restaurant'' based on the frenetically busy Rocco's on 22nd restaurant up the street, seems to have given Union Pacific a reason for being. The staff members, outfitted in shirts the color of raspberry mousse, now zip around the dining room like flies on caffeine. Even the room itself seems to have awakened from its slumber, with bright fuchsia velvet chairs and plum colored walls. Success is very pink.
With the menu, Mr. DiSpirito has made the vital leap from frustrated artist to man with a plan -- and his fame has certainly attracted good talent to his kitchen. (As well as someone who seems to like pickles of all sorts.)
A plate of fluke carpaccio was arranged like a peony in bloom. Leaves of pale, delicate fish were outlined with a thread of cashew purée and pools of olive oil brightened with lemon juice and coriander. On top, a dusting of pickled egg yolk imitated pollen. In another appetizer, pieces of briny and lightly charred cuttlefish were collected under thin swatches of green apple. Feisty sparks of wasabi invaded each bite.
''Sweet carrot soup'' was indeed sweet, and clean, somewhere between libation and sustenance. A lump of tangy cranberry compote huddled in the middle with bits of walnut and popcorn. (Hurry and eat the popcorn before it gets soggy.)
Skate had a high moment. It was coated in cornmeal and made crisp in a sauté pan. Even a weird little dish like turkey schnitzel -- hidden under a shag of watercress -- had the marks of a craftsman behind it.
Do save room for one sweet, the hot chocolate soup. A scoop of mint ice cream illuminates the dessert, and don't miss the corkscrew of red candy. A familiar taste, which is yours to guess.
Union Pacific, 111 East 22nd Street, Manhattan, (212) 995-8500. Dinner: $68 for 3 courses.
Diner's Journal
