Every city has one: the celebrity, politician or businessman who seems to embody its persona, warts and all. Memphis was all about Elvis. New York has Rudy and the Donald. And Cincinnati, most people here would agree, is Pete's town.
Peter Edward Rose, a k a Charlie Hustle, was born on the city's working-class West Side, hard by the mud-brown waters of the Ohio River. He played four decades of headfirst-sliding baseball on local fields, from Little League to the major leagues, breaking Ty Cobb's record for career hits, winning two World Series rings and becoming the Reds manager along the way.
Cincinnati was also, by Rose's own admission, where he gambled voraciously, cheated on his first wife and failed to report at least $350,000 of income. He was banned from baseball in 1989 and served five months in federal prison for tax evasion before moving his family to Florida.
Now comes a new disclosure: 14 years after denying that he gambled on baseball, Rose has admitted that he did just that in his best-selling autobiography, ''My Prison Without Bars.''
For Cincinnatians, many of whom have stuck with their hometown hero through thick and thin, the revelation might seem too much to bear. But not so, judging from the giddy reception served up to Rose this week as he returned to Cincinnati to peddle his book. A rogue, perhaps, but their rogue nonetheless.
''If he played for any other team, I wouldn't have liked him, or what he did to baseball,'' said Jeanne Loreaux, 62, as she waited in the long line for an autograph on Wednesday night. ''But he's from Cincinnati. He's our Pete.''
What Rose did to baseball was break its cardinal rule, placing 412 wagers on games between 1985 and 1987, including 52 on the team he was managing, the Reds, according to an investigation ordered by A. Bartlett Giamatti, then the commissioner. Though Rose denied the accusations at the time, he accepted a lifetime ban that prevents him from being on the Hall of Fame ballot, managing a team or attending a game.
''That was bigger news than O. J. in Cincinnati,'' said Mike McConnell, a talk show host on a local AM station, WLW 700. ''People were incensed.''
All this week, Pete was big news again. Talk radio seemed unable to talk about anything else. A helicopter pulling a ''We Support Pete'' banner circled the city. Thousands of people waited hours in line at bookstores, including one where cold beer and hot dogs were sold.
The crowds were so thick, the fans' arms so filled with books at Joseph-Beth Booksellers on Wednesday night that management announced that Rose would not have time to sign every book. The well-mannered crowd turned angry, jeering like boozy fans in the cheap seats.
''If I was in his shoes, I'd stay, given the bad press he's had,'' said Cathy Huber, who returned four of her unsigned books. (Rose did just that, staying an extra hour to finish signing at least one book for every person in line.)
Not all of the 2,400 people who lined up over the last two days for autographs were motivated by devotion to Pete Rose. One woman tried to sell her copy bearing his signature for $50 moments after leaving Joseph-Beth. Several others put their books up for auction on eBay.
Most, however, were there because they love Pete. In interviews with dozens, almost all said he belonged in the Hall of Fame. But on further reflection, many also expressed dismay with his deceit.
''Truthfully, I didn't want to hear him admit it,'' said George Vanover, 66, a retired construction worker, as he left a Media Play store in west Cincinnati with an autographed book on Thursday. ''In our hearts, we all knew he had done it. But it still hurt to hear him admit it.''
Asked if Rose should be allowed to manage, Mr. Vanover echoed the sentiments of many, saying, ''I don't know if we could trust him.''
Paul Daugherty, a sports columnist for The Cincinnati Enquirer, said he was surprised by how little hate mail he had received after writing that Rose ''makes Pinocchio look like an amateur. You could walk to the moon on his nose.''
''I got a lot of e-mails,'' Mr. Daugherty said, ''from people saying: 'I grew up here and loved the way he played. But I don't feel that way anymore. I feel betrayed.' ''
Still, Rose's defenders remain unwavering, particularly on the West Side, where he is remembered as the flinty son of an amateur football star, the local guy of average talent and oversize heart who stayed close to his blue-collar roots even as stardom beckoned. If Rose lied, they argue, it was only because Major League Baseball unfairly hounded him. Telling the truth would have achieved nothing, they say.
''I'm only mad that he admitted it,'' said Donna Witten, 46, at a West Side institution, Price Hill Chili. ''Lie, deny until you die is my motto. He stayed with it all this time, he should have stuck with it all the way.''
One of her dining partners, Dick Vogel, who played high school baseball against Rose in the 1950's, said the league had applied a double standard, allowing reformed drug addicts to return to the game while barring him for life.
''If character was the issue, Ty Cobb and Babe Ruth and plenty of other guys wouldn't be in the Hall,'' Mr. Vogel said. ''It's Pete's time.''
Cincinnati Journal
