Flight controllers were worried yesterday about their inability to have intelligible communication with the Mars rover Spirit since early Wednesday, an ominous radio silence that engineers could not explain but that they feared was caused by a software or hardware failure.
With each passing hour and no clear message, concern grew that the mission of the robotic spacecraft might have come to an abrupt end, just as it was getting started, on the 19th day of a planned three-month exploration of Mars's geological history. At the time communication ended, the rover was preparing for another day analyzing its first rock.
If communications are not restored, the loss of the Spirit will place an added burden of expectations on its twin rover, Opportunity, which is scheduled to land on the opposite side of Mars late Saturday night. The two rovers are part of the $820 million mission.
''We know we have had a very serious anomaly on the vehicle,'' Peter Theisinger, the project manager at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., said yesterday at a news conference.
A beeping signal from the rover yesterday morning brought encouragement to the control center. It confirmed that the Spirit was not dead, only somehow incapacitated. But the signal carried no information, and it was not repeated.
Engineers said they expected to work through the night troubleshooting possible causes and deciding on the next steps in the investigation -- their ''go-forward activities,'' as they call them. They said there seemed to be no single fault or sequence of faults readily explaining the communications failure.
''That's what is perplexing us at the moment,'' said Richard Cook, the deputy project manager.
Mr. Cook said brief beeps from the rover were picked up Wednesday night by the Mars Global Surveyor, which is orbiting the planet and acting as a communications relay station. But the transmission, he noted, ''was a random pattern of zeroes and ones,'' indicating that the rover's radio was on but that its computer was perhaps unable to send anything intelligible for transmission to Earth.
In short, the Spirit seemed to have a voice and power but for some reason was left with nothing to say.
''We don't know what is the state of the software,'' Mr. Cook said, explaining that some corruption of the rover's operating instructions and memory system could be fixed by beaming corrections across more than 100 million miles to Mars. A hardware problem, he said, would be harder to resolve.
Mission officials ruled out environmental conditions on Mars, like a dust storm, as a cause of the trouble. No storm has been detected in the region of Gusev crater, a broad, rock-strewn plain near the equator.
At first, weather on Earth was a suspected culprit. On Wednesday, rain and thunderstorms at a deep-space antenna in Australia interrupted the transmission of a new set of instructions for the Spirit's next day of operations. The commands were for using a tool attached to the rover's mechanical arm to grind away a tiny area of a rock called Adirondack.
Some of the commands apparently got through, for flight controllers received a simple signal acknowledging that the rover had received them. At the time, Jennifer Trosper, the chief mission manager, said the Spirit continued to use a day-old master sequence of commands that kept it communicating but not using the instruments on its robotic arm.
The day passed without receipt of the scientific and engineering data expected at scheduled intervals.
Engineers seemed unconcerned that day. They noted that similar communications lapses had occurred several times during the Mars Pathfinder mission in 1997. That was the only previous time a rover operated on the planet. The losses of contact then were brief, never lasting more than a day or two.
But now they are examining whether the weather-related glitches could have contributed to the current setback. All of the day's commands perhaps did not get through to the Spirit. The rover's electronic brain, its on-board computer, is programmed to ignore incomplete or seemingly spurious commands. When in doubt at such times, the rover's fault-detection system is supposed to kick in, turning off some systems to avoid more serious trouble and weighing its programmed options.
In such situations, the rover goes into what is known as the fault mode. Mr. Theisinger said at least some aspect of the rover's software was functioning and perhaps trying to restore order and operations.
The 400-pound, six-wheel Spirit landed on Mars on Jan. 3 and rolled off its lander on Jan. 16. Under normal operations, the vehicle receives daily instructions and transmits data and pictures.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration's deep-space antennas are prepared to listen for signals from the Spirit at each opportunity. Mission officials said they were encouraged by the few beeps they have heard. They may not know yet what its problem is, or if it is correctable, but they said they were sure that the rover was still alive.
