On Wednesday night, the BBC's ''Panorama'' program broadcast an investigation into the events leading to the death of David Kelly, a government weapons expert who killed himself last July after he was revealed as the source of a BBC report critical of the government's justification for the Iraq war.
The 90-minute program, highly self-critical, is just one move by the BBC, one of the world's largest and most influential news organizations and broadcasters, to blunt attacks on its practices.
The program was broadcast a week before Lord Hutton, who led the public inquiry into Dr. Kelly's death, is to release his conclusions. ''Panorama,'' the corporation's flagship investigative show, did not try to justify the BBC's role in the Kelly affair but was a largely unflinching examination of the broadcaster's errors. It concluded that the original BBC report that started the turmoil was wrong. That was a radio report on the ''Today'' program last summer charging that Prime Minister Tony Blair's staff had ''sexed up'' the intelligence service's September 2002 dossier laying out the case for war in Iraq.
The ''Panorama'' report, which the BBC said had not been shown in advance to Greg Dyke, its director general, was broadcast in prime time, indicating the soul-searching and self-criticism that the BBC has undertaken since the Kelly affair.
Like the British government, which also stands to be criticized by the Hutton report, the BBC has said it will wait to hear the findings before deciding what to do.
But it is quietly preparing to revise its editorial guidelines in the next few months to clarify its policies on using anonymous sources in news reports, and this is a form of response to detractors.
Last month the BBC reversed a longstanding practice and decreed that journalists in its news divisions would no longer be allowed to write articles on political or contentious topics for national newspapers.
Several of the corporation's biggest names, including Andrew Marr, the BBC's political editor, and John Simpson, one of its star reporters, have lucrative side careers writing regular columns for newspapers like The Sunday Telegraph and The Times of London. Such columns are often used as forums for criticizing the government or taking a stand on disputed issues.
In announcing the decision, Richard Sambrook, director of news at the BBC, said that such columns threatened the BBC's reputation for impartiality.
''When our journalists write in papers, it is seen as an extension of their work for the BBC,'' Mr. Sambrook said. ''Yet columns and newspaper articles on controversial issues depend on expressing opinions to an extent that is often incompatible with the BBC's impartiality. The audience's trust in the independence of the BBC's journalism on all subjects is something we cannot afford to compromise.''
The ban was met with grumbling from some journalists. ''It's a mistake by the governors and an overreaction,'' Jeff Randall, the BBC's business editor, told The Daily Mail, speaking of the BBC's board of governors. He said he stood to lose $36,800 a year when he had to forgo his regular column for The Sunday Telegraph. ''In the long run, the BBC as well as individual journalists will lose out,'' Mr. Randall said. ''But that's the new rule, and it's no good whingeing'' (a Britishism for whining).
This month the BBC also canceled the popular daytime talk show ''Kilroy'' after its host, Robert Kilroy-Silk, wrote in The Express that Arabs were ''suicide bombers, limb amputators, women repressers'' who had made no contributions to the world other than the export of oil.
While accusing the BBC of censoring him, Mr. Kilroy-Silk apologized for the article, one in a series of weekly columns he writes for The Express, and tried to hang on to his television job, for which he was receiving £2 million a year, about $3.7 million. Last year when Mr. Kilroy-Silk published virtually the same column in The Express, the BBC took no action.
But this year, after canceling his show, the corporation said, ''Presenters of this kind of program have a responsibility to uphold the BBC's impartiality.''
In another move that seems intended to anticipate the Hutton report, the BBC appointed Mark Byford, head of the World Service, as deputy director general to overhaul the way it handles complaints.
In a recent interview in The Financial Times, the BBC's chairman, Gavyn Davies, admitted that the company had made mistakes in the Kelly episode. ''We believe that the BBC has made some errors in bringing the story to air,'' Mr. Davies said. ''We pointed out what those errors were.'' But he denied that the company had tried to whitewash the incident.
''I still believe we could not shrink from defending the independence of the BBC when it was under unprecedented attack,'' he said. ''Now, of course, when Lord Hutton reports, we will think again about whether there are things that we should do.''
