When a satellite rocket exploded in late August on its launching pad at a military-controlled base at Alcântara, on the eastern edge of the Amazon, 21 of Brazil's top scientists and technicians were instantly incinerated.
For Brazil, the disaster was the third failure trying to launch a satellite on its own rocket, and the worst in the history of its space program.
But more than calling into question that program's future, the catastrophe also provided a vivid warning to other developing nations tempted to reach for grand ambitions in space on budgets already stretched thin by earthly needs.
Critics call such space programs vanity projects for poor nations still struggling to feed themselves. But Brazilian officials, like those from India to China, describe their steadily expanding space effort as a commercial and strategic necessity, as well as a matter of national prestige.
More than 30 years ago, Brazil's aerospace program, based in this industrial city, was born as part of an effort by a military dictatorship to create a ''Brasil Grande.'' But while successive governments have embraced that vision, they have failed to match ambition with money.
At a memorial service here for the dead space experts, President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva wept copiously and vowed that Brazil would still launch its first rocket into space before his term ended in 2006.
But while he promised a $35,000 indemnity and college scholarships to the victims' families, his proposed budget falls far short of the tens of millions of dollars that experts say is needed to rebuild the launching site at Alcântara and reach his goal.
This kind of tight-fisted approach, say critics like the São Paulo Society of Engineers -- borrowing from the title of a Gabriel García Márquez novel -- made the August calamity the ''Chronicle of a Disaster Foretold.''
Similar views were expressed during a four-month investigation by The New York Times that included interviews with former Brazilian government officials, scientists and relatives of the victims.
Taken as a whole, their accounts portrayed a dangerously underfunded program that forced researchers to rely on substandard parts and questionable procedures, and had little public accountability under an unclear and divided chain of command. A government investigative panel has yet to issue its own report.
''The military didn't have the money, yet they didn't have the humility to admit that and say we should stop,'' said Luiz Cláudio Almeida, the brother of one of the victims and the president of a relatives' group. ''Instead, the military squeezed and squeezed, pressing the civilians to go ahead even when they knew proper working conditions didn't exist.''
Government officials have vowed that the program will not be abandoned. But independent experts and analysts are calling for the program's complete overhaul and have expressed surprise that a major accident had not happened before the Aug. 22 disaster.
Of the more than 20 space programs around the world, Brazil's is unique in being not under the control of a single government agency. Its satellite effort is run by the National Institute of Space Research, based here.
A civilian body, it has successfully capitalized on the growing global demand for the commercial use of satellite images. Foreign partners are in part attracted to cooperation by Brazil's advantage in having the closest launching pad to the Equator, which allows satellites to be lifted more easily and on less fuel.
On the other hand, Brazil's rocket program, which uses some of the same kinds of technology employed in ballistic missiles, is controlled by the Brazilian Air Force.
The rocket program has lagged far behind the satellite effort, critics say, because of excessive secrecy, suspicion of outside collaboration and efforts by the United States and other advanced nations to keep important missile technologies from spreading.
The gap has forced Brazil to use other nations' rockets to put the satellites it develops into orbit, a costly and sometimes difficult endeavor to negotiate. It has also increased the pressure on those working on the rocket program to speed up efforts to close that gap.
Relatives of those who died said the victims often complained of being prodded by career-minded military officers with little understanding of technical problems. Some also alleged that military managers forced the civilian technicians to cut corners, even regarding essential equipment.
''My husband went to them more than once and told them they were using parts that were obsolete,'' said the widow of one of the victims, who spoke on condition she not be named. ''The answer he got back was that the stock of parts on hand had to be used up regardless because they didn't have the money to buy the proper replacements.''
In interviews, Mr. Almeida and other relatives of victims, who asked not to be identified because several continue to work in the space program and fear losing their jobs, said that the victims had complained of receiving electric shocks when they touched the rocket. Some also recalled having had cellphone conversations with the victims while they were on the launching pad, which appears to violate security rules.
Air force officials did not respond to requests for interviews with those in charge of the rocket program, and the secrecy surrounding the program has helped keep many such problems out of sight.
''The issue is being exhaustively studied by the commissions in charge of investigating the occurrence, so it would not be opportune to make any statement about the events,'' the air force said in a statement to reporters in September.
Critics of that investigation say the panel appointed by the government includes members of the same agencies that administer the space program, and have expressed fears of a conflict of interest.
''When there is a plane crash, you don't name the pilot of the aircraft to the board investigating the accident,'' said Jayme Boscov, who was director of the rocket program from 1980 to 1992.
In an interview in Brasília, Roberto Amaral, the minister of science and technology in the left-leaning government that took power in January 2003, dismissed such concerns as ''ridiculous.''
Representatives of the rocket program are on the panel, he explained, in part because Brazil does not have an abundance of experts. But ''these people are competent and have our full confidence.''
Relatives of victims said they pressed for an independent inquiry and expressed fear that the panel's report would be a whitewash that shifted the responsibility from managers to the victims.
''The dead cannot defend themselves, and so they are the easiest to blame for this catastrophe,'' said Mr. Almeida, who accused the air force of withholding vital information. ''There are too many interests at stake for the truth to be told, especially by a commission like this one.''
Since the disaster, calls have mounted for the rocket program to be taken away from the air force and placed under civilian control. Current and former employees say the military's hierarchical and secretive culture dampens the freewheeling inquiry needed for scientific research to flourish.
''The model adopted for the space program still depends on a heavy degree of military control, and that is a system that has not permitted the desired development,'' said Ennio Candotti, president of the Brazilian Society for the Progress of Science.
He and others point to the comparative success of the satellite program as a way toward a more profitable and productive space program for Brazil in the future.
In addition to putting communications satellites into space, Brazil has already launched two multiple-use satellites in partnership with China. In October they signed an agreement to launch two more. Both those satellites are expected to have polar orbits, which will allow Brazil and China to more closely monitor much of the Western Hemisphere.
For Brazil, this means greater intelligence on the harvests of its main agricultural competitors, including the United States. Other satellites are used to monitor Amazon deforestation and off-shore fisheries activities. There may be military and intelligence-gathering applications as well, though Brazil says its effort is exclusively for peaceful purposes. China's position is ambiguous.
''Ours is a country of 3.3 million square miles, with one of the longest coastlines in the world and extensive land borders,'' Mr. Amaral, the minister of science and technology, said. ''We need to better know our own territory and borders and to be able to program our agricultural harvests.''
[Mr. Amaral resigned in mid-January, and his successor, Eduardo Campos, is scheduled to take office before the end of the month. The resignation was not directly related to problems with the space program.]
Shifting control away from the military might also open Brazil's space program to greater international cooperation, experts say. Until now, the United States has repeatedly blocked Brazilian efforts to acquire certain technologies and, according to officials involved in the Brazilian program, has pressured allies to do the same.
''That's no secret,'' Luiz Bevilacqua, director of the Brazilian Space Agency, said in an interview in Brasília. ''They say that openly, and they have their reasons. They don't want a rocket falling into the hands of terrorists.''
The technological blockade has led to elaborate end-runs, like the Brazilian Air Force's quiet accommodation with Russian scientists after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1989.
Several Russian experts were brought to Brazil to teach at universities or to advise the space program. That cooperation continues today. In addition, during the mid-1990's, the air force on several occasions acquired essential rocket components in Russia and clandestinely shipped them to Brazil.
In one case, late in 1994, the Russian equipment was hidden in a shipment of night vision goggles and then secretly flown here aboard a Brazilian Air Force plane, according to three people with direct knowledge of the transaction.
Minister of Defense José Viegas said in an interview that he was ''interested in resuming negotiations'' with the United States over an agreement that would allow American companies to use the Alcântara base, destroyed in August, to launch satellites.
In October Brazil signed a similar agreement to allow Ukraine to use the base to launch satellites atop its Cyclone rockets. But the accord requires Brazil to invest $80 million over the next four years to rebuild the base and other infrastructure.
If all goes well, Brazilian officials say there is even the chance of using a joint Brazilian-Ukrainian rocket to lift the fourth of the Chinese-Brazilian satellites. That would save Brazil the money it would otherwise have to spend to launch its satellites on rockets made by other countries and help restore the prestige of the space program.
''We are determined to persist,'' Mr. Viegas, the defense minister, said. Asked where the money would come from, he shrugged. ''Well, that's the problem,'' he said.
This article is the second of three on the expanding space race in the developing world. An earlier article examined China's rising challenge to the United States. A final one will look at India's attempt to make use of its space program for development.
The Next Space Race
