With the luxury goods business in a marked turnaround, LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the world's largest maker of such merchandise, released a rosy report for 2003 yesterday -- and a note of caution for 2004.
Led by its signature Louis Vuitton leather goods -- a perennial winner -- operating profits at LVMH rose 7 percent in 2003 and sales were up 4 percent.
The figures assume constant exchange rates. Otherwise, largely because of the weak dollar, the company said sales would have been 6 percent lower than the previous year.
While the sales figures were higher than some had expected, the profits were not high enough for some analysts. ''We had been looking for 9.5 percent for the year,'' said James Hurley, a retail analyst for Bear, Stearns. Last year, he said, the company predicted 25 percent ''and they came in at 28.7 percent.''
Dana L. Telsey, also of Bear, Stearns, said she was disappointed that the company had not been more detailed in its projections for 2004.
In a conference call yesterday, Patrick Houel, finance director of LVMH, basically repeated a previous forecast for a ''tangible increase in operating income.'' Several analysts, including Antoine Colonna of Merrill Lynch, downgraded the stock. But one French bank, Crédit Lyonnaise, upgraded the stock from reduce to add, and J.P. Morgan reiterated its overweight rating. Société Générale, another French bank, repeated its buy rating.
''Just remember, despite the SARS, the war in Iraq and the weakness of the dollar, we reached our target,'' said Olivier Labesse, an LVMH spokesman. ''We will be probably the only big international luxury company to deliver that in 2003. Don't forget the first half of the year was incredibly difficult.''
But ''there is still one uncertainty, and that is the dollar,'' Mr. Labesse warned. ''No one knows how that will move in 2004. If the dollar stays weak over the year, we will have to take it into account.''
(One analyst who was not commenting yesterday -- and will not ''until further notice'' -- was Claire Kent of Morgan Stanley. The firm said yesterday that it had dropped coverage of LVMH after a French court ordered Morgan Stanley to pay at least 30 million euros, or $38 million, for what it ruled was a bias against LVMH. )
Although the stock lost a little ground yesterday, closing at 62 euros, company executives noted that on Wednesday it had hit 62.75 euros, its highest since June 13, 2001. The shares now trade at 35 times expected earnings, higher than the 21 times at Burberry and the 30 at Coach.
Both Burberry and Coach sell what they call ''affordable luxury,'' but LVMH does not bill itself that way. Louis Vuitton handbags cost $5,000 and up, and its Dom Pérignon Champagne sells for more than $100 a bottle. (LVMH executives said privately that Champagne had the highest margins of all, about 35 percent.)
Although the company does not break down all of its holdings, it usually spotlights a handful of its best performers. Ms. Telsey said the Louis Vuitton division was up 17 percent from last year.
The Duty Free Shops division returned to ''slight'' profitability in 2003, the LVMH news release said, as tourism rebounded worldwide.
While the company is still struggling with Fendi, the fashion and fur designer, yesterday's report said that ''sales at Fendi continued to grow during the quarter as its store network was upgraded.'' Sephora, the perfume and beauty aids chain, became profitable in the United States last year, and Donna Karan became ''marginally profitable,'' executives said.
LVMH scored a palpable hit with its fragrances in 2003, particularly with J'adore by Dior (the company keeps running the perfume's successful advertisement of a long-haired blonde, glossy with gold jewelry) and with its introductions of L'Instant by Guerlain, Very Irresistible by Givenchy and Kenzo Air by Parfums Kenzo.
Although LVMH produces Dior perfume, it neither owns nor controls Dior Couture, though it might wish it did. On Wednesday, Dior issued some hot results for the fourth quarter, with sales up 11 percent.
But Dior's results were eclipsed by the euphoria over Coach, the American leather goods company, which reported a surprising 53 percent increase in profits and 33 percent rise in sales for its second quarter, which ended Dec. 27. Although Coach is based in the United States, it has steadily increased its markets, particularly in Japan, where stores open at least a year registered double-digit growth.
Japan is a strong market for LVMH, too -- Louis Vuitton's strongest, in fact. Yesterday, Mr. Labesse, the LVMH spokesman, said that one reason for the company's healthy 7 percent profit increase last year was that the price of Vuitton handbags was raised 6 percent in Japan -- not once, but twice.
