After days of speculation that he was about to be fired, Daniel B. Brewster Jr., president and chief executive of Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing, was told yesterday that he was out of a job. The news came from the man who will succeed him temporarily, Axel Ganz, the president of the publisher's international division.
Gruner &amp; Jahr, which publishes Family Circle, Parents, YM and other magazines, said the search for a permanent successor was under way. Mr. Ganz, who lives in Paris, will need to work hard to make sense of a company that has had a year of bad headlines and unimpressive financial performance.
The very public stumble has left some wondering whether Gruner &amp; Jahr, which is majority owned by Bertelsmann, the German media conglomerate, might quit the United States market. It sold its British holdings in 2000. But Mr. Ganz said the company would continue to operate in the United States.
''We are committed to this market and this company here,'' Mr. Ganz said. ''We want to go forward and develop our business.''
He said the company still planned to create a weekly celebrity magazine called Gala, but he would not commit himself to timing. He said he first needed to stabilize the situation and find a new chief executive.
Mr. Brewster, 48, was hired in 2000 to build Gruner &amp; Jahr from its middling size and reputation into the top ranks of the magazine business. He predicted then that Gruner &amp; Jahr would double revenue in five years.
But several efforts to increase its size have not worked as planned. The company spent $360 million to buy Fast Company, a decision predicated in part on the growth of the digital economy, but the subsequent implosion in the technology sector wiped out most, if not all, of the magazine's profits.
Mr. Brewster's decision to try to revive McCall's, then one of the so-called Seven Sisters women's magazines, by hitching it to the name and image of Rosie O'Donnell, then a television talk show host, also failed when the partnership ended in acrimony and a bitterly fought trial. During the trial, it was disclosed that the company had manipulated circulation figures to keep advertisers from learning that Rosie magazine was having trouble retaining readers.
