The coach of a Naperville area girls' basketball team was seething at his star player. She was not rebounding to his satisfaction, she was spending too much time lofting what he considered lazy shots from the perimeter instead of using her height advantage around the hoop, and she was not breaking a sweat on defense -- for starters.
He yanked her out of the game near the end of the first half of an Amateur Athletic Union tournament in the 13-and-under division in Orlando, Fla. As soon as the half ended, he took the eighth grader, who was about six feet tall, behind a curtain where he sought privacy and gave her a tongue-lashing. He did it with the added emphasis of grabbing her by the shirt and putting his nose to hers, to make sure she would not miss the point. When he took a breath, he looked up to see several of the other coaches watching in amazement.
''Now give me a kiss,'' Larry Parker whispered sharply to his daughter, Candace. He pointed to his cheek.
''No,'' she said.
Then he pulled her to him, kissed her on the forehead and smiled at the coaches, as if this were normal parent-child stuff.
''She's my princess,'' he said to the wide-eyed onlookers. Then under his breath he told her, ''Now let's go out and try harder!''
That was four years ago. Candace Parker, now a 17-year-old senior at Naperville Central High School, some 25 miles west of Chicago, recently recalled the incident with a laugh. She can be tickled about it now because, as she said, the instruction to play better, the motivation to excel, the understanding of the game and the attempt to fulfill her potential have been elicited from her father.
He laid the foundation for his daughter, a 6-foot-3 forward, to become the highest-rated schoolgirl basketball player in the nation. Last spring, she and LeBron James were Naismith award winners as the best female and male high school players in the nation. Parker was the first girl to receive the honor as a junior. She has committed to Tennessee to play for its renowned coach, Pat Summitt.
Parker, willowy but strong, who can play with muscle or grace, who can snare a rebound, dribble the length of the court, elude a defender with a behind-the-back move and finish with a dunk, has been named Ms. Basketball of Illinois the past two seasons. The odds are in her favor to win it a third time. She is also the star on the defending state Class AA championship team, which finished last season with a 35-0 record. This season the team is 13-2 (both losses came when she was injured and out of the lineup) and rated No. 1 in the state.
In telling the story of the A.A.U. game in Florida, Larry Parker, in the insurance business and soft-spoken except perhaps when coaching one of his children, said, ''You're making me sound like Daddy Dearest here.''
Candace Parker said: ''The difference is that I know my dad will always love me. And it's only around basketball that we have those kinds of conflicts. When the game is over, we go home and watch television together and joke. His main theme is, 'If you work hard at something, you get out what you put in.' ''
She spoke in a confident and affectionate tone, and with the articulation one might expect from a student who has a 3.7 grade-point average, earned straight A's last year and is taking courses like calculus and advanced-placement chemistry.
''And what happened in that game?'' said Larry Parker, his mind still in Orlando four years ago.
His wife, Sara, answered. ''She came out and scored, what, 20 points? And had 10 rebounds in the second half, and we blew 'em away.''
Candace said: ''He lit a fire under me. And I knew he was right.''
When Summitt was asked what she liked about Parker, she said, ''What did I not like?'' Then she answered her own question: ''Nothing. Unlike some high school stars, she's not satisfied with her game and wants to continue to improve. She has all the physical ability to be a great player, and she has an uncanny understanding of the game.''
And that comes from her father, Candace Parker said.
''When she was 6 years old, she could recognize defenses,'' Larry Parker said. ''I'll never forget, she was still in grade school and we went to a Bulls game and she says at one point, 'Darn, they're never gonna win if they don't box out for rebounds.' ''
Sara Parker said she and her husband -- they met at the University of Iowa; he played for the Hawkeyes and she was studying education -- reared their three children to understand that there are high expectations. Their son Anthony, 28, who is 6-6, was a star player at Bradley. He played three years in the N.B.A. -- two with Philadelphia and one with Orlando -- and is now playing professionally in Israel. Their son Marcus, 25, played high school basketball but gave up the sport to concentrate on medicine; he attends the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.
One-on-one around the basketball, Candace Parker has been ''virtually unstoppable,'' her coach, Andy Nussbaum, said. ''And when other teams double- and triple-team her, she passes to her teammates willingly and precisely,'' he said. ''And if she has to, she can go outside and hit the 3's -- left-handed or right-handed. So pick your poison.''
In a recent practice, in her red headband and No. 32 practice jersey, with a brace on her recuperating left knee from reconstructive surgery six months ago, she was more slick playmaker than bruising pivot player.
Nussbaum said other coaches had on occasion criticized him for letting Parker shoot long shots instead of concentrating on her play around the basket.
''I know Candace enjoys at times playing point guard -- her goal is to be a complete player -- so I let her do it as a reward for the hard work she puts in in practice and in games,'' Nussbaum said. ''And there was a particular moment when that 3-point experience made all the difference.''
It was last season's state championship game against Fenwick. The Naperville Lady Red Hawks were down, 53-50, with about two minutes left in regulation. Parker took the ball upcourt. She knew that if she went for 2 points, Fenwick would get the ball back, and in girls' basketball there is no shot clock. Fenwick could stall and Naperville would have to foul. But that might add points for Fenwick. Parker stopped her dribble with the clock at 1 minute 42 seconds left.
''This is the best open shot we can get at this point'' she remembers thinking, and she popped a 3-pointer. It went in. Tie score. Fenwick missed its next shot, and the game went into overtime, with Naperville winning, 63-59. Parker had a game-high 32 points, including 6 in overtime.
''She's really unselfish by nature, and when she took that 3-point shot against Fenwick, I was expecting it to go in,'' said Courtney Peters, a starting forward on last season's Naperville Central team who now plays at Brown. ''We had gotten used to it.''
Parker is averaging 22 points and 11 rebounds this season. She averaged 20.8 points as a freshman, 22.0 as a sophomore and 24.3 as a junior. She said that despite being tall for her age all her life, it was never a problem for her.
''Never a problem?'' her father said. ''How about when you wore size 9 shoes when you were already a size 11?''
''Oh, yeah, in the sixth or seventh grade,'' she said with a smile. ''Messed up my feet. I said, 'That's enough of that.' Now I wear a 12.'' The same size as her father, who once lent her the basketball shoes he was wearing when she had forgotten hers at a game.
Aside from playing basketball and being a good student, Parker writes a weekly column for her local newspaper, The Daily Herald, in Arlington Heights, as well as a periodic diary for The Chicago Tribune. She missed the first two games for Naperville this season because of her knee injury, but she wrote about her return in The Tribune on Jan. 4.
''My heart raced as I stepped back onto the court for the first time,'' she wrote. ''The rush, the feeling of being given the opportunity to play basketball again was overwhelming. Seriously, I almost began to cry.'' But she didn't feel the old rhythm, did not feel like herself -- ''it was my timing, wind, game experience, nerves and returning from reconstructive knee surgery.''
''So this is what my parents were talking about. I failed to listen to their lecture on how I must be patient and know that when I returned it was going to be tough. I was too busy watching 'Newlyweds' on MTV.''
She concluded: ''Two thousand three taught me a great deal of life lessons, including my resolution not to take anything for granted. Whether it be in basketball or everyday life, nothing is promised. Strive high in 2004. PLJ (peace, love, jump shot).''
While perhaps not meeting her own grand expectations, Parker has excelled in a rather customary fashion.
''When I spoke to her the other day she told me that she's not shooting very well,'' Summitt said. '' 'My 3-point shot's broke.' I said, 'You know how to fix it?' She said, 'Yeah, I'm going back to the gym tomorrow.' ''
And she did. Before going back to the gym, however, she did something she has been doing for years, and happily. She asked her father to accompany her, to check her out. Which, naturally, he did. And maybe not too quietly, either.
BASKETBALL
