Now that Julia Roberts is 36 and Reese Witherspoon 27, the time has come to begin grooming another blushing ingénue to take a turn as the people's princess, Hollywood-style. Right now there is no more likely candidate for that peppermint tiara than Kate Bosworth. This 21-year-old actress, who made a big splash in ''Blue Crush,'' has the glow.
Ms. Bosworth's wide-open face suggests a blend of the younger Ms. Roberts and the pre-Las Vegas Britney Spears. Her aura of fresh-scrubbed integrity is a softer version of Ms. Witherspoon's mystique of thrust-chin goody-goodiness, without seeming namby-pamby. She is neither too brainy nor too much of an airhead for mass appeal. And ''Win a Date With Tad Hamilton!,'' a romantic comedy that has all the edge of an overstuffed cream puff, is just the sort of innocuous vehicle that can carry an aspiring princess another step closer to becoming America's Sweetheart.
Her character, Rosalee Futch, is a star-struck grocery clerk at a Piggy Wiggly market in Fraziers Bottom, W. Va., a rural backwater that except for a dingy motel is indistinguishable from a suburb of Los Angeles. The place is so bland that, by comparison, Pigeon Creek, the jolly hometown of Ms. Witherspoon's character in ''Sweet Home Alabama,'' might as well be Tobacco Road.
Its ridiculous notion of down-home is not the only thing ''Tad Hamilton'' has in common with ''Sweet Home Alabama.'' Robert Luketic, the director of ''Tad Hamilton,'' made his Hollywood debut with ''Legally Blonde,'' the movie that catapulted Ms. Witherspoon to megastardom. In both movies the princess-in-waiting must choose between two dreamboats: a handsome, urbane smoothie and a modest Mr. Nice Guy with a true-blue heart.
Rosalee's Hollywood dream materializes when she wins a date with her fantasy heartthrob, Tad Hamilton (Josh Duhamel), who flies to Fraziers Bottom, accompanied by a mob of paparazzi. The contest was cooked up as a desperate publicity stunt by Tad's agent (Nathan Lane) and his manager (Sean Hayes), both named Richard Levy and both given not nearly enough screen time. (A wild night of carousing had landed Tad on the covers of the tabloids, and he needed to reaffirm his carefully spun Prince Charming image.)
Tad sweeps Rosalee off to Los Angeles in a chartered jet, and the two have a nearly perfect date whose only blemish is an unfortunate episode of car sickness in the limousine on the way to a fancy restaurant. Ultimately, Tad is so disarmed by Rosalee's goodness and her grounded sense of values that he later pays a surprise visit to Fraziers Bottom, intending to hang out with her and absorb more of her goodness. As he takes Rosalee on a whirlwind tour of local fast-food restaurants and pool halls, her boss at the grocery store, Pete (Topher Grace), who has been secretly in love with her for years, suffers in silence.
Will Tad end up whisking Rosalee off to a glamorous new life in Hollywood, or will Mr. Hometown Nice Guy speak up and fight for his true love?
''Win a Date With Tad Hamilton,'' which opens nationwide today, is really a 1950's movie magazine fantasy dressed up just enough to pass for contemporary. Except for the two cynical, wisecracking Richard Levys, the movie is as sweet and nice as a heart-shaped candy. Mr. Duhamel, who resembles a taller, younger, more handsome Tom Cruise with a dash of Charlie Sheen's roguishness, and Mr. Grace, who oozes sincerity and likability, make appealing rivals.
But it is Ms. Bosworth who carries off the movie's toughest balancing act. Without simpering, preaching or seeming prissy or mawkish, she conveys Rosalee's feet-on-the-ground optimism and innate wisdom with total ease. In these prurient times it is no small feat to make virtue seem more sensible (and yes, sexier) than the Paris Hilton-Christina Aguilera alternative.
''Win a Date With Tad Hamilton!'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some strong language.
WIN A DATE WITH TAD HAMILTON!
Directed by Robert Luketic; written by Victor Levin; director of photography, Peter Collister; edited by Scott Hill; music by Edward Shearmur; production designer, Missy Stewart; produced by Douglas Wick and Lucy Fisher; released by DreamWorks Pictures. Running time: 91 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.
WITH: Kate Bosworth (Rosalee Futch), Topher Grace (Pete), Josh Duhamel (Tad Hamilton), Nathan Lane (Richard Levy the Driven), Sean Hayes (Richard Levy the Shameless), Gary Cole (Henry) and Ginnifer Goodwin (Cathy Feely).
FILM REVIEW  Correction:  January 29, 2004, Thursday  A film review in Weekend on Friday about ''Win a Date With Tad Hamilton!'' misstated the location of the first meeting between the characters Tad (played by Josh Duhamel) and Rosalee (Kate Bosworth). They meet in Los Angeles, not in Rosalee's West Virginia hometown.
