Legislators named the 10 members of a bipartisan committee on Thursday that will decide whether Gov. John G. Rowland should be impeached, and gave them a tentative deadline of April 14.
The committee, divided evenly between Republican and Democratic House members, will consist of five lawyers, a former federal investigator, a former nurse, a minister, a former special education teacher and a former sales representative.
''They are fair-minded, deliberative, and they have the intellect and capacity to make an objective decision,'' said House Speaker Moira K. Lyons, at a news conference to announce the names with the House Republican leader, Representative Robert M. Ward.
Governor Rowland released a statement saying that he welcomed the investigation and hoped the formal creation of the committee would receive a unanimous endorsement from the House next week. ''These individuals are all well-respected and are regarded as fair and open-minded members,'' he said.
The selection of the committee, the first of its kind in state history, was a closely kept secret at the State Capitol until just before the announcement. Some members were not asked to serve until Thursday morning, Mr. Ward said.
The committee will have two chairmen, Representative John Wayne Fox, a Democrat who is a lawyer from Stamford, and Representative Arthur J. O'Neill, a Republican and a lawyer from Southbury. Both serve on the General Assembly's Judiciary Committee and are widely respected for their intellect and fairness, legislators said.
The committee could begin its work as soon as next week, Ms. Lyons said, after it is formally created in a special session of the General Assembly convened for that purpose. Its first tasks will be to select a private counsel for legal advice, and to set its own rules and procedures. The members will then face the task of deciding what constitutes an impeachable offense, something that is not clearly spelled out in the state Constitution.
The governor has faced growing scrutiny and calls for his resignation since he admitted last month to lying about having received free work and gifts at his private cottage in Litchfield from state aides and contractors. Some of those people are the subjects of a broad federal investigation.
On Jan. 7, Mr. Rowland became the first governor in the state's history to be served with a subpoena for personal records, as part of the federal investigation. Thursday was the deadline for submitting those records, and the governor's private lawyer had been in touch with federal prosecutors and planned to comply with the subpoena, said Ross H. Garber, the governor's state counsel.
Although he has apologized for lying and accepting the free work, the governor has said repeatedly that he broke no laws. At an appearance in Bridgeport on Thursday, Mr. Rowland told reporters that there was a vast difference between his own case and ''somebody who's been indicted on 21 counts.'' He was referring to Joseph P. Ganim, the former Bridgeport mayor who was convicted of corruption charges last year.
But many lawmakers have said that the governor could be impeached even if he is not indicted. Several members of the new committee, officially called the Select Committee of Inquiry, said on Thursday that their minds remained open about the criteria for impeachment.
The committee's decision does not have to be unanimous, Ms. Lyons said at the news conference, and could be made by a simple majority. Asked what would happen if the committee were evenly split on the question, she said legislators had not decided.
Ms. Lyons said she was eager for a speedy resolution of the matter, but made clear that she would be open to granting extensions if the committee could not finish its work by April 14. Many lawmakers have expressed concern that the inquiry could distract them from the state's other business during the legislative session, which runs from Feb. 4 to May 5.
Some legislators have also voiced worries that those directing the impeachment inquiry could themselves be subject to questions about ethical lapses in their own backgrounds. But Mr. Ward said Thursday that the new committee's members were not vulnerable on that score. ''I am absolutely confident that no one on this committee would be subject to intimidation,'' he said.
Ms. Lyons and Mr. Ward made their announcement in the Capitol chamber where the impeachment committee will hold its meetings, which is also where hearings were held on the impeachment of a Hartford probate judge, James H. Kinsella, in the early 1980's. Judge Kinsella resigned in 1984 before the full House considered the matter.
The Kinsella impeachment provides some helpful procedural guidelines, said Mr. O'Neill, the co-chairman of the new impeachment committee. But the criteria for impeaching a sitting governor will clearly be different from those applied to Judge Kinsella, he said.
The scope of the inquiry also has yet to be decided, Mr. O'Neill said.
''The U.S. attorney's office is already looking into some of this, and that should help,'' Mr. O'Neill said. ''If we get into new areas, that will take some time.''
IMPEACHMENT COMMITTEE  The 10 Who Will Consider the Case Against Rowland
THE DEMOCRATS
JOHN WAYNE FOX, 56 (CO-CHAIRMAN)  A lawyer from Stamford, he was first elected to the House in 1980 and is known for his low-key style and deep legal experience. He is the only House veteran of the state's one prior impeachment committee, that of a Hartford probate judge, James H. Kinsella, in the early 1980's.
JAMES W. ABRAMS, 47  A lawyer who once worked for the State Department of Mental Retardation. First elected in 1994, he represents Meriden and sits on the Judiciary, General Law and Law Revision Committees.
JACQUELINE M. COCCO, 70  A lifelong resident of Bridgeport, where she worked as a nurse at St. Vincent's Hospital. She is a co-chairwoman of the Transportation Committee and serves on the Judiciary Committee.
WADE A. HYSLOP JR., 58  A pastor at New London's Trinity Missionary Baptist Church and the committee's only black member. He was elected in 1990 and serves as deputy speaker.
MICHAEL P. LAWLOR, 47  A former prosecutor who represents East Haven, he was first elected to the House in 1986, and has been chairman of the Judiciary Committee since 1995. He also teaches law at the University of New Haven and lectures at Yale Law School.
THE REPUBLICANS
ARTHUR J. O'NEILL, 51 (CO-CHAIRMAN)  A lawyer in private practice in Southbury, he commands wide respect for his experience and judgment. He was first elected in 1988 and is chairman of the Regulation Review and Law Revision Committees.
RUTH C. FAHRBACH, 61  One of the more senior members of the House, she was first elected in 1980. She serves as House minority whip and has worked extensively on health issues. She lives in Windsor and has seven grandchildren.
WILLIAM A. HAMZY, 38  A partner in a Bristol law firm who was first elected in 1994 and serves on the Judiciary Committee. He is an assistant minority leader.
RAYMOND C. KALINOWSKI, 62  A former Secret Service agent, he worked for two decades as a federal investigator with the Defense Security Service. He serves on the Public Safety, Environment and Public Health Committees. He lives in Durham and was elected in 2002.
CLAUDIA M. (DOLLY) POWERS, 53  A former special education teacher, she was first elected in 1992 to represent Greenwich. She has held a number of positions, and currently serves on the Judiciary, Education and Legislative and Executive Nominations Committees.
