It is no bargain, but it does have the beguiling ring of a sale item.
Like a color television priced at $99.99 or a pair of socks marked $1.98, the New York State budget proposed by Gov. George E. Pataki on Tuesday came in at a neat $99.8 billion. That is to say, not $100 billion.
But the smaller number is so close to that big, round, striking figure that lawmakers, lobbyists and others here are asking whether the total was intended to sound like a really good deal, leaving it to the Legislature to push the final tally over the top.
In the political psychology of lawmakers, a threshold number like $100 billion is freighted with trouble. Only one other state budget, California's, has risen that high. And no one in New York wants to be remembered as the first to propose the triple-digit budget.
''I am sure they struggled mightily to make sure it came in under 100 billion,'' said State Assemblyman Alexander B. Grannis, a Democrat from Manhattan.
''It reminded me of how at the gas station the price is always point-nine,'' he said. ''There must be some marketing mentality that says 99 cents is cheaper than a buck.'' In politics, he said, a figure like $100 billion would make a good ''bumper sticker issue.''
The governor's aides said they had not schemed to keep the number in the 90's but acknowledged they were not entirely unhappy that it ended up there.
''It wasn't something that was obsessed over,'' said an administration official who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ''But we weren't disappointed to see that it was under.
''Obviously, it is not something you completely ignore. But the way the budget process works is you make your decisions and you don't know what the final figure will be.''
It is only natural to want to put as thrifty a face as possible on one's spending habits. After all, Mr. Pataki, a Republican, has portrayed himself as a fiscal conservative. And that television priced at $99.99 has a subliminal pull, those who plumb the psychology of sales say.
''I think it is human instinct to always try and see the best side of things,'' said Nina DiSesa, the creative director at the McCann Erickson advertising agency.
So even though everyone knows that $99.99 is essentially the same as $100, retailers continue the habit of knocking a few cents off to create the illusion of savings, she said. ''It is in the interest of consumers and marketers that prices are attractive,'' she said. ''And it's in the interest in the government to not look like spendthrifts.''
Just two weeks ago in California, Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger tried to show his strength in wrestling the state budget under control by proposing a spending package that would total $99.1 billion for the coming fiscal year. Budget analysts said that was not a true reflection of all that Sacramento would spend when it included federal grants, which New York's budget does count in its total.
Still, the $99.1 billion price tag is an important figure because it is the number that will be used and remembered.
''The hundred-billion-dollar mark is a psychological barrier like 10,000 on the Dow,'' said Edmund McMahon, senior fellow for tax and budget studies at the conservative Manhattan Institute.
Unlike stock prices, however, government spending usually goes only one way -- up. ''Like the state motto would say, 'Excelsior,''' Mr. McMahon said drily.
Governor Pataki has long cultivated the image of a frugal executive who never came across a tax he did not want to cut. Yet since he took office in 1994, the budget has grown by nearly $40 billion. Scott Pattison, the director of the National Association of State Budget Officers, said New York's spending had kept pace with that of other states.
With such huge amounts of money being discussed, it is easy to lose sight of just how much cash is being tossed around.
On Tuesday, when reporters were trying to figure out how the current year's budget quietly grew from the Legislature's estimate of $92.8 billion to $98.2 billion, even the lawmakers were a bit mystified. That is not uncommon in Albany, where the administration, the Assembly and the Senate all have their own ways of counting -- and each claims to be right.
''I wouldn't get caught up with the numbers,'' said Joseph L. Bruno, the Republican majority leader of the State Senate.
But the numbers are formidable. Just the $5 billion discrepancy between those two estimates on Tuesday is more than the government of Uruguay spent in 2000. One hundred billion dollars could finance three trips to the moon, according to the proposal laid out last week by President Bush. Many nations do not even have a total gross domestic product that big; Mr. Pataki's proposal is nine times the G.D.P. of Armenia. A stack of 100 billion dollar bills would stretch well over 5,000 miles.
In more familiar terms, if a family wanted to spend the entire New York budget on a fleet of 2004 Rolls-Royce Phantoms, they could buy 308,641 cars priced at $324,000 each. Or if the buyer had more imperialistic intentions, $100 billion could fetch 926 Air Force F-22 fighter jets or 18 nuclear-powered aircraft carriers.
The state spends the bulk of the money on two things: education and Medicaid. Outside those areas, the most visible places New Yorkers se-e the spending is in transportation and policing.
As daunting as the $100 billion mark may be, Albany lawmakers said it was likely that the state had seen the end of double-digit budgets. As in Hollywood, where a $100 million take at the box office was once considered a roaring success and is now barely enough to cover the marketing of some films, the $100 billion figure will likely be replaced by a new benchmark.
Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a Westchester County Democrat, said that Mr. Pataki had only increased the importance of the figure by creeping so close, but not passing it. ''I think he mistakenly invested it with more political significance than it had,'' he said.
In reality, Mr. Brodsky said, the figure has little meaning. Though everyone is waiting for the Legislature to pass the mark, he said, Albany did so long ago with the help of spending by state authorities and other expenditures that do not show up in the budget total.
''We have been over a hundred billion dollars for 10 years now,'' he said.
