Law and Order: Elmore Leonard Unit
Like other ELMORE LEONARD novels, ''Mr. Paradise'' is a lowlife serenade, with cops, hustlers and dimwit crooks all speaking Mr. Leonard's signature patois of variations on the urban Anglo-Saxon.
Hollywood should do him justice. But of his scores of novels and stories, few films have been commercial or critical successes.
Excluding ''Hombre'' (1967), starring PAUL NEWMAN, only ''Get Shorty'' (1995), starring JOHN TRAVOLTA ,and ''Out of Sight'' (1998), starring GEORGE CLOONEY and JENNIFER LOPEZ, had the requisite Leonard groove.
On Tuesday, at a Barnes &amp; Noble on the glacial Upper West Side, the author read from ''Mr. Paradise.'' Now 78, Mr. Leonard started out shaky and led up to confident as he read out loud about two mentally challenged hit men.
''Those are the bad guys,'' Mr. Leonard said, closing the book. ''There are more bad guys in the book, other bad guys, but they're not much smarter.''
How do you write, someone in the audience asked.
''I write from 10 to 6 every day,'' Mr. Leonard said. ''I skip lunch. I eat peanuts.''
Someone else asked where he got his ideas. Mr. Leonard mentioned his longtime researcher who plays Archie Goodwin to his (skinny) Nero Wolfe.
For ''Mr. Paradise,'' set in Detroit, the researcher shadowed actual homicide detectives, locked on to lingo, kept track of characters, summarized investigations, then reported back to Mr. Leonard so the writer could hard-boil it all.
Someone else asked about his latest movie adaptation, ''The Big Bounce,'' which opens next week.
Mr. Leonard gives the impression of being not terribly censorious, no matter how prodigal the son.
''The movie takes place in Hawaii,'' he said, ''and the book takes place in the tip of the thumb of Michigan.''
''Every so often in the movie, they pan to a surfer riding a giant wave to shore, which has nothing to do with the plot.''
''I don't know what it means,'' he added.
But there may be something on the horizon, he seemed to say.
The sequel to ''Get Shorty'' begins filming next month, Mr. Leonard noted.
Called ''Be Cool,'' it stars Mr. Travolta and UMA THURMAN and will be directed by F. GARY GRAY, who directed ''The Italian Job.''
JOHN MALKOVICH owns the rights to ''Freaky Deaky,'' about a 1960's radical who takes revenge on a snitch. And KATHY BATES wants to write and direct ''Pagan Babies,'' about a fugitive from Detroit who winds up in post-genocide Rwanda.
Ms. Bates said she hadn't told anyone yet. Mr. Leonard said he replied, ''Well, I've told everybody.''
Ms. Tomei Has Gone To the North and South Poles
''Showstopper,'' an original musical screenplay, had a surprise debut.
True, the reading for charity last week at Show Nightclub in the Theater District -- CHITA RIVERA (''West Side Story'' to ''Nine'') was the host -- had other Broadway veterans, among them ADAM PASCAL (''Rent''), SHERIE RENE SCOTT (''Aïda'') and CHRISTINE EBERSOLE (''Dinner at Eight'') as well as the film actor BEN STILLER (''Along Came Polly'').
The surprise was MARISA TOMEI, the actress, who sang a pleasing ''You Made Me Love You.''
Do fans know you sing, our Boldface correspondent asked.
''I don't know whether to say this or not,'' Ms. Tomei said. ''That was the first time I sang in front of an actual paying audience.''
Was Ms. Tomei nervous?
''I don't want to talk about it,'' she replied.
Well, does she still enjoy performing?
''Oh yeah, every time,'' she said. ''There's a stage where you're like really, really excited to meet the other actors and start playing with them, and then as the day goes on, especially in a last-minute thing like this, you get that feeling of, why have I chosen to do this with my life, and I'm going to throw up and throw myself from the building.''
Perhaps our correspondent registered alarm.
''And then,'' she continued, ''you just kind of ride the adrenaline, and then you're really happy and can't imagine doing anything else and want to do it all over again.''
with Steve Kurutz and Melena Z. Ryzik
Boldface Names
