A defense lawyer for a Bedford-Stuyvesant man charged with killing a witness to a murder has accused the Brooklyn district attorney's office of a conflict of interest and asked a judge to appoint a special prosecutor for his case.
The lawyer for the defendant, Trevis Ragsdale, claims the conflict exists because the family of the murdered witness has filed a civil suit claiming that negligence by the Brooklyn prosecutors contributed to the killing of the witness. The city is fighting that suit. ''My client is entitled to a fair trial,'' Mr. Ragsdale's defense lawyer, Paul Lieberman, said yesterday. ''A fair trial in this case means having a prosecutor who is only concerned with this case and is not looking at his office's wallet to protect their financial interests in another case.''
New York courts have appointed special prosecutors in conflict of interest cases. Legal ethics and criminal law experts said yesterday that the existence of the civil suit gave the defense request some credibility.
''If the judge determines the prosecution's personal interest is going to interfere with the prosecution's role of seeking justice, the judge may and probably will remove the prosecutor,'' said Vincent M. Bonventre, an Albany Law School professor.
The civil suit claims the Brooklyn prosecutors failed to provide protection for the witness, Bobby K. Gibson, who was 21. His killing in 2002 drew national attention to flaws in witness-protection efforts. Brooklyn prosecutors have denied claims that Mr. Gibson asked for protection and told prosecutors he had been threatened by emissaries for a neighborhood gang leader that he would be killed if he testified about the killing he had witnessed. Jerry Schmetterer, a spokesman for the Brooklyn district attorney, Charles J. Hynes, declined to comment yesterday.
Mr. Lieberman said the prosecutors' divided interests would undermine ''their obligation to seek justice,'' and said prosecutors who dealt with Mr. Gibson might be called to testify in Mr. Ragsdale's case.
