Following are excerpts from statements by the Democratic presidential candidates on Thursday at a debate in Goffstown, N.H., as recorded by The New York Times:
GEN. WESLEY K. CLARK  On terrorism
President Bush must be held accountable. Before 9/11, he did not do everything he could have done to keep this country safe. After 9/11, he took us to a war we didn't have to fight, and Osama bin Laden and Al Qaeda is still going strong. We were at terrorist condition orange.
HOWARD DEAN  On Iraq
We had successfully contained Iraq for 12 years with no-fly zones. They had virtually no air force to speak of. It turned out they did not have the weapons of mass destruction that people thought they did, myself included. It turned out that much of what the president told us was not so. I believe that Saddam Hussein's removal from power is good. But I also believe that the way to have done it was to do it through the United Nations.
JOHN EDWARDS  On the economy
There's been no discussion about 35 million Americans who live in poverty every single day. Millions of Americans who work full time for minimum wage and live in poverty. We have, in a country of our wealth -- if you'll let me finish -- in a country of our wealth and prosperity, we have children going to bed hungry.
JOHN KERRY  On tax cuts
I am going to protect the middle class. And in the course of my career, I have voted for countless numbers of tax cuts. When I arrived in the United States Senate, the highest marginal rate was 72 percent. We took it down to 28 percent under Ronald Reagan. It then went back up somewhat. I voted for cutting the capital gains tax, I voted for tax incentives for businesses.
DENNIS J. KUCINICH  On the environment
By the year 2010, I'll call upon Americans to assist in creating a program not only of conservation, but of moving to renewable energy, away from oil, nuclear and coal and toward wind and solar and geothermal, green, hydrogen and biomass.
JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN  On Iraq
I didn't need George Bush to convince me that Saddam Hussein was a threat to the United States of America. John McCain and I wrote the law that made it national policy to change the regime in Baghdad. This man was a homicidal maniac, killed hundreds of thousands of people, did have weapons of mass destruction in the 90's, used them against the Kurdish Iraqis and the Iranians, admitted to the United Nations he had enough chemical and biological to kill millions of people, supported terrorism, tried to assassinate former President Bush. I repeat: We are safer with Saddam Hussein in prison.
THE REV. AL SHARPTON  On Iran
I think that one of the problems that we see in Iran in terms of the movement toward open elections, toward clear repression there, is something that we must be concerned about. But I do not, in any way, shape or form, support a military intervention.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
