Gorney Bravin &amp; Lee  534 West 26th Street  Chelsea  Through March 6
The frighteningly beautiful, atrophying world that the designer Syd Mead created for Ridley Scott's ''Blade Runner'' is one of the most memorable visions in late 20th-century moviedom, and this exhibition meditates on its influence on art. Given the present fascination with gothic, horror and science fiction subjects, this shouldn't be difficult. But the assembled works are routine.
As with most thematic group shows, this one is largely a mixture of the usual suspects, gallery artists and guilt by association.
In this context George Shaw's small, fastidious painting of a barren brick-walled yard and a distant church has a certain foreboding, but it is better suited to a show about the influence of Caspar David Friedrich or Pieter de Hooch. Mr. Mead's studies for the sets of ''Blade Runner'' are interesting artifacts, but artistically negligible.
The show's crowded installation puts light, weightlessness and transparency at a premium. These qualities thrive in a big photograph by Moriko Mori that casts her as a beautiful alien who has just landed at the Great Pyramid in Egypt, as well as in works by Jon Kessler, Paul Noble, Benjamin Edwards and Martha Rosler.
But these qualities are freshest and most overt in ''Electric Sheep,'' a video projection from 2001-2 by a young artist named Amy Globus. It shows two octopuses shot from different angles as they ooze their way around several tanks and through narrow glass tubes.
In elaborately edited sequences, some of which have been taken from television, the creatures proceed in rhythm with a woozily manipulated version of Emmylou Harris's ballad ''Wrecking Ball.'' Full of sweet longing -- ''Meet me at the wrecking ball, I'll wear something pretty'' -- the words and music meld perfectly with the pink, accommodating flesh and silken flutterings of the octopuses.
The combination forms a haunting expression of desire: abstract, pansexual and filled with the enchanting power of love.
ROBERTA SMITH
ART IN REVIEW
