Most major league teams crave additional pitching and, sure enough, scouts from 19 teams -- including the Mets and the Yankees -- showed up Thursday to watch as the former Yankee Orlando Hernández worked out at the University of Miami in an effort to show he could still compete.
The scouts also watched an unexpected workout by Randy Keisler, another former Yankees pitcher who may have ended up intriguing as many teams as Hernández did Thursday.
The right-handed Hernández, known as El Duque, fled Cuba in the late 1990's and became a centerpiece on the Yankees teams that won World Series titles in 1998, 1999 and 2000. Hernández was often injured in 2001 and 2002 and in 2003 he was traded to Montreal. But he barely pitched for the Expos after having rotator cuff surgery in May.
Hernández, a free agent whose actual age remains something of a mystery, threw 35 pitches during his workout. His fastball registered only 75 to 78 miles an hour on the radar gun, but Hernández did not seem concerned about his velocity.
''I didn't come here to light up the radar gun,'' Hernández said afterward. ''I came here to show that I'm healthy again.''
Still, his less-than-inspiring velocity left some teams wondering how to rate him.
''It's tough to evaluate that performance,'' said Mark Wiedemaier, a special assistant to the Los Angeles Dodgers' general manager. ''It looked like he was playing catch.''
Al Goldis, the recently hired talent assessor serving as a high-level assistant to Mets General Manager Jim Duquette, chose his words carefully in describing his reaction to Hernández's effort. ''Obviously, he's not in the shape we expected him to be in,'' Goldis said.
Goldis said the Mets want to surround themselves with players who exhibit the type of heart and fire that Hernández did in his five seasons with the Yankees. Hernández had a 53-38 record during the regular season and was 10-2 in the postseason.
''We want, No. 1, guys who are tough guys,'' Goldis said. ''And we want guys that winning means something to them. That describes Duque.''
Goldis said the Mets, still looking for a fifth starter, are interested in seeing how Hernández fares in his next workout off a mound, to see whether he is improving.
Meanwhile, the Yankees were also watching Hernández's workout, and their contingent on Thursday included Damon Oppenheimer, the club's vice president of professional scouting, and Leo Astacio, who served as Hernández's interpreter with the Yankees. Oppenheimer said he expected what he saw Thursday -- a pitcher who is a work in progress. ''We're not going to come away from one workout with all the answers,'' he said.
Jeff Moorad, Hernández's agent, said that Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman would most likely want to be kept informed about Hernández's progress.
''As he often does, he'll keep his toe in the water,'' Moorad said of Cashman. ''He asked if Duque would have any interest in coming out of the bullpen for the Yankees. We told them that that wasn't our first choice in terms of role, but that we weren't going to close any doors at this point.''
Keisler is a left-hander who was drafted by the Yankees in the second round in 1998, started 10 games for them in 2001, missed all of 2002 with shoulder surgery and pitched six innings for the San Diego Padres last season. Thursday's workout was a chance for him to show he is finally back to where he was before having surgery.
The Mets' representatives, in particular, seemed interested in Keisler, huddling with him for about 30 minutes after the workout concluded.
''We scout all left-handers until they've been dead for two days,'' Goldis said with a smile.
INSIDE PITCH
JIM DUQUETTE said the Mets have had conversations with SHANE SPENCER and RICK REED about going to spring training as nonroster invitees. . . . The Cuban pitcher MAELS RODRIGUEZ and second baseman YOBAL DUENAS worked out Thursday for major league scouts in San Salvador, The Associated Press reported. The players fled Cuba in October, arriving by boat in Mexico. They traveled to El Salvador at the end of last year. Rodriguez, 24, was one of the best right-handed pitchers in Cuba, and Duenas, 31, was a top base stealer. Representatives of 15 teams, including the Yankees, the Mets and the Boston Red Sox, attended the workout.
BASEBALL
