During the past year, as the New Jersey Nets' owners publicly threatened to move the team out of the state, Gov. James E. McGreevey insisted that New Jersey would be better off losing the franchise than spending tens of millions of tax dollars to keep it.
Now that the team's owners have agreed to sell to a group that intends to move it to downtown Brooklyn, Mr. McGreevey, a Democrat, will find out soon whether his economic calculation will have serious political fallout.
Articles about the Nets' impending departure dominated news coverage across the state on Thursday, and Republican leaders were quick to say Mr. McGreevey had botched the Nets transaction and ''lost a professional sports franchise.''
Still, there were few signs of any widespread anguish about the plans for the Nets to move, and many political analysts said there was little to suggest that Mr. McGreevey would pay a steep price for losing a sports team. Since the 1970's and 80's, when New Jersey leaders tried to bolster the state's image by luring sports franchises from other communities, voters have grown wary of using tax money to underwrite any sports franchise, according to a variety of polls.
The state is facing its third consecutive budget squeeze and, since the state's homeowners carry the nation's highest property taxes, state officials felt they had little incentive to offer the kind of public money needed to keep the team. In fact, the Nets seemed to have become an afterthought among sports fans, and attracted sparse crowds in recent years even though they were the N.B.A. Eastern Conference champion the past two years.
''Bruce Springsteen and Tony Soprano have done more than anything to put New Jersey on the cultural map, but the Nets don't really seem to register,'' said Michael Alan Rockland, a Rutgers University professor who has written several books about New Jersey's image. ''People feel better about New Jersey than they used to, they're comfortable with all its flaws, but for whatever reason, people never really bonded with the Nets.''
The sale of the Nets and the prospective move to Brooklyn occur at a time when New Jersey's budget problems and Mr. McGreevey's own miscues have left him with low approval ratings.
Losing the Nets also appears likely to strain his relationship with Democratic leaders in Essex County. In late 2001, as governor-elect, Mr. McGreevey asked the departing administration not to approve financing for an arena in downtown Newark, and pledged to prepare his own plan for a stadium.
Now the hope for a downtown Newark stadium is all but dead, but the governor said he was confident that middle-class taxpayers would be grateful that he did not use public funds to help those bidding against the group intent on the Brooklyn move. ''If officials in New York commit to spending taxpayer dollars to build an arena for the benefit of team owners, that is their choice, but we will not play that game,'' he said in a written statement on Thursday. ''I have different priorities and a greater responsibility to the people of New Jersey.''
Republicans, whose opposition helped scuttle the plans for the publicly financed Newark stadium for the Nets and New Jersey Devils, still found fault with Mr. McGreevey over the loss of the team. State Senator Thomas H. Kean Jr. said Mr. McGreevey's administration has harmed the state's business climate. State Senator Joseph M. Kyrillos Jr. said the team's departure would hurt restaurants and other businesses that cater to Nets fans.
''If Governor McGreevey believes the loss of the Nets will not have a negative economic impact on the many small businesses and hardworking families in the Meadowlands region, he is sadly mistaken,'' said Mr. Kyrillos, state Republican chairman.
McGreevey administration officials and some independent analysts said that if the Xanadu office and entertainment complex is built adjacent to the Meadowlands as planned, it will generate more business activity, and tax revenue, than the Nets.
If the Meadowlands redevelopment falters, Mr. McGreevey could face a backlash from an electorate that still questions his decision-making. For now, though, according to Clifford Zukin, director of the Star-Ledger Eagleton poll, voters appear to be unconcerned.
''No elected official wants to be put in the position of losing a team or putting in lots of tax dollars,'' Mr. Zukin said. ''But as far as playing a difficult hand, so far it looks like the governor has made the right decisions.''
