Howard Dean is hardly the first Democratic presidential candidate to change his message and style between the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary.
In Iowa in 1976, for instance, Jimmy Carter was vague about where he stood on abortion in deference to that state's strong anti-abortion movement. But in New Hampshire, where Democrats tended to strongly favor abortion rights, Mr. Carter campaigned as a committed advocate of that position.
Mr. Carter won both states and had clear sailing to the nomination.
In 2000, Al Gore trounced Bill Bradley in Iowa after Mr. Bradley did not respond to Mr. Gore's repeated attacks on him. But Mr. Bradley took a different tack here, using his stump speeches to criticize Mr. Gore sharply, particularly his early votes in Congress to limit abortion.
Polls showed Mr. Bradley gaining on Mr. Gore by at least one percentage point a day in the week before the primary. In the end, Mr. Bradley lost, but only barely.
It is not surprising that candidates change their tack. The economy here is different from Iowa's. There is no talk about farm subsidies, corporate meatpackers or ethanol.
And primaries are different from caucuses. The relatively small number of people who attend the Iowa caucuses tend to be political activists. In New Hampshire, the turnout is almost always high. Independents are eligible to vote in the primaries. Younger, less partisan voters go to the polls.
''That means the candidates throw less red meat,'' said Linda L. Fowler, director of the Rockefeller Center for Social Sciences at Dartmouth. ''Otherwise, you run the risk of alienating the independents and weak partisans.''
And particularly if a campaign seems to be flagging, it is important for the voters and the news media to think the candidate is correcting course, said Dayton Duncan, who has written a history of New Hampshire primaries.
Since Dr. Dean arrived in New Hampshire after a weak third-place finish in Iowa, he has hardly mentioned the war in Iraq, the issue that first propelled him to the top of the field, and he has tried to have dignified, issue-oriented campaign appearances, in contrast with the wild rallies that characterized his time in Iowa.
At the same time, Senators John Kerry and John Edwards, who finished first and second in Iowa, are retaining the messages that worked for them there.
Mr. Kerry is sounding more like a front-runner. Except for one oblique jab at Gen. Wesley K. Clark the other day, he has had nothing bad to say about his rivals, attacking only President Bush.
Mr. Edwards talks of two Americas, one for the haves and one for the have-nots, and he invariably sounds optimistic. His advisers say his positive presentation differentiates him from the other candidates.
General Clark and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman skipped the Iowa caucuses and have been campaigning here for weeks. What they are saying does not seem to have changed much since Monday night.
General Clark is running mainly on his military record and his foreign policy experience.
Mr. Lieberman continues to paint himself as ''the Democrat who can defeat George Bush.''
But if the other candidates are more or less sticking with familiar themes, Dr. Dean has changed his tune. On Wednesday, he talked at length about changes in the campaign finance system, an issue he rarely mentioned in Iowa.
To the extent that Dr. Dean now talks about Iraq, it is not about why he opposed the war but about his willingness to speak out when such a stand was unpopular. That is a main theme of his newest television advertisement, a low-key message that was first broadcast on Thursday. The advertisement concludes with a picture of Dr. Dean, not angry but smiling broadly.
His advisers said his emphasis on campaign finance was meant to appeal to the independents who flocked to Senator John McCain in the 2000 Republican primary here and to crystallize the notion that he was standing up to the establishment.
Andrew E. Smith, director of University of New Hampshire Survey Center, suggested another possible motive. The percentage of New Hampshire Democrats who consider themselves liberals rose to 54 percent in 2000, up from 32 percent in 1980, he said. Campaign finance overhaul, Mr. Smith said, plays well with liberals and might underscore Dr. Dean's determination to hang onto his liberal core in the hope of winning a plurality next Tuesday if the other candidates split the rest of the vote fairly evenly.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO
