A convicted rapist went on a violent 13-hour crime spree across three boroughs, killing a young man in front of a 4-year-old girl in Queens, sexually assaulting a 15-year-old girl in Manhattan and shooting at people in the Bronx before he was arrested by a team of police detectives late Wednesday night, law enforcement officials said yesterday.
Officers and detectives from 10 squads worked against time, piecing together tips and bits of surveillance camera footage as the man they sought crisscrossed the city, growing more violent as the day wore on.
The man who was arrested, Andre Shobey, 45, had a knife and a loaded .32-caliber revolver when the police caught him. He has spent most of his adult life in maximum security prisons for accosting people in elevators, and for raping, robbing, beating and humiliating his victims in one-day crime sprees more than 20 years ago, records show.
He was charged yesterday with murder and criminal possession of a weapon. Other charges were pending, as the authorities continue looking into his activities since he was released from prison in August. The authorities would not suggest a motive beyond noting that Mr. Shobey told his interrogators that he had been drinking.
''I don't know what was in his mind, but he was a registered sex offender, and two of his first targets were women, as was his last,'' said Deputy Commissioner Paul J. Browne.
Mr. Shobey's first reported stop was in the Bronx around 10:45 a.m., when, the police said, he went to the 15th floor of an apartment complex on Washington Avenue. There, the police said, he tried to force his way into the apartment of a woman, brandishing what they believe was a .32-caliber handgun.
Neighbors said Mr. Shobey had been lingering by a trash chute before approaching the woman, who was carrying groceries.
''She just closed the door and started screaming,'' said Enrique Figueroa, 17.
The woman called the police, and Mr. Shobey fled to a brick-facade building nearby and went to the 11th floor, the police said.
A man knocked on a door and asked for a woman named Elaine, said Joan Augustine, 39, who lives on the floor and said that she overheard the conversation.
Told that the woman was not there, the man, later identified by the police as Mr. Shobey, spoke with another woman on the same floor as she threw out her trash, said Santos Perez, 23, another neighbor who also overheard him. The police said Mr. Shobey tried to force his way into that woman's apartment, and she signaled to a neighbor for help.
The neighbor knocked on Mr. Perez's door, he said.
''I went to look at my peep hole, and that's when I heard the shots,'' Mr. Perez said.
Two shots rang out, said the police, who received a call reporting the shots at about 10:56 a.m. One bullet grazed the woman's head, and the other -- intended, the police said, for the male neighbor in the hallway -- hit a white brick wall, about six feet from the floor. The woman was treated at Lincoln Medical Center, the police said.
Mr. Shobey took a bus and then the E train to an apartment in Jamaica, Queens, where, he later told police, he had planned to help his girlfriend pay off a $500 debt. The woman who Mr. Shobey said was his girlfriend, Latrice Hopaway, 23, owed the debt to Geraldine Vincent, whose apartment is on 160th Street, a police official said. Mr. Shobey visited around 2:45 p.m.
There, Mr. Shobey encountered Terrence Neal, 19, a relative of Ms. Vincent's who was looking after the woman's 4-year-old autistic daughter, the police said. Mr. Shobey entered the apartment, looked out the window and saw a person he recognized on the street, whom he wanted to stab, the police said. When Mr. Neal tried to stop Mr. Shobey from leaving, Mr. Shobey slashed him in the neck with a knife and stabbed him in the chest, killing him, the police said.
A caretaker of the child who later visited the apartment discovered Mr. Neal dead on a bed in the apartment, the police said. The child was crying but unharmed.
At some point after the stabbing, detectives received a call from a person who had spoken to Mr. Shobey, telling them that Mr. Shobey was responsible for the shooting in the Bronx and the stabbing in Queens, the police said. They did not release more details about the call. At 8:45 p.m., Mr. Shobey was at an apartment building on Baruch Drive in Manhattan where his niece lives, the police said.
In the elevator, he pointed a gun at a 15-year-old girl and led her to a rooftop landing, where he sexually abused her and stole $9 from her purse, the police said. The police said they arrested him at the building at 11:30 p.m.
Mr. Shobey's criminal career began as a teenager. He first went to prison in February 1977 to serve an eight-year sentence for attempted robbery and went again in May 1981 for attempted assault, according to Linda Foglia, a spokeswoman for the state Department of Correctional Services. He was released in July 1982.
After his release, Mr. Shobey was involved in a series of assaults, rapes and robberies in the Bronx, settling into a signature method of attacking people in elevators, according to Thomas P. Grant, a spokesman for the state Division of Parole.
Mr. Shobey entered the state prison system on Feb. 22, 1985, sentenced to between 12 1/2 and 25 years. Since 1989, he received 27 disciplinary reports, including 15 for refusing direct orders and others for creating disturbances and using drugs. He served time at Sing Sing, Attica and other maximum security prisons.
Mr. Shobey was denied parole five times, and he was released having served out his sentence, last Aug. 27.
