Nokia, the world's largest cellphone manufacturer, reported strong fourth-quarter and full-year profits on Thursday and said it expected sales to rise in 2004, the latest indication that the technology industry may be improving after a slump of more than two years.
Net profit for the fourth quarter, including good will and nonrecurring items, was 1.16 billion euros ($1.47 billion), up 12 percent from a year ago. Full-year profits increased 6 percent, to 3.59 billion euros ($4.53 billion). Nokia's results were lifted by a 20 percent rise in phone sales in the fourth quarter, to 55.3 million phones, and by higher-than-expected sales of 1.7 billion euros in its network division.
The weakened dollar ''severely muted'' revenue growth, the company's chairman and chief executive, Jorma Ollila, said in a conference call about the results.
Mr. Ollila said he expected first-quarter sales to grow 3 to 7 percent, in part because of the company's new product lineup. For the year, Nokia predicted that the number of mobile phones sold would grow by more than 10 percent and that the market for infrastructure -- the equipment that makes cellphones work -- would be flat to slightly up.
Phone sales in 2003 were bolstered by new users in emerging markets like China, India, Brazil and Russia, and by existing users who traded in old phones for new ones with cameras, pictures and color.
Last year ''was a record year for the mobile handset industry and for Nokia mobile phones,'' Mr. Ollila said. Last year, consumers around the world bought 471 million new phones, up 16 percent from the year before.
Mr. Ollila said the gap between Nokia's sales volume and its next largest competitor is wider today than it has been since the company moved into first place in 1998. Nokia has just more than 38 percent of the mobile phone market. About half of Nokia phones sold in the fourth quarter were color-screen phones.
Analysts heralded the results as a sign that the mobile phone market has a bright future. Nokia's strong earnings may ''put to bed some concerns people have about this being a mature industry,'' James Crawshaw, an analyst for Commerzbank in London, said on Thursday.
Favorable trends like the roll-out of third-generation phones and the installation of fiber optics to homes and public buildings to improve cellphone reception could benefit Nokia and its rivals this year, Mr. Crawshaw said.
Nokia reported that profits in the networks business grew 12 percent in the fourth quarter because of software sales. The underlying results were even stronger, Mr. Crawshaw noted.
After removing a 118 million euro charge for capitalized research and development, sales jumped 18 percent.
