Where there was darkness on the morning of Sept. 11, 2001, the architect Santiago Calatrava would bring a flood of light in the form of a winged railway station, draped in glass, suffused with natural illumination and, on occasion, open to the clear skies above.
Mr. Calatrava's design for the permanent World Trade Center PATH terminal, which was unveiled yesterday, is a soaring, sculptural, steel-and-glass shell covering a cathedral-like concourse. Through a network of passageways, the terminal would connect the Port Authority Trans-Hudson underground rail line from New Jersey and 14 subway lines.
'' 'Wow' is the first word that's just got to come to your mind,'' said Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. He joined in the unveiling with Gov. George E. Pataki and officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which will build the terminal. It may cost up to $2 billion. Construction is expected to begin early next year and take four years to complete.
Rather than rely on words alone, Mr. Calatrava took pastels to paper in the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center at Battery Park City. He sketched a child releasing a bird into the air, then superimposed the bird on the outline of the terminal.
About 67,000 commuters boarded PATH trains at the trade center before the attack. Today, a temporary open-air station is used daily by about 30,000 travelers.
In aesthetics and logistics, Mr. Calatrava's design aspires to be far more than a commuter rail station, vital as that is to Lower Manhattan. Its admirers are already mentioning it in the same breath as the old Pennsylvania Station, which was torn down in the early 1960's, and Grand Central Terminal, which Mr. Calatrava claimed as his ''deepest inspirational object.''
Like the original Penn Station, the PATH terminal would bathe travelers in daylight, which would reach all the way to the train platforms 60 feet below ground through the use of glass-block floors above. And like Grand Central, it would be a hub of an underground network linking numerous skyscrapers and subway stations.It would also do something neither of the earlier stations did: move.
Two counterpoised canopies over the main concourse, rising some 150 feet like skeletal birds' wings, could be retracted hydraulically in about two minutes to create a tapered opening almost 50 feet wide at its center. This would ventilate smoke from the building in case of fire and provide natural air-conditioning.
''On a beautiful summer day,'' Mr. Calatrava said, ''the building can work not as a greenhouse but as an open space.'' He also envisioned the symbolic power of opening the roof every year on the morning of Sept. 11, ''giving us the sense of unprotection.''
''The building itself expresses the memory of Sept. 11,'' said Mr. Calatrava, 52, a Spanish architect, engineer and artist who is widely admired for the lyrical quality of his bridges and train stations. Though he has a home on the Upper East Side, the PATH terminal would be Mr. Calatrava's first structure in New York City. (His partners in the design and engineering are DMJM &amp; Harris and the STV Group.)
The angle of the canopies' outer edges would mark the line of the sun at 8:46 on the morning of Sept. 11, when the first plane struck the trade center. The main axis of the 360-foot-long concourse would be aligned with the angle of the sun at 10:28 that morning, when the second tower collapsed.
An architectural expression of these angles was called for in the master site plan by Studio Daniel Libeskind. They formed the Wedge of Light plaza on either side of Fulton Street. In the Libeskind plan, the PATH terminal was to be south of the plaza, in the approximate location of Dey Street, adjoining one of the planned office buildings.
Mr. Calatrava pulled the terminal northward, making it a free-standing structure surrounded by plazas, thereby reopening Dey Street. Because the terminal integrally expresses the Wedge of Light, its design won a warm endorsement from Mr. Libeskind, who has otherwise been struggling to preserve key elements of his year-old site plan.
It was also embraced by Nikki Stern, whose husband, James E. Potorti, died in the north tower. After calling up the images of the design to the screen of her computer, she said her first reaction was -- indeed -- ''Wow.''
''My second reaction was how beautifully it complements Daniel's plan,'' Ms. Stern said, ''and how pleased I am that the Port Authority allowed Calatrava to create something that is respectful, yet so hopeful and functional.''
That is not to say that the difficult issues are all resolved. Among them is the extent to which the platforms and tracks of the new terminal will encroach on the footprints of the north and south towers.
The amount of retail space in the 200,000-square-foot terminal will not only affect its character but could potentially drain life from the surrounding streets.
Construction will also have to be coordinated with that of the memorial, the Fulton Street Transit Center being designed by Nicholas Grimshaw and with the office buildings planned by Silverstein Properties, including 62- and 65-story towers on either side of the terminal.
Only two months ago, the $323 million temporary PATH station opened. A month later, the design of the 1,776-foot Freedom Tower was announced. And last week, the design of the memorial, ''Reflecting Absence,'' was made public.
The permanent PATH terminal and its surrounding network of passageways carries the largest price tag of any of these projects: up to $2 billion, financed with $1.7 billion from the Federal Transit Administration and $300 million in insurance proceeds.
Governor Pataki seemed to anticipate criticism of the project as an extravagance when he summoned the memory of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan. ''He would lament the fact that we don't build grand things any more,'' Mr. Pataki said. The governor said he vowed that on the trade center site, ''the buildings themselves would be a lasting tribute to those we lost and to the courage that showed on Sept. 11.''
After the unveiling, Robert B. Tierney, the chairman of the city Landmarks Preservation Commission, asked, ''Should we pre-emptively landmark this?''
The terminal will not in fact be eligible until it turns 30 years old. But glancing at the shimmering models nearby, Mr. Tierney said, ''This will still be flying at that age.''
