In a new advertisement that began running here on Thursday, Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, smiles one of the brightest smiles he has ever been seen to smile, providing a clear contrast to the repeated images on television of his growling speech on Monday night in Iowa.
A new spot for Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, featuring testimonials from everyday voters hailing his experience and leadership, is the near-image of an advertisement his team believed to be highly effective in Iowa. In this one, though, the people have New England accents.
Advisers to Gen. Wesley K. Clark, meanwhile, say they are almost done with a spot designed to establish him as the one true maverick for a state reputed to love mavericks.
In the final days before the nation's first primary, the major candidates' image-makers are in overdrive. And they have already drawn lessons from Iowa, where there was record spending on advertising.
Several strategists said it was clear that crucial advertising decisions by the major campaigns in Iowa helped hasten the falls of Dr. Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, while aiding the rise of Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Mr. Kerry.
The most important lesson, several strategists said, was that negative advertising can haunt the attacked and the attacker.
Officials with all of the major campaigns said they now believed that two exchanges of dueling confrontational advertisements between Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt over the Iraq war and free trade, in early December and again last week, helped transform the two men from the top two candidates in the polls in Iowa to the third- and fourth-place finishers.
''It's definitely a murder-suicide,'' said Bill Carrick, a senior adviser to Mr. Gephardt. ''They murdered us and killed themselves.''
People in both camps said they believed those advertisements also created an opening for Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards to counter with glowingly positive commercials. The two senators are now relying on those very advertisements, or very similar ones, here.
One of the more prominent advertisements that Mr. Edwards has transferred to New Hampshire shows him speaking about ''two Americas,'' one ''for powerful interests and lobbyists, the other for the rest of us.''
Mr. Edwards's media adviser, David Axelrod, said it seemed to resonate in Iowa. ''We were saying something important to people while perhaps they viewed what they were hearing from others as perhaps more trivial,'' he said.
Mr. Kerry's campaign officials say one of their more prominent advertisements here has played a crucial role in beginning his comeback in the polls. It shows a crew mate on Mr. Kerry's Navy riverboat in South Vietnam, Del Sandusky, recalling how the decisions that Mr. Kerry made during the war ''saved our lives.'' The spot flashes a picture of Mr. Kerry walking in the Vietnamese jungle with a machine gun before his voice chimes in, ''There's a sense, after Vietnam, that every other day is extra, that you have to do what's right.''
He goes on to define ''doing what's right'' as rolling back President Bush's tax cuts ''for the wealthy,'' providing universal health care and investing in education.
Mr. Kerry's campaign manager, Mary Beth Cahill said the advertisement came at a time when he was starting to find his footing on the stump after stumbling in the late fall. ''It all just kind of came together for us,'' she said.
General Clark's advertisements here have struck similar themes, showing him as the figure who led the NATO campaign in Kosovo. But in recent weeks his advertisements have also started to mix his personal story with his plans for domestic policy. One advertisement shows him as a boy with his mother.
''The boy was nearly 4 when his father died,'' an announcer intones. Going on to say that his mother found a secretary's job in an Arkansas bank to support herself and her son, it concludes, ''Is it any wonder that Wes Clark's plans for jobs are bold and real?''
Mr. Lieberman's latest case to voters here is similarly biographical, telling his life story as the son of immigrants. ''His grandparents came to this country full of the dream of America but they never dreamed this big,'' an announcer says before the screen flashes to Mr. Lieberman speaking as the vice-presidential candidate at the 2000 Democratic convention and saying ''Is this a great country or what?''
Dr. Dean, trying to recover from Iowa, has introduced his latest advertisement, which was expected to be in heavy rotation by Friday.
Like past advertisements, it contrasts him with ''other Democrats,'' arguing he ''spoke out'' while others were silent over the war. But it borrows from the leadership themes of the advertisements of Mr. Kerry and General Clark, with an announcer calling Dr. Dean ''a true leader.''
''It gets us back to the governor's early message when he was campaigning in New Hampshire,'' Mr. Trippi said of the commercial. ''He's a governor who balanced budgets, fought for health care for children and stood up when it wasn't popular to do so against the war.''
Asked if a prolonged shot of Dr. Dean smiling was meant to erase images of him established in the Iowa campaign and solidified by his defiant speech on Monday night, Mr. Trippi said, ''We don't believe the people of New Hampshire will allow 15 seconds of tape to erase'' all of Dr. Dean's accomplishments.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: ADVERTISING
