Several senior executives of Computer Associates conspired to obstruct a continuing federal investigation into the company's accounting practices, a former senior vice president said yesterday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
In a subdued 30-minute hearing before Judge I. Leo Glasser, the executive, Lloyd Silverstein, admitted lying to prosecutors and lawyers from the Securities and Exchange Commission in September 2002 about whether the company had booked revenue from unsigned contracts.
Mr. Silverstein also said he had lied to lawyers at Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz, a firm that Computer Associates hired in 2002 to investigate its accounting practices and report the results to the government.
Mr. Silverstein said he lied to both Wachtell, Lipton and the government investigators after several executives senior to him told him to do so. He did not identify the executives, but only a few people in Computer Associates' sales and finance divisions were senior to Mr. Silverstein, including Ira Zar, the former chief financial officer.
In an unusual statement issued after the hearing, prosecutors said that they thought that Mr. Silverstein's plea would be only ''the first step in uncovering a corrupt conspiracy at Computer Associates.''
In a meeting with prosecutors on Sept. 6, 2002, Mr. Silverstein denied that Computer Associates ever booked revenue in a quarter from contracts signed after that quarter had ended. Many former employees have said that practice was common, and in October 2003, the company admitted that it had booked revenue prematurely and it fired Mr. Silverstein, Mr. Zar and another financial executive.
Mr. Silverstein, who was Computer Associates' senior vice president for finance before the company ousted him in October, pleaded guilty to a single count of obstruction of justice. He faces up to five years in jail and a $250,000 fine.
James Walden, a lawyer for Mr. Silverstein, said that he had decided to admit he lied before he was accused or charged. ''Lloyd Silverstein reported wrongdoing to the government even though he knew that decision would have personal consequences,'' Mr. Walden said.
In a related action, the S.E.C. filed a civil complaint against Mr. Silverstein yesterday, contending that he had committed accounting fraud by booking revenue prematurely. Mr. Silverstein has agreed to a partial settlement of the complaint, the commission said.
In its complaint against Mr. Silverstein, the S.E.C. said that Computer Associates prematurely booked more than $1 billion in revenue from unsigned contracts in the year ended March 2000. In some quarters, the premature bookings represented as much as one-third of the company's sales, the commission said.
As part of his plea, Mr. Silverstein has agreed to cooperate with prosecutors, who appear eager to bring charges against other Computer Associates executives. In a statement released after the hearing, Rosylnn R. Mauskopf, the top federal prosecutor for Long Island, said Computer Associates employees had tried ''to thwart and obstruct'' the investigation and that Mr. Silverstein's plea was only ''the first step in uncovering a corrupt conspiracy.''
In general, prosecutors usually will say only that an investigation is continuing, so Ms. Mauskopf's statement was surprising.
Computer Associates did not comment directly on Mr. Silverstein's allegations of a conspiracy. But the company said in a statement yesterday that in October 2003 it had given government investigators evidence linking Mr. Silverstein to its practice of booking revenue from unsigned contracts. In addition, the company said it had given the government evidence that Mr. Silverstein had lied to the lawyers at Wachtell, Lipton conducting its internal investigation.
''The audit committee and the company are continuing their efforts to cooperate with the government's ongoing investigation and are committed to resolving these problems and putting these matters to rest,'' Computer Associates said in the statement. Robert Gordon, a spokesman for the company, said it would have no further comment.
Computer Associates has, meanwhile, quietly changed the way it describes the results of a second internal investigation into its accounting practices. While the company is overseeing the Wachtell, Lipton investigation, its audit committee is overseeing the other investigation. In a quarterly report to the S.E.C. filed in October, the company said that although it had booked sales prematurely, the audit committee ''has found no evidence to suggest that the software license agreements and the revenues and cash flows associated with those software license agreements were not genuine.''
But in its most recent quarterly report, filed on Wednesday, the company said only that the committee ''continues to believe that the company's current business model is unaffected by its investigation.''
Left unanswered is the question of why Mr. Silverstein or anyone else would lie to the government or Wachtell, Lipton about Computer Associates' practice of booking sales made after a quarter had ended. Former employees have said the practice was so common that they joked that March, June, September, and December had 35 days.
In addition, booking sales on contracts that are not signed until a few days after a quarter has ended is a relatively common accounting tactic at publicly traded companies, unlike other accounting practices former employees have said Computer Associates used during the late 1990's. Nevertheless, the premature bookings seem to have become the focus of the government's investigation into the company.
In heavy trading yesterday, shares of Computer Associates closed at $27.28, down $1.16, or 4 percent.
