TOM STRUMOLO, the new director of Greenmarket, New York's system of farmers markets, is showing his hands, front and back, to make a point. We're relieved.
Anything to quiet him down. Mr. Strumolo is relishing his role as voluble promo machine for the markets and friend of the farmer, interjecting plenty of ''excuse me's,'' and impatiently raising an arm like a stop sign as he continues his spiel.
Is he reciting from some manifesto? Actually, it is a mission statement on how the markets promote rural life and its bounty in the city, how they help to preserve more than 25,000 acres of farmland in the region and nourish hundreds of thousands of low-income families and the elderly with a nutrition program.
Mr. Strumolo, who is 57, knows why an interviewer is sitting in his office on the top floor of a narrow five-story brownstone near Union Square. It has been a tumultuous time for Greenmarket in the last year or so. Two longtime managers were fired. Then, in late December, a young and energetic director, Nina Planck, was dismissed after only five and a half months on the job. Handpicked by a search committee, Ms. Planck was supposed to bring Greenmarket up to date, as she had done with farmers markets in London and Washington.
So how does Mr. Strumolo plan to pick up the pieces in the largest farm-market system in the country, an institution that has weathered periodic episodes of discontent since its founding in 1976? He began at the organization 20 years ago as a part-time manager in TriBeCa and until recently was Greenmarket deputy director.
Mr. Strumolo has forewarned an interviewer over the telephone that he is not that interesting. ''My life is just so intertwined with the Greenmarket,'' he demurs.
But what about the man who is a blues-guitar-playing former surfer dude? He used to ride the waves in Florida, where he studied philosophy in graduate school, and in California, where, grooving on the organic food and sustainable agriculture movements in the late 1960's, he had his light-bulb moment. It led him back to New York, where he opened three natural food stores in the 1970's. He later became a solar energy consultant while studying for his architecture degree at the Pratt Institute.
Nah, not interesting. Back to his hands. He muses that his are not those of a farmer. ''They have hands like stumps. Their hands are rough but gentle.'' Even so, he feels a kinship to the farmers of Greenmarket.
''They look upon me as somebody who has come up through the ranks and has their best interest at heart and will be able to communicate what we are doing here, to the city and the community at large, so that we will be able to pass along the rewards to the grower,'' he says.
He explains other merits. ''I talk calmly. I'm a very measured guy. I'm not looking to move on to another organization. I'll retire here. I make it a point to have them understand that the decisions are done though a consensus, that there's a dialogue with growers and consumers.''
Double take! Has he just taken a back-handed swipe at his predecessor? Ms. Planck, it has been reported, met resistance at every turn, stonewalled as she attempted to do things like encourage farmers to keep their stalls tidier, tried to rewrite the rules and worked to improve inspections.
Mr. Strumolo shakes his head, saying no. But he says Ms. Planck's problems were largely a matter of style. ''Sometimes, it's just not right,'' he says.
He says he, too, plans changes, many of which sound similar to what Ms. Planck proposed, but wants to implement them more slowly, in a ''determined and methodical'' way.
''It's how you communicate the ideas that is so important,'' he says. ''It's difficult for somebody to come in on the top without the understanding of the background and the evolution. The set of rules has evolved over 26 years and it's difficult to come in, in a fell swoop, with a complete overhaul. This job is about consensus.''
Time for some context here. Farmers hold much clout in Greenmarket. The nonprofit organization has its own management but is a program of the Council of the Environment, which falls under the aegis of the office of the mayor. There are 32 market sites. Union Square is the largest and busiest.
''I'm trying to strike a balance of how it looks and not becoming a Martha Stewart market,'' he says. ''We don't want it to become too cutesy. It has to maintain a sense of grit, but the marketplace has to be clean and attractive, and the produce has to be first quality and be grown by the producers.''
MR. STRUMOLO, who is dressed in jeans and a hooded sweatshirt with a Greenmarket logo, has a strong voice that hints of Brooklyn roots. He was raised in Bensonhurst, the son of a payroll administrator and a homemaker. He says his passion for agriculture was inspired by his maternal grandfather, with whom he spent much time on a Long Island farm. His grandfather grew mainly vegetables and sold them in his own Bensonhurst store.
The memory of his grandfather prompted Mr. Strumolo to apply for a job with the Greenmarket in 1984. He was peering out of the window of his TriBeCa apartment, which he shares with his wife, Mary, a social worker, and two children, ages 12 and 14, when he saw a farmer on the street, selling produce.
The man could have been blood. ''It was the same hands, the same work ethic,'' he says.
PUBLIC LIVES
