SculptureCenter  44-19 Purves Street  Long Island City, Queens  Through April 11
Here is another room by the master of storytelling installations, Ilya Kabakov, who now shares equal billing with Emilia Kabakov, his wife and collaborator since 1989. ''The Empty Museum'' is more spacious, emptier and less obviously labor-intensive than previous work by the Kabakovs, but its relative minimalism is a nice surprise. Still, the sense of being transported to another, older world and the metaphorical magic by which that faux-antiquity serves to reflect something about contemporary experience -- qualities that the Kabakovs have so dependably supplied over the years -- are abundantly present.
For this piece the Kabakovs did not simply alter the SculptureCenter's main exhibition space; they built a large room inside it. From outside you see only sheetrock and wall studs rising to the ceiling, leaving a narrow corridor around the perimeter. An ordinary door at one corner admits you to the expansive interior, a simulation of a 19th-century museum gallery. It has brick-red walls over wooden wainscoting painted green; gold-leafed, neo-Classically patterned molding around the top; two nonworking doors framed in gold at one end of the room; gray wall-to-wall carpeting; and, in the center of the room, a pair of massive, double-sided black cushioned benches.
Knowing the Kabakovs' previous creations of fictional gallery or museum spaces, you expect to find imitation old masters or Soviet Social Realist paintings on the walls, but here you find nothing but pools of light cast by 11 ceiling spotlights. Instead of visual art, there is music: dirgelike organ works by Bach, resounding at considerable volume.
With the dim lighting, somber atmosphere, gloomy music, black benches and empty walls, it all may be read as a wake for traditional painting or, more broadly, for some golden age of humanist feeling and imagination. The blank walls and the spotlights suggest the cruel Minimalist reduction and dematerialization of art, and most specifically, perhaps, the death of painting.
But then, as Mr. Kabakov explains in a written commentary prepared for the exhibition, Bach's music is an aural equivalent to old master painting and the lights on the walls could be symbolizing the sacred light of stained-glass windows. Maybe, but the main impression is of a mournful abandonment. However the particulars are interpreted, the whole works as a funereal meditation or a mysteriously sad dream about the losses of modernity.
KEN JOHNSON
ART IN REVIEW
