In every budget season, there are certain items like Medicaid spending, school reforms and some taxes that seem only to expand from year to year. Here in the City Council, there is another number that defies limits: Council committees.
Even as city officials are trying to keep down costs, Speaker Gifford Miller ushered in the new Council term this week by naming a record 41 committees, or five more than last year, to oversee a host of city issues from immigration to technology in government.
While Mr. Miller emphasized that the reorganization would benefit all New Yorkers, his critics pointed out that it would also enable the speaker to bestow coveted committee chairmanships on nearly all of his 50 members. The positions come with sizable annual bonuses, known informally as lulus, ranging from $18,000 for a full committee to $4,000 for a special-interest committee that does not meet as often.
Council aides said that a total of $488,750 in stipends would be dispensed to members this year, or a 7 percent increase over last year. The higher cost comes mainly from the elevation of five minor committees to full committee status, more than doubling the salaries of their chairmen, or chairwomen, in the process.
Those committees are Immigration, Technology in Government, Small Business, Veterans Affairs and Waterfronts. In addition, a new subcommittee, Public Housing, was formed.
''The expansion of the committees is part of a gig to keep the speaker in power,'' said Michael Long, chairman of the Conservative Party. ''It's like spreading peanut butter; everybody gets a piece, but the problem is they're spending taxpayer money.''
Mr. Miller, a Democrat who is likely to run against Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg in 2005, does not head a committee but receives a speaker stipend of $29,500 a year. Council members earn an annual salary of $90,000.
Mr. Miller said more committees were necessary, not for his own political gain, but to carry out the work of the city. In the past two years, the Council approved 131 laws and passed 814 resolutions -- about average for City Councils -- and held dozens of oversight hearings. ''It's about being effective,'' he said. ''What I'm trying to do is give everybody an opportunity to contribute.''
He said the extra money for the stipends would come from trimming other administrative costs, like spending on office supplies, furniture and staff. The Council's operating budget has dropped to $45.8 million from $46.3 million last year.
As with other legislative bodies, the Council has traditionally used committee chairmanships as a way to reward loyal members, or to punish dissenters. For instance, in 1994, Councilwoman Ronnie M. Eldridge was removed as chairwoman of the Contracts Committee after voting against the budget.
Sometimes, there are other motivations. Councilman Allan W. Jennings Jr., who faces sexual harassment and misconduct accusations, was replaced this week as chairman of the Civil Service and Labor Committee after council leaders criticized his leadership skills.
Peter F. Vallone, the former speaker, said the growth of committees was inevitable since members -- as well as other elected city officials -- are now limited to two terms in office. Mr. Vallone said that he typically had 30 or so committees during his tenure in the 1990's.
''There's no rationale to say, 'wait your turn,''' he said. ''It is your turn. I'm surprised that there are not 51 committees. How do you tell someone, 'You're not qualified to be a chairman?'''
Gene Russianoff, senior lawyer for the New York Public Interest Research Group, said expanding committees was not necessarily a bad thing, provided they are engaged in serious work. ''If you really want an effective check and balance on city agencies, the Council has to have the resources to do it,'' he said.
Councilwoman Gale Brewer, chairwoman of the Technology in Government Committee, said that her efforts to oversee the city's 311 system had been stymied in the past because, as a minor committee, it did not have assigned members or legislative power. Now it does.
''It's not about money,'' said Ms. Brewer, who plans to use the $6,000 increase in her stipend, to $10,000, to pay her staff members. ''We have a very ambitious agenda, and it will be great to have committee members to share it with.''
