OH, what to wear, what to wear.
Was it a day for the sober gray suit or the trusty blue blazer? The gray looked nice, but a blue blazer is part of the uniform for your typical Sumac (short for Superannuated Male Columnist, though Sullen Manic Codger also works).
And what about the tie? Blue? Red? How about yellow? Tough choices, all.
If these questions strike you as frivolous, you haven't been following the Martha Stewart criminal trial, now in the jury-selection stage at the old federal courthouse on Foley Square.
Judging from some of the news coverage, what counts in this case is how Ms. Stewart dresses and accessorizes herself. Understandably, a Sumac worried yesterday about looking like a rumpled zhlub in so fashion-conscious a setting.
To give you a sense of how important such concerns can be, a handbag has produced the first notable dispute of the trial -- aside from the judge's eyebrow-raising decision to question jurors in a back room, away from public view.
The city's leading tabloid newspapers are unable to agree on how much Ms. Stewart must have paid for the Hermès bag that she carried to court. The Daily News priced it at $6,000. The New York Post upped the ante to $12,000. Unschooled in such matters, we are in no position to judge. But let us all hope that some crusader gets to the bottom of this before the trial is over.
This may be a good moment to remind you of why Ms. Stewart is in court in the first place, along with a co-defendant, Peter E. Bacanovic. She is charged with conspiracy, obstruction of justice and securities fraud as a result of her sale of ImClone Systems stock in 2001.
The government calls her a liar. Among other things, it says, she tried to inflate the value of her own company's stock by insisting on her innocence. Another way to look at it, perhaps, is that she benefited by asserting a right that presumably applies to the rich as well as the poor.
Goodness knows, she is fantastically rich, like many of the men who are at the center of recent corporate scandals but remain unindicted.
Of course, there are differences between her and them. Their actions, in some cases, wiped out pensions and college-tuition plans for thousands of unsuspecting people. Her stock sale did no such thing. It did, however, produce a profit of $45,000 or so. That's enough for at least three Hermès bags, maybe seven, depending on which tabloid you trust.
Kidding aside, Ms. Stewart's appearance may well determine whether she ends up in an orange jumpsuit. So say fashion experts who contend that, to some extent, you are what you wear.
''Images affect us unconsciously,'' said Ruth P. Rubinstein, a sociology professor at the Fashion Institute of Technology in Manhattan and the author of ''Dress Codes: Meanings and Messages in American Culture'' (Westview Press). Most definitely, ''a jury picks up on such things,'' Professor Rubinstein said.
If clothes did not matter, why has so much attention gone to Gen. Wesley K. Clark's sweaters, Senator John Kerry's flannel shirts and Dr. Howard Dean's rolled-up sleeves? It was impossible the other night not to notice that President Bush wore a red tie for his State of the Union address, after two straight years of putting on blue ties for the occasion.
''Red is an attention-getting color -- it exudes confidence,'' said John Birmingham, the editor in chief of DNR, a men's wear trade publication.
ON the other hand, darker shades may be better to project sincerity, as a defendant would want with a jury. ''There are styles, looks and colors that convey a bit more warmth and approachability,'' said David Schwartz, the owner of David Lance New York, a men's clothier in Manhattan. Earth tones, navy blues and deep grays are good for that, he said.
Ms. Stewart got it. Then again, she's not Martha Stewart for nothing. She walked into the courthouse yesterday wearing a chocolate brown pantsuit, high-heeled brown boots and a charcoal coat. The only flash of brightness was a lime-green scarf.
On her way in, she waved to seven supporters. They included a man in a chef's hat who stood with the others behind a metal barrier -- one toque over the line.
As for the Sumac, he settled on the blazer and a yellow tie. Yellow, Professor Rubinstein had told him, is a hopeful color. It suggests ''a new day is coming.''
Ms. Stewart might keep that in mind for the day the jury gets her case. ''If I were waiting for a judgment, I'd wear a yellow shirt,'' the professor said.
NYC
