The digital revolution dealt Kodak workers a painful blow on Thursday. Facing a sharp drop in demand for conventional film, the Eastman Kodak Company said it was speeding its transition to digital imaging while cutting costs in its film business by eliminating up to 15,000 jobs worldwide, more than a fifth of its work force.
The job cuts will come over three years, and the company said it would take charges of up to $1.7 billion against its earnings in that period. Worldwide sales of consumer film, one-use cameras and advanced film stock fell 11 percent in dollar terms, and 15 percent in volume, in the fourth quarter from the period a year earlier, the company said.
In the United States, the shift to digital cameras was even more pronounced. Fourth-quarter consumer film sales fell 20 percent in dollars and 23 percent in volume. Daniel A. Carp, Kodak's chairman and chief executive, told analysts at a meeting in New York that the company intended to cut fixed costs in its conventional film business faster than the volume declined.
Kodak expects the changes to save $800 million to $1 billion a year by 2007. Last year digital sales totaled $4 billion, 30 percent of Kodak's revenues. Mr. Carp said digital revenue would rise to 60 percent of sales and half of profits by 2006.
Wall Street was encouraged. Kodak's stock jumped as much as $4 a share before closing at $30.95, up $3.49, in New York Stock Exchange trading. Over all, Kodak's digital businesses -- including medical and scientific imaging -- are profitable, a Kodak spokesman, Gerard Meuchner, said. He declined to specify which digital units might not be profitable, but said the company was confident that each would become so, as investments in them generate more sales and efficiencies.
Kodak reported that its fourth-quarter profit fell 83 percent, to $19 million, or 7 cents a share, from $113 million, or 39 cents a share, in the quarter a year earlier. Excluding one-time items, Kodak earned $199 million, or 70 cents a share, in the latest quarter.
Sales rose 10 percent in the fourth quarter, to $3.78 billion, from $3.44 billion a year earlier, as increasing sales of digital products more than made up for the decline in traditional film.
In September, Kodak announced that it was ending investments in its traditional film business, and in December it cut its dividend to 50 cents a year from $1.80; both moves were aimed at freeing money to invest in consumer, professional, medical and scientific digital imaging.
Kodak became a household name 104 years ago after it introduced the Brownie, a dollar camera so simple that children could use it. But the company was slow to recognize the popularity of digital cameras, losing ground to Canon, Hewlett-Packard, Sony and others before moving aggressively into digital imaging.
Its Easy Share digital cameras were the top-selling consumer cameras of any type in the United States over the holidays, Mr. Meuchner said. The company said it would soon introduce six new models, including several high-end, high-profit cameras aimed at professionals. Kodak no longer makes film cameras.
Kodak pointed to its ofoto.com unit as an example of its new success. The service enables customers to send digital images over the Internet and get back conventional prints in the mail. Kodak recently expanded ofoto.com to Europe.
For decades Kodak had a virtual monopoly on color film, which generated huge profits. But as competitors emerged, including Agfa in Europe and Fuji in Japan, Kodak's profit margins eroded, and for two decades it has been shrinking its work force and moving jobs overseas.
Kodak invested billions of dollars in other industries, including a drug company -- in the hope that somewhere in Kodak's stores of patented chemicals and processes it might have hidden pharmaceutical assets that could earn profit margins comparable to those of the color film business.
Mr. Carp said the company would concentrate on acquisitions that would fit neatly into its business plan, rather than on exotic ideas with potential profits. That comment appeared aimed at fending off the interest in Kodak shown recently by Carl C. Icahn, the Wall Street investor.
Kodak said one sign of its focus on investing in profitable existing businesses that fit into its plans was a $35 million tender offer announced on Thursday for the remaining publicly held shares of Chinon Industries, a Japanese digital camera supplier.
Since 1998 Kodak has cut about 22,000 jobs. It now employs about 64,000 worldwide, 30 percent of them in Rochester, where an equal share of jobs will be cut, Mr. Carp said. The company was long known as the Great Yellow Father in its hometown because of its support of cultural, social, artistic and civic organizations, but as the company's profits have shrunk, so has its role in the community.
Past job cuts have not damaged the economy in western New York State, but the new cuts may have a greater impact. Most older workers eligible for early retirement or large settlements are gone, and in recent years the company has begun laying off people in their 30's whose only job has been with Kodak, said Kent D. Gardner, director of the Gleason Center for State Policy in Rochester.
Over three years, the cuts will eliminate about 4,500 jobs -- close to 1 percent of the 528,000 jobs in the Rochester market, the largest in western New York, Mr. Gardner said. It is unclear, he said, whether these younger workers will take advantage of Kodak's retraining benefits or will move on.
Correction:  January 24, 2004, Saturday  A chart in Business Day yesterday gave incorrect figures for Eastman Kodak's worldwide work force. Here is a corrected chart.
Chart tracks Eastman Kodak's work force both worldwide and in the United States since 1980.
(Source by Company reports)
Correction:  January 24, 2004, Saturday  A chart in Business Day yesterday showing the changes in the size of the work force of the Eastman Kodak Company from 1980 to 2003 carried incorrect figures. A corrected version appears today, on Page C3.
