AT&amp;T Wireless issued an earnings report yesterday that showed that technological and operational problems took a toll in the fourth quarter, hampering its subscriber growth. The company also formally announced that it was considering buyout offers.
Some critics attribute the company's circumstances to management missteps. Others say, however, that the turbulent dynamics of the telecommunications industry is partly to blame. Over all, AT&amp;T Wireless has posted solid numbers in recent years, doubling its number of subscribers since it went public in 2000 and developing a niche in the profitable corporate market. But it nonetheless has failed to keep pace in an arena where relatively small missteps can give rivals a big advantage.
Among the companies expressing interest in AT&amp;T Wireless are Nextel Communications, Vodafone, NTT DoCoMo and Cingular, which sent a letter last weekend suggesting that it would be willing to pay $30 billion for the company, according to executives close to the situation.
John D. Zeglis, the chief executive of AT&amp;T Wireless, said in an interview that the company's decision to entertain buyout offers grew out of the sweeping changes affecting the industry. This is a good time to seek a buyer, he said, because cellular companies are eager to make an acquisition, improving capital markets are giving those competitors deep pockets, and AT&amp;T Wireless has a strong track record.
''This is not about us bailing out or looking for an early exit,'' Mr. Zeglis said. ''These big dynamics have come together, and we can't ignore them.''
But Mr. Zeglis himself has been the target of criticism, with a number of Wall Street and industry analysts arguing that he failed to protect and exploit a brand name that was once second to none in the cellular industry. The company's reputation for customer service has declined, according to customer surveys, and it is has not been adding subscribers at the same rate as its competitors. The fourth quarter was particularly difficult for customer service because the company had technical problems handling the transfer of subscribers' cellphone numbers to other cellular providers under the new federal rules.
During the quarter, which ended Dec. 31, the company added 128,000 subscribers. That compares with 642,000 for Cingular; other companies have not yet reported results but are also expected to do better than AT&amp;T Wireless in subscriber growth.
Sales were $4.22 billion, slightly lower than analyst expectations. The company posted a loss of $84 million, or 3 cents a share, compared with a loss of $131 million, or 5 cents a share, for the same period a year earlier. The measure of earnings per share, however, is considered less significant in the wireless industry than in some industries because the mobile market is in a big growth and investment phase.
An executive close to one of the potential buyers of AT&amp;T Wireless said the weak earnings results would not change the bidding price. ''We knew this was coming,'' the executive said.
The stock price has climbed steadily since early December, when it was about $7. It closed on Wednesday at $10.99, but fell yesterday to $10.56.
Industry analysts said the results for the fourth quarter and the year underscored their concerns about AT&amp;T Wireless's competitive standing.
''It was the dominant carrier and it became very much of an also-ran,'' said Andrew Cole, the head of the global wireless practice at Adventis, a Boston-based consulting firm that was involved four years ago with the spinoff of AT&amp;T Wireless from AT&amp;T, the long distance company. In April 2000, just as the booming market was deflating, AT&amp;T Wireless went public. The stock briefly spiked, rising into the mid-$30's. But it quickly began a long, sustained decline.
Later that year, AT&amp;T, made the decision to spin off the wireless division because it was saddled with billions of dollars of debt and needed to raise money. Although many analysts have said that AT&amp;T had little choice but to spin off that division, some argue that the mobile company would be in a stronger position today had it remained part of the parent company.
The stock's slide, however, was not unusual in the industry. From the time of the public offering until the end of last year, the Dow Jones Wireless Index was down 74 percent. During that time, AT&amp;T Wireless's stock was down 75 percent, Sprint PCS was down 89 percent, and Nextel was down 48, percent, according to Joseph McCabe Jr., the chief financial officer of AT&amp;T Wireless.
After it went public, AT&amp;T Wireless had what many considered the strongest national brand name among cellular providers. And with 9.6 million customers, it was vying with SBC Communications to be the largest provider.
But the company's market position slipped after two mergers in the industry. Bell Atlantic and Vodafone AirTouch combined their United States wireless operations in 2000, creating Verizon Wireless. In that same year, SBC and BellSouth merged their wireless operations into Cingular Wireless. Almost overnight, AT&amp;T Wireless became No. 3, behind Verizon and Cingular. It was able to make a strong charge initially, even closing the gap in subscriber numbers between it and Cingular. But that gap soon widened, industry analysts said.
Phil Cusick, an analyst with Bear Stearns, said that in 2001, the company had 17 percent of the net additional subscribers in the mobile market. But in 2002, that figure fell to 16 percent, and in 2003, it fell to 6 percent. Yet by other measures, the company has fared well against its competitors. It earns about $59 a subscriber, exceeding the industry average of $52, according to Kevin Calabrese, an analyst with Argus Research. It has also improved its cash position significantly. In 2002, it had $2.8 billion in negative cash flow from operations; in 2003, it posted $1 billion in positive cash flow from operations.
But even the company conceded it faced several major problems in 2003. It began using a new database system in November, but glitches made it difficult to add new customers for three to four weeks, Mr. Zeglis said. At the same time, the company had well-publicized difficulty complying with new federal rules that allow customers to take their phone numbers with them when they switch providers.
On a larger level, critics said, AT&amp;T Wireless has not adapted well to the technology challenges of maintaining and upgrading its network. The blame, some analysts said, should be placed with Mr. Zeglis, who was AT&amp;T's vice chairman and general counsel before becoming chief executive of AT&amp;T Wireless.
''He was at the exact right place at the right time during a monster corporate shuffle,'' said Scott Cleland, chief executive of the Precursor Group, an investment research firm. ''He did not necessarily have a lot of wireless experience.''
Some industry analysts said AT&amp;T Wireless was, in fact, fundamentally sound, despite its recent troubles. ''Until the second quarter of last year, the perception was that Zeglis had done a better job than most expected, given his experience as a corporate attorney,'' said Ned Zachar, an analyst with Thomas Weisel Partners.
Whatever the criticisms, Mr. Zeglis appears to have unequivocal backing of the company's board. ''John is a terrific, smart, savvy and absolutely straight-arrow C.E.O.,'' said Ralph S. Larsen, former chairman and chief executive of Johnson &amp; Johnson and a member of AT&amp;T Wireless's board. ''We are extraordinarily pleased with him.''
Mr. Larsen said the reason AT&amp;T Wireless was considering buyout offers was ''absolutely unconnected'' to the operational struggles the company had had. Rather, he said, it is simply because a number of suitors have come forward.
''It's our obligation to listen if people want to talk,'' Mr. Larsen said, noting that six to eight prospective suitors have stepped forward. ''People have been talking about consolidation for a year. The energy level is higher than it's ever been.''
For his part, Mr. Zeglis vigorously defended his performance, and that of the company. ''We've got four years of uninterrupted growth by every measure that counts,'' Mr. Zeglis said. ''We've had a hell of a run.''
TECHNOLOGY
