A day after the Liberty Media Corporation, the company controlled by John C. Malone, said it was increasing its voting stake in the News Corporation, investors are still wondering what Mr. Malone is up to.
There is at least some explanation for the transaction, in which Liberty swapped part of its nonvoting shares for voting ones. The company has been quietly increasing its stakes in a number of properties where it already has an investment.
For example, Liberty last year bought the 57 percent of QVC that it did not already own from the Comcast Corporation for $7.9 billion. And last January, in a complex transaction with UnitedGlobalCom, a European cable and satellite company, it gained more latitude by terminating an agreement that would have forced it to vote its shares with the founding shareholders. Liberty owns 55 percent of that company and has 92 percent of the vote.
Now Mr. Malone is positioning himself to play a greater role at News Corporation by increasing his voting interest to about 9 percent, making him the second-largest shareholder after the Murdoch family, which has 30 percent of the vote.
Liberty, as a foreign investor in an Australian company could not, however, buy a controlling stake without government permission, according to Australian law. Moreover, Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of News Corporation, and Mr. Malone spoke on Tuesday and Mr. Malone told him that his purchase indicated no change in his amicable support for the company, a spokesman for News Corporation said yesterday.
Michael Erickson, a Liberty spokesman, said yesterday that Mr. Malone was not actively seeking a board seat. He said that the company wanted the voting shares because News Corporation was its second- or third-largest holding and ''it is not bad to have some voting shares.''
Some analysts speculate that Mr. Malone is positioning Liberty as an entity that would be appealing for News Corporation to acquire. That is because Liberty not only owns stock in News Corporation, but its stake in UnitedGlobalCom would be a natural fit with News Corporation.
QVC would also have some appeal for News Corporation, which owns the satellite company DirecTV and could use more programming services. Liberty also owns Starz Encore, a cable programming company, and 50 percent of Discovery Communications, the privately held company that owns the Discovery Channel.
''Malone is winnowing down his portfolio and doing it in a way that could be very appealing to News Corp.,'' said one analyst who follows the company. Mr. Erickson declined to comment on Liberty's long-term plan, calling it speculation.
Tom Wolzien, a media analyst who follows Liberty for Sanford Bernstein &amp; Company, said that despite Liberty's efforts to focus its investments, ''the company is still in never-never land.''
''They have taken steps by consolidating QVC and UnitedGlobalCom,'' he said. ''But some critics still argue that Liberty still does not have an obvious direction.''
