Bruce C. Ratner has never met Byron Scott or Jason Kidd, but he has watched them from afar.
Ratner sat courtside at Madison Square Garden this month to see the Nets beat the Knicks. He also spoke earlier in the season with the Nets' Rod Thorn, the team president, and asked him a wide variety of questions about the organization.
As much as Ratner may know about the Nets, they know little about him. Players have played down any and all consequences of this ownership change, but they are at least curious as to what kind of boss Ratner will be -- free spending or penny pinching.
They will probably not feel his impact for a while. Even if Ratner is approved as the team's new owner, he will undoubtedly be occupied with issues outside of basketball, like moving the team and building it a new arena.
''I don't think this will affect anything we do in the short term,'' Thorn said Thursday night. ''I'm concentrating on the team and how we can tweak it a little to make it better. That's the same thing I've been concentrating on. Sometime in the future, there will be meetings to spell out what's going to transpire here. But until that happens, we'll keep moving on.''
What kind of owner Ratner will be could be determined by the way he approaches key decisions in the coming months. Scott is in the last year of his contract, and Ratner would have to sign off on offering him an extension or replacing him.
Likewise, he will have to open his billfold in the summer to match offers to Kenyon Martin, a restricted free agent.
Under a new regime, players, coaches and executives could feel as if they are auditioning for a place in the future. Perhaps that pressure will snap the Nets out of their recent malaise, during which they have lost four straight games and five of six.
''We can't worry about the owner,'' Kidd said. ''Right now, it's more a matter of us figuring out what to do on the basketball court.''
This franchise has often been in flux, but over the past two years, the team's play served as a stabilizing force. No matter who was bidding for the club or where it was supposedly headed, the Nets were always moving in the same direction -- through the Eastern Conference and into the N.B.A. finals.
The Nets lead the Atlantic Division, but that doesn't say much. They were not competitive at Dallas or San Antonio this week and are 5-14 against opponents with records over .500. At this rate, the Nets will go into the playoffs as underdogs -- trailing Indiana, Detroit, New Orleans and Milwaukee in the East.
''The N.B.A. season is an up-and-down year,'' Scott said. ''We had our lull, then got back on top, and we're having another lull right now. We just have to fight our way out of it again.''
Thorn does not know how much flexibility Ratner will afford him, but he is busy trying to solidify the fringes in cost-effective ways.
Hubert Davis, the former Knicks guard who was waived by Detroit, could sign with a new team Friday. The Nets inquired about Davis because he led the N.B.A. in 3-point shooting percentage four seasons ago, but he is 33 and has played only three games this season.
Eddie Griffin is also getting closer to a return date. He rejoined the team after being convicted of marijuana possession earlier in the week and could play for the Nets sometime in the next 10 days.
Scott does not want to rush Griffin, but at this point he might not have much of a choice.
Unlike the new owner, who is planning five years down the road in Brooklyn, the Nets must be more concerned with the here and now.
REBOUNDS
ALONZO MOURNING was supposed to be making his gallant return to Miami on Friday, but he is back in New Jersey recuperating from a kidney transplant. Although teammates said they missed Mourning and would be excited to see him attempt a comeback, they do not want to see him risk his health.
''Every night you wish you still had him here, and knowing Zo, he'd love to play again,'' JASON KIDD said. ''You can't rule out anything with him. For him to be around the guys is something I would encourage. But playing again, I would discourage.''
PRO BASKETBALL
