Greene Naftali  526 West 26th Street, Chelsea  Through Feb. 14
Put a group of young painters together, however mismatched, and voila! you have a trend. It's almost that easy, or so it seems in the case of this five-artist exhibition.
In the gallery's pretentious locutions, the ''rich color and painterly handling'' of what it calls the New Romantics (who are ''void of both cynicism and of naïveté'') are used ''to construct a proposal about the possibilities of painting's expressive potential.''
Well, O.K. But let's cut to the chase. Some of these talents, quite naturally, are more equal than others, to evoke George Orwell. The most interesting is a young French artist, Philippe Perrot, whose small works in high-key colors -- done in oil and Betadine, yet -- are a daffy mix in several scales of cartoon, fairy-tale book illustration and lively doodling.
In his tondo ''Romance,'' a fin-de-siècle-looking man and woman lounge on a hillock serenaded by a grinning ogre strumming an electric guitar. His huge, jolly, beefy face looms above them. Mr. Perrot's two other works are equally nutty; they beggar verbal description.
Lesley Vance's paintings have a fairy-tale quality too. His ''Foliage, Berries, Moss,'' at 7 by 12 feet the largest work in the show, is a dense, tapestrylike concoction of branches wetly dripping with moss, fruit, leaves, foliage and other natural phenomena -- opened up by a brilliant area of light that could be a passage to a magic world. More unfathomable is his ''Creeper,'' a huge mass of vines that flow together like a fall of hair, suggesting the back of a giant's head, with part of a nude, gnomish figure sticking out where the ear might be.
Christian Ward's strange formations of rounded, sometimes phallic growths in neon colors, creating caverns, grottoes and such, suggest visits to another planet. His ''Small Monument With Clouds,'' a towering pile of rounded protuberances rising into an orange-brown sky from orange-brown water, is a sci-fi seascape. The other artists are Blake Rayne and Nick Mauss. Alas! As New Romantics, they are a fizzle.
GRACE GLUECK
ART IN REVIEW
