The first night that Nacomis Wilson stayed in her new apartment last April, she had to take sleeping pills and drink warm milk to fall asleep.
Sure, Ms. Wilson, 26, was tired after a long day. But the real problem was that her new two-bedroom place in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, was just too quiet.
She could hear the slightest noise in the hallway, and it was a little hard to get used to. Silence was rare in the crowded three-bedroom apartment she shared with her grandmother and other relatives just two buildings away in the same complex.
She had slept in a room stuffed with clothing and toys with her twin daughters, Areesia and Amosia, now 8. The girls, whose father was fatally shot in 1996, doubled up in one bed, and she slept on the other one.
On weekends, Ms. Wilson would share her bed with her daughter, Shalinda, 4, who lives with her father.
Also living in the apartment were Ms. Wilson's five younger siblings, ages 4 to 14, as well as her grandmother, 65.
''It was very stressful because I had to deal with noise, sharing a bathroom, and no peace of mind all the time,'' Ms. Wilson said.
The tight living conditions also aggravated Ms. Wilson's asthma. Because of all the clutter produced by so many people, she felt she had to constantly clean the apartment. And housekeeping often stirred up dust, which set off Ms. Wilson's breathing problems. She said her asthma attacks were so severe that she went to the emergency room nearly a dozen times a year. And in October 2002, she was hospitalized for 10 days.
To get away from it all, Ms. Wilson took the midafternoon and evening shifts at a movie theater, where she worked at the concession stand. And on her days off, she would take her daughters to the library.
Ms. Wilson grew desperate for a change. So, when the twins were 4, and Shalinda was an infant, Ms. Wilson decided that she had to move.
At the time, though, Ms. Wilson thought that the only way she could get another permanent place to live was to first stay in a shelter and thereby qualify for public housing. But after two nights in the shelter, she returned the family to her grandmother's apartment.
The search for a better situation continued. ''I was looking in newspapers, and I had applied to Section 8, but it seemed like it was taking forever,'' Ms. Wilson said.
A few years ago, the Community Service Society, one of the seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, began meeting with the tenants of Ms. Wilson's complex about a plan to make some apartments available.
''We did a lot of advocating to get HUD to turn the building over to a responsible not-for-profit that included the tenants as owners,'' said Brent Sharman, a project manager with the Community Service Society. The agency worked things out between HUD and the New York City Housing Authority.
Eventually, HUD offered leases to people heading households but living doubled up in overcrowded apartments. Section 8 funding was made available through the Housing Authority.
Ms. Wilson's grandmother urged her to try to get her own apartment. Ms. Wilson applied in February and got word that she qualified in March.
Her new apartment has little clutter or dust, and has plenty of windows and closet space. She has had just one asthma attack since she moved in. Ms. Wilson, who now works as a security guard at a homeless shelter, pays $430 in rent.
Her co-workers and relatives bought her an ivory-colored bedroom set, dishes and a dining room set.
For Christmas, the twins got a bedroom set. They have matching bedspreads with ballerina slippers, and dolls. And on a recent afternoon, they wore the same ivory-colored shirt, blue jeans and beige shoes.
Amosia still remembers what she felt when she saw her new room.
''I went in the room, and in my mind I said 'Oh my gosh, it's so beautiful,''' she said.
Ms. Wilson said she would ask them if they wanted to sleep with her because of the unsettling silence of the apartment. ''But they never had any problems,'' she said. ''They just went right to sleep.''
Ms. Wilson's grandmother, who looks after the twins during the week, told her that her face looked brighter. ''It was the happiness showing outside,'' Ms. Wilson said. ''I have space here and I'm loving the advantages of peace. I'm finally happy.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,339,269.03  Recorded Wednesday: $156,807.00  Total: $7,496,076.03  Last year to date: $7,678,037.89
