This 30-second advertisement from Howard Dean began running in New Hampshire on Thursday.
PRODUCER -- Trippi, McMahon &amp; Squier.
ON THE SCREEN -- The commercial opens with a shot of a younger Dr. Dean taking the governor's oath in Vermont and then focuses on a headline about his signing of the bill allowing gay civil unions. The screen flashes, ''A true leader. Howard Dean.'' The screen then shows a picture of President Bush and a newspaper headline from January 2002 about Mr. Bush's popularity in the polls. The screen flashes ''Democrats were silent,'' and then moves to shots of Dr. Dean speaking with prospective voters in a living room, standing alone in the woods and shaking hands with former President Jimmy Carter as the screen flashes, ''opposed the Iraq war,'' ''opposed Bush economic plan,'' ''courageous.'' Next, the screen says, ''What's politically popular is easy.'' After that it flashes, ''But is that what America needs now?'' The spot closes with Dr. Dean, smiling as he moves across a stage in slow motion. A giant American flag hangs behind him.
THE SCRIPT -- A narrator says, ''Standing up for what's right even when it's not popular. That's the test of a true leader. When George Bush was riding high in the polls and other Democrats were silent, Howard Dean spoke out to oppose the war and Bush's economic policies. That's why Jimmy Carter called Howard Dean courageous. Saying the politically popular thing is easy, but is that really what America needs now?''
ACCURACY -- Dr. Dean has, of course, spoken out vociferously against the war and President Bush. But so has Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio. But Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts has noted that Dr. Dean expressed support for a more restrictive Iraq war resolution than the one that passed last year. And while Mr. Carter did call Dr. Dean courageous, he also made it clear that he was not endorsing anyone in the nomination contest.
SCORECARD -- Dr. Dean's advisers are betting that his big smile at the end will win him thousands of votes lost by his Iowa concession. And the spot also seems to effectively position Dr. Dean as a governor with a record of accomplishment. It also tries to recast criticism over some of his verbal missteps as criticism over standing up for his values despite the consequences.
While that may work for some, other voters may not accept that as a blanket defense for statements some have criticized as being inappropriate or insensitive. The spot's negative references to ''other Democrats'' could disappoint potential supporters who want to see a less confrontational Dr. Dean now.
JIM RUTENBERG
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE AD CAMPAIGN
