The avian influenza virus in Asia has mutated from the strain seen in Hong Kong a year ago, leading the World Health Organization to take urgent steps to develop a new human vaccine in case the infection starts spreading from person to person, the agency said yesterday.
While the agency has confirmed only five human cases -- all of them in Vietnam, all fatal and all a result of contact with infected chickens -- health officials worry that the new strain might combine with another virus to create a new virus that could spread easily among people.
[After days of denying it had a problem, Thailand became the latest flashpoint in the crisis on Friday as Health Ministry officials reportedly confirmed two cases of bird flu at separate hospitals, The Associated Press reported.]
As a precaution, the health organization has started taking steps to develop a new human vaccine, as it did last year after two human cases of avian influenza, one of them fatal, occurred in Hong Kong.
Genetic and immunologic tests in recent days show that because of mutation, last year's vaccine would not protect against this year's virus, said the health agency, an arm of the United Nations based in Geneva.
The tests were conducted on viruses isolated from humans and birds in Vietnam and from birds in South Korea. In addition, the agency said it had received information about tests on viruses from bird cases in Japan.
''The tests clearly indicate that the viruses from Vietnam and South Korea are very closely related,'' said Dr. Klaus Stöhr, a W.H.O. influenza expert. But he said they were distinct from the strain found in Hong Kong last year. That strain infected 18 people in Hong Kong in 1997, killing 6, and was found in duck meat in South Korea in 2001.
Health officials are also concerned about the ability of the new strain to kill ducks and other waterfowl.
All of the human cases so far are from contact with infected chickens, but not from eating them or eggs.
In a new development, the birds have been found to be producing large amounts of type A virus, of the H5N1 strain, in respiratory secretions and saliva. In the past they usually excreted the virus only in feces, Dr. Stöhr said.
''There's something in this virus that makes it special to cause outbreaks simultaneously in a number of countries,'' Dr. Stöhr said. ''And there are quite a number of ingredients there for a regional problem.''
Nevertheless, he said, ''W.H.O. is convinced a window of opportunity exists for us to act.''
Developing a vaccine is a complex process. Because the H5N1 strain kills chickens, scientists cannot use chicken eggs in the initial stage of making the vaccine, as they do for human strains of influenza virus. Instead, scientists working with the health agency -- in London, at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, and elsewhere -- are using a newer laboratory technique known as reverse genetics.
The hope is that a seed virus, to be used in developing a human vaccine, will be available in about a month. Scientists hope to ensure the virus's stability as they grow it repeatedly in test tubes. Such a vaccine will have to pass other tests in ferrets, the model animal for testing influenza.
Manufacturers use different techniques in making influenza vaccines. Scientists will have to determine the safety of each type in birds and then in people. The health organization would help coordinate safety trials.
Scientists will also need to determine how many injections each person would need to be protected.
The W.H.O. expects to hold a teleconference with manufacturers next week to determine their interest in making the vaccine, Dr. Stöhr said.
