''THEY'VE gone too far,'' the chief executive of a large American company complained. ''Our audit bill is going to double.''
Two years after Enron collapsed, complaints of overregulation are beginning to be heard. ''Corporate America is spending an awful lot of money on internal controls that are not benefiting shareholders,'' said that chief executive, after getting assurances his identity would be protected.
A survey of global chief executives released by PricewaterhouseCoopers at the World Economic Forum found that 59 percent viewed overregulation as a significant risk or, worse, one of the biggest threats to the growth of their companies -- far more than viewed global terrorism or currency fluctuations as posing major risks.
What has alarmed many is Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which requires chief executives and chief financial officers to certify the adequacy of their internal controls. Then outside auditors must attest to that opinion.
That provision is not in effect yet, but many companies are going through 404 audits this year to get ready. The idea is to find problems while there is still time to fix them without getting a bad audit report.
And it is working. In recent years, said Dennis M. Nally, the United States chief executive of PricewaterhouseCoopers, ''internal controls were a passing thought'' to many auditors. Now, ''the opportunity on 404 is for companies to look at controls and systems and see if there is a more efficient, effective way.''
That is especially true at companies that have made a series of acquisitions. Standardizing controls was seldom a priority. In some of the audits now being done, companies are learning that their controls do not mesh, just as their computer systems sometimes did not.
''We are finding things that need to be changed,'' said William G. Parrett, the United States chief executive of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu. But he said it was too early to know if the benefits would justify the costs.
Even the chief executive who was so angry over rising costs conceded that his auditors had found issues in the company's treasury operations that needed fixing.
Additional spending on controls may be wasteful for some companies, but improving controls could be critical for others. Good controls can create environments in which it is much harder for crooked bosses to make the changes in financial records needed to create phony profits and in which honest bosses can be confident that the numbers they are being given are accurate.
The new audit report on controls could also provide a useful change to the pass-fail audit system of the past, when auditors never commented on the quality of a company's accounting, just on whether it met minimal requirements of complying with the rules. That is still true for the main audit: auditors are supposed to discuss quality issues with audit committees, but not tell the public.
But the attestation of controls could take a different path. No company's controls are perfect, and it would be good if auditors were able to comment on shortcomings without infuriating companies - or panicking investors over relatively minor issues.
Some chief executives are not worried. ''For big, established companies that already do the right thing, it's no big thing,'' said Michael S. Dell of Dell Computer.
But he also passed along a song being circulated on the Internet about a supposed chief executive who has nightmares about being led away in handcuffs.
''I really miss the good old days, when I told my board what to do,'' he sings. ''Now my audit committee is slapping me silly. Got the Sarbanes-Oxley blues.''
Floyd Norris
