Senator Joseph I. Lieberman has a simple way of preaching the value of centrism: he tells voters that his long record of moderation and years of working across party lines is the winning political combination that Republicans will not know how to counter.
''The normal arguments against Democrats don't work with me,'' he told a group of business leaders in Windham on Wednesday.
''They can't say I'm weak on defense because I'm not,'' he declared. ''They can't say I'm a big tax-and-spend person because I'm not. They can't say I'm silent on values because I'm not. They can't say I flip-flop because,'' he paused, drawing out the words, ''I. Do. Not.''
Sometimes he muses, ''I have a dream that maybe I'm George Bush's nightmare.''
As Mr. Lieberman of Connecticut increasingly struggles to be heard by voters in this first-primary state, these phrases are what he calls the ''closing arguments'' of his campaign here.
For a year, the man who was Al Gore's running mate in 2000 has struggled to catch fire with a message of moderation, arguing that he is the keeper of Bill Clinton's legacy and of the new, more moderate identity Mr. Clinton gave to his party.
And so time and again Mr. Lieberman has refined and polished his stump speech, looking for the way to make centrism capture the voters' imagination.
It is now a blunt plea for votes based not so much on where he stands on particular issues -- he has often stood against party orthodoxy on matters like school vouchers -- but on his consistency, his forthrightness, his independence and his character.
''If you disagree with me so strenuously on one of those issues and decide that that's the basis for your votes next Tuesday, I respect that,'' he told a group of educators here on Thursday. ''But if you want somebody who's going to level with you and as president do everything I possibly can to protect your safety and lead a government that is there for your family when you need help, I'm your man.''
He is a man, he often argues, who can build a coalition broader than the Democratic base in order to defeat President Bush. ''We beat him by running as an independent, center-out Democrat,'' he says. ''You unite the party and then pick up support from independents and even from some disgruntled moderate Republicans.'' Describing himself as ''a bridge-builder,'' he adds that when the party won the national election in 1992, Bill Clinton ''worked from the center out and so that's what I intend to do again.''
This rationale has been refined over time. Just a few weeks ago when Howard Dean looked ascendant, Mr. Lieberman was smiling his ubiquitous, voluptuous smile and grabbing for the center in a different way. Warning that to win, the Democrats could not ''replace one set of extremes with an extreme anger of our own,'' he would speak of the ''clear choice'' facing Democrats between himself and Dr. Dean.
''I am not George Bush or Howard Dean,'' he would say, ''but if you are looking for an alternative to both of them, I am your man.''
Now, he takes implicit digs at others.
''I know who I am and what I stand for,'' he tells his audiences, a reminder that Senator John Kerry and Gen. Wesley K. Clark -- both ahead of him in the polls -- have been accused of inconsistencies on where they stand on the Iraq war.
''I didn't just get dropped into this race,'' Mr. Lieberman says, alluding to criticisms of General Clark as a latecomer not only to the contest but also to the Democratic Party.
And as the race has tightened and rivals have surged past him, Mr. Lieberman's speech has become sharper, more focused on President Bush. ''If George Bush set out to make America weaker at home and more distrusted than ever in the world,'' he says, ''Mr. President I have two words for you: mission accomplished.''
And in his discussion of how he would raise taxes on the wealthiest 2 percent of Americans to pay for a middle-class tax cut he says, ''Bush and Cheney and their buddies may not like it but I say to them, with all respect,'' -- here he uses a flourish reminiscent of Mr. Clinton -- ''I don't feel your pain.''
Indeed, the last Democratic president is a constant presence in Mr. Lieberman's speeches, as if he were campaigning around an unspoken maxim, ''It's Bill Clinton, stupid.''
He reminds Democrats how President Clinton reshaped their party, making them stand for an agenda of middle-class tax cuts, a robust foreign policy, free trade and fiscal discipline.
And so Mr. Lieberman too builds his platform on tax cuts for the middle class to stimulate the economy, tax incentives to help business create and keep jobs in the country and tax increases for the wealthy to help pay for a raft of social programs, including health care, child care, education and job training.
He offers balm for the middle class, often ending his remarks by saying that he wants to restore to Americans the lost sense of optimism and limitless possibilities that he grew up with.
''Today the middle class across this country is under more stress than I've ever seen,'' he said recently. ''Paying so much for decent health care and not being able to afford it. Getting billed more than ever before and for child care and college education, struggling to keep their jobs and worried about them, worried about their retirement security. And through it all what has George W. Bush done? He's comforted the comfortable.''
On foreign policy, Mr. Lieberman casts himself as a realist who can shepherd the country through a dangerously complex time, telling his audiences that he is running for president to make the country ''stronger at home and in the world.''
He is unapologetic for his vote in favor of force in Iraq. ''I was for the war against Saddam, and I haven't been afraid to say so because I know it has made the American people safer,'' he says flatly.
He lists his qualifications to be commander in chief, mentioning his long stay on the Senate Armed Services Committee and his world travels. But he also throws in the telling bits of autobiography intended to help him connect with his audiences, saying he was ''the first in my family to go to college,'' the beneficiary of a good public school education and the child of parents who worked their way into the middle class.
He also suffuses his remarks with the language of values, seeking to show that he has the right moral compass. ''My whole career is based on the premise that life in politics ought to be based on values,'' he said in a recent speech. ''I must tell you when Republicans claim a monopoly on values or faith-based values, I'm not going to let them get away with it. Democrats are full of faith and values as much as the Republicans and I'm going to talk about that.''
Perhaps because of the limited time left before the New Hampshire primary, Mr. Lieberman's speech is becoming truncated, occasionally to the point of appearing like the CliffsNotes version of his candidacy. Sometimes, he just lists the ingredients: ''Strong on security,'' ''pro-growth,'' ''independent-minded,'' ''fiscally responsible,'' ''socially progressive.''
And although it was the sting of Mr. Gore's endorsement of Dr. Dean that sparked Mr. Lieberman's new-found aggressiveness, Mr. Lieberman has once again begun to remind Democrats of his partnership with Mr. Gore, a way of signaling to voters that they may have already voted for him once and perhaps they should again.
''Life,'' he says, ''is about second chances.''
This article is the fifth in a series looking at the basic campaign speeches of the presidential candidates.
The Stump Speech
