Led by its financial unit, the Ford Motor Company reported a slim profit for 2003 on Thursday, after losing more than $6 billion over the previous two years.
But in the fourth quarter, Ford said, its loss grew from the quarter a year earlier, largely because of a $1.6 billion charge taken primarily to cover health care and other benefits for 20,000 Ford production workers who remain at its former subsidiary, the parts maker Visteon.
Executives forecast operating earnings of 40 cents to 45 cents a share this quarter, at best flat compared with the results a year earlier. The company has already forecast modestly higher operating earnings for 2004, excluding one-time charges -- in the range of $1.20 to $1.30 a share, up from $1.14 a share in 2003.
Both Ford and General Motors, which reported its earnings on Tuesday, continue to make money from lending to car and truck buyers and from other financial operations. They, along with Chrysler, are struggling to make money in their principal business -- manufacturing cars and trucks -- because of a continuing price war. The three big automakers are offering buyers discounted financing, rebates and other incentives that are cutting into profit margins yet failing to stem the loss of market share to foreign producers.
Weak profits in North America mean, among other things, that slim annual bonus checks will be paid to production workers in March. Ford will pay its 95,000 hourly workers in the United States $195 on average, slightly above the $160 bonus paid last year and the $170 that G.M. will pay to its 125,000 workers this year.
In the late 1990's, much healthier times for Ford, annual bonus checks averaged several thousand dollars, providing an economic boost in the Midwest and other areas with Ford plants.
For 2003, Ford reported net earnings of $495 million, or 27 cents a share, in contrast to a net loss of $980 million, or 55 cents a share, in 2002.
After losing $5.45 billion in 2001, the company replaced its chief executive with the chairman, William Clay Ford Jr.. Mr. Ford, great-grandson of the founder, Henry Ford, quickly embarked on a turnaround plan.
''We have dramatically improved our profitability, beaten Wall Street's expectations for eight consecutive quarters and moved closer to achieving our mid-decade goals,'' Mr. Ford said in a statement Thursday.
John Casesa, an analyst at Merrill Lynch, said in a research note, ''We continue to believe that Ford is in a tough spot between G.M. and the Japanese, limiting earnings growth potential, but it is undeniable that the company's execution is improving.''
The company, which also produces Lincoln and Mercury vehicles as well as European lines like Volvo and Jaguar, said it hoped to shore up its automotive profitability this year with a wave of new products, including passenger cars aimed at winning back customers from Toyota and Honda.
Last year, Ford lost nearly $2 billion in its automotive operations, including special charges but before taxes, compared with a loss of almost $1.2 billion in 2002. Excluding special charges, pretax automotive operations swung from a loss to a slim profit.
But the tally of special charges more than doubled, to nearly $2.1 billion from $900 million. Much of that resulted from the charge related to Visteon, which Ford spun off in 1999 but which employs 20,000 union workers who are still on Ford's payroll. The charge was largely related to health care costs, a rising expense for domestic manufacturers and one that Mr. Ford has called a big challenge for Detroit.
Another charge, of $513 million, was taken during the year to cover restructuring in the company's struggling European operations, which lost more than $1 billion last year before taxes.
For the fourth quarter, Ford reported a net loss of $793 million, or 43 cents a share, compared with a net loss of $130 million, or 7 cents a share, in the fourth quarter of 2002.
Excluding special charges, it earned 31 cents a share from continuing operations, 3 cents more than the consensus estimate of analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call.
Revenue in the quarter was $46 billion, up from $41.5 billion in the 2002 quarter.
