Pete Rose, who was banished by baseball in 1989 for gambling but is hoping to be reinstated, will sign copies of his new autobiography tomorrow at Foxwoods Resort and Casino in Mashantucket, Conn.
Rose admitted publicly for the first time this month that he had bet on baseball but insisted that he went to casinos only to make money, not to spend it. He will speak tomorrow at an invitation-only dinner with 200 to 300 of Foxwoods's premium players. Details of Rose's appearance were first reported yesterday in The Norwich Bulletin.
''We do this regularly,'' Bruce MacDonald, a Foxwoods spokesman, said in a telephone interview. ''We've done it with him a number of times.''
Rose, the career hits leader, is trying to convince baseball that has restructured his life enough to be reinstated. But the perception of his casino appearance could rankle Major League Baseball officials.
A spokesman for Commissioner Bud Selig did not return a call yesterday. Selig has repeatedly declined comment about Rose, other than to say there are no new developments in his application for reinstatement.
In a Jan. 9 interview about ''My Prison Without Bars,'' a book in which he admitted to betting on baseball while he managed the Cincinnati Reds, Rose contended that he is ''not a casino gambler'' and said Selig ''understands things are exaggerated when it comes to casinos.''
Rose said that when he went to the James Toney-Evander Holyfield fight at Mandalay Bay in Las Vegas last October, it was the only time he had been to a casino when he was not paid for speaking or signing autographs. ''As a retired player who does corporate appearances and memorabilia shows, who pays the best in this country? Casinos,'' Rose said on Jan. 9. ''I don't care if it's Foxwoods, Tunica, Biloxi, Atlantic City or Las Vegas. Every time I go there, I'm getting a check.''
MacDonald would not reveal how much Rose was being paid for the meet-and-greet event, citing Foxwoods's policy of protecting the privacy of entertainers and athletes with whom it has agreements. MacDonald said the casino purchased several hundred copies of Rose's book and that the selected gamblers would receive a signed book and the chance to mingle with Rose.
''Pete should be good,'' MacDonald said. ''He's an entertaining speaker and I think people will enjoy him.''
Cathy Gruhn, a spokeswoman for Rodale Press, which published the book, said Rodale was not involved with Rose's appearance at Foxwoods.
MacDonald said Foxwoods has had several major sports figures meet its premium players.
''I do not speculate on our customers and their motives,'' MacDonald said. ''We entertain people. We hope they're entertained. Beyond that and how it would look, I wouldn't dare. That would be walking into a minefield.''
BASEBALL
