Before the first N.B.A. tipoff at the gleaming arena that the developer Bruce C. Ratner envisions for the area straddling the Atlantic Avenue rail yards, Mr. Ratner will have to take on a scrappy squad from down the block: his neighbors.
A more ethnically, economically and commercially diverse crew would be hard to assemble, even in New York City. Within the three-block chunk imagined for demolition, there are artists and auto body shops, a world-famous violin builder, a cherished neighborhood bar and a small company that makes hats for church ladies.
There are no-longer-young yuppie homesteaders who bought pieces of empty warehouses in a crack-plagued neighborhood 15 years ago, and their forebears, immigrants from Mexico and Barbados who bought rundown houses and patched them up. There are professionals in million-dollar penthouses and big Pakistani and Palestinian families crowded into small apartments.
There is a Haitian car-alarm installer on Flatbush Avenue who just signed a 10-year lease on his garage, a Japanese print-maker on Pacific Street, and a clothing store named after Harriet Tubman.
Altogether, neighborhood organizers say, there are about 1,000 residents and workers in their unglamorous corner of Prospect Heights. All of them would have to move if Mr. Ratner gets the state to invoke its power of eminent domain and seize their buildings so he can erect an arena for the New Jersey Nets, which he is purchasing, and a vast retail and apartment complex.
And, for better or worse, they are taking their place in the long line of New Yorkers fighting quixotic-seeming battles against projects that threaten to devour their neighborhoods.
It is a mixed civic history, one filled with hard-fought failures -- the efforts to stop the World Trade Center, Lincoln Center and Mr. Ratner's own MetroTech complex in downtown Brooklyn -- and a few longshot successes, like the defeat of the highway project called Westway.
Patti Hagan, a leader of the Prospect Heights Action Coalition, pointed out the dozens of signs and banners (''Don't Destroy Our Homes'') hanging in windows. ''It's all-out war at this point,'' she said. ''You only get one chance to fight, and if you don't take the opportunity to fight what you think is wrong right now, it will happen, you will be bulldozed and there's no going back.''
The local councilwoman, Letitia James, said yesterday that in the 24 hours since word got out that Mr. Ratner had bought the Nets, she had fielded calls from ''at least 100 residents'' considering lawsuits. ''Everyone is calling me in tears,'' she said.
But veteran organizers noted that development battles are wars of attrition, usually won by the party with the deepest pockets. Olive Freud, who led the fight against the Columbus Center project on Columbus Circle in Manhattan, recalled the day in 1987 when a formation of 800 protesters opened black umbrellas in Central Park to show the size of the shadow the building would cast.
''They chased it away,'' she said. ''People thought they had won.'' But within a few years, she said, another developer emerged. ''Eventually he got exactly what he wanted.''
Scott Bullock, a senior lawyer at the Institute for Justice, a Washington group that helps property owners fight eminent domain seizures, said a successful campaign needed to get organized and educated early, keep the pressure on politicians and make as much noise for as long as possible.
So far, the arena opponents seem to be on schedule. Ms. Hagan trumpeted a traffic study predicting that another 23,000 vehicles a day would use chronically clogged Flatbush and Atlantic Avenues.
They are studying environmental-impact laws and gearing up to fight the Empire State Development Corporation, which has the authority to condemn properties and pay the owners for them.
A pair of architects who live in part of a converted factory on Dean Street have even proposed an alternate development plan that involves razing the Atlantic Center mall, a much-maligned shopping complex that Mr. Ratner built just north of the proposed arena site. (Its newest tenants include two state agencies, the Department of Motor Vehicles and the Empire State Development Corporation itself, which together pay Mr. Ratner more than 1.5 million taxpayer dollars a year in rent.)
''If Mr. Ratner were willing to condemn his own property, he would be able to build his arena without displacing anyone from their homes,'' said one of the architects, Karla Rothstein. ''It would be an improvement on the existing mall.''
She said she could not understand how the doctrine of eminent domain, which allows the state to seize blighted or underutilized land for the public good, could be applied to an area where long-vacant factories have been rapidly transformed into chic condos, or to a development that would be largely run as a private profit-making enterprise.
As Mr. Ratner continues to line up support -- he already has Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz on his side, and is working on the governor's office -- Ms. Hagan said she felt that time was short.
All of this leaves people like Joe Pastore, a semiretired driver for the state who lives in a $400-a-month rent-stabilized studio just off Flatbush Avenue, angry and confused.
''I live at 473 Dean Street since 1967,'' he said. ''For the government to tell me I've got to leave my home, that's not fair, you understand? This is no highway being built or no public building being built for the city or the state or the federal.
Mr. Pastore, 59, recalled that he had watched his block evolve from a strip packed with working man's bars to a desolate eyesore and back to a thriving street.
''There's been a lot of changes here,'' he said. ''But I never thought I'd be one of them.''
