A century after the Russian-Japanese war broke out, the first in a string of conflicts between these Pacific powers, the two perennial adversaries now seem to be finally embarking on an era of real economic cooperation.
Their bilateral trade increased about 25 percent last year. For the first time, Japanese power companies took deliveries of Russian oil and committed themselves to buying Russian gas. Oil and gas investment has flowed in such volumes in the last 18 months that it has roughly doubled Japan's total foreign direct investment in Russia, to about $1 billion.
In the largest such investment in Russia today, Mitsui &amp; Company holds 25 percent and the Mitsubishi Corporation holds 20 percent of the Sakhalin Energy Investment Company, a joint natural gas venture operated by Royal Dutch/Shell. The venture agreed last spring to spend $9 billion on the second phase of project development. In oil, Japan and China are fighting so fiercely for a pipeline from Russia's Siberian oil fields that this month, China, in a pique, suspended a 30-year-old agreement to sell Chinese oil to Japan.
''We are really coming to an important turning point in the future of Japan-Russia economic relations,'' said Takehiro Togo, a former Japanese ambassador to Moscow and now an adviser for Russian projects at Mitsui. ''By 2006, there will be a lot of natural gas coming out of Sakhalin to Japan. Already, many orders are going to Japanese enterprises. This is really making a different picture in this part of the world.''
Mr. Togo, who has advised Mitsui on a lumber project in Irkutsk, in Siberia, predicted that during a second term of President Vladimir V. Putin, Japanese companies would invest in Russia for the production of cars, chemicals, and machinery.
Last month, Russian officials came to Tokyo looking for new investment.
''We need help to build infrastructure in eastern Siberia and the Russian Far East in order to export oil,'' Russia's prime minister, Mikhail M. Kasyanov, told representatives of Japan's most powerful business groups in a Dec. 16 meeting here. ''I would like to hear from private companies that are potential partners.''
After signing an agreement to create a Russia-Japan trade and investment promotion body next spring, he traveled to the Kansai region, Japan's industrial heartland, and again appealed to executives. ''It is possible to develop natural resources in Eastern Siberia on our own, but the pace of development will be faster if foreign investment is available,'' he said, according to the Kyodo News Agency.
Behind this new business friendliness is the growing realization that each country has things the other wants. Besides Japan's desire for Siberian oil and Russia's interest in Japanese investment, each is looking for an ally in the neighborhood to keep China in check.
''The Japanese are never again going to invade,'' one British oil analyst said from Moscow. Connecting the demographic dots -- Japan's aging population and Russia's shrinking eastern population -- he added, ''In the East, there are an awful lot of Chinese, and not too many Russians.''
But the 20th-century wars, far from historical footnotes, still cramp trade and investment. On the battlefields, Japan won Round 1 in 1905, flexed its muscles with incursions after World War I, lost Round 2 in 1937 and then lost Round 3 in 1945. To this day, there is no peace treaty between Russia and Japan, largely because of a dispute over four islands in the Kurile chain that Stalin occupied after Japan's surrender in 1945.
For decades, the territorial dispute soured economic ties between the neighbors, which, in one spot, are just five miles apart. While bilateral trade rose to about $5.5 billion in 2003, Japan's trade with South Korea last year was about $60 billion, and with China, $134 billion. Russia, which has an ample trade surplus with Japan, largely exports fish and raw materials like coal, lumber and aluminum alloy. Japan's biggest exports to Russia are machinery and used cars.
Lately, the desire for oil and gas integration has been pushing the territorial dispute to the back burner.
''The islands shouldn't stand in the way of economic relations,'' Philip Vorobyov, a Russian energy analyst with the Massachusetts-based Cambridge Energy Research Associates, said by telephone from Moscow. ''Japan has territorial conflicts with South Korea, and there are no economic problems there. Japan has territorial conflicts with China, and there are no economic problems there.''
Indeed. Sergei M. Darkin, governor of the Primorye region of Russia, said at a news conference here on Dec. 18, at the end of his and Mr. Kasyanov's four-day visit to Japan, ''The atmosphere has become much easier, much friendlier.'' In recent months, Mr. Darkin and other political leaders in Russia's Far East have openly supported Japanese calls for the construction of a 2,300-mile oil pipeline costing $5.8 billion from eastern Siberia to the Japan Sea.
Several deals last year seem to have changed Russian attitudes greatly. Long-term natural gas purchase contracts were signed in May by the Tokyo Gas Company and by the Tokyo Electric Power Company, and in July by the Kyushu Electric Power Company. Then in September, the Japanese government offered $5 billion in financing to build the pipeline and $2 billion to map and develop the eastern Siberian oil fields.
''The real significance of what has happened in the last few months is that Japan decided to buy natural gas from Russia,'' said Jack King, gas marketing vice president for Exxon Neftegas Ltd., an Exxon Mobil unit that operates a Sakhalin project. ''Before, many of us in natural gas thought it would not happen in our lifetime. It is a significant change in the geopolitics of Northeast Asia.''
Despite a nationalist upsurge in Russia's Dec. 7 parliamentary elections, the Russian officials visiting here a week later stressed that Japanese companies were welcome to explore and develop the oil and gas reserves of eastern Siberia. ''Right now, oil production in eastern Siberia is zero,'' Prime Minister Kasyanov said. ''Verifying reserves is important.''
With Russia feeling insecure about its hold on its Far Eastern region, its plan may be to give Asia's major powers economic stakes in the political status quo.
''Russian mainstream thinking is to put Japan, Russia and China into one consortium to develop the reserves in Eastern Siberia, plus maybe the U.S. and India,'' Vladimir I. Ivanov said from Niigata, Japan, where he is an energy economist at the Economic Research Institute for Northeast Asia.
At the news conference here last month, Mr. Darkin confidently predicted that President Putin would decide to route a pipeline through Primorye to the Japan Sea.
''In the six months to come, we will see a concrete action plan by both Russia and its international partners,'' he said. Which companies would be eligible for pipeline construction contracts? ''I think that it will be one of the largest Japanese trading companies, for example, Sumitomo,'' he said.
A spokesman for the Sumitomo Corporation, Japan's fourth-largest trading company, predicted that his company would try to participate in the pipeline construction project. Sumitomo has a logging joint venture in the Russian Far East, one of the few Japanese projects active in the region outside the energy business.
Still, plenty of investment hurdles remain.
''Unfortunately, Japan is a very cautious player in markets with high risks,'' Vlacheslav A. Andreev, Primorye's economic development committee chairman, said in an interview in Vladivostok in early December. Citing Sumitomo as an exception, he complained: ''In Primorye, there are very few Japanese projects.''
In the immediate post-Soviet era, Russia developed a bad reputation among Japanese businessmen, as several quit the country saying they had been badly treated by Russian partners.
''Japanese businessmen often feel at ease with the Chinese: same characters, same race,'' said Takeo Iguchi, an international law professor in Tokyo. ''The Japanese feel they can't control the Russians.''
And Russia has very little foreign investment in Japan, partly because of the rudimentary nature of Russian capitalism, partly because Russians, like many Westerners, see Japan's economy and legal system as impenetrable.
In an effort to address a mutual distrust of their court systems, the new Japan-Russia trade and investment promotion body will have an arbitration mechanism. Japanese businesspeople entering the Russian Far East can also take advantage of a consular network Japan set up in the post-Soviet era.
But there are no flights between Tokyo and any city in the Russian Far East, some 90 minutes away over the Sea of Japan.
''How many people are in Vladivostok, 800,000?'' a Japan Airlines official said last week, echoing mainstream Japanese attitudes that Russia's Far East is the far side of the moon. ''Why would we want to fly there?'' By contrast, South Korea, with only one-third Japan's population, has developed a Russian route network, including regular service to the Russian Far East's three main cities: Vladivostok, Khabarovsk and Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk. Russian airlines also have flights to Seoul from these cities.
But such signs of neglect between Japan and Russia are likely to recede further if Japanese oil companies do indeed undertake the once unthinkable steps of exploring in eastern Siberia and building a pipeline to the Sea of Japan.
''For Russia, it is a choice of inland Asia or engagement with the Western Pacific,'' Toyohisa Kohzuki, director of the Russia division in Japan's Foreign Ministry, argued in favor of the pipeline. ''This will allow Russia to export oil not only to Japan, also it will open markets to Korea, Southeast Asia, even the West Coast of the United States.''
