For the first few days of his tenure as Knicks coach, Lenny Wilkens traded bouquets with Stephon Marbury and sought to build a relationship, one Brooklyn point guard to another.
Wilkens, who has been cautious not to burden his team with too much too soon, is ready to move on to the other half of the Knicks backcourt -- Allan Houston. Instead of trading bouquets, Wilkens is trading tactics with Houston, the veteran shooting guard, and focusing on making him a dominating scorer again.
Even after a two-hour workout here Thursday, Wilkens and Houston lingered on the practice court inside Philips Arena.
Houston was in the low post making gestures with his arms and hands as if he was moving across the floor; Wilkens nodded over and over, as if to say, ''Yes, that's how you do it.''
The Knicks have won three of four games under Wilkens, but it has troubled the coach that Houston, an 11-year veteran, is not always getting the basketball with room to shoot. Houston, who led or shared scoring honors in 16 of the first 30 games this season, has led or shared scoring just once in the last 15 games.
''We need to help Allan get open a little bit more,'' Wilkens said Wednesday night after the Knicks' 86-71 loss to the Houston Rockets, which snapped the Knicks' four-game winning streak. ''I haven't really focused that much on changing the offense. At the same time, when I see we don't get the ball to Allan as much as we should, then I'm going to make some adjustments so I can get it to him.''
Houston made 4 of 11 field-goal attempts against the Rockets, but it is not as if he is in a miserable slump. During the Knicks' four-game winning streak, he made 30 of 61 shots (49 percent), which is a good percentage for a shooting guard.
Still, Wilkens sees a chance to make Houston a more formidable wing player, especially with Marbury breaking down defenses with his penetration and dish-off passes.
One of the other remedies to ensure production from Houston is to put the 6-foot-6 guard in the low post where he can work over smaller guards. Houston, whose knees were encased in ice after the loss to the Rockets, thinks that is a splendid tactic.
''That's probably where I feel most comfortable right now with the way I'm feeling,'' Houston said. ''You get close to the basket, you don't have to worry about trying to beat a lot of guys and being explosive. When I get the ball in that spot I feel very effective.''
The Knicks were not a very effective team offensively against the Rockets (29 of 73, 39.7 percent) because their fast break was nullified by the Rockets' solid shooting.
Wilkens said his team needs more work with its half-court offense for those games when Marbury can not get the transition game in motion.
''We've got some time coming up, we've got some days, and when you put something in you run it over and over and over, so guys really get comfortable with it,'' Wilkens said.
After Friday night's game in Atlanta, the Knicks will play four of their next five games at Madison Square Garden.
Wilkens is not only focusing on Houston's offense, but also on guard Frank Williams.
Wilkens said he has not played Williams much -- 10 minutes in 4 games -- because he does not know the rookie as a player and has not had a chance to evaluate his skills in practice.
''I want to see Frank Williams more; practice gives me a chance to see that,'' Wilkens said. ''I want to see the small lineup more and practice gives me a chance to see that.''
PRO BASKETBALL
