Lawyers for three terrorists convicted in the 1998 embassy bombings conspiracy case have asked a federal judge in Manhattan for a new trial, citing jury irregularities and other information that they contend could have affected the verdicts.
The lawyers cited a newspaper report stating that one juror conducted her own legal research on the Internet, and that two others consulted their pastors about the death penalty. The jurors also learned that the defendants were shackled during the trial, a fact the court tried to conceal with a cloth to preserve the presumption of innocence.
The lawyers made their request for a new trial to Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy of Federal District Court in a document made public for the first time yesterday. An original version was secretly filed several months ago, but portions were deleted from it before it could be released.
In the filing, the lawyers also claimed the government had wrongfully used a jailhouse informant to extract information from one imprisoned defendant, Wadih El-Hage.
The lawyers say prosecutors also failed to turn over 647 pages of transcripts of recorded interviews with a crucial prosecution witness, Jamal Ahmed Al-Fadl. Prosecutors have said the recordings were made without their knowledge by the United States Marshals Service, and were not discovered until after trial. The government had no comment and is expected to respond in court.
Mr. El-Hage and three co-defendants were convicted in 2001 of conspiring with Osama bin Laden in the bombings of two American Embassies in Africa. All four terrorists received life sentences.
The jury irregularities were first detailed in The New York Times last year, in an article based on interviews with 9 of the 12 jurors who sat anonymously in the six-month trial. Another article described the use of the jailhouse informant, Scott Lee Martin, an armed robber who is also suspected of being a member of a white supremacist group.
All four terrorists appealed their convictions, but one, Khalfan Khamis Mohamed, has since asked to withdraw his appeal, and will also not seek a new trial, his lawyers said.
