The University of California women's basketball players all wore pink -- their teammate Alisa Lewis's favorite color -- and they smiled more than most people do at a memorial service.
That was the power of Lewis's warmth and kindness. Three days after Lewis, 20, died suddenly of what doctors believe was bacterial meningitis, the memory of her smile momentarily stopped family and friends from crying at Thursday's service.
More than 1,500 people gathered at Haas Pavilion here to grieve her death and to celebrate her life. Cal Coach Caren Horstmeyer said Lewis was sitting on the rim, smiling and, with her legs swinging, taking it all in.
''Alisa had a smile that made me feel like I knew her forever,'' her teammate Luana Coloma said.
The sophomore Renee Wright said she grew up watching and emulating Lewis through club and high school basketball. Wright even started wearing kneepads and high socks the way Lewis did. Not until they were teammates last season did Wright ask Lewis why she wore them.
''Alisa turned to me smiling and said, 'My dad always told me girls should have pretty knees and legs,' '' Wright said, fighting back tears. ''And we must have laughed about that for hours.''
Lewis, a junior reserve forward, felt fine after Friday's game against Stanford, but the next day she developed a fever, a skin rash and a stiff neck and began vomiting. Those are the symptoms of bacterial meningitis, a disease that kills about 300 people in the United States every year, said Dr. Arthur Reingold, chairman of epidemiology at the university's School of Public Health.
Lewis's condition worsened and she was taken early Monday to Kaiser Medical Center in Oakland, where she died a few hours later.
The disease can be spread by sneezing, coughing, kissing, or sharing cups and utensils, but the bacteria cannot last longer than two minutes outside the body, Reingold said. Bacterial meningitis kills about 10 percent of those who contract it; 20 percent of its victims are left with serious long-term disabilities that can include deafness, mental retardation or the loss of limbs, he said.
Those who had contact with Lewis are not really at risk, but doctors gave the antibiotic Cipro to teammates, coaches, family and friends as a precaution. Stanford players, who shook hands with Lewis last Friday, and Arizona State players, who played the Bears on Jan. 10, also received antibiotics.
Alisa Marie Lewis was born Sept. 4, 1983, in Minneapolis. She grew up and went to high school for three years in Fairfield, Calif., before moving to Spokane, Wash., for her senior year.
A social welfare major, the 5-foot-11 Lewis played sparingly at Cal but loved the game and ''is on a basketball court in heaven,'' her mother said.
She is survived by her parents, Diane and Joe, and a younger sister, Danielle.
Lewis loved arts and crafts, fishing, watching cartoons, angels, singing loudly off key and spending time with her friends, family members and friends said. She had a soft spot for children and animals, they said.
Her favorite things about Cal were the squirrels and the scenery, Coloma said.
''What I loved most about her was her hugs,'' said Gabriel Hughes, a 6-11 center on the Cal men's team. ''She hugged everybody. And because I was so tall, she would put her head on my chest and squeeze. If I missed a class, she would be the first to ask where I was. But she never judged anyone.
''She touched my life and she is going to make a beautiful angel.''
Horstmeyer initially thought a weekend off would be helpful for her team. But the players decided to practice at 6 a.m. Thursday, then play their games Friday night at Southern California and Sunday at U.C.L.A. Lewis's parents agreed.
'' 'Alisa would want you to get back on the court,' '' Horstmeyer said Joe and Diane Lewis had told her. '' 'Get out there and play for Alisa and for yourselves.' ''
The Bears' uniforms will honor Lewis with a black decal that reads ''AL #31'' in pink lettering. A scholarship will also be set up in her name.
During the service, Lewis's parents were given a framed uniform, an autographed ball and a drawing of Lewis done by center Olga Volkova on Wednesday night.
Leigh Gregory, a junior forward, lived with Lewis for the past two years. She was emotionally drained after the service.
''It's hard to get past the moment,'' Gregory said. ''It's hard to look to the future. The biggest thing is to keep her spirit alive on the court, and that's why we will be excited to play the next game.''
Gregory still has to clean out Lewis's room when she returns from Los Angeles, something she is dreading. Her teammates have spent many hours in that room this week talking about Lewis.
''It was so sudden,'' Gregory said. ''We didn't get to say any last words to her. The only thing that helps at all is for the team to talk about her. The day-to-day things are the hardest.''
Everyone who spoke at the service mentioned Lewis's smile. Jessica Johnson, a high school teammate, said, ''No matter what happened, that smile didn't go away.''
To her family and friends -- 12 of whom will suit up and play in her honor Friday night -- it never will.
''She was the nicest kid I ever coached,'' Horstmeyer said.
BASKETBALL
