The stretch between Iowa and New Hampshire is a very unforgiving time. Candidates who falter, like Howard Dean, have little time to correct course and must do so under the full glare of the media spotlight, with primary voters paying more attention than ever.
Candidates who soar, like Senators John Kerry of Massachusetts and John Edwards of North Carolina, have a finite period to capitalize on the Iowa excitement and consolidate their gains in New Hampshire before the race moves onto a broader field. Candidates who hope to jumpstart their campaigns in New Hampshire, like Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, must cope with the Iowa lift that other candidates received.
With those kinds of stakes, the debate on Thursday night was almost bound to be a careful, at times subdued, affair, a stark contrast to the last, raucous Democratic debate before the Iowa caucuses.
All the candidates clearly drew the same lesson from Iowa: in a multicandidate field, those who attack may in fact wound their opponent, but benefit someone else. No one seemed eager for a reprise of the brutal exchanges that Dr. Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri engaged in during the final days of Iowa, which many believe accounted for their third- and fourth-place finishes.
Mr. Lieberman burst out laughing as his questioners tried to engage him in critiques of his opponents. ''I'd say, nice try,'' he said.
As a result of all this new-found amiability, Mr. Kerry had the happy advantage of being a leader in the polls here, but not drawing the attacks that being in that position ordinarily generates.
The debate reflected another lesson from Iowa -- the importance of electability, the perception that Democrats, more than anything, want to choose a nominee who can beat Mr. Bush and who can be viewed as presidential. Mr. Kerry said, several times, that he would relish the debate with Mr. Bush on issues from tax cuts to values.
Dr. Dean faced the most complex task when he took the stage at St. Anselm College -- rehabilitating himself after a third-place finish in Iowa and a concession speech heard well beyond the political world. He was eager to show humility, a recognition that he had veered from the expected bearing of a presidential candidate. ''I am not a perfect person,'' he said, echoing a theme he hit on throughout the day.
He highlighted his credentials as a budget-balancing fiscal conservative, saying he was ''much more conservative on money than George Bush is.'' He trumpted his record as governor of Vermont.
His advisers maintained that the Dr. Dean on view on Thursday night was the true Dr. Dean, the candidate who can deliver on the kitchen table issues that now consume the voters, like affordable health insurance.
But strategists for his rivals suggest Dr. Dean is in a strategic box. A candidate who rose to prominence as the fiery tribune of Democratic activists angry over the war with Iraq must now defuse charges that he is too hot-tempered, not presidential. That means he has the job of defending his candidacy and halting the rise of his rivals, but avoiding the attacks that hurt him in Iowa.
He has little time to make this turnaround, and the stakes are high. ''Howard Dean has forged a very special relationship with the voters of New Hampshire,'' said one strategist for a rival campaign. ''If he can rehabilitate himself anywhere, it's in New Hampshire. But the corollary is, if he can't rehabilitate himself there, he can't anywhere.''
There have been comebacks here before. Vice President George Bush rolled out of Iowa with a devastating third-place finish in 1988, only to resurrect himself eight days later with a win in the New Hampshire primary.
And in 1992, Bill Clinton spent the days leading up to the New Hampshire primary battling back from a one-two punch of tabloid reports that he had conducted a 12-year extramarital affair and charges that he had sought to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War. His comeback that year when he managed to place second came after a week of impassioned, voter-to-voter campaigning that became the stuff of legends, capped by the promise to keep ''fighting until the last dog dies.''
Dr. Dean clearly hopes to reprise that kind of direct appeal to the voters, over the heads of the pundits and the political class.
General Clark has also found the political ground shifting suddenly beneath his campaign. His allies had hoped that he would be the primary alternative to Dr. Dean in the aftermath of Iowa, but Mr. Kerry intervened. During the debate, General Clark found himself on the defensive on issues from abortion to his Democratic credentials.
In the end, the safest course for General Clark, and the rest of field, turned out to be focusing their fire on Mr. Bush.
''What I'm saying is President Bush must be held accountable,'' General Clark said. ''Before 9/11, he did not do everything he could have done to keep this country safe.''
And Mr. Edwards reiterated his populist critique on an administration that, he said, had come to preside over an economically divided America. There was, in short, a careful sort of unity among the Democrats gathered here Thursday night. Most of them could not afford anything less.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE POLITICAL CONTEST
