Marty Markowitz, Brooklyn's head cheerleader, was still riding a wave of euphoria, one day after the developer Bruce C. Ratner had won the bidding for the New Jersey Nets with plans to install them in a new home near downtown Brooklyn.
''It's exciting,'' said Mr. Markowitz, the borough president. ''It puts Brooklyn back in the big leagues.''
But the hard questions are just beginning to emerge about the feasibility and financial viability of Mr. Ratner's proposal to build a $485 million arena designed by Frank Gehry as the centerpiece of an enormous $2.5 billion residential and commercial development.
For example, can this project survive the kind of political minefields, environmental reviews, community opposition and lawsuits that have delayed or scuttled sports complexes elsewhere? Can Mr. Ratner and his partners counter familiar arguments that sports complexes are poor economic engines by combining the arena with housing, stores and office space? Will the developer be able to obtain private financing for the office towers? And finally, will he be able to keep down costs and minimize the need for public subsidies?
In a remarkably short time, the arena project has gained the enthusiastic support of Mr. Markowitz, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and many of Brooklyn's elected officials. This has happened even when sports complexes have become political dynamite, scaring many politicians aware of a public grown weary of subsidizing extraordinarily wealthy team owners and players.
Mr. Ratner, Mayor Bloomberg and the project's supporters say that the development will be more than a mere sports complex. The glass-walled arena, combined with four office towers and 4,500 apartments, will be a transformative project. It would establish Brooklyn as a destination again and accelerate a revival already taking place in nearby neighborhoods like Dumbo, Fort Greene and the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
Experts say Mr. Ratner may have something else going for him. It is a lot easier to make a 19,000-seat arena work economically than a 78,000-seat stadium that is used only 10 times a year. Mark S. Rosentraub, a sports economist and the author of ''Major League Losers: The Real Cost of Sports and Who's Paying For It,'' estimates that an arena needs to book about 200 events a year to make money. While the Nets have been unable to sell out at their current home at the Meadowlands, he said that Mr. Ratner and his partners should have no trouble filling the seats given that there are 6.3 million people in Brooklyn, Queens and Nassau County, a larger and wealthier market than in N.B.A. cities like Charlotte, New Orleans, Indianapolis and Cleveland.
''The numbers work,'' said Mr. Rosentraub, a frequent critic of public investments in sports complexes. ''You'll have the best arena in the country to service a market of more than 6.3 million people.''
Marc Ganis, president of Sportscorp, a sports economic consulting company based in Chicago, said, ''It will generate the largest naming-rights fee in the history of professional sports, because it is in New York City and the only other arena, Madison Square Garden, can't change its brand name without losing a lot of cachet.''
But much about the project is unknown, including how much public money will be needed to make it work. Some officials said they expected Mr. Ratner's preliminary cost estimates to swell quickly. Mr. Ratner has tried to fashion an aerodynamic plan that he hopes will encounter little resistance from government officials or local residents.
Mr. Ratner and Mayor Bloomberg declined requests for comment yesterday, saying they were awaiting an official announcement by the current owners of the Nets. But at a Dec. 10 pep rally for the project in Brooklyn, Mr. Bloomberg made his sentiments clear: ''We're prepared to team up with Forest City Ratner Companies and with elected officials and people of this borough to bring the Nets to Brooklyn.''
In contrast, the Pataki administration has been more reserved, partly out of a concern that the Jets, Mets, Yankees, Rangers and Knicks also want public money for new complexes. ''It's exciting,'' said Charles A. Gargano, chairman of the Empire State Development Corporation, ''but we'll see what he brings to us for final approval.''
Neither the city nor the state has committed funds for Mr. Ratner's project and, one official said, they are ''months away from agreeing on what they'll do for him.''
The arena would sit on what is now the Long Island Rail Road's Vanderbilt storage yard. Mr. Ratner needs the railroad to move the 11 tracks crisscrossing the nine-acre site to the east.
He also needs the state to condemn four blocks to the east of the rail yard, which includes the homes of 864 people and businesses with about 200 jobs. Many of the residents have vowed to fight the project and will almost certainly file a lawsuit that could delay construction or stop it altogether. They have already formed an alliance with other community groups called United Brooklyn Coalition Against Urban Removal.
With the state in control of the land, however, Mr. Ratner would be able to avoid the city's land-use review process and build a larger and more dense project than he would under the city's zoning regulations. But he will have to complete a stringent environmental review, which could turn up problems like oil contamination in the rail yard.
Although Mayor Bloomberg and Mr. Ratner have stated that the project would be built mostly with private money, the developer has asked state and city officials about doing $150 million in infrastructure work, including moving the tracks and utility lines in the area and building new streets and sewer lines.
Mr. Ratner has also proposed taking about $28 million a year in sales and income taxes generated at the arena to help pay the bonds for its construction. In addition, he is expected to seek tax-free financing for the housing, probably through the state's 80-20 program, which requires developers to set aside 20 percent of the apartments for low- and moderate-income tenants.
Councilwoman Letitia James, whose district includes the neighborhood, is a rare voice of opposition among Brooklyn politicians. She considers the project an oversized monster that will destroy a vibrant working-class neighborhood that has rebuilt itself over the past 20 years.
''This is a great day for rich developers and a sad day for working families,'' Ms. James said. ''It will open the floodgates to public financing of sports arenas.''
Harvey Robins, a former official in the Koch and Dinkins administrations, said the Ratner project is ''antithetical'' to building communities. ''You're putting up monstrous buildings in a low-density area.''
Brad Lander, director of the Center for Community and Environmental Development at the nearby Pratt Institute, somewhat sheepishly acknowledged that he was excited about a professional basketball team coming to Brooklyn.
But he said it was disturbing that Mr. Ratner will bypass the city's land-use review process. He also feared that so many politicians had jumped on Mr. Ratner's bandwagon that it will undercut any attempt to negotiate for public benefits: earmarking housing and jobs specifically for local residents, building adequate parking and roads to offset potential traffic congestion on game nights. While there is a housing crisis in Brooklyn, he said, there is also an affordability crisis that the city should address.
''I'm excited out of hometown pride and the possibility of affordable housing and jobs,'' said Mr. Lander, who lives in Park Slope. ''But I'm very concerned that there will not be a meaningful public process in which the developer commits to things that could make this really work for Brooklyn.''
