It is a matter of just five words, each of which, at least in English, is just one syllable. But that fleeting phrase has touched off an extraordinary degree of speculation, consternation and just plain puzzlement here.
After watching the depiction of the last hours of Jesus' life in ''The Passion of the Christ,'' an unreleased movie by the director Mel Gibson, did Pope John Paul II deliver the judgment: ''It is as it was''?
Or did the movie's promoters, along with one or more Vatican officials, play fast and loose and press the pope into the unwitting service of a movie that Jewish and Christian leaders alike fear could rekindle assertions that Jews were responsible collectively for the crucifixion?
That question lies at the heart of a convoluted tale involving unusual bedfellows: major moviemakers and the upper echelons of the Roman Catholic Church.
It also provides a glimpse into the sluggish and sometimes clumsy workings of the Vatican, especially in the realm of public relations.
More than a month passed between a flurry of news reports that John Paul had pronounced the movie accurate and a formal denial of that by a high-ranking Vatican official early this week. The Vatican press office released nothing on the issue until Thursday.
Did the 83-year-old pope's weak physical condition, which has forced him to disengage from some details, have anything to do with that lag, along with the confusion that filled it?
''It's fair to wonder that,'' said one Vatican official, speaking on condition of anonymity.
''It's not entirely coordinated up there,'' said the official, referring to the pope's inner circle.
Thursday's written statement by Dr. Joaquin Navarro-Valls, the pope's spokesman, was three sentences long. It said that the pope had seen the movie but that it was his '''custom not to express public judgments on artistic works.''
That statement came a few days after Archbishop Stanislaw Dziwisz, the pope's secretary, denied news reports that the pope had offered an appraisal of ''The Passion,'' which is scheduled for release in the United States next month.
Archbishop Dziwisz, who almost never gives interviews, spoke with the Catholic News Service on Sunday and The Associated Press on Tuesday. He did not respond to an interview request sent by fax to his office on Thursday evening.
His statements did not put an end to the tale, in which a movie by a major Hollywood celebrity has become the unlikely focus of chatter in a society that often occupies itself with less ephemeral concerns.
Promiment Roman Catholics in and around the Vatican have various opinions about who really said what and when and why: a fizz of theories that has highlighted the difficulty of knowing what really goes on here and the possibility of many agendas under one roof.
''I think he said something like it,'' said one prominent Catholic here.
But, he theorized, neither the pope nor the pope's secretary intended for John Paul to be drawn so far into debate over ''The Passion.'' They and other people close to the pope were upset when that happened, the official said.
On Wednesday a columnist with The Dallas Morning News, Rod Dreher, reported a claim by the movie's promoters that Dr. Navarro-Valls had previously encouraged them to use the quote, ''It is as it was.''
Mr. Dreher wrote that ''someone close to the Gibson camp'' leaked to him what was portrayed as an e-mail message to Steve McEveety, one of the producers of ''The Passion,'' from Dr. Navarro-Valls.
The message, dated Dec. 28, does not explicitly confirm that the pope remarked, ''It is as it was.'' But the e-mail message says that those words warrant repeating ''again and again and again.''
Mr. Dreher reported that Dr. Navarro-Valls told him that the e-mail was not authentic.
On Thursday afternoon, an assistant to Dr. Navarro-Valls said that he could not be reached for comment. Mr. McEveety did not return a telephone message left at his office in Santa Monica, Calif.
Back when Mr. Gibson was shooting ''The Passion'' in Italy in late 2002, Mr. McEveety and his associates began courting Roman Catholics in and around the Vatican.
Mr. McEveety had connections. One of the movie's assistant directors, Jan Michelini, is the son of Alberto Michelini, an Italian journalist and politician who has known the pope for decades and is a member of Opus Dei, a conservative Catholic group to which Dr. Navarro-Valls also belongs. In early December, Mr. McEveety succeeded in getting a copy of the movie to Archbishop Dziwisz and the pope.
He later told the writer Peggy Noonan that the archbishop had related a five-word response from the pope, ''It is as it was,'' according to a column by Ms. Noonan on The Wall Street Journal's Web site on Dec. 17.
That same day, John L. Allen Jr., the Vatican correspondent for The National Catholic Reporter, posted an article on that publication's Web site that quoted an unnamed Vatican official who put the same words in the pope's mouth. There were similar, subsequent news reports in many publications.
There were also reports that raised doubts and questions.
But until Archbishop Dziwisz spoke out, no Vatican official would talk on the record about the pope's reaction.
The Rev. Thomas J. Reese, an American Jesuit and author of the book ''Inside the Vatican,'' said on Thursday that such a delay had many precedents and was part and parcel of Vatican culture.
But over recent years, the interactions between journalists and the pope have become extremely limited. They no longer get to ask him directly about substantive issues.
Many Vatican officials also talk less frequently with the pope, who suffers from Parkinson's disease.
''The pope's hand at the rudder is a good deal lighter than it was 10 years ago,'' Mr. Allen said.
He added that fallout over ''The Passion'' would feed an impression that ''nobody's in charge.''
Vatican Journal  Correction:  January 24, 2004, Saturday  An article and a picture caption yesterday about speculation on whether Pope John Paul II had voiced an opinion after seeing the Mel Gibson film ''The Passion of the Christ'' referred imprecisely to expressions of worry about the film's depiction of Jews. They have come from many Jews and some Christians -- not from Jews and Christians in general.
