In his stump speech, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman emphasizes the values of centrism. Here is an excerpt from a speech on Jan. 19 at the Black Brimmer restaurant in Manchester, N.H., as recorded by The New York Times:
My folks brought me up to believe that if you worked hard in this country and played by the rules you could make your way up to the middle class. For too many Americans that's not true today.
I've raised my kids to believe that America's a country of values and ideals that was respected, admired, envied around the world not for our material wealth but for what we stood for. That's not the America of George Bush. But I'll tell you this: That will be the America we'll have again when I'm elected president.
I'm as tired as you are of the extremism. I'm as tired as you are with division. I want to unite the American people. I want to unite our party, and then I want to bring us together with the rest of America and get something done.
My record is there for the public to see, so when the voters of the United States are deciding who to vote for, they don't have to try to connect the dots in a slick 30-second commercial. They can look at a record of 30 years of strong, reliable public service and know that I will be a president who will fight for what's right for America and America's middle class. I don't say one thing to one crowd and another thing to another crowd. I make it clear I will take the one position on tax cuts: I'm for them for the middle class. I have just one position on keeping America strong in the world. I was for the war against Saddam, and I haven't been afraid to say so because I know it has made the American people safer.
And, look, we're all focused on the primary next Tuesday, but I want to take you for a moment over the horizon to the general election. Because, let's be honest, we're going to face a guy, a president who's going to have hundreds of millions of dollars and he's supported by a lot of big interests that are happy to have him in power because he doesn't give them a hard time at all.
Did you hear that story that he said to the prime minister of Australia when he was there? They were talking about the election, and George Bush said that he felt the most formidable and toughest opponent Democrats could nominate against them this year is Joe Lieberman. This is one opinion on which I think President Bush has it right.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
