Jury selection in the Martha Stewart trial continued to play out behind closed doors yesterday, and prosecutors moved to keep it that way.
The United States attorney's office filed a brief in favor of continuing to bar reporters and others from observing the questioning of prospective jurors in the Manhattan trial of Ms. Stewart and her former stockbroker. The document, submitted to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, urges the appeals court to uphold a Jan. 15 order from Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum that closed the proceedings. Judge Cedarbaum cited concerns that the presence of reporters might have a ''chilling effect'' on prospective jurors' candor.
Various news organizations, including The New York Times, have sought to have the order overturned and will argue before the appeals court on Monday.
''This case is unique even among high-profile cases,'' prosecutors say. ''It is beyond cavil that Martha Stewart has become a household name in this country. At the same time, for reasons which themselves are the subject of much debate, Stewart has become to many people an object of either veneration or scorn.''
With public interest in the trial strong, the brief continues, ''a number of prospective jurors unquestionably will have strong views about Stewart, exacerbated in part by 'very negative' publicity about her.''
To buttress their argument, the prosecutors' brief cites ''recent press coverage,'' including an NBC movie about Ms. Stewart, ''Martha Inc.,'' as well as ''prime-time television interviews (which themselves have generated even further publicity and commentary).''
Ms. Stewart's team, as part of its defense, has orchestrated a costly publicity campaign that included two television interviews late last year and a Web site devoted to telling her side of the story. She has paid more than $1 million for the campaign, which has also included focus groups where the case against her was presented and polling associated with jury selection.
The prosecutors' brief speaks of ''the truly unprecedented nature of the public interest and press coverage in this matter, with exacting scrutiny paid to such matters as the defendant's personal grooming and apparel.''
Some news accounts have catalogued Ms. Stewart's wardrobe (''a brown jacket with a hint of plaid, and a tasteful strand of pearls,'' the brief notes, quoting the Dow Jones News Service reporting on an earlier court appearance) or her handbag, some newspapers speculating about its sticker price.
Such details ''have nothing whatsoever to do with the merits of the prosecution,'' the brief said. ''Under these circumstances, it is difficult to imagine a case in which prospective jurors would feel more self-conscious and inhibited upon entering the judge's robing room and realizing that the full force of national, if not international, press attention was directed, even for a matter of minutes, exclusively at them.''
Lawyers for the news organizations have argued that the presence of Ms. Stewart herself, as the person accused in the case, is more potentially chilling than any reporter would be. Because of Judge Cedarbaum's order, reporters have had to purchase transcripts released by the court to get any information about the proceedings. The transcripts are being released the day after each session, and do not include the names of jurors. The judge's order also stated that any ''deeply personal'' information would be excised as well.
The prosecutors' brief contends that ''in fact, press coverage of the first day,'' based on the transcript, ''was extensive and detailed.'' But the transcripts made available on Thursday highlighted another exclusion: instead of reading the names of possible witnesses into the record, jurors are apparently being shown a written list of names and asked to say whether they know any of them.
The transcripts released on Wednesday included the names of several possible witnesses, including Jean Pigozzi, a friend of Ms. Stewart; and David Topper, William Drewry and Mary Meeker, all investment bankers or analysts from Credit Suisse First Boston or Morgan Stanley.
One prospective juror, described as a pharmacist with a college degree, was shown the list, switched her eyeglasses and began reading: ''The first name is Brian Gorczyk; Peter Melley, Jean --''
Judge Cedarbaum interrupted her. ''You don't have to read them aloud,'' she said. ''I just want you to look at them yourself.''
Ms. Stewart's lead lawyer, Robert Morvillo, sought to have her excused on the basis of what he said was her poor command of English. Judge Cedarbaum disagreed, then held an off-the-record discussion without the prospective juror present.
Another candidate, identified as Juror No.48, had seen the movie ''Martha Inc.,'' which Mr. Morvillo and his team have said they consider unflattering to Ms. Stewart, and acknowledged that it had been a big influence. ''It is a greed case,'' that prospective juror said. ''I don't think that I would be fair. I think I would be -- I am not even trying to be impartial. I think she is guilty.'' The person was excused.
Judge Cedarbaum also observed that many potential jurors turned out to be lawyers. She was urged by defense lawyers to make it clear to the jury pool that Ms. Stewart has not been charged with insider trading. ''You tell them that this is a securities fraud indictment without making it clear what the securities fraud is,'' Mr. Morvillo said. The judge said she would make that point.
