Buoyed by the unexpected double-digit growth in PC sales and an increase in business-customer revenue, the Microsoft Corporation reported on Thursday that its fiscal second-quarter results substantially surpassed financial analysts' expectations as revenue exceeded $10 billion for the first time.
While sales were unusually strong, Microsoft's profit declined in the quarter because of a significant charge for stock-based compensation for employees. Moreover, the company faced tough questioning from analysts who have become increasingly uneasy about the way the company sells its software to corporate customers and the long-term effects of that strategy.
For the quarter ended Dec. 31, Microsoft, based in Redmond, Wash., reported net income of $1.55 billion, or 14 cents a share, down from $1.87 billion, or 17 cents a share, in the period a year earlier. But profits for the three-month period included an after-tax charge of $2.17 billion, or 20 cents a share, in expenses related to the stock-based compensation.
Without the charge, the company would have posted a profit of 34 cents a share. On that basis, analysts polled by Thomson First Call had expected a profit of 30 cents a share.
Revenue was $10.15 billion, up 19 percent from revenue of $8.54 billion in the period a year earlier.
''They beat my estimates and they beat the Street,'' said Sanjiv G. Hingorani, a financial analyst at Oppenheimer &amp; Company.
The company reported its results after the close of the market, where Microsoft shares closed down 29 cents, to $28.01. In after-hours trading, they fell as low as $27.29.
The company's greatest strength for the quarter came from its core businesses, its Windows XP operating system for desktop computers and servers and its Office suite of application programs for personal computers.
''The biggest story is our big three businesses,'' said John Connors, the company's chief financial officer. ''Each one was up over 20 percent.''
He acknowledged that the company had joined Wall Street analysts in underestimating the growth of PC demand for the quarter worldwide. PC sales, the foundation of Microsoft's business, were strongest in the United States and Europe and weaker in Japan and Latin America, he said.
Over all, Mr. Connors said that the company expected strong growth in consumer spending to continue globally, but he warned that corporate ''cost containment'' efforts that focused on information technology spending could limit Microsoft's future growth. He also warned that the growing popularity of the Linux operating system and other noncommercial products would continue to be a threat.
While analysts were generally impressed by the near-term revenue growth, the company's difficulties in explaining clearly what is happening in its business sales drew intense scrutiny from financial analysts.
Over the last year, Microsoft has been struggling to move its business customers from a traditional software-licensing business model to a subscription-oriented one.
Many analysts have noted that customer resistance to the transition is one of the main obstacles facing Microsoft in its corporate business, as well as an opportunity for competitors. During a conference call with analysts on Thursday after Microsoft reported its results, many questions focused on the shift.
Microsoft accounts for the multiyear deals by recognizing the revenue over the course of the contract. The portion that is booked but not yet recognized is called unearned revenue. For the quarter, the company's unearned revenue continued to decline -- by $395 million, after sliding $770 million last quarter -- raising new concerns about its success in shifting customers to subscription-based purchases of software.
Last quarter Microsoft told financial analysts that the number declined largely because computer security concerns led to delays of purchases by corporate customers. This quarter, however, the company played down security concerns, and that led to an intensification of the discussion of the reason for the decline in unearned revenues.
''The Street is hypervigilant in focusing on this number,'' said Rick G. Sherlund, a financial analyst at Goldman Sachs &amp; Company.
He said the decline in unearned revenue was an indication that Microsoft was having trouble persuading customers to shift to its Software Assurance, or maintenance, programs. At the same time, he noted that the company's overall business was probably strong enough to offset any disappointment in its business sector.
Revenue grew 66 percent in the mobile products business, where Microsoft introduced two hand-held phones during the quarter. However, in its home and entertainment products business, revenue was down for the quarter largely because Microsoft did not have a hit software title for its Xbox video game console during the Christmas quarter. Microsoft said that it was still on track to reach its goal of having an installed base of 16 million Xbox players by the end of its fiscal year and one million subscribers to the Xbox Live online service.
The company also said revenue in its MSN business was $292 million, an increase of 47 percent. Its subscription revenue was down 2 percent and subscribers to the MSN service remained flat, at eight million. Microsoft said recently that it is shifting the focus of its online business toward portal-style competition with Yahoo and search engine revenue in competition with Google.
For the quarter ending in March, the company predicted revenue of $8.6 billion to $8.7 billion and earnings per share of 23 to 24 cents. For the full year, the company increased its revenue prediction to $35.6 billion to $35.9 billion and said earnings per share, including stock-based compensation expenses of 35 cents, would be 82 to 83 cents.
TECHNOLOGY
