Soft, flaky snow kicking up on tracks, coupled with the cold, has knocked Metro-North railroad cars for a loop and has left their riders with a commuting headache.
Railroad officials said that one-quarter of the cars have had electrical problems so severe they have been removed from service and that the situation could get worse before it improves. Trains have been canceled and others combined in an attempt to compensate, but lateness has been on the increase and cars have been filled beyond capacity.
''We always get asked why we can't prepare for this,'' said Dan Brucker, a spokesman for the railroad. But preparation is impossible, he said, because the fleet is chronically vulnerable to bitter cold weather and soft snow. ''And we can't retrofit, reconfigure or redesign it.''
Most of the railroad's approximately 800 train cars are electric, and many, made three decades ago, use traction motors that suck in snow through ventilators and electric boxes that are low and exposed and thus prone to getting wet and short-circuiting.
Keeping the trains rolling is no easy task, Mr. Brucker said. Though repair work is going on around the clock, replacement parts cannot be pulled off the shelf because much of the equipment needs to be rebuilt or custom ordered, he said. There are also no guarantees that once back in service, a car will not break down again. And even if it has not snowed in a while, snow that sits on the track kicks up as the trains travel over it, causing trouble.
''There are no indicators or 'check engine' lights,'' Mr. Brucker said. ''It's just bing, it's finished.''
A measure of relief may be on the way, though too late for this winter. By the end of February or in March, Metro-North will be receiving 180 M7 model cars, made by Bombardier Transportation, with electrical components that are better protected. The Long Island Rail Road already has 200 M7's in operation, and Brian Dolan, a spokesman, said they had been performing very well in the cold and snow.
The Long Island Rail Road has fewer than 100 train cars out of service out of a fleet of about 900, Mr. Dolan said. A spokeswoman for New Jersey Transit said their cars have not been having difficulty in the snow.
As for Metro-North, it is still an open question how much fixing a quarter of the fleet will cost.
Said Mr. Brucker: ''Our first concern is getting the service back. We'll figure out the bills later.''
