There were more chants of ''Fire Sather!'' directed at Rangers Coach Glen Sather at Madison Square Garden last night. There were plenty more boos directed at the Rangers, too, as they lost their third consecutive game, by 4-2 to the Philadelphia Flyers.
But the real drama yesterday was taking shape off the ice.
According to a team official in the National Hockey League, it appeared that the Rangers were on the verge of obtaining the perennial All-Star forward Jaromir Jagr from the Washington Capitals.
The team official characterized the potential trade as being ''not much of a hockey deal.'' In other words, the talks between Sather and the Capitals revolved around how much money the Capitals were willing to pick up from the remainder of Jagr's contract. Coming into this season, Jagr had five seasons and $55 million left on his deal.
The team official said that the Capitals would be ''picking up money'' on the deal, but that Washington would ''also be saving a lot.''
After yet another defeat dropped the Rangers to 2-5-2-1 over their last 10 games, Sather, in his fourth season as the team president and general manager, was asked if he was close to a move to shake up the team. ''I'm not commenting on that,'' he said.
At 18-19-7-4 for 47 points in 48 games, the Rangers trail the Islanders and Atlanta by 2 points in the race for the Eastern Conference's eighth and final playoff berth.
The Rangers played last night without three of their top six defenseman. They were also without their best player, Eric Lindros, who was out with the flu. And then the injury-depleted Rangers lost their struggling No. 1 goaltender, Mike Dunham, to a mild concussion, after two periods.
But the biggest news of the day revolved around Sather's pursuit of Jagr. According to a person familiar with Sather's conversations with other teams over the last two days, Sather had several telephone discussions with Washington's general manager, George McPhee, concerning Jagr, who was named to the Eastern Conference All-Star team yesterday.
A six-time first-team All-Star, Jagr is second on the Capitals in scoring this season with 16 goals and 29 assists in 45 games.
Sather has long seemed ambivalent about making a deal for Jagr, but the Rangers are in danger of extending their franchise record of failing to qualify for the playoffs to seven consecutive seasons despite fielding record N.H.L. payrolls.
Meanwhile, Sather's search for a competent defenseman continued. But as Philadelphia's general manager, Bob Clarke, said at yesterday morning's skate, such defensemen are few and far between around the league.
Sather said of his own search: ''We're working on it. But there are a lot of guys looking for defensemen in this league these days.''
Earlier yesterday, Clarke obtained the journeyman defenseman Mattias Timander from the Islanders for a seventh-round choice in this summer's draft. The Rangers came into last night's game with four of the top nine defensemen in their organizational draft chart out with injuries.
Last night, Rangers defenseman Tom Poti missed his second consecutive game with a back sprain and spasms.
''I'm hoping to play Saturday,'' said Poti, who reinjured his back in the Rangers' 5-2 loss in Boston on Monday afternoon. In that game, the Rangers lost Darius Kasparaitis for 10 to 12 weeks -- in all likelihood, the remainder of the regular season -- to torn knee ligaments and a broken bone in his left leg.
Two other defensemen, Greg de Vries and the top prospect Fedor Tjutin, are also out with torn knee ligaments.
With the Rangers trailing the Flyers by 2-1 late in the second period, Dunham took a hard shoulder in the face from John LeClair at 16:17. Brian Leetch scored on the ensuing power play to tie the game 31 seconds later. But Simon Gagne answered right back just 44 seconds later.
Between periods, Dunham was found to have a mild concussion. Sather later said Dunham would probably not accompany the Rangers to Ottawa for Saturday night's game.
When LeClair scored past Jussi Markkanen on a power-play deflection just 34 seconds into the third period, Philadelphia had a two-goal lead that stood up.
SLAP SHOTS
MARK MESSIER, who turned 43 last Sunday, was named yesterday to the Eastern Conference squad for the N.H.L. All-Star Game in St. Paul on Feb. 8. It was Messier's 17th All-Star selection.
HOCKEY
