New Jersey officials offered explanations Thursday as to why they thought the state lost the Nets to a buyer who plans to move them to Brooklyn. Although they didn't quite say ''we wuz robbed,'' it was clearly what they felt.
George R. Zoffinger, the president and chief executive of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, all but uttered the 1932 phrase -- immortalized by a disgruntled fight manager -- as he criticized the decision by the Nets' owners Wednesday to sell the team to Bruce C. Ratner and not to a group led by the New Jersey developer Charles Kushner and Senator Jon S. Corzine. The sports authority owns Continental Arena, where the Nets now play.
In a news conference at Giants Stadium in the Meadowlands, Zoffinger said good faith had been lacking in the final day of negotiations and that Lewis Katz, a key partner in the Nets' ownership group, stood to gain from the billions of dollars in real estate development that could grow out of a move to Brooklyn.
Katz did not return phone calls Thursday seeking reaction to Zoffinger's comments.
The proposed move could doom the nearly six-year-old effort to build a new home for the Nets and the Devils in Newark as part of that city's revitalization. Any new arena there now would presumably house only the Devils.
''The Brooklyn transaction was about real estate and not basketball, and we think that all along this thing was wired to go to Brooklyn,'' said Zoffinger, who appeared to take some solace in what he said was the uphill battle that New York politicians would face in getting a Brooklyn arena built.
''It made no difference what we did,'' he said.
But that said, Zoffinger did acknowledge that Gov. James E. McGreevey had made a ''public policy decision'' not to use state money to subsidize an effort to keep the Nets in New Jersey.
Meanwhile, Zoffinger and others said that the move by the Nets ownership would require the state to reposition Continental Arena in the marketplace. He said that he was willing to work with the Nets' new owners to allow them to continue to play at the arena until their lease expires in 2008. But in the meantime, he said the 22-year-old Continental Arena would begin concentrating on attracting more concerts, circuses and ice shows and competing for the vast universe of trade shows.
The arena's attractiveness, he said, would only be enhanced by the planned construction of a $1.4 billion entertainment, office and hotel complex called Meadowlands Xanadu that is scheduled to be built on 106 acres adjacent to the arena. The economic activity of this development, said James Hughes, director of the Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy at Rutgers, will dwarf the current level of activity in the Meadowlands generated by the teams now playing there.
Zoffinger said that the state agency currently loses $2 million a year because of the structure of the Nets' and Devils' leases at the arena and the dates that the teams monopolized. With the Nets eventually leaving, he said, Continental Arena will be free to attract a host of new events that would erase the $2 million loss.
But that kind of repositioning could be fatal to Newark's already sinking arena plan. For his part, Mayor Sharpe James of Newark said in a statement Thursday that he remained excited about proceeding with plans to build a $355 million arena in the city despite the state's loss of the Nets. Councilman Donald Tucker and others in Newark said that James was poised to announce next week that the city, along with the Devils, would still try to build the arena and financially bolster it by seeking to stage wrestling matches there along with N.C.A.A. basketball tournament games, concerts and auto and boat shows.
Zoffinger, who said he would seek to attract the same kind of events to Continental Arena, conceded that studies had shown that two arenas within 12 miles of each other vying for the same kinds of events would doom one or both to economic failure.
And Tucker said that James, despite his public optimism, might have to change course. He even suggested that James recognized this possibility as well because in the last few months, he has promoted a downtown ''urban village'' commercial and residential development that is designed to boost the city's population and take advantage of its proximity to public transportation and New York City.
One person who did talk positively Thursday of a new arena in Newark was Lou Lamoriello, the president and general manager of the Devils. Having a new arena all to themselves, he said, would help the Devils address the same kind of attendance problems that have plagued the Nets in New Jersey.
''This could be the perfect end to all of our problems,'' he said.
Through 23 home games, the Devils are averaging 14,497 fans at the 19,040-seat arena, which is not a particularly healthy figure for a team that has won three Stanley Cups in the last nine seasons.
But Lamoriello said he thought the Devils could do much better at the turnstiles if they played in an arena with better access to public transportation and were able to schedule more games on Fridays and Saturdays.
Because the Devils share an arena with the Nets, only two of the Devils' 41 home games are scheduled for Saturday nights this season. In contrast, the Islanders, who have Nassau Coliseum to themselves, are to play 12 home games on Saturday night.
Lamoriello also said that Continental Arena lacked the amenities that newer arenas possess and that he was skeptical that the Xanadu development would address the existing problems.
''It's something the Devils drastically need -- a new facility,'' Lamoriello said.
The principal owners of the Devils are Katz and Raymond Chambers, who own 70 percent of the team, with other investors, through Puck Holdings. The other 30 percent is held by YankeeNets, which is to be dissolved at the end of this month.
PRO BASKETBALL
