Sanofi-Synthélabo, the French pharmaceutical company, is considering making a takeover offer worth more than $60 billion for its neighboring rival, Aventis, executives briefed on the plan said Thursday.
The bid, if successful, would create the world's third-largest drug company, behind Pfizer and GlaxoSmithKline, and a new corporate standard-bearer for France.
Officials at Sanofi-Synthélabo, which makes the sleeping pill Ambien and the antistroke medicine Plavix, and their advisers were meeting Thursday night to plan bidding strategy, which could include a hostile offer, the executives said. An offer could be made Friday, they said. ''It's getting very close,'' one said.
Sanofi-Synthélabo may make a last-minute approach to Aventis in an effort to reach a friendly agreement, the executives said. Still, they cautioned that Sanofi-Synthélabo could decide not to make an offer. ''It's very fluid,'' an executive said. ''At this point it's minute by minute.''
Executives close to Aventis, which makes the allergy drug Allegra and the blood-clotting drug Lovenox, said Thursday that top managers were bracing for a possible takeover bid and had met with their advisers about a defense strategy. Richard Markham, Aventis's chief operating officer, said Thursday night that his company was ''not in talks with Sanofi or with anyone else.''
He added: ''We think we are way undervalued compared to what we're worth on the market. But we're focused on building our capabilities internally so that the value we see ends up being recognized externally.''
In a conference call with analysts on Thursday, Sanofi's chief financial officer, Marie-Hélène Laimay, responded to reports about negotiations between the companies. ''We are not engaged in any negotiations with Aventis, even today,'' she said. Still, she added, ''We have already said that we continue to evaluate any transaction in order to strengthen our position in the future.''
Shares of both companies surged in Europe on a report in the German paper Handelsblatt that the companies were in merger talks. In Paris, shares of Aventis rose 2.8 euros, or 5.2 percent, to 56.6 euros, while Sanofi rose 2.05 euros, or 3.4 percent, to 62.05 euros.
By combining, Sanofi-Synthélabo would get a significant marketing presence in the United States through Aventis's larger sales force. A deal would mean that Sanofi-Synthélabo would no longer have to license its top-selling drugs to American partners with more marketing muscle.
Sanofi-Synthélabo is widely considered to have one of the best pipelines of new products in the global pharmaceutical industry, but it has a very small marketing infrastructure in the United States, the source of half of the industry's sales and most of its profits.
Plavix, the antistroke medicine, and Avapro, a blood pressure pill, are two of Sanofi's top-selling drugs. Both are sold in the United States by Bristol-Myers Squibb.
Sanofi-Synthélabo executives have said in recent years that they would not repeat such deals, in which they surrendered half or more of a drug's sales to Bristol-Myers. Sanofi-Synthélabo struck a deal with Bristol-Myers more than two years ago to buy back some of the rights to Avapro, and it took back entirely the rights for Ambien, which it had licensed to Pharmacia.
Sanofi's ownership structure may also be driving the deal: 44 percent of Sanofi's shares are owned by Total, the French oil company, and L'Oréal, a consumer products company. Total and L'Oréal recently declined to renew an agreement that expires in December that had prevented the companies from selling their stakes in Sanofi. A sudden sale of these shares would depress prices. A merger, however, would dilute Total's and L'Oréal's stakes and make stock sales easier.
''The shareholders' agreement will end by the end of 2004, and that's why we have told the market that we are working to continue to evaluate any transactions that might consolidate our medium and long-term future,'' Ms. Laimay said during the call.
But Sanofi would have to pay a premium to acquire Aventis, and some analysts suggest that the company may not be worth the money. Among other things, Aventis may soon lose much of the sales of its top-selling drug, the allergy pill Allegra, to generic competition, and its pipeline is viewed as distressingly dry.
Marketing organizations are becoming increasingly easy to construct. Contract sales companies can offer hundreds of sales representatives to market drugs relatively inexpensively. Some pharmaceutical giants have become so desperate for new products that they are offering generous terms to license new drugs.
And Aventis, while it has a larger marketing presence in the United States than Sanofi, is not one of the country's top marketers. For that, a Sanofi combination with Bristol-Myers -- which has long been rumored, too -- would make more sense. But there is the issue of French pride.
The main hurdle for any deal with Sanofi has been long rumored to be the reluctance among French government officials to lose the headquarters of a major French drug company. A merger between Sanofi and Bristol-Myers might have led the combined company to move to New York, something French officials have been rumored to oppose.
If Sanofi acquired Aventis, which would be contingent on government approval, the French would have a home-grown behemoth, something French officials would cheer. What they would not cheer, however, would be the inevitable layoffs such a combination would cause.
The French deal would cause ripples throughout the drug industry, because Sanofi has long been seen by large players in the United States as a juicy potential source for licensing opportunities, but would be unlikely to lead to other mergers. A combined French giant would still not even approach Pfizer in size and as a result would be unlikely to scare other drug makers or change their strategic thinking substantially.
Mergers have fallen out of favor recently among drug makers because of a growing consensus that mergers distract scientists from their work, hurting the long-term value of the combined companies.
''All of the merged companies over the past five years have not had a great track record of improved research and development productivity,'' said Joseph Zammit-Lucia, a longtime industry consultant.
The combination between the French giants is proof that mergers rarely solve companies' chronic problems. Aventis was created in 1998 by the merger of Hoechst, a German giant, and Rhône-Poulenc, a French company. About the same time, Sanofi and Synthélabo merged. And now the companies may be involved in yet another enormous deal.
