Novartis, Switzerland's leading drug company, reported a 15 percent rise in fourth-quarter profits Thursday, better than expected, and also revealed that it had increased its stake in Roche Holding by a hairbreadth to the crucial one-third threshold.
Net income rose to $1.36 billion, which Novartis reported for the first time in dollars, while its quarterly sales soared 21 percent, to $6.73 billion. The company, which is based in Basel, Switzerland's pharmaceutical hub, said that reporting in dollars would make its results easier to compare with those of American rivals like Pfizer and Merck.
The company's strong financial health and the fact that Novartis raised its stake in Roche slightly, from 32.7 percent to 33.3 percent during 2003, caused fresh speculation of a merger. But Daniel Vasella, the chief executive of Novartis, said at a Webcast news conference in Zurich that he had no plans to buy more than one-third of Roche. Under Swiss rules, passing that threshold would effectively mean beginning a formal takeover bid.
Since Novartis acquired its first stake in Roche three years ago, takeover speculation has been rife. Analysts were divided as to whether such a marriage would work. Daniel Piller, a spokesman for Roche, said that the company, also based in Basel, was determined to remain independent.
For 2003, net income was up 6 percent, to $5 billion, despite price pressure and increased spending on research and development of drugs. Sales were up 19 percent, to $24.9 billion, for 2003. All business units gained market share in 2003, making Novartis the world's fifth-biggest drug company.
Dr. Vasella told the news conference that growth was driven by two blockbuster drugs to treat hypertension: Diovan, with $2.4 billion in sales for 2003, and Lotrel, with $780 million.
Also, Novartis's cancer drug Gleevec hit the $1 billion sales mark last year, while Diovan became the market leader in its class, grabbing more than 30 percent of total sales in 2003.
Dr. Vasella said the pharmaceuticals market was forecast to slow to just over 8 percent growth this year from 9 percent in 2003, but he said he still expected Novartis -- which has 79 new drugs and products in the pipeline, 64 at ''an advanced stage'' -- to beat the market with growth figures in the high single digits.
He said that he expected Diovan, Lotrel and Gleevec to continue to perform well in 2004, and that Novartis planned to offer three new drugs this year, two for transplant patients and one to treat incontinence. By 2008, Dr. Vasella said, he expected Novartis to have seven blockbuster drugs on the market.
Analysts said that Novartis's results were at the top end of expectations and that the prospect of strong growth, promising new drugs and a track record for effective use of its research bode well for the company and its investors.
''There is some slight concern as to slowing growth in 2004, but all in all it looks healthy,'' said Andrew Fellows, an analyst from Pictet &amp; Compagnie, a Swiss bank.
Dr. Vasella said in a phone interview that Novartis, which was formed in 1996 in the merger of Sandoz and Ciba-Geigy, was looking toward the United States market for possible acquisitions or partnerships.
''We are open to strategic transactions if they make sense,'' he said. ''We won't make acquisitions for the sake of getting bigger.''
He said that the United States would remain Novartis's largest market in pharmaceuticals and that in spite of price pressure and mounting legal and litigation costs the company's American business would remain strong.
Dr. Vasella said that investment in research and development had risen 32 percent last year with the opening of a new research center in Cambridge, Mass.
He said 2003 sales in the United States were particularly strong, up 15 percent compared with increases of 14 percent in Japan and 6 percent in Europe, and that Novartis had gained 17 percent of the United States market. That rapid growth was driven by the two hypertension drugs, Diovan and Lotrel; Gleevec; and Femara, a drug to treat breast cancer.
