Robert A. M. Stern's new design for the National Center for the American Revolution at Valley Forge is a lovely surprise. Imagine Frank Lloyd Wright crossed with Peter Eisenman, and you've clearly got something more than the usual roadside attraction. Critics like myself sometimes belittle Mr. Stern as a theme park designer, and the mind reels trying to figure out what he intends this building's theme to be. Jacques Derrida over Fallingwater, perhaps. Radical forms to commemorate a revolutionary past.
As a training ground for insurrectionists, Valley Forge is a confusing place to think about right now. The imperial shoe is on the other foot. The Defense Department was born there, you could say, and the encampment also anticipated suburbia. The privations suffered by the Continental Army in the winter of 1777-78 resulted from the lack of a proper distribution system. The housing was adequate, but not so the roads. Nor were there reliable means for transporting food, clothing and medicine.
Mr. Stern's design, unveiled yesterday, invites historical speculation. Considering his previous work, he might have been expected to produce a classical structure, a framework to signify cultural certainty. Instead the project suggests that history is an open question, its function to raise issues rather than to resolve them. Though the design includes a classical procession of outdoor and indoor spaces, these elements are emphatically warped, as if to say that the meaning of history changes with the passing of time.
A flowing, almost free-form design, the National Center for the American Revolution takes its aesthetic cues from the rolling landscape of Valley Forge National Historic Park, a 3,500-acre preserve 25 miles northwest of Philadelphia. The design is roughly triangular, but the sides are serpentine, as if to recall a river delta. The roof is broken up into four ribbonlike segments of different height and pitch. Three of these are to be planted with year-round vegetation. Walls faced with Pennsylvania bluestone further integrate the building with the land.
The center owns the nation's largest collection of artifacts from the Revolutionary War. These will be displayed in galleries on the building's three levels, which are reached through a two-story, glass-enclosed Great Hall that serves as the building's entrance. Adjacent to the hall is a 350-seat theater, where mixed-media presentations will introduce visitors to the story of Valley Forge. Circulation is by gently inclined step-ramps. Hardwood floors and ceilings will warm the interior throughout.
Completion of the 110,000-square-foot building is scheduled for 2006. The landscape architects Andropogon Associates and the exhibition designers Haley Sharpe Design are collaborators on the project.
Mr. Stern's ''historical'' architecture is usually ahistorical. He selects the style of a particular period and inserts it into the present like a token of pastness. The Valley Forge center departs from this anachronistic program. A synthetic design, it seems to liquify succeeding architectural epochs into an unbroken stream of memory.
Wright is easily recognized in the horizontal thrust of the building, in its organic relationship to the site, the spatial continuity of inside and outside, and the unadorned state of its materials. (Some will also detect the adaption of Wright's forms by park designers in the great public works of the New Deal era.)
Regionalist painting, too, is hinted at in the design's flowing contours. In the 1930's many Americans believed that cities were responsible for the Depression. Painters like Thomas Hart Benton and Grant Wood appealed to this prejudice by depicting the landscape as a recumbent, maternal figure, a source of sustenance at a time of despair.
If you're a baby boomer or older, the design will also bring to mind the hospitality ethos of the postwar years, when renewed American prosperity inflated the New Deal concept of service. We thought it would last forever, this notion that graciousness could be expanded to the mass society. Rosie the Riveter returned as Dolley Madison to wild suburban applause, but only briefly. Before long the fantasy was dimmed by shrinking economic expectations and the resentment that they provoked. But in Mr. Stern's design beats the heart of a Howard Johnson's hostess, circa 1956.
Now here come the naughty bits: Mr. Stern's use of forms derived from contemporary architecture's progressive wing. Those familiar with Mr. Eisenman's work of the last decade will see his influence in the serpentine outline of the roof, its division into distinct ribbons and the sectional organization of the interior. These features were developed in his convention center and Wexner Center for the Arts (both in Columbus, Ohio), and in more recent designs in France and Spain.
These resemblances may escape the majority of visitors to the Valley Forge center. But they ensure that the design will be discussed in architectural circles for some time to come. A few will be tempted to dismiss the design as a prank. If so Mr. Stern is pranking a prankster, given Mr. Eisenman's proclivity for architectural jests.
It's true that Mr. Stern has perverted Mr. Eisenman's philosophical intentions. When Mr. Eisenman goes wavy gravy, the forms are meant to signify a rupture with accepted contextual norms. In Mr. Stern's design, similar forms convey continuity. The design treats deconstruction as only the most recent view in an unfolding panorama of architectural history.
I find Mr. Stern's the more provocative statement, because it is made on behalf of freedom. Some feel that an eclectic, populist architect like Mr. Stern isn't supposed to borrow from a figure like Mr. Eisenman, who has developed a distinctive formal vocabulary and an intellectual aura to go with it. In many cases what these critics are really saying is that they wish bourgeois taste would remain more identifiably bourgeois, so that their own taste for difficulty isn't called into question.
Time passes, and in the modern marketplace the life cycle of any aesthetic novelty passes quickly. It is the fate of innovation to be absorbed rapidly into the mainstream and to assume forms that innovators are seldom able to foresee. To state that lesson you couldn't pick a better spot than Valley Forge.
ARCHITECTURE REVIEW
