MARIA MORALES'S son, Angel, has learning disabilities and speech problems or, as his mother says, ''Angel's slow.'' At both Public School 3 and Intermediate School 217 in the Bronx, the boy was in ''self-contained'' classes of 6 to 12 special education students.
In September, when Ms. Morales enrolled him in ninth grade at Monroe visual arts high school in the Bronx, she visited to make sure school officials knew he needed a small special ed class. ''They said, 'Don't worry, we have him on the list,''' she recalled.
Wrong. In November, the school called. Angel was failing every class and wandering the halls. Ms. Morales was stunned to learn that he was in regular classes of 35. ''Angel can't handle that,'' the mother said. ''He said, 'Mommy, I don't understand anything, the teachers just talk, no one explains to me.'''
Angel describes it this way: ''It was like confusing, 'cause they don't tell you what's what.''
Ms. Morales urged the counselor to check Angel's special ed records, but was told the school did not have them.
The mother did not realize it at the time, but misplaced and lost records have been a widespread problem since Chancellor Joel I. Klein's citywide school reorganization was carried out last fall. Thirty-seven special ed district offices were moved and consolidated into 10 regional offices, and records are still missing. Ms. Morales recalled, ''The counselor asked, 'Do you have a copy of your son's records?'''
The mother did have Angel's I.E.P. -- the Individual Education Plan that federal law mandates for all special ed students. It called for him to be in a class of 12. Ms. Morales says the counselor then informed her that Monroe did not have such classes. At that point, Ms. Morales appealed to Advocates for Children, a nonprofit agency that specializes in disability issues. Finally, in mid-February, Angel and 11 other Monroe students were put in a new, self-contained class. ''He lost half a year,'' Ms. Morales says. ''He may be held back. It's not fair.''
But it is too common. Ysabel Williams, a law student, moved from New Jersey to Manhattan last summer. In July, she enrolled her son, James, a third grader, at P.S. 41 and visited the Region 9 office to get him the same services he had in New Jersey -- speech therapy and daily academic help from a special ed teacher. For months, Ms. Williams says, she was bounced between the school and Region 9, where, she says, the voice mails were usually full and people rarely returned calls.
By law, James should have had an assessment within 30 days; he still has not had one. Earlier this month, after she faxed yet another request to Region 9 to have James evaluated, she was informed that she had sent the fax to the wrong floor. ''I drafted another letter on the spot,'' she said, and sent it to another Region 9 fax on another floor.
On Monday, after six months with no services, James was promised a speech therapist, but still doesn't have a special ed teacher for extra help. To Ms. Williams, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and Chancellor Klein are hypocrites. They have mandated that all third graders who fail the city reading test be held back, she says, and have issued James a warning letter, yet have not provided the tools James needs to do his best. ''And now they're going to punish him?'' she says.
SONIA SAMAYOA has the same complaint. Her third grader, Oscar, has an I.E.P. dated April 8, 2003, that calls for a laptop computer to help with his severe learning and writing disabilities. The evaluator wrote that with a laptop, ''Oscar shows excellent potential to increase his written output and to articulate his thoughts.'' Last September, when the computer still hadn't arrived, Oscar's teacher at P.S. 134 in Manhattan, Josie Suarez, wrote a note to regional officials, pointing out that without the laptop, ''I grow increasingly concerned about his ability to keep up.''
Yet despite repeated calls to the regional office, first by the mother and then a legal services lawyer, Oscar did not get his laptop until Feb. 12, 10 months late, a whole school year gone. Oscar, too, has received a retention warning letter. ''How can they,'' asks his mother, ''when they didn't give him what he needed?''
Roberta Riley's son, a seventh grader who is classified as emotionally disturbed, made good progress last year and in September was supposed to move from an all-special ed school to a regular school with special ed support. But his case kept getting bounced between Region 10, which serves Harlem, where the Rileys live, and Region 9, which serves his old school. For six months, says Ms. Riley, as she went from one regional official to the next, her son has been home, waiting. And while the city provided home instruction, the mother says the visiting teacher supplied no schoolbooks and her son is falling further and further behind.
Since the chancellor's reorganization last summer, the city's special ed system has been in the worst disarray in memory. That's the conclusion of parents, advocates, teachers, veteran principals, school psychologists and regional officials quoted in last week's column. Among the problems they cite are lack of training for thousands of administrators, psychologists and clerks now doing new jobs; a major loss of records during the shift from district to regional offices; and inadequate staffing of the new regional offices, where managers now often have three times as many schools to supervise.
Eileen Murphy, an Education Department spokeswoman, acknowledged problems in all the cases mentioned above and said they would be corrected quickly. She said that in some situations -- like Oscar's laptop -- the delay was partly the fault of the old district office, which failed to put in the order last spring. The city's top special ed official, Linda Wernikoff, says that the city serves 170,000 special ed children and that any problems are ''bumps in the road'' that go with a new system.
By several measures, however, it appears that a more appropriate image than bumps would be gaping cracks that children are falling through. Under state law, assessment and placement of a child is supposed to be completed in 60 days. By this month, according to statistics obtained by The New York Times, 9,956 students' cases were out of compliance -- had exceeded the 60-day limit. In February 2001, under the old system, about half as many were out of compliance, 5,257.
Ms. Murphy says that in the last two weeks the compliance rate has improved about 5 percent. She says the chancellor has tried to switch resources from the paper-intense assessment process to classrooms.
But, as Cecilia Marchetti, a veteran psychologist at Lehman High (far behind in assessments this year) points out, the paperwork problem is also a human problem. ''Students are being neglected in serious and damaging ways,'' she says, ''a potential loss of use of limbs because of lack of physical therapy, exacerbation of mental illness because of improper placement, violent acting out because of inadequate supervision and support.''
The sad thing is, lots of talented people work in special ed. In Oscar's case the evaluation team wrote an impressive I.E.P., explaining that a laptop with an auditory function would read back the boy's written sentences, helping him to learn through listening, so that when he wrote ''my tchr tks'' it didn't sound like ''my teacher talks'' and he could pinpoint which words needed editing.
But even a veteran legal services lawyer like Julia Rosner was stymied by the new regional system when she took on his case in September. Under the old system, Ms. Rosner dealt with Miguel Alcayaga, special ed coordinator for District 1. Mr. Alcayaga, a 30-year veteran, had a reputation for knowing how to deliver services, and Ms. Rosner said he typically resolved such requests in 10 days. But when the chancellor cut the deadwood and political hacks from the old system, he also lost a lot of gifted people like Mr. Alcayaga, who retired early. Ms. Rosner says that every time she called the region for that laptop, she got someone different, and for weeks messages went unanswered.
Each delay is a quiet tragedy. With the right support, children like Maria Morales's Angel can grow. He is pleased to be in a special ed class of 12. ''I don't wander around,'' he says. ''I understand stuff now. They give you more help. In my new class, the teacher keeps up with you.''
ON EDUCATION
