Two of the state's most powerful Democrats took aim squarely at the Pataki administration on Tuesday, proposing an ambitious overhaul of the way dozens of independent state authorities operate to fix what the officials consider widespread mismanagement and unwarranted secrecy.
The proposal from the state comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi, and the attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, comes as the oversight of spending at entities like the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the New York State Thruway Authority has become a political issue.
Democrats have been criticizing the Republican governor, George E. Pataki, over the last year as several cases of questionable contracting procedures, patronage and unnecessary spending at various state agencies have come to light. They say the semipublic authorities have been ripe for abuse, since they are not overseen the way state agencies are.
Two weeks ago, the Democratic majority in the Assembly pushed through its own bill to give the Legislature greater oversight of state authorities and establish an independent inspector general to watch over them. That bill has hit a wall in the Republican-controlled Senate.
Last week, Governor Pataki ordered 31 of the state's biggest authorities to adopt new procedures intended to improve their management and make their dealings more public. The governor asked the authorities, which his appointees control, to come up with a plan for carrying out the changes by May.
Mr. Hevesi and Mr. Spitzer said those steps did not go nearly far enough to cure the problems in the state's 169 major authorities and subsidiaries, most of which were set up over the last 50 years to insulate lawmakers from unpopular decisions like fare increases and to circumvent the need to have voters approve borrowing for expensive projects, from highways to university campuses.
Mr. Hevesi said the army of authorities, from the huge Dormitory Authority to such forgotten and largely unknown entities as the Overcoat Development Corporation, operated largely without scrutiny. Only 11 need the approval of the governor and legislative leaders to borrow money. Most do not file financial plans with the comptroller. Only two let the comptroller review their contracts.
''Authorities have become a secret fourth branch of government, with little or no accountability, and many have developed a culture of arrogance,'' Mr. Hevesi said.
Among other things, Mr. Hevesi and Mr. Spitzer are urging lawmakers to authorize creation of an 11-member commission with the power to dismantle authorities that have outlived their usefulness or to consolidate authorities. It would also require all independent state authorities to follow the same procurement rules regular state agencies do. That means all contacts would have to be approved by the comptroller's office.
In addition, their proposed bill would force lobbyists who try to influence the awarding of contracts at the authorities to report their earnings and expenditures to the state lobbying commission, just like those who try to influence legislation.
Finally, their proposal would require that large public authorities adopt stronger guidelines for their corporate governance. Audits would have to be conducted by firms with no stake in the authority. A majority of board members would be required to have no former business ties to the authority. Top managers could not serve on an authority's governing board and would have to certify annual financial statements.
''Accountability and transparency are necessary to good management, and accountability and transparency are absent in our public authorities right now,'' said Mr. Spitzer, who is widely seen as a possible candidate for governor in 2006.
Mr. Hevesi pointed out that the largest authorities had issued a large number of bonds with very little oversight by the Legislature or the state administration. Seventeen big authorities -- among them the Dormitory Authority, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the Thruway Authority, the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority and the Long Island Power Authority -- currently owe bondholders about $105 billion, of which the state is obligated to pay about $34 billion.
Kevin Quinn, a spokesman for the governor, said the administration had taken many steps to make the authorities more open and more accountable to the public.
Last year, the governor ordered that if a formal legal request is filed, authorities must disclose who lobbied for a contract and how much they were paid, Mr. Quinn said.
Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a Democrat who has spearheaded investigations into procurement, lobbying and patronage hiring in the authorities, applauded the proposals.
A senior aide to the leader of the Senate's Republican majority, Joseph L. Bruno, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said many Republican senators viewed the new proposal as a political attack on the governor and were not inclined to support it.
