The Jets made several trade offers last week to the Washington Redskins for the Pro Bowl cornerback Champ Bailey, but the Redskins appear close to sending Bailey to the Denver Broncos for the Pro Bowl running back Clinton Portis.
Two people with knowledge of the Jets' offers said running back LaMont Jordan would have been traded to Washington, the team that one year ago lifted four players from the Jets roster during a sometimes-contentious signing period for free agents.
But at the N.F.L. combine last week in Indianapolis, the Jets and the Redskins freely discussed a trade for Bailey, whom the Redskins made available after negotiations for a long-term contract fell apart.
Under one proposal, Jordan, tight end Anthony Becht and the Jets' first-round pick in April's draft (No. 12) would have been sent to the Redskins for Bailey, running back Ladell Betts and the Redskins' third-round pick, one of the players' agents said.
ESPN.com reported yesterday that the Jets also offered defensive end Shaun Ellis in an effort to lure Bailey.
The Redskins entertained offers from several teams at the combine. But a potential deal for Portis -- who, like Bailey, is among the best at his position and is seeking a larger contract -- has the most momentum. ''I have heard that the Washington-Denver deal was all but done,'' the agent said. ''All they have to do is dot the i's and cross the t's.''
Although a Bailey-for-Portis deal would not become official until March 3, the start of the N.F.L. trading period, the hurdles for the trade appear to be falling.
Both teams made moves yesterday that could expedite the deal. Washington cut defensive end Bruce Smith, the career sacks leader, and the Pro Bowl linebacker Jessie Armstead to help get under the $80.6 million salary cap.
The Broncos, meanwhile, agreed to terms with linebacker Al Wilson, which should help them to reach a long-term contract for the 25-year-old Bailey and for Washington to do the same for Portis, 22, who rushed for 1,591 yards last season.
The Denver Post reported that Portis had told the Denver radio station KKFN-AM: ''It was enjoyable playing with the Broncos. If this is the end of my stay, I had a great time.''
Elsewhere yesterday, the Tennessee Titans declined to use their franchise player tag on the Pro Bowl defensive end Jevon Kearse. If the Titans and Kearse do not agree to a new contract before next Wednesday, he will become a free agent.
''This does not end the process with Jevon,'' Titans General Manager Floyd Reese said in a statement. ''We would still like to have him as part of this team, just not under the franchise tag parameters.''
If the Titans had given Kearse the franchise tag, they would have had to pay him $6.5 million in 2004, the average of the five highest-paid defensive ends.
PRO FOOTBALL
