Two men who were at Jayson Williams's country estate on the night a chauffeur was killed there testified on Tuesday that they saw Mr. Williams wiping down a shotgun moments after the fatal blast.
However, a third witness at the scene that night said Mr. Williams never encouraged any of the nine men in the mansion to lie to the authorities about the shooting. Instead, that witness, John McPartland, 26, said Mr. Williams's good friend, Kent Culuko, had told them to come up with false stories about the shooting.
For the second day in a row, the prosecution focused on its cover-up case against Mr. Williams and its charges that he tampered with witnesses and evidence in the aftermath of the shooting. He also faces charges of aggravated manslaughter and manslaughter. There were vivid descriptions of what appeared to be an anguished Mr. Williams moments after the chauffeur, Costas Christofi, 55, was killed in the former basketball star's master bedroom in February 2002.
But some of the day's prosecution witnesses contradicted another prosecution witness, Dean Bumbaco, who testified on Monday. And while two of Tuesday's witnesses, Craig Culuko and John Gordnick, said that Mr. Williams wiped the 12-gauge shotgun with a towel after the shooting, they disagreed with each other on some points and with Mr. McPartland on others.
Craig Culuko, a 33-year-old teacher and the older brother of Kent Culuko, testified that ''it was chaotic'' in the master bedroom moments after the shooting. Craig Culuko said he was in an adjacent study and hurried into the bedroom at the sound of the shot. Under questioning by a prosecutor, Katharine Errickson, he said Mr. Williams was on his knees, saying: ''We got to do something. We got to get help.''
Later, during cross-examination, Mr. Culuko told a defense lawyer, Joseph A. Hayden, that Mr. Williams had exclaimed, ''Oh my God, oh my God,'' as Mr. Christofi lay dying.
On Monday, Mr. Bumbaco said Mr. Williams had said ''My God, my life is over,'' moments after the blast. Tuesday's witnesses did not offer anything similar to that remark.
Craig Culuko said he saw Mr. Williams wipe the shotgun, as Mr. Bumbaco testified yesterday. Mr. Gordnick, a 46-year-old personal trainer, also said he saw Mr. Williams wiping the weapon. He also testified that Kent Culuko, 31, who once tried out for the New Jersey Nets while Mr. Williams played on the team, also wiped the weapon. Craig Culuko said nothing about his brother's handling the shotgun.
Mr. Gordnick and Mr. McPartland, who said he played professional basketball in Europe, were both in Mr. Williams's indoor basketball court when the shot was fired.
Both said they went upstairs toward the bedroom. Mr. McPartland said he quickly went back downstairs after one of four Harlem Globetrotters in the mansion, Curley Johnson, told him Mr. Williams had shot Mr. Christofi.
On the issue of whether Mr. Williams ordered his houseguests to lie, Craig Culuko said during cross-examination that he initially told detectives that Mr. Williams had ''directed'' everyone to say they were all downstairs, heard the fatal shot and went to the bedroom. He testified that in a later statement to detectives, he said all the guests had ''mutually agreed'' to say they were downstairs. He said nothing about Mr. Williams trying to make the shooting appear to be a suicide, as Mr. Bumbaco said on Monday.
Mr. McPartland later contradicted Craig Culuko, testifying that Kent Culuko had told him to lie, without any encouragement from Mr. Williams.
Mr. McPartland also said that some of the houseguests met with Mr. Williams about a week after the shooting. At that time, he said, Mr. Williams told them to ''tell the truth,'' adding, ''I'll have to deal with the consequences.''
Like Mr. Culuko, Mr. Gordnick said he saw Mr. Williams kneeling by Mr. Christofi moments after the shooting. ''I heard him say, 'Oh, my God, oh, my God,''' Mr. Gordnick said. A few seconds later, he said, Mr. Williams said that Mr. Christofi had shot himself.
Shortly after the shooting, Mr. Gordnick said, Mr. Williams told his guests not to say anything to the authorities until his lawyer arrived.
Several weeks after the shooting, Mr. Gordnick pleaded guilty to hiding the clothes Mr. Williams was wearing and has pleaded guilty to tampering with evidence.
