With conference tournaments on the horizon, the countdown to the Division I N.C.A.A. championship is about to begin. In a little more than six weeks, one team will claim the title and its fans and alumni the bragging rights.
For those who cannot wait to start the debate over their alma maters' claims to college hockey supremacy, here is some fuel: a look at which universities have sent the most players to the N.H.L.
Of the 944 players who have played in the N.H.L. this season through Feb. 17, 205, or 21.7 percent, played college hockey in the United States, according to the National Hockey League.
Michigan has sent the most, 18. Close behind with 16 players was Michigan's rival in the Central Collegiate Hockey Association, Michigan State.
Fourteen players from Boston University have been on N.H.L. rosters this season, followed by North Dakota with 12, Minnesota with 11 and Boston College and Maine each with 10.
Bowling Green, St. Cloud State and Wisconsin each had eight former players on N.H.L. rosters this season, and Harvard and New Hampshire had seven. Clarkson, Lake Superior State, Miami of Ohio and Providence each had six.
Colorado College, Rensselaer and Vermont each had five former players in N.H.L. uniforms, Western Michigan had four and Denver three.
Ten programs sent two players: Colgate, Cornell, Ferris State, Massachusetts-Lowell, Michigan Tech, Minnesota-Duluth, Northern Michigan, Northeastern, Notre Dame and Ohio State.
Of the 205 players in the N.H.L. who reached the league through American colleges, 57 percent were born in the United States, 41 percent were born in Canada and 2 percent were from other countries.
E.C.A.C.  Colgate Eyes the Cleary Cup
Colgate (18-9-5, 13-5-2 Eastern College Athletic Conference) can clinch the Cleary Cup as regular-season champion by collecting 2 points this weekend against eighth-place St. Lawrence and ninth-place Clarkson. The Raiders' route to the top has been smoothed by the play of goaltender Steve Silverthorn, whose goals against average of 1.94 is sixth best in Division I.
HOCKEY EAST  Will Shave Head for Victories
The hair on the head of Massachusetts-Lowell Coach Blaise MacDonald appears safe for now. After an eligibility error forced the River Hawks to forfeit five victories, MacDonald offered to shave his head if his players could accumulate 5 points in their next six games.
Two ties against No. 8 New Hampshire were followed by consecutive losses to No. 1 Boston College. For MacDonald to shave his head now would require a victory and at least a tie at home against third-ranked Maine.
C.C.H.A.  Another Battle of Michigan
Over the past five seasons, Michigan and Michigan State have finished either first or second in the C.C.H.A.'s regular season (Michigan State tied for second with Miami of Ohio in 2000-1).
First-place Michigan (23-8-1, 18-5-1) finished undefeated and untied in conference play at home for the first time. The Wolverines wind up with a road series against Notre Dame and a home-and-home series against the Spartans. The Spartans (20-15-1, 16-9-1), after two shutouts over Nebraska-Omaha, 3-0 and 5-0, have the weekend off.
W.C.H.A.  Showdown in Northern Minnesota
With a chance to clinch the MacNaughton Cup, which goes to the Western Collegiate Athletic Association's regular-season champion, league-leading Minnesota-Duluth plays host to second-place North Dakota for two games this weekend. The Bulldogs (22-8-3, 18-5-1) can clinch at least a share of the title with 3 points against North Dakota (22-6-3, 16-5-3). North Dakota won the three previous meetings this season, all in Grand Forks, N.D., 3-2, 5-4 and 6-3.
DIVISION III  Cooper Sparks Middlebury
Middlebury (21-3, 15-3 New England Small College Athletic Conference) defeated Norwich, 6-2, on Saturday, knocking the Cadets out of the top ranking in the U.S. College Hockey Online poll. Middlebury's leading scorer, Kevin Cooper, had a hat trick against Norwich.
Hobart had not beaten Rochester Institute of Technology in 29 games, dating to 1992. But two third-period goals by Jonathan Swift earned Hobart (13-7-5, 7-2-1) a come-from-behind 5-4 victory Saturday. Swift, a freshman from Andover, Mass., led the Statesmen to their first E.C.A.C. West title.
Slap Shots
Providence has two freshman who have impressive hockey pedigrees. Bill McCreary is a left wing from Howell, Mich., whose father and grandfather (both also named Bill) and uncle Keith all played in the N.H.L. His cousin (what else?) Bill is currently a referee in the N.H.L. . . . Chase Watson of Media, Pa., is the son of Jim and the nephew of Joe, both of whom played for the 1974 Stanley Cup champion, the Philadelphia Flyers.
HOCKEY: COLLEGE REPORT
