Georg Jensen, the renowned Danish silversmith, has come up with a new design, this one for smaller stores that will be a defining quality of the company's expansion in this country. The first of the new 1,100-square-foot to 2,500-square-foot stores, with a tighter focus on goods manufactured by Jensen, are to open later this year in SoHo in Manhattan and in Greenwich, Conn. Moves from existing stores to smaller spaces nearby are planned for Short Hills, N.J., and the flagship store on Madison Avenue.
The company, which has more than 100 stores in 13 countries, is celebrating its 100th anniversary this year, an event marked in its home city, Copenhagen, with a museum exhibition and the dedication of a new ballet, among other things.
In the United States, where there are only four Jensen shops, the company is defining its new store concept. ''What we are doing,'' said Lennart Palm, president of Georg Jensen USA, ''is in line with our international strategy, where we will refocus our product line on jewelry, silver tableware and watches.''
The Jensen stores are dropping china, glass and giftware made by others. ''We are no longer carrying anything but our own products,'' Mr. Palm said, ''and we are taking on a more contemporary theme.''
Georg Jensen came to America in 1924, opening in a large two-story space at 667 Fifth Avenue that operated as a sort of department store of expensive household goods made in Scandinavia.
''The store was owned by somebody else who could sell anything,'' said Amy Chukerman, vice president for retail operations at Jensen USA. ''That's how it seemed as if Jensen's was selling furniture and Royal Copenhagen china and Orrefors crystal.''
By the 1970's Scandinavian design was hardly a novelty, and Fifth Avenue was home to airlines and operations other than retailing, so Jensen moved to 2,900 square feet at 683 Madison Avenue, between 61st and 62nd Streets.
The creation of a signature design for all Jensen stores, based on a prototype in Denmark, will lead to more outlets and a consistent look, Jensen says. The elimination of merchandise other than its own will require less store space -- in the range of 1,100 to 2,500 square feet being planned.
Jensen shops that have operated in Manhattan, Chicago, Short Hills and Hawaii for 5 to more than 20 years will be moved to smaller quarters and renovated to conform as much as possible to the interior and exterior of the Copenhagen model.
New sites have been leased at 160 Greenwich Avenue in Greenwich, and at 125 Wooster Street in SoHo. Mr. Palm estimates they will be completed by June or July at a combined cost around $1 million.
Construction at the Short Hills Mall, scheduled to start within two weeks for an April opening, involves moving to a 1,100-square-foot space down the corridor from the current larger store, and the Madison Avenue shop will move in the fall to a smaller space next door.
''We may find a new location on Michigan Avenue for the Chicago store,'' Mr. Palm said. ''The present location in the Drake Hotel is 3,000 square feet -- too big for us.''
In addition to a store that will be renovated in the Halekulani hotel in Honolulu, he said, ''we are negotiating with the Ala Moana outdoor mall in Honolulu for a second store that we will build, and we have tentatively signed a lease for the Westchester mall in White Plains, where we cannot get access to space until 2005.''
The company is also prospecting for sites in Las Vegas, Florida and in California at Rodeo Drive, Beverly Hills, and the Costa Mesa mall in Orange County.
James S. Downey, an executive of Cushman &amp; Wakefield's Retail Services Group, said he and his partner, Eric Le Goss, had represented Jensen for almost five years, chasing down and leasing stores in prosperous areas.
The SoHo location is a former clothing store in a building owned by Richard Talmadge. It has 800 square feet on the ground floor and another 800 on the second floor, which Jensen will use as offices. The five-year lease has a five-year option to renew, and the rent is approximately $200 a square foot annually.
The Greenwich site, a former video store, is across the street from Saks Fifth Avenue and within a block or two of Tiffany's, Baccarat and other high-end shops. Jensen's 10-year lease has a five-year renewal option, and Peter Lauridsen, principal of the Greenwich Land Company, who represented Charles Suttig, the owner, said the rent was $90 a square foot annually plus utilities. One or two months will be rent-free.
Andrew Tuller, architect for the Greenwich and SoHo projects, said the look of the stores would be ''essentially black and white.'' With walls of black slate tiles, display cases of white lacquer and black leather, floors of beige limestone and halogen lighting, the design is intended ''to make the merchandise shine,'' he said.
The products to be sold are mainly inventive functional designs in silver and lower-priced stainless steel by top Scandinavian artists. A selection of Jensen's vintage designs of tableware and jewelry, still being manufactured by the company, will be available.
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
