Senator John Kerry scooped up another primary victory on Tuesday in his quest for the Democratic presidential nomination, capturing Utah, where he had not campaigned but hardly anyone else had either.
With 85 percent of the vote counted, Mr. Kerry had 55 percent, and Senator John Edwards 30 percent. Representative Dennis J. Kucinich was a distant third, with 7 percent, and Howard Dean, who dropped out of the race but was still on the ballot, received 3 percent.
Mr. Kerry also won the Idaho caucuses on Tuesday, the Associated Press reported, taking 64 percent of the votes, compared with Mr. Edwards's 20 percent. Voters also held caucuses in Hawaii. The three states provided only 61 delegates (23 in Utah, 20 in Hawaii and 18 in Idaho), which is why the candidates largely skipped them in favor of campaigning in the larger states that vote March 2 on Super Tuesday.
Also, these three states have entrenched voting patterns, with Utah and Idaho among the nation's most solidly Republican states and Hawaii one of the most reliably Democratic. That meant whatever the candidates did for Tuesday was unlikely to affect the outcome in November.
Mr. Kucinich, running near the back of the pack, was the only candidate to visit Utah in recent months. In a drop-by at the airport in Salt Lake City, he told voters that, unlike President Bush, he would ''bring an end to all the nuclear testing'' in the adjacent Nevada desert. He also visited Hawaii, where he said he expected his campaign to gain traction.
Senator Edwards, who has been a distant second to Mr. Kerry, ignored all three states, even though they provided his cleanest shot yet at Mr. Kerry. Mr. Edwards pulled out of big party dinners in Idaho and Utah. ''I'm one human being, and I can't go everywhere,'' he told reporters from Utah in a conference call.
While Mr. Kerry did not visit Utah either, he sent in a team of five people to get out the vote for him and sent a surrogate, Henry Cisneros, the former Clinton cabinet official, to the dinner in Utah. He also held a conference call with reporters from Utah, telling them that he opposed nuclear testing and would favor using computer simulations instead.
In Idaho, Mr. Kerry sent his wife, Teresa Heinz Kerry, who owns a home in Sun Valley, to campaign for him, and Carole King, the singer and longtime Idaho resident, held free concerts there on his behalf.
Donald Dunn, the Democratic chairman in Utah, said he would support holding a regional primary in conjunction with other Western states in 2008 so that their states would get more attention from the candidates than they did this year. He said in the evening that turnout was higher than he had anticipated.
Carole Summers, 76, said she supported Mr. Kerry because ''he has a nice head of hair.'' She forgave him for not campaigning there, saying, ''We realize Utah is not the big place to worry about, but we Democrats need to make our voices heard.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE PRIMARIES
