Increasing intolerance and tough anti-asylum measures, particularly in Europe, helped to reduce the number of asylum seekers to the lowest level in six years, according to a report published Tuesday by the United Nations refugee agency.
The number of asylum seekers across the world dropped by one- fifth, to 471,00 last year -- the lowest figure since 1997 -- compared with 587,000 the previous year. Almost all of those arrived in 36 industrialized countries, the report said.
Russia produced the largest group of asylum seekers last year, with 33,400. Most of those were Chechens, who replaced Iraqis as the largest group of asylum seekers in 2002.
The Geneva-based agency said the drop in asylum seekers globally had been caused in part by the increasing security in countries like Afghanistan, Iraq and the former Yugoslavia, which both facilitates refugees' return and lessens the motivation to leave.
But Ruud Lubbers, the United Nations high commissioner for refugees, warned rich industrialized states that ''improvements remain fragile in many countries'' and that ''continued investment of aid and resources'' was needed to prevent a reversal of the downward trend.
About 41 percent fewer asylum seekers arrived in Britain last year compared with the previous year, although it was still the largest recipient, with 61,050 asylum seekers arriving in 2003. It was followed by the United States, with 60,700 arrivals in 2003.
Germany registered a 29 percent drop in asylum seekers, while there were 28 percent fewer arrivals in the Netherlands, which recently unveiled plans to deport 26,000 disqualified asylum seekers.
Mr. Lubbers said a ''hardening of attitudes'' toward asylum seekers, who are seen increasingly as a drain on public finances, was an understandable response to the huge influxes of the 1990's, particularly in the European Union.
''Now that the numbers have dropped back, I hope the debate will focus once again on the vital need to protect refugees,'' Mr. Lubbers said.
