When a truck bomb exploded last month near the occupation headquarters in Baghdad, two of the casualties were volunteers for the new Iraqi Army officer corps. One died instantly; the other lost an eye.
As reports of the attack reached the base set up in Jordan to train new leaders for the Iraqi military, one promising officer announced that he was quitting. Others began saying the same, demoralized at joining an army allied with an occupation force unable to defend its own front door.
Instead of accepting the resignations outright, Lt. Col. John M. Pioli of the Marine Corps, one of the Americans organizing the Iraqi officer training, told the Iraqi officers to go home for a week and reconsider.
''I told them that if they quit now, their friend had died for no reason,'' he said.
On the day they were due back, Colonel Pioli was on pins and needles. ''I waited and I waited,'' he said. ''Every one of them showed up.''
The Iraqi Army is a work in progress. Last fall, the initial goals for force levels were tripled. Plans now call for fielding nine infantry brigades by September. The force of about 40,000 would be one-tenth the size of the army under Saddam Hussein. The officer training portion of the army program has a budget of $57 million.
Col. Kim Smith of the British Army, who serves as chief liaison officer here, was asked about the decision to accelerate the effort. ''Time is not on our side,'' he said.
The quality of the first Iraqi officer candidates, who are getting three months of training here, ''is quite impressive,'' Colonel Smith said. He said they could play a crucial role ''in setting an example for the right-minded in a new and democratic Iraq.''
The army is just one piece of a security architecture that is new and increasingly Iraqi, including police officers and a civil defense corps. Even so, debate continues in Washington about how best to deal with Iraq's near-term security threats ahead of the transfer of sovereignty set for June 30.
Building an army is a long-term process requiring discipline and money and is viewed as a concrete symbol of the promise of sovereignty. But some, even within the Pentagon, argue that the less expensive civil defense corps should be the priority.
The officer candidates, all former military men, include one officer who says he was drummed out after the Persian Gulf war of 1991 when he refused orders to bomb civilians rising up against Mr. Hussein. He avoided prison, and perhaps death, he says, only because he had a chest full of medals from the Iran-Iraq war.
Some of those training here were in the Iraqi military during the American-led invasion last year; they said they stayed in the service out of patriotism, not loyalty to Mr. Hussein. They were interviewed during a tour given to this reporter of the secret training base here.
The cadre of officer candidates was selected, officials say, to represent Iraq's explosive mix of Arabs and Kurds, Sunnis and Shiites. Predictably, things have not always gone smoothly.
Two officers were sent home after a brawl that began when one, a member of the Sunni minority that rose to privilege under Mr. Hussein, sang an anthem glorifying the ousted dictator. A Kurdish officer hit him with a duffel bag.
''The Iraqi officers are forbidden to speak of the past,'' said Brig. Gen. Achmed D. Farajat, the Jordanian who is director of the training program here. ''We tell them, 'You are not a Sunni, a Shia or a Kurd. You must forget what happened to your father or your cousin in the past. You are leaders of a new Iraqi Army now.' ''
The first group of officers was interviewed, screened and quietly brought here the last week of December. They range in age from 21 to their late 40's, with varied leadership and combat experience. Some have only elementary schooling and several have advanced degrees.
The Jordanian government, in just 40 days, built a base outside Amman, scraping the desert, pouring foundations and erecting barracks, mess halls, recreation centers, a clinic and a mosque under such tight security that only the occasional wandering goat can get anywhere close without an official escort.
One of the Iraqi officers here, Lt. Col. Hayder al-Tayer, considers himself lucky.
As an instructor at a Baghdad military academy, he sat out the war, not having to make the near-suicidal choice of whether to defend the capital against an overpowering American-led invasion or risk retribution against deserters.
A Sunni Arab, Colonel Tayer said his most difficult decision came after major combat operations ended: the choice to sign on with the new army. That meant standing up to threats from Hussein loyalists and dismissing fears for his family.
Still, the violence Iraqis face weighs heavily on his mind.
''We know the reasons for these attacks on our police stations, on our people,'' Colonel Tayer said. ''They want to destroy Iraq. It will become our responsibility to protect our nation. If we don't accept that responsibility, who will?''
