George Steinbrenner navigated his personalized GMS golf cart along a green carpet at Legends Field, creeping forward only a few feet a minute as he rambled on about everything from why reporters should stop asking Alex Rodriguez and Derek Jeter about their changed friendship to why the Boston Red Sox are the favorites in the American League East to why he does not think the Yankees have a steroid problem.
On the first full workout day for the Yankees, Steinbrenner, the team's principal owner, never appeared on the field. But he made enough noise to last for the rest of spring training while maneuvering his cart outside the clubhouse for 10 minutes before he stopped driving and chatted amiably for another 15.
Steinbrenner compared John Henry, the owner of the Red Sox, to the Scarecrow from ''The Wizard of Oz,'' which was clearly a response to Henry's comparing him over the weekend to the comedian Don Rickles. And Steinbrenner, 73, who was hospitalized after fainting and hitting his head two months ago, said that other than knee pain and normal fatigue, his health is fine.
''Everybody's coming up to me, 'Sign this baseball,' '' Steinbrenner said. ''You all think I'm going to die. You want one of the last autographs.''
About 200 reporters covered Rodriguez's first official workout with the Yankees, a $180 million All-Star team of sorts, yet Steinbrenner was again a notable behind-the-scenes presence. As always. Steinbrenner spoke optimistically about the possibility of signing Manager Joe Torre to a contract extension, added that he would accept part of the blame for Torre's unhappiness last season and said that he would favor a replacement for Yankee Stadium.
''I'd love a new stadium for the fans of New York,'' he said. ''It should be high on the mayor's wish list. We're slowly but surely getting him on our side. He's a great mayor. I know some of the polls don't say that. He's made a billion dollars. He might be the smartest man I know.''
For all of the subjects Steinbrenner covered, he was most adamant when he discussed his desire to have reporters cease quizzing Rodriguez and Jeter about the tension that has existed between them. They have been peppered with questions regarding Rodriguez's critical comments about Jeter in an Esquire magazine article three years ago.
''They get tired of answering those questions,'' Steinbrenner said. ''That's it, fellas. No more. I don't want to say, 'Get out of here.' They're playing a game. Let them play baseball.'' He added: ''I don't think it's a nonissue. I know it's a nonissue.''
Perhaps Steinbrenner's mandate about a topic that he said reporters were using to try to divide the Yankees had become an organization-wide edict. ''The questions about our relationship, I'm not going to answer them anymore,'' Jeter said Tuesday.
Steinbrenner has not yet made the same request of reporters questioning Jason Giambi and Gary Sheffield about steroids. They testified before a grand jury investigating the Bay Area Laboratory Co-Operative, a nutritional supplements company whose founder has been charged with distributing steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs to professional athletes.
''It hovers because I have distinct feelings about steroids,'' Steinbrenner said. ''I was the vice president of the Olympic Committee when we put in strict things in the Olympic movement. I worry about anybody that's using them because of the aftereffects.''
When Steinbrenner was asked if he thought Giambi or Sheffield was a steroid user, he said he did not think so. ''They know how I feel about it, and I think they feel the same way,'' he said.
And though Steinbrenner tweaked Henry, he lauded the Red Sox and Theo Epstein, their general manager. Steinbrenner referred to Epstein as Esposito, the second time in less than a year that he has erred on Epstein's last name, as he was explaining why he thought the Red Sox were the favorites in the division.
''I think they've got a great lineup,'' he said. ''I think Esposito has done a great job for them, like Cashman has done a great job for us. I think they have more stability in their pitching staff. I think we have a few question marks.''
Steinbrenner admitted the Red Sox got a pitcher he wanted when they obtained Curt Schilling from the Arizona Diamondbacks, but he immediately added, ''But I got Kevin Brown, so we're O.K.'' Steinbrenner called Brown a good No. 1 man, seemingly indicating he considered Brown the ace. That would contrast with Torre's view, because Torre has practically anointed Mike Mussina as the opening day starter.
Steinbrenner said he and Torre had an understanding about Torre's future and called him ''very important to this team.'' Torre probably felt as recently as a month ago that he might be managing his final year with the Yankees in 2004, but it now seems inevitable that Steinbrenner will offer him an extension.
''He's got to enjoy it,'' Steinbrenner said. ''I don't think a lot of it was enjoyable for him last year. I'll take some of the blame, but not all of it. We had other things that weren't going right in the locker room.'' Then, in what was surely a reference to the former bench coach Don Zimmer, Steinbrenner mentioned the current coaches and said, ''You notice how happy everybody is?''
As Steinbrenner discussed how Rodriguez and Barry Bonds are probably the two best players in baseball, he referred to Bonds as Bobby Bonds, his father, three times. Since Barry Bonds and Ken Griffey Jr. are sons of former Yankees, Steinbrenner said he should have been smart enough to lock them in the Stadium until they became professional players.
Steinbrenner also called Sheffield as good an offensive player as there is in the major leagues, explained how he told his executives to sign reliever Tom Gordon because Gordon often silenced the Yankees, and said he was flattered by Henry's comparing him to Rickles because Rickles is a great talent.
When a reporter wondered if Steinbrenner planned to take Rodriguez to dinner, Steinbrenner said Rodriguez was married to a ''very beautiful and brilliant girl'' who should accompany him. Then Steinbrenner suggested Jeter should do it.
The usually blustery Steinbrenner seemed happy and relaxed from behind the wheel of the golf cart Tuesday. Steinbrenner said he needed the cart ''to get around because I'm slowing down,'' but the words were coming out as fast as ever.
BASEBALL
