New York State's highest court yesterday overturned the death sentence of a Rochester killer who had told police he could not ''do a hundred years in jail'' and wanted to be executed.
The convicted killer, Angel L. Mateo, is already serving 128 years to life for three killings and other crimes. He is to be resentenced and could be given another life term for the murder of a 20-year old Rochester man for which a jury had sentenced him to die.
Yesterday's ruling was the third under the state's 1995 capital punishment law in which the Court of Appeals in Albany has overturned a death sentence. The court has not approved a capital sentence.
As it did in an earlier narrow ruling, the court said there was a constitutional flaw in the 1995 law because it gave capital defendants who pleaded guilty a sentence of life without parole, while those who went to trial faced the possibility of execution.
''We break no new ground,'' said the 5-2 majority opinion by the chief judge, Judith S. Kaye.
The court's failure to approve an execution is drawing some concern among some state legislators and death-penalty supporters. In Albany, Joseph L. Bruno, the leader of the State Senate's Republican majority, said the court's judges were ''hanging on technicalities, and we are going to continue to review why.''
Gov. George E. Pataki's most recent appointee to the seven-member court, Robert S. Smith, voted with the majority.
Mike Green, the Rochester district attorney, said he was considering asking the United States Supreme Court to review the case partly because of Mr. Mateo's violent background. ''If the death penalty is not meant for a guy who kills four people when he's on parole and tries to kill a fifth,'' Mr. Green said, ''who is it meant for?''
The majority rejected several defense claims, including an assertion that the judge in Monroe County improperly allowed the capital jury to hear that in a confession, Mr. Mateo had described killing three other people. Kevin M. Doyle, the state's capital defender, said yesterday's ruling may come to be seen as a ''watershed moment'' in a process under the capital punishment law that he described as distorting fair-trial rules.
Judges George Bundy Smith and Albert M. Rosenblatt each wrote separate opinions disagreeing with the majority's view that it was permissible for the jury to hear evidence about Mr. Mateo's other killings. Judge George Bundy Smith said allowing the information about other killings was a breach of rules that generally bar efforts to prove that a defendant has a propensity to commit a certain type of crime.
