IN the kitchen at Signatures, an upscale restaurant midway between the Capitol and the White House, Morou Ouattara is the chef, moving swiftly with his assistants in his wake, awaiting his orders.
But on this day he has become a boy again. His mother is visiting from their home in Ivory Coast, and she will not let him cook, at least not in her presence.
''It is a question of tradition,'' said his mother, Constance Hallange Ouattara, speaking in French. ''If a man knows how to cook, it is a sign that a woman is not doing her job. There is no respect.''
Mr. Ouattara, 37, moved to the United States in 1988 to live with his older brother, Amadou, in Washington and study computer science. They worked nights in local kitchens, where they found their true callings. Both are now chefs, his brother at an Italian restaurant in Gaithersburg, Md.
It was as a dishwasher at Ristorante I Ricchi in Washington that Mr. Ouattara got his start at a stove, when one of the cooks quit and he became an emergency replacement. Like many immigrant cooks, Mr. Ouattara has learned new customs and techniques as he tried to please the public and create what he calls an American cuisine with international influences.
''My mom's food is what I grew up with, and I love these sauces and stews,'' Mr. Ouattara said on a recent evening as his mother and his sister Kady cooked dishes from Ivory Coast in this reporter's kitchen. ''But I have dated girls who can't stand the smell of things like dried fish. Americans have set things in their mind.''
He said he dreams of someday opening a ''fine dining American restaurant with African flair.''
Mrs. Ouattara, 61, who has never visited her bachelor son at his restaurant, is proud of what he is doing. ''I am happy that he can cook,'' she said.
''Now when he feels like eating something he can make it himself.'' Just not when she is visiting.
''My mother force-feeds me when she comes,'' Mr. Ouattara said. ''It is as if there is no food in America.''
The Ouattara family comes from Bondoukou, a town of about 30,000, in the savannah in northeastern Ivory Coast near the border with Ghana. In the town, a center of Islamic culture and commerce, Mr. Ouattara's late father was a coffee and cocoa wholesaler.
Although his family lives comfortably in a two-story clay brick house with a refrigerator and a propane gas stove in the kitchen, his mother cooks outside in the yard.
''The first thing that is different,'' Mr. Ouattara said, ''is the rhythm of cooking that continues all day long outside.''
''My mother sits on a taboret,'' a little stool, he said, ''and uses a pot set on a low fire.'' Daily life surrounds the slow-cooking stews and the gruels that need to be stirred and tended. ''It is like making polenta,'' Mr. Ouattara said. His mother's cooking needs so much attention in part because it is difficult to regulate the heat of an outdoor fire. ''Every meal becomes a feast with my mother cooking for 10 or 11 people,'' he said.
The process allows time for socialization. Because cooking in Ivory Coast is the women's domain, Mr. Ouattara and his 10 brothers and sisters learned from watching, much as his sister Kady's 1-year-old son, Nasser, tied to her back with a colorful sling, will do in a few years.
As Mr. Ouattara started to use a cutting board to slice an onion for a refreshing cucumber and tomato salad, his sister, 35, a nurse living in Bowie, Md., snatched the onion and, holding it in her hand, began slicing it paper-thin with a knife. ''No one uses cutting boards where we come from,'' Mr. Ouattara said apologetically.
The salad and a piquant tomato relish would be served over whole grilled tilapia with a cassava couscous on the side.
''In Ivory Coast, this fish, grilled on the side of the road, is street food,'' Mr. Ouattara said.
In Africa, Mrs. Ouattara makes the cassava couscous herself: first boiling the cassava tuber, removing the core, fermenting it for a few days in a leftover rice bag, drying it, removing the fiber, wetting it and rolling it by hand into tiny little balls for the couscous.
''The water that comes out of the wet cassava is used for starch for ironing,'' Mr. Ouattara said. In Maryland, Mr. Ouattara's sister buys cassava couscous, imported frozen from Ghana, at a local African store and then microwaves it. Africa has a couscous dividing line: in West Africa cassava, millet and sometimes corn are used; North Africa favors durum wheat. Because of the spicy sauces that accompany it, this couscous is made without salt, much like rice in Asia.
As the three talked in French and Dyula, their local language, the women prepared the vegetables to be cut up in a palm nut fruit sauce. ''This is the fruit of the wild palm tree,'' Mr. Ouattara said. ''We serve it with bush meat like antelopes, game meats, and sometimes agouti, which is much like a rabbit or a guinea pig.'' His mother prepared the stew with a combination of crab, goat and snails, not unlike a gumbo. Although Mr. Ouattara has not been to New Orleans, he has tasted Southern food and pointed out that the slaves from West Africa probably transformed their native stews, using ingredients found in the South, into gumbos and étouffées.
''Americans today wouldn't want to mix all these ingredients together,'' Mr. Ouattara said. He later made his mother's recipe for the delicate sauce at his restaurant and served it over a duck confit. He also has served it with pork, a meat forbidden to his family, who are Muslims. ''I have to taste everything,'' he said quietly, looking in his mother's direction. ''This is part of my job.''
As he talked, Mrs. Ouattara and her daughter expertly mixed the cassava and cornmeal into a gruel, much like grits. They then mixed it with water and slapped it together, forming it into a jellied mass that was cut and served as a starch with the palm nut sauce.
A third dish, a ground peanut stew made two ways, with chicken and with boroboroba, or wild spinach, is prepared in this country with peanut butter. In Africa the family uses ground raw peanuts. ''On the street at home you can buy grilled plantain with roasted peanuts,'' Mr. Ouattara said. The wild spinach they used was purchased in an African store, but in season it is available from African farmers in some parts of the United States.
The stew would be accompanied by a plantain dish called foufou. To make it, Mr. Ouattara's sister placed a cooked ripe plantain in the food processor, but his mother, who had her eye on everything in the kitchen, immediately transferred it to a large wooden mortar and pestle, which she placed on the floor, as she would in Africa. She pounded the plantain, molding it into a soft ball.
Later at his restaurant, Mr. Ouattara, made what he called a plantain loaf, which he coated with Japanese panko to add crunch. ''Americans love texture and they don't want to chew a lot,'' he said. ''We like lots of salt in our sauces, not in the rice or plantains.''
As Mr. Ouattara watched his mother prepare the food he grew up with, he said: ''You see how she is taking a pinch of this and a pinch of that. You can't translate that into numbers and cups.
''In Africa when we watch our mother cooking, we don't have to do anything else but listen to stories. Time is different there. It is slower, like being in Miami. When an older person dies in Africa, we say that a whole library has gone up in flames.''
IVORY COAST SALAD  Adapted from Morou Ouattara  Time: 20 minutes
2 cucumbers  1 tomato  1 green bell pepper
1/2 onion  3 heaping tablespoons prepared mayonnaise  2 heaping tablespoons plain yogurt  1 tablespoon vegetable oil, if necessary  Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste  Paprika to taste.
1. Slice cucumber in half lengthwise, and remove seeds. Cut into half-moon slices  1/4-inch thick. Slice tomato, green pepper and onion thinly.
2. In a small bowl, place mayonnaise and yogurt, and mix well. If very thick, thin with a little vegetable oil. Sprinkle with salt, pepper and paprika.
3. Place vegetables in a bowl and spoon on dressing. Serve as is or on top of fish.
Yield: 4 to 6 servings.
SPINACH-PEANUT STEW  Adapted from Morou Ouattara  Time: 40 minutes
1 10-ounce bag spinach, washed  2 tablespoons vegetable oil  1 onion, diced  1 medium tomato, diced  1 tablespoon tomato paste  1 cup chicken or vegetable stock  1 cup chunky peanut butter  Salt and pepper to taste
1/2 cup white melon seeds or pumpkin seeds.
1. Put 3 cups water in a medium saucepan, and bring to a boil. Add spinach, and cook for a minute or two until soft. Remove from heat, drain well, and transfer to a food processor equipped with a steel blade. Pulse a couple of times, but do not purée. Set aside.
2. Return pan to stove, add oil and cook onion until translucent. Add tomato and tomato paste. Stir and cook for 2 minutes. Add stock, peanut butter, salt and pepper. Bring to a boil, reduce heat, and cook for a few minutes.
3. Heat oven to 350 degrees. Place melon or pumpkin seeds on a cookie sheet, and toast until they start to pop, about 5 minutes. Grind seeds in a coffee grinder or small food processor.
4. Add seeds to stew, and simmer a few minutes. Add spinach, and simmer slowly, uncovered, about 25 minutes. It will be a thick stew. Remove from heat, adjust seasonings and serve.
Yield: 4 to 6 servings.
OVEN-ROASTED TILAPIA WITH SPICY TOMATO SAUCE  Adapted from Morou Ouattara  Time: 1 hour
For the sauce:  1 1/2 medium onions  3 tomatoes, whole  2 tablespoons olive oil  2 tablespoons dry shrimp powder (sold in Asian markets)  1 teaspoon sweet paprika  Salt to taste
For the fish:
1/3 cup vegetable oil  2 teaspoons salt, more to taste  Freshly black pepper to taste  4 cloves garlic, crushed  1 teaspoon paprika  4 whole tilapia, gutted and cleaned (about 1 1/2 pounds each).
1. To prepare sauce: quarter an onion, and place in a medium saucepan with tomatoes. Cover with water, and bring to a boil. Cook for 5 minutes, or until onion is soft. Remove from heat, and transfer to a blender. Purée until smooth. Remove from blender, and set aside.
2. Dice remaining onion half. Heat oil in a small saucepan. Cook onion until golden brown. Add tomato mixture, and cook for 3 more minutes, stirring occasionally. Add shrimp powder, paprika and salt and cook for 5 more minutes. Adjust seasonings to taste. Remove from heat, and set aside.
3. For the fish: heat oven to 400 degrees, and cover a baking sheet with aluminum foil. In small bowl, mix vegetable oil with salt, pepper, garlic, paprika and 4 tablespoons tomato sauce. Rub over fish.
4. Place fish on foil, and bake on middle rack of oven about 40 minutes or until cooked. Serve fish on a platter, with remaining tomato sauce on the side.
Yield: 4 to 6 servings.
HOME COOKING
