It was the blink of an eye, really, 30 short minutes out of a busy and protracted Thursday: Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, standing in a barren lot in Washington Heights, announced that the city would soon have a new parking garage. There were five speakers, including Mr. Bloomberg, who banged his hands together to fight off the cold as each person took his turn expounding on the traffic troubles in upper Manhattan.
But if the moment was largely pedestrian and political -- an overture to a largely Hispanic neighborhood by a mayor trying to shore up his flagging minority support -- it was one of many in recent months that point to a sea change in the mayoral style. Facing what his aides concede is going to be a very stiff re-election battle next year, Mr. Bloomberg is quietly retooling himself into something of the political creature he claimed to disdain during the first part of his term.
He is making focused efforts to curry favor with specific constituents -- most visibly Hispanic New Yorkers -- in ways he once dismissed as ceremonial obligations that took up too much of his time. In addition to announcing the parking garage, he recently went to a small Dominican organization in Washington Heights to promote the earned-income tax credit.
He holds a news conference every week outside Manhattan announcing some small-bore program, like a tax abatement plan for Co-op City, in the Bronx.
And instead of digging in and backing his commissioners to the bitter end as he has in the past, Mr. Bloomberg appears to be picking his battles a bit more carefully. This month, he backed away from a controversial piece of legislation that would change the rules governing night life, once it became clear he was going to pay a political price for it. This was in stark contrast to his refusal little more than a year ago to yield an inch on his citywide smoking ban, which infuriated bar and restaurant owners.
Most notably, Mr. Bloomberg is stepping up his political rhetoric, something he all but refused to do until this year. He has recently been attacking the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, and by proxy, Gov. George E. Pataki, over its decision to buy new Metro-North Railroad cars rather than improve the city's transportation network. Taking on the authority over an issue that pits city against suburbs is a time-honored way for a mayor to win support in the five boroughs, and Mr. Bloomberg has done it with a directness and constancy he has never shown before.
All of this, on the heels of a homeowner tax rebate, suggests that Mr. Bloomberg has abandoned his notion that simply ''doing the right thing,'' to use his phrase, would hoist him to re-election. The mayor has clearly learned that while New Yorkers liked a candidate who was not a classic politician, a politician is apparently exactly what they want for a mayor.
His press secretary, Edward Skyler, said the mayor is simply starting to show the personal style he kept under wraps after his first bruising campaign. ''His public personality has evolved into what he is like in private,'' Mr. Skyler said. ''He is a sharp, no-nonsense guy who says what he thinks and is deeply committed to the city. It is ironic that he couldn't be more different from the noncaring technocrat he has been typecast as.''
The reinvention of Mr. Bloomberg, the politician, started last summer, with his poll numbers in the basement, but a budget crisis largely behind him. The mayor began to tool around the city, bringing neighborhoods goodies like street repairs and small jobs programs.
Mr. Bloomberg also began to insert himself into parochial battles that even a year ago he would have viewed as too local to merit the help of City Hall; for example, he announced last fall that the city would acquire six acres of land from the KeySpan Corporation for a park in Elmhurst, Queens, to block Home Depot from buying the land against community opposition.
And beyond his parking-garage announcement, his second public appearance in Washington Heights in the last month, Mr. Bloomberg has tried to find other ways to reach out for the all-important Hispanic vote, like inviting Fernando A. Mateo, the president of the New York State Federation of Taxi Drivers, to join him on a recent broadcast of his weekly radio show. The mayor continues to take Spanish lessons, and tries his best to knock out an intelligible line or two in that language during some news conferences.
''Almost all of his activity is geared toward the outer boroughs,'' said Kenneth Sherrill, a professor of political science at Hunter College. ''Including the Hispanic and African-American activity. He is targeting those who say, 'This is a Manhattan mayor who does not understand people like us.' Also, mass transit is a natural for outer-borough votes.''
Mr. Bloomberg also seems to be trying to counter the largely held perception that he fails to stand up for New York City, and responds to its critics and adversaries with conciliation. Just before New Year's Eve, when Representative Christopher Shays, a Connecticut Republican, said he would not go to Times Square ''for anything,'' Mr. Bloomberg mocked him, suggesting that the congressman should call the servicewoman who joined the mayor for the festivities to ''learn a little bit about courage.'' He recently criticized the police union for taking a vote of no confidence against his police commissioner.
And over the last few weeks, Mr. Bloomberg has been attacking the transportation authority with some regularity. ''I don't think they should be spending money on new things until they first do the basic objective that they were set up to accomplish,'' he said this week at a news conference on the Upper West Side, ''and that was to provide reliable, safe, affordable mass transit for all of the people of the region, particularly for those in the center of the region. And that means doing something about buses from Co-op City and buses from Queens and that sort of thing. Let's get serious.''
Of course, telling the authority it should get serious is not exactly the stuff of the mayor's predecessor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, who pelted personal insults at those who defied him. Then again, Mr. Bloomberg's criticism of the transportation agency comes from the same mayor who once defended its desire to raise transit fares, before the fare increase was announced, much to the annoyance of the governor and the authority.
Whether all of these efforts will translate into votes for Mr. Bloomberg in 2005 is unknowable. But recent polls suggest they have not hurt; a Quinnipiac University poll last May found that 32 percent of those surveyed approved of the mayor, and that number rose to 44 percent in the same university's poll this month.
''A lot of it depends on who runs against him,'' Professor Sherrill said.
