A senior leader of Al Qaeda threatened further attacks against the United States and denounced France for banning Islamic head scarves in statements on two audiotapes broadcast by separate Arab satellite channels on Tuesday.
Analysts at the Central Intelligence Agency said the recordings appeared to have been made by Dr. Ayman al-Zawahiri, the top lieutenant to Osama bin Laden. ''After conducting a technical analysis, the C.I.A. assesses that the voice on the recordings is probably that of Zawahiri,'' a C.I.A. official said.
The tapes are of relatively recent vintage, since on one Dr. Zawahiri mocked remarks from President Bush's State of the Union speech in January and on the other he referred to December developments in the scarf debate.
''We remind Bush that he did not crush two-thirds of Al Qaeda,'' he said in a recording broadcast on Al Jazeera. ''On the contrary, thanks be to God, Al Qaeda remains on the battleground of the holy war, raising the banner of Islam in the face of the Zionist-Crusader campaign against the Islamic community.''
In his State of the Union address, Mr. Bush said almost two-thirds of the known leadership of Al Qaeda had been captured or killed.
In the recording on Al Jazeera, Dr. Zawahiri expressed wonder that the leader of a superpower could deliver a speech so full of lies.
''Bush, fortify your defenses and intensify your security measures,'' he said, ''because the Muslim nation, which sent brigades to New York and Washington, has decided to send you one brigade after another, carrying death and seeking Paradise.''
In Washington, the director of central intelligence, George J. Tenet, said in testimony before the Senate Intelligence Community on Tuesday that Al Qaeda retained the ability to carry out attacks. ''Even catastrophic attacks on the scale of 9/11 remain within Al Qaeda's reach,'' Mr. Tenet said, according to a transcript from the Federal New Service. ''Make no mistake, these plots are hatched abroad, but they target U.S. soil or that of our allies.''
Dr. Zawahiri, an Egyptian surgeon, repeated the charge that the campaign against terrorism was really a war on Islam, and he condemned Islamic leaders cooperating with it. ''Bush appoints corrupt leaders and protects them,'' he said on the Jazeera tape. ''A glance at the Islamic world from Morocco to Indonesia will reveal those U.S.-backed leaders.''
The second tape, broadcast on the Dubai-based network Al Arabiya, singled out France for its pending ban on the wearing of Islamic scarves by girls in state schools.
''France, the country of liberty,'' the tape said, ''defends only the liberty of nudity, debauchery and decay, while fighting chastity and modesty.''
The recording also criticized Sheik Muhammad Sayed Tantawi, the grand imam of Al Azhar in Cairo, the most venerable seat of Sunni Muslim learning, saying his support for the French decision was a scandal. Sheik Tantawi said in late December that Muslims in France must respect French law.
--------------------
20 Are Held in Pakistani Raid
(By The New York Times), ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, Feb. 24 -- Pakistani troops carried out a raid near the country's border with Afghanistan on Tuesday morning and captured 20 people they suspected of being Islamic militants, government officials said.
Information was sketchy, and there were conflicting reports as to whether the suspects were all Pakistanis or included foreigners.
Officials said ammunition, weapons, audiotapes and passports had been found in the raid on a compound seven miles outside the town of Wana, the administrative center for the South Waziristan Tribal Agency. Officials declined to say what was on the audiotapes.
