On West 44th Street in Manhattan Golda Meir has been holding court in relatively conventional fashion for months. But if you prefer your prominent 20th-century women deconstructed, fractured, filtered and reinvented, walk a few blocks south. There, in two shows, are glimpses of Madame Mao, Eva Perón, Imelda Marcos, Elena Ceausescu, Eva Braun and Clara Petacci, along with a torrent of fragmentary thoughts about power, sex, second-class citizenship and whale vomit.
''Summit Conference,'' at Urban Stages on West 30th Street through March 13, brings together Braun and Petacci, mistresses, respectively, of Hitler and Mussolini, for an imaginary tea that starts out benignly but makes the full circle, from weird to dark to repellent and back to benign.
At the start the women are played as the stereotypes of their countries. Braun (Sarah Megan Thomas) is chilly and rigid, Petacci (Rita Pietropinto) gregarious and a bit flighty. There is some obligatory moaning about the status of mistresses. ''The whole world knows I am here, and nobody knows who I am,'' Braun laments, and Petacci complains of being ''delivered to the back door like the bread.''
But Robert David MacDonald, the playwright, soon replaces the tea with alcohol, and the women turn increasingly vicious. They turn all the way into their men, excoriating Jews and others and clashing over military tactics. A young Nazi guard (Eric Altheide), who may have some Jewish blood, absorbs the worst of their vitriol in a macabre, degrading seduction scene. And then it's abruptly back to tea and pleasantries, as if the ugliness never happened, a shift suggestive of how, even today, some people prefer to regard the Holocaust.
''Summit Conference'' is a long way from ''Golda's Balcony,'' the fairly straightforward biographical treatment of Golda Meir running on Broadway. But it seems downright conventional compared with another play, on West 42nd Street, called ''The Ladies.'' It is a rollicking take on four first ladies who exercised power far more openly than did the ''Summit Conference'' mistresses.
The piece, from the inventive pen of Anne Washburn and directed with verve by Anne Kauffman, throws together Perón of Argentina (Maria Striar), Ceausescu of Romania (Quincy Tyler Bernstine), Jiang Qing, or Madame Mao, of China (Nina Hellman) and Mrs. Marcos of the Philippines (Alison Weller). Their interactions are marvelously indescribable, made up of snippets of their actual words, imagined words, chants, semi-songs and tape recordings of the actresses who play the parts, trying to give impromptu capsule biographies of the women.
On top of that Ms. Washburn and Ms. Kauffman have inserted themselves as characters into the play. (Jennifer R. Morris is Ms. Kauffman, Jennifer Dundas is Ms. Washburn.) Their dialogue is apparently drawn from recordings that they made as they shaped the piece.
The resulting stir-fry, presented by Dixon Place at Chashama through Sunday, can't be followed in any logical way, but it's brashly entertaining. And it's full of moments of quirky insight. A riff near the end by Ms. Morris about why she yearns to be powerful is simultaneously ridiculous and mesmerizing. Just as riveting is a monologue by the Perón character about why those who rise to great heights so often come to bad ends. Power, she says, makes them dizzy and clouds their judgment, like deep-sea divers who lose perspective and cast off the weights keeping them submerged.
''Their bodies rush upwards through the water too fast, and their brains are crushed, and when they arrive on the surface their bones are smashed, and they float on the surface like a mangled, limp thing,'' she says. ''Like the vomit of whales, which lies on top of the waves and is called ambergris and is an extremely expensive ingredient in the best perfume from Paris. That is what it is like at the heights; what is most rare, most costly and sought after, is really just vomit.''
In ''The Ladies'' Nora of ''A Doll's House'' turns up briefly, her declaration of independence sounding positively quaint juxtaposed against the words of these female giants. Ibsen's rudimentary cry for empowerment now rings naïve because underlying ''The Ladies'' and ''Summit Conference,'' both well-acted, is our knowledge of how four of these six powerful lives ended: violently, in executions or suicides. Watch out, Nora; it's not easy being queen.
THEATER NOTEBOOK
