An investigator hired last week by the House committee that will decide whether to recommend the impeachment of Gov. John G. Rowland has resigned, citing a possible conflict of interest.
The investigator, Bart M. Schwartz, resigned on Monday after discovering that his former company, Decision Strategies, had done work for the Tomasso Group, a state contractor whose gifts to Mr. Rowland are part of the impeachment inquiry.
Mr. Schwartz was hired last Thursday, and his resignation will slow the committee's work only slightly, said Representative John Wayne Fox, the committee's Democratic co-chairman. Members expect to hire a new investigator this Thursday, Mr. Fox said.
The committee also expects to issue its first batch of several dozen subpoenas on Thursday, Mr. Fox said. Mr. Rowland's office has offered to supply the committee with more than 30,000 pages of documents already given to federal investigators, Mr. Fox said. ''That will help us get started,'' he added.
Mr. Schwartz, a former federal prosecutor, said that there was no actual conflict of interest but that he did not wish to create any distractions or perceived problems for the committee. He left Decision Strategies in April 2003 and was unaware that the company's Hartford office was hired by the Tomasso Group three weeks earlier, while he was on sick leave, he said.
The resignation was first reported on Tuesday in The Hartford Courant. It came three days after P.J. Delahunty, a state official who has been under scrutiny because of his links to Mr. Rowland, resigned as a manager in the Department of Public Works. Mr. Delahunty resigned after learning that his salary would be cut in half, to $55,000.
Mr. Delahunty, a friend of the governor, signed a state lease with a major Rowland contributor that the state attorney general's office labeled a ''sweetheart deal.'' And a construction company owned by Mr. Delahunty's family did free work on Mr. Rowland's Litchfield cottage in 1997.
It was after Mr. Rowland admitted to lying about free work and gifts at that cottage that the impeachment inquiry began. William J. Sweeney, a lawyer for Mr. Delahunty, declined to comment on the matter Tuesday.
Also on Tuesday, the University of Connecticut issued a quarterly economic review containing an article suggesting that political corruption could curtail job growth.
The article, by Stephen P. Lanza, says that Connecticut is low in corruption compared with other states. But it also cites a study concluding that one additional conviction per 100 elected officials reduces job growth by 1.1 percent.
