Howard Mills, a little-known Republican assemblyman from Wallkill who is seeking to challenge Senator Charles E. Schumer, jumped into the race on Tuesday by trying to establish himself as a serious candidate and addressing doubts about his ability to compete financially.
Standing in a marble hallway in the Capitol under television lights, he held his first news conference, saying that he supported President Bush's initiative to get a constitutional amendment that would ban same-sex marriage and was fully supportive of Mr. Bush's decision to go to war. But only a couple of policy issues were raised in the brief, low-key affair, which was held outside the office of his fellow Republican Joseph L. Bruno, the Senate majority leader. Most of the questions and answers were more about style and money.
''I believe this campaign can be won,'' Mr. Mills said.
He bristled at the suggestion that in picking a relative unknown to run, the state party was essentially writing off the race.
''The state Republican Party did not turn to me, I turned to them,'' he said. ''I approached the governor, I approached the state chairman. I wanted to run. I went to them two weeks ago, and I said to them that I wanted to be the nominee for the Republican Party for the U.S. Senate because I think this race can be won.''
Mr. Mills is not officially the Republican candidate, but with the support of the state party and the governor, he is confident he will win the nomination in May.
In what he said was a preview of the campaign, Mr. Mills laced into Mr. Schumer.
''Senator Schumer has a record of press conferences, he has a record of fighting for headlines but not of delivering for New York, and that is going to be a theme of this campaign,'' Mr. Mills said.
Phil Singer, a spokesman for Mr. Schumer, responded, ''From bringing JetBlue Airways upstate to helping secure $20 billion for New York City, New Yorkers know that Chuck Schumer has a strong and deep record of accomplishment.''
Mr. Mills faces a formidable challenge in getting his message out across the state. Mr. Schumer has more than $20 million in the bank to finance his campaign, more than any other senator up for re-election this year.
Mr. Mills did not say how much money he has on hand or how much he believed he needed to raise, but he insisted he was not worried about the matter. ''Everyone looks at Chuck Schumer's war chest,'' he said. ''If every politician can just put together a campaign war chest and scare away any credible challenger, what kind of democracy would we have?''
He said he had spoken to Senator George Allen of Virginia, who as head of the National Republican Senatorial Committee could help finance his campaign, and was promised assistance.
''He told me they would have their full resources available to us,'' Mr. Mills said. ''We will have financial support and I am confident that we will have the resources to run a very effective campaign.''
Dan Allen, a spokesman for the Republican senatorial committee, said that Senator Allen and Mr. Mills would probably meet when the assemblyman came to Washington, but that no decision had been reached on whether they would contribute to the campaign financially.
Other Republican strategists said privately that it was unlikely that the national party would spend money in New York. That is partly a function of New York's not being viewed as a competitive arena and the financial reality the national party faces with new campaign finance laws.
While in 2001-02, the National Republican Senatorial Committee was able to spend roughly $60 million on candidates around the country, the committee currently has only about $10 million in the bank, according to public disclosure forms.
With five Democratic seats open in the South, seats Republicans feel they can challenge effectively, and several other tough races in the country, the Senate race in New York does not rank as a top priority.
