''MY father would drive five hours for the right pancetta, the right pecorino,'' Cesare Casella said as he whisked a shot of olive oil into a deep garnet pool of balsamic vinegar, red wine and red wine vinegar. ''This dish takes five minutes.''
Mr. Casella was preparing a hearty salad of scrambled eggs, pancetta and lettuce in a test kitchen two floors above Beppe, the Manhattan restaurant where he is the chef, research director, archivist, government liaison and genius loci. Although pancetta and pecorino are delivered right to his door, Mr. Casella has proved himself as persistent as his father in a somewhat different realm: the paper chase.
Last year, he filed a request with the Agriculture Department to import from Tuscany the Cinta Senese pig, a muscular heirloom breed prized for its intense flavor, to raise in the Hudson Valley. Importing foreign breeds of swine is an exhaustive, bureaucratic process, one that may take a year or two more before Mr. Casella is able to bring home the ''right'' bacon.
Turning to the far simpler task before him, Mr. Casella poured the dressing over a thatch of mixed salad greens, tossed it a few times with a fork and set it aside.
''I call this Pontormo's Salad,'' he said, explaining that the dish was inspired by Jacopo da Pontormo, the 16th-century Italian court painter. Mr. Casella has scoured the artist's diaries for references to food and drink.
In the course of his research, he learned that Pontormo ate regally in the presence of the Medicis, but that the meals he prepared in his own quarters, where a side of pancetta perpetually hung from the ceiling, were quite modest. A lowly head of lettuce became a meal with the addition of a healthy dose of protein: a scrambled egg on top.
Mr. Casella lighted a burner and from a tall steel pitcher with a long spout poured a splash of olive oil into a large frying pan. He picked up a bowl of dried herbs and sprinkled generous pinches into the oil.
''Sage, rosemary, thyme,'' he said. ''This is the only dish I use dry herbs. Why? I don't know.''
As the oil warmed, the piney fragrance of rosemary filled the kitchen, and Mr. Casella added to the pan a generous half-cup of pancetta: thin, pink batons about an inch long and marbled with fat. He cooked the pancetta in the oil over medium heat, stirring frequently to keep the herbs from scorching and to cook the pancetta evenly. He then started on his own road story.
''When I was 18, I would drive six hours to Troisgros or Bocuse,'' Mr. Casella said, referring to those temples of French haute cuisine. His cross-border research pilgrimages were made during rare days off from the kitchen of Il Vipore, the small restaurant in Pieve Santo Stefano in Tuscany, where his father is the gardener and provisioner, where his mother is the chef, and where Mr. Casella, 44, began his own cooking career at 13.
His parents were kept in the dark about his fact-finding missions. ''I would spend in one meal what my father spent in a week to supply Il Vipore,'' he said.
When the pancetta had just begun to crisp at the edges, Mr. Casella moved the pan from the flame to a cold burner. He cracked six eggs directly on top of the pancetta and herbs, and stirred them gently, as if in slow motion, with his whisk.
He turned the flame to low and returned the pan to the burner.
''I want to cook them together,'' he said, whisking swiftly a few seconds, then pausing to let the eggs set a little more. He stirred again, then stopped and repeated the gesture once more, until the eggs had firmed up, but still glistened.
''You don't want the eggs completely chalky and dry,'' Mr. Casella said. He transferred the contents of the pan to the bowl of salad greens he had dressed, tossed them lightly with tongs, then lifted portions of the salad from the bowl onto serving plates.
Although fresh leaves and scrambled eggs would seem to be incongruous on the plate, they blended together beautifully, the greens wilting slightly under the warm egg mixture, tinted a faint green by the herbs. The brisk, winy dressing checked the richness of the egg and the pancetta. Whatever its source, the dish seemed to capture the spirit of comfort food, Tuscan or otherwise.
We asked Mr. Casella if his persistence came from his father.
''My father was very particular,'' he said. ''For example, he never ate something frozen in his life.''
Except gelato.
PONTORMO'S SALAD  Adapted from Cesare Casella  Time: 5 to 10 minutes
1 1/2 teaspoons red wine vinegar  1 1/2 teaspoons balsamic vinegar  1 1/2 teaspoons red wine
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1/4 cup extra virgin olive oil  4 cups mixed salad greens in bite-size pieces  1 tablespoon mixed dried herbs like tarragon, rosemary, thyme, basil, sage or oregano  3 1/2 ounces pancetta, sliced and cut into 1-inch strips  6 eggs  Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste.
1. In a small bowl, whisk together vinegars and wine. Whisk in salt and pepper, followed by two tablespoons olive oil. Place salad greens in a large bowl, pour dressing over greens, and toss thoroughly to coat.
2. In a large frying pan, place remaining olive oil, herbs and pancetta over medium heat. Cook, stirring, until fat has rendered and pancetta begins to crisp, 5 to 7 minutes. Remove pan from heat and crack eggs into it, on top of pancetta and herbs. Stir eggs with a whisk to scramble them. Return pan to a low flame for a minute, but remove before eggs become entirely dry. Add salt and pepper to taste. Spread contents of pan over dressed greens, and toss to mix. Serve immediately.
Yield: 4 servings.
THE CHEF: CESARE CASELLA
