President Vladimir V. Putin abruptly dismissed Russia's prime minister and his cabinet on Tuesday, announcing that he would appoint a new government in a surprise shuffling of ministers on the eve of an election Mr. Putin is sure to win.
Mr. Putin, who announced his decision in a brief, emotionless address on state television, did not directly criticize the work of the prime minister, Mikhail M. Kasyanov, but said the country's voters deserved to know the shape of the new government before casting their ballots on March 14. But Mr. Putin did not explain exactly what shape the new government would take. Nor did he make any immediate announcement of a replacement, though he did install one of Mr. Kasyanov's deputies, Viktor B. Khristenko, as acting prime minister.
The dismissal of Mr. Kasyanov, the second most powerful official in Russia, is not expected to produce any immediate or significant changes in policy, which is strictly managed by Mr. Putin's Kremlin.
But by not immediately picking a successor, Mr. Putin injected an unexpected degree of political drama into an election season that his critics have increasingly derided as a charade of democracy that, on Tuesday, was threatening to drive two of the leading opponents in the presidential race to quit in frustration.
''The advancement of all state and socioeconomic reforms depends to the most vital extent precisely on the government,'' Mr. Putin said. ''That is why I think it correct right now, not awaiting the end of the election campaign, to declare the composition of the highest executive organ of state power, which will have to take on its share of responsibility for the further development of our country.''
Lawmakers and political analysts differed wildly on Mr. Putin's motives -- a reflection in itself of the opacity of the Kremlin's inner workings.
''It reminded me of Boris Nikolayevich's time, when serious political and personnel decisions were made without any explanation,'' Vladimir A. Ryzhkov, a liberal member of the Parliament, said in a radio broadcast on Ekho Moskvy, referring to former President Boris N. Yeltsin's frequent dismissals of prime ministers in the 1990's.
Some saw it as a continuation of an internal power struggle between Mr. Putin's advisers, divided between democratic reformers and those who represent the ascendant security services, known as the siloviki.
Others suggested that Mr. Putin's decision could be intended to shield him from criticism facing the government. It is one of the peculiarities of Russian politics that Mr. Putin remains overwhelmingly popular, while the government that he appointed is not.
Vladimir A. Pekhtin, vice speaker of Parliament and a leader of United Russia, the party loyal to Mr. Putin, blamed Mr. Kasyanov's government for stalling changes in the bureaucracy. In a statement, he praised Mr. Putin's ''timely decision.''
The acting prime minister, Mr. Khristenko, along with other ministers, including those overseeing the Foreign and Defense Ministries, will serve until Mr. Putin appoints a new prime minister and cabinet, which a Kremlin spokesman said would not happen until next week.
That ensures a week of intrigue and speculation -- which will almost certainly subsume any campaign news -- over who Mr. Kasyanov's replacement might be. Some have suggested that Mr. Putin's next prime minister would be his designated political heir in 2008, and Mr. Putin indicated in a recent speech that he intended to choose one.
Neither Mr. Putin nor other Kremlin officials discussed possible candidates, but the leading ones are believed to include Sergei B. Ivanov, now the defense minister, who, like Mr. Putin, served in the Soviet-era K.G.B., and Aleksei L. Kudrin, now the finance minister and deputy prime minister, who is considered a strong advocate of pro-market economic reforms. Dmitri N. Kozak, a lawyer from St. Petersburg and close adviser to Mr. Putin, is also considered to be a candidate.
Mr. Putin's move, the first significant shake-up of the top levels of government since he rose to power in 2000, came on a day that two of his most prominent challengers indicated they might drop out of the race because the Kremlin's dominance over government resources, especially over state television, made it impossible to compete fairly.
Irina M. Khakamada, a liberal and one of Mr. Putin's fiercest critics, said in a statement that the presidential campaign was increasingly characterized by ''lawlessness and lies.'' She called on Mr. Putin's other challengers to join her in what would amount to a boycott of the election next month.
Sergei Y. Glazyev, a member of Parliament from the opposite side of the political spectrum, was urged by his campaign managers to withdraw, as well. A spokeswoman, Yanina S. Dubeikovskaya, said Mr. Glazyev had not yet decided to pull out, but could make an announcement as soon as Wednesday. ''This cannot be called an election,'' she said.
While Mr. Kasyanov's departure in Mr. Putin's second term had long been expected, the timing was not.
It appeared to surprise everyone, including senior members of the government and their aides, some of whom said they learned of the decision like everyone else, on television.
A cabinet meeting scheduled for Tuesday morning was repeatedly postponed before being canceled moments before Mr. Putin's televised decree. At a meeting of his security council later in the day, Mr. Khristenko appeared directly to his right. The stock market quickly dropped because of the uncertainty surrounding Mr. Putin's announcement, though it recovered by the end of the day.
Mr. Kasyanov had served as prime minister since 2000, when Mr. Putin took over the presidency after Mr. Yeltsin's New Year's Eve resignation. Mr. Kasyanov, who previously served as finance minister, was considered an expert economic policy maker and an advocate of pro-market reforms.
He served loyally under Mr. Putin, but publicly differed with him last fall over the arrest of Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, the oilman who remains in prison on charges of fraud and tax evasion, which his lawyers and supporters call politically motivated. Mr. Kasyanov did not immediately make any public statement after his dismissal.
Olga V. Kryshtanovskaya, a scholar at the Institute of Sociology of the Russian Academy of Sciences, who has closely studied Mr. Putin's appointees, said Mr. Putin's move appeared to be an answer to the growing questions about the course of democracy in Russia.
In an interview, she predicted that Mr. Putin would appoint a new prime minister who would be viewed, here and abroad, as a moderate committed to advancing Russia's sputtering democratic evolution. If Mr. Putin intended to appoint a hard-liner from the siloviki, he would have waited until after his re-election, she said.
''It's purely a pre-election P.R. step,'' she said.
