It would only be human nature for Coach Lawrence Frank and the Nets to look past the depleted Toronto Raptors and set their sights on the Minnesota Timberwolves.
After all, it was the Timberwolves' Kevin Garnett who said last week that the Detroit Pistons would be the Eastern Conference team to reach the N.B.A. finals.
But the Nets swore they would not look ahead, and they took care of business Tuesday night at Continental Arena with a methodical 86-74 victory.
The victory was the Nets' 14th straight, the longest streak in the N.B.A. this season, surpassing the 13 in a row won by the Spurs and the Pistons. The last time the Nets lost was Jan. 23.
The Nets have won eight straight games at home and 18 of 20 since a 2-6 start. And Frank is 13-0 as head coach, four games better than the previous N.B.A. record for a coach beginning his career.
''I think it's incredible, an incredible feat, to do this and think about where this team was about three, four weeks ago and where the team is now,'' Rod Thorn, the Nets' president, said. ''No one's ever done it, the first time in the history of sports. I think he's going to be a terrific coach in this league. He prepares people, makes good decisions, whether it's changing defenses or getting the right people in the game. He's done a terrific job.''
Kenyon Martin had a game-high 25 points and 15 rebounds and Jason Kidd added 17 points and 7 assists. Rodney Rogers contributed 12 points, shooting 6 of 6 -- all in the second quarter -- to help open a 15-point halftime lead.
The Raptors, who lost to the Nets in Toronto on Friday, played without Vince Carter (sprained ankle), Jalen Rose (broken hand) and point guard Alvin Williams (sore right knee). Toronto, which has lost six straight games, started a lineup of Roger Mason Jr., Milt Palacio and Morris Peterson alongside the usual starters Chris Bosh and Donyell Marshall.
If there was a moment when the Nets might have been thinking ahead to Wednesday's game against Minnesota, it came early in the fourth quarter. A 19-point lead late in the third quarter was whittled to 11 with 9 minutes 52 seconds to play and Frank called a timeout. But he kept Zoran Planinic on the floor and rested Kidd.
Just over a minute later, the lead was down to 73-68, with the Raptors scoring the first 11 points of the fourth quarter. Frank called another timeout and summoned Kidd and Kerry Kittles off the bench. If the starting five were not enough to regain the team's focus, Martin had to be pulled away from Referee Tony Brothers, and Frank drew a technical foul from Referee Eddie F. Rush.
''We let down,'' Kidd said. ''We had the game under control and they kept playing. We were fortunate to win the game. We were up 20 and kind of went on cruise control. We've just got to learn from that. Nobody was out there talking about Minnesota. I think we just relaxed a little bit. Now we see what can happen when we relax.''
Kidd said the team had not been talking about the winning streak. ''Nobody is jumping around, excited,'' he said. ''We try to keep everything in perspective and understand that there's a lot of basketball to be played and we've got to get better.''
Frank's 13-0 start is better than any in Major League Baseball, the National Football League or the National Hockey League -- topping the 12 consecutive victories in baseball by Joe Morgan with the 1988 Boston Red Sox and by Jim Price with the 1884 New York Gothams, who became the Giants the next season.
Before the game, Frank said: ''I'd be lying to you if I wasn't aware, just because I've heard about it. But at the same time, with all due respect to those before, it's irrelevant.''
Afterward, Kidd had this to say of his coach: ''We all respect what he has to offer to the game, and if you say you dislike what he's all about, then you don't like basketball.''
PRO BASKETBALL
