At a time when architects are radically rethinking the urban landscape of Europe, it is a commentary on the marginal influence of fashion that no designer has attempted to produce a similar sense of excitement in clothes. What you saw in Giorgio Armani's ample coats, with their spreading collars and nipped waists, was not the style of Norman Foster's London but the style of London before the motorcar. And despite Miuccia Prada's love of architecture, you didn't see in her romantic steeple prints the new Germany of Daniel Libeskind but the old Germany as recalled in the dog-eared tourist guides you find in the Berlin flea market, of Ulm and Baden-Baden in their doily days.
History is a heavy harp for fashion to play, especially in the age of the plasma television and the titanium-clad building. Mr. Armani said before his show on Monday that he was thinking of the eccentric woman who emerged at the turn of the last century, her body trim in a small-shoulder jacket (now in brown snakeskin lined with mink) and her skirts rustling at the hem with a spray of tulle. Mr. Armani's clothes were indeed very beautiful, though not in a revolutionary way. He broke away from the careworn notion of a tastefully composed outfit, offering more exceptional separates like loose sweaters made of woolly yarn curls, mink knitted with tulle and transparent blouses laser-cut into half-moon slivers.
The jersey belled trousers and sweeping, romantic coats looked new from Mr. Armani, who has been chided for not keeping up with the times. But while he was right to place himself in the couture tradition of Chanel and Balenciaga -- here and there with an extravagant sleeve or an evening wrap puffing off the shoulder -- the eccentric creature he was imagining still belongs to another time.
Before Ms. Prada's show on Tuesday night, she said she was intrigued by the unexpected relation between Romantic Era German and Italian paintings of the 19th century and the computerized images and colors of video games. ''I realized there was exactly the same kind of drama going on,'' she said. It takes a designer of Ms. Prada's curiosity and mental speed to make such a connection, but there it was, in vintage prints and moiré silks, which appeared as both the real and virtual versions, as a romantic German princess with a liebchen portrait neckline and as a video-game princess whose watery moiré skirt looked almost jumpy.
It is rare for a designer to think in historical modes and, at the same time, in new media, much less to be able to express the dynamic in clothes you can wear. With her ingenious prints, Ms. Prada came close to capturing the energy you see in graphic design and even in architecture, with its use of materials that create three-dimensional forms and luminous surfaces. There were dresses, for instance -- filmy skins of pale chiffon worn over matching undergarments -- that appeared to be creased with lines but were actually printed. The effect was incredibly sneaky because for half a second you thought the girl was naked under her dress. Only she wasn't.
Yet somewhere in the middle of all this excitement, Ms. Prada fell back on the old harp. Slim suits and coats in charcoal wool looked smartly beautiful, and the use of broaches and patches of crystal beads was enchanting. But her romantic leanings led her into too many coats belted over sweaters and pleated skirts, producing an hourglass silhouette that looks static -- even artificial -- in a contemporary landscape. In a way, Ms. Prada can't help herself. She is of an age when the past still means something. The challenge now for her and all thoughtful designers is how to break with it. Because that is the only way that fashion will have an influence in this century.
In Tomas Maier's first full-scale presentation for Bottega Veneta on Tuesday, he proved he may just be the Gucci Group's most underrated designer. He has already shown imagination with leather goods, moving Bottega Veneta far from its woven, old bag days. Now, with his ready-to-wear, he brings a true sense of eccentricity missing from the fall 2004 collections. He was lightly inspired by the architecture and colors of New York -- ''the shiny black,'' as he said, ''of Park Avenue after a rain'' -- and he made each garment a jewel on its own. To an urban base of asphalt-colored tweed and flannel, he added cropped jackets in vivid yellow crocodile and fire-color suede, ''caviar'' print blouses and jazzy multicolored sweaters. The silhouette was elongated, with a slightly dropped waist, and Mr. Maier artfully removed the vintage from his prints.
''It's not like a regular ready-to-wear collection,'' he said as the models posed on platforms, their hair slicked into marcelled waves. ''It's all about an item.''
Rifat Ozbek, the London designer, is now behind the Pollini label, and with any luck, he will put it on the boards. This was a terrific collection, with digitalized printed and pleated dresses worn with brocade-trimmed coats, tops with ribbon ties at the cuffs, and printed wool skirts in Tibetan sunrise colors. Mr. Ozbek blended the urbane with the ethnic, more than he did in the past with his own line in the 1990's. To wit, a gray herringbone cape with a high fluted collar in those Himalayan tones. Isabella Blow, the fashion editor of Tatler, was trying to snag the cape after the Monday show to wear out that night. Well, why not? It looked absolutely right.
Alberta Ferretti didn't move mountains with her show on Monday, opening with her signature skimmy dresses, now capped with fur shrugs (haven't we seen enough of them?) and tweed shifts fringed at the hems. The collection had a touch of the 1920's influence creeping through fashion this season, with bias dresses and loose boxy jackets worn with black stockings and wedge sandals. Still, Ms. Ferretti knows which side her bread is buttered on, with the front row of retail honchos sitting shank to shank and not thinking of Berlin or the new new world.
