Israel and Jordan have agreed to build an environmental studies center on their shared desert border, a rare instance of cooperation on a major project between the Middle East neighbors, officials said Tuesday.
The countries will donate a total of 150 acres of parched land along the frontier, about 30 miles south of the Dead Sea. A private group, Bridging the Rift, will develop the center with two American universities, Cornell and Stanford.
The project comes at a time of great mistrust and turmoil in the region. But supporters describe it as a serious scientific effort to focus on biological sciences in the desert environment, as well as the kind of bridge-building that was envisioned when Israel and Jordan signed a peace treaty a decade ago.
''This is going to be a full-blown operating research center,'' Cornell's president, Jeffrey S. Lehman, said in a telephone interview. ''We would not be doing this if we did not believe it was a good science project.''
Mr. Lehman is to lead the delegation from his university, which will take part in a ground-breaking at the site, known as Wadi Arava, on March 9, along with Israeli and Jordanian cabinet ministers. Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel and King Abdullah II of Jordan will be hosts that day at separate ceremonies in Jerusalem and Amman.
The Israel-Jordan border, while heavily guarded, has been largely calm during the past three years of Middle East fighting. The countries have agreed to take down a small segment of the border fence so the new institution can straddle the frontier, according to Avigdor Itzchaky, the director general of Mr. Sharon's office.
''The idea is to remove part of the border and create a free education zone,'' said Mati Kochavi, one of the founders and the chief executive of Bridging the Rift.
Mr. Kochavi, an Israeli businessman who has lived in New York for the past decade, began working on the idea four years ago, before the current round of Israeli-Palestinian fighting began. His group includes a mix of Jordanians, Israelis and Americans who have raised money and designed the project.
''Very few people in these two countries talk to each other,'' Mr. Kochavi said of Israelis and Jordanians. ''We want to start by speaking the common language of science, and then we will build the language of cooperation and partnership.''
Although Jordan has not been involved in the Middle East bloodshed, the violence has heightened tensions and made the project much more difficult, Mr. Kochavi said in a telephone interview from New York.
Jordan withdrew its ambassador from Israel after the Israeli-Palestinian violence erupted in September 2000. On Tuesday, a Jordanian diplomat told the International Court of Justice in The Hague that his country feared Israel's separation barrier in the West Bank could prompt large numbers of Palestinians to flee to Jordan.
Still, King Abdullah has sought to serve as a Middle East mediator. Last June the king welcomed Mr. Sharon; Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian prime minister at the time; and President Bush to a meeting in Aqaba, Jordan, to formally introduce a Middle East peace plan.
The academic center is expected to take three to five years to build, and will initially accommodate about 150 people, with long-term plans to expand to 1,000, according to Mr. Kochavi.
Cornell and Stanford will send scientists to work with Israelis and Jordanians who have been accepted as graduate students at either of the universities. Students from other Middle East countries are expected to join later.
Though Israel has been seeking to improve relations with Jordan, Mr. Sharon had harsh words on Tuesday for the Palestinian prime minister, Ahmed Qurei, who is known as Abu Ala.
''The Abu Ala government is a government of murder and lies,'' Mr. Sharon was quoted as saying in Yediot Ahronot, Israel's largest circulation daily. ''It will be impossible to reach any agreement with this government.''
Mr. Qurei has been in office more than four months, but has yet to meet with Mr. Sharon for talks on the stalled Middle East peace plan.
