The finale of ''Sex and the City'' paid off for HBO Sunday night with record ratings for the long-running comedy.
About 10.6 million viewers watched the show, easily dwarfing the previous high for the series of 7.7 million. That made ''Sex and the City'' the second most watched show at that hour Sunday night, beating all the broadcast networks except ABC, which drew 17.5 million viewers for its first edition of ''Super Millionaire.''
Meanwhile the Fox network scored a huge success with a finale of its own Monday night as its latest reality series, ''My Big Fat Obnoxious Fiancé,'' brought in about 21 million viewers, one of the biggest numbers of the year for reality shows.
Beyond its big viewer totals Sunday night, ''Sex and the City'' had even more to brag about: it beat every network, including ABC, Sunday night in the audience most of the networks use as their benchmark, viewers between the ages of 18 and 49.
In that group, ''Sex'' pulled in 7.43 million viewers, nosing out ''Millionaire'' with 7.33 million.
HBO of course is available in only about 30 percent of the nation's homes, compared with the nearly 100 per cent reached by the broadcast networks.
Chris Albrecht, the chairman of HBO, said , ''It was really gratifying that so many people in the media and obviously from these numbers so many viewers, had this kind of connection to a television show that also supplied a very satisfying ending.'' As for how HBO will live without the show, Mr. Albrecht said, ''Thank God 'The Sopranos' is coming back in two weeks.''
Over at Fox the results for the ''Fat, Obnoxious Fiancé'' were only a minor surprise, said Mike Darnell, who heads that network's reality programming, ''because we saw the momentum building, and we thought we had a really great finale.''
Among all reality shows this season, the ''Fiancé'' finale was beaten in that 18-to-49-year-old category only by several of Fox's editions of ''American Idol'' and the first episode of the current ''Survivor'' on CBS, which was broadcast after the Super Bowl.
Mr. Darnell said the idea of a ''surprise conceit'' as a format was something he was toying with for other reality shows.
For HBO all of Sunday night was a ratings highlight. An hourlong special retrospective of ''Sex and the City,'' from 8 to 9 p.m., also drew a huge number of viewers, about 7 million. And ''Curb Your Enthusiasm,'' the comedy that followed the finale, scored its second-best rating ever, with more than 5 million viewers.
HBO is still exploring the idea of producing a ''Sex and the City'' movie, and the four stars are under contract for three months while a possible script is prepared.
