In the hill country just north of here, a rail repair car laden with sections of track broke loose from a locomotive before dawn the other day and began to roll down the line, free of all control.
For more than three miles it gathered pace in dark and deadly silence until -- at around 40 miles an hour near the village of Tebay -- it smashed into a group of repair workers, killing four of them.
In the annals of needless tragedy, the incident might seem small, but on the television news, reporters called it Britain's latest rail disaster, as if this single rogue railroad car had joined the chronicle of fatal crashes in southern England whose locations -- Southall and Ladbroke Grove, Hatfield and Potters Bar -- have come to be cast as emblems of how far Britain has traveled from the rose glow of its post-imperial past. Indeed, for some the crash sites are no more than chapter headings in a fable of decline.
Mournful talk of the railways, of course, is a staple of public discourse, particularly on the crammed commuter trains that lurch into London each day, or along the drafty platforms of countless railroad stations becalmed by delays and cancellations across the land.
But as television's treatment of the Tebay deaths showed, the debate evokes deep and conflicting memories beyond mere commuter grumblings, reaching into the way Britons see the state of their nation.
At a theater in London a new play by David Hare, called ''The Permanent Way,'' tells the story of the four crashes from Southall in 1997 to Potters Bar in 2002 as an angry tirade against the government's decision in the 1990's to sell off the once state-owned railways to private companies -- a ''painful parable,'' Mr Hare said, of bad government.
By contrast, at this onetime rail hub, 250 miles northwest of London, volunteers have rebuilt the station tearoom to resemble its erstwhile appearance as the set of the 1945 movie ''Brief Encounter'' -- a tale of thwarted longing and infinite sorrow starring Celia Johnson and Trevor Howard, whose trackside yearnings seem peculiarly relevant to Britain's often forgotten romance with its railroads. Even the station clock that figures in the film, built in 1880, has been restored to functioning splendor.
''People come here for nostalgia,'' said Jane Quinn, the owner of the tearoom. ''They come because years ago they met here and now want to come back.''
But it is precisely that interplay of generations that helps define one aspect of modern Britain, tugging the nation's heartstrings between a past cloaked ever more in the myths of time and a present that has learned its lessons of instant celebrity so well from the United States that it has begun to re-export them.
In a television competition last year, viewers were still sufficiently enamored of their history to vote Winston Churchill the greatest Briton ever. But so-called ''reality'' television spectacles like ''I'm a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here'' offer the nation new icons in the form of C-list celebrities reanointed in the pantheons of transient fame. If Churchill defined one notion of Britain and America marching in lock step, consider a more recent Atlantic crossing: shows like ''American Idol'' (''Pop Idol'' in Britain) or even ''Big Brother'' made their debut in Britain before taking their brand of quick-fix fame to the United States.
On the railways, the gulf between present and past seems peculiarly sharp. This is, after all, the land that pioneered steam-powered rail travel with George Stephenson's locomotive, the Rocket, in 1829 (In 1830, the Rocket also pioneered rail accidents when it ran over William Huskisson, a legislator from Liverpool, mangling his leg so badly that he died of his wounds). Indeed, the railroad powered the industrial revolution, inspiring the dreams of empire that linger still in the collective memory of older Britons. But there is a more elusive association.
''People don't care about people any more,'' said Peter Yates, 56, the head of a trust that has overseen the renovation of the Carnforth tearoom and built a museum of railroad memorabilia here.
''People come here because they are hungry for the values they saw in 'Brief Encounter,' the values of that era -- politeness, correctness, loyalty,'' he said. ''This place revolves around nostalgia. Everyone is hungry for nostalgia.''
And people do come here, sip tea or coffee and tour the museum -- here a photograph of the station platform in 1904, when the mainline trains from London to Glasgow still stopped here, and there a luggage trolley with leather suitcases. In a makeshift theater, they also screen ''Brief Encounter.''
Compare that with ''The Permanent Way'' on stage in London, a production full of rail rage and sorrow, borne along by outrage that profit-driven privatization of the railways should have led to so much death and suffering.
If the mood in Carnforth is lyrically nostalgic, then the atmosphere on stage in London's Cottesloe Theater is acrid with anger at the way the government, then run by the Conservatives, sliced up the once monolithic British Rail into a series of privately owned operating franchises separate both from one another and from the company responsible for the tracks and stations.
Where engineers once held sway, the show asserts, expediency and greed fused together at the expense of basic maintenance that might have averted the four crashes.
In an article after the play started its run, Ian Jack, the editor of the literary magazine Granta and author of a book that inspired the show, said that, perhaps, the crashes -- and the play -- had finally removed the tinted lenses from British retrospection.
Mr. Jack recalled the fondly soft-focus railway writings of the onetime poet laureate John Betjeman and concluded that it was ''impossible to write of railways in such a way any more.''
''You might have to say we have carried on writing about them like that for far too long -- nostalgically, after the facts of them had utterly changed,'' he said.
LETTER FROM EUROPE
