When Howard Dean withdrew from the Democratic presidential race last week, he left hundreds of thousands of passionate voters without a candidate. He left a highly efficient Internet organizing and fund-raising machine without a cause. And he left state operations, the envy of his opponents, without any reason to be.
Now as the remaining candidates battle it out with an eye toward the Super Tuesday contests, Dr. Dean's supporters and his vast political machine have become an important wild card. And so they are being aggressively courted by all the candidates, particularly Senator John Edwards.
In Minnesota Dr. Dean's former campaign leaders are weighing whether to get behind Mr. Edwards, Mr. Kerry or to vote ''undecided.'' In New York, some of Dr. Dean's former state officials have started a Web site, DeaniacsforEdwards.com, while some grass-roots supporters are continuing to back the former candidate. In California, the Dean apparatus is not dissuading his supporters from continuing to push his candidacy aggressively, to send Dean delegates to the Democratic National Convention this summer.
An aide to Dr. Dean said the former Vermont governor had spoken to both Mr. Edwards and the Democratic front-runner, John Kerry, in recent days.
But Dr. Dean is getting conflicting advice from his closest advisers, with some telling him to endorse Mr. Edwards, others telling him to endorse Mr. Kerry, and some telling him only to endorse when there is a certain nominee.
And it remains unclear whether he could dictate the direction of his supporters, even if he wanted to do so.
''The whole organization was so decentralized, it's not a command and control organization,'' said Karen Hicks, Dr. Dean's state director in New Hampshire. ''Even if Governor Dean were to endorse a candidate, it's not certain that the whole organization would shift in that direction.''
In dozens of interviews with Dean devotees, from organizers to ordinary voters, in half a dozen different states, opinion was fairly split between Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry.
And a large number of volunteers said they planned to stick with Mr. Dr. Dean or at least his ideas. In many states, his name remains on the ballot.
In North Carolina, dozens of Dean staff members vowed on Monday night to ''stay the course'' and to continue working for the candidate, hoping to get some delegates who supported Dr. Dean to the Democratic convention in July.
'We were deeply committed to the cause of Howard Dean and we couldn't stomach not voting for him,'' said Blaise Strenn, a Dean volunteer coordinator in Raleigh, N.C.
''Sure Edwards may be a little closer to our values. But, in a way, both he and Kerry are Bush-lite. So as long as we have a choice on the ballots, we will remain Deaniacs and show we are a force to be reckoned with.''
Susanne Savage, a Dean volunteer in California, voiced similar sentiment. ''I've been working an entire year on this Dean campaign,'' she said. ''It's my pleasure and my privilege to vote for Dean on March 2. So that's what I'm going to do.''
Mayor R. T. Rybak of Minneapolis, co-chairman of the Dean campaign in Minnesota, said Mr. Edwards met with some top Dean supporters in the state, himself included, on Saturday to seek their support. Mr. Kerry planned to do the same. Mr. Rybak said the campaign would hold an open meeting for Dr. Dean's supporters on Thursday to decide what to do.
He said, it was possible that the remnants of Dr. Dean's Minnesota operation would caucus for an undecided designation. The idea, he said, would be to create a slate of state delegates born of Dr. Dean's campaign but beholden to no one.
''The irony is that a campaign that crashed so quickly has created a legacy that can be the infrastructure for a more energized party,'' he said. ''The campaign is irrelevant. The movement is what matters, and that transcends Dean and his operation and goes to the core values that brought people together. Nobody is sitting around here waiting to get orders from Burlington.''
In New York, Eric Schmeltzer, the former state press secretary for the Dean campaign, said he and a group of former staff members had created DeaniacsforEdwards.com, in an effort to use the Web site to move Dean votes to Mr. Edwards. ''I think he's more in line with the principles that Governor Dean elaborated and I think he's more electable,'' he said. ''If we are successful at moving voters as a block, it could move the race forward again.''
But Tracey Denton, who ran a volunteer group of more than 1,000 members, NYCforDean, said most of her group was planning to vote for Dr. Dean in next Tuesday's New York primary. She said she resented pressure from former state campaign officials to do otherwise. ''These people don't represent the grass roots,'' she said.
Stanley Sherman, an artist and Dean volunteer in New York City, said that he had ''toyed with voting for Edwards'' in the New York primary, but that he decided that he ''just couldn't do it'' and would pull the lever for Dr. Dean instead.
''When people view their candidate as the savior and then he's gone, it is easy for the movement to disappear -- but we are determined not to let that happen,'' said Mr. Sherman, who still wears a Dean for President button. He and many other Dean supporters said they would instead seek to promote the issues central to the Dean campaign -- from fighting against the war in Iraq to environmental protection.
But many less ardent supporters spoke in more practical terms. Those leaning toward Mr. Edwards said they felt that Mr. Kerry was too much of a Washington ''insider'' and that they considered Mr. Edwards something of a populist renegade. ''Like Dean, I think Edwards could bring a new perspective to Washington and reinvigorate the party, said Mike Livemore, a law student at New York University.
Others said it was most important to go with the most certain winner for the Democrats. ''Now Kerry has a strong lead, so I'll support him, but it feels a little disappointing,'' said Helen Johannesen, a student at the New School for Social Research in Manhattan.
A close aide to Dr. Dean said the former candidate's main advisers were of different minds about whether he should endorse anyone before the nominee was chosen.
Those who argue for Mr. Edwards point out that he is more similar to Dr. Dean with his outsider message and promises to help the disenfranchised, the aide said. The argument for an endorsement of Mr. Kerry holds that by endorsing Mr. Edwards, Dr. Dean would risk appearing like a sore loser out to harm Mr. Kerry, and that while his endorsement would greatly help Mr. Edwards, his candidacy could remain a long shot just the same.
Jay Carson, a spokesman for Dr. Dean, said: ''He has no plans to endorse anyone right now, except for the nominee. He will definitely be fully supportive of the nominee.''
In that vacuum, many former Deaniacs are agonizing over how to cast their votes. ''I'm looking to fall in love with John Kerry,'' said Katy Eymann, a business coach and Dean volunteer from Salem, Ore. ''I suppose I'm looking at Edwards too. I'm a loyal Democrat, so I'll support either one in the end, though I don't feel much enthusiasm about the two.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
