On those late-summer nights in the minor leagues when the crowd was paltry and the road to New York looked long, Drew Henson would call the one baseball player who he knew understood what he was going through and what he was giving up.
That player was Kenny Kelly, who these days walks shirtless through the Mets' spring training clubhouse, a University of Miami logo tattooed on one arm. The logo includes a full-color picture of Sebastian the Ibis, the Hurricanes' mascot. David Weathers, the veteran relief pitcher, asks Kelly about the current landscape of college football. Esix Snead, a minor leaguer like Kelly, asks him about his favorite pass pattern.
He smiles wearily and slides his baseball jersey over his head. Kelly, a nonroster outfielder, is wearing No. 0.
Kelly first met Henson two years ago in the Arizona Fall League, which just happened to coincide with the 2001 college football season. They would play baseball, then go to dinner and ponder what they were missing back on campus.
At the time, Kelly was supposed to be the starting quarterback at Miami. Henson was supposed to be the starting quarterback at Michigan. But because of extravagant signing bonuses and differing circumstances, they had left two of the most glamorous gigs in all of sports for outposts in the bush leagues.
''I knew what Drew was going  through because he was just like me,'' Kelly said. ''He never struggled before, and then he struggled a lot. Drew could have been an all-star baseball player, but if you're not happy with this sport, it will eat you up. And Drew was not happy.''
When Henson recently left the Yankees organization for what he hopes will be a fulfilling career in the N.F.L., Kelly called to offer his congratulations. Kelly then reported to spring training in Port St. Lucie, which is about two hours north of Miami.
Once billed as the prototypical quarterback for a new era, a prodigy who would surely lead the Hurricanes back to national prominence, Kelly won the starting position at Miami as a sophomore in 1999. He led the Big East conference with 212.6 passing yards a game, despite playing only nine games, and he produced a victory over Georgia Tech in the Gator Bowl.
With Kelly at the helm, Miami expected to challenge for the national championship the next season, but Coach Butch Davis did not want him to continue playing baseball in the summer for the Tampa Bay Devil Rays organization. Davis gave Kelly an ultimatum: Miami football or minor league baseball.
For many 21-year-olds in a football-obsessed state like Florida, the choice would have been obvious. But Kelly's life had become much more complicated; when he was only 16, he fathered his first child, a girl named Jeneisha. While Henson chose baseball to guarantee his future wealth, Kelly chose it in part to support his family.
''When I had my little girl, it was scary because I was so young,'' Kelly said. ''A lot of decisions I made weren't just for myself. But I think that turned around my career and my life. Like any other young man, I used to go out and hang out. When my little girl came into the world, I settled down and focused on the real parts of my life.''
He earned a major league call-up with Tampa Bay in 2000, but was traded to Seattle and found himself back in Class AA in 2001. Meanwhile, Miami marched through the football season undefeated. In what was supposed to be Kelly's senior year, Ken Dorsey took the Hurricanes to the national championship. Dorsey was playing Kelly's position, on Kelly's team, with many of Kelly's closest friends. A lifelong Miami fan, he found it almost painful to cheer.
''All I could think was, 'That could have been me,' '' Kelly said. ''I saw how a lot of those guys excelled and won the national championship, and I was happy for them, but it was hard because I wasn't there. I had always dreamed of winning a national championship at Miami.''
He is just 25 now, but admits that he looks and feels significantly older. Kelly was forced to make adult decisions when he was still a teenager. He became the subject of an intense recruiting battle, then found himself amid a quarterback competition at a college that seems to major in quarterbacks.
''He went through a lot at Miami,'' said Snead, one of Kelly's closest friends in the Mets' system. ''Being a quarterback at Miami is one of the toughest things you can do. There was more pressure on him than most people can understand.''
When the Mets traded Rey Sanchez to the Mariners last season, they asked for Kelly in return, partly because of the athletic ability he shows in the outfield, and partly because of his background. Jim Duquette, the Mets' general manager, says he likes to acquire players who can ''handle New York.'' Kelly has already handled playing in front of 80,000 fans at the Swamp at the University of Florida.
''There's no doubt about his ability to handle a tough situation or a tough crowd,'' Duquette said. ''Going into Florida State or Florida, I can't imagine that's any less intense than what it would be like in a playoff game in New York.''
Kelly says he daydreams about winning the World Series with the Mets, saying it would surpass even a national championship at Miami. Although he has never hit better than .280 in the minor leagues and is disappointed in his development to this point, he has impressed the Mets in the first few days of spring training, showing an eagerness to learn.
The club still considers Kelly a prospect because he has not had enough years to progress as a full-time baseball player. He will probably start this season at Class AAA Norfolk, playing alongside Snead, another former college football player, who caught passes from Minnesota Vikings quarterback Daunte Culpepper at Central Florida.
Snead also befriended Henson, and whenever he reached third base against the Columbus Clippers last season, they would draw football plays in the dirt. Snead and Kelly are doing the same. During outfield drills, Snead acts as if he is catching post patterns. Kelly's favorite route, fittingly, is the comeback.
After practice, Kelly watches sportscasters on TV debating a potential trade that would send the Denver Broncos' Clinton Portis to the Washington Redskins. Kelly played with Portis at Miami. As Portis achieves national stardom, Kelly is just trying to make a team.
These days, Kelly is just like any another young professional with a new wife, three children and some very famous friends. When he calls Henson these days, he can hear the happiness in his voice.
Kelly promises to follow Henson throughout his new career. But he promises never to follow him back to football.
INSIDE PITCH
MIKE CAMERON said the bone spur in his right big toe was improving and Manager ART HOWE said it was not a concern ''right now.'' . . . A groundskeeper put a covering over a fence on one of the fields, preventing fans from watching MIKE PIAZZA take ground balls at first base. Mets officials said the covering resulted from ''miscommunication'' and had it taken down.
BASEBALL  Correction:  March 5, 2004, Friday  A sports article on Feb. 25 about Kenny Kelly, a former University of Miami quarterback who is now an outfielder in the New York Mets organization, referred incorrectly to a comment by the baseball team's general manager about the player's preparedness to ''handle New York.'' Although Kelly played quarterback for two seasons, in 1998 and 1999, no Miami games took place then at the University of Florida's stadium, known as the Swamp.
