Despite Iranian disavowals, International Atomic Energy Agency experts in Iran have found evidence of indigenous production of a concentrated fuel that, if pure enough, can be used to make nuclear weapons. They said in an inspection report that equipment made there showed many traces of the fuel, highly enriched uranium.
Iran has consistently argued that any traces of concentrated fuel must have come from equipment contaminated before it was imported, presumably from Pakistan. But the report, distributed yesterday to the agency's board, found the fuel on parts Iranians had made, and ''only negligible traces'' on imported parts.
The evidence that Iran may still be hiding crucial elements of its nuclear program prompted a sharp response from the Bush administration, with one senior official saying, ''The key right now is to build an international consensus about what Iran is doing, and the Iranians are making it easier every day, by their failure to disclose and by what's being found in Iran.''
The agency's report stops well short of declaring that Iran has a weapons program under way, and in that respect it disappointed American officials who have cast scorn on Iran's arguments that it is seeking to produce fuel only for power plants.
But the report also contradicts many of the claims of Iranian leaders. It found, for example, that Iran had concealed plans and experimental work to make sophisticated centrifuges, including a model called the P-2, a second-generation Pakistani design that has also been found in Libya. Centrifuges are used to make enriched uranium.
Iran has said it encouraged domestic companies to produce the components it needed for the centrifuges. But, the report noted, ''most workshops for the domestic production of centrifuges are owned by military industrial organizations.''
Centrifuges are hollow metal tubes that spin very fast to enrich uranium in its rare uranium 235 isotope. When thousands are linked together, they can concentrate the isotope enough to make potent nuclear-bomb fuel. Nuclear reactors use a less concentrated isotope.
Other findings include the assertion that until pressed, Iran hid work done at a previously known reactor to make polonium 210, a highly radioactive isotope that in small amounts can help set off a nuclear explosion. Polonium 210 has peaceful uses as well, and the Iranians denied it was linked to a weapons program. The polonium program's existence was reported yesterday by The Washington Post.
The Iranians also failed to account for a discrepancy between the amount of plutonium they showed inspectors and the amount the inspectors calculated the Iranian equipment should have produced. But the missing amount does not appear to be enough to build a bomb.
The agency, a branch of the United Nations, said it was still trying to figure out whether nuclear material had been diverted to projects that inspectors have yet to discover.
According to the report, Iranian officials have now promised to go beyond past pledges to suspend operation of fuel-producing centrifuges: They have vowed to halt the production of new centrifuges and parts early next month.
The agency said Iran had assembled ''some 120 centrifuges'' since it announced its suspension of operations in November. It also said Iran had agreed that if it cannot suspend all its contracts for centrifuge parts, it will put those parts under the supervision of international inspectors.
In London on Tuesday, senior British officials confirmed the new commitments from Tehran. ''It's significant,'' a European diplomat familiar with the report said of the new pledges. ''If you don't have centrifuges spinning, you can't make material for bombs.''
Iran's efforts to produce bomb fuel became a central issue for George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, in an appearance on Tuesday before the Senate Intelligence Committee to discuss threats facing the United States.
While noting that Iran had begun to give international inspectors access, he said, ''The difference between producing low-enriched uranium and weapons-capable high-enriched uranium is only a matter of time and intent, not technology.''
Over the weekend, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell urged Britain, France and Germany to put additional pressure on Iran, despite the deal struck by the three countries late last year to avoid a showdown on the nuclear issue at the United Nations Security Council.
Still, one senior American official said, there is little concern that Iran is on the verge of obtaining a weapon. The official said, ''Everyone believes that with the I.A.E.A. crawling over the country,'' it would be difficult for Iran to do so.
Another official said, ''I don't think we're prepared to go to the Security Council yet, but every week, we're peeling back another layer of the onion, and maybe that's just as good.''
The international agency's report notes ''several common elements'' between Iran's nuclear program and Libya's, which is being dismantled.
It does not raise the question foremost in the minds of American officials: whether the Pakistani network led by A. Q. Khan sold Iran the complete plans for building a warhead. Such a plan was sold to Libya, and when Libyan officials turned it over to the United States and the agency last month, it was flown out of country. It is now being examined at the Department of Energy, the custodian of the American nuclear arsenal.
Last year, the I.A.E.A. found traces of highly enriched uranium on Iranian centrifuge equipment, touching off an international crisis. The new report said the centrifuge gear and Iran's claims about it still pose ''a number of discrepancies and unanswered questions.''
For instance, it said, uranium contamination from two centrifuge plants differed in material respects, even though Iran said the source in both cases was the same: imported centrifuge parts.
It added that the agency had found the purity of highly enriched uranium from one of the sites, the Kalaye Electric Company, to be 36 percent -- short of the 90 percent needed for most nuclear bomb designs but far greater than that needed to make fuel for nuclear reactors.
The most surprising disclosure was the report's claim that the agency had found ''only negligible traces'' of the 36 percent-enriched uranium on imported parts. In the past, Iran had argued that any such material would have entered the country on imported gear.
By contrast, the Kalaye site, which housed Iran's prototype centrifuge plant, ''seems to be predominantly contaminated'' with the highly enriched uranium.
Private experts said that finding suggested -- but did not prove -- that Iran, contrary to its repeated claims and denials, had itself begun to use its centrifuges to produce highly enriched uranium.
''Something here is very fishy,'' said David Albright, president of the Institute for Science and International Security, an arms control group in Washington. He added that the Iranians were ''clearly nervous to cave'' and suspend manufacturing.
The energy agency's report will have the United States government ''rubbing its hands in glee,'' Mr. Albright predicted. ''But this is positive, and we should use the leverage to get Iran to cooperate more.''
