Most of the Rangers were hard at work Tuesday, spending 45 minutes on their forechecking and power play after two dismal losses in what appears to be a doomed season.
Center Mark Messier, the Rangers' 43-year-old captain, right wing Jaromir Jagr and center Petr Nedved were among those told they did not have to skate. The backup goaltender Jussi Markkanen and right wing Chris Simon did not practice, either.
Meanwhile, Glen Sather, the president, general manager and coach, was in a meeting elsewhere in the complex.
''We can all learn; this is a tough time for all of us,'' the assistant coach Tom Renney said after practice. ''Learning is a part of everyday functioning for these guys.''
The slumping right wing Aleksei Kovalev was among those who practiced. But he said he was unsure how long he would be part of the Rangers.
''I like to be here, but it's something I can't control,'' he said, smiling weakly. ''Whatever they decide to do with me, that's fine.''
Kovalev, who has 13 goals in 62 games, realizes the Rangers may trade him before the trade deadline March 9.
But he also realizes that the Rangers (22-29-7-4), who are 14 points behind the Islanders for the eighth and final Eastern Conference playoff berth, may keep him.
''Rumors are rumors,'' Kovalev said. ''If there is a trade, it happens. I'd still be a hockey player.''
This is his 12th N.H.L. season, and he has never scored fewer than 20 goals in the 10 seasons in which he has played at least 60 games. The Rangers are in danger of extending their team record to seven seasons without making the playoffs.
''You wish you could be better,'' Kovalev said. ''I thought that when I came here, I could help this team make the playoffs.''
''I chose this situation; I didn't think it was going to be that bad,'' added Kovalev, who played for the Rangers from 1992 to '98 and rejoined them a year ago after a trade with Pittsburgh. ''If they decide to keep me, I can help this team make the playoffs, too.''
Kovalev, 31, said he had had trouble with his sticks shattering this season, but he added that he was not trying to use that as an excuse. ''Except for scoring goals and getting points, there's a lot more you can do,'' he said.
But Kovalev knows the Rangers acquired him to score goals. He had 37 goals with Pittsburgh and the Rangers last season, and a career-high 44 with the Penguins three seasons ago.
He was asked if it had been hard to hear Rangers fans booing and (as was the case at the end of the 4-1 loss Monday to Montreal) chanting for refunds? ''That's their right to be upset,'' Kovalev said. ''I'm more worried about the team, the guys I play with.''
So how does he get through two more weeks of uncertainty?
''Just play,'' he said. ''Keep playing. Work hard.''
HOCKEY: RANGERS NOTEBOOK
