WRITING in the magazine Wine last year, my friend Jancis Robinson wondered ''Whatever Happened to White Burgundy?'' Hers was a melancholy tale about the decline of what were once the finest of all white wines. And she spared no one.
At one tasting, she said, out of 35 Austrian and French whites, seven of them Burgundies, five of the seven lowest scorers were Burgundies. The best any Burgundy did was to come in 18th.
Faring even worse, she wrote, were a 1997 Montrachet from Baron Thénard, a 1996 Chevalier-Montrachet from Étienne Sauzet and wines from Louis Jadot, and Domaines Leflaive and Ramonet. ''And,'' she added, ''this was an event that included mature wines.'' Burgundians often maintain their wines are tasted too young.
In another tasting, to find a few decent Meursaults for British Airways to serve to passengers in first class, she found that 5 of the 12 submitted were indistinguishable from a much less expensive Stellenbosch, a South African chardonnay. Like all good Burgundies, these tasting wines were made from the chardonnay grape.
Ms. Robinson's fear is that the Burgundians may be ignoring the quality of their vineyards to turn out what she politely calls New World chardonnay with its toasty oak, tropical fruit flavors and discernible sweetness.
Until a month ago I would have agreed. In many instances I still do. Lately, great white Burgundy has been rare indeed; indifferent white Burgundy, some of it suspiciously Californian in style, less so.
But then came a couple of industry-sponsored tastings that might have restored some of Ms. Robinson's shattered illusions. They did mine. Both tastings, in New York, offered red and white Burgundies; here I will discuss only the whites.
The first, arranged by the importer Frederick Wildman, included white Burgundies and whites from Chablis and the Mâconnais, both regions technically in Burgundy but outside the legendary Côte d'Or, the heart of the Burgundy region.
The three that interested me were 2001 whites from the producer Olivier Leflaive: a Puligny-Montrachet Champ-Gain and a Meursault-Perrières, both premier cru, and a grand cru, Criots-Bâtard-Montrachet. The Chablis were from Christian Moreau; the attractive Mâcon wines from the Château Fuissé.
The second tasting was sponsored by the importer Kobrand and featured Maison Louis Jadot wines exclusively. Kobrand and Jadot are owned by the same company. The Jadot wines, all 2002's, included a Savigny-lès-Beaune, Clos des Guettes; a Beaune Bressandes; a Chassagne-Montrachet, Morgeot, Clos de la Chapelle, Domaine Magenta; a Meursault Goutte d'Or; and a Puligny-Montrachet, Les Folatières, all of them premier crus. There was also a grand cru, a Corton-Charlemagne.
At lunch, the white wines, again Jadots, were a 2001 Chassagne-Montrachet Village, premier cru, and a 1999 Chevalier-Montrachet, Les Demoiselles. The Leflaive 2001 wines had already been bottled. The Jadot wines were all barrel samples; they will be bottled later this year at the Jadot cellars in Beaune.
Even to minimally dedicated wine drinkers it should be obvious that these are not, for the most part, simple everyday wines. They are from famous, often tiny vineyards within storied Burgundy communes, as their majestic but often cumbersome pedigrees imply. Most come from vineyards with the coveted premier cru (first growth) and grand cru (great growth) designations, and they are expensive. To cite one example, the 1999 Chevalier-Montrachet lists at $200 a bottle.
These top-of-the-line wines are not for casual sipping. They are lean, dry and profound, and at their best offer what Remington Norman, the wine merchant and writer, calls a dimension of understated elegance and class. They virtually demand to be paired with food and are best matched with seafood and white meats. New World chardonnays, heavily oaked, often by artificial means, fruity and slightly sweet, are generally drunk as cocktails. A veteran participant at the Jadot tasting said that it was refreshing that not a single wine tasted like pineapple.
My own favorites among the whites included the Jadot Corton-Charlemagne, at $120, with its incredible depth and elegance; the Chassagne-Montrachet Morgeot, at about $56, for its developing richness; and the lighter, pleasant Savigny-lès-Beaune because, at about $33, it represented the best value in the tasting. Whether some Mâcon whites will come along to match it at half the price remains to be seen.
If, as Ms. Robinson says, some Burgundians are rushing to emulate muscular chardonnays from the Napa and Barossa Valleys, there was little evidence of it. The 2001 vintage was difficult in Burgundy but good, and lucky producers made good wine. Almost everyone in Burgundy made good, if not great, wine in 2002. Just how good will be better known after everything has been in bottle for a few months.
To no one's surprise, prices for the 2002's will be up considerably. The most important reason lies with the 2003 vintage, just five months old. It is expected to be one of the great vintages of recent times. But it will be maddeningly small, thanks to the bizarre weather France suffered last summer.
Then, too, the dollar is expected to weaken further against the euro. So savvy American buyers will almost certainly snap up the 2002's, anticipating difficulty getting a decent share of the 2003's.
But those who relish Burgundy are unaffected by the economic problems that trouble lesser mortals. As the cagey winemakers of the Côte d'Or have always known, there is never very much Burgundy around and there are enough fanatics who will pay anything to get it.
Which, I guess, is why some of vintners might be tempted to let standards slip now and then.
WINE TALK
