IS it possible there is no more drama at Us Weekly, now that Janice Min is ensconced as editor in chief, having replaced the magazine's buzz-generating Bonnie Fuller, who abruptly clicked her Manolo Blahniks out the door last summer to stomp her imprint elsewhere?
Not on your life. Not when Anna Nicole Smith has lost more than 60 pounds! Not when Janet Jackson has finally emerged from her Super Bowl half-time peep show! Or when MTV's ''Newlyweds,'' Jessica Simpson and Nick Lachey, are talking! Is her fame tearing them apart?
On a recent morning, Ms. Min, 34, is smiling slyly at the headlines leaping out of the tattler's March 1 issue, spread out on her cluttered desk. ''The ability to entertain people is completely underrated,'' she says with the conviction of someone who believes there is something to this celebrity world of people with the depth of a cookie sheet.
During a long chat, not a bit of the drama queen can be found in Ms. Min, who daintily nibbles oatmeal in her large but unremarkable office in Midtown Manhattan. Earlier in the morning, she presides over a daily meeting of youthful staff members in a crowded conference room. The tone is light, irreverent, as Ms. Min gamely probes for the goods on this or that celebrity, while flipping through the gossip pages of The Daily News.
Ms. Min, it seems, is the undiva. She is relaxed, down to earth, her petite frame outfitted in a tight black shirt, Juicy Couture black corduroys and slingback Manolos. She is also six months pregnant.
On this day, she admits to feeling uneasy having the tables turned, these questions about herself.
''I'm definitely not a me-me person, a look-at-me person,'' she says. ''Doing this interview is horrifying to me, kind of. It's not something that naturally occurs to me, the publicness of it. Definitely a part of me enjoys being locked up in an office, rewriting a story, but I realize the job involves much more than that. Being an editor of a magazine, you have to sell yourself as much as the magazine, because the two parts are now thought of as one.''
That's a juicy tidbit. Until last summer, there seemed as much media chatter about the tumult inside Us Weekly under the reign of the demanding Ms. Fuller as there was about the magazine's frothy pages. Production nights were known as brutal, extending often to all-nighters. Now they end around midnight.
Ms. Min, who describes herself as decisive and collaborative, has reason to be in a good mood these days. Us Weekly, which is published by Wenner Media, showed strong gains in newsstand sales during the last six months of 2003, rising 38.3 percent on newsstands from the same period the previous year -- to an average weekly sale of nearly 699,000 copies. Its total circulation rose 18.9 percent to 1.3 million copies.
Not bad when, after the exit of the high-profile Ms. Fuller, there was feverish speculation about whether Us Weekly could hold on to its success. Did Ms. Min feel the pressure?
''My main anxiety when I accepted the job was sort of the spectacle of being humiliated in public and it going really, really badly,'' she says. ''I felt anxiety because I knew I'd be watched so much. But I'd already been doing this. Bonnie and I worked very closely together.''
Ms. Min, who joined Us Weekly two years ago, was executive editor when Ms. Fuller left for American Media, which publishes supermarket tabloids like The National Enquirer and The Star. Ms. Min was previously at In Style, where she started special wedding and makeover issues. She also had stints at Life magazine and People, where she began as a writer and rose to senior editor. She graduated from the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University in 1991.
SO, with the kudos rolling in, how are the big dogs, like the magazine owner Jann S. Wenner, taking her pregnancy news? She and her husband, Peter Sheehy, a history teacher at the Horace Mann School, are expecting their first child. They live in a renovated warehouse in the meatpacking district.
She is frank, saying she hopes there are no issues. She plans to take off up to six weeks. ''The staff is really strong here, so it shouldn't be a problem.''
As Ms. Min talks, one is struck by her lack of slickness, especially for someone so entrenched in the celebrity niche. She grew up in Littleton, Colo., a mile from Columbine High School, though she did not attend the school. ''It was an extraordinarily ordinary childhood.'' She is the youngest of three children. Her father was an executive for a medical supply company, while her mother was an agent for the Internal Revenue Service.
Ms. Min says she is frequently asked career advice, especially by Asian-American journalists. She is second-generation Korean-American. ''Everything is so unplanned, and you end up doing things that suit you,'' she says. ''Everything has been about making the most of the opportunities that present themselves.''
She leans over to make the point that she thinks too much ink has been wasted on ''a simple editor change'' at Us Weekly.
She's one to talk! An editor of a magazine like hers!
She relents. ''I can accept it. Everyone loves a good drama, a good soap-operatic story, and this is one of them. I'd be the last person to sit there and say, 'How dare you?'''
PUBLIC LIVES
