Offering some flexibility on the city's strict new promotion requirements for third graders, Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein said yesterday that he would create an appeals process based on teacher evaluations of students' work.
The new promotion requirements, announced last month by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, would force any child scoring at the lowest level on the annual citywide reading or math tests to repeat the third grade.
But at a public forum on the new policy, held yesterday evening by the Manhattan borough president, C. Virginia Fields, the chancellor said that parents would be given a chance to plead for their child's promotion.
''We will rely in the first instance on test scores,'' Mr. Klein said. ''We do that recognizing that test scores are not infallible. So we will put in place an appeals process that allows students to take an appeal based on teachers' recommendations on class work, homework and other performance in school.''
Mr. Klein and other officials had previously said they were considering an appeals process, but the chancellor's remarks were the first indication a decision had been made.
The policy is intended to end a practice known as ''social promotion,'' in which students are advanced despite failing to meet academic requirements. In recent weeks it has come under increasing criticism by parents.
Numerous studies of such policies around the country have found no benefit in forcing students to repeat a grade and instead show that those held back are far more likely to drop out before graduating high school.
Forcing students to repeat a grade is also enormously expensive, and similar efforts, including one in New York City in the early 1980's, have failed. Testing companies also strongly urge education officials not to base promotion decisions on the results of a single exam.
New York City officials have estimated that on the basis of failing test scores, as many as 16,000 children would be forced to repeat third grade under the policy, more than three times as many as have been held back in recent years.
Currently, teachers decide whether to promote students based on an array of criteria, including standardized test scores, grades and performance in class.
Mr. Klein and his aides have said their policy would succeed where others have not because they planned to identify struggling students early on and offer intensive intervention and support, including tutoring after school and on Saturdays.
Students who still scored at Level 1, the lowest of four rankings on the standardized tests, would be able to enroll in an intensive summer-school program and to retake the test. Those still at Level 1 would be forced to repeat the third grade.
Under the city's policy, children scoring at Level 2, which is still considered failing to meet academic standards, could be promoted.
''We're talking Level 1 -- which is far below standard,'' Mr. Klein said. ''So even with the fallibility of testing, there is a wide margin in there. But as I said, that being so, we will have a process whereby students through their teachers -- if their teachers think it's warranted -- can make an appropriate appeal.''
