But for a chance decision, a newborn baby named Moses lies in the care of Harlem Hospital Center instead of in a darkened storage closet.
But for a well-timed cry, a different newborn escaped going out with the trash on the cold stoop of an apartment building in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
But for guidance from calls to an anonymous safe haven service, yet another baby escaped an unknown fate and was left for nurses to find in the sink of the emergency room at St. Vincent's Staten Island Hospital.
Within 26 hours, three newborns were found abandoned at far ends of the city, leading to police investigations. New York State has a law, adopted in 2000, that shields mothers from criminal prosecution for abandoning infants younger than 5 days old if the child is left in a safe manner and suitable location, typically a hospital or police station. But the first two cases would not qualify for such protection, according to the city's Administration for Children's Services, and it was not clear whether the Staten Island case would either.
''This is the busiest time of year for finding abandoned infants,'' said Timothy Jaccard, director of the nonprofit Children of Hope Foundation's Safe Haven Program. ''The mothers get pregnant on spring break or the beginning of summer, hide the pregnancy for nine months and then fear handing over their baby.''
From the start of 2001 through June 2003, the only period for which statistics were available, 13 infants under the age of 5 months were abandoned in the five boroughs, according to Children's Services: five in Brooklyn, four in the Bronx, two in Manhattan and one each in Queens and on Staten Island.
The infant boy left in Harlem on Monday morning was probably under a week old, a police spokesman said. The child was abandoned in a dark leather bag in the third-floor hallway of a former junior high school, now offices, at 127 West 127th Street.
Katrina S. Gray said she found the bag as she walked down the hall on Monday morning. It almost ended up locked in a storage closet for the Northern Manhattan Perinatal Partnership Inc., where she works as a program assistant.
''I so easily could have put that leather bag in the storeroom that we sometimes open just once a week,'' Ms. Gray said. ''I feel terror in my heart when I think that or think about how I could have dropped the bag.''
Unaware of its contents, Ms. Gray carried the zippered bag for a full 15 minutes, showing it to a meeting room of about 15 people and to passers-by. After unzipping it and seeing a pink blanket, but not the baby, she left it in a receptionist's office and went off to a meeting.
A few moments later, a slight noise, like the crying of a cat, frightened Hamidah S. Sharif, 27, the organization's health education coordinator. ''I hate cats,'' Ms. Sharif said, ''so I didn't want to open it until I noticed it moving like a baby.'' She unzipped the bag and found a crying boy still smeared in natal blood.
When Ms. Sharif, the mother of a 3-year-old, held him, he stopped crying. ''We were so surprised that we called him 'it' until somebody pulled down his Pampers,'' she said. ''We wanted to give him a dignified name, so we decided on Moses.''
When Ms. Gray returned to find her colleagues coddling the sleeping child, ''I was stunned and did not believe them,'' she said. ''Somebody must have been looking out for little Moses.''
The police were searching for the infant's mother, checking names of visitors who had signed in to enter the building, and Perinatal Partnership was checking with all mothers using its services.
''We do not think it was one of our clients,'' said Mario J. Drummonds, the partnership's executive director. ''We have a small ratio of clients to workers, so someone would know right away.''
Later Monday night, Richard Maratea, 29, was returning home to 80th Street in Bay Ridge from a sushi dinner with a friend when he was startled by noises coming from a gift bag on a step in his apartment building's unheated vestibule.
He said he thought the bag contained an electronic game or toy. The noise sounded just like a cat. ''I nudged it with my foot. Nothing moved, but the sounds got louder,'' Mr. Maratea said. He reached into the bag, he said, and discovered a baby girl. ''I didn't unwrap the baby or take it out of the bag, because I don't know how to hold a baby,'' said Mr. Maratea, who is single and without children.
After dialing 911, he pulled the blanket away from the baby's face and turned down the edges of the bag so the infant could get some air while he waited for the police.
The baby still appeared to have an umbilical cord, said Mr. Maratea. He added that he had no idea about the identity of the child's mother.
''I unfortunately didn't see anyone, and I didn't think to look around,'' he said. ''I just wanted to take care of the baby. It was crying. I was pretty nervous for the child.''
The third newborn, a girl, turned up around 12:30 p.m. yesterday in a bathroom sink at the Saint Vincent's emergency room. She was wrapped in a shopping bag.
A spokesman for the hospital said that someone from the Children of Hope Foundation had called to warn that such a drop-off might take place. The baby was in stable condition, the spokesman said.
