The period of Pete Rose's gambling that led to his banishment from Major League Baseball will be the focus of an ESPN film that is scheduled to be shown in September, the network announced yesterday.
''If you look at the timeline of Pete Rose, any time there's a chance of someone batting .400, his name comes up,'' said Mark Shapiro, the executive vice president of ESPN. ''Whenever there's talk of a hitting streak, he comes up again. The Hall of Fame argument comes up anew every few months, and then there was the book. After so many touchstones, we should capitalize on the growing interest.''
Shapiro said the film would be largely based on the 1989 report on Rose's gambling by baseball's investigator, John Dowd.
''But in order to feel some sympathy for him, we'll have to build him up,'' Shapiro said, ''so you'll see the backdrop of his success years in Cincinnati and take some time to tell the hard-working American story that he encapsulated.''
ESPN has produced films about Bob Knight, based on the book ''A Season on the Brink,'' and about Coach Bear Bryant's 1954 Texas A&amp;M team, titled ''The Junction Boys.''
It is working on ''3,'' a movie about Dale Earnhardt, which is to be televised in December.
Richard Sandomir
Soriano Staying at Second
Michael Young wanted to get the issue settled: he is ready to be the Texas Rangers' shortstop.
Young told Manager Buck Showalter yesterday, the day before the team's first full-squad workout, that he would move from second base to fill the void created by the trade of Alex Rodriguez.
That means the two-time All-Star Alfonso Soriano, the player Texas received from the Yankees in the Rodriguez deal, will remain at second base. (AP)
Sosa Deflects Questions
After his first spring training workout at the Chicago Cubs' camp in Mesa, Ariz., yesterday, Sammy Sosa brushed aside questions about steroid use in baseball, saying he did not know what other players are doing and could not control anyone but himself.
''I really don't want to make a comment about that because we've got a beautiful team here,'' he said. ''We've got something else in mind, to come here and play baseball. I don't want to make a comment because I don't have anything to talk about.'' (AP)
Cardinals' Pitcher Cleared
Luis Martinez, a left-handed pitcher claimed by the St. Louis Cardinals on Monday off waivers from Milwaukee, was released from police custody in the Dominican Republic yesterday after being cleared in a shooting during a traffic dispute that left a man hospitalized.
He planned to leave for the Cardinals' training camp in Jupiter, Fla.
Prosecutors decided not to file charges after the police concluded that Martinez had shot the man twice in self-defense. Martinez was the Brewers' minor league pitcher of the year last season. (AP)
BASEBALL: NOTEBOOK
