THE star shortstop, who was traded and then not traded, worked out a day early and admitted he was insulted and hurt. The pitching ace, who doesn't have a contract for next season and may not get one, showed up several days late, with permission, and said if his team doesn't want him, fine, he'll go elsewhere.
And the slugger, who is everyone's favorite flake and, like the shortstop, wasn't even supposed to be here, according to the grand administrative plan, remained out of sight, out of left field.
Where was Manny Ramirez? Pedro Martínez said, ''Manny's in la-la land.''
Home, sweet, home.
Ladies and gentlemen of New England, your Boston Red Sox class officers, unchanged, unrepentant and unsure of most things with the notable exception of their continuing mission: build a bridge past the Yankees, ease Red Sox Nation's pain.
''I don't want to say it, I want to do it,'' said Martínez, sounding a new Red Sox war cry for 2004: Cowboy Shut Up.
So you think the Yankees have issues? You think it will be much too crowded on the left side of their infield? You think the Red Sox had the superior off-season by landing Curt Schilling and closer Keith Foulke, giving them the deeper and more reliable pitching staff?
You may be right on all counts, but do not for a moment discount the instability of the Boston star set as the potential dynamic of self-destruction, as it was in the American League Championship Series last fall. Do not forget how valiantly the scruffy Fenway ranch hands performed against the Yankees only to be thrown by the horses they were riding to glory. Do not be misled by the smiley, chatty personas of Martínez and Nomar Garciaparra here yesterday as they met the news media for the first time this spring.
Because, as Martínez warned: ''Today I'm talking. Tomorrow, I'll guarantee you I won't be talking.''
Granted, no pennant has ever been won by way of the press box, but beginning today, when all position players, including Ramirez, will presumably join pitchers and catchers, it will be business as usual. The Red Sox will charge out of the spring-training gate behind their new manager, Terry Francona, but also, Schilling notwithstanding, with the same old surly star leadership that has been given even more reason to be chronically cranky over the summer when the clubhouse gets hot.
Start with Garciaparra, who hid his eyes behind a pair of dark shades but could not hide his dismay over the Red Sox' conditional deal with Texas, Ramirez for Alex Rodriguez, with Garciaparra supposedly rerouted to Chicago for Magglio Ordóñez.
''I was definitely hurt by a lot of it,'' Garciaparra said. ''I felt like anyone else would feel after spending a whole career in one organization, and you find out you've been traded and are pretty much gone over the television. That's how I found out.''
Of course, the trade was struck down by the players union, leaving Ramirez and Garciaparra as the unwanted still on board, with Martínez lugging around the baggage from Game 7 of the A.L.C.S., when Grady Little surrendered the ball and his managerial career to the conceit of his arm-weary ace.
It's all become so untidy for this talented threesome, a struggle not to look back or dwell on the future. Logic tells us that the Red Sox will offer Garciaparra a long-term extension to avoid losing him to free agency after this season. He acknowledged preliminary discussions and said he would like to remain, but who would be surprised if Garciaparra played out the season and gave the Red Sox a swift kick that would make his new bride, Mia Hamm, proud?
As for Martínez, the miles on his fragile right arm may well be the Red Sox' excuse to offer a cold shoulder. They have six frontline players in the final year of their contracts, and General Manager Theo Epstein admitted yesterday that not all would return.
''Forget about what's going to happen to me,'' Martínez said. ''I'm pretty sure I'll get another job with someone else.''
Players say all the time that it's about business, but sooner or later they wear emotions, not cuff links, on their sleeves. Martínez and Garciaparra spoke enthusiastically about the new season, the pitching upgrades, but they will play for a new manager, whose closest ties are to Schilling. They will return to Boston, where the pain runs deep from the recent defeats at the hands of the Yankees, on field and off.
How soon will Martínez be allowed to forget Game 7? How many more of Ramirez's half-hearted efforts in the outfield and on the bases will be tolerated? How many times will Garciaparra be reminded of his 2003 fall slump and that he is not A-Rod?
''One bad month in eight years is better than having eight bad months in one year,'' he said.
Do the Red Sox appreciate that? ''Everyone saw their actions,'' Garciaparra said. ''You knew what their priorities were.''
Epstein didn't want to talk about the deals that weren't, and the potential fallout. ''That's not something for public discussion,'' he said. ''I have a lot of faith in Terry Francona's ability to work with this group. By the time we leave camp, if not already, we will have a common goal of winning.''
Up in Tampa, Joe Torre has already had a head start. Say what you will about the Yankees, most of their big names -- Jeter, Williams, Sheffield, Matsui -- have been working out, fitting in. A-Rod has given up shortstop to join them.
Manny Ramirez's la-la land it isn't, but no one ever doubts the Yankees' horses, and whether they will be in the mood to run.
Sports of The Times
