If Senator John Edwards is to span the imposing gap separating him from Senator John Kerry, he knows he must directly appeal to every possible wavering constituency, especially those most amenable to his message of economic disparity and working-class empowerment.
That is why he is focusing his efforts on three fertile constituencies -- Southerners, union workers and Dean supporters -- in the days before Democrats in 10 states vote for their party's presidential nominee.
Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, made frequent mention of his Southern roots in appearances on Tuesday in Atlanta and on Monday in Albany, Ga., and Columbus, Ga., emphasizing that he understood the concerns of ordinary people in the region.
''I grew up in the rural South,'' Mr. Edwards said after an evening rally in Columbus. ''I share the values that rural Southerners share; faith, family, integrity. Those are the things I've believed in all my life, the things I've been standing up for. We have somebody like me at the top of the ticket, we can do very well.''
In New York and Ohio on Sunday and New York on Monday, Mr. Edwards met with several groups of union workers and told them that his campaign was ''about working families,'' in hopes of overriding the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s endorsement of Mr. Kerry of Massachusetts by going directly to the rank and file.
And last weekend, Mr. Edwards collected endorsements from Dr. Dean's former Ohio coordinator and two co-founders of Generation Dean, the campaign's youth group.
In each case, his method was the same: to assure voters that he not only felt their pain, as Bill Clinton had famously proclaimed, but that he had also lived through it and shared their dreams and hopes.
''I'm reaching out directly to households of workers and union members,'' he told reporters on Sunday after a union rally in Rochester. ''They'll respond because I come from the same place they do.''
The goal, Mr. Edwards said, is to give voters ''a president who understands their life at a personal level,'' which his campaign strategists consider a major difference between him and the patrician Mr. Kerry.
To Dean backers, he casts himself as a fellow Washington outsider, as against Mr. Kerry's insider. To union workers, he is an up-from-the-mills crusader who remembers his roots. To Southerners, he is one of the boys.
''I have lived with this myself,'' Mr. Edwards told Norma Mulligan, one of a circle of textile workers who were handpicked by his campaign to question the candidate before television cameras in a Manhattan union hall Monday morning.
Ms. Mulligan had asked about paying for college, and his response was to recall having discussions on that very topic with his own parents. ''I can remember how we would sit around the table and figure out how in the world we were going make it,'' Mr. Edwards said.
Mr. Edwards has no time to lose. In seven days, on Super Tuesday, 1,151 delegates are at stake, more than half the 2,159 delegates needed to win the nomination and Mr. Edwards is far behind Mr. Kerry in every measure.
Polls in the most populous states have not been encouraging. A Los Angeles Times poll of 506 likely Democratic primary voters in California showed on Tuesday Mr. Kerry ahead by 56 percent to 24 percent. A Marist College poll of New York voters showed an even wider spread last week.
Mr. Edwards has insisted he will close the gap in the final days, just as he did in South Carolina and almost did in a surprising second-place finish in Wisconsin a week ago.
''We've got to start changing the momentum,'' Mr. Edwards told reporters on Monday after a rally in Columbus, Ga. ''We have big primaries on Tuesday. We need to do well in a group of those, and I think we have some great opportunities. Minnesota, for example. Georgia. Ohio. And we'll compete very hard in New York and California. And then, the following week, we need to continue that momentum by doing well in a group of states I am naturally strong in: Florida, Mississippi and Louisiana.''
In another indication that he may be looking beyond Super Tuesday, Mr. Edwards flew on Tuesday to the fourth state that votes on March 9, Texas, appearing at a fund-raiser in Houston and a local high school.
The policy proposals that Mr. Edwards offers up union audiences -- new regulations making it easier to organize, a streamlining of ''the bureaucratic maze,'' college tax credits, a significant increase in the minimum wage -- seems secondary at times to his persistent desire to convince them that he understands exactly what they are feeling.
When Omar Alexander told the senator about losing his job after 34 years, Mr. Edwards told him the story that he has used almost daily on the campaign trail. ''What you are describing is something I have seen over and over and over,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''In fact, my father worked in a mill and I saw what happened to the families involved when the mill in my hometown closed. And, you know, this is something that crowd in Washington just doesn't get.''
But he did more than witness that mill's closing, Mr. Edwards said. He absorbed the emotions of the people who went through it. ''People don't understand, it's not just a paycheck for you,'' he said. ''It has some effect on your self-respect and dignity. I hear that and I see it in your face, and I hear the same thing over and over and over across this country.''
Two of Mr. Edwards's union rallies -- Sunday in Rochester and Monday in New York -- were sponsored by Unite, the textile workers union that has been the only labor union to endorse him. But to really make inroads with union families, Mr. Edwards will have to appeal to those represented by the dozens of A.F.L.-C.I.O. unions whose leaders have endorsed Mr. Kerry.
On Sunday in Niles, Ohio, a small city not far from Youngstown, Mr. Edwards appeared before a few hundred steelworkers who have been locked out of a local titanium factory since October.
Jim Beal, who has worked at the plant for 14 years and lives in nearby Poland, Ohio, said it made no difference to him that union leaders had backed Mr. Kerry. ''They're more interested in winning than they are in the right person for the job,'' he said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
