A FIELD in winter may look dead and barren, but good things often grow underfoot. Things like crosnes, small, bumpy tubers that might just be nature's quirkiest and most elusive vegetable.
Crosnes (pronounced krones) have many pseudonyms and are unsightly, difficult to grow and expensive. That being the case, New York chefs can't get enough of them.
''I love crosnes,'' said Troy Dupuy, the chef at La Caravelle. ''I'm reluctant to say they're unique, because nothing is unique in the food world, but I don't know of a similar vegetable.''
Diners could be forgiven for not being familiar with crosnes. More obscurely known as knotroot, chorogi or stachys affinis, and more commonly referred to as Chinese or Japanese artichokes, crosnes derive their name from Crosne, a town south of Paris where they were planted in 1882 by an agronomist who had brought them from Japan.
Crosnes, which average an inch in length, are similar to water chestnuts in texture. The French variety tastes a bit like potato. The American variety is smaller and nuttier. The delicate flavor suggests jicama or Jerusalem artichoke. Unlike most tubers, crosnes stay crunchy when cooked.
Crosnes may be delicious, but from a farmer's perspective, the fall harvest is no fun at all. ''They're very tedious,'' said Franca Tantillo of Berried Treasures Farm near Roscoe, N.Y. ''They come in late when the ground is cold and your hands are freezing.''
For a cook, they are impossible to peel and annoying to clean. (Rub them with salt and a little water -- the salt gets the dirt out of nooks and crannies.) Nevertheless, home cooks who like a challenge (or an adventure) can buy crosnes for $15.50 a pound at D'Artagnan, (800) 327-8246, or $4.99 a quarter pound at Agata &amp; Valentina, 1505 First Avenue (79th Street).
Crosnes are often compared to Jerusalem artichokes, but they have nothing to do with artichokes of any nationality. They belong to the mint family, though the resemblance is only aboveground. The crosne plant looks like mint, but its leaves have no flavor. (For anyone keeping track, Jerusalem artichokes are actually sunflowers.)
Inner charms notwithstanding, crosnes suffer from an aesthetic problem. They have been described as looking like uneven pearls, mini Michelin Men or fat caterpillars. To others, crosnes are the E.T. of vegetables: so ugly they're cute.
Crosnes were popular in Europe until the 1920's, when they fell out of food fashion. They reappeared around 10 years ago, when ''all those roots like rutabaga and Jerusalem artichokes were coming back,'' said Thierry Farges of Marché aux Délices, a Manhattan importer that brings in crosnes from France.
Inventive chefs are moving far beyond the classic Larousse recipe of boiling them slightly and adding lots of butter. Bryce Whittlesey, the chef at the Wheatleigh hotel restaurant in Lenox, Mass., features them in a 21-vegetable casserole. ''The season is so short you run out of time before you run out of ideas,'' he said.
Most chefs serve crosnes in small doses, as accents to raw or cooked dishes. John Schaefer, executive chef at Gramercy Tavern, pickles them for a salad and roasts them with chicken and other root vegetables. David Bouley serves them with halibut and mushrooms at Bouley and with braised shrimp and pumpkinseeds at Danube. But Mr. Dupuy of La Caravelle puts crosnes center stage, turning them into a confit with olive oil and herbs.
The chef at Alias on the Lower East Side, Anthony Rose, prepares them as creative side dishes, sometimes with chicken stock, butter and mint; sometimes with pork belly; sometimes in a red-wine sauce. His relationship with crosnes has been lifelong: his mother used to cook them.
Was he turned off by the look? Hardly.
''They were so weird,'' Mr. Rose said. ''And it was cool to eat something that looks like a worm.''
