Eye-teasing, light-stroked surfaces tantalize the unhappy characters in ''Beautiful Child,'' Nicky Silver's portentous play about parental love and the lies that families live by. The reflective sheen of a pale boy's skin, the white radiance of a snowscape, the beckoning blue of an elusive woman's coat: these images accumulate in a gorgeous inventory of ephemera in this grim comic drama, which opened last night at the Vineyard Theater.
But no surface glitters as seductively as Mr. Silver's prose. A decade after he captured critical attention with ''Pterodactyls'' (also at the Vineyard), Mr. Silver continues to shape sentences that have the vibrant, poisoned lusciousness of a John Currin painting. And for the first act of ''Beautiful Child,'' which is directed with care and elegance by Terry Kinney, Mr. Silver's finely wrought dialogue and monologues almost lull you into believing that you are watching a play of substance and coherence. That illusion disintegrates entirely by the end. A variation on the theme of ''Pterodactyls,'' in which a grown son with a dark secret returns to his parents' home, ''Beautiful Child'' is a symbol-laden, poetic exercise that never achieves dramatic weight or crediblity.
Swerving from the brittle, accusatory dialogue of a bitterly married couple to a scene of ritualistic sacrifice à la Sophocles, Mr. Silver has composed an ambitious but ungainly answer to Edward Albee's plays of domestic existentialism, works like ''A Delicate Balance'' and ''All Over.'' Ultimately ''Beautiful Child'' isn't much more than ersatz Albee. And nobody gets away with doing Albee except Mr. Albee (and even he doesn't all the time).
Even Richard Hoover's set, a devastatingly tasteful living room with French windows and Oriental rugs, brings to mind the upper-middle-class environs in which Mr. Albee's sparring spouses exchange low blows. And sure enough ''Beautiful Child'' soon introduces its own vicious married couple: Nan (Penny Fuller) and Harry (the excellent George Grizzard, who won a Tony, by the way, for the revival of ''A Delicate Balance'').
Harry is having an affair with Delia (Alexandra Gersten Vassilaros), his aging waif of a secretary, but he still loves Nan, who can't bear to have him touch her. It's a, uh, delicately balanced marriage, and that balance threatens to crash when their son, Isaac (Steven Pasquale), comes home, seeking refuge from a love that dare not speak its name. And no, it has nothing to do with a goat.
Stop reading here if you don't want to learn what Isaac's problem is, though he announces it fairly early in the first act. Isaac, a painter and a schoolteacher, has been having a sexual relationship with one of his students, who happens to be 8 years old.
After A. R. Gurney's ''Big Bill'' at Lincoln Center, this is the second play to open this week about a man with an appetite for under-age boys, a sexual proclivity that has also been much in the newspapers of late, thanks to Michael Jackson and some Roman Catholic priests.
But Mr. Silver isn't just being sensational. He is using Isaac's confession to explore the boundaries of parental acceptance. ''I want to understand,'' Harry says to Isaac. Isaac responds, ''You want to judge.''
This is a legitimate dramatic idea and a provocative one. But here the volleys of accusations and declarations of love and hate have a grating, rote quality. (''Who are you to judge me?'' Nan screams at Harry. ''You with your mistresses and lies on top of lies.'')
It's hard to give credence to the idea that these characters are emotionally connected in any way. It may be Mr. Silver's point that they are not. But for its whopper of a denouement to pay off, ''Beautiful Child'' needs to make plenty sure that you care about Isaac and his family.
That you don't is no fault of the cast, which also includes a wry Kaitlin Hopkins as two sharp-edged women who may or may not be real. The performers deliver Mr. Silver's finely turned phrases with crispness and conviction, though only Mr. Grizzard comes close to seeming entirely human. And while the play's barbed filigree language captures your ear, at least at first, ''Beautiful Child'' never lays siege to the heart.
BEAUTIFUL CHILD
By Nicky Silver; directed by Terry Kinney; sets by Richard Hoover; costumes by Michael Krass; lighting by David Lander; original music and sound design by Obadiah Eaves; production managers, Kai Brothers and Bridget Markov; production stage manager, Rachel Perlman; director of production, Reed Ridgley; general manager, Rebecca Habel. Presented by the Vineyard Theater, Douglas Aibel, artistic director; Bardo S. Ramirez, managing director; Jennifer Garvey-Blackwell, executive director, external affairs. At 108 East 15th Street, Manhattan.
WITH: Steven Pasquale (Isaac), Alexandra Gersten Vassilaros (Delia), George Grizzard (Harry), Penny Fuller (Nan) and Kaitlin Hopkins (Dr. Elizabeth Hilton/Victor's Mother).
THEATER REVIEW
