Pentagon officials said Tuesday that they were bringing charges for the first time against detainees at the Guantánamo Bay naval base, formally accusing two detainees of conspiracy to commit both terrorism and war crimes against civilians.
The detainees, who thus become the first candidates there to face a military tribunal, were identified as Ali Hamza Ahmed Sulayman al-Bahlul of Yemen and Ibrahim Ahmed Mahmoud al-Qosi of Sudan. They were described in charge sheets, the equivalent of indictments, as senior members of Al Qaeda who had served in a variety of capacities for its leader, Osama bin Laden.
The action of bringing charges against named detainees means that the military commission process that was first announced within weeks of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, is, after many delays, about to be put into operation. No date was set for what would be the first United States military tribunals since the end of World War II.
Some Pentagon officials said they expected that pretrial proceedings would last a few months, after which the actual trials before a panel of up to seven military officers might start, perhaps in the late spring or early summer.
But a military defense lawyer assigned to one of those charged cautioned against predicting anything about the proceedings. Lt. Cmdr. Philip Sundel of the Navy, one of Mr. Bahlul's two lawyers, said in an interview that he and his co-counsel might not deal with the case solely on the merits of the charges but might challenge the entire foundation of the proceeding. Commander Sundel said the scope of the pretrial period might be widened because ''we have concerns about virtually every aspect of the military commission process as it relates to our client getting a fair trial.''
Under the process adopted by the Bush administration, the military tribunal proceedings are reviewable by a special appeals panel and ultimately by the secretary of defense and the president. There is no provision for review by civilian courts.
''This does not have the checks and balances built into it that guarantee a fair, impartial and independent process,'' Commander Sundel said.
He also said that he did not know whether the tribunal would allow such issues to be raised and that therefore he could not predict how long it would be before any tribunal actually began.
According to the charge sheets, the two men have been part of a criminal conspiracy with Mr. bin Laden and several of his top aides that committed the offenses of ''attacking civilians, attacking civilian objects'' and other acts attributed in the documents to Al Qaeda. Mr. Bahlul is described as a Qaeda propagandist who made a recruiting video that celebrated the bombing of the American destroyer Cole in 2000 in the Yemeni port of Aden. Mr. Qosi was described as a Qaeda senior accountant who served as the deputy to the organization's chief financial officer. Both were described as part of an elite cadre of Qaeda associates who served as close associates of and bodyguards for Mr. bin Laden.
Prof. Detlev Vagts of the Harvard University Law School, an authority on the laws of war, said the conspiracy charge appeared to be an effort to fashion a new military offense along the lines of the civilian crime of conspiracy. Officials, Professor Vagts said, appear to have taken care not to charge that membership in Al Qaeda alone constitutes a crime.
Although the tribunal rules allow for the death penalty, the two defendants will not face it. Maj. John Smith, a lawyer with the Pentagon's office of military tribunals, said Tuesday that the chief prosecutor, Col. Fred Borch, had already decided that it would not be appropriate given the details of the accusations.
The trial is supposed to take place in a secure courtroom at Guantánamo that was readied more than a year ago. Bush administration planners had initially hoped to have military tribunals functioning within a year of the attacks to demonstrate swift retribution, but their strategy shifted to one of detaining suspects at the naval base at Guantánamo and other undisclosed locations in order to gain intelligence through a prolonged interrogation.
Commander Sundel and his co-counsel, Maj. Mark Bridges, have not yet met with their client, nor has Lt. Col. Sharon Shaffer met with hers, Mr. Qosi. They are expected to travel soon to Guantánamo to do so.
The two defendants are among the 650 or so detainees being held at Guantánamo by the American military. Most were captured in Afghanistan or Pakistan after the defeat of the Taliban government in Kabul. Bush administration officials have declared the detainees at Guantánamo illegal enemy combatants, saying that because they did not comply with the rules of war in the Geneva conventions, like wearing proper uniforms or insignia, they were not entitled to be treated as prisoners of war.
The officials have said the detainees have been treated humanely and in accord with the standards of the Geneva conventions. Nonetheless, the administration has faced strong criticism, especially from abroad, over holding the detainees without bringing charges until now.
On Tuesday, the White House counsel, Alberto R. Gonzales, said the critics of the detentions at Guantánamo were ill informed. Mr. Gonzales, in a speech to a meeting in Washington of the American Bar Association section on national security issues, said the critics had failed to understand that the detentions should not be viewed as a civilian law-enforcement situation in which people were entitled to be charged and tried or released. Under the laws of war, he said, they could be detained, ''and they need not be guilty of anything.''
Mr. Gonzales's speech was part of a recent campaign by the administration to counter what it contends is unfair criticism of the detentions. Recently, the military has begun winnowing down the numbers at Guantánamo, releasing more than 90 detainees to their home countries.
Pentagon officials said last week that some detainees could be held for years or even indefinitely if they were judged to remain a danger. That means that even after a detainee had served a sentence, he might still not be released.
Last week, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said the military would establish a special panel as a kind of parole board to evaluate annually whether long-term detainees were still a danger.
At one time, administration officials said they hoped that the first batch of Guantánamo detaineescharged would be those with whom a plea bargain could be reached. It was unclear whether the two defendants charged Tuesday would be willing to plead guilty to any charges; there was no indication whether the accusations came from their admissions or were gathered elsewhere.
