Tourists who take a wrong turn while driving out to the Khmer Rouge ''killing fields'' could be in for a shock. The highway passes a new water park, a new factory district, a new international school and a new golf course. Eventually, the newly repaved road ends at the beaches of Sihanoukville, where an 800-room hotel opens in June.
''We want to flip the killing fields page to one of a normal country,'' a trade ministry official, Siphana Sok, said. Speaking fluent English, which he learned growing up in Washington, after escaping the Khmer Rouge as a child, he added, ''We want to move on.''
A quarter-century after the Khmer Rouge communists were driven from Phnom Penh, streets here throb with market capitalism.
''Do you want to buy 'Last Samurai'? 'Lord of the Rings?''' a vendor in a brown silk shirt appealed to an American visitor to one market, his stall stacked with pirated DVD's, selling for $3 each. Nearby, a multicolor display of raw silk scarves drew more tourists, a vanguard of the estimated one million expected here in 2004.
With the Khmer Rouge years reduced to sinister displays rusting in museums, Cambodia is solidly on the map of mainstream Asian tourism. With the temple complex of Angkor as the main draw, Cambodia recently won new international airline flights and new international hotels.
''Just eight years ago, there were only a few hotels,'' said Thim So Thea, a guide in Siem Reap, gateway city for the Angkor complex. ''Now there are more than 60 hotels and more than 100 guesthouses.'' Passing a man ferrying a pig to market on a motorcycle, he said: ''Look, tourism provides a lot of jobs for the Cambodian people.''
The other pillar of Cambodia's new economy, the garment industry, is cautiously expanding, despite the threat of direct competition with China next year as the United States drops most quotas on imported clothes.
''We are looking at $39 million in new investment this year,'' said Ray Chew, secretary general of the Garment Manufacturers' Association in Cambodia. ''For companies who are here, the tendency is expansion.'' His group represents the 196 clothing factories that have opened in the last decade.
Cambodia's garment industry has received a publicity lift with a campaign led by the actress Minnie Driver and Oxfam, a private charity concerned with fighting poverty. The campaign gives cautious praise to improvements in working conditions here, but urges international buyers, like Gap and Nike, to do more.
Ly Tin's trade views are shaped by selling shampoo packets and sundries to women working in garment factories across the street from her store. ''The United States,'' she said, ''should continue to provide Cambodia with most-favored-nation status, to help us develop.''
Propelled by these twin forces, tourism and garment manufacturing, economists forecast that Cambodia's economy will grow 5 percent this year, matching last year's level.
But Cambodia still lags its neighbors, Thailand and Vietnam. Last year, Vietnam's economy grew 7.3 percent, Asia's second-fastest growth rate, after China. Every year, Thailand's more-developed economy draws thousands of illegal migrants from Cambodia, a country where more than a third of the population of 12 million get by on less than $1 a day.
Ties with Thailand, the largest foreign investor here, are being patched up after anti-Thai riots a year ago caused an estimated $55 million in damage to Thai-owned companies and the Thai Embassy. An 11-foot wall surrounding the rebuilt embassy here speaks of residual wariness about volatile nationalist feelings.
Five years after the last Khmer Rouge were disarmed, Cambodia is one of Southeast Asia's largest aid recipients, taking in $635 million last year. But Japan, the largest donor, is urging Cambodia to shift from public aid to private investment.
Shoichi Nakagawa, Japan's trade and industry minister, said on a visit here in early January that Cambodia should cut taxes, reduce corruption and treat foreigners in a consistent and transparent manner to attract investment. To jump-start the process, Tokyo is sending groups of business leaders here on investment promotion trips this spring.
A big stumbling block to foreign investors has been Cambodia's political paralysis. More than six months after Cambodia's parliamentary elections in July, the prime minister, Hun Sen has been unable to form a new government. His Cambodian People's Party did not win enough seats to form a government alone, and opposition parties have refused to join him.
Because of the deadlock, Cambodia has won an extension, until September, from the World Trade Organization to pass legislation to put Cambodia's membership into effect. Last September, in a step toward joining the global economy, Cambodia was admitted to the group.
The political uncertainty is delaying many public and private investments. A visiting Cambodian-American engineer from a Massachusetts technology company said he would shy away from investing in Cambodia until the political outlook clears.
At an adventure travel agency facing the chocolate waters of the Mekong River, Andre Ruys, the Dutch owner, studied a map of Cambodia and lamented that many road-paving projects were stalled, losing the dry season, largely because donors are unsure of the composition of the new government.
''The Thai military have machines ready to build bridges and pave here,'' he said, tracing a road running east from the Thai border, parallel to the Gulf of Siam. Turning to other road rehabilitation projects, west from Vietnam and south from Laos, he added: ''The Vietnamese are ready to build from their border. The Chinese are ready to come down here. Everybody is ready. Only the government is not ready.''
Mr. Chew of the garment makers' group -- a Malaysian who moved here in 1992 -- said Cambodia's circumstances should be kept in perspective, adding: ''Vietnam has had peace since 1975. Here, they have no war only five years.''
