With Boston Scientific poised to introduce a drug-coated device to keep coronary arteries open, Johnson &amp; Johnson is scrambling to protect its lead in what is likely to soon be a $3 billion market.
Johnson &amp; Johnson, the first company to get approval for the new drug-coated stent, as the device is called, said yesterday that it had joined forces with another competitor, Guidant, to sell its Cypher stent.
''This agreement places the Cypher stent into the hands of what together is the largest and best-trained interventional cardiology sales force in the United States,'' Dr. Guy J. Lebeau, the Johnson &amp; Johnson company group chairman who oversees Cordis, the unit that makes the stents, said in a statement.
While the move may help Johnson &amp; Johnson defend its position, the alliance does little to change the dynamics of the competition among the three companies, some analysts and doctors say. Boston Scientific is close to receiving approval for its competing stent, Taxus, and some analysts expect the company to take away the market lead from Johnson &amp; Johnson. Guidant is still two years away from introducing its own drug-coated stent in the United States.
The threat presented by Taxus, which is viewed as a strong alternative to Cypher, appears to have motivated the two other major competitors to join in a strategic alliance, said Thomas J. Gunderson, a senior research analyst for Piper Jaffray. ''They found it to be in their best common interest to try to slow Boston down,'' he said.
Johnson &amp; Johnson and Guidant, which also announced an end to their outstanding patent disputes, will devote about 500 people to marketing the device.
''There is no doubt that by having the Johnson &amp; Johnson and Guidant sales force selling Cypher, there will be more Cyphers sold, period,'' said Daniel Lemaitre, an analyst with Merrill Lynch. But while the combined marketing push may help Johnson &amp; Johnson protect a few hundred million dollars in sales, Mr. Lemaitre said he remained convinced that Boston Scientific would eventually seize the bulk of the American market.
At stake is what analysts and others estimate is a $3 billion market in the United States by the end of the year, as more and more doctors turn to drug-coated stents to treat patients with heart disease. A stent is a meshlike device inserted in coronary arteries to help prop them open; the new ones are coated with drugs to help prevent the arteries from becoming blocked again by scarring. Johnson &amp; Johnson coats its stent with a drug called Sirolimus, used for patients getting kidney transplants.
Johnson &amp; Johnson's Cordis unit received regulatory approval to sell the device last spring, but Boston Scientific has been close behind. Regulatory approval for the Boston Scientific stent, which is coated with a different drug, paclitaxel, is expected to come sometime before the end of March, if not sooner.
''Any day now, they will get approval,'' said Dr. Michael Dake, an associate professor at Stanford University School of Medicine. ''The next year, year and a half, they will have their place in the sun.''
With no definitive studies available suggesting that one stent is better for patients than another, doctors may favor Taxus because they view it as easier to use.
Of the three kinds of stents being made, ''the Cypher is the least deliverable,'' said Dr. Deepak L. Bhatt, an interventional cardiologist at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, who described that stent as ''difficult to navigate'' in some patients whose arteries have twists.
Under the agreement reached with Guidant, Johnson &amp; Johnson will be able to make use of any advances made by Guidant in how the stent is deployed, using a balloon catheter, but not Guidant's plain metal stent, called the Multi-Link Vision. ''What I'm disappointed in is that Johnson &amp; Johnson didn't get the Vision stent,'' Mr. Lemaitre, the Merrill analyst, said.
Doctors may also be impressed by some preliminary data that show Taxus may be more effective in patients with diabetes than the Cypher stent, analysts said.
But Mr. Gunderson said Guidant's delivery system might prove valuable to Cypher, which could introduce a stent with the new technology before the end of the year. Guidant has a ''better balloon,'' he said. Still, he said, right now Boston Scientific appears to have the advantage. ''They do have the overall superior system,'' he said.
Johnson &amp; Johnson, which lost its command of the plain-metal stent market in the 1990's after failing to innovate quickly enough, had the disadvantage in this case of being the first to the market, Mr. Gunderson said. When the company developed Cypher, its stent represented the latest technology, but its rivals, including Boston Scientific, have since had the opportunity to develop better devices, he said.
Boston Scientific already has the lead in Europe, where the two stents compete, and many analysts predict that it will be able to take the lead in the United States by the end of 2004.
Guidant's decision to help Johnson &amp; Johnson market Cypher also benefits Guidant, which would otherwise be destined to stay on the sidelines until 2006. ''It's a very beneficial deal to Guidant,'' said Juan Noble, an analyst with Oppenheimer &amp; Company, because it allows the Guidant sales force to continue to have a presence in the market and benefit from the experience of selling the stent until it introduces its own version.
But the companies are not likely to compete by lowering the price of the stents, now about $2,700, according to Mr. Noble, who says Boston Scientific is likely to price its stent about the same.
Boston Scientific declined to comment on its pricing strategy, and a spokesman for Cordis said the company did not plan to compete primarily on price.
''There's not going to be a price war,'' agreed Dr. Dake, who said device companies tended not to cut prices sharply even when faced with competition.
Shares of both Johnson &amp; Johnson and Guidant rose yesterday. Johnson &amp; Johnson closed at $54.18, up $1.13, while Guidant closed at $67.95, up $4.50. Boston Scientific was flat, closing at $41.27, down 3 cents.
