There are plenty of things you can buy in New York at 3:30 on a Sunday morning, but, strangely enough, take-out beer is not one of them.
This, a lower-court judge in Brooklyn has ruled, is not just.
The judge, Charles A. Posner of Criminal Court, found that the state law banning the sale of beer from 3 a.m. to noon on Sundays was unconstitutional because it is based in religious beliefs -- specifically Christian ones -- and thus violates the separation of church and state.
''In the case at hand,'' the judge wrote, dismissing a misdemeanor summons issued to a Brooklyn shopkeeper named Abdulsam Yafee, ''there is no secular reason why beer cannot be sold on Sunday morning as opposed to any other morning.''
Don't pop your tops yet, late-night revelers. Judge Posner's ruling does not compel other judges to rule similarly.
''A decision would only bind on a lower court, and there is no lower court,'' said Prof. Stephen Gillers of New York University School of Law, adding that not even Judge Posner's fellow Criminal Court judges are bound by it.
Still, Susan Hendricks, the lawyer in charge of criminal defense at the Legal Aid Society, which occasionally represents people charged with illegal Sunday alcohol sales, said the society would not hesitate to bring Judge Posner's ruling to the attention of other judges.
''If such a poor soul were arrested and processed, it would be grounds to dismiss the case against him,'' she said, praising Judge Posner's reasoning as ''very sound, and a good analysis of New York law and constitutional law in this area.''
Under state law, New York City bars are allowed to serve until 4 a.m. on Sundays, but take-out sales must stop at 3 a.m.
Neither the Brooklyn district attorney's office nor the state attorney general's office appeared to know what to make of the ruling, which was issued in January and reported yesterday in The New York Law Journal. Both said yesterday that they were reviewing it.
Professor Gillers said that the government should appeal the ruling, even at the risk that a higher court -- in this case, the Appellate Term -- will uphold Judge Posner. ''The prosecutor has an interest in uniformity of the law,'' he said. ''The results they get shouldn't depend on which judge happens to be in the arraignment part the day the case is heard.''
Because the summons was dismissed, the particulars of the case are now sealed in the vault of history. Mr. Yafee's court-appointed lawyer, Damien M. Brown, said he did not have a file on the summons and did not recall where his client lived or worked.
All that could be confirmed yesterday was that Mr. Yafee was accused of selling beer somewhere in Brooklyn at 3:30 a.m. on a Sunday sometime before April 25, 2003, the date that Judge Posner dismissed the ticket. (He did not issue his formal opinion on the case until last month.)
In New York, as in many other states, the Sunday restrictions on businesses known as blue laws are gradually being dismantled. A state law enacted last year allows liquor stores, which sell wine and spirits, to open on Sundays for the first time since the days of the temperance movement. In Judge Posner's case, he cited a 1976 State Court of Appeals decision that struck down several other blue laws.
''In view of the acknowledgment by the Court of Appeals that Sabbath laws are founded in religious beliefs, it is time to declare all such laws unconstitutional,'' he wrote.
Mr. Brown said that dismissing the ticket on constitutional grounds was entirely Judge Posner's idea, though he was quick to add, ''I would have made that argument if I'd gotten the chance.''
Mr. Brown called Judge Posner, a former deputy district attorney in Brooklyn who was appointed to the bench in 1995, ''a great judge who runs a fair court.''
Judge Posner declined through a spokesman to comment on the ruling.
