In a span of four days last week, St. John's won one Big East Conference game and lost another by a point, signs of life for a team whose attempt to end the season on an upward note seemed hopeless. Then Connecticut came to town.
It was back to reality for St. John's last night at Madison Square Garden as it was outclassed by No. 8 Connecticut in front of 11,736 fans, many of whom were rooting for UConn. The Red Storm lost, 71-53, in a game decided during the first half. St. John's made three field goals and shot 9.4 percent from the floor in the half.
A meaningless 17-2 second-half run by St. John's began with UConn leading by 50-20. It only helped to make the final score less embarrassing for the Red Storm.
St. John's fell to 6-18, setting a team record for losses in a season. The 1993-94 team finished 12-17. The Red Storm is 1-12 in the Big East.
The Huskies (22-5, 10-3) were led by Emeka Okafor, who had 22 points and 18 rebounds. Making his first start of the season, Connecticut's Rashad Anderson had 17 points.
The Red Storm came out wearing throwback jerseys commemorating the Final Four team of 1985, an inadvertent reminder of how far the program has fallen since its glory days. The current edition, reduced to five scholarship players after the suspensions and expulsions that resulted from a trip to a Pittsburgh strip club by six players, does few things well.
But seldom has it struggled the way it did in the opening 20 minutes last night. St. John's made 3 of 32 field-goal attempts in the half, which ended with UConn leading, 33-16. The Red Storm stayed as close as it did because it shot 9 for 11 from the free-throw line.
''We just missed shots,'' Kevin Clark, the St. John's interim coach, said. ''We had 11 offensive rebounds at halftime. We just didn't convert.''
The game was reasonably close when a short jumper by the Red Storm's Andre Stanley cut the Connecticut lead to 20-14 with 4 minutes 32 seconds remaining in the half. From there, UConn went on a 13-2 run to close the half.
''I thought we played brilliant basketball the last seven minutes of the half,'' Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun said. ''If we can take 18, 19 minutes of that kind of basketball, we can beat anybody in the country.''
Clark praised his team for its second-half play and for making a run that put a dent into the Connecticut lead, but it was more a case of the Huskies coasting after they were ahead by 30. Connecticut was playing with little intensity and appeared indifferent on the defensive end of the court.
''We let up; we played to the competition,'' Connecticut guard Taliek Brown said. ''We were up by 30 and played to the lead because we were up by so much. We know we can't do that when we play harder teams. We know what we have to do and what we have to look forward to. We got a win today and when the time is right we'll play.''
Okafor said: ''We need intensity. When we have a 30-point lead, we need to extend that to 40 or 50.''
Though his team has been inconsistent this season and does not always play with a lot of fire, UConn's second-half doldrums did not bother Calhoun.
''You know what, that was inevitable,'' he said. ''We tried some different kids and some different combinations. Over all, our goal was to try to win six in a row. If I try to overdissect a 19-point win I'm going to drive myself crazy.''
Point guard Daryll Hill, who scored 22 points in last Wednesday's victory over Georgetown and 27 in Saturday's 54-53 loss at Virginia Tech, was again the offensive star for St. John's. He scored a team-high 21 points. Kyle Cuffe had 13 rebounds to go with 16 points.
By shooting 47.4 percent (18 for 38) in the second half, St. John's managed some respectable final statistics. It shot 30 percent for the game. Connecticut was only a little better at 36.7 percent.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
