Lawyers for Martha Stewart said yesterday that they would wrap up their defense in her trial this morning, without testimony from Ms. Stewart. Closing arguments in the case could begin as early as tomorrow.
Ms. Stewart and her former broker, Peter E. Bacanovic, are on trial in federal court in Manhattan on charges that they conspired to hinder a government investigation into Ms. Stewart's sale of shares in ImClone Systems just before news became public that drove its stock price down.
Mr. Bacanovic's lawyers said yesterday that they had called their last witness and would have only some documents to introduce in evidence today.
The strategic decision to forgo extensive testimony in Ms. Stewart's defense is risky but not unusual, lawyers said. The move allows her lawyer, Robert G. Morvillo, to argue that the government failed to make its case without having to worry about cross- examination of defense witnesses. But it also means that if the jury found the prosecution's version of events compelling, Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic -- who also did not testify -- will not have provided them with an alternative.
''It's a gamble either way, but it is not at all uncommon,'' said Melinda Haag, the former chief of the white-collar crime section of the United States attorney's office in San Francisco and now a partner at Orrick, Herrington &amp; Sutcliffe. ''It can be a much cleaner approach to defending a case, because you don't have to talk about your side.''
''You just chip away'' at the prosecution's case, Ms. Haag said.
The judge overseeing the case, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum, said that she would probably announce this afternoon her decision on motions for acquittal filed by both defendants. The judge said she would also hold a conference with lawyers for all sides, after Ms. Stewart's defense concludes questioning of its witness, to discuss the instructions she will give to the jury. She added that closing arguments could be scheduled for tomorrow.
Mr. Morvillo, Ms. Stewart's lawyer, said he planned to call as a witness a junior lawyer who sat in at an interview of Ms. Stewart in the early stages of the government's investigation into her December 2001 sale of shares in ImClone, the company headed by her friend Samuel D. Waksal. The government contends that Ms. Stewart sold 3,928 shares after she was tipped off by her stockbroker that Dr. Waksal was trying to sell his shares; he is serving a seven-year sentence on charges including securities fraud.
The defense is expected to argue that notes taken by the junior lawyer at the interview of Ms. Stewart show that she did not make false statements, one charge in the indictment.
Yesterday, a principal witness for the defense, Heidi DeLuca, a business manager for Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, was undermined by prosecutors. Ms. DeLuca told the jury on Monday that Mr. Bacanovic said on Nov. 8, 2001, that he would discuss with Ms. Stewart a plan to sell her ImClone shares if the price fell below $60 or $61. This arrangement is one of the main arguments by the defense that there was no cover-up because the sale was legitimate.
But Michael Schachter, an assistant United States attorney, methodically made the case yesterday that Ms. DeLuca was at best confused on the timing of her conversation with Mr. Bacanovic about the prearranged sale agreement and at worst was motivated by greed in testifying on her boss's behalf.
''On Oct. 24, 2001, you spoke to Mr. Bacanovic for 21 minutes from 2:19 in the afternoon to 2:40 in the afternoon,'' Mr. Schachter said. Ms. DeLuca said that she had.
Mr. Schachter then noted that on that call, Ms. DeLuca discussed selling nearly 52,000 ImClone shares held in Ms. Stewart's pension account (separate from Ms. Stewart's personal account at Merrill Lynch, which held the 3,928 shares whose sale is at issue). The shares in the pension account were sold weeks before the trade in December 2001.
Mr. Schachter noted that a document that Ms. DeLuca had said concerned setting a price for the sale of the ImClone stock in the personal account appeared to reflect information related to the sale of the stock in the pension account. Ms. DeLuca said she was sure that she had a separate conversation with Mr. Bacanovic on Nov. 8 about the stock in the personal account.
Mr. Schachter then attacked Ms. DeLuca's motives for testifying. In response to questioning about her compensation, Ms. DeLuca said she received a raise of about $21,000 in 2002 -- an increase of nearly a third of her $72,000 salary in 2001. And Mr. Schachter questioned her about her winter vacation in late December 2001, asking bluntly: ''You falsely billed this trip to the company as a business expense, didn't you?''
The final witness of the day, John Davenport Maine, a former senior investment banker and now a consultant, told the jury about how stock prices can be analyzed and provided definitions for different types of prearranged trades. The prosecution's effort to undermine his testimony through questions about his compensation were less harmful to his credibility.
''You were paid to come here, I take it?'' Karen Patton Seymour, a prosecutor, asked Mr. Maine.
''Not yet,'' Mr. Maine said, ''but I hope I will be.''
