As the political world comes careering toward the critical March 2 primaries, two things are apparent:
* There are only two candidates for the Democratic nomination.
* There will not be any debates featuring only two candidates.
Dennis Kucinich and Al Sharpton are planning to tag along anywhere John Kerry and John Edwards go that features a stage and a TV camera. Thursday's debate in California will include all four candidates, giving primary voters still more valuable insights into the priorities of a Kucinich or Sharpton presidency. Next Sunday's debate in New York, co-sponsored by CBS News and The New York Times, will have the same cast of characters.
Now this is probably not the central issue in American democracy. Get too worked up over marginal candidates' crowding the debates and you'll wind up sounding like one of those people who kept complaining that the new millennium didn't really begin until Jan. 1, 2001.
Still, there's the irritation factor. The American public has a very limited appetite for political coverage, and some people are using up way more than their share.
Supporters of Mr. Kucinich, the Ohio congressman, argue that he deserves a place at the debates because he represents the views of all the Democrats to the left of Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry. But after the first 17 primaries, Mr. Kucinich had yet to win a single delegate. (His campaign has the support of two superdelegates, prominent party members who aren't bound by primary results. One of them is Mr. Kucinich himself.) Representing a position does not confer legitimacy when even the people who agree with you are voting for someone else.
The question of what to do with marginal candidates comes up all the time, in elections from United States senator to deputy town superviser. Front-runners, with everything to lose, generally want to clutter up the stage with as many bodies as possible. Sure enough, The Associated Press reported last week that Senator Kerry was referring to Senator Edwards as simply ''one of the leading contenders'' and refusing to show up for any debates without the rest of the crowd.
Senator Edwards has complied, partly because he needs to get Senator Kerry to come, and perhaps partly because he has judged that the flak he'd get from fighting about the issue would not be worth the game.
He is probably right. Mr. Sharpton has made it clear that he'd cry racial exclusion if he was kept off the stage, and he's perfectly capable of mobilizing pickets to drive his point home. But Mr. Sharpton's role is the weirdest and least defensible part of the whole debate arrangement. Dennis Kucinich is a congressman off on a quirky crusade. Al Sharpton is a freelance civil rights activist who's reinventing himself as a professional failed candidate for high office.
There have been a number of occasions when Mr. Sharpton could have run for office from his base in New York and had a good chance of being elected -- to the State Legislature, the City Council or perhaps even Congress. But he prefers to run for jobs he cannot possibly win -- United States senator, New York City mayor, president -- and bask in the attention.
Mr. Sharpton's ability to get into the debates is critical to maintaining this peculiar career. He has a keen intellect, a quick sense of humor and a gift for snappy comebacks. Pitted against a couple of serious candidates who sense that their futures may be on the line, Mr. Sharpton can look cool and reasonable while everyone else on the stage looks sweaty and slightly desperate. The very nonseriousness of his campaign is what keeps it going. If anyone ever imagined that he had a serious chance of winning an important elective office, questions about his history and his campaign money would quickly overwhelm his candidacy.
What we have here, then, is a candidate who is not serious, who cannot afford to be serious, but whose career depends on frightening people who know he's not serious into pretending they think he is. Political campaigns aren't generally a venue for unvarnished truth-telling, but this setup can't be good for anybody -- except, of course, Mr. Sharpton.
Editorial Observer
