For the second time in less than a year, Senate Democrats on Tuesday blocked a White House-backed effort to impose strict caps on jury awards in medical malpractice cases. But Republicans vowed to bring the issue up again later in the year.
The backers of the measure, which would curb jury awards in medical liability cases against obstetricians and gynecologists, fell 12 votes short of the 60 necessary to have the bill considered by the Senate. The final vote, 48 to 45, fell mostly along party lines; the outcome was a foregone conclusion.
''We're going to keep going until we succeed,'' said Senator Elizabeth Dole, Republican of North Carolina, at a news conference before the vote. Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, the majority leader, said after the vote, ''I want to keep the issue out there, because I think patients are being hurt.''
With doctors around the country complaining bitterly that the rise in liability insurance premiums is forcing them out of business, Republicans, including President Bush, have made a revision of malpractice law a central part of their tort law agenda. But the effort, which has met with success in the House, is gaining little traction in the Senate.
In July, Senate Democrats blocked a far-reaching bill, passed by the House, that would have imposed a $250,000 cap on jury awards for pain and suffering in all medical malpractice cases. Republicans responded by scaling back the measure to apply the $250,000 cap only to obstetricians and gynecologists, who have been particularly hard hit by insurance rate increases.
''Our medical litigation system is failing the American public,'' Dr. Frist, who is a surgeon, said in introducing the bill. He added, ''The ultimate victims are the patients who see that their access to care is being threatened, and in some cases their access to care is disappearing.''
But Democrats argued that the bill would strip patients of their right to legal recourse, and they said that Republicans, in bringing the measure up for consideration without a committee hearing, were simply playing politics.
''Here is a bill that would take a chain saw to the legal rights of the American people,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, the senior Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee. He added, ''It is an election year and their lobbyists came up and said we really want this bill, so here it is.''
The lobbying on both sides was intense, with doctors and business groups, a traditional constituency of Republicans, pushing hard for the legislation, and consumer advocates and trial lawyers, who traditionally back Democrats, fighting hard against. Proponents of the bill said it would curb frivolous lawsuits that are driving up insurance rates; opponents said that the insurance companies themselves were responsible for the rate increases.
In an interview, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah and chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, acknowledged that in forcing a vote, Republicans were trying to highlight what they regard as the influence trial lawyers have on Senate Democrats. Saying it was impossible to overcome the trial lawyers' lobby, Mr. Hatch said, ''The only way we're going to get that done is to have them vote time after time after time.''
