HIGHLIGHTS
VAN GOGH OR NOT VAN GOGH? -- Is it or isn't it? That's the question swirling around the 19th-century photograph that is the focus of an exhibition running through March 4 in the Seton Gallery at the University of New Haven in West Haven, Conn. Is the photograph, above, the image of the mature Vincent van Gogh, who left behind 40 self-portraits but is believed to be the subject of only two photographs, taken when he was 13 and 19. Dating to the late 1880's, the pivotal photograph of the middle-aged man on view in West Haven was bought for $1 by an artist, Tom Stanford, who found it while combing through a stack of 19th-century photos at an antiques dealer's in 1990. It shows a bearded man with a long, sharp nose and a neat beard who is wearing a plain suit and a bow tie and certainly bears a strong resemblance to the van Gogh familiar from his paintings. Although the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam contests the conclusion that the man is van Gogh, David Skora, the director of the Seton Gallery, said the photograph was subjected to analysis by Joseph Buberger, a photo historian, and Dr. Albert Harper, director of the Henry C. Lee Institute of Forensic Science. He said both concluded that the image is that of van Gogh and that the person depicted in the two photographs believed to be those of the artist as a teenager is actually his brother, Theo. With reproductions of self-portrait paintings and drawings shown with permission of the Van Gogh Museum, ''Discovering van Gogh: A Forensic Study in Identification'' displays not only the photos and related art but explores forensic evaluation.
NEW BENEFACTORS -- American Ballet Theater announced yesterday that it had attracted three new corporate sponsors and a challenge grant of $400,000. The troupe said Countrywide Financial Corporation, a major residential mortgage lending concern, and Cole Haan, the fashion and accessories company, had become sponsors of its national tour and New York seasons, and that Saks Fifth Avenue had become a sponsor of its costume fund. In addition, Joseph A. Wilson, a commercial real estate developer from New Jersey, has initiated the challenge grant to raise funds for Ballet Theater in the next two years. The grant will match new or increased donations up to $400,000, for a potential yield of $800,000; and if the challenge is met, Ballet Theater said, Mr. Wilson has made an additional commitment of $200,000 for 2006, raising the potential to $1.2 million.
'REEFER MADNESS' REDUX -- ''Reefer Madness,'' the cautionary tale of the perils of marijuana that first saw the light of a projector as a 1936 film, is coming back. In its new incarnation, ''Reefer Madness,'' a Showtime Original Picture, produced with Apollo Screen, will be a musical adapted from the stage musical seen in the 1999-2000 season in Los Angeles and in 2001 Off Broadway. Robert Greenblatt, the president of Showtime Entertainment, said he would describe the new production, to be directed by Andy Fickman and starring Christian Campbell and Kristen Bell, all of the Los Angeles production, ''as a cross between 'Grease' and 'The Rocky Picture Horror Show.' '' Production is to begin next month. No broadcast date has been scheduled.
IRAN: BRITISH ART -- Including major names like Damien Hirst, Henry Moore and Barbara Hepworth, the first exhibition of British art in Iran since the Islamic revolution in 1979 went on view yesterday at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Tehran, the BBC reported. Alireza Sami Azar, the director of the museum, said, ''This exhibition will give momentum to further exchanges of cultural projects between the two countries.''
IN THE GLARE OF DISNEY HALL -- What's it like to live near the new Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles? Dazzling and hot might be two words that come to mind. Neighbors are complaining that the intense glare from some of the shimmering stainless steel curves, above, of the $274 million hall designed by Frank Gehry has raised the temperature in nearby condominium apartments by as much as 15 degrees, The Associated Press reported. Jacqueline Lagrone, 42, said that when she returned for lunch one day before a temporary change was made: ''You couldn't even see, and then the furniture would really get hot. You would have to literally close the drapes, and you'd still feel warmth in the house. You would have the air-conditioning on all the time.'' On one corner, where a glossy steel finish reflects the sun more harshly than the brushed steel used elsewhere, officials have put up netting pending a permanent solution. ''We've chosen a sort of sandblasted finish,'' said Terry Bell, a Gehry partner. He said the impact of shiny steel on neighboring buildings was considered by the architects, but during construction, curving metal sheets ended up at a slightly different angle than called for by the plans.
FOOTNOTES
Ray Charles, 73, has canceled his performance on Tuesday at Alice Tully Hall in the second annual HIP Jazz Concert Series. Since mid-July he has been experiencing discomfort after undergoing hip surgery. He said, ''I never like to miss a show, so I'm terribly disappointed to miss this one, but my doctors feel that I need more rest, at least a few more months, before I can start doing concerts again, so I'll sadly heed their advice.'' The vocal ensemble Manhattan Transfer will take his place. . . . ''Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' has joined ''Titanic,'' becoming the second film to take in more than $1 billion in worldwide ticket sales, the BBC reported.
