Laying the groundwork for an overall state budget that could top $100 billion for the first time, New York's two top legislative leaders agreed on Tuesday that Gov. George E. Pataki had underestimated revenues for next year.
While the two agreed that revenues had been underestimated, the amount of revenues they predicted diverged. They have only a little more than five weeks left to work out those differences in time for the 2004-05 fiscal year.
On one side, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Democrat, said revenue collections would actually exceed the governor's projection by $656 million, pushing the total to $100.8 billion next year. His forecasts on income and business taxes flowing into New York were higher than Mr. Pataki's.
Joseph L. Bruno, the Republican majority leader of the State Senate, said the Pataki administration had underestimated revenues by $228 million, still enough to push the available revenue to slightly over $100 billion.
In January, Mr. Pataki unveiled a $99.8 billion budget plan, with spending and revenues matched up, but neither house on Tuesday addressed the spending side of the governor's plan.
Now the effort begins by Mr. Pataki, Mr. Bruno and Mr. Silver to reach consensus on the taxes and other revenues expected to flow into New York in the next year. Many obstacles lie ahead, but the three leaders have all pledged to reach consensus on the revenue figure quickly, and to finalize a spending plan by April 1, a deadline that has gone unmet in New York for 19 consecutive years.
What will be a thornier issue than agreeing on the available money is deciding how to spend it. The two houses stand far apart on an array of more politically charged financial issues.
Chief among those is satisfying a Court of Appeals order that the state provide children with ''a sound basic education.'' Leaders in the Assembly say the solution, including a windfall for New York City, must be included in the next state budget, while those in the Senate say it should be handled apart from a spending plan.
Even more contentious is Mr. Pataki's plan to improve failing schools using revenues from video lottery terminals, similar to slot machines, placed around the state. He has proposed establishing eight new gambling parlors with the devices, in addition to eight parlors already approved for horse tracks, to raise hundreds of millions of dollars for education.
