Questions about who knew what, and when, continue to dog the Walt Disney Company, which disclosed on Monday that its board had been advised of an overture to enter merger talks with the Comcast Corporation ahead of a $54 billion bid.
Disney disclosed that its chief executive, Michael D. Eisner,  had consulted directors before the Feb. 9 phone call he received from Comcast's chief executive, Brian L. Roberts, to enter merger discussions.
During that call, Mr. Eisner read from his computer screen a scripted rejection which, the company disclosed Monday, the board had approved. Two days later Comcast made a formal offer, which the board rejected as too low.
The new disclosure seemed to contradict an earlier impression that Mr. Eisner had rebuffed Mr. Roberts' request for merger talks without talking to the board.
Richard Greenfield, an analyst at Fulcrum Global Partners, wrote in a report, ''We find it curious that the Disney board would instruct Mr. Eisner to read a canned rejection of Comcast's solicitation straight off his computer, without the board at least entertaining a discussion with Comcast.''
Patrick McGurn, special counsel at Institutional Shareholder Services, added: ''I think it would have been more powerful if they said something last week. Many people were left with the impression that Michael did this on his own.''
Disney says it has had a board-approved strategy for two years to address situations related to mergers and acquisitions. ''The board had a process in place in how to respond regarding any communication regarding an overture and what the proper procedure was for handling it,'' a spokeswoman, Zenia Mucha, said. ''That procedure was followed.''
But Mr. Roberts was not so sanguine in his response to Monday's news. ''I purposefully raised the topic of a combination with Mr. Eisner in a way that I thought would lead to a discussion,'' he said in a statement. ''How can it be in the best interest of Disney shareholders for him to not even talk to us?''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS
