An oversized team logo billowed behind them. An empty soda cup tipped over and rolled across the table. The wind raged and the rain intensified on the roof of the tent. Derek Jeter had taken a seat beside Alex Rodriguez at a news conference on Tuesday after the Yankees' first full-squad workout.
The first question addressed to both players asked for their thoughts on sharing the same infield. Jeter looked over his left shoulder to Rodriguez, but Rodriguez insisted Jeter go first.
''It's awkward,'' Jeter said. ''We've been on the same field before, at the All-Star Game, but never as teammates. I think it's going to be awkward for a while.''
Rodriguez took the question and fielded it cleanly. ''It's going to be fun having him next to me, to have someone to lead me and make me laugh,'' he said.
Awkward? Fun? There is probably a little of both in the evolving relationship between Rodriguez and Jeter as teammates. Jeter said he would answer no more questions about their complicated friendship, but after watching Rodriguez take grounders at third base on Tuesday, he came away impressed.
''He'll pick it up probably as quickly as anyone could, because he's a great athlete and he has great hands,'' Jeter said. ''Only time will tell, but I don't think it'll take him long.''
Rodriguez was on the field with the coach Luis Sojo at 8 a.m., two hours before the Yankees' practice began. They worked on backhanded plays and slow rollers, and Rodriguez later spent time with Graig Nettles, a special instructor and a former Gold Glove third baseman for the Yankees.
Sojo, Nettles and the bench coach, Willie Randolph, will supervise Rodriguez's transition from a Gold Glove shortstop to a novice third baseman. Rodriguez told Sojo he wants to work out early every other day to speed up his learning curve. He is also pleasing his boss.
''Everybody knows how great a player he is,'' George Steinbrenner said. ''For him to come out early shows what kind of guy he is. It's a great example.''
Rodriguez said he expected the most difficult play to be a bunt or a chopper from a speedy player, which would require Rodriguez to throw across his body and avoid hitting the runner in the shoulder. But first things first. ''Every play is challenging right now,'' he said.
Nettles, who met Rodriguez for the first time on Tuesday, said he wants Rodriguez to play deep at third base, so it would seem more like shortstop. After one day, Nettles had no doubt about Rodriguez's ability.
''He'll be fine over there,'' Nettles said. ''It's an infield position. It's not too different from shortstop. It's a ground ball; you've got to be able to catch it and throw it. He's proven he can do that. It's just a matter of getting into the right position and getting a few games under his belt.''
Nettles wore No. 9 as a Yankee, before it was retired in Roger Maris's honor. He wore No. 45 on Tuesday, and Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, said he would let Nettles wear his old number if he made Rodriguez a smooth third baseman.
''Well, he's going to let me starting tomorrow, no matter how the project turns out,'' Nettles said. ''That was nice of him.''
Rodriguez has a special bond with Sojo, 38, who was a teammate of Rodriguez's on the Seattle Mariners in 1994 and 1995. Rodriguez joked that he was 18 when he broke in and Sojo was 42.
''He's going to kill me for that,'' Rodriguez said, laughing. ''He really taught me a lot about playing shortstop. He knows me very well. He knows my arm strength. He knows my positives and my weaknesses. That part of it makes me feel very comfortable, knowing I was coming to the Yankees and having Luis as an instructor. We're going to get along just fine.''
When Rodriguez played with Sojo in Seattle, he boldly told Sojo that he wanted to be the best shortstop in the league. He accomplished that by winning American League Gold Gloves in 2002 and 2003. Now that he has given up shortstop to join the Yankees, Rodriguez has similar goals at third base.
''It's amazing to me how much he wants to improve,'' Sojo said. ''The guy wants to be the best third baseman in the world.''
The Yankees said 2,225 fans attended Tuesday's workout, a crowd Rodriguez said was easily the largest he had seen in spring training. He spoke excitedly about ''Yankee Nation,'' swiping a nickname from Red Sox fans, and he continued to express amazement that he was finally here.
''I often ask myself, 'Where are we?' '' Rodriguez said.
Rodriguez took batting practice with Homer Bush, Miguel Cairo and Gary Sheffield, and on his seventh swing crushed a homer that nearly struck a Yankees logo high on the scoreboard in left-center field.
Sheffield said he felt as if he were taking part in a home run derby, and Jeter said the Yankees seemed like an All-Star team. A jolt of Rodriguez can go a long way.
''It's been a breath of fresh air,'' General Manager Brian Cashman said. ''A lot of people have been energized by this thing. That's a nice fringe benefit.''
BASEBALL
