Senator John Kerry accused the Bush administration on Tuesday of helping foster the political instability in Haiti that has given rise to the armed rebellion threatening to overthrow the government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
''I think the administration has missed a lot of opportunities, in fact has exacerbated the situation over the last few years with its cutoff of humanitarian assistance and its attitude towards the Aristide administration,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''So they sort of created the environment within which the insurgency could grow, take root. And now they're trying to manage it, I think.''
He also questioned whether the administration had been playing ''a duplicitous game'': publicly encouraging Mr. Aristide but declining to assert itself in his behalf with the insurgents.
''They hate Aristide,'' Mr. Kerry said of administration officials at a morning meeting with editors and reporters of The New York Times, as he sought endorsements in New York's Democratic presidential primary next week. He then flew to Ohio, another Super Tuesday state, to campaign near Youngstown and in this Cleveland suburb.
Mr. Kerry touched on a wide range of topics in the interview, including gay marriage, President Bush's depiction of him as a flip-flopper, his competition from Senator John Edwards and his performance on the stump. But it dealt most heavily with foreign policy and national security, which Mr. Kerry said would be the dominant issues of the campaign and would play to his strengths.
''The president has made it very clear he wants to run on national security, and it makes sense, because he can't run on jobs, he can't run on deficits, he can't run on the environment, he can't run on a host of other things,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''So I think you're going to have a fear-and-security campaign. If they can. And I think I'm a candidate who's perfectly situated to challenge them and take them on. And I think I scare them on that level.''
If nominated, Mr. Kerry said, he will put together a ''security team'' to show voters ''that Democrats actually have a bench that is prepared to be put in the game that can keep America safe.''
He repeatedly attacked the administration's competence, calling its foreign policy ''almost stupid'' and, in a reference to its domestic policies, declaring, ''It's staggering to me how completely inept these people are in almost every choice that we face before the country.''
Mr. Kerry said his vision for Europe and the Korean peninsula -- he favors resuming bilateral negotiations between the United States and North Korea -- ''could begin to lighten'' the burden on the armed forces, eventually allowing the United States to reduce its military presence in South Korea and Germany.
On Haiti, Mr. Kerry said that if he were president, he would consider threatening to deploy an international peacekeeping force to persuade the insurgents to back away from their goal of toppling Mr. Aristide.
His message to the rebels, Mr. Kerry said, would be: ''You're not going to take over. You're not kicking him out. This democracy is going to be sustained. We're willing to put in a new government, new prime minister, we're willing to work with you, but you're not going to succeed in your goal of exile'' for Mr. Aristide.
''And unless that's clear,'' he added, ''you can't necessarily stop it in its tracks.''
Mr. Kerry was also asked about Mr. Bush's campaign speech on Monday night, in which the president described him as opposing now what he had voted for earlier -- on tax cuts, education reform, the USA Patriot Act, the Iraq war and free trade.
Mr. Kerry said he was unconcerned. ''You just deal with it by pointing out that they're the 'say one thing, do another' administration,'' he said. ''We'll countermessage as we go through this.''
In Struthers, Ohio, near Youngstown, Mr. Kerry did exactly that on Tuesday afternoon.
''I think the president is a walking contradiction,'' he told reporters, accusing Mr. Bush of ''broken promises'' on education, deficit reduction, health care and the environment.
''The president talked about a prosperity that millions of Americans are not seeing, feeling or living,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''Last night was almost a fantasy speech about a world that doesn't exist for most Americans.''
The Kerry campaign also released the text of an advertisement set to appear in Ohio and upstate New York starting Wednesday, in which the senator promises to create jobs and rein in health care costs. ''George Bush won't do it,'' Mr. Kerry says in the ad. ''I will.''
In the interview at The Times, Mr. Kerry also faced questions on gay marriage. On Monday, when asked about a decision by the mayor of San Francisco, Gavin C. Newsom, to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples in defiance of a California law, Mr. Kerry said he had not ''really kept up with exactly what he is doing.''
Mr. Edwards, meanwhile, came out publicly on Monday against Mr. Newsom's decision. And on Tuesday, Mr. Kerry followed suit. ''I think he's made a mistake,'' Mr. Kerry said of the mayor. ''I think what he's doing is not the law. I think if you want to challenge the law, you challenge the law or you change it.''
Asked to assess Mr. Edwards, Mr. Kerry praised his ''communication skills'' but said Mr. Bush was ''running as the wartime president with a security advantage against somebody who has four years' experience, five years' experience, in the United States Senate.''
''If people think that on balance he can stand up to that withering assault,'' Mr. Kerry added, ''they should vote for him.''
Mr. Kerry also played down the idea that Mr. Edwards, finishing a close second to him in Wisconsin, had done well there because the voters had had a chance to look at the two contenders head to head. He said Republican ''mischief'' could have been at work.
''Wisconsin was the only open primary, and you saw a very large number of Republicans come over to vote,'' he said. ''Now, I wonder why.''
Sharpton Says He'll Go to Haiti
Another Democratic presidential candidate, the Rev. Al Sharpton, said Tuesday that he planned to go to Haiti this week to try to help Mr. Aristide and rebel leaders negotiate a peace agreement.
Mr. Sharpton said that in telephone conversations, the rebel leaders, who on Tuesday turned down an American-backed plan, and Mr. Aristide ''said they wanted to talk to me, and both said they'd welcome my coming.'' He said that he would leave on Thursday or Friday but that he had not yet determined how he would travel to the country, where spreading violence has caused chaos and already closed at least one airport, at Cap Haitien.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
