As Tom Vander Ark ambles through, teenagers eye him with intrigue or apathy, bright smiles or blank stares. They have no idea what he's doing there, but he wraps their hands in his, working the classroom like a politician at a banquet. And take a look at the principal, they howl. He's never worn such fancy clothes.
''Are you running for governor?'' is one of the questions Mr. Vander Ark's visits inspire, and the very idea splits his usually stern face into a grin.
No, no, Mr. Vander Ark is the producer, the man behind the school. It and many others like it might have all remained wishful thinking without Mr. Vander Ark's faith -- and the many millions that that brings.
As the education director for the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Mr. Vander Ark is shaping what is easily the most aggressive infusion of private money into the nation's public schools today, if not ever.
In the last five years, the foundation has committed more than $1 billion for new and existing public schools, with no intentions of slowing down, giving Mr. Vander Ark, 44, one of the loudest megaphones around.
He is anything but shy about using it. Since joining the foundation in 1999, he has been unflinchingly critical of how the public schools have ''failed and forgotten'' poor and minority students, a consequence of what he calls a deep-seated ''institutionalized racism'' rife with low expectations and a rush of dropouts.
His counterattack has come through investments in about 1,900 public schools, most of them high schools, with the aim of creating small institutions that do not merely hope their students will go on to college, but demand nothing less of them.
Philanthropists had rarely plunged into the business of creating new high schools, and the choice gave the foundation relatively untrodden terrain on which to make a very public imprint.
Mr. Gates and his wife, Melinda, give Mr. Vander Ark wide latitude, largely deferring to his judgment about where the money should go, and why. Still, they question him persistently in long, intense sessions, keenly aware that they are taking very big risks on schools that are often long-term bets, at best.
''Tom is central to our efforts in education,'' Mr. Gates said. ''We depend on him to keep us up to date on the latest thinking and issues facing our work in this area.''
But don't expect him to entertain just any idea. The foundation does not take unsolicited proposals. Rather, it is Mr. Vander Ark, with his sharp suits, neatly trimmed goatee and football player's build, who comes to you.
''Tom's hugely influential,'' said Arne Duncan, chief executive officer of the Chicago public schools, the nation's third-largest school district, which has received about $24 million from the Gates foundation. ''I happen to be lucky to be in total agreement with him.''
New York City, too, has adopted the foundation's approach, and it received $51 million last year to create 67 small high schools. Still, the going has not been easy, and Mr. Vander Ark is the first to admit it. Last year, an independent review of the foundation's earliest efforts found that the small schools brought benefits but warned against expecting too much from them.
The dance with school districts sometimes involves clashing. But Thomas W. Payzant, superintendent of schools in Boston, which has received about $26 million from the Gates foundation said Mr. Vander Ark never waves the foundation's dollars around, threatening to yank them away unless he gets his way.
''The conversation is never about Gates's money,'' Mr. Payzant said, ''but the work, and what it's going to take to get it done.''
Despite Mr. Vander Ark's influence, he hardly sees himself as a visionary. Instead, he describes himself as a disenchanted businessman with an unremarkable, even somewhat unsuccessful, stint as a school superintendent who was dragged reluctantly into public service.
''I was clearly quite inept,'' said Mr. Vander Ark, adding that by the end of his five years as superintendent of Federal Way, Wash., ''I was in more trouble than when I started. The best thing I did was ask a lot of dumb questions.''
Before going to the Gates Foundation, where he is paid $280,000 a year, Mr. Vander Ark was neither particularly experienced nor notable in the realm of public education, but colleagues have long praised him for being a quick study willing to put in long hours.
And there was also something personal at stake for Mr. Vander Ark. As a superintendent, he once claimed that big, impersonal high schools would go up only ''over my dead body,'' though they ultimately did. Now, he is making up for the defeat.
Mr. Vander Ark essentially spent his first three years at the foundation in training, visiting all manner of public and some private schools for the gems that seemed to work. On the way, he developed a fierce loyalty for educators who have seemingly pieced together more of the puzzle than he has.
How does he know they are the right people to finance? That is as much art as science, Mr. Vander Ark said. While data on grades and graduation rates give strong clues, there are always the intangibles to consider, too: the look of the homework hanging on the walls of their schools; the mood of students in the halls; even the way he himself feels simply upon walking through the door.
''When you're a superintendent and you go home on Friday night, you know whether you moved the needle or not. You know whether you're winning or losing and why,'' he said. ''You win and lose from a distance here.''
He was not always so concerned.
His father, a neurosurgeon and preacher, used to drag him on weekends to the poorest parts of town -- in Washington, D.C., then Denver -- to help out, to teach Sunday school, in short, to serve. Did it sensitize the young Mr. Vander Ark to suffering? Did it fill him with passion for social justice?
''No, it used to drive my sister and I crazy,'' he said.
In fact, it sent him in the opposite direction. By the time he left high school, Mr. Vander Ark hoped to sequester himself far away from humanity, scaling mountains and studying lonely glaciers.
When he entered professional life, first as a mining engineer and then as a retailer, Mr. Vander found himself consumed by what he calls the ''typical executive rat race,'' chasing promotions, a better car, a bigger house.
''I think he was rebelling by becoming a cold-hearted financial whiz,'' said Barbara O'Brien, one of the people Mr. Vander Ark credits for turning him into ''evangelist for children.''
It came as a total surprise, to him most of all. While an executive at PACE Membership Warehouse, he was required to help a local charity. So he picked the Colorado Children's Campaign, a group run by Ms. O'Brien, explicitly because he thought he would have no direct contact with children. Even so, the deeper he looked at the obstacles facing poor minority children, the more it infuriated him.
Taking over the Federal Way school district, at 34, was Mr. Vander Ark's first exposure to the public schools. There was a teachers' strike his first day on the job. Later, the teachers would hold a no-confidence vote in his curriculum director, an open challenge to him as well, he still believes.
But there was progress, too, especially with the district's finances and its lower grades, he said. The only truly baffling task was improving the high schools.
So, why did the Gates Foundation choose him to lead its education efforts? True, they had come to know his name through Microsoft, with which he worked to bring laptops into his schools, but he was hardly a veteran with a track record of victories.
''I liked the way that he was a continuous learner,'' said Patty Stonesifer, the foundation's president.
Which is largely what he remains. The riddle of fundamentally repairing the nation's high schools still plagues Mr. Vander Ark.
''It's what wakes me up in the morning,'' he said.
