THIS is one of those moments of seismic change in New York's restaurant landscape. A rush of big-ticket restaurant openings, from over the treetops at the Time Warner Center to down in TriBeCa, has put more pressure than ever on chefs and owners to find qualified people to chop, sauté, serve, clear, pour and manage the dining rooms.
There is no shortage of talented cooks. Cooking schools have been as overcrowded as public kindergartens, and great chefs keep their ties to old stove mates. Some cooks who worked with Gray Kunz at Lespinasse five years ago will be back with him at Café Gray in the Time Warner Center.
But who will be delivering a plate of Mr. Kunz's famous short ribs from the kitchen to the customer's table?
''No one wants to be on the floor at the very beginning,'' said Donatella Arpaia, an owner of David Burke &amp; Donatella, which opened two months ago. ''Openings are tough and business is slower.''
Cooks are a wandering lot, seeking advancement, experience and a chance to participate in the creation of a great restaurant. But waiters and managers are rarely eager to leave secure jobs with benefits at top restaurants.
A good waiter or captain in a top restaurant can make more than $100,000 a year in salary and tips, and is likely to have benefits, including health coverage that can cost employers $700 a month. But most earn considerably less. An experienced restaurant manager may make $75,000 and is not entitled to participate in the tip pool.
Daniel Boulud, the chef and co-owner of Daniel, Cafe Boulud and DB Bistro Moderne, said his ''staff is not jumping to the latest trendy place.'' At Le Bernardin, Eric Ripert, the chef and partner, said he has not lost any waiters or captains. ''They make too much money here,'' he said.
But it just might be too early to tell.
Frannie Rabin, the former general manager of Eleven Madison Park, is now to be the manager of Café Gray, which opens in April. She said the restaurant has had ''lots of people call'' for service jobs. And she described them as ''great résumés, from the who's who of restaurants in New York: Alain Ducasse, Citarella, Daniel, Nobu, Union Square Cafe.''
None have given notice. ''We won't be ready to officially offer any jobs before the end of February,'' Ms. Rabin said. ''And we'll be careful not to hire too many from any one place.''
Stephen Hanson, the owner of a large collection of big restaurants, including Atlantic Grill, Blue Fin, Fiamma and Ruby Foo's, said he has not lost any of his service staff to new places like Per Se, David Burke &amp; Donatella, Megu, Océo and Spice Market. ''It's premature for anyone to leave,'' Mr. Hanson said. ''Good people wait two or three months past the opening, to see how a place is doing, before they'll make a move. But I've started to hear people talk.''
Laura Cunningham, who is in charge of hiring and training the front-of-the-house personnel at Per Se in the Time Warner Center, was all set, until a kitchen fire on Saturday night shut down the restaurant just six days after it opened. Ms. Cunningham said the damage is still being assessed and the restaurant would probably be closed for two to four weeks.
The chef, Thomas Keller, had already closed his renowned Napa Valley restaurant, the French Laundry, which has permitted a transcontinental staffing shift. ''We brought 15 of our staff from the French Laundry,'' Ms. Cunningham said. ''We needed another 50 or so. It was slim pickings.''
Ms. Cunningham said that very few of her applicants came from four-star restaurants. Most were trying to migrate from higher-volume two- and three-star places, she said. She required them to have a minimum of five years' experience and is paying salaries while the restaurant is closed. She said she planned to use the downtime to fine-tune the service.
Masa Takayama, the owner of Masa and Bar Masa at the center, has a total staff of 10, including cooks, and he brought about half of them from his restaurant in Beverly Hills, Ginza Sushiko, which he has closed (his sous-chef reopened it as Urasawa).
Mr. Kunz said that he had a policy of not poaching people from his high-end colleagues. ''I let people approach us,'' he said.
But David De Bacco, the manager of Megu in TriBeCa, which is to open in two weeks, seems to have fewer compunctions. He said he spent a lot of time dining out when he returned to New York last year after seven years at Nobu in London.
''Sometimes if I had a very good waiter in a restaurant, I'd hand him my card and mention that I was hiring,'' Mr. De Bacco said. ''Poaching isn't nice but it does happen, and what I was doing was pretty innocent.''
He recruited Yasu Suzuki from Sushi Seki and Rima Yamamura, a manager at Kai, whom he said he had trained to be a captain when he was at Nobu.
Many restaurateurs, especially those with several restaurants, are hoping to build a career-oriented staff, not hire out-of-work actors or other part-timers. But forging a team like that can be difficult.
While the New York dining scene has few rivals in the world, with dazzling meals served in multimillion-dollar dining rooms, the service still needs work. Zagat ratings for service invariably lag behind those for food and décor. In the 2004 survey, 52 percent of the correspondents complained about service, a spokesman said.
There are no schools for budding waiters and captains comparable to the French Culinary Institute or the Culinary Institute of America for chefs. When it comes to service, on-the-job-training is what prevails.
''We usually hire people without tons of experience so we can mold them and train them,'' said Lois Freedman, who, having hired and trained the staff at Spice Market, Jean-Georges Vongerichten's new restaurant in the meatpacking district, is about to start training the dining room staff at Mr. Vongerichten's Rare Steakhouse in the Time Warner complex. ''We hold a big casting call and can get 1,000 applicants.'' Many have some experience, she said, but ''we never get our waiters from the four-stars.''
The training period is a shakeout. Sit in on a session a week or two before a restaurant opens and you will see a classroom atmosphere, with the trainees taking copious notes about the menu, the ingredients, the wines. They may have to pass a test.
Servers have a lot to master these days, like computer systems and special dietary requests, and the identities of cheeses, oysters, seasonings and various exotic ingredients. Ms. Cunningham said Per Se even lost a couple of potential waiters during orientation when she discussed proper posture.
Then there is the challenge of finding managers.
In the past few weeks, Sushi Samba, Tao, Spice Market, the Harrison, Eleven Madison Park, Main Street Restaurant Partners (the owners of Django, Rain, Calle Ocho and Union Pacific), Compass, Bastianich-Batali restaurant group and Tavern on the Green have all advertised looking for managers.
Eric Weiss, a restaurant and wine consultant who trains service staff, said servers can be trained but managers must be found. The manager, usually the one in a suit, not a tuxedo, runs the teams of captains, waiters, runners and busboys and is the general problem solver. Often, the manager hires, fires and disciplines.
''There's a plethora of chefs, I can find servers, but I have very few choices when it comes to managers,'' Mr. Weiss said. ''And lately, some of the best ones have left the restaurant business to go into the wine business, where they make more money and don't have the same hours or pressure.'' For example, Kurt Eckert, formerly of Jean Georges, now works for Krug Champagne.
Some managers, like Jean-Philippe Leloup, who was at Lespinasse, have opened their own restaurants. He is now an owner of Océo, where he doubles as the manager.
Restaurateurs like Mr. Hanson and Mr. Boulud, with more than one dining room to staff, say they can keep ambitious staff members from leaving by giving them opportunities to advance.
Stephen Starr, Philadelphia's answer to Drew Nieporent, has even placed ads in New York to find front-of-the-house people for his restaurants. ''You can't find enough qualified people in Philadelphia,'' he said.
Tracy Nieporent, Drew Nieporent's brother and the marketing director for the Myriad Restaurant Group, which owns Nobu, Tribeca Grill and Montrachet, among others, said the group works hard to maintain good staff. ''There's a lot more competition for skilled people today,'' he said. ''But it hasn't affected us.'' Yet.
