The plaque is back, and for that, city officials of Garfield, N.J., are grateful.
But they are not happy that the nearly 100-pound ornament, a tribute to a retired police chief, was unbolted from the entrance to police headquarters and taken to a police retirement party. And please do not mention the plaque's side trip into the Passaic River.
The case of the wayward plaque, first reported on Tuesday by The Herald News of West Paterson, began on Feb. 12, when about half of the 60-member Garfield Police Department attended a retirement party for Lt. Arthur Wildoner, a 26-year veteran who family members said was headed to Iraq to train members of Iraq's police force, said Thomas Duch, the city manager. At some point during the party, at the Pescador Restaurant across the street from the Passaic River, someone arrived with the plaque, which, until then, had been mounted prominently at the Police Headquarters.
The bas-relief honors a former police chief, Alessi Cimino, who was known as Babe and retired in 2000 after 33 years. It had been donated to the town by the local Veterans of Foreign Wars chapter, which Chief Cimino belonged to.
Mr. Duch, a former mayor of Garfield, said that eventually the plaque was thrown into the river. What has him particularly angry, he said, is that no one reported it to him or the police until five days after the party.
''I got a call from a citizen who said that they had heard about it from a policeman,'' Mr. Duch said. ''I was very, very upset when I found out. It was conduct unbecoming of a police officer.''
As for the motive, Mr. Duch said that he had heard that ''Wildoner and Cimino were not the best of friends'' when they served together before the chief's retirement. Either way it was a bad joke, he said, adding that he immediately summoned the current police chief about the matter.
The plaque, he said, was recovered Feb. 18 by divers searching in the Passaic River. It has since been returned to its original location.
Family members of Mr. Wildoner, who was out of town and could not be reached, said that they were not aware of any animosity between him and the retired chief. Chief Cimino could not be reached for comment, but one of his friends, Bob Benanti, called the incident ''a disgrace.''
The department refused to comment, and the current chief, Thomas Lamantina, said that he was conducting an internal investigation that has focused on two police officers.
