Gov. James E. McGreevey mixed economic boosterism and a moral call to arms in announcing a new $26.26 billion state budget containing added spending for programs ranging from preschools to stem cell research.
The budget proposal, for the 2005 fiscal year, promises money for poor children, community college students, veterans, the arts and the elderly, but it rests on continued borrowing and new taxes and fees to stay in balance. The Republicans, in the minority in both houses of the Legislature for the first time in more than a decade, denounced Mr. McGreevey's reliance on credit and predicted that the budget would force property taxes up.
But for a governor who has spent the past two years battling shrinking revenues and a divided State House, today's exultant budget address before a Legislature controlled by fellow Democrats was clearly a moment to savor. The governor entered to a standing ovation, paused in his delivery from time to time for the loyal applause he knew he could expect, and did not even bother to acknowledge the Republican leadership in his introductory greetings.
In contrast to the angry and pinched language of Mr. McGreevey's past two budget messages, today's speech was part policy wonkfest celebrating the minutiae of big-state budget making, and part revival sermon extolling New Jersey's resurrected economy and the resulting opportunities for new social spending.
''This book reflects the conscience of our state and the collective compassion of our citizenry,'' the governor said toward the end of his 45-minute talk. He went on: ''In the past, it has reflected the tough, difficult, ugly choices of difficult times. Today, it reflects the investments of a state that has put itself back on the right track.''
Mr. McGreevey did not mention his own bid for re-election next year, but got in his digs at the administration of President Bush, saying he would defy the imposition of the president's new prescription benefits program on New Jersey and contrasted his state's budding economic recovery to the way he sees Mr. Bush's record.
''While the administration in Washington has lost two million jobs,'' the governor said, ''we in new Jersey have added 40,000 since the Legislature passed my first budget.''
Although the line-by-line details will not be available for at least three weeks, the budget contains gift baskets to most of the constituents who saw their programs blocked or trimmed in past years.
The most sustained applause came for a relatively modest $10 million program promising to pay the community college tuition of students graduating in the top 20 percent of their high school classes, apparently without regard to income. Like a similar program recently proposed by President Bush, Mr. McGreevey's tuition plan is aimed squarely at blue-collar students and their families, a pivotal voting bloc, for whom four-year colleges are often out of reach. The governor expects 9,000 students to avail themselves of the scholarships each year.
In other social spending, Mr. McGreevey asked for money for new preschool and after-school programs, a relatively modest $70 million extra for New Jersey's public and private four-year colleges and universities, and new spending to provide cervical cancer screening and mammograms for 20,000 women lacking insurance coverage.
The governor's office has been leaking parts of his good-news budget over the past week, and opposition among anti-abortion campaigners is already forming for perhaps the most unusual part of his budget, a 10-year, $50 million plan to create and fund a New Jersey Institute for Stem Cell Research.
Dr. Clifton R. Lacy, commissioner of Health and Senior Services, said after the speech that the money would buttress the state's strength as a center for medical and pharmaceutical research.
''It will be a magnet to attract the best and brightest researchers, not only from New Jersey but from around the world,'' he said.
Mr. McGreevey would rely on new taxes and fees, as well as hefty borrowing, to balance his plan to appropriate $1.7 billon more than the current budget, which expires June 30.
Besides borrowing $1.5 billion for next fiscal year's operating expenses against future revenues from a cigarette tax increase of 45 cents per pack and new surcharges on traffic offenses, the governor is asking for a 90-cent-per-month fee on cellphone users and a delay in funding future pension costs. He is also seeking to postpone until 2007 the ability of state businesses to deduct past losses against current income on their state tax returns.
And although the governor said he would not raise taxes, his budget proposes to more than double an environmental cleanup tax on petroleum products -- to 3.1 cents a barrel, from 1.5 cents -- and make the charge retroactive to the start of 2004. New Jersey is home to immense oil refineries, and the new fee would bring in an extra $20 million a year.
These and other measures closed the $4 billion deficit the McGreevey administration is anticipating for the 2005 fiscal year, and the Republican leadership pounced on them. State Senator Leonard Lance, the Senate minority leader and New Jersey's ranking Republican, accused the governor of avoiding hard choices since he came to office in 2002.
''He is still governing by papering over a deficit with credit card borrowing,'' Mr. Lance said.
Mr. Lance was reminded that the governor specifically challenged his critics, in his speech, to ''show me'' where they would cut to avoid his stopgap measures, but Mr. Lance declined to offer specifics before the complete budget is made public, probably by mid-March.
