As mergers, buyouts and hostile bids begin to percolate through the financial community, it is no surprise that the traders who make their living by betting on deals are cautiously celebrating.
What is unexpected, though, is just how many of these traders, known as arbitragers, are on the sidelines, perhaps dipping a toe in the market but waiting to jump in head first.
During a takeover, arbitragers often buy stock in the company being acquired, anticipating that the price will rise over time. Because stocks of acquirers usually fall, the arbitragers typically short that stock -- selling borrowed shares hoping to replace them later for less.
The amount of money earmarked for arbitrage investments has increased significantly from the last time deal-making climbed from a slump, market participants say. As these traders begin to bet on deals, their wagering could help to encourage another round of deal-making frenzy. Or it could make this type of investing even riskier than it has ever been and weigh heavily on some corporate stocks.
''Certainly there is more merger arbitrage money around in the market than there has been in the past few years'' said the head of the London-based arbitrage desk of a New York bank. Recent big deals like Sanofi-Synthélabo's hostile bid for Aventis, or J.P. Morgan Chase's buyout of Bank One, are drawing arbitrage investors who have spent the last three years toiling to make returns from smaller deals or had abandoned the market entirely to trade bonds.
''We've gone from investing 10 percent of our money in arbitrage, and 90 percent in distressed debt, to 50-50,'' the arbitrage desk manager said.
This could just be the beginning of a tidal wave of money if deals increase. That is because a good chunk of the cash that has poured into the hedge fund industry in recent years is earmarked for bets on deal-making. Assets managed by hedge funds that have a so-called event-driven strategy -- arbitrage on mergers and acquisitions when deals are flowing, and a bankruptcy-related distressed debt focus when deals are not -- have increased tenfold, to $127.5 billion, since 1994, according to data from Tremont Advisers' TASS Research.
Longtime arbitrage traders say their outlook on an influx of hedge funds is mixed. ''A lot of the hedge funds are doing opportunity investing,'' and if they see the merger business picking up, they are going to get into the business, said George Kellner, managing partner at Kellner Di Leo &amp; Company, a longtime merger arbitrage investor in New York.
The end result of all this liquidity may be more deals getting done, particularly hostile ones. That is because the fundamental principle of most merger arbitragers is simple: they make money when deals are completed and can lose exponentially more money when they fall apart. Because they are betting that a deal will close, they are more likely than long-term investors to tender their stock in a controversial bid situation.
''In general, when you see an increase in arbs, especially in hostile deals, there is more likelihood of that deal going through,'' said Francesca Cornelli, a professor at the London School of Business. Professor Cornelli estimates that as much as 40 percent of the stock of any target company is held by arbitragers soon after a deal is announced.
Investment bankers involved in hostile deals are cheering the rise in arbitragers. ''Will they be voting for the target company's management? I don't think so,'' said one investment banker who is working on a hostile bid. ''They're going to want to make a return, so they're going to vote for a deal.''
But the recent unprecedented increase in players in the market may also result in an increase in risk. Merger arbitrage traders are often highly leveraged and buy stock ''on margin,'' putting down as little as 10 percent of the stock's face value. If the stock moves even a little bit the wrong way, perhaps because of a rumor that a deal might fall apart, losses can quickly eat up the arbitragers' capital.
Consequently, any drop in the price of a stock, or even worse, a collapsed deal, could potentially set off a wave of panic selling that would be exacerbated by a record number of participants. When merger arbitragers think a deal is falling apart, ''they all want to get out'' as soon as possible, Professor Cornelli said. ''You can have a very adverse effect.''
