WHO will remember the Subway sandwich shop? Or that Pronto Pizza place? Or Tad's Steaks, with its ''Bathroom for Customers Only'' sign, and those rotisserie chickens spinning interminably on the spit?
Who will remember these disposable businesses along this stretch of West 42nd Street, the one with no Times Square cachet? Not many, most likely. But for those who might be so inclined, heed the words now tumbling from a speaker outside another of those throwaway stores, the awkwardly named Westside Audio Video Inc.
''Ladies and gentlemen, that's it,'' the recorded message says, in a flat, whadda-ya-gonna-do voice. ''No holding back.''
Just as the recording sings out a store's farewell, over and over, so too does New York City re-create itself, over and over. Some things we save, but most we do not, with this generation leaving to the future what past generations left to us: the question, never satisfactorily answered, of what the street I am walking on was like 20 years ago, 50, 100.
Except for the Condé Nast headquarters, all buildings on the block bordered by Broadway, Avenue of the Americas and 42nd and 43rd Streets are supposed to be vacated within the next few days. The developer Douglas Durst and Bank of America plan to build a skyscraper there. Demolition begins in May.
So let us take one last walk along the north side of that stretch of 42nd Street, where buildings of modest heritage stand beside the architectural equivalents of Bic lighters. And let our guide be Anita Durst, 35, daughter of the developer, an actress and a champion of the arts.
In 1997, while the Durst organization was piecing together a development plan, Ms. Durst persuaded her father to allow an arts group, Chashama, to use some of the space in the interim. ''My dad assumed that we'd be there a year, maybe two,'' she says. ''Not seven years.''
Ms. Durst begins her bouncing walk at 135 West 42nd, once a sporting-goods store and now Chashama central, if only for this week. Artists will be performing here in these last days, including one who will spend 80 hours as a window display. Chashama will find another home, Ms. Durst says with certainty. Besides, artists thrive on change.
Walking east, she passes Westside Audio, where that speaker sings its sky-is-falling song. Inside, the owners briefly squabble about which day is their last. Depends on when the marshal comes, one says; not true, the other responds. But they agree that soon their cameras and watches, their F.D.N.Y. sweatshirts and Statue of Liberty figurines, will be put into storage.
Past another Chashama storefront where the faded red canopy hints of an earlier incarnation as a clothing shop. Past a Fresco Tortillas. Past the old building that once housed a fried chicken place and maybe, long ago, a fraternal lodge. Now it is home to the Bindlestiff Family Cirkus, whose last performance here is Sunday.
SOMEWHERE along this block -- behind this door, or maybe that one -- was the entrance to the old Pix movie theater. In trumpeting its grand opening in December 1939, the management boasted of the flame-red ''body-form'' chairs, which were guaranteed not to ''cause runs in milady's sheerest hose.''
Until last month the Laura Belle catering hall occupied the building, sharing space with what some believed was the ghost of a projectionist named Frank.
Ms. Durst passes an empty storefront where tourists once bought ''N.Y. souvenirs,'' then pauses before the building that until July 2002, housed the Peep-O-Rama -- to be remembered if not for its glorious name, then for being the last sex shop on 42nd Street.
There is no plaque, only the Peep-O-Rama marquee. The Durst organization plans to save the sign -- for posterity only, and not because of any plans to diversify its portfolio.
Ms. Durst walks past Tad's, whose facade is black and white, like that of a gargantuan Holstein. Just inside the window, a cook flings bony steaks onto the blackened grill, which reminds Ms. Durst that she has not eaten there in a long while.
Next comes an America's 99-cent Store, where the window display advertises St. Valentine's Day balloons, more than a week after Feb. 14th and still 99 cents. After that another storefront used by Chashama, where an artist wearing a plastic red nose -- he is, after all, Mister Clown -- gives Ms. Durst a wave.
A Sprint telephone store. The Subway sandwich shop. A magazine store. And, at the corner, Pronto Pizza, where, for a few more days, at least, a slice with pepperoni goes for $2.75.
That's it. Ladies and gentlemen, that's it.
About New York
