After I was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease two years ago, at the relatively young age of 52, I read everything I could about the condition's usual ''progression'' -- an odd word for degeneration. The worst-case prognosis is grim: a long slide into physical and mental incapacity.
That is not going to happen to me, I said, as I began measuring my physical decline. I am young enough that I may be able to benefit from advances in medicine, especially in brain research. Maybe with new medications I would be able to put off taking L-dopa, the best drug for Parkinson's but one that loses its effectiveness over time. Surely better treatments will become available, I told myself.
So why didn't I welcome the news that researchers in South Korea were able to clone a human embryo and extract viable stem cells from it? After all, one of the researchers said their goal was ''not to clone humans, but to understand the causes of diseases'' -- and one of the diseases named most often was Parkinson's. Scientists say they may one day find a way to develop stem cells into brain cells to replace the ones that are killed or disabled by Parkinson's.
Part of my reaction, I know, is simply personal; I don't think cloning offers much hope for a cure for Parkinson's any time soon. But my objections are also moral, ethical, economic and scientific.
I feel this way not because I oppose human cloning, although I do. What bothers me is that scientists are putting forth an overly optimistic list of potential benefits of their research. The potential benefits of human cloning, we are told, include growing replacement kidneys and other organs, nerve cells to patch damaged spinal cords, and neurons to help cure neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson's.
Such predictions engender genuine, if speculative, hope. I suspect it is human nature to want to believe in a cure, whether derived through magic or science. But ethical uneasiness clouds this promise when the issue is human cloning.
If the researchers crossed an heretofore unbreachable line by cloning a human embryo, the argument goes, they did so for a noble cause. Neither they nor any other respectable scientist would engage in reproductive cloning to create a human baby. By implication, if I object to therapeutic human cloning I am condemning myself -- and everyone else with an incurable disease -- to a life of suffering. I am also opposing scientific progress.
But the invocation of human suffering to justify cloning and other controversial procedures is disingenuous and unfair. Saying that their goal is therapeutic does not alter the fact that researchers in South Korea have cloned an embryo that could become a human being. Holding out the possibility of some future health benefit simply obscures more fundamental issues.
And the possibility of a health benefit seems remote. Even if researchers could use embryonic cloning to create neurons from my cells, who is to say that the new neurons won't die again after being injected into my brain? In trials so far, the injection of neurons from other sources into the brains of Parkinson's patients has largely failed to have an effect, perhaps because no one yet fully understands how the brain malfunctions in people with Parkinson's disease.
Even if cloning and implanting neurons worked, it would be expensive, with little guarantee that insurance companies would pay for it. Would the medical benefits of cloning be available only to those who could afford to pay for them? Someone like me might have to serve as a scientific guinea pig, a role I would prefer not to play.
Granted, stem cells from cloned embryos might provide scientists with some basic insights into the development of organs and cells, and might ultimately present the opportunity for testing treatments. But in its current state embryonic cloning means less to me, as a Parkinson's patient, than other new research, some of which involves adult stem cells. In a recent issue of the journal Nature, for example, researchers discussed the need to better understand the purpose and potential of neural stem cells that are found in all adult human brains.
For me, the tradeoff is personal. I would rather give up any possible benefit of human cloning research than rush into a practice with such profound repercussions for society. So why not declare a worldwide moratorium at least on human cloning? Scientists could study the cloned animals and embryos that now exist to determine their properties and potential. And the rest of us could join in the necessary debate about what it means to be human.
Op-Ed Contributor Mark Derr is author of the forthcoming ''A Dog's History of America.''
