Saudi Arabian oil executives said Tuesday that they planned to maintain production capacity at the current rate of 10 million barrels a day for the rest of this decade but could increase maximum output by 20 percent to 50 percent in about 10 years.
But an energy expert based in Houston, warning that ''the easy oil era in Saudi Arabia is either nearly over or over,'' called for large-scale research into new energy sources.
The debate about Saudi Arabia's oil future played out at a packed conference here sponsored by the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a research group.
Two executives from Saudi Aramco, the government-owned oil company, and Matthew R. Simmons, chairman of an energy investment bank in Houston, addressed the group. They agreed that Saudi Arabia's spare capacity -- the cushion of two million barrels a day between what it produces and what it could produce -- had long played a crucial, calming role in global oil markets. But they parted ways on what lies ahead.
Most forecasts by government oil experts and oil companies say Saudi capacity needs to roughly double by 2020 to meet growing demand. The Saudi Aramco executives emphasized the company's conservative approach to managing its aging fields and their belief that new oil recovery techniques could significantly increase their reserves, the largest in the world.
Nansen G. Saleri, a manager of reservoir management for Saudi Aramco, said the current company plan was to maintain capacity at 10 million barrels a day through 2009, but he also offered possibilities of maximum output of 12 million or 15 million barrels a day, beginning in a decade and continuing for 50 years.
But some current and former Saudi Aramco executives say those possible outcomes are unrealistic, as does Mr. Simmons, who has advised the United States secretary of energy and the 2000 Bush campaign.
The Saudi Aramco presentation reflects increased disclosure about its operations. Still, Mr. Simmons asked why the company did not report its field-by-field production data, as some oil producers do.
Dr. Saleri said the company could finance any production increase on its own. But Washington, and Crown Prince Abdullah, the de facto ruler of Saudi Arabia, see a need for foreign investment in the kingdom's energy sector. Both backed an initiative to attract as much as $25 billion in foreign investment in the country's natural gas business. But the plan essentially collapsed last year amid disputes over the rates of return sought by American companies and the extent of Saudi gas reserves.
In one meeting with American diplomats in October 2002, the crown prince complained that the companies were too greedy in their negotiations, according to American and Saudi officials. The American ambassador, Robert W. Jordan, defended the companies then. ''I had to stand up for American business,'' Mr. Jordan, who left his post last fall, said in a recent interview.
From the perspective of some of the Americans, the Saudis were not being forthright about their natural gas reserves. ''We were concerned about some of the gas,'' one American oil executive said recently, ''and our concern led us to say to Saudi Aramco, 'Give us geological data to prove the reserves or allow us an outside audit before we commit.'''
In the end, Saudi Arabia has proceeded with a much more modest project that involves no American companies, but some from Europe, Russia and China.
