I.B.M. waded into the debate over stock options yesterday by announcing that it was overhauling the way it pays its senior executives so their stock awards only become valuable if the company's shares rise by 10 percent or more.
I.B.M., analysts say, is the first large American company to adopt a program in which its senior management team is granted stock options at a price higher than what shares are selling for at the time they are issued. The approach, they noted, ensures that I.B.M.'s public shareholders add at least modestly to their wealth before I.B.M. executives can begin to cash in their stock options.
I.B.M. is choosing to alter its stock-option program for executives instead of moving away from options, like General Electric, or abandoning them, as Microsoft has done. Those companies have chosen to give their executives outright shares -- rather than options to buy shares -- if the company meets certain performance goals, which can include sales, cash flow, customer satisfaction and stock performance compared with the market or companies in similar industries.
Both kinds of programs, analysts say, are efforts to link the incentives of corporate management more closely to their performance and to give them greater reasons to act in the long-term interest of shareholders.
In the 1990's, the generous use of stock options as compensation, analysts say, allowed many executives to get rich simply because the stock market soared, not because of their performance as outstanding managers.
''The plain vanilla stock option -- granted at the market price -- is out, and pay-for-performance is in,'' said Patrick S. McGurn, senior vice president of Institutional Shareholder Services, which advises large shareholders.
''I.B.M. recognizes that and this is its answer,'' he added.
The premium-priced options program applies to Samuel J. Palmisano, I.B.M.'s chairman and chief executive, and the company's 300 most-senior executives. I.B.M. intends to expand the program to all of its 5,000 executive-level employees in the next year or so.
The company will continue to allow executives to acquire a limited number of stock options pegged to the market price, but only if they buy some I.B.M. shares with their own money and hold them for three years. The company said that to acquire options with a target value of $18,000, for example, a manager would have to first purchase $9,000 in I.B.M. stock.
''The buy-first provision and the three-year holding requirement means management has skin in the game,'' Mr. McGurn said. ''It means executives can't cash in their options, dump and run.''
Over all, I.B.M. does not plan to increase the rate at which it issues options as a result of the new programs, a company spokesman said.
I.B.M.'s overhaul, analysts say, does address some of the main shortcomings of stock options programs. In the worst cases, like Enron and WorldCom, the excessive use of options seemed to provide an incentive for executives to manipulate quarterly earnings, and then cash out their options at a favorable price, with little regard for the long-term welfare of the company.
In the 1990's, under Mr. Palmisano's predecessor, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., there were occasional questions raised about how aggressively earnings were managed to meet quarterly goals. But even Mr. Gerstner's critics did not suggest that he was cashing out his shares. Nor has there been any doubt about the turnaround under Mr. Gerstner or the health of the company he passed onto Mr. Palmisano, who became chief executive in March 2002.
More stringent rules for accounting for stock options is another post-1990's reform that is being pressed on corporate America. The Financial Accounting Standards Board has not yet taken a final stand, but it is expected to require that the cost of options must be deducted from profits, at least in part, as an expense. I.B.M.'s above-market-price options will result in a somewhat smaller expense than if it granted ordinary options.
The I.B.M. stock-option overhaul, analysts say, may well serve as a model for other companies. ''What I.B.M. does has the potential to change the way people look at options,'' said Brian Foley, an independent executive compensation consultant in White Plains. ''It's not a panacea for all the criticisms of stock options, but it is significant.''
Premium-priced options have been used by American companies, but only on a limited basis and usually as part of a pay package for a coveted executive, giving the person an incentive to increase a company's share price over the long term.
The I.B.M. program, however, applies to all the company's senior managers. ''This is the first time a major American company has done this, and it can't be seen as anything other than a positive step,'' said Paul Hodgson, a senior research associate at the Corporate Library, a corporate governance research group.
Still, it remains unclear how significant the move will be. The options vest over four years, and the options that will be granted under the program in the next couple of months will not expire for a decade.
If I.B.M.'s stock increased by 100 percent over the next decade from its current price of around $97 a share, for example, an I.B.M. executive could earn a profit of a little more than $87,000 on 1,000 premium-priced stock options instead of the $97,000 he could make under the old market price system.
''It sets an example by moving options to a performance basis, but it isn't the most challenging target in the world,'' Mr. Hodgson noted.
I.B.M. is following a path taken by some European companies recently. Under prodding from the German corporate governance council, a private but influential group, some big German companies, like SAP and Siemens, adopted premium-priced options programs last year.
''It's not new to us,'' said Henning Kagermann, chief executive of SAP, Europe's largest software company.
SAP, like I.B.M., adopted a 10 percent premium over the market price for options for officers, but not without haggling. ''At our shareholders' meeting last year, the debate was whether it should be 10 percent or 15 percent,'' Mr. Kagermann recalled. ''We finally settled on 10 percent.''
