Eighteen former and current employees from the social services arm of the Salvation Army sued the organization in federal court yesterday, accusing it of imposing a religious veil over secular, publicly financed activities like caring for foster children and counseling young people with AIDS.
The plaintiffs charged that the Army's New York division tried forcing them to sign forms revealing the churches they had attended over the past 10 years, name their ministers and agree to the Army's mission ''to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ.''
Several employees say they were pushed out after years of working in secular jobs when they objected. Others said the new religious focus violated the social workers' ethics code and could have a chilling effect on their work -- for example, preventing them from giving condoms to people infected with H.I.V. or forbidding abortion counseling.
''I was harassed to the point where eventually I resigned,'' said Margaret Geissman, a former human resources manager who said her superior asked for the religions and sexual orientation of her staff. ''As a Christian, I deeply resent the use of discriminatory employment practices in the name of Christianity.''
In a statement, the Salvation Army said it was reviewing the lawsuit and would respond in detail at some point. The organization said its ''policies and procedures were entirely consistent'' with laws governing the employment practices of religious institutions. In the past, local Salvation Army officials said that the forms had long been in use around the country and that their policies were permitted under terms of contracts with New York City and New York State. No employees are forced to uphold church beliefs unless they are in a position of ministry, they have said.
While the Salvation Army is a worldwide evangelical religious body, it is better known for its charitable works. In the New York area, it runs numerous programs to help the poor using state and city money, which the plaintiffs say requires it to obey anti-discrimination laws.
The suit focuses on the Army's children's services agency in New York. Public funds for the agency amount to at least $50 million, making it the largest publicly financed Army unit in the country, said Anne Lown, the agency's associate director and a plaintiff. It has 900 employees and serves 2,300 children, the suit said.
The lawsuit was filed in United States District Court in Manhattan. The employees are represented by the New York Civil Liberties Union and Martin Garbus, a noted First Amendment lawyer.
The suit accuses the Army of religious discrimination. It also names New York City and commissioners from the city and Nassau and Suffolk Counties, charging them with violating the First Amendment clause against the establishment of religion.
The plaintiffs include senior administrators and caseworkers. They are Jewish, Catholic, Protestant and nonreligious.
The lawyers said the case fundamentally challenged the Bush administration's effort to increase federal financing of church charities.
''What it really attacks is George Bush's faith-based initiative,'' said Mr. Garbus, who joined a group of plaintiffs at a news conference at the civil liberties union.
The plaintiffs' lawyers argue that while churches are allowed to exclude nonbelievers in their own activities, the law forbids them to do so in publicly financed programs in which churches effectively become arms of the government.
''It's critical at this stage of the game to put a stop to proselytizing with government money,'' said Donna Lieberman, executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union.
The lawsuit comes in response to an effort last year by the Salvation Army's Greater New York Division, which encompasses the five boroughs, Long Island and seven counties north of the city, to reassert its religious mission.
Employees in the social service arm feel oppressed by the new atmosphere, some plaintiffs said.
''Whenever there's a prayer or 'blessings be upon you' in an e-mail, they're watching the Army marching in,'' said Mary Jane Dessables, director of the management information systems and a churchgoing Presbyterian. ''In a professional environment,'' she said, ''I'm not looking to be blessed by my supervisor.''
