European antitrust regulators are considering a requirement that Microsoft sell two versions of Windows in Europe -- one with the music- and video-playing software stripped out -- should they find the company to be an abusive monopoly, people close to the case said Tuesday.
Regulators may also demand that Microsoft itself propose ''within a few months of a ruling'' what computer code for Windows it should disclose to make the operating system fully compatible with programs and servers manufactured by rivals, these people said. Servers drive networks of personal computers.
The European Commission is nearing a final ruling in the five-year-old case. Unless a settlement is reached in the next few weeks, the commission will find that Microsoft abused its dominant position in operating software and will propose remedies and a fine of at least $100 million.
The commission has completed an internal review and the proposed ruling against the company, which was written by competition regulators in January, has emerged ''almost untouched,'' a person close to the case said.
Representatives for the commission and Microsoft both declined to comment on possible remedies or on the state of negotiations. A Microsoft spokesman said the company was still pursuing ''an amicable settlement.''
Last August, the European Commission told Microsoft that its practice of bundling Media Player into Windows amounted to an abuse of the operating system's dominant position because it placed rival music and video players at a disadvantage.
The commission agreed with Microsoft's rivals, who argue that record companies and Hollywood studios will increasingly tailor their digital products exclusively for Microsoft's Media Player, because it will be the only player they are sure that people will have on their personal computers.
Microsoft has argued that unbundling Media Player from Windows would prevent the operating system from working properly. It is also fears the precedent that would be set if it did agree to separate Media Player from Windows.
A person close to the case said that offering two operating systems in Europe would give customers a choice while allowing Microsoft to keep its business model intact.
During the commission's internal review, Erkki Liikanen, the commissioner for the information society, urged Mario Monti, the commissioner for competition, to be tougher on Microsoft over the Media Player issue. But Frits Bolkestein, the commissioner for the internal market, warned Mr. Monti not to infringe Microsoft's intellectual property in the part of the ruling that concerns interoperability, or making the software compatible with rival programs and servers, the person close to the case said.
The draft decision may order Microsoft to decide what must be disclosed about Windows to ensure interoperability.
Mr. Bolkestein warned that ordering Microsoft to disclose code, which is protected by copyright and to a lesser extent by patents, could make the commission vulnerable to a legal challenge by the company at the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg.
Mr. Bolkestein's responsibilities include creating intellectual property protection laws for the European Union. His department and Mr. Monti's team of competition regulators have often fought over how far rights holders should be allowed to protect their inventions.
European case law is not clear on the matter. Two cases involving the largest collector of pharmaceutical sales and prescription data in the world, IMS Health of the United States, appear to contradict each other on the question of intellectual property rights.
The European Court of Justice overturned a commission decision from 2001 ordering the company to license the way it organizes drug sales data from the German market, because it said such compulsory licensing amounted to an infringement of the intellectual property rights of IMS. But in a separate case last year against IMS, a judge said the company might be abusing its dominant position by refusing to license the way it structures its information about the German market.
TECHNOLOGY
