Parmalat's dairy subsidiaries in the United States filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday, saying they were trying to protect their assets while preparing for a possible sale that could help settle the parent company's debts.
Included in the filing yesterday in Federal Bankruptcy Court in the Southern District of New York in Manhattan were the Parmalat USA Corporation and its Farmland Dairies and Milk Products of Alabama units.
Analysts said the move had been expected after Parmalat, the food and beverage giant, sought protection in Italy in December amid an accounting scandal. The United States bankruptcy filing did not include Parmalat's lucrative bakery business or the company's operations in Canada.
Despite its connection with its scandal-ridden parent company, analysts said Parmalat's dairy operation in the United States could be an attractive acquisition in the competitive milk business in America, which had $10.5 billion in sales last year.
Parmalat USA said a $35 million loan from GE Capital would allow it to continue operating without any disruption while it was reorganizing; the money would be used to pay its milk suppliers, as well as its payroll and other operational costs.
According to yesterday's filing, Parmalat USA has assets of $414 million and debts of $316.5 million. The parent company has $17.8 billion in debt.
Led by Farmland, the American units have about 1,272 employees with operations in New York, New Jersey and the southeastern United States, including Georgia and Alabama. The units are primarily responsible for the processing, packaging and sale of fresh milk to supermarkets.
Marc Caira, the president and chief executive of Parmalat Dairy North America, said in a statement, ''We have initiated this action today to protect Farmland's business, brands, plants, people and customers, while resolving operational and liquidity issues in the most efficient manner.''
Parmalat, which has 30 subsidiaries around the world, has been engulfed in an accounting scandal since late last year when it said that a bank account that supposedly contained $5 billion did not exist. Auditors had used the fictitious account to certify the company's books. Several Parmalat executives have since resigned and are under investigation for fraud.
In Italy yesterday, more than a dozen representatives from the Securities and Exchange Commission and the United States Department of Justice met with Italian prosecutors investigating Parmalat. The company is in the process of restructuring.
In its Manhattan filing, Parmalat USA said that its liquidity had been hurt by the media coverage of its parent. As a result, lenders and insurers demanded payment of millions of dollars that Parmalat USA said it was unable to supply. The United States unit has outstanding loans totaling $20 million to Comerica Bank, Banca di Roma and IntesaBci S.p.A.
Parmalat USA also said some vendors and suppliers had asked for stricter payment terms, including cash on delivery and prepayment as a condition for continuing to do business.
The company estimates that demands by vendors and service providers affected its cash flow by $8 million. In early January, the United States businesses stumbled further, according to the filings, when two of Parmalat's top sales agents left to work for competitors. Several companies refused to pay Parmalat, contending that they were promised sales concessions by the company's former employees. Parmalat said it lost approximately $2 million as a result of that situation.
Unable to make several large payments to its milk suppliers, Parmalat USA received $8.6 million in loans from its parent in January. But that was not enough to ensure that the company could continue to run. This year the company contacted Lazard to help organize a sale of the dairy units.
According to the bankruptcy filing, several prospective purchasers have signed confidentiality agreements and some of those parties have executed nonbinding letters of intent.
Gillian Hewitt, a Parmalat USA spokeswoman, said that she could not provide the names of companies that had expressed interest in acquiring the dairy businesses. But, she said, ''a sale is only one of a couple of options that might happen for the business.'' Ms. Hewitt said the company had not ''detailed'' its other options.
Michael C. Bellas, the chairman and chief executive of Beverage Marketing, said of the businesses: ''They've been run separately; from what I can gather they're doing just fine. They're self-contained. You don't ship milk across the Atlantic.''
But some analysts said the dairy businesses alone might not be enough to attract the price needed to reduce Parmalat's debt significantly.
''It's much harder to sell a dairy business than it is to sell a bakery business,'' said Duncan Yin, a distressed-debt analyst at CRT Capital Group. ''Generally, the dairy business does not have strong brand names and there are a more limited number of potential buyers.''
