When Los Angeles police officers unleashed a barrage of bullets early Monday into the car of a robbery suspect, killing him, five television helicopters hovered above, beaming the scene into thousands of viewers' homes.
Puffs of smoke could be seen as the officers fired their handguns into the car of Nicholas H. Killinger, 23, who toppled face down into the street in front of Santa Monica High School. Mr. Killinger, who was suspected of tying up a gas station attendant at knifepoint near Malibu and taking $180 from his cash register, died an hour later.
While police pursuits are a staple of broadcast fare in freeway-laced Los Angeles and its environs, televised killings are not, and the latest shooting has given urgency to a Los Angeles Police Department examination of how and when police officers should use their weapons while chasing a fleeing suspect. In addition, the shooting prompted lively chatter on local talk radio shows about whether it is proper to show shootings on television.
Already being criticized for its approach to deadly force, the department is struggling to define a workable policy on pursuits and how to end them. Last June, Chief William J. Bratton ordered his officers to stop chasing drivers for traffic infractions or low-grade misdemeanors. In the six months that followed, the number of police pursuits dropped dramatically.
In the wake of the latest shooting, Chief Bratton has reiterated his intent to review the deadly-force guidelines, which allow officers to shoot at vehicles that pose a threat. In the Killinger case, three officers appeared to react to the fact that the driver, who had been eluding law enforcement officers from various jurisdictions for more than an hour, stopped as he was trying a U-turn and then backed his white Ford Tempo into the front of a patrol car. The officers fired about 11 rounds.
It is not clear whether the officers knew that Mr. Killinger was convicted last year for assault with a deadly weapon, although their knowledge of his actions in the gas station earlier on Monday probably gave them sufficient reason to expect that he would be violent, said Geoffrey Alpert, a professor in criminology at the University of South Carolina.
''If a fleeing suspect has committed a crime that doesn't involve the use of violence, then a pursuit may not be justified because of the risk to the officers, the public and even the fleeing suspect,'' Professor Alpert said in a telephone interview. ''But if it's a carjacker or a rapist, it raises the level of risk that officers are allowed to take.''
If the officers who fired at Mr. Killinger deduced that he was backing up his car ''in a violent manner,'' Professor Alpert said, that would be enough to fire at him in self-defense.
Officer Kristi Sandoval, a spokeswoman for the Los Angeles Police Department, said Tuesday that Chief Bratton and his staff were considering adopting some pursuit-ending procedures used by the California Highway Patrol, including laying spike strips on roads and bumping suspects cars so that they spin out of control.
''We want to try to eliminate the pursuits being controlled by the suspect,'' Ms. Sandoval said, ''so we can stop the pursuit on our terms.''
Last year, there were 579 police pursuits -- 100 fewer than the previous year -- in Los Angeles, a 468-square-mile city with a population of 3.8 million.
Since the mid-1990's, as the competition between local television stations has become more intense, helicopters have given viewers a bird's-eye view of every conceivable event, with high-speed chases often the most dramatic. Since 1998, when a furor erupted after a man was shown shooting himself on a highway overpass, some stations have tried to be more circumspect. On Monday morning, as officers fired at Mr. Killinger, some of the airborne camera crews pulled back to a wide-angle view, to reduce the close-up detail.
''You did not see him get shot on our air,'' Robert Long, news director of KNBC-TV, said in an interview. ''It could have happened, but we have good people who know how to read these things.''
Mr. Long said he had directed his staff not to broadcast car chases unless there is ''something extraordinary.''
''It has to rise to the level of news, and not just something you can't take your eyes off of,'' he said.
Early last year, Chief Bratton asked television news directors informally to reduce or even halt their coverage of police pursuits, under the premise that they were treated as entertainment and that the broadcasts could encourage flight by suspects who want a moment in the spotlight. Many people here recall with fascination the long afternoon a decade ago when, on the day he was supposed to turn himself in on double murder charges, O.J. Simpson led police on a meandering drive along the San Diego Freeway that was televised around the country.
''They should outlaw those helicopters,'' Chuck Hurley, a vice president at the National Safety Council, said, only partly in jest, from his office in Washington D.C. ''They make a sport out of police chases.''
