In May, 2002, Representative Tom Sawyer, an eight-term Democrat, was handed a stunning primary election defeat by 28-year-old Tim Ryan in a district stretching from Akron to Youngstown. The major issue was trade.
Some people in and around Ohio politics think Senator John Edwards of North Carolina has a fighting chance to do the same thing to Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts in the state's presidential primary next Tuesday. Mr. Kerry remains the strong favorite, but there is no question that free trade, and the loss of jobs to which it has contributed, could damage him here.
The bulk of the vote will be cast in northern Ohio, whose cities have been in economic decline for decades, a trend that has worsened lately. Ohio lost 246,700 jobs in the last three years, 67,000 of them last year -- more than any state except Michigan. Organized labor has called an emergency meeting in May to address the situation.
''There is enormous bitterness among working people on this issue,'' said Mr. Sawyer, who is at least temporarily out of politics, ''and Edwards is in a position to tap into it.''
In 2002, Mr. Ryan criticized Mr. Sawyer, who was also hurt by redistricting, for his support of trade-liberalization measures, especially the North American Free Trade Agreement. Mr. Edwards has taken a similar tack here, playing up Mr. Kerry's Senate vote for Nafta and his own misgivings about the agreement in speeches to enthusiastic, often overflow crowds in Cleveland, Columbus and Youngstown over the weekend. One of his two commercials that went on the air Sunday is called ''American Jobs.''
Fighting back, Senator Kerry embarked on what his campaign billed as a ''jobs tour'' across the area of maximum economic distress (and maximum Democratic voting strength). He spoke in Youngstown on Tuesday afternoon, moving on to Cleveland in the evening. On Wednesday, in Toledo, he is scheduled to receive the endorsement of former Senator John Glenn, still by far the state's best-liked Democrat.
Also on Tuesday, Mr. Kerry began broadcasting a 30-second commercial that features Del Sandusky, a boatmate in the Vietnam War. It is intended to underline his foreign-policy and military credentials.
Both Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry are courting suffering Rust Belt workers. Mr. Edwards has campaigned with locked-out steelworkers in Niles and Mr. Kerry visited a closed auto-parts plant in Dayton, where he said ''the heart has been ripped out of the heartland,'' and a shuttered mill in Youngstown.
''I think Edwards has reasonably good prospects here, although going into the final week Kerry is well ahead,'' said John Green, director of the Ray C. Bliss Institute of Applied Politics at Akron University. ''He is exploiting the trade issue pretty effectively, and it could do him a lot of good.''
Dennis White, the state party chairman, said he thought Ohio was ''still up for grabs.'' Mr. White said he had been surprised as well as impressed by the crowd Mr. Edwards drew at Ohio State University -- 1,200 people packed into a room at the Ohio Union -- and even more impressed by ''his ability to connect.''
Mr. Edwards's biggest problem is reaching enough voters quickly enough. He has done best, winning in South Carolina and closing in quickly to finish a strong second in Iowa and Wisconsin, where he has been able to concentrate his attention on a single state for a week or more. But nine other states will vote or hold caucuses on the same day as Ohio, which chooses 140 pledged delegates, including California (370 delegates) and New York (236 delegates).
Of the three, Ohio probably offers Mr. Edwards the best prospect of pulling off a big upset.
''Too little time and too much to do,'' Gerald Austin, a political consultant in Cleveland who is not involved in the presidential race, said of Mr. Edwards. ''He likes retail politics, but with only a week to go, he has to do New York and California, too. You can sometimes make up for lack of campaign time with a real blitz of television, but he doesn't have the money for that.
''And remember, he has to win, not just run strongly. Otherwise he ends up like poor Mo Udall, who finished second almost everywhere in 1976.''
Mr. Kerry is clearly counting on the backing of organized labor, a more important factor in Democratic politics here than in many other states, to inoculate him against accusations that he has cost Ohio and other states jobs with his backing for free trade. But it appears unlikely that the unions will make a big push for him this week.
In a message posted on the organization's Web site, William A. Burga, president of the Ohio A.F.L.-C.I.O., acknowledged the endorsement of Mr. Kerry by the organization's national leadership. But Mr. Burga reminded members that their main responsibility was winning in November.
''At this critical time,'' he said, ''we can't afford to be distracted from our important goal of laying the groundwork needed for Ohio labor to play an effective part in the 2004 election and beyond.''
Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Cleveland, a long-shot candidate for the Democratic nomination, is expected to pull relatively few votes. His hometown paper, The Plain Dealer, greeted him Sunday with the headline, ''What home-field advantage?''
The only primary poll, completed before the Wisconsin primary on Feb. 17, breathed new life into the Edwards campaign and forced Howard Dean from the race, showed Mr. Kerry far ahead.
Given the time constraints, Ohio has attracted a lot of attention from the candidates. The reason is not so much its convention delegates as its potential importance in November as one of a handful of major battleground states. Mr. Kerry flew here immediately after the Wisconsin voting, and Mayor Charlie Luken of Cincinnati announced, ''Welcome to the battle of Ohio. This is going to be ground zero.''
Ohio has a record as a bellwether in presidential elections equaled only by Missouri; in this century, it has voted with the winner 23 of 25 times. In 2000, it came within two percentage points of matching the national average. It is often remarked that no Republican has won the presidency without carrying Ohio, and President Bush has visited the state often. But some Republicans have carried the state and failed to take the White House; Richard M. Nixon did so in 1960.
The state has become more and more Republican in recent years. At the moment, the governor and all the other elected state officers are Republican, as are both senators and 12 of 18 representatives. Both houses of the Legislature are controlled by Republicans.
In the last 40 years, only Southern Democrats -- Lyndon B. Johnson, Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton twice -- have succeeded in Ohio. One big reason is that the others have had difficulty scoring well ''south of U.S. 40,'' as the local political saying has it -- that is, in the Appalachian counties that were settled from Virginia.
That might augur well for Mr. Edwards, a Southerner, in the general election if he is nominated. But it will not help him next week, because the Appalachian counties cast few votes in Democratic primaries.
''I see this race as a kind of trial heat for the fall,'' said Dale Butland, a Columbus lobbyist who was Mr. Glenn's Ohio chief of staff for many years. ''It's a chance for Kerry and Edwards to introduce themselves to the voters in a state where they are not known, and to raise questions about issues like jobs and education in a state where the trends are going the wrong way.''
An Ohio Poll, sponsored by the University of Cincinnati and completed Feb. 10, suggested that the economy will be the overwhelming issue in November. It showed President Bush's approval rating at 49 percent, the lowest since he took office, with another 49 percent disapproving and 2 percent unsure.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: OHIO
