For three quarters in the booming band box of Arco Arena, where the Sacramento Kings had not lost to an Eastern Conference team this season, Tim Thomas burst into his Knicks career just as his new bosses had hoped he would.
He drained 3-pointers, drove the lane and blanketed Peja Stojakovic, one of the N.B.A.'s hottest shooters.
The teams entered the final quarter with the score tied at 78-78, but less than three minutes later, Thomas and the Knicks cooled off while Stojakovic and the Kings let loose on a scoring rampage that seemed as if the best team in the league were merely toying with the visitors.
Sacramento broke out to a 12-point lead with five minutes remaining, and while the Knicks cut the deficit to 6 points in the last 90 seconds, the Kings closed out a 107-99 victory on Tuesday night to send the Knicks reeling in the first of a four-game trip. The Knicks will travel to Phoenix to play the Suns on Wednesday night.
''It was just a matter of me getting more comfortable, learning the system,'' said Thomas, who acknowledged that he jammed his left hand sometime during the game. He scored 27 of his 33 points in the first three quarters.
Stephon Marbury, who had an off shooting night (6 of 20 for 15 points) said: ''I don't think Tim had anything to prove to anyone. Tonight he played great. It's kind of an adjustment for him.''
Thomas's final act of the night sealed the defeat. He spit out his gum as he walked to the bench when he fouled out with 1 minute 11 seconds left. He scored 33 points, a season high. Stojakovic hit both free throws to give the Kings a 105-97 lead.
This was a prime opportunity for the Knicks (26-32) to steal a victory, but instead they lost their third straight game and fifth of the last six. The Kings (41-14) played without the suspended forward Chris Webber, forward Brad Miller and guard Bobby Jackson. And the Kings played little defense.
But the Knicks faded when it counted. The Kings, meanwhile, had plenty of support for Stojakovic. Mike Bibby overwhelmed Marbury, scoring 28 points. And Darius Songaila, starting his fifth game in place of Miller, added 17 points and 13 rebounds.
Stojakovic paced the Kings to an 18-5 run to begin the fourth quarter, scoring 12 of his 27 points in the final quarter.
The Knicks found themselves with a 10-point deficit with seven minutes to play, and they could not recover.
The Kings led by 55-52 at the half, but Thomas scored 14 points in the first seven minutes of the third quarter to lead the Knicks to a 72-66 lead with 5:40 to play. The Knicks scored only 6 more points the rest of the quarter.
Although Nazr Mohammed, who scored 15 points and had 8 rebounds, gave the Knicks a 74-66 lead with 5:08 to play in the third, the Kings tied it going into the final quarter.
From the outset, Thomas was more aggressive than he had been in his first three games with the Knicks. He scored 13 points in the first half, sprinting onto the fast break and hitting 6 of 10 from the floor. He also cloaked Stojakovic, holding him to 7 first-half points.
''I think he got tentative when they called all those quick fouls in the fourth quarter,'' Coach Lenny Wilkens said.
Wilkens mixed up his lineup in the first half, emphasizing youth and quickness.
Not only did he choose not to start an unhappy Dikembe Mutombo, he brought in the rookie forward Mike Sweetney first off the bench when Mohammed picked up two fouls in the first quarter.
Sweetney scored a career-high 7 points alone in the first half. Mohammed scored 7 points. Mutombo did not score, playing 13 minutes, and on Tuesday morning before the game he sounded as if he knew his career was coming to an end -- at least in New York.
''I'm feeling like I have had enough of this game,'' Mutombo said at the shoot-around. ''Just 13 years, man, you're getting tired of this.''
Last season with the Nets, Mutombo and Coach Byron Scott clashed over his role and playing time both before and after he lost four months because of wrist surgery.
Wilkens, who had coached Mutombo in Atlanta, bluntly recognized what others have only been subtly suggesting. ''He's not what he was five years ago,'' Wilkens said.
Mutombo sees himself playing a valuable role -- and not just during the playoffs in the half court.
''I think they need me,'' Mutombo said. ''It just a matter of the direction that they want to take. I knew it was going to be a change. Like a week ago, a couple days before the trade, Isiah mentioned something to me about it. He said they want to go in a different direction, either me coming off the bench or getting traded.''
He came off the bench on Tuesday as youth served the Knicks well.
REBOUNDS
ALLAN HOUSTON said he was close to returning. ''I just want to make sure that I get some kind of scrimmage,'' he said, adding that he wants to gauge how he feels after an intense workout. . . . STEVE MILLS, the chief operating officer of Madison Square Garden sports, said he had not had a meeting yet with forward VIN BAKER to discuss him signing with the Knicks. But Baker's agent, AARON GOODWIN, said that nine teams had expressed interest and that Baker would start talking with teams soon.
PRO BASKETBALL
