Two Democratic senators said Tuesday that they would hold up the confirmation of a new Medicare chief until the Bush administration explained why it was adamantly opposing imports of lower-cost prescription drugs from Canada.
A Republican senator who supports such imports said he too had many questions about the administration's policy that would have to be answered.
President Bush said Friday that he intended to nominate Dr. Mark B. McClellan, the commissioner of food and drugs, to be administrator of the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which provides health insurance to more than 70 million Americans. As head of the Food and Drug Administration, Dr. McClellan has led opposition to any change in federal law that would make it easier to import medicines. Federal officials say they cannot guarantee the safety of such imports.
One of the Democratic senators, Byron L. Dorgan of North Dakota, said: ''I intend to inquire and cogitate on this nomination, and it will take me a while to cogitate. Dr. McClellan has waged a relentless campaign against the importation of prescription drugs. We want to know why the F.D.A. has embarked on this crusade. It's supposed to regulate, not represent, the pharmaceutical industry.''
Drug companies strenuously oppose imports of prescription medicines, especially from countries that regulate drug prices. They say many of the imports are counterfeit or contaminated, and they assert that the loss of revenue could harm their ability to discover new cures.
The other Democratic senator, Debbie Stabenow of Michigan, said she had ''some real concerns'' about Dr. McClellan's staunch opposition to drug imports. ''He has gone way beyond what's necessary or prudent,'' Ms. Stabenow said. ''He has been very strident and has taken the position of the industry.''
The Republican senator, John McCain of Arizona, said, ''Dr. McClellan has done a great disservice by trying to frighten our citizens into believing that drugs imported from Canada are somehow hazardous or dangerous.'' He said that Dr. McClellan had declined to testify on the issue before the Commerce Committee, of which Mr. McCain is chairman.
William A. Pierce, a spokesman for the Department of Health and Human Services, which includes the F.D.A. and the Medicare agency, said it would be unfair to delay action on the nomination. ''Dr. McClellan has impeccable credentials and is highly qualified,'' Mr. Pierce said. ''We hope he will continue to receive bipartisan support.''
Dr. McClellan is highly regarded on Capitol Hill, but one senator could easily delay the nomination. The White House and many lawmakers say the Medicare agency urgently needs a new leader to carry out the Medicare law signed in December.
Several governors lobbied Congress on Tuesday to allow imports of drugs from Canada. The effort was led by Gov. Tim Pawlenty of Minnesota, a Republican, and Gov. Rod R. Blagojevich of Illinois, a Democrat.
Minnesota recently established a Web site that pointed consumers to Canadian pharmacies thought to be reliable sources of safe medicines.
Gov. James E. Doyle of Wisconsin, a Democrat, said he would establish a similar Web site, and other states are considering buying Canadian drugs for state employees.
Representative Rahm Emanuel of Illinois, a Democrat, said the campaign to permit drug imports, subject to strict regulation, was gaining momentum in this election year.
The focus, Mr. Emanuel said, is shifting from the philosophical issue of whether to allow imports to the practical question of how to do so safely, with maximum protection for consumers.
