The double ranks of pickup trucks that now control seven intersections leading to the New York Stock Exchange will be replaced with retractable posts, wedgelike vehicle barriers and custom-designed barricades resembling small sculptural bronze boulders.
These and other elements of high-security landscaping, which were approved yesterday by the Landmarks Preservation Commission, are intended to protect the exchange from terrorists without sacrificing the public realm to the almost warlike blockades, including the trucks, that have been in place since Sept. 11, 2001.
''This is about making the area around the stock exchange more secure, more livable, more attractive and easier to navigate,'' Gov. George E. Pataki said in a statement issued by his office. He has called existing security measures obtrusive and obnoxious.
Installation of the new devices is expected to begin within weeks, said Joanna Rose, a spokeswoman for the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation, which is contributing $10 million of the financing. The total cost has yet to be determined, she said. Private contributions are expected from the exchange, among others.
Acknowledging that vehicles will no longer be welcome directly in front of the stock exchange, the development corporation and the City Planning Department said that the roadbed of Broad Street, between Wall Street and Exchange Place, would be repaved in preassembled paving blocks called Eurocobble, creating a permanent pedestrian zone.
The most visually striking element will be a new kind of polygonal sidewalk barrier, called a NoGo, designed by Rogers Marvel Architects of Manhattan. These would largely replace the far more cumbersome jumbo planter tubs that have come to be another unwelcome intrusion along city sidewalks.
NoGos would stand up to 30 inches high and weigh several thousand pounds each. (Officials did not want their specific weight disclosed.) Their faceted exteriors would probably be clad in cast bronze, but their cores would most likely be solid concrete. Because of their weight, they would not need to be anchored to the pavement and threaded through the linguini of utility lines under the sidewalk.
At five intersections, the pickup trucks that security officers now drive back and forth to allow the passage of authorized vehicles would be replaced with movable barriers set flush into the street that rise up to form a protective wedge. These are commonly known as Delta barriers after the manufacturer, the Delta Scientific Corporation.
They would be at Pine and Nassau Streets, Wall and William Streets, Exchange Place and William Street, Broad and Beaver Streets and New and Beaver Streets.
At Broadway and Wall Street and Broadway and Exchange Place would be operable bollards -- upright posts that could be retracted to admit emergency vehicles, the only motorized traffic allowed through these pedestrian-only intersections.
To accommodate the bollards, the street level on these blocks would be raised to the curb level, creating a uniform surface, with the former curb line shown graphically. This proposal drew objections from some preservationists, since it is the street plan itself that is protected under a 1983 landmark designation.
But the landmarks commission members greeted the proposals warmly. They unanimously adopted a positive report on the matter, saying that the new measures ''will not significantly diminish the perception of any of these areas as streets.''
Vishaan Chakrabarti, director of the planning department's Manhattan office, also offered a distant hope. ''We don't necessarily view these security elements as something that has to be there for the rest of our lives,'' he said.
