Columbia University's president, Lee C. Bollinger, yesterday condemned a series of race-related incidents on campus, including the publication of a racially offensive cartoon in an alternative student newspaper last Friday.
In a message sent to the Columbia community, he said several statements and events that demeaned blacks and other minorities ''have proved unusually offensive to members of the Columbia University community, including me.''
Mr. Bollinger, the former president of the University of Michigan, who is widely known for his defense of affirmative action in two lawsuits that went up to the United States Supreme Court, said in an interview that he hoped to find ways to make Columbia a more comfortable place for minority students.
His comments followed a meeting that he and other Columbia administrators had with black student leaders on Friday.
''I was saddened by the pain and frustration that they expressed about various encounters on the campus and the number of incidents that made them feel unwelcome,'' he said. ''That, together with the publication of another offensive statement over the weekend, made me feel I really needed to say something to the community.''
Several hundred students protested the incidents, gathering on the steps of Low Library on Monday and yesterday; the protesters said they would continue to demonstrate through the week.
Like Mr. Bollinger, they said they were troubled not only by the cartoon, published in a student newspaper called the The Fed, but also by a performance by Columbia's marching band in December. They said the script amounted to a ''no-holds-barred attack'' on blacks, gays, Jews and women. A protest flier said the performance illustrated ''the campus tendency to brand 'humor' as offensive jokes almost exclusively at the expense of marginalized minorities.''
Protesters also criticized an ''affirmative action bake sale'' this month by the Columbia College Conservative Club, which sold doughnuts and cookies at higher prices to white and Jewish students and at lower prices to black, Hispanic and female students. (Such bake sales have been staged on a number of college campuses.)
Some student leaders said yesterday that they were glad to finally have the president's attention, and that they believed there was much to be done.
David J. Jones, a senior from Los Angeles who helped organize a new advocacy group, the Columbia University Concerned Students of Color, said that although Columbia boasts that it is the most diverse college in the Ivy League, ''for many students, diversity on this campus exists just as a word; there is a lack of diversity in the exchange of ideas and discourse.''
''At the core,'' he said, ''is a lack of sensitivity and understanding of issues surrounding race, racism and the inequitable distribution of power and privilege in society.''
The cartoon published in The Fed last Friday was titled ''Blacky Fun Whitey'' and purported to be a brief history of black Americans in honor of Black History Month. The newspaper, published about nine times a year, calls itself ''Columbia's subversive newspaper'' and says it has no particular political leaning.
One panel of the cartoon declared, ''Black people were invented in the 1700's as a form of cheap labor.'' Another said: ''A little later, it was found that these noble brothers were super athletes! They were soon set free to follow their hoop dreams!''
It was drawn by a Columbia alumnus, Ben Schwartz, whose cartoons have appeared in both The Fed and The Columbia Daily Spectator. Some of the Fed editors opposed running the cartoon, but were overruled by others on their board. A note printed above the cartoon said that The Fed was a forum and that ''a lot of us didn't really want to print this cartoon, 'cause it's kinda offensive.''
Mr. Schwartz and the Fed's editors apologized for their insensitivity this week. The Fed's apology said, ''We in no way intend to contribute to racism on campus.'' It also invited contributions on the subject of racism. The leaders of the conservative student group also apologized. But some Columbia students said the cartoon and other recent incidents constituted attacks on minority students at the university.
''I have not felt threatened or unsafe before,'' said Claudia Sandoval, a 19-year-old Latina student from Bay Shore, N.Y., who is communications chairwoman of the United Students of Color Council at Columbia. ''But the events that have happened recently have made me question that.''
Mr. Bollinger said he thought race relations in the United States and at Columbia and other universities generally were good, ''and are better for the fact that we have diverse student bodies at colleges.''
''But there are problems of misunderstanding, insensitivity and even racism that continue to plague us as a society and as a university,'' he said.
Even as he expressed his hope for improvement, Mr. Bollinger, a legal expert on the First Amendment, was clearly trying to navigate carefully between the issues of free speech and hurting others.
He said that he is reluctant to intervene every time something offensive is said, but that the accumulation of events and his discussion with black student leaders last Friday prompted him to express his views yesterday.
Correction:  February 26, 2004, Thursday  An article yesterday about a series of racial incidents at Columbia University misspelled the surname of a student leader who complained of an absence of racial sensitivity on campus. He is David J. Johns, not Jones.
