HAS it really been 20 years since a wave of Louisiana restaurants paraded through New York, flashing their wares like gaudy Mardi Gras beads, and then just as quickly high-stepped off? Back then, ravenous crowds practically wiped out the redfish population at restaurants like La Louisiana and Gulf Coast, Bon Temps Rouler and Texarkana. Hands more accustomed to caressing crystal brandished Mason jars holding Cajun martinis. New Yorkers happily waited for hours when the celebrated Cajun chef Paul Prudhomme brought his K-Paul's Louisiana Kitchen to the Upper West Side for a temporary stint in 1985.
The fascination faded quickly. When Mr. Prudhomme opened an actual restaurant in New York in 1989, it lasted a shaky three years. And though an occasional worthy specimen has turned up -- Bayou in Harlem, Cooking With Jazz in Whitestone, Queens -- most New Yorkers seem to have stowed away their Louisiana fascination with their platform shoes and tie-dye shirts.
But perhaps the cycle has spun, and if it is not yet time for New York to boogaloo anew, it is at least gingerly dipping its toes back in the bayou. Jacques-Imo's Cafe, a quintessential New Orleans joint, will open a New York City branch any day now on Columbus Avenue. Louisiana touches have shown up in new restaurants like Jack's Luxury Oyster Bar in the East Village and Ida Mae Kitchen-n-Lounge in the garment district. And a couple of new smaller restaurants like Natchez in the East Village are also taking cues from New Orleans.
When considering tiny Natchez, it is hard not to wonder whether New Orleans will once again be a fleeting fascination. Formerly Mugsy's Chow Chow, an East Village institution, this dreamy little dining room, with its floor of tiny black and white tiles and open kitchen, in 2002 became Patio Dining, a way station for the chef Sara Jenkins. She left after a year, and it plodded on briefly before morphing late last year into Natchez, with Shawn Knight as chef.
Mr. Knight worked for 10 years in New Orleans under the chefs Emeril Lagasse and Susan Spicer before coming to New York in the early 1990's. After working in various kitchens, Mr. Knight has now returned to the New Orleans vernacular, offering a spare menu with fewer than a dozen dishes each night. Many of the better selections on it have clear Louisiana antecedents, like the exceptional gumbo ($10), thickened Cajun-style, with filé powder rather than okra. The roux is cooked until almost black, intensifying its spicy flavors, and the gumbo is served almost soupy, laden on the nights I tried it with andouille sausage and either duck or chicken, and topped with toasted rice, which lends a nice crunch to the blend.
A clutch of baked stuffed oysters ($9) -- really a proletarian term for oysters Rockefeller -- has a pleasing anise edge, while puffy golf-ball size crab cakes ($9), a little dry on their own, get a welcome jolt from mustard-spiked hollandaise. But my favorite appetizer is tender braised short rib meat ($10), chopped up and sandwiched between two pasta rounds -- called a raviolo on the menu -- and barely scented with truffle oil. Salads ($6), either soft romaine with buttermilk dressing or endive with watercress, grapefruit and blue cheese, are excellent, but shrimp coated with coconut, fried and served on sticks ($9), should be retired to a sports bar.
Main courses have been inconsistent from visit to visit as Mr. Knight shuffles side dishes and combinations. Filet mignon ($20) is decent enough, but I love its side of oxtail braised in red wine, and while I have found pork tenderloin ($15), marinated in soy and cane syrup, to be too sweet, I can't get enough of its side of chopped brussels sprouts with smoked bacon. It is worth ordering by itself for $5. I didn't care for a potato-crusted redfish fillet ($17) wrapped around a pile of crab meat, but the dish came together when Mr. Knight lost the crab meat and served the fish ($17) with sumptuous smoked mashed potatoes and a lively tomato chili marmalade.
A well-seasoned oyster po' boy ($12) was just fine one night, but on another it was served with a shrimp cocktail sauce that made me want to stick voodoo pins in it.
Natchez has a short wine list, and serves cocktails from the Patio bar next door, which is connected by a doorway. The bartender mixes a mean Sazerac, though he begged off when I asked about a Ramos gin fizz, that other New Orleans staple.
The desserts also shift regularly. Dark chocolate torte ($6), with a crisp base, strawberry coulis and mascarpone whipped cream, is a delight, while peanut butter pie with caramel sauce ($6) is as sweet and irresistible as can be.
Mr. Knight is working at Natchez with Gary Auslander, for whom he once worked in Baby Jake's, a mid-90's bit of East Village Acadiana. What goes around comes around.
Natchez  31 Second Avenue (Second Street), East Village; (212) 460-9171.
BEST DISHES -- Gumbo; baked stuffed oysters; crab cakes; braised short rib raviolo; brussels sprouts with smoked bacon; redfish with smoked mashed potatoes; dark chocolate torte; peanut butter pie.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers, $6 to $10; main courses, $10 to $20.  CREDIT CARDS -- Cash only.  HOURS -- Monday through Saturday, 6 to 11 p.m. Closed Sunday.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS Narrow entrance. Narrow aisle to restroom.
$25 AND UNDER
