RESTAURANT chefs and home cooks alike can now choose from a world of salt, including Hawaiian black lava salt, gray fleur de sel de Guérande from Brittany, Peruvian pink salt and a host of other varieties that have become available in the last few years.
''Salt is the new olive oil,'' said Thomas Keller, the chef of the French Laundry in Yountville, Calif., and the new Per Se in the Time Warner Center in Manhattan.
Given the considerable expansion of the salt rack, some chefs are also advocating new ways of cooking with salt, especially when making meat dishes. Common belief -- indeed, cooking-school doctrine -- has long been that meat should be salted just before cooking and not a moment before.
But lately, chefs like Mr. Keller, Alice Waters of Chez Panisse in Berkeley, Calif., and Judy Rodgers of Zuni Cafe in San Francisco, have been encouraging cooks to try salting earlier.
''Back in the 80's, like any other cook, I was really weighted down with this admonition that you do not salt anything ahead of time, or it dries out,'' Ms. Rodgers said. ''As a novice, I wasn't in a position to question that. But it wasn't hard to realize it didn't make any sense. Cooks have salted things early for thousands of years, meats that retain their succulence because of the cure.''
Ms. Rodgers learned a great deal about salt when she worked in the Landes region in southwestern France, which is known for its preserved hams and confits. The cooks there salted everything in advance -- meats they were preserving as well as those they planned to eat in a few days.
''They broke all sorts of rules,'' she said, ''but it worked. Their food wasn't dry, it tasted really good. I started to wonder.''
Traditionally, when browning meat, chefs skip the addition of salt because the salt draws water out of the meat's surface through osmosis.
If, for example, you were to season a steak just 10 minutes before grilling, beads of moisture would appear on the surface, eventually forming a shallow puddle of juices. On the grill, the steak would turn gray, not brown.
As Harold McGee, the food scientist, explained in his classic text, ''On Food and Cooking'' (Fireside, 1984), meat cells brown at around 310 degrees. Water on a steak's surface boils and turns to steam at 212 degrees, so a wet steak can turn gray and cook through before its surface can brown.
Early salting has traditionally been associated with curing, which uses salt as a preservative, not as a seasoning. Mark Kurlansky, the author of ''Salt: A World History'' (Walker &amp; Company, 2002), wrote that people have been salting early for at least the last 8,000 years. The Chinese are thought to have been the first to discover the process. They cured fish and soy. Ancient Egyptians may have been the first to cure meat.
In ''What Einstein Told His Cook: Kitchen Science Explained'' (W. W. Norton, 2002), Robert L. Wolke wrote that salt preserves in much the same way it moistens a steak: It draws out the moisture from bacteria cells, hindering their growth or killing them. Sugar does the same thing, which is why fruit is preserved in sugar solutions. But salt came into use first.
True curing not only dries out meat but also profoundly alters its taste. An example of this is the difference between prosciutto and fresh pork. Light curing can make meat more moist. Ms. Waters often includes recipes in her cookbooks in which white meat like pork or chicken is lightly brined in a wet cure, a solution of salt, sugar and other herbs and spices. Mr. Keller and Ms. Rodgers both encourage a light dry-cure, salting the meat and leaving it to dry uncovered in the refrigerator for a day or two before cooking.
As Ms. Rodgers and Mr. Wolke explained, when salt encounters protein, the protein changes shape on a molecular level. In its new form, it can absorb more water than normal and softens. So a salted piece of meat can taste juicier and more tender than an unsalted one. If the meat is not too heavily salted, nor left to dry very long, what little drying results may also improve the flavor. The trick to keeping a presalted steak from turning gray is simply to pat the surface with paper towels just before you put it on the grill, to dry off any moisture.
Additionally, any herbs or spices included with the salt ''ride piggyback,'' as Ms. Rodgers put it, into the meat's cells, further improving the taste.
''Just as dry-aging beef creates a more intense flavor, salting a chicken a day or two ahead intensifies the flavor,'' Mr. Keller said. ''It also allows the chicken skin to become much more crispy.''
When Ms. Rodgers became the head chef at the Zuni Cafe, she began to experiment with salting ahead, based on her experiences in France. That led to her signature dish, a presalted chicken roasted in a wood-burning brick oven. The dish is now such a favorite, she said, ''we just can't roast chickens fast enough.''
WINTER CHICKEN  Adapted from ''The Zuni Cafe Cookbook,'' by Judy Rodgers (W. W. Norton, 2002)  Time: 1 1/2 hours plus 48 hours' refrigeration
1 4-pound chicken, preferably organic, not kosher  2 teaspoons salt  1 teaspoon sugar
1/8 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/8 teaspoon ground allspice
1/8 teaspoon ground cloves
1/8 teaspoon ground nutmeg.
1. Rinse chicken, and pat dry. In a small bowl combine salt, sugar and spices. Coat chicken evenly with seasoning, sprinkling a little in cavity, and rubbing the rest into skin.
2. Set chicken uncovered on a rack above a plate. Let chicken stand for 48 hours in refrigerator, preferably on top shelf for maximum air circulation.
3. Heat oven to 500 degrees. In a small roasting pan, place chicken breast side down on a rack. After 15 minutes, reduce heat to 450 degrees, turn bird breast side up, and roast 15 minutes more. Reduce heat to 425 degrees, baste chicken with released juices, and cook 30 minutes more, or until temperature at leg reads 160 degrees.
4. Remove chicken from oven, and let stand 15 minutes before carving. Serve warm.
Yield: 4 servings.
Correction:  March 3, 2004, Wednesday  A picture caption last Wednesday with an article about chefs who salt meats in advance of cooking, sometimes days ahead, misidentified the cook shown at Zuni Cafe in San Francisco. She was Alyssa Peddy, a line cook, not Judy Rodgers, the chef.
