The Islanders and the Boston Bruins went to overtime Tuesday night at Nassau Coliseum. That was nothing unusual. The teams played an extra period in all four of their encounters this season.
It was the wait before the game that was unusual. A crooked Zamboni blade gouged a rut into the ice in front of one goal, causing an 81-minute delay of the opening face-off, to 8:29 p.m.
The 0-0 final score did not produce the electricity befitting two teams chasing playoff spots, but both came away with a point. The Islanders (29-22-9-2) extended their unbeaten streak at home to nine games (6-0-3) but dipped into the Eastern Conference's eighth and last playoff position, a point behind Montreal, which defeated Ottawa. The Bruins (30-15-13-6) remained in fifth place but pulled a point behind idle Toronto.
The Bruins gave Andrew Raycroft, their precocious rookie goaltender, the night off after Florida handed them their first regulation loss in 13 games on Monday. But Félix Potvin thwarted the Islanders with 33 saves.
The Islanders' Rick DiPietro had 28 saves, his steadiness matching his acrobatics in notching his third shutout of the season. He made two difficult stops with a minute left in overtime. The Islanders have earned at least a point in 12 of his last 13 starts.
Islanders center Michael Peca nearly pushed the game-winner past Potvin with 26.4 seconds left in overtime.
The Bruins and the Islanders played conservatively, mindful of turnovers. In their last meeting Jan. 29 in Boston, the Bruins' Glen Murray stripped a careless Jason Blake of the puck and shoved in the game-winner in overtime.
''There wasn't a lot of chances,'' Potvin said. ''Mostly there was just a lot of scrambling for the puck.''
DiPietro said the overall condition of the ice was slushy but improved as the game wore on.
''We're going to enjoy this point, and take the positives away with us, and get ready for the Rangers tomorrow,'' he said.
The Islanders play host to the Rangers on Thursday night. The Rangers are 5-0 against them this season.
Islanders forward Mark Parrish returned Tuesday after missing 23 games because of an ankle sprain and took one shot in 10 minutes 54 seconds. More concerned with clogging the ice than speeding over it, the teams combined for just 31 shots in the first two periods before an expectant crowd of 13,579.
The rogue Zamboni stole the spotlight for a while by gouging the ice nearly to the concrete floor. Maintenance workers had to repeatedly pour hot water on the area around the rut and let it freeze.
The problem was made worse because the ice had been shaved extra thin to clean up after Sunday's Arena Football League game, said Scott Mullen, the arena's general manager.
Some fans booed the delay and others were amused by the sight of the Islanders warming up before a makeshift goal placed between the circles' hash marks while the goal area was set off by barricades.
Coliseum officials could not remember any such mishap previously.
The scoresheet was empty, but Robert Borzomi could have received an assist. Mullen credited Borzomi, the coliseum's head icekeeper, with getting the surface ready.
HOCKEY
