The Yankees have agreed to terms with first baseman Travis Lee on a one-year, $2 million contract with a club option for 2005. Lee was here for a physical on Tuesday.
The Yankees have a backup first baseman in Tony Clark, and General Manager Brian Cashman spoke to Clark on Tuesday to tell him that Lee was coming. Cashman said Lee and Clark would practice in the outfield as well as at first base, and he said both could make the 25-man roster.
Lee, 28, has played regularly in all six of his major league seasons. But if he played in the field every day for the Yankees, Jason Giambi would be the designated hitter and Bernie Williams or Kenny Lofton would sit.
''If we conclude the deal, there would be no promises of any playing time,'' Cashman said, referring to Lee. ''He would come in and be an option for Joe Torre.''
Another pending move is the release of third baseman Aaron Boone, who is not listed on the club's official roster and does not have a locker. Cashman said he had nothing to announce yet on Boone, who violated the guarantee on his contract by injuring his knee playing basketball in January.
Boone will lose about $4.8 million when the Yankees release him, and he speculated to The Dayton Daily News last week that he could re-sign with the Reds. Boone's agent, Adam Katz, had no comment.
Giambi's Weight-Loss Mentor
George Steinbrenner defended Jason Giambi's slimmer appearance and said it was his idea for Giambi to lose weight over the off-season.
''I must confess, I'll take part of the blame for his weight loss, and I resent anybody questioning his integrity,'' Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, said through his spokesman, Howard Rubenstein. ''He's a true Yankee.''
Giambi, the Yankees' first baseman, said he had lost four pounds since last season despite a markedly trimmer physique. Giambi's size is under scrutiny because he testified in December before a federal grand jury investigating the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative, or Balco. Two Balco executives were among four people charged this month with illegally distributing steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs.
''He's a sound young man whose father knows the long-term damage that steroids might have,'' Steinbrenner said of Giambi. ''As a home-run hitter, he's great, but not because of steroids. He knows he's very strong, and if anyone wants to test it, they should challenge Giambi to a wrestling match and they'll see how strong he is.''
Giambi needed surgery on his left knee last November, and Steinbrenner said he told Giambi that he, too, had bad knees from playing football. Steinbrenner said he told Giambi that slimming down would help his knees.
''He's got to keep the weight off and stick to a diet of healthy eating,'' Steinbrenner said. ''Giambi is vitally important to the Yankees.''
Rivera Talks Begin
Brian Cashman had lunch with the agent Fern Cuza at Legends Field on Tuesday, and the two discussed a new contract for closer Mariano Rivera, who wants a deal that takes him through 2007.
''The willingness of both parties is there, and that should be enough to get something done at some point,'' Cashman said.
The men did not exchange offers, but Cuza said he hoped to meet with Cashman next week. Both sides would like to complete a deal by the end of spring training.
''I don't want to put a deadline on it, but once the season starts, Mariano wants to just focus on the season,'' Cuza said. ''There should be plenty of time to reach an agreement.''
Houston Is Released
The Yankees released the veteran utility player Tyler Houston, who never reported to spring training. Houston had been a candidate to play third base before the Yankees traded for Alex Rodriguez.
''He had a change of heart when we got Alex Rodriguez,'' General Manager Brian Cashman said.
Torre Leaves Early
Manager Joe Torre left Tuesday's workout early after his father-in-law, Ed Wolterman, fell and broke his wrist while staying with the Torre family in Tampa. Brian Cashman said Torre would be back Wednesday.
BASEBALL: YANKEES NOTEBOOK
