The Mets had a simple plan this off-season: refrain from the excessive spending that had ballooned their payroll and piece together a roster of solid but not necessarily spectacular players. The Mets fulfilled the plan and seemed to be done with significant moves when temptation crept in.
That came in the form of a repressed market for baseball's premier free agent, outfielder Vladimir Guerrero.
The Mets, with a gaping hole in right field and seeing Guerrero dangling in the second week of January, decided to make a bid and see if they could capitalize on baseball's changing marketplace.
The Mets offered Guerrero's agents a three-year contract Thursday, falling far short of the five-year, $65 million proposal he received from the Baltimore Orioles. Baltimore's offer came a month ago, and Guerrero responded by asking for seven years and $105 million. While the sides have continued negotiating, the Orioles' inability to lock up Guerrero seems to say a lot about how he regards the team.
One general manager familiar with Guerrero's plans said his signing may not be resolved for up to two weeks, and another baseball official said the Detroit Tigers could get involved because of their willingness to spend money.
With Guerrero, who turns 28 next month, having drawn little interest, the Mets felt they had a chance, albeit slim, of getting him at a relative bargain. The team has established an unofficial policy against contracts longer than three years, preferring to make additional years part of a vesting option in which the player carries the risk to earn the money. Mets General Manager Jim Duquette said Tuesday that in his conversations with Guerrero's agents they told them that he would not accept such an offer.
Mets officials have expressed skepticism that their proposal, presumably for no more than the $13 million annual average Baltimore offered, is enough to sign Guerrero, but it was an opening bid meant to kick-start negotiations, with the Mets' offer having the potential to rise.
A few months ago, Mets officials gave themselves little hope of even getting this far in talks with Guerrero. Team officials reported that Guerrero had told Mets players last season that his preference was to return to Montreal, where he was comfortable, or play in Miami, where he would be surrounded by a large Latin community and be a relatively short flight from his home in the Dominican Republic.
Duquette had argued throughout this off-season that he would not lobby ownership to spend on Guerrero when he felt the Mets needed more than one player. The signings of shortstop Kazuo Matsui, center fielder Mike Cameron and closer Braden Looper have brought the Mets near owner Fred Wilpon's budgeted payroll of $80 million, but they have also made it much less likely that the team will throw games away defensively, as they did so frequently the past two seasons. Under those circumstances, a gifted player could make a difference.
The Mets acknowledged their offer to Guerrero in a three-sentence statement yesterday, and the interest is mutual. Guerrero's representatives have sold him to the Mets as a star player who will reignite their fan base and draw on New York's huge Dominican community, and they noted that he hit .353 with 17 home runs in 61 games last season after missing nearly seven weeks with a herniated disk.
But what is really powering the Mets' chances is the lack of demand for Guerrero. Many teams have been scared off by his back injury and the length of the contract he is demanding. Guerrero's agents have asked for a seven- or eight-year deal, and one general manager said, ''Those contracts are never going to happen ever again, at least not for a long time.''
Baseball officials said that Guerrero was a casualty of a market that has shrunk salaries since owners and players agreed to a new basic agreement in 2002.
''Players have always known a one-way street when it comes to salaries over the last 15 years,'' said the general manager of a team that did not pursue Guerrero. ''That one way was going up and up every year. Now all of a sudden, salaries are leveling off and many are going down. I think players still have a problem with that.''
The lack of interest in Guerrero has drawn the suspicion of the players association. ''I don't understand why a guy like Guerrero, one of the best talents in baseball, can be a free agent and still be out there,'' said Tony Bernazard, a special assistant to the union's executive director, Donald Fehr. ''It's very puzzling.''
Guerrero's largest offer so far came from his former team, the Expos, who offered him five years and $75 million.
''I don't know why he hasn't signed yet,'' Expos General Manager Omar Minaya said. ''All I can tell you is he's an excellent player and he's a pleasure to watch. Seeing him on a daily basis in Montreal, I loved to watch him.''
BASEBALL
