The United States moved Friday to secure backing from Secretary General Kofi Annan for the American plan to transfer authority to Iraqis this summer, and to persuade him to send United Nations staff members back to Baghdad promptly.
The American ambassador, John D. Negroponte, met Mr. Annan late Friday after consultations in Washington to spell out what role the United Nations could play and what security assurances the American-led alliance could provide.
The United States is eager for the imprimatur a United Nations presence in Iraq would give the allied forces but has resisted Mr. Annan's repeated demands for ''clarity'' over exactly what its workers would be asked to do and how safe they would be from attacks like those that drove the organization out of Iraq this fall. A bomb at the United Nations offices in Baghdad on Aug. 19 killed more than 20 staff members. Mr. Annan pulled all non-Iraqi staff members out of the country in October.
In actions that have alarmed Washington, individual Iraqi leaders have been seeking United Nations intervention in the current transition plan, a Nov. 15 agreement that calls for regional caucuses leading to the appointment of a provisional government by July 1.
They would like to see elections occur before that date, but Mr. Annan, in a gesture welcomed by the United States, sent word on Thursday night that elections could not be organized so hastily and that the United Nations would not intrude on the security arrangements.
His statement came in a response to a Dec. 28 letter from Abdel Aziz al-Hakim, a leading Shiite Muslim who served last month as president of the Iraqi Governing Council. A powerful Shiite leader, Grand Ayatollah Ali Husseini al-Sistani, has complained that Washington's plans do not ensure broad representation of Iraqis.
Mr. Negroponte declined to discuss what proposals had come up, but he said there would be further conversations about security.
Also under discussion was a meeting in New York that Mr. Annan has scheduled for Jan. 19 with members of the Iraqi Governing Council and the Coalition Provisional Authority.
The council has agreed to send three members -- Mr. Hakim, December's president; Adnan Pachachi, the current one; and Massoud Barzani, next month's president -- but there has been no response yet from the Coalition Provisional Authority, which represents the United States and other occupying forces.
Mr. Negroponte told reporters that the United States would be ''appropriately represented.''
Britain, the Americans' principal ally in Iraq, is sending Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Britain's envoy to Iraq and its former ambassador to the United Nations.
The Bush administration is reluctant to open up the transition process to the scrutiny of the Security Council, some of whose leading members have been vocal opponents of the war and last year blocked approval of military action.
The Americans are wary because of word that Mr. Annan has also scheduled the monthly lunch of the 15 Security Council members for Jan. 19 and suggested that the visitors from Iraq would be invited.
An ambassador of one of the five permanent members of the Security Council said the Americans' worry was misplaced, adding, ''We are all now united in the desire to bring peace and stability to Iraq.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: DIPLOMACY
