Government officials said Friday that President Bush would call for relatively modest budget increases to pay for the early stages of his plan to send humans back to the moon and on to Mars, but for reasons both technological and political, the administration was vague about the long-term costs of the proposal.
Government officials and outside experts who have seen the proposal said Mr. Bush would call for a gradual program of research and development, freeing him from putting a specific price tag on a decades-long project that would not come to fruition until long after he was out of office.
The officials said Mr. Bush would propose a funding increase for NASA next year of around 5 percent, or $750 million, with increases of a similar scale for the remainder of the five-year budget that the White House will send to Congress next month. Additional money for the program would come from reallocating funding now going to other space projects.
Officials said the reallocation being considered by the White House for NASA assumed a gradual phaseout of the space shuttle program, and they left open the possibility that the space agency would eventually have to make painful tradeoffs between manned and unmanned space science projects to pay for the new initiative.
Mr. Bush's decision to propose ambitious new space exploration goals, intended as a unifying historical endeavor in a nation riven along partisan lines, could expose the White House to election-year criticism for committing the nation to a hugely expensive program at a time of rising budget deficits and unmet needs closer to home, people in both parties say.
Mr. Bush is scheduled to announce his plans on Wednesday in Washington, the White House said Friday, and officials said he would set a goal of returning to the moon in 8 to 10 years and eventually sending people to Mars. But the administration remained silent about many of the essential questions surrounding the proposal.
Administration officials said the proposal had been drawn up through an interagency group that included senior members of the National Security Council, and outside experts said the plan envisions continued cooperation with Russia, Europe and other countries. But it was unclear how large a role would go to other countries once NASA completed its work on the International Space Station over the rest of this decade.
Republicans said the initiative could give Mr. Bush a chance to give his presidency -- or at least his election-year agenda -- a legacy-inspiring flavor of something beyond the polarizing issues of the war with Iraq and big tax cuts.
''If his proposal matches the headlines, it is the right direction and a significant political asset in the long run,'' said Newt Gingrich, the Republican former House speaker. ''Those who jump up and down and say, 'Don't go the moon, don't go to Mars' have a hard argument because they are up against 250 years of optimism in American history.''
But Democrats said that just putting the nation on a path toward a manned mission to Mars would serve to highlight the issues, like health care, education and retirement benefits, that they said remained underfunded and unresolved on Earth. And they said that the proposal would remove any remaining claim Mr. Bush had to fiscal responsibility, especially since the full costs of the space program would extend into the decades ahead, just as the retirement of the baby boom generation created an intense budget crunch through increased Social Security and Medicare payments.
''The Bush White House is taking its obsession with being bold to new heights,'' said Will Marshall, president of the Progressive Policy Institute, a centrist Democratic research group. ''There's no real rationale for a manned space program, much less colonization of the moon, so it's hard not to be cynical and conclude this is the space-age equivalent of bread and circuses.''
Even some Republicans were wary about the fiscal implications of the plan, and about the tradeoffs between manned space flight and other priorities, including unmanned space exploration, like that of the rover that landed on Mars last weekend. Especially since the loss of the space shuttle Columbia last year, members of both parties in Congress have been calling on Mr. Bush to articulate a vision for the space program as a way of beginning a national debate.
''Any decisions on the future of manned space flight must be made in the context of budget realities, the continuing need for the reforms called for by the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, and the need to keep NASA's unmanned space programs at the robust and productive level that has borne such remarkable fruits just this past week,'' Representative Sherwood Boehlert, the New York Republican who is chairman of the House Science Committee, said in a statement.
Mr. Bush got high marks from space analysts who said he had come up with a plan that was ambitious enough to provide a rationale for manned space flight but mindful enough of the technological and budgetary problems to be realistic. They said the plan, by calling for completion of the space station before embarking on an effort to send manned and unmanned missions to the moon, provided time for the development of new technology and a detailed approach to how lunar missions could be a proving ground for an attempt to send people to Mars.
''The vision is very simple: Humans need to go out into the solar system to stay,'' said Keith Cowing, editor of Nasawatch.com and a former NASA official. ''The vision is to go out there, but you need to homestead, to build the tools and learn how to use them.''
Mr. Bush's advisers have cast the initiative as one that would cut across ideological lines and give the nation a sense of purpose -- and to position Mr. Bush as a leader above the partisan fray heading into the presidential campaign.
But politics does not stop at the atmosphere's edge. At a rally in Rochester, N.H., on Friday for his campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination, Howard Dean, the former Vermont governor, suggested that Mr. Bush's motivation was political and he raised questions about how the program would be paid for.
''I happen to think space exploration is terrific,'' Dr. Dean said. ''Where is the tax increase to pay for it? It is not worth bankrupting the country.''
AMERICA IN SPACE: THE PRESIDENT
