After finding chemistry with a new coach, Sasha Cohen has a golden opportunity to end Michelle Kwan's domination of figure skating and start her own reign.
Since Cohen was 15 and started competing against senior-level skaters, she has been trying to unseat Kwan. But Kwan has gone merrily on, and at 23 her achievements include seven national championships (the last six in a row), five world championships and two Olympic medals. At 19, Cohen has no national titles, no world titles and no Olympic medals, but huge promise.
Before last season, Cohen left California for Connecticut to train under Tatyana Tarasova, the renowned Russian coach. Cohen started winning, but the relationship soured.
Two weeks ago, Tarasova was out and Robin Wagner, who coached Sarah Hughes to the 2002 Olympic gold medal, was in. So far, the Cohen-Wagner team looks formidable.
On Thursday night in Philips Arena, Cohen was nearly flawless in winning the women's short program at the United States Figure Skating Championships. Kwan finished second after a slight bobble, but if she wins the free skate Saturday night, when the weeklong nationals end, she will take the title.
This is the first time since 2000 that Kwan has not won the short program in the nationals, but she has been competing at this level too long to be concerned. She has survived rivalries with youngsters like Tara Lipinski and Hughes.
''My best friend and worst enemy on the ice is myself,'' Kwan said. ''I don't find motivation from the outside.''
So far, Cohen looks solid on the ice and off. It is too early to judge how long her partnership with Wagner will last, but Cohen seems to have found a coach she can relate to.
''We work really hard and have a lot of fun off the ice,'' Cohen said. ''I've had a lot of joy brought back to my skating. I feel like I am getting what I want to accomplish, but I am also having the same kind of fun I had when I was 8 years old and just sliding all over the place.''
Cohen and Tarasova had their differences. Cohen said she and Tarasova disagreed over the number of events Cohen should enter, with Cohen wanting more. Cohen now says Tarasova was right, but that did not lessen her desire for a less-contentious relationship with a coach.
On Thursday, after Cohen's short program, Wagner was beaming.
''I'm obviously thrilled,'' Wagner said. ''She did solid skating all around. She skated a complete program.''
Cohen still has to perform well in the long program. Though the sport is experimenting with a new scoring system, which was used in the Grand Prix events, the old system is being used here. That means that if one of the top three skaters after the short program wins the free skate, she will win the competition. The free skate counts for two-thirds of the final placings.
Jennifer Kirk of Newton, Mass., was third in the short program. She plans to do a triple-triple combination; Cohen and Kwan do not.
FIGURE EIGHTS
TIMOTHY GOEBEL, a silver medalist in the last two national and world championships, withdrew from the men's competition Friday after a disastrous short program Thursday left him in 10th place. He said in a news conference Friday night that season-long boot problems had thrown his body out of alignment. ''I need time off to re-evaluate my body,'' he said. In a statement earlier in the day, Goebel said that a doctor who examined him found ''distinct changes to my anatomical structure.'' JOHNNY WEIR, 19, is the leader entering Saturday's free skate.
RENA INOUE and JOHN BALDWIN JR. won their first United States pairs title Friday night. TIFFANY SCOTT and PHILIP DULEBOHN, the defending champions and the leaders after the short program, skated so poorly that they dropped to third and may not make the world team. KATHRYN ORSCHER and GARRETT LUCASH were second.
In the ice dancing Friday night, TANITH BELBIN and BENJAMIN AGOSTO, the world junior champions in 2002, won their first national title. MELISSA GREGORY and DENIS PETUKHOV were second and LOREN GALLER-RABINOWITZ and DAVID MITCHELL third. The five-time national champions NAOMI LANG and PETER TCHERNYSHEV withdrew earlier in the week because of an injury.
FIGURE SKATING
